This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project
to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the
publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.

We also ask that you:

+ Make non- commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web



at |http : //books . google . com/


3 6105 048 492 172



THE

MARCH OF THE TEN THOUSAND



J - ^ •



THE MARCH
OF THE TEN THOUSAND

BEING

A TRANSLATION OF THE ANABASIS

PRECEDED BY

A LIFE OF XENOPHON



BY

H. G. DAKYNS, M.A.



Eontion
MACMILLAN AND CO., Limited

NEW YORK : THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
I9OI

AU rights rgserved



Reprinted with cerreetions/rom I'oiume /. of" The Works of Xenophon,'

Tratulatedby H. G. Dakyns, M.A. 4 vols. Crown ivo

(Macmt'llanandCo., 1890).


PREFATORY NOTE


OUGHT to explain the nature of the present publica-
lon. It consists of a sketch of the Life of Xenophon
.nd a translation of the Anabasis (with maps and
index), which, along with much other matter now ex-
cluded, formed the earliest volume of my translation of
Xenophon's works.

As to the object of this reprint, it has been pointed
t to me that there are many readers to whom a
ersion of Xenophon's most famous work, The March
of the Ten Thousand, would be welcome, if presented in
a more accessible shape.

As to the Life, which I have once more ventured to
insert, it will form, I hope, a not unfitting Introduction
to the author's treatise. Xenophon's Anabasis was, in
the opinion of the greatest ancient critics, not only
a true story of heroic adventur e ; but, by a somewhat
subtle interblending of " truth and poetry," a kind of
Apologia. In my own contribution towards the biography
of the man and the history of the times in which he
jved, I trust I have at any rate helped to provide the
'ounger generation with sufficient data for a just ap-
•eciation of the author; his character as a man, his


THE MARCH OF THE TEN THOUSAND

genius as a soldier, his true position in the several
spheres of politics, philosophy, and letters.

The opportunity has been taken to make sundry
minor corrections both in the Life and in the Anabasis^
but I have made no attempt to recast the one or the
other as a whole. As I have already said, this is a
reprint, not a revised edition.

H. G. D.

Haslemere, May 1901.



NOTE

The larger edition of The Works of Xenophon, translated
by H. G. Dakyns, 4 vols. Cr. 8vo (Macmillan and Co.),
is referred to in the following pages thus : ' ' Xen. Works,
I. etc,"



CONTENTS


PAGE


Note Explanatory of Maps


. Next page


A Sketch


OF


Xenophon's Life


i


The Anabasis


Book I. .


I


j>


Book II. .


39


>.


Book III.


67


»»


Book IV. .


97


)5


Book V. . .


132


))


Book VI. .


167


))


Book VII. .


196


Index


•


.


241


Note on


Anabasis V. in. 4 .


265



NOTE EXPLANATORY OF MAPS

Part of Babylonia. [To /ace p. 38.

This is taken from Edward Stanford's map, based on surveys of ancient
Babylonia, etc., made, by order of the Government of India in i860 to
1865, by Commander W. Beaumont Selby, Lieutenant W. CoUingwood, and
Lieutenant J. B. Bewsher ; with others made by Felix Jones, I.N., compiled
by order of H.M. Secretary of State for India in Council by Trelawney
Saunders, F.R.G.S., Geographical Assistant India OflBce, 1885.

The Country around Scillus. [To /ace p. 140.

This map is drawn chiefly from that accompanying the account of excava-
tions at Olympia by Kaupert and Dorpfeld, supplemented from the 1 : 300,000
map of Greece issued by the Military Geographical Institute of Vienna.
Ancient sites and roads are shown in red. Heights, of which but few are
obtainable, are expressed in English feet above the level of the sea.

Route of the Ten Thousand. [To /ace p. 240.

Chiefly from Dr. H. Kiepert's map of the Asiatic Provinces of the Ottoman
Empire, published in 1884, and the route maps of Dr. Sterrett, published in
1886. The route has been carefully laid down in accordance with present
topographical knowledge of the country, and where it differs from the route,
as drawn on Dr. Kiepert's latest wall map of the Persian Empire, that route
is shown by broken red lines. Better surveys are required before we can
satisfactorily lay down the tracks between the Pylae Syriae and Thapsacus,
and between the Phasis and Gymnias.



A SKETCH OF XENOPHON'S LIFE



circa 431, BiRTH. — (The first year of the Peloponnesian War.)

431-424, Infancy (a^/. 1-7). — Till the eighth year of the war, his life
was probably spent in Athens, at any rate during spring
and summer.

423-415, Boyhood [aet. 8-16). — Spent possibly partly in the country (at
Erchia, modern Spaia) ; religious training t<^ iraTpLtp pSfup
{Anab. VII. viii. 5, see below, p, 237) ; old -Attic vocabu-
lary ; education in /lovaiKi] ypdfifiara yvfivaariK-fi ; gnomic ;
sophistic ; may have * ' heard " Prodicus of Ceos ; introduction
to Socrates.

415-413, Youth {aet. 16-18). — Socratic training, illustrated hy Meinorab.,
Symp., Oeconom.

413-411 {aet. 18-20). — Hunting education, illustrated by C>«?/(e//Va.

411-405 (a^^. 20-26). — Political interests, illustrated by /^«//e«?Va, I. and

II. (A).

405-403, Young Manhood [aet, 26-28). — N.B. There are two conversa-
tions in Mem. (II. viii., vii.), named as belonging respect-
ively to the end of the war, 405 B.C. , and the "year of
anarchy," 404-403.

403-401 {aet. 28-30), — Political prospects, from the amnesty to Cyreian
expedition. Cynegetica possibly published now ; and the
portion of Hell., I. -II. iii. 10 (see Xen. Works, I. pp. 1-50 ;
also Note C on Hell. , p. Iviii. foil. ), constituting the TrapaXei-
Trd/ievoor sequel to Thucydides, beinggot ready for publication.

401-399, Manhood {net. 30-32). — Floruit; the advance with Cyrus and
the retreat of the Ten Thousand ; the Thracian campaign ;
surrender of the remnant of the Cyreians, six thousand men,
to Thibron ; illustrated by Anab. and Cyrop. , also Hell.

III. (B).

399-394 {aet. 32-37). — Uncertain movements at this date (spring of
399 B.C.) ; Hell. I. and II. (A) published (?) ; Asiatic cam-
paigns with Spartan harmosts, Thibron (?), Dercylidas,
Agesilaus ; marriage ; exile ; sons ; return to Europe,
394 B.C. before Coronea ; illustrated by //if//. III. iv. (B).
d



il LIFE OF XENOPHON

B.C.

394-387 {aet. 37-44). — With Agesilaus in Sparta and campaigning (?) ;
sons educated in Spartan training ; till perhaps peace of
Antalcidas (?) ; illustrated by Hell. IV. v. 1-36 (B) ; and
Lac. Pol.

387-371. Middle Age (aet. 44-60). — Presented (now or perhaps earlier,
389 RC.) by Spartan authorities, with a house and farm at
Scillus, where he resides for many years, acting probably as
proxenus for his adopted state ; intellectual floruit, great
literary period ; illustrated by all his writings in some form
or other. Many, e.g. Metnor., Symp,, Oeconotn., Hiero,
were here published ; the material for the remaining portions
of the HelUnica was being got together currente calatno ;
and material for later works, some of which were nearly
ready for publication, e.g. Anabasis, revised.

371-369 [aet. 60-62). — Battle of Leuctra ; the Anabasis published after
expulsion from Scillus, and HelUnica B { = Hell. II. iii. 11 —
V. i. 36). perhaps in the year 371 B.C., after Leuctra,
possibly at Corinth, where the family finally settled. The
sons going back to Athens after the decree of banishment was
rescinded, probably in 369 B.C., sened in the Athenian
cavaUy at Man tinea 362 B.c.

369-362 {aet. 62-69). — Banishment rescinded ; literary labours continued
at Corinth (or possibly at times at Athens) ; Hipparchikos
(or a Cavalry General's Manual), with its sequel the irepi
iinrifc^ (tract on Horsemanship), both published ; the Cyro-
paedia and HelUnica C ( = Hell. V. ii. to end) put into shajie
and finally published between 365 and 357 B.C. (epilogue
to Cyrop. after 364) ; death of Gryllus before Mantinea
362 B.C.

362-354, Old Age (aet. 69-77). — The Agesilaus, B.C. -^^t circa. His last
work, the WJdpw. or tract on Revenues, published 355 B.C.

circa 354, DEATH (aet. 77). — He died at Corinth (tradition says) ; se&Demetr.
Magn. , ap. Diog. Laert. Li/e of Xenophon.


^



«>



Xenophon was an Athenian, of the deme (or borough town)
Krchia, and therefore a fellow -townsman of his illustrious
contemporary Isocrates. His father was named Gryllus, his
mother probably Diodora,^ By his own marriage he had two
sons, named respectively Gryllus and Diodorus. They were
famous in their day, and were popularly called the Dioscuri,
or great twin brethren. Possibly they were twins. But of
them presently.

The date of Xenophon's birth is, as elsewhere ^ explained,
uncertain. For the purpose of this sketch it is assumed that
he was born about the commencement of the Peloponnesian
war in 431 Kc. (possibly a little earlier; not improbably even
somewhat later).

With regard to his early bringing- up, the statiJs of his
family, the means and occupation of his father, we know next
to nothing. It is commonly believed that Xenophon was
qualified to serve as a knight. Tradition^ says that he did so
serve. He had all the tastes of an Athenian country gentle-
man or yeoman, of the type presented to us by his own
Ischomachus,* devoted to dogs and horses, and the breeding

1 Sec Roquettc, de Vii, Xe/t,, Append, il., *'de Xen. Malre," p. log foil.

3 S«c Xen. Works, I. p. xlix. Note B.

* Diog. LaerL ii. 5, Vit. Socr. 7 ; Strabo, IX. ii. 7. * See Oecon. vi. 17.



SKETCH OF THE



and training of these, and to hunting as a prcltminary to
warfare.^ He took horses with him on the famous expedition
under Cyrus; and it was he who, at a critical moment,"
organised the small squadron of forty horse, which ])roved so
effective during the retreat. His interest in this branch of the
service is unceasing, and is evident in many passages of his
works. As an old campaigner he seems to have taken ru
iTTTrtKoi' under his special protection, and he ended by writing
two companion treatises on the subject, the earlier of which,
" A General of Cavalr}'," is addressed apparently to one of the
hipparchs for the year at Athens — possibly about 365 B,c. —
when his two sons were serving as knights in the state cavalry.
If this was the status of the family, we may suppose that his
parents had means ; and it is clear ^ that Xenophon set off on
the expedition above named in quest of glory and adventure
rather than of wealth. The question, as we shall see, is
important in reference rather to his political leanings than to
his economical surroundings.

We may, perhaps, assume that the boy was reared in
easy circumstances and as befitted a KaAo^ re Kaya^o?,'* a
"beautiful and good" citizen of Athens, We may assume
further that he was piously and healthily brought up. The
grown man, we know, was religiously and healthily disposed ;^
and the child, we suspect, was herein father to the man. But
we have also a suggestive anecdote which throws light on the
family worship in the home of Xenophon in the rural deme
of Erchia. It is recounted on page 237 of this volume, and
I need not repeat it ; but it is noticeable that Zeus Meilichws^
to whom the old family soothsayer Eucleides bids Xenophon
sacrifice " in the ancestral fashion," is the same god who was
honoured in the festival of the Diasia ; ^ and the incident may

1 Cf. de R. Eq. 2 See below, \x 63 foil.

^ See below, pp. 171, 181.

* See Becker, Charicies, Excursus to§ i, "Education."
*> See Diog. Laerl. Life of Xen. ; Anab. panim.

• The Diasia was a country festival existent long before the festival of
Olympic Zeus, as Cylon in his attempt upon the Acropolis found out to his
cost. And, to skip from grave to gay, the name recalls not only the tragic end
of Cylon, but the Lragico - comical experiences of the old Athenian country
gentleman in the play (Aristoph. Clouds, 408 foil., 864) trying to softLMi the
otxliuate heart of bis borse-raclng youngster by reminding him hovr, when he


LIFE OF XENOPHON



even throw a ray of light on the old- Attic propensities i;ety mo-
logical or other) of our author.

We may further surmise that the health of his body was no
less thought of than that of his soul. The love of field
exercises and the chase, the belief in bodily training and the
salutary effects of toil, summed up in one of his mottoes oi'&ev
av€v l?>pi7nos, date back to childhood.

If he was born in 431 b.c, and was in Attica at all, the
first years of his life, or a great part of each year, must have
been spent inside the city walls. The distances in that whole
countr>' are indeed so small that the owner of an estate even
at Thoricus might have returned to his farm at intervals after
the Laconian troops had done their work of devastation for
one year, and before they returned on the same errand the
nextj so that the child may well have breathed fresh air
during some months in every year.^

He gives no hint, nor indeed bad he perhaps any vivid
recollection, of the earlier troubles incidental to the '* Archi-
damic " war. He is equally silent touching things which he
might well have recollected as he grew in years. As far as

was a little boy and could only lisp^ hfs father had bought him a little go-cart
at the festival of the Diasio. Strepsmdes, the father, bears no further resem-
blance to (jrj'llus than that he is an old man from the country ; nor, except
in his love for horsL'S, does f'heidippides recall Xenophon. (He is more lilte
a famous Athenian, with whom Xenophon has Ixecin aonielimes confoanded,
Alcibiades. ) But, for the peep into Attic life which it affords, with its con-
trasts of old and new, rustic and polite, during the age of the Sophists, the
M hole pliiy bi an apt contimentary upon the times of Xenophon's boyhood.

The anecdoit; of the .4nai>astx is suggestive not only of a religious hut of
an old-fashioned style of bringing-up ; and, if 1 am not mistaken, even the
phraseology of Xenophon bears an impress also of that ancient style of educa-
tion so much commended by the Dikaios Logos in the play already referred
to. How is it that Xenophon is 5io glib in the use of old Attic words and
inflections? why is it a chance whether he will say irfjrao'ffat or K(KT^a9ai,
and why does he persist in writing ^eX^ur, dpewf . etc. ? Why does he call
the goddess of dawn "Hws as the poets do, and not"Ews as the rest of the world
does? 1 know that there are other answers to ths question, but I cannot help
thinking that it is because, at an age nl which the boy could only lisp, such
were the sounds familiar to his ears in his father's family, and amongst the
peasantry on the eastward face of Brilessus (Pentelicus), in the rural d^me
of Erchia.

"^ It was no great distance from Athens to Erchia (not nearly so far as to
Thorictts) if, as is supposed, the site of the d^me is that of the modern Spaia.
By the modern road it cannot t»e more than seventeen or eighteen miles.
See map.



Vl



SKETCH OF THE



foreign invasions were concerned, his out-door training might
well have begun in earnest at the age of seven (the eighth
year of the war), 424 b.c.» and have been continued steadily
till the first year of the " Deceleian " war, 413 b.c, when he
would be eighteen years of age. Then for ten years it must
have ceased entirely, or nearly so. In his tract on hunting
(which as some think was his earliest work) ^ he says in a style
somewhat pedagogic for so youthful a writer : " My advice to
the young is;, do not despise hunting or the other training of
your boyhood, if you wish to grow up to be good men, good
not only m war, but in all else of which the issue is perfection
in thoughtj word, and deed." And before plunging into
practical details, he adds ; " The first efforts of a youth
emerging from boyhood should be directed to the institution of
the chase j after which he should come to the rest of education
— provided he have the means and with an eye to the same ; if
his means be ample, in a style worthy of the profit to be
derived ; or, if they be scant, let him at any rate contribute
enthusiasm, in nothing falling short of the power he possesses."

Whether he himself enjoyed this education, or is only incul-
cating what he regarded as desirable, and was able eventually
to give to his own sons at the proper time of Ufe, we cannot
say. What we can say is that his description of the chase in
this treatise (as far as coursing hares is concerned) would suit
the slopes and gullies of the Attic mountains (of Parnes,
PentelicQs, and Hymettus) no less than the scenery of the
Triphylia, of Pholoe and the hills which stand about Olympia.

Apart, however, from this exceptional form of gymnastic,
and provided always that his boyhood " was spent in Attica and
Athens, we may suppose that he was subjected to the common
training of young Athenians at that time. "We have been
companions in the chorus, the .school, the army," is the telling
appeal with which the herald of the mtistai^ Cleocritus, chal-
lenges the city party on a memorable occasion to cease strife
with the exiles in Piraeus."' ^Ve may picture Xenophon as a



^ Sec Cyneg. \, iB ; it. i. If this was really an early work, 1 think il musl
have been rt!-handliid and re-ediled in middle age. See below, p. bt.vvii.

» See a slory in PhilostmUis, TV/. Soph, i. la, according to which ho lived
part of the time as a captive in Boeotia. ^ See J^tr/A II. iv. ao.


LIFE OF XENOPIION



Vll



I

I



sharing in choruses, or wending his way to school, or
going through the exercises of the palaestra and gymnasium
with the Critobuluses and Euthydeniuses, who were his fellows,
just as when older he probably shared in military drill and
service— whether with horse or shield — and in the first instance
perhaps among the TreptiroAot.^ At school he would learn
ypdfjLfxaTfi and fxowTLKTr'i End yu/nvao-TiKiJ, according to the system
in vogue. He would come to know the poets — Hieognis ami
Hesiod and Epicharmus— and, beyond all, Homer, In all
ways he was brought up, I think, in the ancient style, as far as
was then possible, and whatever else was the result of this
educationj the main point was secured. l"he young man had
formed in his breast the image of Aidos. For the rest his
training in the new learning of the Sophists was, for a youth of
his temperament, by no mean^ detrimental. Rather it was of
the best. It is quite possible that, like Callias or Proxenus,-
he paid fees to some one of the professors to whom he intro-
duces us in the Memorabilia and elsewhere. Perhaps Dionyso-
dorus taught him tactics. Perhaps he heard Prodicus of Cecs.
But it was a greater than Prodicus who truly initiated him
into such philosophy as he was capable of, and who taught
him how to discover the first principles not of strategics only
but of a much higher art — that of right living — and of koAu-
KayaQLo. in general. This teacher, himself the greatest of the
Sophists, and yet in a deep sense antagonistic to all other
professors of wisdom — one also to whom he certainly paid no
fees of money — it need hardly be said, was Socrates.

At what age Xenophon came under the influence of this
friend and teacher, we cannot tell ; we may suppose, however,
that he was emerging from boyhood, and had done with paida-
gogoi, in the technical sense, when this new and spirit ualising
influence was brought to bear upon him. If we are to guess
at a date, we might choose that famous year 415 b.c (the
seventeenth of the war), in which the expedition sailed for
Sicily, and Alcibiades, being accused of profaning the mysteries,
was condemned to death in his absence. Socrates himself

^ A sort of horse palrol composed of young Athenians between eighteen
mid twenty to guarci the frontier.

^ See Symf>. v. 4, 62 ; Aniil>. V. vi. 16, p. 141 ; Mem, III, i. t, IF i. 21.



VIM



SKETCH OF THE



would then have been fifty-three, Plato would have been four-
teen, Alcibiades about thirty-four, and Xenophon about six-
teen. Whenever it happened and however the introduction
came about, the change wrought in the young man's disposi-
tion was deep and permanent. The story is prettily told by
Diogenes I^aertius, and with so clear a ring of poetic tnith
that we need not stay to inquire whether the particular in-
cident occurred. This is how the biographer recounts the
matter : " Xenophon was modest of mien, and surpassingly
fair to look upon, Tradition tells how Socrates met him in
a narrow way, and stretching his staff athwart him, so as to
bar his passage, plied him with inquiries as to where this or
that commodity was to be purchased, to all which questions
the boy answered fluently ; when the sage at length put to him
a final question, 'And where are the fair and noble to be
found ? ' The boy shook his head ^ in perplexity. Then said
he, 'Follow me, and be taught' So he followed him, and
thereafter became his hearer.'^-

The question so propounded became indeed the problem
of Xenophon's life. Where are the xaAoJ. KayaBol to be found ?
And what is that perfection of combined beauty and goodness,
displaying itself in beautiful and good deeds, otherwise called
virtue? That to some extent he solved it will perhaps be
admitted by whoever has noted the distinctive quality of his
writings and the persistent ambition of his life. The answer
which the " inspirer " himself was prepared to give to his
"hearer" may in part be read in the J^ecolkdhfis and other
"Socratic" writings of Xenophon; and still more largely in
the dialogues of Plato. The attitude meanwhile of the pupil
to his friend during ten or fifteen years of his life is easy to
picture.^

^ Lit. "raised his brows," precisely as a modem Greek does, express? ng-
blank surprise. - Diog. I,aert. Life, § a.

8 It h.15 indeed been pictorially rcpresfinted by that most famous painter of ihe
Renaissance, whose sympathetic mind unerringly interpreted to him the spirit of
the Greeks. In Rafael's Schvoi of Athens, aniotig the 5iix or seven figvires which
compose the Socratic group, thnt of Socrates himBelf is so truly depicted as to
forni a companion to the portrait of the philosopher as drawn by Alcibiades in
the Symposium of Plato. Of the rest, none are more inithful to the imagination
than those of Alcibiades and Xenophon. The hclmeted mail-cLid warrior
facing tJic philosoplier with exquisite proud poise, indicative of a graceful



*



^


LIFE OF XENOPIION



IX


The best commentary on this period of Xenophon's life is
to be found in his own Socratic writings, and chiefly in the
Alemorabiiia. That work is an honest attempt to explain the
character and position of Socrates to a public who seemed to
misconceive of him ; and, being based mainly on the writer's
personal recolleclions, is replete with autobiographic matter.
It must be borne in mind, however, that none of these writings
were published, nor in any technical sense composed, until long
after the death of Socrates, which took place in 399 b. c
Even the most matter-of-fact of them, therefore, the Memora-
biiiay cannot escape a certain colouring. Socrates is seen
through a vista of years. The young man's memoranda, how-
ever faithfully preserved, represent also the mature reflections of
one who has himself gone through many experiences, since as
a youth he sat in some saddler's shop and imbibed words of
wisdom, and whose own character is formed. With this
caution we may well turn over the pages of the Manarabilia^
etc., in confidence that the story of Xenophon*s own deeper
education lies therein. There is, indeed, one specially autobio-
graphic passage,^ in which the author names himself as an
interlocutor in a conversation (which took place between
Socrates and Critobulus), the subject of which may be called
"the danger of a kiss." Possibly Socrates had observed in
Xenophon a certain propensity, which in his ironic fashion he
thus set himself to counteract. The incident appears to have
clung to the mind of him whose judgment was appealed to.

Besides this, there are endless occasions on which Xeno-
phon suggests his own presence at a conversation by such
phrases as, *' I will here mention what I once heard him say
about the divine power;''- or, "As I listened to these sayings
I could not but reflect that he himself had attained, whilst we
his hearers were being led onwards, to true happiness ;"^ or
again, in order to show how Socrates helped his friends out of

self-confidence on the very verge of insolence, is unmistakable ; but beside
the latter, with back-turned face, hanging on his lips, is a youth with rosy
cheeks and auburn hair ; he leans on one anii in a brooding attitude ; his eyes
are set in decj}, earnest, religious gaze. That is Xenophon, the future apologist
I of the life of Socrates, treasuring one of the discvwsions of the Memorabilia.

^ Mem, 1. iii. is. - lb, 1, iv. 2.

* lb. 1. vi. 14; cf. I. ^ii. 5; II. i. I, iv. i, w i, vi, i.



their difficulties, vaT}'ing the treatment to suit the need of llie
case, he recounts three or four stories, '* which he t an personally
vouch for " {tpui 6e /cat Iv rourois a crvvoiSa aiVy).^ The two
first of these are, it so happens, the only two in the whole
collection of which the exact date is given in so many words —
the one is named as belonging to the end of the war 405 11, c,
and the other to the year of division which followed^ — before
the city party and the party- of Piraeus had healed their dif-
ferences/^ To others we can approximately assign the date
through internal evidence ; some are dateless. But our
suspicion is that the mass of these conversations which Xeno-
phon recounts on his personal authority belong to his maturity,
say to the years 411 B.C. and onwards.

By that date (411 B.C.) Xenophon had doubtless begun to
take an interest in politics (as what Athenian did not?), and
was perhaps meditating some essay in literature. The prospect
of continuing the history of Thucydides had not as yet dawned
upon him ; nor could he as yet foresee the need which would
come of writing an apology for Socrates. But I make no
doubt that he already had an eye to current affairs ; and in
the spirit of Boswell was duly taking notes of conversations
which he felt to be of permanent interest.

It may be hard at times, as already suggested, to distinguish
between the later reflections of the middle-aged man of letters
and the original impressions of curious youth ; but the fact
remains incontestable that this was the period of seedtime.
The particular word or words in which the good seed Avas
sown ; the exact moment (to use a more Socratic phrase) at
which birth was given to some struggling idea, we may not be
able to discover ; but we have Xenophon's own testimony to
the educational effect of this discourse or that discussion upon
the minds of those who, like himself, consorted with Socrates,
and we can hardly doubt that he was generalising from his
own experience. Tf he says that to listen to such and such
remarks was to be led on a step farther in the direction of
mX^uKayadia, or self-restraint, or wisdom, or courage, or trust
in the fiods, or belief in the omnipresence of Divinity, or
acquiescence in the supreme will, he means that he himself

' ■l/t'/w. 11. vii.. viii. . ix. , X. I. ^ See /Mf. ]1. iv.



I



LIFE OF XENOPHON



tnust admit that in his experience it was so ; and henre it is
with a genuine outburst of affection, betokening a deep sense
of his own indcbledness and loss that he speaks of the very
recollection of Socratefs as in itself an inspiration to good
conduct. " Amongst those who were brought into communion
with Socrates and recognised his greatness, all true lovers of
virtue still to this day cease not to lament his incomparable
loss with bitterest regret ; as for one who, as none else could,
helped them in the pursuit of perfection. For my part, when
I think of him and what he was like . . ."^

The quahties which he admired most in Socrates were his

I spirituality ,* his faith and sense of proportion in matters divine
and matters temporal ; his sincerity and independence ; his
horror of quackery and self-deceit ; his educational ardour in
behalf of all who consorted with him ; the purity of his aim
and methods ; his enthusiasm in the serv^ice of the world at
large ; his subordination of all virtues, whether of the intellectual
or of the practical type, to healthiness of soul (rrwt/i^jtMTi'w;),^

Further to point what has been said. The biographical,
that is to say, the autobiographical importance, in a general
sense, of the Memorabilia (as of the other Socratic writings of

I Xenophon), can hardly be exaggerated ; but there is need
of discrimination before we can say that such and such a
conversation throws light upon the youth and early manhood
of Xenophon. Thus, if we consider the nature of the dis-

* Sec.1/t'w. IV. viii. ir foil.

' Some of the good words now sown, which were destined lo bear fruit

I eventually, may readiJy be picked out. They recur frequently in the writings

[of Xenophon- They arc his adopted formulae — one might sp>eak of them

I as talismans. Such is the //w/WrV gnoiim *:o53fVa^u» to which Socrates gave

new currency ; or tlie Xenophoiittne motto. iriV Georr : or this : otir6 TWf

efwv tfp^ecrfl'ai. Some are tests of the spirit, suited to sclf-exanunation, such

as : " Be what you would fain be tliought lo be" ; or this, " What am 1 worth

to my friend?" Others arc compemiious moral maxims: "Self-mastery is

the ikelson of virtue ; " " Virtues prow by knowledge (and practice). " One is

tlie master's own prayer, and the pupil did well to remember it. " lliive me

what is best for me, for ye know what good things are." — Mim, 1. iii. 2 ; cf.

Plat. AUib. ii. 143 A -

Zeir ^asi\f\), tA idv itr&Xii Kal ei'i'XOju/i'Ois ifai dFei'jrroii
"XfLfu iiSoVf TO. 5i Sfwa Kal tuxofiipot^ araXi^ny.

' O King: Zeus, grant 10 us all blessings, whether wc pray for iheiu i»r not.
And deliver us from evil, even to the denial of our prayers."



SKETCH OP THE



cussions themselves, some, it must l>e admitted, savour some-
what of the after-reflection of a mature commentator ; and from
a biographical point of view are no less illustrative of the
veteran at Scillus than of the young man at Athens. Such is
a series in Afem, II. on the relations of parents and children.
" How should a son behave to his mother?" or "Concerning
brotherly affection." But these are just of a sort to mark the
intimate relations between the teacher and the pupil at the
time. They form a chapter of the private life of Socrates
revealed to a friend. There is no reason why they should
not be also verbatim reports at first hand Others read like
authentic records of actual descriptions related to Xenophon
by an intimate friend. The two conversarions between Euihy-
demus and Socrates in Bk. IV. are good specimens. Another
set suggest either that Xenophon himself, or some one very
like Xenophon, was the interlocutor. The sentiments of the
disputant might well have been his at the time. Such are the
two in Bk, III. ch. ii. and iii. — Socrates and a young man on
the duties and ambition of a strategos and of a hipparch
respectively. (We are close upon autobiography here, I think.)
Others, again, discover the artist working up his material to
the best advantage (and occasionally perhaps in a way which
offends our sense of dramaric propriety). How often is not
Xenophon tempted consciously or unconsciously to impress
his own personality upon some one or other of his dramatis
fursonaef There is a llnal class, of which the Economist
may be taken as a highly -developed type, which read as
if the artist had at times got the better of the biographer.
It is hard not to helieve that in the conversation between
Socrates and Pericles the younger (one of the unfortunate
generals at Arginusae, it will be recollected), Xenophon
lias contrived dramatically to represent the workings of
his own mind upon the subject of debate. Just as the
Kcnuomist is i>erhaps an expansion of some actual Socratic
conversation with a view to a freer handling of the topic, so
this particular discussion (setting forth the pessimistic views of
Pcriiles concerning the Athens of the moment, in contrast
with the mure hopeful views of Socrates touching an ideal
Athens of the future) might well have been worked up into



i


LIFK OF XENOPHON



XM



a political pamphlet in praise of the Solonian institutions.^
Between these two voices it is possible to detect the workings
of Xenophon's own mind. One may hear or overhear hts
thoughts excusing or else accusing one another politically.
Such a discussion may actually have taken pLice — and Xeno-
phon may have listened to it probably between 411 b.c. and
406 B.C., by which time his own miso-Theban views were
probably already pronounced.

But it was not to Socrates alone that Xenophon's introduc-
tion to politics was' due (though to make his friends statesman-
like was, as we know, a great object with that teacher) ; there
were other go-betweens of all sorts, human or metaphysical.
Demonic forces were leading him on, and fixing his views for
better or for worse. These were pre-eminently the current
incidents of the time (some of which he has graphically
enough described). There were also the prepossessions and
intellectual propensities of the individual. What Xenophon*s
leanings were we can scarcely doubt. He is one of those
thinkers to whom we may perha|)S apply the modem term
** aristocratic" without doing his departed spirit an injustice.- In
the arena of ancient politics he watches impartially the behaviour
of the combatants in their strife for glory ; but his eye is fixed
most readily on the doings of the ^eATttrroi,, whether the state
be friendly or hostile. The better classes were better than the
rest of the world That is axiomatic ; at the same time he
admits Socratically the sad truth : Corruptio optiml pcsdma est.
Nor does his admiration of respectability fill him wuth preju-
dices against the vQ.vriKh<i ^y\x>^ of Piraeus, whose good dis-
cipline on shipboard delights him. It does not blind him to
the fact that in a deeper and more philosophic sense the free
man may be a very slave in soul and the slave-born man win to
himself a patent of nobility. But, on the whole, and with large

* Such a ireaiise would have been an apt counterpart of the so-called
Lacfdtumonian Polity, a pamphlet in praise of the institutions of Lycurgus. As
to the Athenian Polity, see Xen. Works, II. It ^^as written by perhaps a
cleverer, at any rate a more Machiavellian, person ihan Xenophon.

- Could he revisit earth and study modern hteralure. I think he would find
the doctrines of Thomas Carlyle most congenial to his political mind ; but to
his aesthetic and philosophic soul in general the style and sentiments of John
Ruskin.



XIV



SKETCH OF THE



deductions due no less to his Iiumaii-heartedness than to his
artistic sense (to which, as lo some high court of equity, he
may appeal against the prejudices of an Athenian knight or
hopHte), he is of the school at Athens of Theramenes.^

AVhat part, if any, the future historian of the period hhn-
self played in public affairs from 4 1 1 ac, to the date of the
amnestVj whether or not he shared in the troubles of the Four
Hundred or in those of the Thirty, we cannot say. It is quite
possible that, in accordance with a tradition mentioned by
Philostratus, he was during part of this time a prisoner
in Eoeotia. Wherever he was, it is certain that his poUtical
views were all the while shaping themselves, If merely from a
literary and artistic point of view, he could not fail to note
with curiosity the course of events, the import of which,
whether at iionie or abroad, was alike momentous. The plot
thickened apace. The spectator was not of a temperament to
sit by perfectly unmovedj or unbiassed in his judgment.
Perhaps, like the youtliful Ion in the play of Euripides, he
wished to hold himself aloof, «v voXn ^oi^y ttXc^.- But
however loath he might be to plunge into affairs at the sacrifice
of that "dearest boon to mortals — leisure," he was at the same
time a youth of some ambition. He had studied to make
himself an adept in speech and action. The question must ere
long present itself to his mind, How was he to turn his
political training to account ?

On the whole, and apart from the dramatic interest of them,
the incidents of these years offered no encouraging prospect to

^ So, after Mr. W. L. Newman {The Poliiks of Aristotle, vol. i. p. 491).
I nanit: ihe more moderate wing^ of the popular party at Athens during the
years 411-403 B.C. (sec Thuc. viii. 97, and Xeit. HeU. IL iii. 43, cf, Plalo.
Laws, 753 B). For the doctrines of this " left centre " party, with many of which
Aristotle himself sympathised, s-ec op. at. p. 470 folt, TJiey nimy l»e summed
up in the phrase 17 5i4 tuji^ fiiiruy ToXtrem : and by the /u^eroi v.<e must under-
stand the moderately well-to-do classes in the state intermediate between the
very rich and the very iroor. AnoUier '"kri cctitre " tenet iittributed lo Tlicra-
menes is thnt the well-wishers of u constitution must be stronger than its
opponents if the constitution is to stand, 0/. cit. p. 491 and note; sec also
Xen. Heli. IT. iii. 19, 20, 42, 44, compared with Aristot. PoL 7(5)9, 1309/'. 16
seq. ', 8(6)6 1320 h. 25 sfg. The atiove seems a fair conclusion lo draw from
the lone of the first two books of the Helknica.

' Sec Eur. Ion, 6ot, and with the boy's speech, cf. Xen. Mem. III. vii. 5
and Cyrvp, I. ii. 3.



LIFE OF XENOPHON



XV



a man of his disposition. There were the events of 411 b.c
The government of the Five Thousand might perhaps have
satisfied him, could it have lasted.^ In that best of modern
constitutions, in which oligarchy and democracy were duly
attempered, and the reins of power lay in the hands of those
who could furnish themseh'es with arms, Xenophon might
have hoped at the age of thirty to find a sphere of use-
fulness. But the limited democracy did not last for more
than one year. Again in the spring of 404 b.c could the
young philosopher have stopped the wheels of time, just
when the Thirty commissioners were chosen to draft a con-
stitution based on the ancestral laws of the state ; could he
have forced them to carry out the duty imposed on thenij
we can readily imagine the type of polity which he would
have had established. As a matter of fact the commissioners
had no intention of setting u|) a Neo-Solonian democracy, nor
yet an aristocracy ; they were bent upon the methods of
tyranny. Yet even so their first high-handed measures against
' sycophants ' might perhaps be winked at, but the intro-
duction of a Laconian bodyguard under a creature like
Callibiug was past forgiveness. Xenophon would have been
no true pupil of Socrates if his horror of sycophancy and the
make-believe of statecraft had not been counterbalanced by
an instinctive repugnance to tyranny and lawlessness. Some
of these commissioners might have possessed the rudi-
ments at least of political sagacity — they were not simply
empirics ; but unless they added to these elements the right
moral diathesis which distinguishes the true ruler, they had
not the fTTto-Tr/p; of government, their technical knowledge
w^as in vain. Critias might be the fit subject of a moral
treatise : corrupiio opllmiy but he was no true governor.
Where then w\is stable government to be found? Not in
democratic Athens, where the voter was ignorant and govern-
ment depended on the lottery of the bean. Was it perchance
to be found in Sparta? or was Xenophon rather indulging a
philosophic dream of a new Athens, a novel association of
states in a renovated Hellas, in which the naturally cohesive
force of virtue should as by some elective affinity bind to-

"• See Tliuc. vit, 97.



the souls of the i'lite ; where there should t^e
combination of all the KaAo/caya^ot in the statCj or in society
at large, to help each other, and in generous rivalry to dominate
and regenerate the world ? Was not that the meaning of what
Socrates had been saying to Critobulus about friendship?^
Thus lie ruminated.

But how was his own tjuXoTifxia to express itself? One
may easily make a grave blunder in answering such a question
touching a man in whom the artist ever predominated over the
citizen. H we may judge from hints scattered up and down
his writings, or from the analogy of other young Athenians at
the time (one thinks of Proxenus as described by Xenophon
himselfj of Mantitheus in the speech of Lysias, of Akibiades
as depicted in the A/a'd. major of Plato) ; or lastly, from the
next chapter of his own life, as narrated in the Anabasis^ be
took a supreme interest in the problem of o-pyji-" If he could
not rule in his own person he would like to divine the secret of
rule, and to discover the " archie " man. His moralising habit
of mind, moreover, led him to divide the world into good
and bad, or to accept with readiness the old political party
catchwords.^ For some reason the popular party at Thebes,
whose scheme was to absorb the other Boeotian states, appears
to him in an evil light. Even after the restoration and in
spite of the good turn they did to the exiles, he cannot get
over his natural antipathy to this border state ; and amid
the home troubles he could not help being driven to certain
generalisations. In these lie the germs of the political philo-
sophy of the mature man.*

These speculations, which had occupied his mind for half
a doxen years, were rudely interrupted by the anarchy of
the Thirty. Presently we are in the turmoil of civil war.
What, if he was at Athens, was the occupation of Xenophon

1 See Mem. II. \\. ^ See Index "Xenophon,"

^ Theognis, 31-38 ; cf. Mem. I. ii. 20 ; Plato. Meno, 95 D : Aristot. Etk.
ix. 9 : and see Mr. Synionds" remarks on the meaning of itrBXai and AyadoL,
KttKd and 5«\oi (Gteei Poets, i. p. 89).

* As seen in his reflections on Ihe I.aconian or Lycurgean institutions or
the ideal oligarchy ; the despotic man ; the archie man. These form the
theses of three existing works. Tlie work on the Solonian institvitions —
which he might have written — was never achieved. Perhaps this was a
matter tcna close hotne.


A



LIFE OF XENOPHON



XVI 1



then ? We should like very much to know whether he was
employed in the cavalry or otherwise, and how he comported
himself. His sympathies as a historian seem to be with
Thrasybulus. But on the whole we are most struck by the
healthy impartiality of the narrative, the chief defect of which
is that it omits to tell us all we should like to know. The
author seems to draw a long breath of relief at the end of
Bk. II. ch. iv., "The Amnesty." In his own writings there is
a gap between the second and third books of the Jleihnica,
commonly so called, which is only partially covered by the
incidents of the Ar/ a/fasts.

We are led to ask ourselves, what happened to Xenophon
in this interval — between the summer of 403 e.g. and the
spring of 401 ac. At that latter date we know that he had
taken a momentous resolution, and had started on an adven-
turous quest with his old friend Proxenus, and his country's
ancient enemy, the younger Cyrus. In taking this step he
was not free from misgivings, if only because he acted against
the better judgment of the friend whom he most trusted.
What put him to k? In the absence of real information we
are once more thrown back upon conjecture. The explanation,
if we can divine it, lies in the character and ambition of the
man. Many things perhaps combined at this date to make the
invitation of Proxenus attractive; the promptings of his physical
temperament, his belief in energising, his political bias and
curiosity (since Cyrus was reported to be an "archie" man),
his somewhat vague but at the same time noble yearnings
after reputation — these on the positive side ; and on the
negative, a sense perhaps of limitation at home, unless he were
to strike out a new line of his own. He was not, we suspect,
enough of a student to sit down quietly and work out his
literary salvation in the closet (as did his contemporary
Isocrates). He was not so essentially a soldier that he would
have accepted the career of an Iphicrates or a Timotheus had
such a chance come in his way. Perhaps he reasoned with
himself that just now he had a right to indulge his natural
appetite for adventure. It was an appropriate moment at
which " to cross over to Asia and meddle with Asiatic affairs," '

1 See Plato. A/ciS. \, 105.



XV] 11



SKETCH OF THE



1



since at this juncture the interests of Sparta and the new
democracy were one ; and if the voice of conscience whispered,
" But Cyrtis is the arch-enemy of your state," he might have
said to himself, ** It is an old story now," dkka to. fitv -rrpoTf-
Tvx^ai. But it was the touch of knight-errantry in his com-
position, probably, which, combining with friendship for a
friend, enabled him to connive at the antecedents of Cyrus>



Manhood, 401-387 b.c. ; The "Anabasis," etc., 401-399 b.c, ; Un-
certain Movements in Asia with Agesilaus, 399-394 b.c ; at
Sparta. 394-387 ac

Thus he took the resolution, and with lightness of heart, if
in humbleness of soul, set sail. He was under the protection
of Zeus the Saviour and of Heracles the Leader ; what then
need he fear? Perhaps in secret he nursed an Achillean hope,
*'But my fame shall be imperishable," as with an attendant
soothsayer he started from Ephesus to join his friends at Sardis,

•
1 The thought suggests itself that he may really have served as a knight
under the Thirty. Doubtless there had been many "left centre" democrats so
employed^ but as a lx>dy tlmt class of citizens was not in good odour. No
mischief befell ihem except thai some of then; had to forfeit their aJlowances
(KaT(i(rTa6rtj), and when the opportunity arrived the more conspicuous instru-
ments of the Thirty were sent oft" on foreign service under the Spartan harmosi
Thibron in 399 ; somewhat, as it would seem, in maiam rem. However
neutral the part which Xenophon, on this hypothesis, had played, his pohtical
career at Athens would have commenced (he may have felt) under difficulties
in spite of the amnesty, which from himself we know was, for the matter of
that, religiously observed. But this is pure speculation. There is anofher
point. Either now or possibly on his return to Europe in 399 EX., he seems
to have had an interview (at Megana) with another enemy of the democracy ,
the Spartan Lysander. So I gather from the expressions put into the mouth
of Socrates in the Economiit {Oec. iv. 20), which must surely refer to some
personal experience of the author. If this interview look place and now.
Lysander naturally had fine stories to tell about C>tus. According la another
hypothesis, TTliucydides perhaps died in 403 B.C., and Xenophon had for the
last year or so been busily employed in editing his great predece-ssor's works,
and supplementing them by his own Parakip&mena (Hellenica, Bks. 1. and
II. iii. 10). At the end of that literary labour he was in need of a holiday. If
so, a shooting excursion in Pisidia in the company of Proxenus and this fine
fellow Cyrus was just the thing for him. His warmth in the matter is shown
by the manner in which he consulted the god (see below, p. 68) ; his loo late
repentance (seeing that the thoughtless step led to exile) by the remark, possibly,
in Memorab. 1, i. 4. But this again is pure hypotiiesis.



LIFE OF XENOPHON



and nt the outset the god vouchsafed him a sign. An eagle
sat perched on the wayfarer's right hand, portending glory not
without alloy of suffering, but untainted by any huckstering
gain of money. The full import of the omen, as in the case
of another later revelation^ was only made plain by the events
which followed ; yet it sen-ed, maybe, to fix his purpose and to
stimulate his ardour. Little he recked of evils to come, as the
blood coursed healthily through his veins and regally the sun-
god smiled upon his going. Blitheness indeed and buoyancy
in spite of some occasional passing cloud of despondency, are
the distinctive characteristics of the Anadasisy that prose epic
of historic Greece, into which the author has with much skill
interwoven a chapter of his life. Still to-day, as we read the
story, an unaccustomed spirit lifts us above the ground with
cheerful thoughts. Here too, on the side of action, Xenophon
appears at his best. Here he is most truly Oreek, nor does he
stand alone ; "EAAjp't? au iraiSe? would be a fitting motto to
the w^ork, in compliment to the adventurous warriors who rise
above their baser selves in adversity, and claim kinshi[) with
the heroes of the Iliad. There are at the same time certain
traits of disposition which serve in some degree to distinguish
the protagonist The vein of religiousness which pervades the
story is of this idiosyncratic sort. This tJ^o? 6*€ocre/3es (as the
ancient critics would have called it) is strong enough at times
to tinge the narrative with an inner parabolic meaning. The
romantic march becomes an allegory of a soul's adventure, in
which the mighty ones of earth are cast down and the little
one is exalted : in which effeminacy, treachery, and arrogance
may work mischievously for a season, but in the end are
brought to nought ; while the faithful God-fearing man who
helps himself and patiently endures will win in the end
salvation. Xenophon 's own habit was, he tells us, to turOj as
Socrates had taught him to do, in matters beyond the ken of
man's wit tt> decide, for help to heaven. Illustrations of this
behaviour on his part are plentiful. His relations indeed to
the heavenly powers resemble those of Hermogenes in the
Symposium or of Socrates himself.^ He is so dear to the gods
that they will not leave him without a sign, when a sign is

^ Sec Symp. iv. 47 foil. ; Mem. JV, in. 13 foil.



SKETCH OF THE

needed. Either in dreams ^ or sacrifices, by birds, or voices,
or by something encountered on the path, they graciously
make known their will to him, A modern man may smile at
the machinery of divination ; but, as bearing witness to an
inner need of our common humanity, he will welcome the
childlike trustfulness and reverence of the pious Athenian
captain.

Another trait of this period may be spoken of as the
awakening of dormant ambition in the breast of one who was
too diffident to snatch at honour, but on whom honour was
thrust. We can follow the growth of this sentiment from the
moment when it becanmc apparent that the raid into Pisidia
was a pretext, since Cyrus was flying at lordlier game than
certain irrepressible hill tribes.

Perhaps at Issi or at Myriandus Xenophon might have
withdrawn, as he was free to do. But like Pj-oxenus,- if in
a less degree, he felt under an obligation to his host ; he _
had laid his hand to the plough, and it was base to turn back.
Curiosity in itself was a further incentive, as the military
aspect of the expedition grew in fa.scination. How far was
this boasted Persian empire open to attack ?^ Lastly, there
was doubtless a personal side to the matter. It was but natural
to forecast events. C>tus in his free-handed way had promised
crowns and satrapies to his Greek officers.'' He, Xenophon,
though unofficially attached, would certainly not be forgotten.
He would return home with enlarged experience, and the
wherewithal to benefit a friend. The death of Cyrus dispelled
these fancies. But others of a more permanent character took
their place. Between the battle of Sept. 3 and the passage



' One of these signs has already be«n mentioned, nor need I forestall the
reader's pleasure in picking tbem out for himself. They are of re.il psycho-
logical inleresl. In particular, the drtsuns — that on the night of the seizure of
the generals, or that other {a t/Kvoi Sia^aTitc6s) at the passage of the Ceatrites —
help us to follow the workings of his mindl. They remind one of St. Paul's
vision of the man of Macedonia (Alexander the Great?), dreamt in the vicinity
of " sacred lliou," and were in a spirit;ial sense " veridical," Sec for this, and
for other traits of character — e.g. his strategical skill ; his combined tact and
eloquence; his philanthropy exhibited towards barbarians no less than t>ie
Cyreians ; the awakening of his jiersonal ambition ; his colonisation schemes ;
his respect for law and authority, his /^etoix^ia — Index " Xenophon."

- See pi3. 49, 6g. " See p. ig. "* See p. 34.



LIFE OF XENOPHOX



XXI



\ie Tigris (Oct 5), a month of suspense intervened. The
brains of the young scholar or philosopher were working the
while. He was duly taking note of the surroundings.^ The
germ of a colonisation scheme,* which was never realised indeed
but never laid aside, belongs to this intervaL So, doubdess,
does the germ of that lordlier undertaking, which in the ful-

1 ness of time was amply realised — the conquest and absorption
by Hellas of the Persian empire.^

The murder of the generals on the fatal 2 2d of October
transformed the theorist into the man of action. In the
visions of that night a new spirit bred of sharp necessity and

[true courage entered him. A voice summoned him to the
leadership in a forlorn hope. In obeying the call he found
himself not in name only, but after a brief apprenticeship, in
very deed, what he had aspired to be, a ruler of men. The
story of his generalship 15 told with ample detail in the four
last books of the Ana/Bast's, and need not be repeated here.

^ I confine myself to general observations.*

* We shall find traces of this in his latest works. See Cyrop. passim.
His notes arc liiose of an intelligent traveller, observant of men and
manners and scenery, with a taste for sport. But he has further the keen
critical eye of the war correspondent or military attachd, ^ee pp. 19, 48,
etc In the Cyropaedia we traverse the same ground and fight the old
battles over again.

- For the gradual working out of this project, see p. 80. note i, and
p. I So foil. He cherished it all his life as we suspecL At Calpe it seemed
on Ihe point of realisation, but at a sudden turn of affairs (the advent of a
Spartan admiral) the dream melted into thin air. The rock fortress which
L was to have become an independent lillle state with great powers of expansion
^and the happiest future before it, had to be deserted. Its abandonment was
evidently a blow to Xenophon's ambition, but it is not his liabit to repine.
Self-effacement of a sort is easy to him,

" We discover both, in the rcHcclion how easy jt would be to plant them-
selves as a military colony in the heart of Babylonia, p. 79. In its immediate
conception strategical, tliis project presented a philanthropic side. Such a
colony, wherever planted, would serve to draw oflT a portion of the surplus
|>opulation from his native city and to diminish pauperism (sec Rev. \. i).
[To be the {oerist or) founder of such a settlement would have satisfied the
Ipersonal ambition of Xenophon. But there was no chance of gratifying it at
I present in the basin of the Tigris,

* The reader who wishes rapidly to piece together the leading personal
'details can do so by turning to the Index and reading what is there given under

the name of " Xenophon." The authenticity of the story is another matter.
There is, 1 believe, no just ground for doubting it. The part which Xenophon
assigns bimself is somewhat idealised ; but these were the facts. This indeed


SKETCH OF THE



The path of leadership is glorious bat beset with peril.
According to Xenophon's mature reflection, it can only be
trodden with absolute success by the real prince ;^ and the
qualities requisite aie not to be found in ordinary mortals.
That he was able himself to play the part with credit for a
season must be ascribed at once to his native Attic abilit)' and
to his Socratic training. To Athens he owed that happy
combination of eloquence and confidence with soldier-like
resource and bravery,* which his countrymen regarded as the
natural outcome of their democratic institutions. To Socrates
may be traced those ruling qualities of sympathy and human-
hearted ness, and that readiness to take the lion's share of
fatigue and danger, which won him the obedience and affection
of the soldiers. This volunteer was no pretentious charlatan,
else they would soon have exploded him. Nor was he a mere
rule-of-thumb tactician and drill-sergeant, or it would have
fared but ill with him and them- He had, it was soon seen,
a real gift of inventiveness and a sound economic sense.' An
instinct told him how best to adapt the means at his disposal
to a given end ; and that too in the face of ancient methods.

IS the charm, or one charm, of the Anadaris. It contains, as I have elsewhere
suggested, not only a graphic account of a notable episode of Greek history,
but it constitutes a chapter of autobiography in which the personal element
subsenes to the general drantatic interest of the narrative. Without bdng
unfaithful to Qio. the muse of history, the author uses his tablet and stylus in
the senice of her sister Calliope. And of his own prose epic he is the central
figure So he behaved. Such was the real meaning, the true interprelalion,
of his intent and conduct From aiiotho- point of view, the inier^l of the
Anabasij centres in its niilitary problems. It might have setred. like the
Commettlairei of Blaise de Montluc, as a " soldier's breviary " or vade mecum.
It was not the Anatasts, however, but the Cyropatdia, a work based to a
groat extent on the v4««i#<tr<j. which .^fricanus carried about with him. See Cic
TuK. II. xxvi, 63, " Semper African us Socraticum Xenophonteni in manibus
habebat, cujus imprimis lajjdabat illud {Cyr. I. >-i. 25). quod diceret. eosdem
labores non esse acque graves imperatori et milrti. quod ipse bonos laborem
IcNiorcm facerel imperatorium. " Cf. Ep, ad Q. Fratr, /. , I, viii. 23. " Quos
quidem libros non sine causa noster ilJe Africanus de manibus ponere non
!KjIel)ai : nullum est cnira praeterroissum in his officiuro diUgentis el moderati
imperii."

^ "The Archie Man." See Cyrop. 1. i. and vi. passim; llipparck.: also
^fem. IV- ii. 11.

- The words are Grote's, H. G, \x, p. 117, 1st ed. See also Curtius.
^- G, (Eng. tr.), iv. 130.

ItifXfLviK^i. oiKwafjUKOi. See Mtitt. II!. i. 6; IV. ii. 11.



I



LIFE OF XEXOPHON



xmi



"Whatever his prior military experience may have been, he had
studied in no narrow-minded spirit He was all the more apt
to learn the handling of troops in the school of experience.
If, for instance, the ground which they were forced to traverse
were not suitable to the evolutions in vogue, it seemed a
matter of sound sense, no less than of generalship, to suit their
tactics to their novel circumstances. Opportunities for such
moditications of method in march and battle daily presented
themselves. The experience so gained was of permanent
value. If, therefore, it is to the credit of the Ten Thousand
coUectively that they were able to face blithely a long series
of ever-shifting difficulties, it is equally to the honour of Xeno-
phon and his colleagues that the strain was not greater. To
him and them attaches the glory of the pioneer. They are
reformers in the art of warfare. How fer Xenophon can be
fairly regarded as the monopolist of these reforms is not an
easy question. It is he, however, who has explained them to
us, and they savour of his inventiveness.*

But apart from these traits of originalit>% self-devotion, and
alertness^-characteristic in themselves of the archie man, there
is no doubt that Xenophon possessed what he himself would
have regarded as the sine qua non of success in leadership. -
This special qualification of the Hellenic happy warrior he had
in his pious disposition. His, as I have already said, was a
quite childlike faith and a trust in di\ine providence. This
attitude of mind did not render him superstitious or inactive.



* They cany the hall-mark, as one may say, of his particular genius, bear-
ing a strong family likeness lo the literary innovations which his written works
exemplify. As lo the tactical reforms in question, they were discussed at the
cotmcil of war by all the generals, etc.. and the whole board must have the
credit of their adoption. But it is almost certain that the prime mox'er was
not xmfrequentty tlie Athenian. This seems to have tx-en llie opinion of Uic
ancients, il^ough there is no direct contemporary evidence in proof. It is also
the opinion of imp>ortant modem authorities. What seems quite certain is,
that the modifications in the handling of heavy and light infantry and cavalry,
and the combined evolutions of these troops, which were presently adopted
in Greek warfare, f.g. in some of Agesilaus's battles (in Asia and at Coronea},
were primarily due to the experiences of the Ten Thousand. See Rlistow
and Kochly, Gfsch, d. Griech, Krugnt^esens. p. 158 [note 19), and the refer-
ctioes 10 Xenophon and other authorities there given. Anab. V. iv, aa. p. 144 ;
Aga. ii. 9-14; Hell. IV'. iii. 15; Plut. Ages, 18; Diod. xiv. 84; Polyaen.



1,4; 6. ^9 ; Krontin. ii. 6, asra.



See Cyrop, I. vi. 46.


I



XXIV SKETCH OF THE

It did not leave him open to the chicaneries of every lying
soothsayer.^ On the contrary it gave him confidence in the
practical affairs of life and a sense of security in dark places.^
It enabled him also to acquiesce in the many personal disap-
pointments which at this period awaited him. It saved him from
the torture to which certain sympathetic natures are liable, the
consciousness of talents wasted in fond subsemence to the will
of others. But the disappointments were very real It is a proof
indeed of his literary skill that he can present them so vividly
without wearying his readers by the enumeration of them.

These were, to put it briefly, the offences which must needs
come to a man like Xenophon so exceptionally circumstanced.
Some may be traceable to a certain weakness in his nature, .
since, as above suggested, he was (to apply language of his own) I
to some extent dipsychic and the cherisher of incompatible
desires. * The larger portion of them, however, were the out-
come of what was most honourable to him, his insatiable
striving after honour.'* The rest spring out of the inevitable
misunderstandings of the situation. It must be, in so motley

' Sec Cyrofi. T. vl. a, and see p. 155 for a practical illiislTation.

^ So at any rate he seems to feel ; and one may well believe. It did not
of course instruct him ethically. Ii did not precisely quicken his social or his
political conscience. How should it? By which I nra far from implying that
Ihcse stood in any special need of ciuickcning. His feelings towards slaves
and "barbarians" are markedly philanthropic. His anti-Theban bias is the
common narrow-mindedness of active political partisanship. It, like the rest
of his political shortcoming, is compatible with an exalted pan-Helletiic patriot-
isni. resembling that of Lysias and Isocrales.

" ittcompaiiblc desires. — E.g. he wishes to return home, but he \sill not
abiindon the army — or go against the will of the God — or he does not find it
easy to bresik with the Spartan governors, His proper respect for vested
authority looks at times like subsorvjencc \ or is his vacillation owing to a
growing sense of insecurity at home ? (See below. )

^CKvnplxL : his chief ambition is to rule and to obey. toD dpx^'»' re fcol
dpX'*''^*' ■ '° "^o ^'^ share in some famous deed. The successful conduct of
the advance — and still more so, of the retreat — ought surtrly to redound to
their credit and his. That is his hope. To found a colony is a scheme which
appeals to his sense of economy. It is a practical thing to do. It leads to
honour. To possess a sea -board fortress is a more simply self- regarding
scheme. By the end of the year 400 B.C. he has come to regard himself as a
possible rolling stone. He is in the category of the mercenary captains, or
may be. This idea seems to have occupied liis mind only during the last
M'inter, when his hopes of fame were beginning to dwindle and his appre-
henjiion of certain .Spartans and of Pharnabazus had grown large.

* See Cytap. passim ; Hiero, vtl 3.



LIFE OF XEXOPIION



XXV



host and with so many rival captains, sonic generous and
others the reverse, in eager competition, that offences against
an Athenian private gentleman without followers to back him
should come ; so soon at least as the immediate difficulties
were past and there Avas time to attend to private advantages.
This did not make them the less bitter. With Xenophon at
least we shall agree that the elemental forces of nature were
not so hard to battle with as those various moral evils which
beset the army from Trapezus onwards. As to himself per-
sonally we can well understand that the tooth of an Armenian
or Scythian winter did not bite like a fellow-man's ingratitude.
But underlying the last books of the Ariafias/s is the sense of
something more than disappointment. I think we must call
it a sense of disillusionment.^ It is not spoken of tediously
with many words ; but here and there a phrase well suited to
its context, like the echo of a sigh, pathetically reveals it.
" Somewhere," he says, as he parts with the Thracian princeling
SeutheSjto whom he has restored a kingdom and without reward,
*' somewhere I may rise to honour ; and that shall redound to
your gain also." 2. Let us consider this matter. I have already
spoken of the colonisation scheme. The abandonment of it
was on each occasion doubtless a blow to his hopes.^ "For
myself I have done with that dream," betrays the feeling of a
sacrifice. But to turn the troops to so good an account — to
become famous as the t}t:a'sf of a new and thriving settlement —
was not his sole personal ambition, nor its abandonment his
only act of self-sacrifice. It was only part and parcel of the
more general ambition which he cherished- He cared much
for the good name and fame of his fellow-soldiers.'* For him-
self, he hoped that some echo of his success as a commander
might be borne on the wings of fame to Hellas : that, to use
his own phrase, he might one day reach his native city^ and
find his name writ large.*^ At a certain date in the month of

* This is iiTtcUigible cnougli when wa bejir tn mind that the work itself,
or, at any rnte, a portion of it, could not have been fin^1lly comf)osed until
long after the years (401-399 B.c) in which Uie incidents look place.

2 See page 236. * Page 156.

* Page i6a. "The praises we expect to win from the mouths of raen/'
, • Page 170.
I* The desire to return home is first expressed in the speech at Cotyora,



XXVI



SKETCH OF THE



May (400 B.C.), whilst the army lay at Harmene, the port of
Sinope,^ and the proximity to their goal brought self-regarding
feelings to the surface, it looked for one moment as if
Xenophon were about to reap the first-fruits of a well-earned
reputation. After a public meeting of the soldiers, the sole
generalship was formally offered to him. But this honour,
gratifying to his personal vanity, had, in obedience to the will
of heaven, to be foregone. Firmly, and without repining, he
put it aside. Yet he makes no secret of a certain perturbation.
However plain the duty^ — however salutary the consequences^ —
of self-effacement in the future, for the moment his hopes were
disappointed. There were other disappointments of a .similar
sort in store for him — before Byitantium — at Selybria, and
again during his service under Seuthes, On every occasion the
higher — at least the more reasonable — nature of the man wins
an easy battle over some subordinate inclination. Zeus is ever
his saviour j Heracles is his guide.

It must, however, be admitted that these triumphs are
somewhat at the expense of self-assertiveness. I do not mean
that Xenophon ever ceased to he a man of action. If he
sometimes let " I dare not '* wait upon " I will," the hero within
him reasserted itself. It was never swallowed up by the philo-
sopher. But at times that nearly happened. What between
his sense of fairness on the one hand, and his infinite regard
for law on the other, his will was kept in abeyance. This man
has none of the self-aggrandising dash of Alcibiades. For
vested authority he has an infinite respect. It is astoni.shing
how readily he accepts the hegemony of Sparta at this period,
as if it belonged to the eternal order of the universe. It is
thus that, externally at any rate (though with his inner being it
is quite otherwise), his life becomes as it were the plaything
and sport of fortune. Thus we find this great Athenian cap-
tain playing the ignoble part of tennis-ball to rival Spartan
harmosts. When he has a chance to return home his desire
to keep the army together, in compliance with the schemes of

June 400, in which he abandons the colonisationi scheme (p. 15&). It is re-
peated at Heraciea in July ; but the design is vetoed by Heracles {the Leader)
(p. 175). Again, iu August, at Chrysopolis ; and at Byzantium, August to
October (pp. 196, 197-aoi). Again, in February of the next year, 399 B.C.,
on leaving Seuthes (p, 236). ^ Page 171.



J



LIFE OF XENOPHON



XXVI t



Anaxibius, leads him to prolong his stay. The counter views
of Aristarchus drive him to undertake the 'rhraciaii campaign
with Seuthes ; and the end of it all is that the escape from one
Spartan, Aristarchus, throws him into the arms of another,
Thibron.

During these last months (the winter campaign in Thrace)
Xenophon has an uneasy suspicion that one day he may need
a private fortress (like Alcibiadcs before him) as a harbour of
refuge from political storms.^ But Bisanthe, Ganos and Neon
Teichos, like the city that might have been of Calpe, prove
but cloud-castles. Owing to the weakness of Seuthes the
Thracian prince, and the machinations of a false Hellene
(Heracleides), the Asiatic campaign is less remunerative to
Xenophon than the Cyreian expedition. Chiefly through his
disinterestedness he finds himself all but beggared, when, for
the last time postponing his departure homewards, he consents

I to hand over the Cyreians in person to their new paymaster
Thibron in Asia. The old family soothsayer Eucleides^ is
clever in his diagnosis. This man is an obstacle to himself.
Zeus Meilichios is a further obstacle. As far as the god is con-
cerned there is a speedy cure ; but I need not repeat the story

I already referred to. We leave Xenophon at the end of the
Anabasis enriched as he little expected to be. He is not only
in the lap of luxury, but he is in the midst of friends. He is
at home with the family of Gongylus the Eretrian, his sons and
their mother Hellas, He i.s popular with the army, men and
officers. His old friends the Cyreians vie with his new I^conian
friends in honouring him. Zeus Meilichios is well appeased.
But do we leave him freed from the .self-hindrance of his own
compliant nature ? I think not. On the contrary, this same self-
hindrance would seem to have been the very principle of his
spiritual development A worse thing than the lack of means
was about to happen to him — the loss of his countr}'. The
causes of that catastrophe are still a matter of speculation. If
it were possible to divine them, they would be found, I think,

I to exemplify the diagnosis of Eucleides, " You are an obstacle
to yourself." But of this matter enough,

^ See p. so8, in case of difficulty wiih Lacedaemon in the first instance ;
also pp. 230, 22g, 335. ^ Page 337.



XXVlll



SKETCH OF THE



In the spring of 399 i:.c, Xenophon, if not himself alto-
gether a different person, is differently conditioned from
the youth who in this same month of March just two
years ago set out from Athens to join Proxenus and Cyras.
Hoth these friends and many others were dead. Socrates
was at the point of death.' In what direction should he
turn now, this man with his Achillean aspirations and his
Odyssean cautiousness ; his almost Socratic independence
in things of the soul, his sophistic scrupulosity, or should
it be said, his Attic ayj^u/ota in practical affairs? In a
material sense he was more free to move, but politically he
was more isolated. If he had now at last something in his
pocket wherewith to benefit a friend^ was he likely to find his
name written large in the hearts of his own countrj'men ?
would he even be welcomed as a virtuous citizen at home?
There the tide of conservative reaction was setting in apace.
The most deserving section of the party — the saviours of the
Democracy — were naturally well - disposed to Thebes ; the
citizens in general resented the leadership of Sparta. Was
the Democracy for ever to play a secondary part ? Was not
empire the birthright of Athenians ? On the whole, and how-
ever great his natural inclination to return horae,^ this was
scarcely an opportune moment for a citizen of his antecedents
to think of establishing himself at Athens. It is Xenophon
himself who benrs witness to the generous and reasonable
l>ehaviour of the restored Democracy.^ It is he who has

^ Socmtcs drank the tieml(x:k iia May. It is nol probable lliat Xenophon
ever saw him again. When and where he heard the account ol his trial iintl
condemnation, we cannot lell. Perhaps with other considerations it com-
bined to determine his movemenls now,

'•* See the last two books of the Aii/idasis, passim (pp. 156, 175, 196.
197, 20i< 236). Grote thinks that he did return for a sliort while, during
which time he brought out his Pamieipome/ia and then returned to Asia,
rejoining the remnant of the Cyreians under the Spartan harmost Thibron or
his successor Dercylidas. Others have thought that he did not return at all,
or that he got no farther on the homeward journey than Megara. where he
would have heard froiu the Socraticswhat fate had befallen their friend. There
is something plausibJe in this last view of his movements. He probably had
his papo-s to put in order : and possibly a laook to publish. If so, was it
now that he interviewed Lysander? See above, p. xviiL

' See Neii. li, iv. 43. As Grote points out, the verse of Aeschylus
Tpaxiis yt (livroi. i^p.o'i iKipvyijiv taiKi. especialJy did not apply to the restored
Democracy. .See//. G. viii, p. 415 (aded.).


LIFE OF XENOPHON



XXIX



recorded a significant incident, which serves to illustrate the
spirit of the times. Among the troops of Thibron, he tells
us, was a contingent of cavalry sent out by Athens, as her
quota, in obedience to the ruling power. It consisted of those
knights who had been of special service to the Thirty. In
thus obeying the mandate of Sparta the home authorities
were probably stirred by two desires. They wished, on the
one hand, to deal justly by people of opposite politics, and,
on the other, to be rid of political firebrands. In the language
of the historian, they believed it would be a gain to the Demo-
cracy for these people to see some foreign service, and if it
I cost them their lives it was no great loss J The feeling of the
authorities towards these knights was a straw to show which way
the wind blew, and if Xenophon had contemplated returning
home in hopes to find his name writ large, perhaps the
talk of these men and the story of Socrates' fate served to
disenchant him. The latter tragic incident, whenever and
wherever the news reached him, must have come as a great
shock to him. He does not talk about it Neither in the
Afemorabiiia nor elsewhere does he speak angrily of the
accusers, still less so of the Athenian public,^ least of all does
he allow any note of personal resentment to obtrude upon the
solemn sadness of an irretrievable loss.

Whether he returned to Europe or not during the spring

[ or summer of this year, it seems certain that he was back

I in Asia before its close. The internal evidence derived

from certain books of the Hillenica (III. and IV.) "^ appears

conclusive on that point. In some way, officially or non-

^ oi 3* tvtp.'^a.y rCiv ivl tuv TpiiKovra iwTrevadvTiin/ vofd^ovTfi K^pSos r^
' A^/u^t fi diroSrifiQiev koI (vaTr&\otvTO, What actually became of ihem we do
not know.

'-* As he reflected on this matter later in life he was able to form a perfectly
considerate judgment. It was in a fit of jealousy (pardonable in frail
humanity) that ihtf Athenian public had acted. D6nios, as a it>n pire de
famitU, had turned against the philosophic tutor whrj had stolen the aflections
fof his darling son. This is the apolo^e of tiie allusive passage in the
Cyropitedia (III. i, 38-40). The bans pires dt famiik are represented by the
Armenian. His son Tigranes is the youth of Athens, whom tlie philosopher
had "corrupted." Cyrus is the outer world interested to discover the real
explanation of so sad a story.

■ As the mrnutene9s of detail impljitig the personal knowledge of an eye-
1 witness seems lo shaw.



XXX



SKETCH OF THE



officially, he was connected with the Spartan harmosts in Asia
off and on for five years (399-394 bx.) — if not with Thibron
hiraselfj to whom he had surrendered the six thousand Cyreians,
at any rate with Dcrcylidas first,^ and later with Agesilaus.
With this latter,- in the year 394 b.c, he certainly did return
to Europe, and was present consequently, whether he fought or
not, at the battle of Coronea,

This was a inomentous period in Xenophon's life. Within
its scope fall to be considered not only his marriage and the
birth of his sons, but his exile and that which in connexion
with his exile closely affected his whole after-life — a new friend-
ship with the Spartan king Agesilaus.

To speak of these in some order. The date of his
marriage can be approximately fixed ^ as falling in the year
399 B.C. or soon after. Who his wife was, we do not know.
One may suspect that he found, her in the Aeolid, perhaps in
the pleasant home of Hellas, the wife of Gongylus, or of some
other of his Perganiene friends ; but this is mere guesswork.
She may have been a foreigner, or she inay have been an
Athenian, a native of the Aeolid, or one of those women who
had shared in the campaign. There is no saying. That she
became the mother of two noble sons named Grj'llus and
Diodorus, we know ; and that her own name was Philesia,
Possibly the boys were twins, as their Spartan sobriquet T/ie
Dioscuri suggests. They w^ere popularly named "the great
twin brethren," and became famous. As to Pliilesia herself,
their mother, she is, we suspect^ the prototype of some one or
other of those delightful \Y0men worthy of Zeuxis and Euri-
pides, whom Xenophon has depicted.* Perhaps it was of her



1 See //f//. ITL i. 6 ; ii. 7.

2 See Arruf'. V. iii. 7 fp, t+o below) ; I/^U. IV. iii. 15 ; Plut. .4ges. 18.

* I speak here of his mamage mth Philesia, the mother of his two sons
Gryllus and Diodorus. It is possible ihat she was his second wife, And if
we could accept il as authentic, the pretty story repeated by Cicero [e/f /nz'etrt,
i. 31) oti the authority of Aeschines, the Socratic (cf, Quictil. V. ii. 27), of a
dialogue between Aspasia. Xenophon, and Xenophon's wife, would itnply
that he had V>ccn married before he left Athens in 401 B.C. ; indeed so many
years before that we should be driven to 440 bx. {tin-a] as the date of his
birth. But the conversation is doubtless imaginary. So, too, is the Soteira
of one of the epistles, commonly held lo be spurious. SioVj. Fioril. 3, ag.

* .•\nd Heywood, the Elizabethan, reproduced. See below, p. Ix.



LIFE OF XENOPHON



XXXI



thought when he drew the portrait of the wife of Tigranes,
"who went soldiering with her own man," in the Cyropaedia.
As might be expected, we get no hint from Xenophon him-
self in these matters ; nor does he once have occasion to
name his wife. Such silence is only natural and common.
It is, of course, quite compatible with the existence of those
happy relations which, from the pen of Xenophon himself, best
of all Greek wTiters, we know to have subsisted between
husband and wife in ancient Greece.^

If, as seems probable, Xenophon and Philesia were married
in 399 B.C., we may perhaps i>e warranted in assuming
that their two sons were born to them within the next two
years — possibly both in 398 it.c or 397 B.c. ; or, if not twins,
within a year of each other, the elder in 398-397 b.c and the
younger in 397-396 B.C. ; so that at the date when their father
left Asia with Agesilaus on the perilous expedition of 394 B.C.,
the two children would still be at their mother's apron -string.
Perhaps for a couple of years the family life was so far broken
up that the mother and children remained at home in Asia,
whilst the father followed the fortune of his friend the king of
Sparta in Europe. But in 392 B.C. it recommenced, and as
fortune willed it, was happily continued for many years ; first
in Sparta itself and afterwards at Scillus.^

In this summary application of the almanac to the private
life of our author, we may seem to have too long neglected
the stormier question of his public bearing and his banishment
To this we come.

If we do not know the precise date of Xenophon's marriage,
still less do we know the date of his banishment ; and if we
are ignorant as to the date, still more are we ignorant as

* See, in particular, the relations of Ischomachus nnd his wife in the
Economist : ihe Crropaedui, passim: and for Xenophon's views as lo TfKm-
VM'ia and the t^fJucalion of children, see in addition to the above-named works
Liu. PoL I ; Mem. 1. iv. 7.

* The evidence for ihe dale of Xenophon's marringe and the birth of his
sons is as follows : — (i) We know on the best authority (from Anab, VII, vi.
34, p. 227} that he was not married, or at any rate had no children , in
February 399 H.C. {2) We further know, on the authority of Plutarch in his
life of Agesilaus. that, at some interval between 394 and 381 B.C. {sesNiU. IV.
iv. I9)^ when Xenophon was with Agesilaus in .Sparta, his sons were (not only
bom, but) of an age to be initiatctl into the public training according to the



xxxu



SKETCH or THE



to the cause and circumstances of that occurrence. The
ancients themselves ' attributed it in some way or other to

institulion of Lycurjjus : which dyuryrf the Spartan lads commenced at the agv:
o( nez't'u. Plutarch's words arc: "He (Agesilaus) kept with him Xenophon
the philosopher, and made much of bin;, ^nd proposed to him to send for his
{■hildr^H and educaii tkein at Sparta, where they would be taught the best of
all learning; how to obey and how to command" (Clouj[jh, 4, 24). This
Xenophon appears to have done. It will fulfil the conditions best if we
suppose that Xenophon on leaving: Asia in 394 RC. had left his wife and
chiEdren there (at lL|)hesu,s or elsewhere), Or, to slate the matter chrono-
logically : Supposing that his marriage took place in 39y ac, and that the
children were born both in 398-397 B,C. (or at an interval of a year) ; in
393 H.C. they (or the elder of iheinj would be about six years of age, and
ahnost ripe for the Spartan public schooling, which commenced at tlie age
of seven. See Plut. Ages. xx. Sevo^wcra 5^ rhv ea^hv ix^v MfS' fttiToii
['AYijtffXaoy] triroijSafdju.ej'os cK^\ti*e TOi'^i iralSar iv AaKfdaifiovi rp^tpeiv

Kod Apx^tv. See Roquette, A'en. Vit. I. § 5, p. 25.

'^ It will be best to cite tlie ancient authorities : —

Besides two passages in Xenophon himself {Ariab, V, iii, 7, and VII. 57),
which must be considered in reference at least to the date (see pp. 140, 236),
we have the statements of three ancient authorities, none of which are very
close to the times of Xenophon. Hie earliest is Dio Chrysostom (the famous
rhetorician of the Flavian era, 100 a.d,), who tells us that "Xenophon was
exiled owing to his expedition with Cyrus," SfJ'o^wj' ^ipirye dih Ti}v putrk
'Kvpov (TTpa-Tfiav (viii. p, 130 M) Imt how, why, or when, he does not explain.
The next is Pausanias, the archaeologist,, etc. ^160 A.D.), who adds a
suggestion, '* Xenophon was banished by the Athenians as having shared in
the expedition against the king, their well-wisher, with Cyrus, who was the
bitterest foe of the Denjocraey," iSithx^'n ^ z-fvotputy vwd 'A0T}yaibn> u!5 iirl
fiatTiXia aepivjr eOcoiv iS»ra ffrpardas ,tieT(urx'^v Ki'/>^ iro.\ejwci;rdry rod
S'^puoviv. 6j 5), There seems to be some hope of a discovery here, but it is^ after
all delusive, since, as Grote points out, Artaxerxes only became eCvovs to Athens
in 39G B.C., and Xenophon"s friendship with Cyrus was an old story then.
The last authority is Diogenes Laertius. He has two references to the matter.
The first h contained in one of the two epigrams which he wrote in honour
of Xenophon (.see Xen. IVoris, I. p. xliv. , and below, p. 68). in which occur the
words K^KpoTT&s <re toXitcli ipeiryttp KaT{yvu>v r<iv ^iXou x^P^ KiJpoi', "Thee
Cecrops' citizens condemned to exile /ar fhy dear Cyrus s sake" (Diogenes
Laertius, Lift: of Xen. § 14). The other occurs a little earlier (in § 7), where
he tells us that " after the ' Anabasis" and the occurrences in Pontus (in the
' Caiabasis'), and the breaches of faith on the part of Seuthes, the king of the
Odrysians, Xenoplion came to Asia to Agesilaus, the king of I^cedaemon, and
presented him with Cyrus's soldiers for pay [i.e. as a mercenary force)." [This
is clearly u blunder, since he came to Tkibron in 399 B. c. , to whom he handed
over the Cyreians, and to Dercylidas later on in the year, and to AgesiLius only in
396 B.C.] " It was at this time" [what time? 399 B.C. or 396 B.c.?] headds,
' ' that he was condemned to exile by tlie Athenians on the i^roundof Laconism :
HerA, Si Tqv ava^aariv xa.1 tqi fi' ri^ llovTifi trvfuftopiii Kal raj ■rapaairoj'Si^ftf
ris Sfi'^oi' Toti 'OSpiHTWv ^atrtX^ws ■^Kev eh 'Afrlai/ Trpbs ' AytialXaov
riyv AoKeSai.uoctwj' jSatrtX^a, fiiff6ov toil's Ki'poi' arpaTiuTas aiT-tJj irapoffxw',



LIFE OF XENOPHON



XXXI 11



I



his friendship with Cyrus, or (scarcely less vaguely) to his

^^\ot T€ V f^y ('irep(io\'^i>. Trap in Kaipbif £irt AaKCiivttrfi^ (f>ifyjp» vw'
'X&Tiyaluy KaTeyviliff&-r}. Diogenes is an unsatisfactory authorily, and
generally contrives to confuse matters through carelessness. Bui on the whole
we must admit that his lestintony, like that of llio other two authorities, ia
fositively in favour of an earlier date than 394 RC, , and negatively of a less
pronounced form of Laconism than would have been Xenophon's presence
with the enemy of the allies and Athens at Coronea. On this intricate
qviestion the modern authorities are nejirly equally divided. Thus Grote is
quite clear tlial the sentence of banishment was not passed until after the
battle of Coronea, which took place in August 394 B.C. ; and he states
clearly the grounds of his opinion in H. G. vol. ix. 242 note i, which he
reiterates as an historical fact in Piato. III. xxxix. p. 566. Curtius, on the
other hand ( Eng. tr, , vol. v. p. 149, bk. vii. ch. ii. ), takes an opposite view.

" Thus Xenophon when probably not more than ihiity years of age entered the
serv'ice of Cyrus, and was unexpectedly called upon to perform duties of high
importance, in which he exhibited so much efficiency that his fanie even
radiated itself upon Athens. And yet by what he did he incurred the loss
of his native city ; for probably about the time when proceedings against all
ami -constitutional tendencies were resumed at Athens (vol. iv, p. 142 and
when Socmiea was sentenced, Xtnophon was by a popular decree deprived of
his ci\ic rights as a partisan of Cyrus ; possibly a diplomatic consideration
for the wishes of the Persian king contributed to bring about this decision,"
etc. With this in the main I agree. 1 uiU only add a note on the two
passages in the Anaiasis above referred to. The first occurs on p. 140 and
note 4. The words run thus : Eft'o^w*' Bre Air^t ffii* 'Ay»jtftX(i(fi iK rr^i
'Atrial tV cts Boiyrot's &S6v, KaraXdirfi {rb rijs 'Apt^/iiSov P^P<^^) irapa
Mrya/St'ff^ . . - ical iTvicrTfiXev, t^v ftiv avrbi aaSii, ^aiT^ diroSoi'i'ai ^v 5i
Tt irddfjf dvaSdvat irotrfffdfifvov r^ ^Apr^fiidi & n otoira xap'^^'^^ttt n? tf«?j
'EireJ 3' tffttvyty & Af^vofp&if, KaroiKoQvTcs ijSij iv 2*:it\Xo(/i'Ti, d<f>iKveiTai
^fydfiv^os. ... It has been asked by those who rely on this passage to
prove that Xenophon was banished after 394 H.C., "Why should he mention
his banishment at all in this context, if it had occurred five years or so before
he set off with Agesilaus to Europe?" To those who are not satisfied with
Thirlwall's explanation (see //. G, iv. ch. xxxiv. |j. 357, and in reference to
Anai. V* iii. 7, Xi^nophon, Niebuhr, and Delbrueck, Pkilol. Mui. vol. i. p.
516), I would suggest that the expression is natural enough, if at the date
of publication of the Anabasis the sentence had been rescinded. It is
highly probable that this was the case. Xenophon was, 1 think, forced to
leave Scillus, and settled in Corinth soon after the battle of Leuctra, 371
B.C. Tilt sentence of banishment was rescinded not later, I think, than
369 B.C., possibly earlier; and the Anabasis published almost simultane-
ously. But this will need further discussion (see Xen. U-'isrij, III. parti i.). In
any case [ do not consider the inference to be drawn from Anab. V, iii. 7 con-
clusively in favour of 394 B.C. And the suggestion, if in that direction, may
be met by the suggestion of Anab. VI L vii. 57 : Sfo^w*- 5e 01' xpouiJff,
aKKh. (pavtpbf ^v ofcaSf vapaaKevai^SfiePOi' ov ydp jtcj ^i^ii^oj aiW^ fTTJKTO
'A6-^Vf}ei irepl tpvy^i, which surely implies that the incident of his bnnish-
did presently prevent him from carrying out his intention to return home.
le only escape from that conclusion is to suppose that the words ov yap tw

:. r.X. are an editor's note — wrongly inserted in the text — a footnote, as it


XXXIV



SKETCH OF THE



Laconism} But in what particular way this Laconism was
shown, or how and why either Laconism or friendship with
Cyrus should have brought upon him a sentence of exile, is at
the present time altogether a matter of conjecture. Under
the circumstances it will be fairer at once to Xenophon and to
my readers, if I state here my own conviction that the sentence
of exile was passed soon after the events recorded on the last
page of the Anahasu (p. 240 of this volume), and that the
}^ravamen of the indictment lay, as the ancients put it, at once
in his former friendshi]> with Cyrus and his present (or late)
inclination towards Sparta, the ancient enemy of the Democracy,
By " soon after/' I mean within a year or two years (or three at
the most). It seems to me not improbable that Pharnabazus
himself, or some one of the great king's personal agents,-


were, cautioning the reader, who thinks of Xenophon as a. banished man, not
to antedate the commencement of his exile. But thfit in itself is surely
far-fetched. According to Grote he not only was free in 399 B.C. to return
to Athens, but for a short while did so. But if so, why in recounting ihe
incidents of 395 B.C. should he go out of his way to spe.xk of a matter which
could only affect his movements in 394 B.C. ?

' AttKUPiffjui^s — ft leaning to Sparta, a phtlo-Laconian propensity or be-
hasTOUT, not necessarily even in the sphere of practical politics treasonable ;
though often enough so actually or so regarded. Cf. d potwTiafoi'Tes, oi
d/ryoXifoMT*^!, to express a party in the slate favouring a particular policy.
To understand Laconhin, as I have elsewhere said, we ought to go to a
somewhat iinalogous period — tlie Uaiy of the Republics, wheu Venice with
her relative stability and oligarchical government — Sparta ; Florence with her
intellectual turmoil and political self-consciousness = Athens, The comparison
might be worked out in detail. Vide Symonds, Age of ihe Despots, ch. iii.
passim, and ch, iv, p, 236 ; also Freeman, Historical Essays, ad series,
p. 32.

''' For the iroXiTr/oayiLtcwiJvij of these big men and the little men their agents,
seeThucydides, and Xenophon ^ HdL passim. See too the ^«cdaj/r for speci-
mens of the petty scheming busybody and emissary such as Desdppus, Neon
perhaps, Medosades, Heracleides. For the diplomacy of bigger men see the re-
iations of Pharnabasus and Anaxibius, and again of that satrap and Aristarchus.
As to the personal catastrophe, the tale told to Xenophon by Seuthes (p. 229 1
at a certain dale, that Tliibron meant to put him to death, though falsified by
events, shows the sort of hazard which a man of some mark and scanty
means might be supposed to nin. Still more to the point is the actual risk
either of losing his life or being delivered up to Pharnabazus (who had a
horror of Cyreians}, which befell him tLirlier, before Perinthus, at the hands of
an e\'illy-disposed Spartan harmosl (p. 204). One lias only to imagine some
Athenian or other of the Dexippiis type worked upon by an emissary of
Pharnabazus {as the Rhodian Timocrates wns employed by the satrap
TIthraustes in a grander affair, Heii. III. v. 1), or of his own (notion working


LIFE OF XENOPHON



XXXV



^



Greek or foreign (working upon the ecclcsia by dint of some
Athenian interjiie diary )j may have had a hand in it. There
were many such pohtical go-betweens, big or small, who already
during the Cyreian expedition, and whilst Athens was still in
political vassalage to Sparta, would be on the look-out to
undermine the inflQence of the dominant Hellenic power.
Is this probable ? Apart from the relatively small matter of
a single man's private fortunes, it can, I think, be shown to
be so.

Even during the earliest period of her supremacy, be-
tween 403 B.c and the Cyreian expedition, when Spartan
influence was predominant in Greece and Asia, signs that the
tide would soon turn were already visible. The Corinthians
and Thebans, who would have been glad in 405 b.c. to see
Athens blotted out, were now beginning to be jealous of
Sparta rather than of Athens in her present defenceless con-
dition. The high-handed measures of the dominant power
shown in her treatment of the Asiatic states, where the Lysan-
drian Decarchies were a worse scourge than the imperial system
of the Democracy had ever been, caused disaffection in Asia
and apprehension in Hellas proper. This was not all. The
war with Elis, which was simply coercive, was so unpopular with
the free states^ that though Athens could not but send a con-
tingent, Corinth and Thebes refused to do so when summoned
in 399 B.c Thereupon her tactics in Asia were changed, but
not skilfully. If the Decarchies were withdrawn, the states were
left to the mercy of the new Persian governor Tissaphernes,
who showed himself a very different master from Cyrus. The
states appealed to Sparta as the TrpotrTar);? of Hellas, and her
tactics were further changed. A war with the Persian satraps
was undertaken. The idea of a national conquest of Persia,
a pan-Hellenic march in which Sparta was to represent Hellas,
began to fascinate the government. The first step was to send
out in 399-398 B.C. a body of troops under Thibron to assist
the Ionian cities.^ It consisted of one thousand Spartan neodvi-

l for Pharnabazus or the king, or in the interests of a political party at Athens,
[or conceivably in n self-seeking spirit, and for private purposes ; and the
fitphism of Eiibufus, or whoever it was, is not unintelligible.
» Hell. III. i.


XXXVl



SKETCH OF THE



I



modes, four thousand Peloponnesians, and the three hundred
Athenian knights above spoken of. The Corinthians and
Thebans were again recalcitrant. They would have nothing to
do with the pan-Hellenic march. When the new Agamemnon
Agesilaus in 396 B.C. proposed to offer sacrifice in Aulis, the
latter laughed him to sconHj and treated the king of men and his
sacrifices with prosaic effrontery. Certainly, as Pausanias tells us,
they were but little affected by appeals to their gratitude.^
Their grievances were too deeply seated. The Corinthians and
Athenians more politely — but no less practically — for one
plausible reason or another begged to be exctised. Nothing
has been said of Argos. There too, as in the three states
already mentioned, political ideas were already ^ shaping them-
selves which eventually led to the coalition of 395 b.c.^ Pau-
sanias seems to think that the excuse offered by Corinth was bona
fide^ but with respect to the Athenians in 397 B.C. he adds signifi-
cantly that though they assigned the present weakness of the
state and pestilence as the ground of their inability, the real
reason was that they had already got wind of a visit of Conon,
the son of Timotheus, to the court of the great king.

This visit is perhaps the key to the whole matter. It is
unfortunate that we cannot fix the date of it more exactly. It
was brought about by Pharnabazus, who as far back as 408
B,c., and under the influence in part of Alcibiades^ was ready
to procure the assistance of Persia for Athens rather than for
Sparta. He failed indeed, but only owing to the stronger will
and power of Cyrus, who elected for Lysander and Sparta,
as narrated in Heiiemca, I. iii. 8. Again in 404 b,c. the
same satrap had lent himself to negotiations with Alcibiades,
then in exiJe, the object of which was to further the interests of
Athens at the court of Susa, rather than those of Sparta, which
it could be shown were already unduly fostered by the rival
satrap (or, to give him his proper title, the Karatios Cyrus).
This history now repeats itself. It is no longer Alcibiades, but
another distinguished Athenian exile, a man of less question-

^ Pausan. iii. 9, a, '^ And even earlier.

' Which was said to be brought about in part by Persian gold. See the
lale of the Rhodian Timocrates sent by Tithraustes, the Persian satrap who
succeeded Tissaphemes, and the thirty thousand archers. (TJie coins were
stamped with the image of an archer.)


IJFE OF XENOPHON



x»cvu



r



able patriotism, Conon, at the court of Evagoras, the prince
of Salamis in Cyprus, who conducts the negotiations on the
side of Athens ; but the satrap is the same.'^ In 397 B.C., as
it would appear, if not in 398 B.C. summer (see below), during
a tnice with the Spartan Dercylidas, he repaired to Susa,^ and
by dint of a diplomatic correspondence which he set up
between the court and the prince of Cyprus, he entirely
altered the king's policy. The correspondence, it seems, was
skilfully conducted by Ctesias the king's physician, and an
important item of the new programme was the equipment of
a royal navy, the command of which should be entrusted to
Conon.^

The prospect of so securing the goodwiU of Artaxerxes,
though not openly proclaimed, may well explain the reluctance
of the Democracy to assist in any joint attack on Persia in 397
"B.C. If we turn for a moment to home affairs,"* the feeling of the
state towards certain wealthy oligarchical members is clear
enough from the remark of the historian already quoted. To
send off three hundred knights seemed to the ecclesia, even as
early as 399 b.c, no bad riddance of bad rubbish : or to speak
more courteously, as Grote says, they were glad to see such
people honourably provided for. In either case, it seems
certain that between 399 B.C., or even earlier, and 397 B.C.,
the emancipation of Athens had commenced. As a subject
ally of Sparta, and seeing that her walls were still dismantled,
she was debarred from independent action, but an instinctive
germinal foreign policy existed. This, as regards Hellas

' For the relslioTts of Pharnabazus and Akibiades in 404, see Grate, H. G,

I'viii, p. 427. For those of Pharnabaius and Conon in 397 (or earlier), see

T Plut. .Arfax. Ctesias of Cnidos, the court physiciati. was also diplomatically

[ employed in this matter, as the king's plenipotentiary. Didot. Ciesiae, fr. ag,

§ 63 <as preserv'ed by Photius).

^ See Heil. III. ii. 1. 398-397 B.C. ; winter truce extended through summer,
ib. ii. 9.

a S«e Heil III. iv, r.

■* For internal afTaits at Athens between 403 B.C. and 395 B.C., see among
modem authorities, Grote, H. G. viii. ch. Xxvi,; Curtius, iv, p. 14a foil, (Eng.
ir. ); Jebb. Affic, On vol. i. , on I^ysias, and /assim ; Thirlwall. vol iv. xxxv.
Among ancient authorities, Xen. //#//. III. ; Lysias, Or. xxxiv., xix., xxvi., xvi..
xxxL. XXV., xii.. vi. (which is not by Lysias but probably by some con-
temporary), and xiii, ; Ctesias, his fragments in IJidot., nnri a passage quoted
by Plut. Artax. (Clough, v, p. 443) ; Pausanias, iii. 9, 2.


XXXVIll



SKETCH OF THE



proper, pointed in the direction of alliance with Thebes and
other states fretting under Spartan predominance. As regards
Asia and her former subject alh'es, it implied a readiness to
meet the Persian king half way, in case he showed any desire
to retaliate for Cyrus's attack upon the state which had aided
it^ whose power he had suicidally developed

One must not make too much of. a small matter; but to return
to our biographical difliculty — it seems quite likely that some
member of the ecclesia may at any moment after the return of the
Ten Thousand have proposed the banishment of that Athenian
who had most distinguished himself in the attack on Artaxerxes,
whether he was a knight or not, and whatever the colour of his
politics before he left Athens in 401 to strike up a quixotic
friendship with the bitterest foe of the Democracy (rco
TroAf/xt/cwrttrtfj), who had proved himself the worst foe also of
the Persian king his brother. The conduct of Xenophon on
his return to Europe might in itself be easily open to mis-
construction. During the two years' absence he had to a
great extent lost touch of home politics ; or he did not
allow sufficiently for the conservative reaction at home, and
the recovery of national independence. To him the dominion
of Sparta appeared to be solidly established ; to the leaders at
home it appeared to be assailable. Judging as he did that
Sparta was the leading state, and that whatever a LaconJan
officer willed was law, he had somewhat coquetted with and
humoured the navarchs and harmosts with whom he came in
contact. It was not through lack of patriotism to his country,
but out of loyalty to his fellow-adventurers, that he so adapted
himself. It was from an amiable desire to save the reputation
of the heroic band, and not their reputation only but their lives,
that he so acted. But thi.^ action may have been misunder-
stood or misinterpreted,^ Just as his detractors explained to
the Laconian emissaries that he was too much the soldiers'
friend, too popular in his manners, and would prove a thorn
in the side of Sparta ; so at home it might have been reported
of him that he was too simply philo- Laconian. A better
citizen would have done better by a fine body of troops than
surrender them to Thibron. And what did it all tend tc
* At the end of Ihe TJiracian caixipaign (see p. 223).



I



UFE OF XENOPHON



XXXIX



^



M not to furthering interests which neither the Democracy
approved of, nor the king, whose goodwill was worth concili-
ating, could be other than annoyed! by ?

It was thus, or somehow thus, as I imagine, that on the
motion of Eubulus or some other citizen the decree of banisli-
nient was passed (between 399 B.C. and 397 b.c) There was
certainly no mystery about it at the time ; nor does this view
of the matter need any machinery of syfopknfifs to support it.
It imphes no anti-oligarchic bias in the behaviour of the
restored Demos — no overriding of the amnesty^ — nor indeed
anything but what seems natural enough and was already fore-
seen in 401 B.C. by Socrates : a readiness to dispense with the
services of so doubtful a citizen,^

The effect of it was to throw Xenophon more completely
into the hands of the Spartan authorities, and led eventually
to those close relations with Agesilaus, affecting the whole tenor
of his future life, which it is now our business to consider.

It has already been suggested that in the spring of 399 B.C.,
after handing over the remnant of the Cyreians to the Spartan
Thibron at Pergamus, Xenophon himself, being free to return
home, returned to Europe, possibly to Athens, or more prob-
ably no farther than to Megara, where in the society of the
Socratics and perhaps of the Spartan Lysander, he may have
found time to set his affairs in order,- during the space of a
month or two, after which he returned to the Aeolid. Accord-
ing to another view, which is quite as probable, he never left
Asia at all at this season, but continued in command, actually

^ The offence, such as it was, was the consequence of an 0rigin.1l false slcp,
■bul under iho circumstances it may weJl have been made 10 appp-ir unpardon-
able, Iriendship wilh Cyrus, aiid l^coiiism ! We, loo, know the force of
pohtical catchwords. We do not know, of course, how the charge was
brought against him ; what the procedure, or what the court was. But if he
could liave pleaded his case, or, better still, if Lysias could have pleaded it
for hitn, we can guess the sort of topics he would have insiiited on. He might
have urged mutatis vtutandh what he urjtfetl in the case of Mantitheus, with
whose character Xenophon's is comparable, that " brilliant, ambitious young
Athenian, burning to fulfil the Homeric ideal by distinguishing himself in
council as in war ; an Alcibiades made harmless by the sentiment of chivalry."
See Sir R, Jebb, Attic Or. vol. I. ch. x. p. 247.

^ E.g. there were his histories, ficUenica A (and the commencement
of 5[?]} unless already published, and notes for the Life of Socxates, to be
atlended to.


xl



SKETCH OF THE



or virtually, of the six thousand Cyreians, now amalgamated
with the Spartan forces under Thibron.

His presence at the scene of action is proved by the
minuteness of detail with which he describes the successive
campaigns of the following years (summer and winter), and by
one or two suggestive phrases, in which he may be supposed
to refer to himself. He had many friends in this part of the
world. Here too he found that dearest friend of all^ his wife
Philesia.^ Xenophon, whatever the date of his arrival, is very
much at home in the Aeolid. His friendship with some of
the leading families was helpful to the general ; but the
Ijehaviour of the Cyreians was not altogether satisfactory to
the allies, as we discover presently ; and before the end of his
term of office Thibron was superseded by Dercylidas (autumn
of 399 B.C.), and eventually banished on a charge, preferred
against him by the allies, of allowing his troops to pillage
their friends. Dercylidas was a very different person. He
is graphically described by Xenophon as an inventive and
versatile diplomatist, who went by the nickname of Sisyphus.*
He probably received the troops from Thibron in Ephesus in
the fall of the year 399 b.c. ; and at once began to turn to
account the well-known jealousy subsisting between the two
Persian satraps Tissaphernes and Pharnabazus. Making terms
with the former in the south, he proceeded to attack Pharnabaxus
in the north. Diplomacy and a touch of animosity, since he
owed the satrap of Phrygia a personal grudge, dictated this



' His intimacy with the Greek families descended respectively from Gongylus
the Erctrian and DamaTatus the ex-king of Sparta is established by what is
narrateti on pp. 238-240 of this volume (Autik YUl. viii. 8-36), with which
should be compared the account given of Thibron's prosecution of the war,
now that he had received so stalwart an addition lo his forces, and aided by the
families in question. This is to be found in //('//. III. i, 5, 6. Thibron, who
had no desire to cope with the Asiatic cavalry, seems to have clung to the high
ground until the arrival of the Cyreians. After lh:U hi? was free to descend
into the plains, Fergamus, Teiithrania. and Halisarna, places which Iwlcnged
to Eurjrsthenes and Procles the descendants of Damaratus, g^avein their adhesion.
Gainbrium and Paiaeg;imbriura, Myrsina and Grj^niunir were brought over by
Xenophon's friends, the brothers Gorgion and Gonp>'lus (the sons of Hellas)
respectively. Others Thibron took by storm, but balking at Egyptian Larissa,
(see Cyrofi. VI I . i. 45), was ordered by the Ephors to march south into Caria
(the salrapy of Tissaphernes).

' &ei}p SoKWf flmi ftdXa fnjx'^iKiii teal ivficaXc'iTo S^ "Zitri'ifKn (//t/^. Ill, i. 8).



LIFE OK XEXOrilON



xl:l



Movement. Before the \vinter of 399 commenced we are
back again in the Aeolid. Xenophon is certainly there
too.^ The dramatic skill of the writer is the chief matter of
biographic interest here; and for hterary purposes we must
bear in mind tlmt the experiences of these years, 399 b.c. and
onwards, will eventually form the material not only 'for the
remaining portions of his Hellenics ^ but also for the Cyropaedia
and other writings. All these matters, grave or gay, are grist
to the author's mill This cjinnot be too emphatically insisted
on. When and \vhere he found leisure to take notes or pen
paragraphs we may conjecture, but cannot positively state.^

Thus during these winters, and in the intervals of warlike
operations, I can imagine that Xenophon all along found time
for study. Here he jotted a note and there he composed a
chapter, while for the rest, even on march or in the battlefield
he had a clear head and a strong visualising faculty, so that
many of the events recorded m his histories are as plainly given
as if they had only the day before been written on the tablets
of the brain. Vividness — that it is which gives the charni to
these historical writings. The campaign in the Aeolid of
Pharnabaziis, in which the wily Laconian took eight cities in
as many days and reduced Pharnabazus to terms, is of this sort.*'
So is the next campaign in Bithyntan Thrace during the winter
of 399-398 B.C., \n which we find ourselves once more in
company with a contingent of Odrysians sent over by Seuthes.
We know this part of the world already,"* and the ways of the
folk.

The proceedings of the next year (398 b.c) are not less
graphically told as by an eye-witness ; and liere occurs one of
the passages in which Xenophon appears to refer to himself.
We are at Lampsacus ; the Spartan commissioners have come

^ " The very cfrcumstiintial tl stalls which Xenophoti giv^es about the pro-
ceedings of Derkyliilas against Meidias in the Troad seem to indicate that lie
was there in person " (Grote, H. G. ix. 294),

* The second part of the HelUnica {i.e. the history of events during 399-
3S7 RC.) was not finally put into sliape for several years ; and is one of
the products, 1 take it, amonprst several others of his Scilliintine leisure. The
third part of the Hellenica (387-362 B.C.) was probably put into its final shape
at Corinth or possibly at Athens. *• HeiL III. ii. i.

^ See Anab, VI, p. 176 folL, and VII. passim, p. 219 foIL ; Uell. HI.
ii. 2-5.



xlii



SKETCil OF THE



to inform Dercyltdas that his term of office is to be prolonged
for another year. Reference is made to the late charges
against the troops. The commissioners call a meeting of the
soldiers and make plain to them the views of the home
authorities. Such proceedings would not be tolerated — just
dealing by the allies would not be unrewarded. To which the
representative of the Cyreians o nZv Kvpetiitv "Trpoiur^fKm makes
a highly Xenophonttne answer. " We," said he, "are the same
men as we were last year; but we are under a different general.
You need not look further for an explanation." ^ Dercylidas
having renewed the truce with Pharnabazus for the summer,
is now off on an expedition to the Thracian Chersonese.^ He
goes through the territory of Seuthes and is hospitably enter-
tamed by him. Having fortified the Isthmus^ he is presently
back again in Asia, and laying siege to Atameus.^ This place
he reduces in eight months — and garrisons as half-way house,
and so returns to Ephesus — at the close of 398 RC

This winter {398-397 B.C.), again^ may well have been spent
by Xenophon quietly in Ephesus. It is perhaps the year in
which his son (or sons, if twins) was bom to him. It was
the city, it will be recollected, of Xenophon's patron divinity.
Here was the great temple of Artemis. Here too lived his
friend Megabyzus, the sacristan of the goddess. Hitherto
Tissaphemes and Dercylidas had no quarrel ; the barbarian
and Greek population spent their days in peace. But at this
date the Spartan government, urged on by the allies, determined
to force the satrap to grant independence to the Hellenic cities.
Dercylidas received orders to march into Caria. In combina-
tion with the Spartan admiral Pharax operating by sea, he was
to attack Tissaphemes in house and home. The result of this
movement on his part was a coalition between the northern



1 Ne/F. III. ii. 7.
a //e/l. III. iL 9;



See Grote, //. G, \x. 300, 301.

cf. Diod. xiv. 39 ; see Grote, //. G. ix, 353. It was at
this date, the summer of 398 B.C., that Pharnaliazus, as t suspect, took the
opporluniiy of pajn'ng a visit to the court of Persia. See above, p. xxxvii. ;
also CArofi. TaMes of Greek //ist., Carl Peter, p. 84 note 163, of Mr.
Cbawner's translation.

* See Anah. p. 154. also p. 2, of this volume,

* A place occupied by Chiaii exiles (oM friends of the Democracy perhaps),
who harry Ionia {Hell. 111. il ri). The officer left as governor or firijueXijTTj*,
Dracon of Pellene, is named in the Fanegynkos of Isocrates, p. 70.


LIFE OF XENOPHON



xltii



and southern satraps. The overtures came from Pharnabazus.
Though he had little stomach for the overlordship of Tissa-
phernes, who had stepped into the place of Cyrus^ he was
smarting under the loss of the Aeolid, and entertained decided
views as to the propriety of driving the Hellenes^ — that is to
say, the Spartans — out of Asia.

The campaign of 397 ii.c.^ began boldly but was blood-
less. Ha%'ing fortified Caria the two satraps marched tow^ards
Ionia. Dercylidas followed. In the valley of the Maeander,
which was deep in corn, the army found itself in the pre-
sence of the united Persian forces. Our informant has the
graphic pen of the war correspondent. Suddenly from a
specular mount we sight them— white-shielded Carians, and
the whole Persian force under arms, with a couple of Hellenic
divisions in pay of either satrap, and a cloud of cavalry.
The situation is admirably described, as by an cyc-witness.
While Dercylidas marshals his forces with the precision of
a Spartan general, the faint-hearted allies drop their arms in
the long corn and run off. Meanwhile Pharnabazus is eager
enough to join battle, but Tissapherncs has little hankering to
engage with Hellenes ; he has tasted the quality of the Cyrcians
already, and the rest, he argues, will be like them.- He sends
by preference messengers proposing an interview. " The wily
Spartan gave audience to the envoys in front of a body of
picked men (tois KpaTt<rrov<5 TO. ciSif T(o»' 'n'tpl aiVroii' Kul tTTTredii'
*fac 7r((un' — was Xenophon one of these ?), affected to receive
their proposals with indifference, and demanded an exchange
of pledges " ; so Thirlwall, after Xenophon, recounts the scene.
Our minds, with Xenophon's, revert to a similar situation four
years previously,*'* for so in these trifles history repeats itself.
The scenery is sketched with the old familiar touches. When
these formalities were concluded, the armies retired for the



1 J/rll III. ii. 12 foIL

■■^ Hem is;i personal touch. Xenophon is proud of the CyrexAna, 'Ofiivroi
Titrffa^tipvrji t6 re K^>pHov crpdrevfjia KaTa\oyt^6jX(vos un ^ToX^/iijfre*' aiVroty Kal
ToiTif} TTcLvras pofil^uv ofioiot'i elvai to(''s "FAXr^vas om Ifio^-Xcra fidxftrBcu aWii
T^fixj/ai trpds AtpKvXlSop etro', on et's XA^oii ^avhoiTO airrt^ dtpiK^aOai,
HelL Til. ii. 18 foil.

•"• Clearchus's interview with the king's envoys on Sept. 6, 401. Atuib. II.
iii. 3, pp. 46, 47.


xliv SKETCH OF THE

night : the Asiatic to Tralles in Caria, the Hellenic to
Leucophrys, where was a temple of Artemis most holy, and
a sandy-bottomed lake more than a furlong broad, fed by a
warm spring of water fit for drinking. The next day Dercy-
lidas demanded the autonomy of the Greek cities ; Tissa-
phemcs and Pharnabazus the withdrawal of the troops from
Asia and the harmosts from the cities. Both parties agreed
to report progress ; Dercylidas to the home authorities, and
Ussaphernes to the king at Susa. There was truce meanwhile.

Here is a lull in affairs, during which the historian pauses
also to chronicle the march of events in Europe ^ during the
same space of time (401 B.C.-397 b.c.) He has to recount
the coercive measures of Sparta in Elis, and the seizure of the
Triphylia ; the accession of Agesilaus, lame in body but whole
of spirit, upon the death of Agis ; the discovery of grave
domestic discord and the conspiracy of Cinadon ; the alarming
news of a huge Persian armada, fitting out in Phoenicia, the
object of which was unmistakable. This report reached Sparta
as it were by accident. A Syracusan master of a merchant
vessel (named Herodas), whilst trafficking in those regions,
had seen the great galleys collecting and in all stages of
equipment.^ The excitement at Sparta was great. The allies
were summoned, and war with Persia was resolved upon. The
new king, Agesilaus, supported by Lysander,'^ who wished to
restore his DecarchieSy accepted the duty of leading the host ;
and in the spirit of another Agamemnon, started. How he
fared at Aulis has already been related.*

Our immediate concern is with the intimacy which presently
sprang up between the Spartan king and Xenophon. The two
men were mutually drawn to one another. Xenophon, already,

1 JML TIL ii. 21-31 ; iiL, and iv. \. This, methocl of arraugcment ii
significant of a new deparlure in the style of writing hislory. In his earlier
work he had naturally followed ^raore or less consistently) the Thucydidean
method of chronicling eveiits by summers and winters.

^ See Xenophon' 5 description of " the great Phoenician" in the Rconomhi
(viii. ii). The history of the matter is to l>e found in some fragments of
Ctesias preserved by Phoiius ; and in Diodorus, See Grote, //. G. ix. 354
note; and p. xxxvii.. suprn, for the persons concerned in planning the alliance
between Athens and the king.

' .See his allusion lo the Cyreians, HetL III. iv. 2.

* And may be read in the pages of Xenophon and Plutarch.



LIFE OF XENOPllON



xlv


as I believe, in exile (or, if the other view be right, still free to
return to Athens), was fascinated by so vigorous a personalit)'.^
The new-comer was not only a Heracleid, a king descended
from the loins of kings, but there was that about him which
prognosticated the right prince. Perhaps Xenophon admired
him the more because of the infirmity of his body, seeing
that he had an eager and heroic soul within. As a practical
man he fully sympathised with the quest upon which he
was sent out. He had long ago discovered how easily the
Persian empire might be invaded, and by strategic methods
sapped. He had pondered over the problems of its dis-
solution and absorption. On the other hand, Agesilaus could
not but appreciate highly the Athenian — whether or not he
had already incurred banishment as an over-zealous admirer
of Spartan institutions. With his combined literary and
philosophic tastes, his military- training and experience, his
local knowledge of the country and the character of the
Persians and their subject nations, he was exactly the man
to keep by his side if possible as his political adviser. Before
many months had passed the intimacy was sealed, and from
this date onwards (396 b.c), or a little later, we must think
of Xenophon not perhaps in command of the Cyreians so
much as attached to the staff of the general-in-chief. Cicero
speaks of him as the instructor and inspirer of Agesilaus.^ In
his own more technical phrase he figures, if I mistake not^
among the iiriKaipioi of the Spartan king. He is one of
"those about him/' and the two became fast friends.

Perhaps at this date one of the minor services rendered by
Xenophon to his patron was to help in organising the cavalr)'.^
Whether that particular function devolved on him personally

1 E.^. as shown in his setting down of Lysander, Jfgll. III. iv. Agesilaus,
even more than the yoiingrer Cyrus, is the prototype in Xenophon's imagina-
tion of the "right prince" — Cyrus of the Cyropaedi'a. Cf. Sidney's An
Apohgit for Poetrie , 1595 — " So right a prince as Xenophon's Cyrus" (p. 25).

■■* Cic. de Or. III. xxxiv. Curtius says that he took the place of Lysander
when the latter WiLs disgraced. See //. G. (Eng, tr, , iv. p, 213), bk. v.
ch. iii. That he was no longer in immediate command of the Cyreians, if
indeed he had ever held that post officially since March 399 B.C., is proved by
the statement in Hell. III. iv. 20.

» )nfx HetL IIL iv, 14; and for his interest in this branch of the servict!
wet Hipparch. ix. 9; Cyrop, IV. iii. 4 foil, and/aw/m.


SKETCH OF THE



may be doubted ; but to his keen interest in the undertaking
and sympathy with the spirit of emulation fostered by the
' archie ' man for training regiments of infantry and squadrons
of cavalry, and one arm against another arm, we have ample
testimony in those pages of the Helknka which concern the
present moment. Certain chapters are all aglow with organisa-
tion conducted on the competitive principle, and, as I must
once more remind my readers, these passages will repeat them-
selves, sometimes phrase for phrase, in parallel pages of the
Cyropaedm. If the separation from his country, and the
fading hopes of attaining glory at Athens, and the loss of
familiar scenes and faces were a source of deep regret to him,
as doubtless was the case/ there were certain consolations
here. " Patria, bonis, amicis, genitoribus abero"; but then
he had his wife and children, as we imagine, to visit during
leisure. He had many dissolving views of scenery, cities of
men and actors upon life's daily stage, to interest him artistic-
ally. There was the excitement of militar}' preparation, there
were chance expeditions to whet the soul and nerve the body
— and the business of soldiering was relieved by sport.

It is impossible in this sketch to follow the story of Xeno-
phon's life as minutely as he has given it — since there is
scarcely a page of his history for at least ten years which does
not reveal some one or other of his experiences or reflections.
Indeed, so far as reflections are concerned, the remark applies
to the whole of the Helknka^ and, as I have before said, to
most of his writings, the autobiographic transparency of which
is extraordinary and leaves no doubt on our minds as to the
essential underlying qualities of the writer's nature : his patient
courage, his healthy human-heartedness, his painstaking care-
fulness, his noble ambition, and his reverential piety.'-

It was an early experience of Persian warfare in 396 B.C.
which had revealed to Agesilaus the need of cavalry.^ He

* The terms in which he speaks of exile as one of the great admJUed mis-
fortunes of life, seem to show it ; and from the man's friendly nature we must
needs divine it.

^ KO-prTEpia, <f)i\ay^punria, evifi^Xeta, tpiXartpdaf twi^eia. These are the
Xenophontine virtues.

•■' In Phryg:irt, when? the Greek cavalry were repulsed by the Persian horse
of Phamabams near iiascylium, Nell. HI. w. 13. The prior events may


LIFE OF XEXOPHON



xlvii


^



spent tlie winter therefore in organising that arm. In the
spring of the next year (395 b.c.) he collected his whole army
at Ephesus, which, in the glowing language of the historian,
became a colossal workshop of war,^

At the beginning of the official year Lysander and his
Thirty were replaced by Herippidas and his Thirty. One of
these officers, named Xenocles, with another unnamed officer,*
was put in command of the cavalrj' ; another of them, Scythes,
commanded the neodamode hopHtes ; Herippidas himself
the Cyreiaiis (which was apparently a corj^s JWiie) ; and a
fourth of them, Mtgdon, the contingents from the states. The
king warned them (and his voice is the voice of the elder

be briefly suinmarised thus : Leaving Aulis, Agesilnus sailed to Geraestus,
where he collected his forces {thirty Spartans, two thousand neodauiocles, and
six thousand allies), and thence to Ephesus. Tissaphemes at once demanded
why he had come, ami was told, to secure the ftiJl autonomy of the Greek
Asiatic cities. The satrap proposed a truce in order to consult the king, but,
with his wonted treachery, look occasion instead to send to the king for h. large
addition to his forces ; Agesilaus conscientiously adhered to the treaty. In this
inter\'a1 occurred the humiliation of Lysander, who was sent to the Hellespont,
and did good ser\'ice by persuading Spithridates (see Anab, VL v. 7, p. iti6,
for this officer) to revolt from Phamabazus. 'i'issaphemes, now reinforced, de-
clared war, unless Agesilaus chose to withdraw from Asia, To this ultimatum
Agesilaus replied with a cheerful countenance, /LuiXa <paiSp^ tw Trpoa-urjri^ (com*
pare the description of Clearchus in the Afiabasii), bidding the envoys to
take back his thanks to Tissaphemes for having so secured the hostility of
heaven by his perjury, Sri CTrtopKijcraj aerds p:iv naXeuiovi roifs SioOi iKT^/firaTO
Ttif S' "EWijffi ffvfifxdxovt ^ToiTjfl-ej', and deceiving Tissaphemes by a skilful
ruse, marched not upon Caria but into Phrygia.

^ Xenoplion's description glows with enthusiasm. The passage is quoted
by Poly bias (xii. 20, 7) and others, d^iav Si Kal flXTji* rrpf x&Kiy^ iv -§ ^i/,
0iai iToirftrtv * ^ tt ykp dyopi ^v fietTT^ vavTooavQv Kai iTrruitf koI oirAu*
uvluiv ot T€ xaXfoTii-irot koI ol r^Krovfj *rai al xaXffW fai ol aKtiTari^ai koX
ot (<irYpd4>oi TrofTfj Tro\ffiiKa oir\a KaTeaKci'a{^ov, wcrre riftf ir6\iv HvTiJs
a(ea€ai iroX4fioti ipyaar-i^ptov eivai. firtppuwrftj 5'iS.y rit Kal fK^j'o iSnlju,
'AyrfirlXaQy ftiv TrpCtrov, fTmra Si Kal to^ &Wovs ffrparttiTBi iiTT€<f>«.y<tifi4¥oi'i
ariy twm yiffifavliiiv awtdprai Kal dvariS^i'Tas roiiv artipdyov^ rff *ApT4fii5t,
6tov yiip dvSpei 0(o{fi ft^u ff^fiaivTO, rh S^ woXepunh AffKOiev, 'K€iOap\iiv St
HeXfT^fv, wm ovk fiicis ivrauda. roMTa p^ecrrct AWSwm il7adb;f elvai ; Neli,
III. iv. 16-19. See Xen. VVuris, U. p. 29 for a translation of the passage.

* TOi'Tuiv Se»'o*c\^a ju*v teal fiXXoi- (To^fv iirl rotJi IiTTer?, ^kvStjv Si iirl
Toi>s vtoSafjuliSfii ottMtm, 'HplrrTiSav S' firl toi>! Kvpeiovt, MfYSw^a 5^ iirl
Tor^s CTO TWf rroXecin' tTTpaTiiJjTas, koI irpoeliref aiVots, tis ev6i>i if^iljaoiTo tt}v
a-vfTOfAWTd-njv €wl ra KptLruna rrji x'^P^^f Struts airT6&ev o^ia rA atlffiara xai
r^ yvuifi.i}v Trapa<rKivd\Qivrxi ws i.yijiVio\)fXfvai. Hell, III, iv. ao. Who is
meant by fiXXof ? If he was one of the Thirty, why is he not named with
the other fotu officers? Is it possibly Xenophon himself?



xlviii



SKETCH OF THK



Cyrus in Xenophon's romance) of his intention to march
through the roughest districts of the countr}'^, in order to whet
their souls and bodies against the day of battle, which was not
long And this he did, marching upon Sardis- He met the
enemy on the Pactolms, and defeated hitn. Part of the spoil
was some camels, which, the historian tells us, Agesilaus im-
ported into Greece.^ Tissaphernes was in Sardis when the
battle took place, and there he met his fate. Accused at Susa
of mismanaging affairs, he was superseded by another satrap,
Tithraustes, who was sent down with orders to behead him ;
and so he died. The new satrap had new terms to offer to
the Spartan king. Agesilaus on his side would do nothing
without sanction from the home authorities ; but having got
thirty talents from Tithraustes to support his army, he gave him
respite, and retired north into the territory of Phamabazus.

Tithraustes meanwhile, who had grave suspicions that the
Spartan had no intention of leaving Asia, but, on the contrary,
was cherishing vast hopes of capturing the King himself, re-
sorted to other tactics.

It was now- that the Rbodian Timocrates was sent with
fifty talents of silver to visit the states of Greece, and so to
work upon their leaders as to kindle the flame of war against
Lacedaemon. The Rhodlan with his thirty thousand ' archers '^
visited Thebes, Corinth, and Argos, not without success. The
Athenians, though they would have no share of the gold,
were equally eager for the war; vo/jttfoi'Tcs aiVwi' to dpxeiv
" empire belonged to themselves "—that was their creed. It
was thus that the coalition of the allies was cemented, and now
that everything was ready, theThebans, according to the his-
torian,^ set the springs of hostility in motion. The disposition
to war they found already existing ; a pretext only was wanting,
and this they easily devised. It was to set the Locrians of
Opus and the Phocians by the ears. Presently the Thebans

* See Grote, //. G. is. 43a ; and for the use of camels in battle, Cyro/r.
VIL i. 22, 28. 48 ; Poi/ux, i. 140.

3 "The coin of Persia is stamped with the figure of an archer," Plut,
Agfs. (Clough, iv, 1 9 J.

» So Thirluall {vol iv. p. 391) after Xenophon, Nfil. III. Cf. Grole, ix.
397-408, and Curtius, bk. v. iv. {vol. iv. 221-224, ^^S- irans.) for their views
of the Fhociaji war.


I



LIFE OF XENOPHON



xlix



found themselves in the position of champions defending the
Locrians, and Sparta the Phocians. Either state was really
anxious to fly at the other's throat. The Laconians had not
forgotten how the Thebans had claimed a tithe of the spoil
dedicated to Apollo in the Deceleian war ; nor, yet again, how
they had not only refused to join in the expedition against Pir-
aeus (in B,c, 403), hot had induced the Corinthians to refuse
also ; nor, last of all, their kte affront to King Agesilaus at
. Aulis. Indeed they thought the moment opportune, and
Jrushed hastily into war, sending Lysander into Phocis. Here
that officer was to raise forces and march upon Haliartns, where
Pausantas, the Spartan king, was to join him with the Pelopon-
nesian forces by a certain day. Lysander carried out his
commission to the letter. He went farther : he brought over
Orchomenus. Pausanias the while was collecting his forces at
Tegea.

The ThebanSj finding that they were to be invaded by a
Laconian array, sent an embassy to x\thens. Their speech
does great credit to the envoys and to Xenophon's historic
imagination.^ It was a deliciite matter for a Theban to ad-
dress the ecclesia at ^Athens. There were many ancient pre-
judices to be overcome and painful recollections to be effaced.
The orator begins with the most poignant of these : the atti
tude of Thebes at the end of the great war, when they had
proposed to wipe Athens off the face of Hellas, But that was
not the vote of a free constitutional city, it was the wicked
design of a single man ; whereas on a later and happier occa-
sion, when they had refused to march upon Piraeus, the whole
city passed that resolution. It was their conduct then which
had brought down upon them the wrath of Sparta now. He
presses the claim of obligation home on the city party and on
the Democracy in turn. He kindles their imaginations by
appeals to the well-known ambition of the city to recover empire.
"When we and you are standing shield and shield to-
'gether ((rvva(rrrtBovvTi<i\ be sure the enemies of Sparta will
spring up by thousands on every side. Laconians are hated
everywhere — by Argos of old, by Elis m modern times.

^ ffe/i, HI. V. 8-15. " The speech of the Tlieban envoys sets forlh strik-
ngly the «ise against Sparta as it then stood," Grote, //. G. ix. 405.

€



1



SKETCH OF THE



Corinthians, Arcadians, and Achaeans, one and all, like our-
selves, detest them for good reasons. We are tired of fighting
their battles and receiving no share of the reward of toil
They appoint their helots ^ as harmosts, and now in the day of
their success belord it over their allies, who are after all free
men. No set of people have suffered more than your own
subject allies, who clutched at liberty and have embraced a
twofold slavery. They lie between the upper and the nether
millstone of the harmost and Lysander's Decarchy. And what
of the great king who contributed the heaviest item towards
your overthrow ? With him it fares to-day no better than if he
had supplied Athens instead of Sparta with the sinews of war.
Now then is your opportunity. Put yourself at the head of
all these victims of Spartan injustice, and you will regain your
empire. You will more than regain it. Athens will be the
mistress not of a maritime force only as of yore, but of all of
us. We, and the Petoponnesians, and your former subjects, and
the king himself with his vast armament, will follow your leader-
ship. We were staunch allies to Sparta in the past How much
more staunch shall we be to Athens now when we are fighting,
not for islanders, or Syracusans, or other foreigners, as in the
late war, but for ourselves who have suffered fou! wrong 1 Your
empire crumbled ; how much more readily will this fabric of
selfishness called Sparta fall to pieces ! Your empire was
based on a naval power, which they lack. Theirs is a system
of selfish dominance, the tyranny of a handful of people
exercised over numbers equally well armed. Now is your
time, men of Athens. We summon you to a fortune far
happier for Athens even than for Thebes/' The assembly
unanimously voted the alliance, and that too in spite of the
fart pointed out by Thrasybulus to the envoys, that Athens lay
midway between the belligerents with dismantled walls." But
they had not forgotten the debt of gratitude due to Thebes
during the troubles of the Thirty. They would run the risk.

Into the history of this campaign I need not enter.
Lysandcr was slain at Haliartus ; Pausanias arrived too late,

^ Compare whh ihis indictment Xcnophon's own slriciures on the de-
generacy of Sparta in the appendix chapter to his Lacedaemonian FolHy, xiv.
^ HeU. III. V. 1 6.


LIFE OF XENOPHON



I



»



and in the face of the united forces of Thebes and Athens,
presently fell back. The feeling of irritation at Sparta vented
itself on Pausanias, who, being condemned to death, retired to
Tegea. His son Agesipolis succeeded to the throne.

To return to Agesilaus and Xenophon. The autumn cam-
paign of 395 B.C. in Asia was directed against Pharnabazus
and Phrygia. At the suggestion of T.ysander's friend Spithri-
dates,' who undertook to introduce the native ruler of the
country to the Spartan, it was extended to Paphlagonia.- To
bring over one of the nations subject to the great king was
much to the taste of Agesilaus, The interview was most suc-
cessful. The independent chieftain Otys was quite ready to
make an alliance. Thereupon to reward Spithridates for his
services, and to strengthen Spartan interests in Asia» Agesilaus,
with a diplomacy worthy of Xenophon *s " archie " man,^ set
himself to negotiate a match between King Otys and the
daughter of Spithridates. The details are given in Xenophon's
romantic manner, and remind one of the Cyropaedia. So does
die scenery of Dascylium, Pharnabazus' residence, now occu-
pied by the Spartan king, with its parks and forests abounding
in game of every kind. Here in winter quarters lay the army
comfortably, and Xenophon, we may be sure, found time for
sport * (there was hunting, fishing, and fowling to be had), as
also for Uterary exercises and meditations.

' See above, p. xlvii. This must certainly, 1 thitik, be the officer mentioned
in Anab. VI. v. 7, p. 186.

' This independent chieftain, here called Otys (and in the Ages. iii. 4,
•• Colys*"), scenis to bear a striking resemblance to Corylas in the Anah^ V,
iv, 8, p 151. Here it is said of him, soJ! ^Ap iffaAotJ^tjfos \nrh ^aaiKio}^ om
aya^e^^K€i, Htll. IV. i. 2 ; there the words are itai vxiv o&rot (the Paphlagon-
ians) 01' ■trapeyhofTO §atriKei kuXovvti, dAXd pai^otf tppovct b &px*^^ avrCsy.
That was in 400 B.C. Within five years the chief may have changed, but not
the independence of the people.

* Hell. IV. i. 4 foil. So the "archie ' man, the '* right prince" of the
Cyrop., is a great matchmaker,

* icai d^pat ok yutv kq.\ iv wepiftpyfiivon vapuSeiffoii, ai Si khI avatrevTa-
fUpoii tAitoij, Tr6.yKa\ai. vept^ppei 5i Kai iroTaub^ iravToSairujv ixSi!>u}v
irX-qpr^. 9pf U Kal rb. Trrrivii, dtpOova tois dpfifffOaai Sivapi^vois, Hell. IV. i.
15. If only he hud niLMationed tlie fjartiouhtr f;uina of the district and the
methods of fowling t Hell. IV. i, 15 foil. Dascyhum is on the Propontis {Sea
of Marmora). A modem traveller quoted in Murray's Turkey in Asia, 1878,
p. 134, says : "The fauna of Olympus is also rich. RoC'deer and wild boar

'are very abundant ; red-decr are also found, together witb foxes, jackals, and


Iti



SKETCH OF THE



i


It was not all play, however, for the satrap, ousted from
house and home, was ever ready to pounce upon marauding
parties, or gave occasion himself for some deed of emprise.
Scene upon scene, these incidents of the campaign present
themselves. It is like turning over the leaves of an artist's
note-book ; or, more truly, these are finished sketches illustra-
tive of the matter in hand, which will by and by themselves
be turned to new account as the material of more elabo-
rate compositions. And what a ripple of sunny gladness plays
over these leaves ! what joy in mere living they reveal I what
a merry-go-round of soldierly adventure ! what an absolute
freedom from ennui ! what contrasts ! The gipsy life of the
roving Persian satrap ; the brilliant raid of Herippidas ; the
sudden departure in dudgeon of Spithridates and his Paphla-
gonians,^ The crowning scene is an interview between Agesi-
laus and the satrap.- It was arranged by a certain Cyzicene
Greek named Apollophanes, an old friend of the satrap's
and a new friend of the king's. The try sting -place was a
grassy mead, where Agesilaus and his Thirty lay outstretched
on the sward awaiting the arrival of Phamabazus, who appeared
ere long in magnificent golden apparel. His courtiers and
attendants began to lay down carpets and cushions for their
lord. But the satrap was too well bred to indulge in dis-
plays of luxury as if in contrast with Spartan simplicity.
He too, without more ado, reclined upon the greensward.
The interview is dramatically conducted in the historian's
favourite manner. It is also a chapter in political diplomacy.
The language used by Pharnabazus brought a blush to the
cheeks of those over-aggressive Spartans. It is impossible not

wolves. Eagles, of more than one species, were constantly in sight. Vultures
are occasionally met with, and the red-legged partridge, qua.il, and woodcock
are abundant." The whole description of the hunting-grounds, parks, and
open country has its paralU-l in the Cyropaedia. It was here, loo, as well as
on the field of Cuna.xa. that Xenophon made the study of Scjlhian chariots
(§ 7}. which he elaborated into the monograph on the subject m Cyr&p, VI. i.
S3 foil.

1 To complete the story — these barbarians could not understand the r'^;ula-
lions of the Spartan quartermaster-general touching spoil. So off they went
to throw in their lot with Ariaeus, who had also, it seems, revolted from the
king. Hfll. IV. i. 26 foil.

- lb. IV. i. 29^38. Apollophanes is another of the "go-betweens." See
above.



LIFE OF XENOPIiON



^



'to admire the courteous independence of the Persian. Our
sympathies are touched. T.ike Agesilaus, we are ready to
grasp the satrap's hand and assure Knn of our warmest regard.
Surely Xenophon was seated there amongst the Thirty, if not
of them. To the more serious business there is a pretty after-
scene — the seal of reconciliation between king and satrap.'^

It was about the beginning of spring in the year 394 b.c.
when, in accordance with his promise to Pharnabazus, the
Spartan king withdrew from Phrygia. Reaching Thebe's
plain, he encamped in the neighbourhood of the temple of
Artemis of Astyra, and began collecting a numerous host
from all sides. His preparations were made with a view to
marching up as far as possible into the heart of the Persian
dominions, and in the progress of this march he reckoned on
being able to detach one nation after another from the king.

^Vhat hold such a project must exercise on the minds of
those concerned, and on Xenophon in particular, we can well
imagine. Some years later,- when the hegemony of Sparta
was scarcely more widely admitted than at this season, the
democratic orator Lysias urged at Olympia the duty of pan-
Hellenic combination against the tyrant of the west, Dionysiusj
and the t>T*ant of the east, Artaxerxes. At a later 01>Tiipic
festival Isocrates in his Pane^'rikos still more elaborately
argued in favour of an attack on Persia, which ancient wrongs
and present opportunity alike de mantled. " If for Hellas'
sake our fathers rallied against Troy, ought not an insult to

* See Grolc, //. G. ix, 387. All these intemunciatory stories reveal a side
of Greek cliaracter (I scarcely like to think of Xenophon's own character, and
yet he has a touch of it) which 1 hardly know how to name. 1 fear the word
" flunkeyism" must be uttered. In us, at any rate, the thing I am aware of
would amount to flunkeyism ; and in the Alexandrian period there is no doubt
abovit it. ThcTL' is flunkeyism mi nauseam there. Xenophon and his friends
are saved by the grace and obvious dignily of the narrative. They do not
sacrifice Iheir own liberty of action : but whether for artistic purposes or
because he feels the glamour of orientalism, be surrounds his archie man (be
it Agesilaus or Cyrus the Great) with too many scraping courtiers and nodding
satellites, in too oriental a fashion, Ck 7^ ^juoJ Soku. See Cyrop. passim.

' Either 384 B.c:., as Grote (//. G. x, 103 tiaU) and others think, or in the
preceding Olympiad, 388 B.C., which isSirR. Jebb's view. See his reasons
for accepting this as the date of the Olyrnpiakos of Lysias {Attic Orators, i. 204
note 2. The date of Isocrates' Fanegyrikos is undoubtedly 380 H.C., I think :
op. cit. vol. ii. ch. xvi. p. 150 foil. I have freely availed myself ofSirk. Jebb's
analysis of both speeches.


tiv



SKETCH OF THE



Hellas to kindle a war now— a war which will move forward,
not liable to repulse, but with the stately progress of a sacred
embassy?" This was in 380 b.c. Fourteen years previously
Agesilaus was looking forward to a march moving forward not
liable to repulse ; and he had good reasons for so prognosti-
cating. He chanced also to have with him the best authority
on such a matter in the person of Xenophon himself, who could
tell him in plain terms (what the Olympic orator did not fail to
introduce as the climax of his argument), the inherent weakness
of Persia. " Some stand in awe of his strength. Were he
indeed strong that would be but another reason for attacking
him before he is stronger. But he is not strong." Xenophon
might have anticipated the very language of the orator, '* I
pass over the successes against Persia of Dercylidas, of
Dracon, of Thibron, of yourself Agesilaus. Nor is the mettle
of the Persian troops better than the quality of Persian
generalship. This was well seen in our own case who ac-
companied Cyrus. After the loss of our leaders, surrounded
by difficulties of every kind, we effected our retreat as smoothly
as if the Persian force, which sought to harass it, had been a
guard of honour. Chastised when he invaded Europe, de-
feated on the seaboard of Asia, the Persian king has actually
been mocked under the walls of his own palaces,"^ To the
Greeks the practicability of the idea was now for the first time
demonstrated. Its fascination needs no demonstration to
ourselves. To attack the Barbarian was incumbent as a
sacred duty, not only because he was the natural and common
foe of Hellas, but for the unifying of the states of Hellas. So
it appeared as an unselfish project which appealed directly to
men's consciences, and might at times be preached as a
crusade.^ Sooner or later it must be realised; but the glory
of its fulfilment was denied to Agesilaus,^ and to him who was
partly the inventor of it — Xenophon.*

^ See Anafi. 11. iv. 4, p, 51,

s The ]Kirallel is so far tenable, in that the crusades were directed Rgadnst tlic
common foe of Christendom and tendedto the unification of the nationsof Europe.

^ Denied also to Jason of Pherae and to Philip, its realisation was, as all
the world knows, reserved for Alexander. See Bacon's HV/vfr, iii. 313
(Spudding and Ellis).

■' See Plul. yigei. (Cloiigb), iv. ro, ai, 23, 35, 40, for Xenophon's relation
to the Spartan king.


LIFE OF XENOPHOX



Iv



*
I



Just when the march was about to be commenced, Epi-
cydidas arrived from Sparta with the message of recall.
Xenophon admires the Spartan disci phne with which the king
turned and obeyed. He is sorry for hini. But in some
respects he was himself the more to be pitied. Once more
the chance of doing something which should redound to his
honour was stolen from him. There was in his case also a
deeper calamity attending the change of programme. To follow
Agesilaus homewards, in whatever capacity he went, was a
double disaster. It was to run more than the ordinary risk of
life, which was perhaps of little consequence j^ and it involved,
further, his appearance in the field of battle in opposition to
his own countrymen.

If, as I suppose, he was already banished, possibly he had
but little choice of action. AH we know about the matter is
from his own lips in a single passage/'^ It is not even plain,
though an obvious inference from that passage, that he was
present at Coronea. Plutarch (and it is only what any
one else would be inclined to do) somewhat expands the
remark, "Xenophon, 7if/iff icas present and faugkf on A,i:^esiians^
side^ reports it to be the hardest fought battle that he had seen."
Xenophon 's own description of the battle, it must be added,
reads like that of an eye-witness, and for compressed force of
language is a masterpiece of word painting often quoted by
the ancient writers.^

But the fact of his presence is one thing, the moral
question another. In reference to this double problem I
have little to say, except that I believe he was present, and not
improbably in arms. He may have been in command of a
division of cavalr>', or he may have been simply attached to

^ We may fairly credit Xenophon, who was not so much philo-Laconian
as a man cast in Dorian mould, with the desire to live and die lis KtkK\i<na
(see Anah, fossim). According to the epitnph of Plul. Pelop. (Clough), li.
p. aoa —

" They tlicct, but not as lavish of their blood,
Or thinking death itself was simply goud ;
Their wishes neither were to live nor die,
HiU to do both alike cornmendahly."

* Ana^. V. iii. 6, p. 140, compared with Plttt. A^^es. (Clough). iv. p. ar.

* Meli. IV. iii. 15 folL, e5|)eciully § 19. Cf. Longinua, irtpl {J^oi/s, ^ ly.
Xenophon himself rep«>at5 it in L'yrvp. VIII, i, 38.


Ui



SKETCH OF THE



the staff of the general and performing the duty of an adjutant.
In either case had he been taken prisoner it would have gone
hard with him. Wherever he was, he was a keen observer of
the fighting * but he unfortunately does not mention as an eye-
witness or from hearsay what part his own countrymen played.
He merely tells us that they were posted in front of Herippidas
and the foreign brigade, including, I suppose, the Cyreians.
It is significant that he entered into private life soon after,
unless perhaps for a few years he continued to attend Ageai-
laus on some of his campaigns. It is further noticeable that
no word of reproach in reference to his conduct on that
day is raised against him by any ancient wTiter, contemporary
or other; nor does any word drop from his lips in sign of
an evil conscience. Yet it is he who has said some of
the noblest things ever said touching the duty of a citizen
to the state. Nor do I think that his share in the wider
if more visionary sentiment of pan -Hellenic patriotism can
be urged in explanation of his conduct, since, though doubt-
less he was strongly swayed by it^ he was not of so dull
a wit that he could fail to distinguish between one duty and
another. Nor again was he, nor could he feel himself to be,
justified as an exile fighting for reinstatement, or for the sub-
version of a pernicious government, de fado but not dejure
dominant at home. He was not in the position of a follower
of Hippias at Marathon, or of the Duke of Berwick at the
Boyne, or of a French h/iigre noble in '93. He could not
possibly excuse himself by casuistical arguments suited to the
later circumstances of mercenary generalship. The difficulty
in which he was involved was not the result of a private con-
nexion by marriage with a Seuthes or a Cotys. He was not
in like case with some free-lance captain who, on a sudden
turn of politics, should find himself in the employment of his
country's enemy, the other day its friend,^ The difficulty in

^ The story of Charidemus would be illustrative were his not an exceptional
case amongst the condtftderi of those times. 'J'hat of Iphicrates, taking: part
with his father-in-law Cotys and actualiy fighting against Athens, is more apt.
See Demos, c. Aristocr. p, 664, § 153, irbXptrfaev inrip twi' Kdrvoi vpm.ypia.TUt'
eyavTia roit {iftcripmi ffTpaT-ifyoit tfavfj-axeiv . Groie, //. C x. 410: Curt.
//. (7. V. 103, Eng. trans. ; Rehdantz, /'//. //Ak. Chahr. Titmth, Athenien-
slum, V. §§ 7, 8.


LIFE OF XENOPHON



Ivii



Xenophon's case was in some sort exceptional, and the ex-
planation of his behaviour obvious. In no case was his
offence so heinous but that before the end of his days the
sentence of exile was rescinded This only happened indeed
when the " Boeotian " party at Athens had lost and the
" Laconian " party had regained its power. At that date
(possibly in 369 B.c) Xenophon was not only reinstated
legally, but was evidently regarded by his fellow-citizens as
one whom they could well afford to be proud of. But con-
cerning this matter, not more obscure indeed than it was
unhappy, enough has been said. The reader will form his
own conclusion.-^

Agesilaus was wounded in the battle of Coronea, and taken
home to Sparta. Thither Xenophon evidently, as I think,
accompanied him, and with him there stayed for the next few
years (between 394 b.c and 389 B.c, or even so late as 387 B.C.,
the year of the peace of Antalcidas). He probably accom-
panied Agesilaus on more than one campaign in this interval.
He seems to have been with him during the expedition into
Corinth- (392 or 391 e.c. ?), and at Peiraeum, when the news
of the destruction of the mora by Jphicrates was brought
Possibly he was with him also the following year in Acamania.
There is the same minuteness of detail and vividness of
description now and again in his chronicle of these years,
which we have noted as a proof of the historian's presence at
the scene of action in Asia.^

The two incidents of chief biographical -importance for

Mf he lakes Grotto's view ho will probably subscribe to the verdict of
Niebuhr, " Xenoplion was not a good citizen," albeit in other respects tcdWur-
Tin Tf Kal Apia-Toi. For myself, 1 regard him as to some extent (how far it is
irapossibte to say) a victim of circumsLi nccs. I also admit that the web in
which he wiis eventually caught was very much of his own weaving. Faciiis
dt'Sttnstts: the fault was greatest when tihe act was slightest. He ought never to
have joined C>tus, the enemy of his country, on a wild-goose chase after glory,
liut how, being what he was, could he at that date have resisted the tempta-
tion ? and how could any one, except perhaps Socrates, have foreseen the
mischief which would come of it? The remark in ihti Jifemara/nita comes
back to lus : " But those who refused to listen to his warning lived to repent
of their obstinacy." It is not the fashion of these Greeks to speak of personal
jovs and sorrows. He had too much Kaprepta to bemoan his misfortune.
^ 'J N^//. IV. iv. 19 ; IV. v. 2 ; IV. vi. 6 foil.
' S«e above, p. xl. foil.



hHii



SKETCH OF THE



this whole period are now to be named. The first of these
has indeed been already discussed in detail in a former fool-
note — the latter has been more than once referred to. It
was during his sojourn at Sparta, as Plutarch tells us, that at
the instance of Agesilaus the exiled philosopher was persuaded
to send for his children, and had them educated in the lore
of Spartan chivalry. That is the first point. The second
is that at a certain date— perhaps before, and probably
not later than, 387 B.C. — he was sent as a colonist to SciOus
by the Laconians, in appreciation of his services, and event-
ually presented with a house and farm.^ Scillus was one of
the Triphylian townships which had been taken from Elis in
400 B.C., where the donors evidently wished to have some
trusty person with a head upon his shoulders, to represent
their interests. No doubt^ in return for the gifts of leisure and
security the new resident was expected to play the part of
proxenos or consul to the Spartans. In both of these oppor-
tunities so presented to him the philosopher is to be deemed
happy. The first enabled him to bring up his children in
what he probably regarded as the best education to be had in
Mellas ; the other to write his books."

It was doubtless at Sparta that he collected facts and formed
reflections, the fruit of which is to be found not only in the
Lacedaemonian Polity (an immediate product of his sojourn in
the capital), but in those other poHdcal studies, the Hiera and the
Cyropaedia. His mind was set working more definitely than
before on the question of government (what is an dpx^J l)y and
these are his answers. The Hiero probably did not find ex-
pression until the author had witnessed the remarkable scene

' See Diog. Laert. IJfe of Xen. § 8. ivrevOtv ^\9(v tli ttjt 'EKXdda

pitrii ' AyiiffiXdov wirXijMfVov ets riw Trpbt Qrt^aiovs ir6\fnoy ' xai a^^

Tfnt^tpiay iSwfav tH XaKeSaxftivtOi • ivT(i'9€i>, edo-ai tov ' Ayrf<ri\a.i>if ^icev e«

X^jWorira . . . atfuKOfjUpov 5i rod Mfya^oj^ov Kara Trpbtpaaw rrji ■KayTjy6p€(at.

uadp.€vot tA x/")^"*''* X'^f^'f" ^*pi-oTO koI Kadi^puKre rjj 9f^5 . . . tpW- ^' ^

Ipopxo^ 6ti Kai o'lKiav koI iypdv oivri^ (Soffof AaiceSot^tAi'iot, Cf. Paus. v.

5. AaKfOaifJ-dfiot oi tuTtpcv "LKiWovvra aTrorffibfuvoi t^x 'HXctat

■Po^VTi (5oaav T*j5 rpiiWou k.t,\.

* See Plutarch, de Exilic, p, 603 B. xoia. (piryaoinT} »'^<ros ovk (<rn
,'\aTVTipa Trjt XxiWovfTiai x^pos, iy 5 So'o^v fxera tt/i' tTrpardav t6
Kiwap&¥ €lSe yfjpai ; if>, p. 605 C. QovkMStjs cvviypa^ rov Tr^Xe/xar tuip
^AoroMnjtf/tiW KoX 'Adrfvaiuv iy Qp4*^^ itepl ■riji' ZxaTr;^ vXrfv ' Xfvo^MP iv



LIFE OF XEXOPHON



lix



described by Lysias in his Olympiiic, when the tyrant Dionysius,
in the person of his brotiier, sent a magnificent theory to the
famous festival, and drew down upon himself the sarcasm of
the great democratic orator,^ The Cyropaedia was not penned
for many a day yet, and is evidently a composition of a novel
order, upon which the ^v^ite^ expended much pains, meaning
it to embody his theory that the secret of a/>x>/ is the dis-
covery, as the result of parentage and education, of the right
prince or archie man. But with this work, so often referred
to in the pages of this sketch, we have nothing especially to
do at present. The Laconian Polity is interesting as contain-
ing a quasi-historical account of Lycurgus's institutions, as seen
or pictured in their more or less ideal working, along with a
severe criticism on the practical breaking-down of these insti-
tutions in modern Sparta.- It is to Xenophon that we owe
the truly fine phrase, *' They magnify themselves on their
lowliness "— r^ TUTretfot ilvu-i /xeyaAvt'ot^rat, which has the very
ring of a magnificat Such was the spirit in which he wished
his boys to be brought up, so that they might become adepts in
the art of self-discipline and leadership, ro apx^'''^ '^^ ''"^ d/)x*'^^*'*i
since that was the gist of the whole matter. The beginning and
end of Doric or Spartan education, it tallied or complemented
that other Attic or Ionic principle in which Xenophon himself
had been excellently trained, that a man should be able to
speak and to act, Xky^iv t€ kqX Trpdrreiv SvvatT9at, As to his
two sons, they grew up to be good citizens. One of them, the
elder (Gryllus), died fighting for his country in behalf of his own
state and his father^s adopted state — Athens and Sparta — at
the battle of Mantinea.^ The younger came out of the battle

' This i.vas either in 388 or 3B4 8.C, See note above, p. ]tii.

" The epilogue of ihe Cyropaedia (VIII. viiL), if written by Xenophon him-
self, is exactly analogous mth the striclures passed on Spartan institutions in
Uiose degenerate days which are to be found in cliapter xiv. of Lac. Pol. How
this chapter, which I hold to be genuine, came to be inserted into the text at
this particular point of the treatise, is a question into which it is not opportune
to enter at present. It was probably of later date than the bulk of the essay,
and should npix^ar as a note, or in appendix. Both criticisms read lilte the
pralinode or liberavi aniinam of a wriltrr who finds the world he has tried to
idealise not after all so very good — the sigh of a dissatisfied demiurge.

* Or rather, the cavalry skirmish of the day before. See Heti. VII. v. Tg.
16, 17. fimdv 5i airi&avop &v5p€i iyadci (he is WTiting his own son's
epitaph) xal djtiKTdvav de dnXov Sti toioiStoi'j,



SKETCH OF THE



tinscathed. Bat this is to anticipate the evil day, which was
also the day of glory and reaown, by many years. Before
they left Sparta the boys were probably of an age to play
football and to go hunting excursions with the other young
Spartans ; ^ and we may guess, from their appellation, these
great twin brethren were quite at home, and favourites.
Their father is silent of course concerning his own domestic
life and literary occupations.^ Of the latter I have already
spoken. The former we are left to gather from the niany
passages in which he lovingly depicts the joys and sorrows,
the sunshine and April showers, of boyhood,'* and the
sophrosyne {a-totppocrvv'^i} of womanhood. He might well have
written a special treatise on boyhood — a prose ]iocm, in that
sweet style of his own, anticipative of /'ari d'etre grand-pire.
He did write, as is well known, a treatise which might have
been entitled On Wifehood — the Eamomist^ which Alberti *
(or some other of those times) used to depict the life of a
good citizen, founded on masserizia^ piety, and good sense.
Perhaps we need not go farther to assure ourselves of Xeno-
phon's own private happiness than to this idyll of married life,
the delicate domesticity'' of which is truly touching. This
was a peace which no exile could rob him of, and which was

^ See Miiller's Doriam, voL li. p. 309. " During the progress from the
condition of an ephebus to manhood, the young Spartans were called Spkaereis,
probably because their chief exercise was football, which game was carried on
with great emulation, aiid indeed resembled a battle rather than a diversion.
In Iheir nineteenth year they were sent out on Uie cfypieia," liVc, Tbe two
boys would be brought up as Tphfptpuii.

- If not finished some years ago, the first part of the Hclknica (Bks. 1, and
IL to speak roughly — see Xen. Works, 1. p. Iviii. , Note C) perhaps belongs
to this date, and was finished in Sparta.

^ Cyra^. passim. For tart d'ffre grani-f^re, see Cyrop. I. iv., Astyages
and his little grandson. One cannot help thinking of Xenophon and his two
sons, whilst reading the passages on brotherly aflTeciion in the Memorabilia, IL
iii. I foil, and Cyrop. VIII. vti, 13 foil. As to the sophrosyne of woman, see
Cyrop. passim. Heywood has put two of these— Panthea, the wife of Abra-
datas, unci Tigranes's wife — into his Twaixfiov (pp. 126, 245 of the edition of
1634). There are many others, historical or purely imaginary, sketched in a
manner worthy of Euripides or of the painter Zeuxis himself.

■• .'Uberti wrote also in exile. iSee for the influence of Xenophon's
Ocranomicus on Italian writers, Mr. Symonds, Italian Lit, Part 1. p.
196 nofe.

" Cf. Cytitp. VI L V. 56 for tlie secret of Xenophon's happiness — " Home,
sweet Home" — and the keystone of his philosophy.



I



I



LIFE OF XENOPHON



Ixi



indq^endent of locality. He could find it alike in Europe
and in Asia : SparLi, Scillus, Corinth in turn fostered it. It
was, as far as any earthly joy may be, perdurable. >.

If indeed anything of a more external character were
needed to enhance it, that additional element was to be found
in the quietude of Scillus,^ The lovely scenery of the place
itself, to this day lovely ; the delicious atmosphere ; the rare
combination of mountain, wood, and stream ; the opportunity
for sport ; the horses and the dogs ;'^ the farmstead and its
daily round of occupations ; the household and its inmates,
with their varied interests ; the neighbouring townships and
local politics ; the proximity to Olympia ; the recurring season
of festival ; the stream of visitors ; the pleasures of hospitable
entertainment ; the daily family sacrifices at the hearth or
before the cedar image of the great goddess Artemis in her
model temple — these things, and, above all, the serene satis-
faction of literary labour, combined to form an enviable sum
total of sober happiness during many years.



Middle Age, 387 (or 3S9)-37i ex. circa; At Scillus ; Intel-
lectual Floruit, Gseat LiTtRARv Period.

It is not certain at what date the family migrated to
ScilluSj nor at what precise date was disestablished j but

* See map ; also Baedeker's Greece, p. 315, and Xenophon's own descrip-
tion, p. 140 of this volume. It is appropriate here to quote the words of
Theniistius " the eloquent " [flor- 355 A.D.] Tliat writer, like Cicero and ihe
ancients in general, fully believed in the genuinene;>s of the Agesiiam (as to
which I will state my views in a later volume). He says {Or. 2, p. 27 D)
' Kyriffi\aov M olSa rbv j^a<n\4a rfjt ^TrdprTjj 6ti Sevo^ajf ovk Hkpci iirmve7v
Kal dfielfieffSai fiaxpi^ ^tjiXitfi {or does the orator refer to Hellenka B,
rather than the vyK^hp-iov itself?) ^irciST) aw^i vitiesQai h^vpo^aro x'^f^o" "
;nerttfy'H\iSoi Kal ApjtaS/ar, ovir&ppai ^KtWoGvro^ ff rjj ^vy^. — Ov fiyiv o'uS^^
X^pts 6fU3la ayp6y ipyd^'fa&ai Tvpolna 'ApKaSttciv, fl iTabov rtrx^etv dy^pta re
Koi dOaPO-Tov • raxa 5' ftv Kal aiirbs 6 'Apxi^dfiou n/utirfpoi' ^witpii dy<u, t^i
airroS Stiiptaj t6 jfajOtcrTTjpioM toC ^eiroifttiivTOi * tA ftiv yitp X6yos ipf i/vA
ifK\o>iT6ipcv yeypafifievoi, if Si^ et ri ifi iirptxTix^if t^ ei\if}ip6rij wpolKal KpiSal
icat TptoKTA. dpaia Kal 5opKddm Kal eruj Giufxeiv re Kal aKOPTl^fiv,

' For the horses and dogs, see Xenophon's two tracts, that on Hunting
(Cyriegeticm), perhaps a youthful work ; and that on H&rsemanskip, a work of
iits old age. Tollux the grammarian (v, 47) says he had a dog named Hippo-
centaur — cf. Cyrop. IV. iii, 17; Aelian V. H. 9, 39, For the farming occupa-
tions, seethe Econ^jmist. See Xen. Works, HI. part i, and part ii.


hil



SKETCH OF TTTE



there, amid those loveliest surroundings of nature, and within
easy reach of the sacred city, they lived, we must assume, for
fifteen or probably twenty years. There the boys grew up to
manhood, properly trained for war by yearly hunting expedi-
tions. There let us believe that Philesia, being still alive,
played a part like that of the wife of Ischomachus,^ finding
happiness in manifold co-operation with her husband 5 the
wife, the mother, the kindly mistress of the house, befriending
her servants, and beloved of all^ There, at all events, the
father, whose character was fully formed, spent his time
between healthy bodily and mental exercises, "in hunting," as
his biographer has told us,-* "and entertaining his friends, and
writing his histories." Here certainly he attained his literary
prime.*

A large number of his wTitings (at least as finished com-
positions) probably date from this period. Others were in
process of composition, and had reached various stages of
completionj before Xenophon was forced to change his resi-
dence. Both sets may appropriately be named in order here.
They are the specially Socratic writings, including the Afemor-
abiHa^ the Economist^ and the Symposium^ which are all closely
connected— the Economist being, as I have elsewhere suggested
(Xen. Works, vol i, p. liv.), an expanded chapter of the Memor-
abilia but, as a finished composition, perhaps the earliest of the
three. With these, as a product of the Scilluntine leisure, we
must include the HietOy the nature and occasion of which^
admirable dialogtie have already been noticed. It is worth
notinK perhaps, ns a point of l)iographic interest, that the
pr<i iphon to keep in some sort

n»" .ivTS. He may well have

l^^^.yxias above referred to^ and,
' of Isocrates. These oppor-



ition), Ofxon. \ii. 17.
ua/ausfions Advtnfure,

A icn forty and fifty when



LIFE OF XENOPHON



IxJii



tunities were not likely to be wasted. The last writing, which
almost certainly belongs in the same sense to this period, is
the Polity of l/it Lacedaemonians {see Xen. Works ^ II.),

This list of finished, and possibly puhUshed, \Yorks does not,
as already stated, exhaust the literary labours of the period.
During the sixteen or eighteen years in question (from 389 or
3S7 B.C. to 371 B.C.) the author, it would seem, had two or
three of his larger works still on hand, though at various
stages of completion. Thus the Anabasis, if for the greater
part written, was not published in its final form till after
371 B.C., or even later.^ The second part of the Htihniia^'
containing a record of Hellenic affairs from the year 403 b.c.
tu 387 R.c, was in the same way probably ripe for publica-
tion before Xenophon left Scillus \ while whatever his method
of composition may have been, the author was certainly em-
ployed in collecting notes for the final portion of the same
historical work^ during the whole of his residence in Scillus.
Besides which we may suppose that he was always in some
sense working at and meditating scenes and chapters for his
historico-philosophical romance, the Cyropaedia. Possibly he
had made some advance with the composition as a whole.
The publication (or completion), howe%'er, of these four larger,
and of his remaining minor works ^ can be clearly referred
to a later period, when his happy residence at Scillus was a
bygone.

If w^e are right in our conclusions, that residence was dis-
continued in the year so disastrous to the arms of Sparta on the
field of Leuctra {b.c 371), and for reasons closely connected
with that historical event.

* As proved by iDternal evidence deducible from Analt. V. iii. p. 140
folL See Xen. Works, L Note R. p. Ixvi.

3 HelUnica Z? = Bk- III. i. i (or perhaps more strictly, 11. iii. ti) lo V.

i- 36'

3 Hellenica C=Bk. V. ii. to the end of Bk. VIT. (387 B.C. -362 B.C)
The process of collecting notes for this work at Scillus, broken off in yji B.C..
was resumed at Corinth, and occupied the author till the end, Tlie book was
still on hand in 359 p.C. See Xen. Works, 1. pp. Ivii., Ixii., Ixiii.

* The Cynegetkiis was possibly already published ; the Lac. Pol, probably
at Scillus, Ttie remaining minor works are the iiipparchikos , and the tract
on iioratmanskip, the Agesilaus, and the pamphlet on Rez'tnucs. I do not
count the Apology, which some hold to be spurious. See Xen. Wprks, U. , HI.



SKETCH OF THE



Into the minutiae of this question I need not here enter,
but will reserve its discussion for a footnote, 1 agree with
most modem critics in accepting 371 B.C. ^ as most probably

1 This is RoqueUe's view {de Xen. Vit. i. § 6, p. 26 foil.), with which
Grote \H. G. be 245, 246) evidently agrees (ihough in his P/a/o, iii. 567,
he seems to have altered his view). 1 cannot do better than quote his words.
"The interesting description which he hunself (Xenophon) gives of his resi-
dence at Skillus implies a state of things not present and continuing, but past
and finished. Other testiinonicj, too, though confused and contradictory,
seem to show that the Laconian settlement at SkiUns lasted no longer than the
power of Lacedaemon was adequate to maintain it. During the misfortunes
which befell that city after the battle of Leuctra {i.^. 371 B*C. ), Xenophon^
with his fiimily and his fellow-settlers, was expelled Ijy the Ekians, and is then
said to have found shelter at Corinth." This date is at any rate much nearer
the oiaxk than 363-362 B.C., which, unless it is a mere slip of the pen, would
seera to be Grote's later view, as expressed in his Life of Xenophon, above
referred to, "SkiUus," he there says, " the place in which the Lacedaemonians
had established Xenophon. was retaken by the Eleians during the humiliation
of Lacedaemonian power, not long before the battle of M^ntineja " {i.t. 362
B.C. ) Nor again do 1 follow Curtius (vol. v. Eng, tr. p, 149 ; bk. vii. ch. ii.)
when he says, " The war between Arcadia and Elis " (referring to the war of
365 B.C. apparently) "once more deprived him of a home; he emigrated to
Elis, but about the same time," etc.

The fullest argument for the date 371 B,c. is given in Roquette's disserta-
tion, de Xenopkontu Vita. He assigns two main reasons for that particular
date :—

(1} llie Eleians, at the congress, held in the autumn of that year at Athens
just after the battle of Leuctra, to which the Athenians invited all who wished
to hold to the Peace of Antalcidas, claim that certain cities of the Triphylia
(Marganes and the rest, of which they had been robbed in 400 a. r,) should
not be regarded as independent {Hell. VL v. 2, in reference to IlelL HI. ii.
20), which claim (according to Roquette) implies that they were then recovered.

(2) This recovery could only have taken place when the Laconians were
somehow crippled, as they were at the instant of the defeat at Leuctra.

Roquette finds confirmation of his view in the following facts. (1) The
hostility of Hits to Sparta, is vi/ait accompH in the winter of 370-369 B.C. — i.i.
they are allies of the Thebans on the first Theban invasion of Peloponnese
(//*•//. V^I. v. 30 ; Grote, //. G. x. 294). (2) In 368 B.C. the Eleians maintained
that these cititis had deserted to the Arcadians {Hell. \'il. i. 26), which implies
that between 400 B.C. and 368 B.C. they had for a season recovered them.
(3) Diog. Laertius's {i.e, Dinarchus's) phrase, ^pa^irtfovTiciv AciKeSat^piwi',
implying some slackness on the part of Lacedaemon. would be inapplicable
after 370 B.C., when Megalopolis was built, and still more so in 369 B.C.. when
Mcssenia also was freed; since, however rapid had been their movements at the
latter date, the l^cedaemonians could hardly have relieved the towns in qucstiou,
being themselves cut off from both the northern roads to the Triphylia.

With this reasoning in the ntnin I agree, I do not think, however, that
il follows from the claims put forward by the Eleians at the Athens congress of
371 B.C that they had necessarily at that time recovered the townships, since
the claim was clearly irrespective of any nH Jf0ssi<kfi>, or their then condi-


LIFE OF XENOPHON



the date of the occurrence, the history of which I will now
state in the words of the most ancient authorities. This is
what Dinarchus the orator tells us in the pages of Xenophon's
biographer, Diogenes Laertius. *' The Eleians marched
against Scillus, and through the tardiness of the Laconians (in
relieving it) took the place ; at which time his sons made
their escupe by stealth, with a few of the domestics, to
Lepreum (a township farther south in the Triphylia) ; and
Xenophon himself, first to Elis (?),^ and then to Lepreum^
where he joined his sons ; and from Lepreum eventually
escaped along with them to Corinth, and there settled."^

Xenophon is silent in his history of the times about this,
as also about nuich else of larger historical importance.
Whether or not he betook himself to Elis^ (^''■y or district), or
for what reason, now or at any subsequent moment, is beyond

tion. It was anterior. Perhaps they had already recovered them : perhaps
they only succeeded in their object later. By 368 B.C. apparently lliey had
again lost them.

^ fit TTjp *HXiJ' Trp6T€poP. This is puzzling, Why should be at such a crisis
betake hiinself to Eli;i? One wuuld like to substitute "TXijv, if only one could
find authority for such a name or district. " Forest," or " woodlands" ; but
see below.

- Diog. I^crt § 9 of U/e.

* According to IPausanias, v. 6, 6.

The Eleian exegetae told the traveller, when he visited the spot five centuries
afterwards, thai Xenophon had been condemned in the judicial council of
Olympia, as being a wrongful occupant of the property at Scillus obtained
through L-aconian violence ; but that the Eleinns had granted him indulgence
and allowed hrm to remairn. He adds that a short distance from the temple
a monument was pointed out, with a statue in i'entclic marble on the tomb, which
the inhabitants believed to t>e of Xenophon. His words are : 0! 5^ "HXfiwv
^f77T''«i Kop,iaaa-&ad re at-flcs Skj-XXowto 'B.\dom tXeyop, Kal ^EeroipQfTa.

fiov\^, ri'jfifra 5^ trapk IJXeiwF crtry-yi'ui^Tjy dSews iv ^KiKkovvTi olKi)(rai. Kai
^19 Aral dXiyov dirwr/pw toO icpo9 ^ffjpLd rt eSetKi'i'TO Kal rijt IJenreX^irlt' icrrt
\i6QT0fjJ.ai (Ikuv iwl t^ Td(f>i(t ' elvai di aiirb Sfvo^wi'TOJ \4yovatP d TpoaoiK-
oii'Tcs. But probably Groic ti, right in his criticism of this storj' : "As it
seems clearly asserted that Xenophon died at Corinth, he can Iiardly have
availed himself of the indulgence ; and I incline to suspect that the statement
is an invention of subsequent Eteian Exegetae, after they had learnt to
appreciate his literary eminence" (Groie, Piato, iii. p, 568). Or is it
possible that thttre is some truth in the story — that the case was heard and
sentence passed, followed by a special indulgence, for whatever reason,
granted to the pious intruding foreigner : which indulgence he for many
reasons may not have cared to avnil himself of? The story in any cose is
interesting as a tradition.


Ixvi



SKETCH OF THE



our discover}\ I'o Corinth clearly he eventually came, and
there he once more established himself.

Corinth then we assume to be the scene of Xenophon's
last years. At Corinth we must suppose he finished his
literary labours. At Corinth, according to the statement of
another ancient authority, ** he finished his course." But
there were many years to run yet before the last lap of the
race was reached.



At Corinth. 371-354 b.c. circa: Recall, and Service op ms Sons in
THE Athenian Cavalry, 369 b.c. ; Death op Gryllus. 362 b.c. ;
Literary Labours, 359 B.a and onwards ; Old Age and Final
Work, 355 ac. ; Death, 354 b.c. circa.

The years which remain appear to have flowed in genera!
with an even tenor. They are the years of ingathering. One
is aware of certain autumnal tints, and an occasional flutter as
of sere leaves falling, but they were rich with the fruitage of
ripe thought and literary labour. It is of tliat we think rather
than of the two or three external incidents which fall within
the period. These latter, however momentous as personal
experiences, are devoid of complexity, and may be briefly
chronicled. The most important of them are the recall of
Xenophon from banishment, the mission of his sons to Athens,
and the death of Gryllus.

If we are right in our dates and suppositions, Xenophon
was past si.xty when he found a new home for himself and his
family at Corinth. His wife was, we hope, stilt living ] no one
knows. His sons would be yoong men of about eight or nine
and twenty. They had perhaps already seen service,^ oppor-

^ See the passage, Hell. V. iii. 9. in which the historian describes the cam-
paign undertaken after the defeat and death of Teleutias before Ol^tithus in
381-380 B.C. The authorities despatched the king, and with him, as in the
case of Agesilaus' Asiatic campaign (see above, p. xlvii.), thirty Spartans
TfKOKQVTa lirapTuvruiv ' ttoWqI S^ aiV^ Kal tQ)v TrfpioUuv ide\oPTcd kii\oI
KayaOol ijKoXov&ouv kuI ^ivot tup tfiatpitujii' KaXovp^ivitiv Koi vitBoi tujp
2iVa.fiinaTtjv ftdXa evfidelt rt Kal tQv iv rp ifdXet koXuk- ovk Areipoi.
Grote (/y. G. x. 91) conjectures that Xenophon s two sons, being educated at
Sparta, would come under the category- of Tp&fpifiot, and if either were old
enough, he migUl probably have been among the volunteers to nccompany
Agesipolis. At this date Gryllus may have been about eighteen, and of an
age to serve. For the noble csoriage of these young men and their high


LIFE OF XENOPHON



Ixvii



tunlties for which were not lacking during the last ten or
twelve years of their sojourn in the Triphylia. Possibly they
were to be found among the " fosler-sons " of Lacedaemon, who
followed the Spartan king Agesipolis against Olynthus in 3S0
B.C. " Handsome fellows, and well versed in the lore of
Spartan chivalrj^," we can well believe, they were.

In 369 B.C a rarer chance presented itself to the young
men of doing service in behalf not only of Sparta but of their
truer fatherland, and in the state cavalry of Athens. The
sentence of banishment under which their father lay was
rescinded, we may suppose,^ about the same date, and possibly
the two incidents are connected as cause and effect The
biographer Diogenes Laertius merely tells us^ that ''mean-
spirit, see the description of the cavalry skirmish in which Gryllus fell before
Manlinca, already quotc^d above ; Helt. VII. v. 17, and below. We may be
certain that they knew all about ca\'alry maaioeuvxea atid horsemanship from
their father, whose happiness it was to have sons who shared his lasies and
perhaps his raost cherislied beliefs,

1 -^^. jiave reason to tjelieve, on independent grounds, that Xenophon was
reconciled to his country within five years of the battle of Lcuclra. The
decree rescinding his exile may therefore have t)eea passed ah-eady in 369 B.C.,
or it may have been a subsequent matter. But vifhether his sons served their
country while their father was still an exile, or only after the sentence of recall
was passed, is a minor matter. As a sign and seal of reconciliationj we find
the sons serving in the state cavalry from 369 B.C. to 362 bc, and ihe
father addressing his political (xiinphJen, tlie Hipparckikos, lu one of the hip-
parchs of the year, apparently 365 B.C. See Xen. Works, 111. part ii. Introd.

- On the authority of Dinarchus apparently, or of the orator as quoted
in Diocles, ap. Diog, Laert., op. cit, § 10. The statement of the bistoriaii
Ister, ap. Diog, Laert. , op. cit. § 15, *:ai 'larpos t^ticiv niirhv ifniyftv Kara
^IrfyfuiTfia Ei'ijSoi'Xoi' Kal KareXdelp Kara \fnfffpnrfni roG airroG, may or may not be
correct as regards the idcnlily of Enbuhis (sec above), but is good external
evidence to the fact of Xenopbon's recalL The internal evidence of the Nip-
parcAikos—i:v\<ienl\y written by a man of mature age, and addrc-ssed to the
hipparch of the year during^ an interval of peace [Hipparch, \. 19 ; iv, 6).
when there was a prospect of a war with the Boeotians \ib. vii. 3)— pointjs (as
koquette shows, op. dt. Ii. 34, pp. 95, 96) to the year 365 B.C. as the date of
publication, and is conclusive as to the completeness of the author's reconcilia-
tion with his country. As to Eubulus, it is quite possible that the well-known
statesman Eubulus of Anaphlystus may have proposed the decree of recalL
Xenophon was not indeed precisely of his colour of politics, since Eubulus was
at this date, I suppose, an adherent of Adstophon, and had never favoured
Sparta as Calhstralus and his friends did. When we come to 355 B.C.. how-
ever, Eubulus's v^e^vs, as the head of the peace party, may possibly have
seemed statesmanlike to Xenophon, I regard the Dii&ot as the speech or
political esiay of an old man, written perhaps to order, or to scrN'e a friend, and in
behalf of commercial interests, but none ihc less sincerely. Cf. Isocr. de Pace.



Ixviii



SKETCH OF THE



while the Athenians having passed a decree to aid the Lace-
daemonians, Xenophon sent his sons to Athens to serve in
behalf of the Lacedaemonian^" adding, in a later passage,
that according to the historian Ister, the decrees of Xenophon's
banishment and recall were due to the same person, whose
name was Eubulus, What is of greater importance to us
regarding the matter biographically, is that after so many years
of change and counterchange in the domestic and foreign
politics of the cityj and of her political parties, the moment
had at last come in which Xenophon, in the persons of his
sons, and by the labour of his pen^ might find himself once
more functioning like a true-bom Athenian, powerful at once
in speech and action (Xfyeiv tc Kal 3r/>aTT€tv SifvaTtaraToq).

Such a happy conjunction of the stars was reached in
369 B.C. : happy it was, at any rate, for Xenophon, as he
scanned the political horizon, and waited for a sign in Corinth,
We can easily follow the sequence of events, as we turn over
the pages of his own history : the cold shudder which ran
through the Athenian senate, seated in the Acropolis, at
receipt of the news of Leuctra^ (b.c, 371); the reawakening
ambition of the leaders of the Democracy to strike out a more
independent policy ; the thought of hegemony ; the retreat of
the Spartan reinforcements; the intercession of Jason;- the
summons to a congress at Athens of all who cared to hold
to the Peace of Antalcidas ; the dissentient Eleians con-
testing the autonomy of such townships as Marganes and
Scillus and the Triphylia;^ the rebuilding of the walls of
Mantinea, and the recovery of her civic life in spite of
Agesilaus ; the pan-Arcadian movement, and the split of parties
at Tegea ; the rival programmes of her demos and her opti-
mates ; the party of Callibius driving out the party of Stasippus ;
the intervention on the one side and the other of Mantinea and
Sparta ; the cohesions and disruptions of the Arcadian League ;
the elective affinities of the different states of Peloponnese ;

^ //r//. \1. iv. 20. rtJif i^ 'Adiiivcdu¥ ^ ^v\if iriyx""'^'' ** aKp«itii\ei
Ka^M^i?« ir.T.X.

* /*. ifi. 20-34, Note Jason's Xenophontinc argunienl. xoi 6 6(6t ie, ujs
ioute, JToXAdffU X*M*f* '''"^J M^*" M*«po'"'Y ^ryiXoitj roiwr, Toi>s Si ^TtiXoi';
fUKfnd^t and see below. A»at. 111. ii. lo. p. 76.

' /^. V. 1-3, for the congress at Athens, and the dissent of the Eleians,



I



LIFE OF XENOPHON



Ixix



the fierce party politics; Arcadian Orchomenus refusing lo
join the League in hatred of Mantinea; the Argivcs biding
their tirae ; the abortive attempt to try conclusions with Man-
tinea on the part of Agesilaus during the mid-winter of 370
B.C. ;^ the fateful spring of 369; the The bans joining the
Arcadians, and with them a cloud of northern powers — the
Phocians and the Eubaeans, the Locrians and the Acarnanians,
the Heracieotes and the Mahans, with horse and light infantry
from Thessaly,^ — their objective Laconia; the burning of
Sellasia; the enemy encamped near the unwalled city of
Sparta itself; the women of Sparta and the sons of Sparta at
bay ; the hideous nightmare dissolving as the Theban army
passed on to Amyclae and across the Eurotas away to Helos
and Gytheum ; the Spartans offering and dreading to ann
iheir helots ; a new horror; the four faithful allies — the men
of Phlius, the men of Corinth, the men of Epidaurus and
Pellcne ; ^ the restoration meanwhile of Messene,* the
autonomy of which ancient state, now suddenly revived, will
become the keystone of the pan-Boeotian policy of the great
Theban statesmen ere long; and so we are brought to the
moment when, as we picture to ourselves, there was a break
in the storm-clouds overhead, through which a ray of joyous
sunlight shed itself on the veteran biiitorian, seated in his
study at Corinth, and waiting for a sign.

It is no part of my intention at present to attempt to esti-
mate the political position of Xenophon either as a citizen or
as a historian of the time. To do so would lead us too far
afield, and involve us in the discussion of deeper matters con-
cermng the literary and philosophical standpoint of our author,
which may fitly be postponed for future consideration.^

* Hell. VI. V. 3-ai, for the incidents In Peloponnese liUihe winier of
370 B.C,

* lb. ib, 22-32, for ihc incidents of the first Thetmn invasion in 569 B.C.

•* Xenophon omits lo mention the founding of pan-Arcadian -MegalopoUs
and the restoration of Mrssene at the moment, but refers to both later on.
IlfJL VII. V. s : and VII. i. 27, 36,

■* I hope in a final volume to oifer a few reniaiks on Xenophon's literary
quality and position in the evoluitoii of thought and feeling — in a word, his
spiritual quality. But such observations clearly should stand as ihf epilogue
rather than as the prologue lo the piece. In his Hdkn'tca we are at once
brought face to face with the problem of Xenophon's position as one



SKETCH OF THE



If, however, we wish to discover certain political leanings
of Xenophon at this particular period of his life, we cannot do
better than study the sentiments which he puts into the mouth
of the Athenian orator Callistratus (the head of the antt-
Theban or " Laconising " party at Athens between the years
378 B.C. and 361 B.C.) when sent with Callias and Autocles to
Sparta before the battle of Leuctra in 371 ac. ;^ or again, of
the Phliasian envoy Procles in his address to the Athenian
ecclesia in 370 b.c.^ It was that speaker's eloquence which
carried away the feelings of the Assembly, so that the arguments
of the opposition fell on deaf ears, and the resolution was passed
to aid Sparta with a levy ^// masse ; and for this object Iphicrates
was chosen general, 369 ex. If it was a satisfaction to Xeno-
phon to send his sons back to Athens at such a crisis, the
conduct of the campaign was not altogether to his taste as a
military critic. The blunder of Iphicrates — since, in spite of
his great ability as a general, he seems to have committed
a blunder in the handling of his cavalr)' — made a deep im-
pression on Xenophon, and served him for illustration in his

of the Attic historians. As to which I commend to the notice of my readers
Mr. Freeman's essay, "The Historians of Athens/' Histtiiiati Essays, and
series. For my own views, see Xen. Works, 11. Introduction, p. xvii. foU.

^ For 371 B.C.. see Heit. VL iii. J0-17, Calltslralus's h the third speech,
and is skilfully juxtaposed so as to form a climax to ihe bracing home-truths of
Atitocles and the professional platitudes of the Dadimchos Callias. Callis-
tratus. admits that Athens and Sparta have both made gjave blunders as
imperial and rival states. But sweet arc the uses of adversity. One need not
continue rivalry to the bitter end. It is jK>s3ible to take the pitcher once too
often to the well, aKKa ^tiv ovS' dKeffoiT iywyt fTTotcw otViPES ayaviiTTai
ycvifjbeyoi Ktti v(vtKtjK6T€t iJStj iroWaKtr Kal S^^av ^x^"'''^^ ourur tpiXovetKOvaiv,
&crT€ ov irpiiTepov ira^faovTai. wplv dtv rjTTrjBivTa ttjv AaKticiP A'aro.XiVwcrtp', ovd4
■ye Tuiv KV^evTiiv oJrti-es a& (dv ^V n tTnriJ'X'^^t iff pi SiwXaffitJv KV^e^ovffiv. 6pQ
ykp Kcd rwv roioiiruv roiis irXcfow diropoirs -jrayTdTrain yiyvo^iivaifi. The
athlete may descend once too often into tiie arena. The gambler may go on
doubling the stakes till he finds himself penniless, d xpf) Kal i}fias op&VTai ets
fih TOiovToy dryutva fj^jS^iroTe KaTa<TTi}yai, u<tt i^ wavra Xa^iv ^ ttovt' awo^akfTy,
?ci;s 5^ Kal 4pfHi}jfj,f(fa teal evTi-xoyu-^*' 0fXo«'5 d\Xi}Xots yei>4(T9aL, Let us jxause
in time and shake hands, before our stock of stren^h is spent, and our luck
exhausted. So shall we through you. and you through us, attain to an un-
precedented height of power throughout Hellas, oDtuj yap ij^ifh t hv fl(' vp.a^
Kol if^tii di ^juas (ti fid^ovi ^ rby Trap^XObyra xp^^ov iv r^'EXAd^t avaarpt-
<p>olu£&a.

' For 370 B,c,, see //«•//, VI, v. 38-48. ivl S^ roj^rt^ {Cldteles of
Corinth) A.vi<n-r} ITpokXtJs ^Xtdfl-tot Kai eLirfv. "O n ptiy, u> AvSpts 'Adrpraiot,

K.T.X.


LIFE OF XENOPHON



Ixxi



pamphlet on the cavalry general's duty so often referred to.^
I'his is how he speaks of it.

The professed object of Iphicrates was to cut off the retreat
of Epaminondas and the Thebans returning homewards in
the winter of 369 e,c. This^ intentionally or not, he failed
to do. The historian was well posted in Corinth to watch the
tactics of both parties. As the enemy withdrew from Lace-*
daemon Iphicrates fell back with his Athenians on Corinth.
(He lays his finger sharply on the Athenian general's next
move.) ^Vhilst watching on Oneion to intercept the enemy's
retreat, he allowed him free exit by the magnificent side
route of Cenchreae ; and then in his desire to discover
whether the I'hebans had passed Oneion, he must needs send
the whole of his Athenian and Corinthian cavalry in force on
scouting duty, when a handful of troopers would have sen'ed
the purpose of a reconnaissance quite as well as the larger
body. In case of need they would have had a far better
chance of hitting upon a suitable road and falling back
leisurely. It was the height of folly to advance a force at once
so large and yet inferior to the enemy. It was inevitable,
owing to the extent of ground they covered, that they should
be involved in all sorts of difiiculties, and the result was the
needless sacrifice of twenty troopers. The Thebans meanwhile
were past and gone, and no one said them nay. ^Vith this
criticism should be compared an admonitory note addressed
to the cavalry general *^ some four years later. Probably both

' See HclL VI. v. 51. 52, tlpikv oHy AWo rt koAws iaTpaiifyTieftf, 06 tpiyu) •
iiifTva fiivTOi, A ^y ti^ X/^*"** ^^eivtp ^Tpaf e, wdvTa fi;ptffKU} rd pUv fid-njtf, tA 3^
Kal icFVfif^6pvi ireTtpayfidua, atVip • itrtx^ipr^iraf fi^v y^p tf>v\i.TTeiir ^iri rt^ *0»'cl^,
K.T.X, For English rendering see Xen. IVoris, II. p. 1B5 ; III. partiL p. 28 foil,

- Hipparck. y\\\. 10 foil. In. Zk jSoiJXo^ai i/iro^j'jjcran Koi t bht^\iK^TTtaSa.i-
elffl ydp Tipfi, ol &T<iv fiiv twaiu ivl Tovraus, uf &» oluvrai fcpfirTovs ilvat,
ftavTa-Kaaiv ia^fVfi fiyi^d/uet ^/ixovTcit, iwre iroWaKtt liradov 4 i^dvTO TTanrjfffif '
Srav 5' eVt roi'rrotis <l>v &v aatpiQi fwiffTbiVTai grrow ^cres, iraaav otrriif &v ^x^ffi
5iffa/xti> d70i'firu'. iyu 5e <j&ijju,i XP^*'"-*' TOvavTla. roiirtai' Troi€tv, Brav fuv Kpaiiffftiy
ol6iJ.evoi dyrft ^tj ipfiSfffdai ttJs dwd^eut^, Sa-Tif Siv ^XV ^^ yiipTToKu viKav oifBevi
irttnroTf //cTa/^Aetai' irap^ax^^' ^TOf 5^ to?? iroXii KpelrTOitiv (irix^ip^ koI
Tpoyiypu}(rK-[f, &tl TOiiiaavTa Srt Siv dvvrp-ai (fteVKT'fou cVxif, ds tA TOiavrA
tfyilpLi roXd KpEiTTOtr dvai dXlyovf i} irivrai Trpoffiyeiy , Tois p.isrT<K dirciXey/x^vow
Kai iirwovt Kol AvSpai toi'S Kpasltrrov^ ' Toiourot yap 6vT£i aal iroti^crm dv ti Kal
i-TTOx^p^droti dfftf^aXitrTfpov a* SuvatvTO. orav Si ■jrp6$ toi)s KpfiTTOvi Tdvrai
irpoffa.ya.yuiv aTtoxtapwitf ^ot'XTjTat, avdyK^ touj fikv iiri tQv ^pa^vTOTiav twiriiiv



irv SKETCH JF THE

;j«i^«agcs w^-e penned itxuic ±e same :ime, and serve amonpt
many ..>fher< :o >how :he uniiiininisiied .merest vhich. :iie oid
rav^ir- oific^r continued :» :esi in his laTounce branch oi me
:;<?rv!ri^. •

That the ^ns of Xenophon ^vere greseat m the aiaove
orcssion :s. of couise. not .irwointey certain : "jul if die
:>fry»raoher ;«« to oe reiied opan. tfaer probabiy wer^ They
ma^.' »lso iiave shared in one or more of diose exploits which
th^^ir father rtir,ounts in his list of die vaiomus detrds of the
men of Phlius — as, for instance, when dier kniipits and a
pirWA iwiy (yf hoph'tes. aided by a squadron of Atfaehan
r;»vrj|r.% r«?peiled an attack of the Arcadians and .^jrgives '*at
the ^rt*;vig^e of the river'* lesi -rq (uaBmrm. mv -mrafxav) ap-
p?>rem'.y in ^<SS or 567 ac^ or again under the Athenian
j?i*neral <';hdre??. The admiration of die histnnan for this dtde
state, the neii^hbour and ally of Corinth, is highly charactadstic.
and the manner in which he introduces the scory of her
prcywitm M an episode worthy of record is remaritable. His-
tr)ri{»n«,'* he tfMs us, are ever prone to emanate upon the
^/^at deeds ^f the great powers^ whereas it seems to him a
hij^her dnty tf> bring to light a long list of ▼aloroos achieve-
ment!* wr<*>ii^ht by some single petty state. There wore features
prhysi<'al nr\/[ historical peculiar to this particular little state of
Pl^liiis which tended to rivet his attention to It — its promnity
to (l<)r\rtthy its steadfast loyalty to the T arnnian alliance at

/iitti\Hpfl^9»flfl«A.' KoX 7*^ irttKbv rftfgem x«^**^ eupo* alov & tit dS^sxn,
r.t.'K. Vtit /vthar ftrifkwm* <A \\fcacnUA oi a more laadatonr character, see
/A// rv. viii. '^ PAV : VI. ii. 3^ ; »*. 39.

» <^<* A*f»<^<^wII/ Hippnrch. \%. Ux vahoos fefa cnis wfiicfa. he proposes to
iftfffi^iif-f iftUt th*f %ifit*; (HvsiWy a* to the admutnre of a foreign dement —
^Jf. fitifff ttrrtt/if^ cMi/m% anrl two hundred Umagaen at Athens — and his
iUrfVtntif*ri fffrm 1 /ttcfmiATt Tfrlorm* /since Lenctra, when their cavalry w^as
•f)tMt-}iH\, //»//. Vf. }v. 11)-, ti\%osA to the introduction of ifu-rroi. light in-
fntiUi, tutiMiK thn ctivHUy. /liffparch. r, 13 ; and an improvement in the arm.
M^ w^rtjf'l Ilk*" \ti Ifitr^KJiice tA Kfmvi'tya iCo troKrA, after the fashion of the
\'ht%)nu^, lfi*<#«/| //f ihf U/njj bbpv KafJtdHiPW, H&rumamhip, xii. 12 ; of. Cyrop.
Vtl. J 1*, fifiH /A//, ni, iv. 14, a personal eitpericnce. See above, p. xlvi.

' H'*'' //f//. Vn, ii, fo, and ilf. ao, in connection with the Athenian general
/ Untf-n.

" Ih //'. i, fi/iwt Itt dttHapripovP h rp avfifjutxiqi . 6.\\h yhp tQv fiiv
fitydhutp nli\n0¥ tt ti ka\f>¥ fwpa^au, Avavret ol avyypcupeis fUfjunjvrcu ' i/jutl
at flnkH kttl ft m fukpil ir6\i9 of>aa froXXd teal KoKi. (pya SiavitrpoKToi, fri

\h(t¥ d^wn ptptii AirotftulPtiP.



^



the present crisis, the chivalry of its citizens, their bravery,
i^encroaity, and religiousness. But even so, there is a warmth
of tone in the chronicle of their doughtj* deeds which seems
to point to some close personal relationship. There is no
proof of this ; yet, as we recollect, the old family soothsayer,
Eucleides,^ came from Phlius.

In the year 366 B.C. incidents occurred^ which make it
intelHgible to us why Xenophon, even if free to return to
take up his abode permanently in Athens or the neighbour-
hood of Athens, may well have chosen to continue his resi-
dence in Corinth. The fact is that from this date onwards?,
and for many years, Corinth was much the quietest place for a
student and non-combatant to live in ; and at this period of
life^ if ever, Xenophon had his hands full of literar}^ work
of all sorts. His practical energies were satisfied, as already
suggested, by the composition in behalf of his native city
of those political tracts which I have used so freely for the
purpose of biographic illustration. I believe that Jie never
migrated from his home in Corinth, and for the reason
suggested ; but it is more than likely that he was often in
Athens, the glitter of whose temples was visible from the lofty
Acropolis of Corinth, and whose streets and squares were dear
to him.^ Perhaps he was there for weeks at a time, or months,
or even years, but "stranger-loving Corinth," as the biographer's
epigram has it, had received him in the day of need, and to
her fostering arms he clung. Here a student of history and
politics might gaze at the shifting scenes of the complicated
drama now enacting without being called upon to play a part
himself. The various vicissitudes of states and parties would
proceed, but the philosopher would not himself be caught into
the vortex of political life. Governments would rise and fali ;
the great man might become, like Jason,* greater and most

' Si^c fibove, pp» iv. , xxvii., and below, p, 347.

- See Hell. VII. iv. 6-11, and nole a, ntxt page \ and cf. for the situation
of ihe moment Isocr. Arehidamos; Jebb. Ait. Or. ii, 193,

^ See Rctenuts, i. 4» for Lhe architectural beauty of tlie city, ^dXAtorot
ixh vaol, fcdXXttrrot 5^ ptwfXQl . . . eiJTrpor^ffTara Si Qtoh dydX^ara., and
Hippatxh. cli, iii, for topographical details in connection with the Panatlmnaic
procession and other iroMTraf. There 15 a strong flavour of Attic life in such
passages. The local colouring, at any rate, is vivid and very pleasing.

* Seo, for Jason's rise and fall, especially Hell. VI, iv. 27-32 ; and for the



Ixxiv



SKETCir OF THE



great, and at the height of his power fall by the knife of an
assassin, but the working out of the divine purpose would
only be clearer to ^is religious consciousness. Demagogues
like Euphron or Lycomedes might flourish for a season and be
swept to their doom, his heart might be touched, but the hand
of the artist would not falter in its portraiture ; the chronicler
of tragic incidents would depict and criticise and point his
morals, as the spirit moved him, with reserve and dignity. He
might be tempted to throw down his pen in despair at the
confusion worse confounded which seemed the sole result of
the battlefield of Man tinea, ^ but the ivave of its storm would
not come nigh him. He could still console himself with his
great philosophical romance and his minor scientific treatises.
It was as the result of a series of such political vicissitudes ^

artifice of style, fidya^ fiel^uv fjUyt^roi, cf. Bel/. VI. v. 47, jroXdv JciXXio*-

^ See the concluding words of the HeUenica, VII. v. 27. ''where it \vas
expected that one or other of these fell combatants would rule an empire,
there set in once more confusion worse confounded (not an dpx^, but worse
anarchy)," and my romarks in thR volume of essays already referred to,
" Hellenica," p. 383 (p. 330 ad cd. j

- Hell. VI r. i. 39 foil, (i) The state congress at Thebes had proved a
failure. None of the powers could be got to sig^ a rescript obtained from the
king at Susa the year before {Hill. VII. i. 33 fall.), securing a common peace
on the basis of the autonomv of Messene and the nullificatioa of the navy of
AUieos^ {2) The Thebans I'lad their hands full in Thessaly. (3) Whilst the
armed force of Aihetis under Chares was occupied in Argolis, the town of Oropus
was snatched from her by refugees from Eretria. Chares was ordered home,
but as soon as his back, was turned the Arcadians and Thebans recovered the
port of Sicyon, which was a severe blow 10 .Athens. .\one of the allies would
help her {HelL VII. iv. i). She was forced to put Oropus into the hands
of Tliebes till the rival claims cpuld be arbitrated upon {Hell. VI L I v. 2),
(4I Lycomedes thereupon seized the opportunity of negotiating a peace with
live Athenians, indign.ini at their isolation ; and so it came about thai at one
and the same moment Athens was in league with Sparta and her enemies the
Arcadians, whilst the .Orcadians themselves were in league with Thebes and her
enemies the Athenians. But that was not the end of the matter. (5) On the
motion of Demotion it was proposed to append as a rider to the Atheno-
Arcadian peace an injunction to the generals to secure Corinth to the De-
mocracy {Hell. VII. iv. 4, 5) : c<ir<Si'TO$ hk Anjftfyrlwvoi tv rifi otJmV '"'^*'
'Affifveuur dis i) f^t> rpbt Toi>i 'ApKdSai ipiKla KoXu*? aiT^ SoKoii] trpaTreffBai.
rots ^ivToi CTpa-npfvr^ Tpoardiai f^rj XPV"'*-^ otus koI K6/)(v^o{ crtfa ^ t<^
d^fUf) tQv 'Ad-qvalajv aKovaavrfi 5i Tavra. oi KopivOim . . . k.t.X. {6) The
Coriolhians jjetting wind of their intention, promptly but in the civilest manner
sent away all Athenian troops from their garrisons, and when Chares appeared
with his fleet in the hariiour of Cenchrcae, refused him anchorage (Hell. VII,
{7) Then by a stroke of diploomcy tliey secured the treaty of neutrality



I



LIFE OF XENOPHON



Ixxv



^
N



n



that Corinth, with her subordinate sister states Phlius, Epi-
daunis (and Pellene?), had by a stroke of diplomacy secured
to herself (in 366 B.C.) in the midst of the general confusion
a position of comparative security. With the permission of
Thebes, the consent of Sparta, and the tacit acquiescence of
Athens, these states had bound themselves by a self-defensive
treaty of neutrality. The .oaths were taken at Thebes, since
with Thebes they had hitherto along with Sparta been at war ;
and Corinth at all events not only continued to keep at peace
with all the world for many a long day, but was strong enough
to remain unmolested.

We pass on to the year 363 and the incident so often
referred to^ — ^the death of Gryllus, whom wx assume to be the
elder of the Dioscuri. He was killed in the cavalry skirmish
the day before (or possibly a day or two before) the battle of
Mantinea itself. Xenophon has himself passed an encomium
on the gallant and unselfish behaviour of the Athenian cavalrj',
who, to save the sheep and cattle, children and old folk, still
outside the walls of the city^ rode out at the urgent petition
of the townsmen, after a long march and without breakfasting,
and achieved their object,^ It was in this engagement, prob-
ably, that Xenophon's son felL He fought so manfully and
was so much beloved that it is easy to understand how the
story came to be invented that Epaminondas had fallen by the

above refeired to [i^, 6- to). After variou« negotiaiions the Thebans, as Xeno-
phon tells us, finally offered the Corinthian envoys alhance, which, as implying
war with I heir former friends, was refused. They had come, I hey said, pro-
pared to swear to an equitable peace ; and the Thebans, a<lmiring their
staunch loyalty to old friends in the face of danger, conceded it {<nvex<^PW'-i'
oiVots Kai 4>Aiaffioti kuI toU iXSovci- fitr aiVui;' eh Brj^as ttjv eipi^prjv i<p' i^re
f^ftf TTjf iavTuv eh-doToi's). I cannot but think that the historian in his
heart approves of this whole arrangement, and he certainly does justice to tlie
Thebans, .As to the conduct of his friends the Phliasians aiid Corinthians,
he might have said precisely what Archidamus the son of Agesilaus is made to
say by Isocrates in the composition so named {Isocr. Or. vi., Anhidamos, §
91), which ptirports to be spoken at a particular stage of the negotiations in
366 B.C. , during: a debate at Sparta on the Thebnn proposal, " Epidaurus,
Corinth, Phltus. may without reproach prefer safety tohonour : Sparta cannot. "
" Even, however, if we were utterly forsaken 1 should be ashamed to give up
Messene" {ib. § 70). So Xenophon, of ihe Spartans on the same occasion :
airroi 3' itjiatrav TroXffiovvTfi irpa^etv 6ti &v t(^ Qe^ iplXov j( ' vtpii<rfa6aL 5k
oi'S^iroTf ffv ttaph ruv TrarifHitv irapiXafiov Mfaai^viiiv raiJnji aTfprjd^vai.
1 See Curtius, N, G. h\ 4S4.



Ixxvi



SKETCH OF THE



hand of Gryllus, as represented in a famous picture.^ The
loss of this young man signifies, of course, but a drop in the
cup of collective pain ; nor was the particular pain itself without
its anodyne, since the youth had died nobly. There is a pretty
fi-agment of a letter among the Xenophontine epistles preserved
in Stobaeus, which no one will hold to be genuine, but the
sentiment of it is well conceived, and seems to fall from the lips
of Xenophon. It is addressed to Soteira, who may be supposed
to be the wife or sister of Gryllus. "Blessed then is Gryllus,
blessed amongst those who chose not length of days but a
life of virtue ; blessed is he, although God granted to him but
a brief span of years " (jiaKapios ofii' S») P/it^AAo? Kal ocms; ov

TO {J.'/lKlfrTOV iXofL€VO^ TOV ^lOV, TO 5* /iCTU tt^eTV^S, Kul tl f3pa)^VV

ol eStoKd' amva 6 Beo?).^ This is how Diogenes Laertius re-
counts the matter. He is inaccurate in details, but the tale
itself deserved to live. *' Diodorus came safely out of the
battle without having wrought any conspicuous deed. He
had a son born to him whom he named after his brother.
Gryllus was serving in the cavalry ; it was the battle of Man-
tinea, and he fought valorously and was slain, as says Ephorus
in chapter xxv. Cephisodorus was in command of the Attic
horse, and Hegesileos was general. It was in this battle that
Epaminondas fell.^ Meanwhile, as the story goes, Xenophon
was engaged in offering sacrifice j the chaplet was upon his
brow when they brought him news, saying, 'Your son has
fallen,' whereupon he removed the chaplet ; but as the mes-
sengers added * nobly ' he replaced it on his head, shedding,
as others have mentioned, no tear, but only uttering the
words (fStiv Oi'ijTin' ycyo'iT/KW'jj (I knew my child w^as mortal)."
But of this matter enough. To pass on a few years. The
autobiographical passage penned by Xenophon in 359 B.C.*

^ Painted by Euphranor. See Pausan. VIII. xi. 6 ; IX. x\\ 5 ; Ephor.
ap. D, L. ii. 53 ; Plut. de Glor. Aihert. ii. 346. The real slayer, according to
Dioacoridesap. Plut Ages. 35, was the Spartan Anticratcs (Madiaerion).

'•* E^. frag, e Stob. 9.

" Epaminondas fell in the battle itself, as every one knows. It is doubt-
less a mistake to suppose that Gn'llus fell actually in the same l>attle. TTie
Athenian cavalry, as we learn from Xenophon himself, scarcely came into
action. Nothing at any rate is said of any loss sustained on their part, which,
if Gryllus had fnll<?n on that day, would be truly astonishing.

■* HHL VI. iv. 37, TuJi' hi TaPra ir/Kufii'Tu*' (the assassins of Alexander of


LIFE OF XENOPHON



Ixxvii



(which has been more than once referred to) brings us back
to the writer's study ; and now, if ever, we must picture him
hard at work finishing and revising, and perhaps superintend-
ing the editing of various works. How these labours were
performed, and who helped him in them, we cannot say. Per-
haps some member of his family, his son or a grandson, or a
favourite slave or freedman, played the part of amanuensis.
Perhaps works already on the stocks were now finished ; per-
haps later and fuller editions of old works, with notes and
emendations and appendices, were now being made ; whilst
others were still shaping themselves in his brain or upon his
lips. One may almost overhear the author dictating to his
secretary, who is taking dow^n the sentences. This is not the
place to press the inquiry into his manner of composition
further. 1 I content myself with the suggestion conveyed in
the above picture. If correct, it might perhaps explain cer-
tain puzzles in connection with many of the Xenophontine
writings, as we possess them (his repetitions, and so forth),
which are familiar enough to the critical student. Perhaps
this alter ego^ of whom we seem to be aware, is no grandson
editor,^ nor yet a trader in false wares crudely imitating the
writer's mannerism, but simply the voice of the old man him-
self going over the old ground, and enunciating in season (or,
it may be, out of season) wise saws and solemn instances, the
inveterate convictions of a lifetime. If the saws are somewhat
pedantic at times ; ** i£ the amiable didactic air has grown

Pherae) AxP* "^ ^*^ ^ Xfryar eypd^To Tt(j(^o»foi ir/jeo-jSrJraTOt w>' twi' d5eX<p^j>'
tS)* d/rxV nlxc- Kor the date of the occurrence see above, note 3, p. Lviii.

1 It seems to me certain that^ if the Cynegetkus was a work of his yotjih
(and, doubilcss, it is instinct with a certain youthful fervoTir, as Cobet has said,
Mnem. 7, 422, N. L. 774, as of one <3t'^oft3oi!s rt k^I ipwriKoy), the author
re-handled it in his old age. The Lett-. PaL seems also to hEive been rc-
handled ; so too the Memorabilin pjerhaps, the Cyropaedia, and the Oecorwmic.

^ See above, in reference to llie O^i'on antic. It is the opinion of many
critics that Xeriophon's grandson (the Xenophon of the dironrratrfoi/ XAvor) per-
haps edited his grandfather's works, and interpolated them. See above. It
should be Iwme in mind that the very existence of this grandson is based upon
a mere conjecture, however acute, of Grote {//, G. ix. 246 note 1). It is
remarkable what use the critics have made of hirn. He has proved a very
tieus ex machimi for solving all sorts of bibliographical difficuliiL-s.

' It looks as if Xenophon hnd in his later years gone to school once more,
and taken Isocrates as his model. His style, naluriilly so simple, appears lo



Ixxviii



SKETCH OF THE



upon him ; if he morahses overmuch, we ought not to mind.
His heart is still as sound as ever^ and his voice was certainly
never sweeter than in some of his later works. As I have
elsewhere observed,^ we seem to be listening to a sweet-
toiigued talker, a wise man and a good, whose style reminds
us of the Vicar of ^Vakefield. In spite of his sage talk, he
presents to us the appearance of a practical man, who has seen
men and manners, and tasted wisdom at the fountain-head.
Nothing is pleasanter than to sit by and listen to his reflec-
tions, somewhat loosely and yet pretentiously delivered.

I have already expressed my conviction th:it the tract on
the Rei>€Jiues" is the latest of his works, and that this essay
was written, as I take it, to please a friend, but with absolute
sincerity, and from the point of view of commercial interests.
It was not penned till 355 b.c, when, probably, the writer was
over seventy-five years of age, and within a year of his death.

The limits of this sketch do not permit me to dwell on the
many points of biographical interest to be discovered in this
and the other minor works of Xenophon, replete as these all
are with illustrations of the writer's personal qualities — his
religiousness and his moralising vein, his belief in the virtue
of sport and athleticism, his economic bent,^ his strategic and
scientific interests, his kindliness to slaves and animals,^ his
appreciation of the duties of a good father'* and a good
citizen — his pride in Athens underlying all.^

1 will content myself with but two instances among many.
The first passage is from the Hipparckikos^ and was penned,

have bccorae, sometimes pleasanlly and sometimes painfully, artificial. Apart,
from wliich, he has suffered much from edilors and interpolators.

* See my essay in " Hellenica," pp. 343, 344 {313 foTl. 2d ed. }

'•* As is proved, I think, by internal evidence. Apparently it was intended
for a sp>eech, or lobe read as a spt:ech, on some financial debate in the Senate
nl Athens. The friend for vvbom it was wrillen may have been Eubuhis him-
self, or a supporter of his. For the policy advocated cf. Isocrates, de Pace.
\( the wTiter of this tract was not Xenophon himself, it was certainly some
one iivho had tliorougbly caught his maimer, and thought as he did on most
matters.

•* I have already referred to Cyro^. VIH. ii. 5, a passage worthy of Adam
Smith.

•* Sec Cyneg. v. 24, 29, 33, passages which remind one of Gilbert White,
Michelet, and Charles St. John. * See Cyneg. i. and .\ii.

° See Revenues, i* ; v. 10 ; Hipparch. ; tie A'. Eq. passim.



LIFE OF XENOPHON



Ixxix



^



perhaps, in the year 365 b.c.j before his son Gryllus died.
The other may be the very last words he wrote before death
summoned him also. Both have this biographic quaUty
in common, that the writer relapses into an ancient mood
of mind, and, in the second of them, even into an ancient
manner of expression. In the former he is apologising for
what may seem to his readers the too frequent iteration of
his favourite phrase, tri'v 6fw (Cjod granting). This is what he
says : " If the repetition of the phrase throughout this trea-
tise, * Act with God/ surprises any one, he may take my word
for it, that with the daily or hourly occurrence of perils which
must betide him, his wonderment will diminish ; as also with
the clearer recognition of the fact that in time of war the
antagonists are full of designs against each other; but the pre-
cise issue of these plots and counterplots is rarely known. To
what counsellor, then, can a man apply for advice in his
extremity save only to tlie gods, who know all things, and fore-
warn whomsoever they will by victims, or by omens, by voice
or vision? Is it not rational to suppose that they will prefer
to help in their need, not those who merely seek them in time
of momentary stress and trouble, but those who, in the halcyon
days of their prosperity, make a practice of rendering to heaven
the service of heart and soul ? " ^

The concluding paragraphs of the Rei'enues run as follows,
and read as if the speaker were recalling an experience of his
early manhood : "Yet if none of these proposals be impracti-
cable or even difficult of execution ; if rather by giving them
effect, we may conciliate further the friendship of Hellas,
whilst we strengthen our own administration and increase our
fame ; if by the same means the People shall be provided
with the necessaries of life, and our rich men be relieved of
expenditure on war ; if with the large surplus to be counted
on, we are in a position to conduct our festivals on an even
grander scale than heretofore, to restore our temples, to rebuild
our forts and docks, and to reinstate in their ancient privileges
our priests, our senators, our magistrates, and our knights ;—
surely it were but reasonable to enter upon this project speedily,

' Hipparch. ix. 8, 9 ; and for the harking back of thought see Mem. and
Symp. passim.


Ixxx LIFE OF XENOPHON

so that we too, even in our own day, may witness the unclouded
dawn of prosperity in store for our city.

" But if you are agreed to carry out this plan, there is one
further counsel which I would urge upon you. Send to Dodona
and to Delphi, I would beg you, and consult the will of Heaven :
whether such provision and such a policy on our part be truly
to the interests of Athens both for the present and for the
time to come ? If the consent of Heaven be thus obtained,
we ought then, I say, to put a further question : whose special
favour among the gods shall we seek to secure with a view to
the happier execution of these measures ? And in accordance
with that answer, let us offer a sacrifice of happy omen to the
deities so named, and commence the work; since if these
transactions be so carried out with the will of God, have we
not the right to prognosticate some further advance in the
path of political progress for this whole State ?" ^

^ U6poi, vi. 1-3. This reads like the peroration to a speech addressed to
the Boule in a finance debate (see above, p. Ixxviii. ) ; and for the thought
passing through his mind see Metn. and Anai.


I



ANABASIS



BOOK L I. 1-5



1. ^Darius and Parysatis had two sons : the elder was
named Artaxerxes, and the younger Cyrus. Now, as Darius lay
sick and felt that the end of life drew near, he wished both his
sons to be with him. The elder, as it chanced, was already
there, but Cyrus he must needs send for from the province
over which he had made him satrap/having appointed him
general moreover of all the forcgs that muster in the plain
of the Castolus. ^ Thus Cyrus went up, taking with him Tissa-
phernes ai^ his friend, and accoiiifi42i?.^>f^^9 J^Y- A body of
Rpllj^npcj^ [hrf>>-> hijii^rlri^rl hcavy armed menpTnder the command
of Xenias the Parrhasiaru^y^

Now when Darius was dead, and jV rtaxerxe s was estab-
lished in the kingdom, Tissaphernes brought slanderous accu-
sation against Cyrus before his brother, the king, of harbouring
designs against him. I And Artaxerxes, listening to the words
of Tissaphernes, laid hnvid ^ ppnn Cp iis, desiring to put him
to death ; Jiut.his_ mother m ade interce ssion for him, and- sent
him back again in safety to his prtjvince. He then, having
so escaped through peril_^an(MfisliQjjjgy^ fell to considering,
not only how he might avoic|^a:fi^|igain being in his brother's
power, /but how, if possible, he might become king in his
stead. » Parysatis, his mother, was his first resource ; for she
had more love for Cyrus than for Artaxerxes upon his throne.
Moreover Cyrus's behaviour towards all who came to him
from the king's court was such that, when he sent them away

^ Pnrrhasia, a district or canton in the south-west of Arcadia. For the
incidents in the life of Cyrus referred to, sec /ic/l I. iv. ; II, i. 7-13.


.,**'*j\WABASIS BK. I.



( CH. H 5-9



again, th^-.\\*4fc 'Better friends to himself than to the king his
brotFrer- '<^t)r did he neglect the barbarians in his own ser-
.vi&g ; *tjiit trained them, at otice to be capable as warriors and
,"\*jleTOted adherents of himself. lastly, he began collecting his
*• VHellenic armament, but with the utmost secrecy, so that he
* /might take the king as far as might be at unawares. ^/^

The manner in which he contrived the levying of the troops
was as follows : First, he sent orders to the commandants of
garrisons in the cities (so held by him) ^ bidding them to get
together as large a body of picked Peloponnesian troops as they
severally were able, on the plea that Tissaphernes was plotting
against their citiest/and truly these cities of Ionia had origin-
ally belonged to Tissaphernes, being given to him by the king ;
but at this time, with the exception of Miletus, they had all
revolted to Cyrus. In Miletus, Tissaphernes, having become-
aware of similar designs^Jjad forestalled the conspiratocs by
putting some to death and banishing the remamder. j Cyrus,
on his side, welcomed these fugitives, and having collected
an army, laid siege to Miletus by sea and land, endeavouring
to reinstate the exiles ; and this gave him another pretext fpr
collecting an armament, // At the same time he sent to the
king, and claimed, as being the king's brother, that these
cities should be given to himself rather than that Tissa-
phernes should continue to govern them ; and in furtherance
of this end, the queen, his mother, co-operated with him, so
that the king not only failed to see the design against himself,
but concluded that Cyrus was spending his money on arma-
ments in order to make war on Tissaphernes, Nor did it
pain him greatly to see the two at war together, and the
less so because Cyrus was careful to remit the tribute due
\ to the king from the cities which belonged to Tissaphernes.
^'^ — ^ third armyjvyas being collected for him in the Chersonese,
L_oyer against Abydos, the origin of which was as follows : There
was a Lacedaemonian exile, named Clearchus,^ .with whoni,
Cyrusjiad become associated, Cyrus ^ admired the man, and
made him a present of ten thousand darics.- Clearchus

^ See above. ^^//. I. i. 35-

' =j^io,20o; n Persian gold com= 125.55 grains of gold = j^i : 2 : 2^, but
sefebelow, pp. 13, 26.



^^■^



c»i. I. S 9-cM. n.
f t, n-c. 403-40 J



CYRUS LEVIES TROOPS



took the gold, and with the money^r aised an army, andoisingj,
the Chersonese as his base of operat:ions, ^.set to \vork| L.tQ figbt
^n.cA-*'^the Thracians north of the Hellespont, in the interests 01 tiie


^



^



Hellenes, and with such happy result that the Hellespontine
cities, of their own accord, were eager lo contribute, funds for
the ^^pport of his troops. Tn this way, ag^, an armament
iwas b eingL^ecretly. maintained for Cyrus. ^^

Then there was the Thessalian Aristippus, Cyrus's friend/
whd, und er pre ssuj-e of the ^ rival political party^at home, had
come to tyrus and .asked him for pay Tor ^two thousand mer-
cenaries* to be continued for three months^ which would enable
him, he said, to gain the upper hand of his antagonists. Cyrus
replied by presenting him with spc months' pay for ^four thousand^
^lercenaries — only stipulating that Aristippus shouL3^not come
to terms with his antagonists without final consultation with
himself In this way he secured Xo himself the secret main-
tenance of a fourt h ann ament.

Further, lie Sade Proxenus, a Boeotian, who was, another
tViend^ get together as many men as possible,' and join him
on jn pvpjj'di^'i"" which he meditated agains t the Pisidians,"
who were causiriigannovance to his territory. Similarly two
other friendsj^ Sopliaenetus the Stymphalian,^ and Socrates
the Achaean, Jiad fljders to get together as many men as
possible and /^ome to him, since he was on the point of
^openjng a campaign,, along ^yjth, the Milesian exiles, against
Tissaphernes. These orders were duly carried out by the three
in ujic^tion.

/J^u^But when the ri ^^ht J iaoment ij^mcd t o lilui lu tiA W ! >
cchr^^t which he should begin hisL march into the interior^,^^
the pT^^Rxt which he put forward was his desire to expel ibe
Pisidians utterly out of the country ; and he began , ^^lec^inj g;
bol,h his A sin^ tic .-^n^ his H ellenic armamenla. avo^vedly ^gaiust^
thn.Lj ygri p lt^. From Sardis in each direction his orders sped :
to (^leari3bjus, to join him there with the whole of his army ;

^ Lit. " gTiiest-fri6nd," f^vos ^i*. ArisLippus; was, as we kam from the
Meno of Plato {ad in.), a native of Larisa, of the family of the Aleundae, and
:i pupil of Gorgias. He was also a lover of Menon, whom he appears to have
sent on this expedition ifisieiid of himself. See below, p. 65.

- Lit. " into the country of the Pisidians."

' Of Stymphalus in Arcadia,



ANABASIS — BK. I.



f.



CH. II. I J-i

Mar. 6-9, B.C, 40 1



iT



to Aristip]>UR, to come to tenps with those at home, and
to despatch to him the troops ^in his employ j to Xenias the
ArcaJmn/ who was acting as general-in-cliief of the £oreign j
troops in the cities^ to present himself with all the men avail-
able, excepting only those who were actually needed to garrison
the citadels. He next summoned the troops at present en-
g;aged ia ]J[\f. siege of Miletus, and called upon the exiles to
follow hira on his intended expedition, promising them that if
he were successful jn his object, he would not j^use until he
had reinstated them in their native city-X To this invitation
they hearkened gladly ; they believed in him ; and with their
arms they presented themselves at Sardis. So, too, Xenias
arrived at Sardis with the contingent from the cities, fourj
thousand hoplites ; Prnvpn^'^^ also, with fifteen hundred hop-**;
lites and five hundre"H light-armed troops ; Sophaenetus the
Stymphalian, with one thousand hoplites j SocrStes the Achaean,
with five hundred hoplites ; while the Megarian Pasion came
with three hundred hoplites and three hundred peltasts.^ This
latter officer, as well as Socrates, belonged to the force engaged
against Miletus. These all joined hira at Sardis. X

But Tissaphernes did not fail to note these proceedings.
An equipment so large pointed to something more than an
invasion of Pisidia :,'so he argued ; and with what ^peed he .
might, he set off to the liing,^ttehded by about five hundred
horse- The king, on his side, had no sooner heard from
Tissaphernes of Cyrus's great armament, than he began to
make counter-preparations.

Thus Cyrus, with the troops which I have named, set out
from Sardis, and marched on and on through Lydia three
stages, making two-an4;tw etilJL^ai:a iange:^4a4h<rriver j^ laeandeL
That river is two hundred feet ^ broads and was spanned by
a bridge consisting of seven boats. Crossing it, he marched
through Phrygia a single stage, of eight parasangs, to ColossaeT

1 > ' Targeteers " armed mtto a light shield (irAnj) instead of ihe larger
dffTli of the hoplile, or heavy infantry soldier. Iphicrates made great use of
this arm at a later date. See //e/L IV. iv. i6.

^ The Persian "farsang" = 3o stades, nearly i league, j^ statute miles,
though not of uniform value in all parts of Asia. Cf. Grotc, Hist, of Greta,
vol. i. p. 19 note (ist ed. )

' "Two plethra" : the plethron = about loi English feet.


CH. II. fi 6-9 1
Mar. To-Apr. 19/



I

■



an inhabited city,^ prosperous and large. Here he remained
seven days, and was joined by Menqn the Thessalian, who
arrived with one thousand hoplites and five hundred peltasts,
Dolopes, Aenianes/"^ and Olynthians. From this place he
marched three stages, twenty parasangs in all, to Celaenae, a
populous city of Phrygia, large and prosperous, riere Cyrus
owned a palace an'3~aJarge _park ^ full of wild beasts, which he
used to hunt on horseback, wKehever he wished to give himself
or his horses exercise) Tliroughjthe noidst of the park flow^s the V
river Maeander, the soXirces of which are within the palace build /^
ings, and it fiow.s through the city of Celaenae.* The great king
also has a palace iru. Celaenae, a strong place, on the sources of
another river, the Marsyas, at the foot of the acropolis. This
river also flows through "the city, discharging itself into the
Maeander, and is five-and-twenty feet broad Here is the place
where Apollo is said to have flayed Marsyas,^ when he had con-
quered him in the contest of skill. V He hong up the skin
of the conquered man, in the cave¥n w^here the spring wells
forth, and hence the name of the river, Marsyas. It was
on this site that Xerxes, as tradition tells, built this very
palace, as well as the citadel of Celaenae itself, on his retreat
from Hellas, after he had lost the famous battle.X Here Cyrus
remained for thirty days, during which Clearchus the Lace-
daemonian arrived with one thousand hoplites and eight
hundred Thracian peltasts and two hundred Cretan archersX
At the same time, also, came Sosis the Syracusan with three
thousand hoplites, and Sophaenetus >the Arcadian ** with one
thousand hoplites ; and here Cyrus held a review, and numbered
his Hellenes in the park, and found that they amounted in all
to eleven thousand hoplites and about two thousand peltasts. '^/'^

^ Lil. ' ' iTihabilerf," many of tlie cities of Asia being ihen as now deserted,
but the suggestion is clearly at times " thickly inhabited, " ' ' populous."

'■^ For these tribL-s see below, p, 168,

' Lit. "paradise," an oriental word = park or pleasure-ground ; in LXX.
of the garden of Eden, hence our " ParadisL-."

■* F'or the position of Celaena.c see map,

^ For the story of Marsyas see Herod, vii. 26 ; Livy, xxxviiL 13 ; Plat.
-ffi'A 3. 399 E.

* Perhaps this should Ix? Agias the Arcadian, as Mr. Macmichad suggests.
.Sopliaenetns has already bi'cn named nbove,

^'ScK 'I'hirlwall, Hiif. tf/ Gnece, ch, xxsiil. p. 289, and lielow, p, 138, note 4;
jj, ^75, note 3.



ANABASIS — BK. I.



f CH. II. S lO-IS

\ Apr. ?o-May 8



From this place he continued his march two stages — ten
parasangs — to the populous city of Peltae, where he remained
three days ; while Xenias, the Arcadiaiv, celebrated the Lycaea^y
with sacrifice^ and instituted games. LTlie quizes -weieLbead-i
bands of gold ; and Cyrus himself was a spectator of the contest
'CFrom this place the march was continued two stages — twelve
parasangs — to 't Ceramon -agora, a populous city, the last on
the confines of AlysTa. 'ihence a march of three stages —
thirty parasangs — brought, him to C^avstru-pedion.^ a populous
city. Here Cyrus halted five days ; and the soldiers, whose
pay was now more tjjan three months in arrear, came several
times to the palace gates demanding their dues ; while CyrusY
iput them ofFjvith fine words and expectations, but could not
kconceal his vexation, for it was not his fashion to stint payment,
[when he had the means. At this point Epyaxa, the wife of
Syennesisj the king of the Cilicians^ arrived on a visit to Cyrus :
and it was said that Cyrus had received a large gift of money
from the queen.x/At this date, at any rate, Cyrus gave the
army four months' pay. The queen was accompanied by a
bodyguard of CilicianSfend Aspendians ; and, if report speaks
truly, Cyrus had intimate relations with the queen, j^

.From th is place he marched two stages — ten parasangs —
t qJThym l^riuna,^ populous city. Here, by the side of the road,
i^Qhe sprmgof Midas, the king of Phrygia, as it is called,
whereNMidas, as the story goes, caught the satyr by drugging
the spring with wine.^ From this place he marched two stages —
ten parasangs^ — t oTvriaeum. a populous city. Here he halted
three days ; and the Cilician queen, according to the popular
account, begged Cyrus to exhibit his armament for her amuse-
ment. The latter being only too glad to make such an exhibi-
tion, held a review of the Hellenes and barbarians in the
plain. He ordered the Hellenes to draw op their lines and
post themselves in their customary battle order, each general
marshalling his own battalion. Accordingly they drew up four-

^ The Lycaea. an Arcadian festival in honour of ZePf Ai'Koio'i, akin lo ihc
Roman Lupurcalia. which was originally a shepherd festival, tfie introdnclion of
which the Romans ascribe to the Arcadian Evander. Sec Plutarch {Cat-sar).

' Lit, "plain of the Caysrer, " like Ceramon -agora, "the ninrkci of the
Cp«""io»is" above, the iianae of a to\«a.

ihe story of Midas and the Satyr see Ovid, Met am, xi. go ff.



CH. II. 8 15-20 1
May gr29, b-c. 401 J



REVIEW AT TVRIAEUM



deep. The right was held by Menon and those with hmi ;
the left by Clearchus and his men ; the centre by the remain-
ing generals with theirs. Cyrus first inspected the barbarians,
who marched past in troops of horse and companies of in-
fantry. He then inspected the Hellenes ; driving past them
in his chariot, with the queen in her carriage. And they all
had brass helmets and purple tunics, and greaves, and their
shields uncovered.^

After he had driven past the whole body, he drew up his
chariot in front of the centre of the battle-line, and sent his
interpreter Pigres to the generals of the Hellenes, with orders to
present arm s and to adv ance algngjhe whole^line. This order
was'">tpeaTS3"by the genSratrtodieirmeirrana^t the sound
of the bugle, with shields forward and spears in rest, they
advanced to meet the enemy. I'he pace quickened, and with
a shout the soldiers spontaneously fell into a run, making in
the direction of the camp, Cireat was the panic of the bar-
barians. The Cilician queen in her carriage turned and fled ;
the sutlers in the marketing place left their wares and took to
their heels ; and the Hellenes meanwhile came into camp with

t N roar of laughte r. ^What astounded the queen was the
brilliancy and order of the armament ; but Cyrus was pleased
to see the terror inspired by the Hellenes in the hearts of the
Asiatics^
Frosyto-Rlacfi he marched on three stages — twenty para-

sangs — toJcorjiiniT^ the last city of Phrygia, where he remained

Ihree days. Thence he marched through I^ycaonia five stages —

thirty parasangs. This was hostile country, and he gave it over

I to the Hellenes to pillage. At tJiis point Cyrus sent back the

^_ Cilician queen into her own country by the quickest route ; and

^B to escort her he sent the soldiers of Menon, and Menon himself.

^^ With the rest of the troops he continued his march through

Cappadocia four stages ^twenty -five parasangs — to Dana^ a

populous city, large and flourishing. Here they halted three

days, within which interval Cyrus put to death, j>n a ch arge o f J

c onspirac yj^jL Persian nobleman named Megaphernes, a wearer ^

of' the royal purple ; and along with him another high dignitary

among his subordinate commanders.

^ /.e. ready for action. Cf. "bayonets fixed." Or, "Tyana."


ANABASIS — BK. I,



f CH. It. § ai-26

I May 30-Junc .3



From this place they endeavoured to force a passage into
Cilicia. Now the entrance was by an exceedingly steep cart-
road, impracticable for an army in face of a resisting force ;
and report said that SAennesis was on the summit of the pass
guarding the approachA\ Accordingly they halted a day in the
plain ; but next day came a messenger informing them that
Syennesis had left the pass ; doubtless, after perceiving that
Menon's army was already in Cilicia on hJs own side of the
mountains ; and he had further been informed that ships of
war, belonging to the Lacedaemonians and to Cyrus himself,
with Taraos on board as admiral, were sailing round from
Ionia to Cilicia. Whatever the reason might be, Cyrus
made his way up into the hills without let or hindrance,
and came in sight of the tents where the Cilicians were on
guard. From that point he descended gradually into a large
and beautiful plain country, well watered, and thickly covered
with trees of all sorts and vines. l/This plain produces sesame
plentifully, as also panic and millet and barley and wheat ;
and it is shut in on all sides by a steep and lofty wall of
mountains from sea to sea. Descending through this plain
country, he advanced four stages — twenty-five parasangs — to
Xarsus, a large and prosperous city of Cilicia, ,_Ii£re_sto©d
the palace of Syennesis, the king of the country ; and through
the middle of the city flows a river called the Cydnus, two
hundred feet broad. They found that the city had been de-
serted by its inhabitants, who had betaken themselves, with
Syennesis, to a strong place on the hills. All had gone, except
the tavem-keepers. ^The sea-board inhabitants of Soli and Issi
also remained. Now Epyaxa, Syennesis's queen, had reached
Tarsus five days in advance of Cyrus. During their passage over
the mountains into the plain, two companies of Menon's army
were lost. Some said they had been cut down by the Cilicians,
while engaged on some pillaging affair; another account was that
they had been left behind, and being unable to overtake the
main body, or discover the route, had gone astray and perished. .
However it was, they numbered one hundred hopHtes ; and /
when the rest arrived, /being in a fury at the destruction of their
fellow-soldiers, they vented their spleen by pillaging the cit}-
of Tarsus and the palace to boot. Now when Cyrus had


DISCONTENT AT TARSUS



marched into the city, he sent for Syennesis to come to him ;
but tlie latter reph'cd that he had never yet put himself into
the hands of any one who was his superior, nor was he willing
to accede to the proposal of Cyrus now ; until, in the end^ his
wife persuaded him, and he accepted pledges of good faith.
After this they met, and Syennesis gave Cyrus large sums in
aid of his army; while Cyrus presented him with the cus-
tomary royal gifts— to wit, a horse with a gold bit^ a neck-
lace of gold, a gold bracelet, and a gold scimitar, a Persian
dress, and lastly, the exemption of his territory from further
pillage, with the privilege of taking back the slaves that had
beengeizcd, wherever they might chance to come upon them.
\iiQ — At Tarsus Cyrus and his army halted for twenty
days; the soldiers refusing to advance further, since the suspicion
ripened in their minds, that the expedition was in reality directed
against the king; and as they insisted, they had not engaged their
services for that object. Clearchus set the example of trying
to force his men to continue their march ; but he had no sooner
started at the head of his troops than they began to pelt him
and his baggage train, and Clearchus had a narrow escape of
being stoned to death there and then. Later on, when he \
perceived that force was useless, he summoned an assembly
of his own men ; and for a long while he stood and wept,
while the men gazed in silent astonishment. At last he spoke
as follows : " Fellow-soldiers, do not marvel that I am sorely
distressed on account of the present troubles, Cyrus has been
no ordinary friend to mc. When i was in banishment he
honoured me in various ways, and made me also a present of
ten thousand darics,^ These I accepted, hut not to lay them
up for myself for private use ; not to squander them in pleasure,



And, first of all, I wentj



but to expend them on yourselves.)

to war with the Thracians, and with you to aid, I wreaked
ven^iuaceon them in behalf of Hellas ; driving them out of
the Chersonese, when they wanted to deprive its Hellenic
inhabitants of their lands. But as soon as Cyrus summoned
me, I took you with me and set out, so that, if my benefactor
had any need of me. T might requite him for the good treat-
ment I myself had received at his hands. . . . But since

(see p. 13)-



to



ANABASIS — BK. L



f;



CH. Itl § s-io



you are not minded to continue the march with me, one of
two things is left to me to do : either I must renouhce you for
the sake of my friendship with Cyrus, or I must go with you
at the cost of deceiving him. Whether I am about to do right
or not, 1 cannot say, but I choose yourselves ; and, whatever
betide, I mean to share your fate, y Never shall it be said of
me by any one that, having led Greek troops against the bar-
barians/ I betrayed the Hellenes, and chose the friendship
of the barbarian. No I since you do not choose to obey
and follow me, I will follow after yo\i. Whatever betide, I
will share your fate. I look upon you as my country, my
friends, my allies ; with you I think I shall be honoured,
wherever I be ; without you I do not see how I can help a
friend or hurt a foe. My decision is taken. Wherever you
gOf I go also. Be sure of that/*

~^ Such were his words. But the soldiers, not only his own,
but the rest also, when they heard what he said, an d how jie

-had RrQuted.lbe.idea of going up to the great king's palace,^^^^
^3£ Dr e^ed their aopr^al :. and more than two thousand men
ieserted Xenias and Pasion, and took their arms and baggage-
train^ andcameL.and encamped with Clearchus. But Cyrus, in
despair and vexationaflHiIs turn of affairs, sent for Clearchus.
He refused to come ; but, without the knowledge of the soldiers,
sent a message to Cyrus, bidding him keep a good heart,
for that all would arrange itself in the right way ; and bade .
hira. keep on sending for hioi, whilst he himself refused to go,/|
After that he got together his own men, with those who had
joined him, and of the rest any who chose to come, and spoke
as f ollow s : " Fellow soldiers, it is clear that the relations ofl
Cyrus to us are identical with ours to him. We are no longer
his soldier.s, since we have ceased to follow him ; and he, on
his side, is no longer our paymaster. V He, however, no doubt
considers himself wronged by us ; and though he goes on send-
ing for me, I cannot bring myself to go to him : for two reasons,
chiefly from a sense of shame, for I am forced to_admit to
myself that 1 have altogether deceived him ; but [lartly, too,
because I am afraid of his seizing me and inflicting a penalty

' Lit, " inlo tlie country of the barbarian.
" Or, " how he insisted that he was not going «p."



CH. JJI. i tt-ts)
June 4-23 J



CLEARCHUS AND THE SOLDIERS



It



_« on me (c



on me for the wrongs which he conceives that I have done him,
^n mv opinion^ then, this is no time for us to go to sleep
and forget all about ourselves, rather it is high time to deliberate
on our next move ; and as long as we do remain here, we had
better bethink us how we are to abide in security ; or, if wel
are resolved to turn our backs at once, what will be the safest |
means of retreat ; and, further, how we arc to procure supplies,
for without supplies * there is no profit whatsoever either in the
general or the private soldier. | The man with whom we have
to deal is an excellent friend to his friends, but a very danger-
ous enemy to his foes. And he is backed by a force of infantry
and cavalry and ships such as we all alike very well see and
know, since wc can hardly be said to have posted ourselves at any
great distance from him. If, then, any one has a suggestion '

jake. now is tt| g \]]w *^ cp.^u '' with these words hej

^ 'I'h^ti various speakers stood up ; som e of their owi
— ,_jajotion to propound their views ; others inspired ^ by Clearchus
to dilate on the hopeless difficulty of either staying, or going back
without the goodwill of Cyrus. One of these, in particular, with
a make-believe of anxiety to commence the homeward march
without further pause, called upon them instantly to choose other
generals, if Clearchus were not himself prepared to lead them
^_ backjj^" Let them at once purchase supplies " (the market being
^H in the heart of the Asiatic camp), *Met them pack up their
^^ baggage : let them," he added, " go to Cyrus and ask for some
ships in order to return by sea : if he refused to give them
ships, let them demand of iiim a guide to lead them back
through a friendly district {/and if he would not so much as
give them a guide, they could but put themselves, without more
ado, in marching order, and send on a detachment to occupy the v
pass — before Cyrus and the Cilicians, whose property,"^ the
speaker added, " we have so plentifully pillaged, can anticipate
us." Such were the remarks of that speaker ; h e was foUo^ve d
by Clearchus, who merely said ; " As to my acting personally
as general at this season, pray do not propose it : 1 can see
numerous obstacles to my doing so. Obedience, in the fullest,

' cr. Cyrofi, I. vi. 14.

- Cf. below, VII, vi. 41. p. 228, note 1 ; Cyro/>. 1. vi. ig.

' Or more lit. ' whom ue have robbed of men .and goods so freely."



13



ANABASIS — BK, I,



f CH. HI, I 15-M

\ June 4-33, D.c. 401



I can render to the man of your choice, that is another
matter : and you shall see and know that I can play my part,
under command, with the best of you." *

After Clcarchus another spokesman stoofi up, and pro-
ceeded to point out the simplicity of tha speaker^ who
proposed to ask for vessels, just as if CyruB were minded
to renounce the expedition and sail back adain. "And let
me further point out/' he said, "what a simplie-minded notion
it is to beg a guide of the very man whose\designs we are
marring^ If we can trust any guide whom Cyrus may vouch-



safe to give us, why not order Cyrus at once



to occupy the



pass in our behoof? For my part, 1 should tUink twice be-
fore I set foot on any ships that he might give us,, for fear lest he
should sink them with his men-of-war ; and I should equally
hesitate to follow any guide of his : he migh : lead us into
some place out of which we should find it impossible to escape.
I should much prefer, if I am to return agamst the will of
Cyrus at all, to give him the slip, and so begone : wj/Ach
indeed is impossible, y But these schemes aire simpj^fion-
sensical.^ My proposal is that a deputatiom of fit^rersons,
with Clearehus, should go to Cyrus : let themjgo t^Cyrus and
ask him : what use he proposes to make of us ifapG if the busi- •
ness is at all similar to that on which he onsg/jS^ore employed
a body of foreigners — let us by all means ^wVv : let us show
that we are the equals of those who at^^ipanied hhn on
his march up formerly. But if the design should turn out to
be of larger import than the former one — ^involvi ng more toil
and more danger — we should ask him, either to give us good
reasons for following his lead, or else consent to send us away
into a friendly country. ^ In this way, whether we follow him,
we shall do so as friends, and with heart and soul, or whether
we go back, we shall do so in security. The ans>^r to this



shall he reported to us here, and when we have^
will advise as to our best course."

This resolution was carried, and they ch
deputation with Clearehus, who put to Cyt
which had been agreed upon by the army,
follows : That he had received news that
* Or. "all tliis is more trifling." - ,«/. " o



Ird it, we

sent a
estions
iplied as
, an enemy



CH. til. f 30-CH. IV. f 3 I

June 34-July I I



FLEET JOINS AT ISSI



13



of his, was posted on the Euphrates, twelve stages off; his object
1 was to march against this aforesaid Abroromas :. and if he were
still there, he wished to mflict^ punishment on hira, " or if he
be fled "^ (so the reply concluded), *' we will there deliberate on
the best course." Th^ deputation received the answer and
reported it to the soldiers. The suspicion that he was leading
them against the king was not dispelled ; but it seemed best
■ to follow him. They only demanded an increase of pay, and
1 Cyrus promised to give them half as much again as they had
hitherto received, — that is to say, a daric and a half ^ a month
to each man, instead of a daric. Was he really leading them to
attacV the king? Not even at this moment was any one ap-
pr ijg d of the fact, at any rate in any open and public manner.
'^^Tv^ — From this point he tnnrched two stages — ten parasangs
— I^rfne river Psarus, which is two hundred feet broad, and from
the Psarus he u^arched a single stage — five parasangs — to the
river Pyramus, which is about two hundred yards broad, and
from the Pyramus two stages — fifteen parasangs — to Issi. t he
last city in Cilicia. It lies on the seaboard — a prosperous,
large, and flourishing town. Here they halted three days, and
here Cyrus was joined by his fleet. There were thirty-five
ships from Peloponnesus, with the Lacedaemonian admiral
Pythagoras on board. These had been piloted from Ephesus
by Tamos the Egyptian, who himself had another fleet ot
twenty-five ships "belonging to Cyrus. These had formed
Tamos's blockading squadron at Miletus, when that city sided
with Tissaphernes ;^ he had also used them in other military
services rendered to Cyrus in his operations against that satrap.
There was a third officer on board the fleet, the Lacedaemonian
Cheirisophus, who had been sent for by Cyrus, and had brought
with hira seven hundred hoplites, over whom he was to act
as general in the service of Cyrus. The fleet lay at anchor
opposite Cyrus's tent. Here too another reinforcement ptdff^
sented itself This was a body of four hundred hoplites,

* Reading 4>vy^ ', or if iptOy^, " if he lake to flight."

' /.(?., roughly speaking, 30s. in lieu of £1 ; see above, p. 9. The daric
" was in 'iTtUie nearly equivalent to a sovereign, and of a very convenient size
and shape." — Percy Gardner, TAi Types of Greek Coins^ ch. iu p. 12 ; see
below, p. 26, note i.

^ Or, "since the town had been friendly to Ti55aphemcs. "



14



ANABASIS BK. I.



f



CH. IV. S 3-7

July 2-iOj B.C. 4*1



Hellenic mercenaries in the service of Abrocomas, who deserted
him for Cyrus, and joined in the campaign against the king.

From Issi, he marched a single stage— five parasangs —
to the gates of Cilicia and Syria. This was a double fortress :
the inner and nearer one, which protects Cilicia^ was held by
Syennesis and a garrison of Cilicians ; the outer and further
one, protecting Syria, was reported to be garrisoned by a body
of the king's troops. Through the gap between the two
fortresses flows ^ river n ami ed the ^ars ^, which is a hundred
feet broad, -affdlhe whdt& space Between was scarcely more
than six hundred yards.^ To force a passage here would be
impossible, so narrow was the pass itself, with the fortification
walls stretching down to the sea, and precipitous rocks above ;
while both fortresses were furnished with gates. It was the
existence of this pass which had induced Cyri;s to send for the
fleet, so as to enable him to lead a body of hoplites inside and
outside the gates ; and so to force a passage through the enemy,
if he were guarding the Syrian gate, as he fully expected to
find Abrocomas doing with a large army. This, however,
Abrocomas had not done ; but as soon as he learnt that Cyrus
was in Cilicia^ he had turned round and made his exit from
Phoenicia, to join the king with an army amounting, as report
said, to three hundred thousand men.

From this point Cyrus pursued his march through Syria
a single stage— five parasangs^to MyTJand its , a city inhabited
by Phoenicians, on the sea-coast. This was a commercial port,
and numerous merchant vessels were riding at anchor in the
harbour. Here they halted seven days, and here Xenias the
Arcldian general, and Pasion the Megarian got on board a
trader, and having stowed away their most valuable e fleets, set
sail for home ; most people explained the act as the outcome
of a fit of jealousy, because Cyrus had allowed Clearchus to
retain their men, who had deserted to him, in hopes of return-
ing to Hellas instead of marching against the king ; when the
two had so vanished, a rumour spread that Cyrus was after them
with some ships of war, and some hoped the cowards - might
be caught, others pitied them, if that ?j t ^ gul^ be their fa te.

' LiL " three stades " = 6o6 yds. a ft. 3 in. >

^ Reading SEiXoi&s : ai. Schtovs = " the treacherous fellows."


CH. IV. 5 8-11 1
July ii-?a /



But Cyrus summoned the generals and addressed them ;
" Xenias and Pasion," he said, " have taken leave of us ; but
they need not flatter themselves that in so doing they have
stolen into hiding. I know where they are gone ; nor will
they owe their escape to speed ; I have men-of-war to capture
their craft, if I like. But heaven help me! if 1 mean to pursue
them : never shall it be said of nie, that I turn people to
account as long as they stay witii me ; but as soon as they are
minded to be off, I seize and maltreat them, and strip them of
their wealth. Not so ! let them go with the consciousness that
our behaviour to them is better than theirs to us. And yet I
have their children and wives safe under lock and key in
Tralles; but they shall not be deprived even of these. They shall
receive them back in return for their former goodness to me."
So he spoke, and the Hellenes, even those who had been out
of heart at the thought of marching up the country, when
they heard of the nobleness of Cyrus, were happier and more
eager to follow him on his path.

After this Cyrus marched onwards four stages — -twenty
parasangs — to the river Chalus. That river is a hundred
feet broad, and is stocked with large tame fish which the
Syrians regard as gods, and will not suffer to be injured —
and so too the pigeons of the place. The villages in
which they encamped belonged to Par}'satis, as part of her
girdle money. ^ From this point he marched on five stages^
thirty parasangs — to the sources of the river Dardas, which is
a hundred feet broad. Here stood the palace of Belesys, the
ruler of Syria,- with its park- — which was a very large and
beautiful one, and full of the products of all the seasons in
their course. But Cyrus cut down the park and burnt the.
palace. ' Thence he marched on three stages — fifteen para-
sangs — to the river Euphrates, which is nearly half a mile

^ Cf. Plat. A kid. i, 123 B. "Why, I have been informed by a. credible
person, who went up to ihe king [at Susa], thai he passed ihrouj^h a large
tract of excelletit land, extending for nearly a day's journey, which the people
of ihe coutltry called the queen's girdle, and another which they called iier
veil," etc. — Prof. Jowett, Fltif. ii. 473. Olympiodoma and the Scholiast both
suppose that Plato here refers to Xenophon and this passage of the Aftal'iuis.
Grote thinks ii very probable that Plato had iti his inittd Xenophon (either his
Anabasis or personal communications with hint). — f'lato, yuA. i. 353, note f.

^ Or, "late ruler."



I



I



i6



ANABASIS BK/ T.



f CK. IV. 5 11-16

i July 33-37, B.C. 401



broad. A large and flourishing city, named Thapsacus, stands
on its banks. Here they halted five days, and here Cyrus
sent for the generals of the Hellenes, and told them that the
advance was now to be upon Babylon, against the great king ;
he bade them communicate this information to the soldier.s and
persuade thera to follow. The generals called an assembly,
and announced the news to the soldiers. The latter were
indignant and angry with the generals, accusing them of
having kept secret what they had long known ; and refused to
go, unless such a bribe of money were given them as had been
given to their predecessors, when they went up with Cyrus to the
court of his father, not as now to fight a battle, but on a
peaceful errand — the \'isit of a son to his father by invitation.
The demand was reported to Cyrus by the generals, and he
undertook to give each man five silver minae^ as soon as
Babylon was reached, and their pay in full, until he had
safely conveyed them back to Ionia again. In this manner
the Hellenic force were persuaded, ^ — that is to say, the majority
of them. Menon, indeed, before it was clear what the rest of
the soldiers would do — whether, in fact, they would follow Cynis
or not— collected his own troops apart and made them the
following speech : '' Jtlen, " he said, " if you will listen to me,
there is a method by which, without risk or toil, you may win
the special favour of Cyrus beyond the rest of the soldiers.
You ask what it is I would have you to do ? I will tell you,
Cyrus at this instant is begging the Hellenes to follow him to
attack the king. I say then : Cross the Euphrates at once,
before it is clear what answer the rest will make ; if they vote
in favour of following, you will get the credit of having set the
example, and Cyrus will be grateful to you. He will look upon
you as being the heartiest in his cause ; he will repay, as of all
others he best knows how ; while, if the rest vole against
crossing, we shall all go back again ; but as the sole adherents,
whose fidelity he can altogether trust, it is you whom Cyrus
will turn to account, as commandants of garrisons or captains
of companies. You need only ask him for whatever you want,
and you will get it from him, as being the friends of C>tus."
The men heard and obeyed, and before the rest had given

^ /^20 : 6 : 3 ; one tnina = ^^4 : t : 3.



H. IV. i 16-CH. V, 1 :3 1

||nly aB-Aug. 12 /



PASSAGE OF EUPHR.\TES



It



their answer, they were already across. But when Cyrus
perceived that Menon's troops had crossed, he was well
pleasedj and he sent Glus to the division in question, with this
message : " Soldiers, accept my thanks at present ; eventually
you shall thank me. I will see to that, or my name is not
Cyrus." The soldiers therefore could not but pray heartily
for his success; so high their hopes ran. But to Menon,
it was said, he sent gifts with lordly liberality. This done,
Cyrus proceeded to cross ; and in his wake followed the
rest of the armament to a man. As they forded, never a
man was wetted above the chest : nor ever until this moment,
said the men of Thapsacus, had the river been so crossed
on foot,"" boats liad always been required ; but these, at the
present time, Abrocomas, in his desire to hinder Cyrus from
crossing, had been at pains to burn. Thus the passage was
looked upon as a thing miraculous ; the river had manifestly
retired befofe the face of Cyrus, like a courtier bowing to his
future king. From this place he continued his march through
Syria nine stages^^^ — fifty parasangs — and they reached the river
Arajces. Here were several villages full of corn' and wine ; in
which they halted three days, and provisioned the army.
■ V. — Thence he marched on through Arabia, keeping the
•Euphrates on the right, five desert stages- — thirty-fjve parasangs.
In this region the ground was one long level plain, stretching
far and ivide like the sea, full of absinth ; whilst all the other
vegetation, whether wood or reed, was sweet scented like spice
or sweet herb ; there were no trees ; but there was wild game
of all kinds—wild asses in greatest abundance, with plenty
of ostriches j besides these, there were bustards and
antelopes. These creatures were occasionally chased by the
cavalry. The asses, when pursued, would run forward a space,
and then stand still — their pace being much swifter than that
of horses ; and as soon as the horses came close, they went
through the same performance. The only way to catch them
was for the riders to post themselves at intervals, and to hunt them
in relays, as it were. The flesh of those they captured was
not unlike venison, only more tender. No one was lucky
enough to capture an ostrich- Some of the troopers did give
chase, but it had soon to be abandoned ; for the bird, in its

c


IS



ANABASIS — BK. I,



/ CH. V. § 3.8

\Aug. 13-29, B.C. 401



effort to escape, speedily put a long interval between itself and
its pursuers ; plying its legs at full speed, and using its wings
the while like a sail. The bastards were not so hard to catch
when started suddenly ; for they take only short flights, like
partridges, and are soon tired. Their flesh is delicious.

As the army wended its way through this region, they
reached the river Mascas, which is one hundred feet in
breadth. Here stood a big deserted city called ^or^te^^
almost literally environed by the stream, which flows^Tound
it in a circle. Here they halted three days and provisioned
themselves. Hence they continued their march thirteen
desert stages — ninety parasangs — w^ith the Euphrates still on
their right, until they reached the Gates. On these marches
several of the baggage animals perished of hunger, for there
was neither grass nor green herb, or tree of any sort ; but the
country throughout was barreru The inhabitants make their
living by quarrying millstones on the river banks, which they
work up and take to Babylon and sell, purchasing com in ex-
change for their goods. Com failed the army, and was not to
be got for money, except in the Lydian market open in Cyrus's
Asiatic army ; where a kapithe of wheat or barley cost four
shekels j^ the shekel being equal to seven and a half Attic
obols, whilst the kapithe is the equivalent of two Attic choenices,^
dry measure, so that the soldiers subsisted on meat alone for
the whole period Some of the stages were very long, when-
ever they had to push on to find water or fodder ; and once
they found themselves involved in a narrow way, where the
deep clay presented an obstacle to the progress of the wagons.
Cyrus, with the nobles about him, halted to superintend the
operation, and ordered Glus and Pigres to take a body of
barbarians and to help in extricating the wagons. As they
seemed to be slow about the business, he turned round
angrily to the Persian nobles and bade them lend a hand to
force the wagons out Then, if ever, what goes to constitute
one branch of good discipline, was to be witnessed. Each of

^ 3s. 8d. nearly ; i ffly^ot (or " shekel ") = 7^ obols. i obol = about i Jd.

^ The choenix = about 1 quart {or, according to others, ig pint)- It
was the minimum allowance of corn for a man, say a slave, per diem. The
Spartan was allowed at the public table 2 choenices a day. See Herod. VI.
Ivii, 3 ; and Arnold's note to TAuc. iv. 6. j


I



^



^



DISPUTE BETWEEN THE SOLDIERS



those addressed, just where he chanced to be standing, threw
off his purple cloak, and flung himself into the work with as
much eagerness as if it had been a charge for victory. Down
a steep hill side they flew, with their costly tunics and em-
broidered trousers, —so me with the circlets round their necks,
and bracelets on their arms — in an instant^ they had sprung
into the miry clay, and in less time than one could have con-
ceived, they had landed the wagons safe on terra firma.

Altogether it was plain that Cyrus was bent on press-
ing on the march, and averse to stoppages, except where he
halted for the sake of provisioning or some other neces-
sary object; being convinced that the more rapidly he ad-
vanced, the less prepared for battle would he find the king ;
while the slower his own progress, the larger would be the
hostile army which he would find collected. Indeed, the
attentive observer could see, at a glance, that if the king's
empire was strong in its extent of territory and the number of
inhabitants, that strength is compensated by an inherent
weakness, dependent upon the length of roads and the inevit-
able dispersion of defensive forces, where an invader insists
upon pressing home the war by forced marches.

On the opposite side of the Euphrates to the point reached
on one of these desert stages, was a large and flourishing city
namedij[lhatmande. From this town the soldiers made pur-
chases of provmoni^ crossing the river on rafts, in the following
fashion : They took the skins which they used as tent cover-
ings, and filled them with light grass ; they then compressed
and stitched them tightly together by the ends, so that the
water might not touch the hay. On these they crossed and
got provisions: wine made from the date -nut, and millet or
panic -com, the common staple of the country. Some dis-
pute or other here occurred between the soldiers of Men on
and ClearchuSj in which Clearchus sentenced one of Menon's
men, as the delinquent, and had him flogged. The man went
back to his own division and told them. Hearing what had
been done to their comrade, his fellows fretted and fumed,
and were highly incensed against Clearchus. The same day
Clearchus visited the piissage of the river, and after inspecting
the market there, was returning with a few followers, on



ANABASIS— BK. I.



/CH. V. 5 ra-CH. VI. t t
i Aug. 13-39, B«c. 401



horseback, to his tent, and had to pass through Menon's
quarters. Cyrus had not yet come up, but was riding up
in the same direction. One of Menon's men, who was
splitting wood, caught sight of Clearchus as he rode past,
and aimed a blow at him with his axe. The aim took no
effect ; when another hurled a stone at him, and a third, and
then several, with shouts and hisses. Clearchus made a rapid
retreat to his own troops, and at once ordered them to get
under arms. He bade his hoplites remain in position with
their shields resting against their knees, while he, at the head
of hisThraciansand horsemen, of which he had more than forty
in his army — Thracians for the most pait — ^^advanced against
Menon's soldiers, so that the latter, with Menon himself,
were panicstricken, and ran to seize their arms ; some even
stood riveted to the spot, in perplexity at the occurrence.
Just then Proxenus came up from behind, as chance would
have it, with his division of hoplites, and without a moment's
hesitation marched into the open space between the rival
parties, and grounded arms ; then he fell to begging Clearchus
to desist. The latter was not too well pleased to hear his trouble
mildly spoken of, when he had barely escaped being stoned to
death ; and he bade Proxenus retire and leave the intervening
space open. At this juncture Cyrus arrived and inquired
what was happening. There was no time for hesitation.
With his javelins firmly grasped in his hands he galloped up,
— escorted by some of his faithful bodyguard, who were pre-
sent^ — and was soon in the midst, exclaiming : " Clearchus,
Proxenus, and you other Hellenes yonder, you know not what
you do. As surely as you come to blows with one another, our
fate is sealed — this very day I shall be cut to pieces, and so
will you : your turn will follow close on mine. Let our
fortunes once take an evil turn, and these barbarians whom
you see around will be worse foes to us than those who are at
present serving with the king." At these words Clearchus
came to his senses. Both parties paused from battle, and
retired to their quarters : order reigned.

VI. — As they advanced from this point (opposite Char-
niande), they came upon the hoof-prints and dung of horses at
frequent intervals. It looked like the trail of some two thousand



I



M. VI. $ 1-61
Mg. 13-29 /



TRIAL OF ORONTAS



at



horses. Keeping ahead of the army, these fellows burnt up the
grass and everything else that was good for use.'^Now there
was a Persian, named Oroiitas ; he was closely related to the
king by birth : and in matters pertaining to war reckoned among
the best of Persian warriors. Having formerly been at war with
Cyrus, and afterwards reconciled to him, he now made a con-
spiracy to destroy him. He made a proposal to Cyrus : if
Cyrus would furnish him with a thousand horsemen, he would
deal with these troopers, who were burning down everything in
front of them ; he would lay an ambuscade and cut them
down, or he would capture a host of them alive ; in any case,
he would put a stop to their aggressiveness and burnings ; he
would see to it that they did not ever get a chance of setting
eyes on Cyrus's army and reporting its advent to the king.
The proposal seemed plausible to Cyrus, who accordingly
authorised Orontas to take a detachment from each of the
generals, and be gone. He, thinking that he had got his horse-
men ready to his hand, wrote a letter to the king, announcing
that he would ere long join him with as many troopers as he
could bring ; he bade him, at the same time, instruct the royal
cavalry to welcome him on arrival as a friend. The letter further
contained certain reminders of his former friendship and fidelity.
This despatch he delivered into the hands of one who was a
trusty messenger, as he thought ; but the bearer took and
gave it to Cyrus. Cyrus read it. Orontas was arrested. ^ Then
Cyrus summoned to his tent seven of the noblest Persians
among his personal attendants, and sent orders to the Hellenic
generals to bring up a body of hoplites. These troops were
to take up a position round his tent. This the generals
did ; bringing up about three thousand hoplites. Clearchus
was also*' invited inside, to assist at the court-martial ; a com-
pliment due to the position he held among the other generals,
in the opinion not only of Cyrus, but also of the rest of the
court When he came out, he reported the circumstances of
th^ 4rial (as to which, indeed, there was no mystery) to his
friendS;/ He said that Cyrus opened the inquiry with these
wofds : " I have invited you hither, my friends, that I may take
advice with you, and carry out whatever, in the sight of God
and man, it is right for me to do, as concerning the man before



22



' ANABASIS — BK.



/ CH. VI. § 6-IO

I Aug. 13-49. B.C. 401



yoUf Orontas, The prisoner was, in the first instance, given
to me by my father, to be my faithful subject. In the next
place, acting, to use his own words, under the orders of my
brother, and having hold of the acropolis of Sardis, he went
to war with me. I met war with war, and forced him to think
it more prudent to desist from war with me : whereupon we
shook hands, exchanging solemn pledges. After that," and at
this point Cyrus turned to Orontas, and addressed him person-
ally,— "after thatj did I do you any wTong?" Answer, " Never."
Again, another question : " Then later on, having received, as
you admit, no injury from me, did you revolt to the Mysians
and injure my territory, as far as in you lay?" — " I did," was
the reply. " Then, once more having discovered the limits of
your power, did you flee to the altar of Artemis, crying out
that you repented ? and did you thus work upon my feelings,
that we a second time shook hands and made interchange of
solemn pledges? Are these things so?*' Orontas again
assented. "Then what injury have you received from me,"
Cyrus asked, " that now for the third time, you have been
detected in a treasonous plot against me?" — "No injury,"
Orontas replied. And Cyrus asked once more : " You plead
guilty to having sinned against me?"—'* I must needs do so,"
he answered. Then Cyrus put one more question : " But the
day may come, may it not, when you will once again be hostile
to my brother, and a faithful friend to myself?" The other
answered : " Even if I were, you could never be brought to
believe it, Cyrus.''

At this point Cyrus turned to those who were present
and said : " Such ha.s been the conduct of the prisoner in the
past : such is his language now. I now call upon you, and you
first, Clearchus, to declare your opinion — what think you ? "
And Clearchus answered : *' My advice to you is to put this
man out of the way as soon as may be, so that we may be
saved the necessity of watching him,* and have more leisure, as
far as he is concerned, to requite the services of those whose
friendship is sincere." — "To this opinion," he told us, "the
rest of the court adhered," After that, at the bidding of Cyrus,

' <f>i<\dTTe<T0ai. i.e. "need not to guard against him," " waich bis move-
ments."



Ck. VI. I ro-cji. vir- % ^\
Aug. 30-Sept. 2 i



MIDNIGHT REVIEW



23



each of those present, in turn, including the kinsmen of
Orontas, rose and took him by the girdle j which is as much as to
say, " Let him die the death," and then those appointed led him
out ; and they who in old days were wont to do obeisance to
him, could not refrain, even at that moment, from bowing
down before hira, albeit they knew he was being led forth to
death.

After they had conducted him to the tent of Artapates,
the trustiest of Cyrus's wand-bearers, none set eyes upon him
ever again, alive or dead. No one, of his own knowledge,
could declare the manner of his death ; though some con-
jectured one thing and some another. No tomb to mark his
resting-place, either then or since, was ever seen.

viL — From this place Cyrus marched through Babylonia
three stages — twelve parasangs. Now, on the third stage, about
midnight, Cyrus held a review of the Hellenes and Asiatics in
the plain, expecting that the king would arrive the following day
with his army to offer battle. He gave orders to Clearchus
to take command of the right wing, and to Meiion the
Thessalian of the left, while he himself undertook the
disposition of hi s own for ces in person. After the review,
with the first approach of day, deserters from the great king
arrived, bringing Cyrus information about the royal army.
Then Cyrus summoned the generals and captains of the
Hellenes, and held a council of war to arrange the plan of
battle. He took this opportunity also to address the follow-
ing words of compliment and encouragement to the meeting :
" Men of Hetlas," he said, " it is certainly not from dearth
of barbari;iins to fight my battles that I put myself at your
head as my allies; but because I hold you to be better and
stronger than many barbarians. That is why I took you.
See then that you prove yourselves to be men worthy
of the liberty which you possess, and w^hich I envy you.
Liberty — it is a thing which, be well assured, I would choose
in preference to all my other possessions, multiplied many
times. But I would like you to know into what sort of
struggle you are going : learn its nature from one who knows.
Their numbers are great, and they come on with much noise ;
but if you can hold out against these two things, I confess I



r CH. VII. i 4-9

iScpL a, H.C. 401


am ashamed to think, what a sorrj' set of folk you will find the
inhabitants of this land to be. But you are men, and brave
you must be, being men : ^ it is agreed ; then if you wish to
return home, any of you, I undertake to send you back, in
such sort that your friends at home shall envy you ; but I
flatter myself I shall persuade many of you to accept what I
will ofler you here, in lieu of what you left at home."

Here GauHtes,^ a Saraian exile, and a trusty friend of
Cyrus, being present, exclaimed : " Ay, Cyrus, but some say
you can afford to make large promises now, because you are
in the crisis of impending danger ; but let matters go well with
you, will you recollect ? They shake their heads. Indeed, some
add that, even if you did recollect, and were ever so willing,
you would not be able to make good all your promises, and
repay." AVhen Cyrus heard that, he answered : '" You forget,
sirs, my father's empire stretches southwards to a region where
men cannot dwell by reason of the heat, and northwards to a
region uninhabitable through cold; but all the intervening
space is mapped out in satrapies belonging to my brother's
friends : so that if the victory be ours, it will be ours also to
put our friends in possession in their room. On the whole my
fear is, not that I may not have enough to give to each of
ray friends, but lest I may not have friends enough on whom
to bestow what I have to give, and to each of you Hellenes
I will give a crown of gold"

So they, when they heard these words, were more elated
than ever themselves, and spread the good news among tlie rest
outside. And there came into his presence both the generals
and some of the other Hellenes also, claiming to know what
they should have in the event of victory ; and Cyrus satisfied
the expectation of each and all, and so dismissed them. Now
the advice and admonition of all who came into conversation
with him was, not to enter the battle himself, but to post him-
self in rear of themselves ; and at this season Clearchus put

1 Reading with Sauppe. vfiQv Sk avSpuif tifrtav xal fi/rfiX^iwJ' 7«i^o^i»fcjj',
iyij K.T.X. : or, reading with Hug [I'^tuJt' Si dv&jf}un> ivrtiiv], Kal el' rdv ijimv
yevo/ju^vufv, iyili k.t.\., translate "[but you are men], aad if my affairs txim
out well, I," etc.

^ For a namesake of this raan, a Carian, spcaldng both Greek and Persian,
see TAuc. viiL 85, unless, indeed, they are the same person.



CK. VII. S 9-15
Sept. a



)



NUMBERS ON EI



»5



a question to him : " But do you think that your brother will
give battle to you, Cyrus ? " and Cyrus answered : " Not
without a battle, be assured, shall the prize be won ; if he be
the son of Darius and Parysatis, and a brother of mine."

In the final arming for battle at this juncture, the numbers
were as follows : Of Hellenes there were ten thousand four
hundred hea^vy infantry ^ with two thousand five hundred
targcteers, while the barbarians with Cyrus reached a total of one
hundred thousand. He had too about twenty scythe-chariots.
The enemy's forces were reported to number one million two
hundred thousand, with two hundred scythe-chariots, besides
which he had six thousand cavalry under Artagerses. These
formed the immediate vanguard of the king himself. The
royal army was marshalled by four generals or field-marshals,
' each in command of three hundred thousand men. Their
names were Abrocomas, Tissaphernes, Gobryas, and Arbaces.
(But of this total not more than nine hundred thousand were
engaged in the battle, with one hundred and fifty scythe-
chariots ; since Abrocomas, on his march from Phoenicia,
arrived five days too late for the battle.) Such was the in-
formation brought to Cyrus by deserters who came in from
the king's army before the battle, and it was corroborated after
the battle by those of the enemy who were taken prisoners.

From this place Cyrus advanced one stage— three parasangs
— ^with the whole body of his troops, Hellenic and barbarian
aUke in order of battle. He expected the king to give battle
the same day, for in the middle of this day's march a deep
sunk trench was reachedj thirty feet broad, and eighteen feet
deep. The trench was carried inland through the plain,
twelve parasangs' distance, to the walk of Media. ^ [Here
are canals, flowing from the river Tigris : they are four in
number, each a hundred feet broad, and verj' deep, with corn

1 Lit. "the sliield." kc. shield-force (d<nris) numbered ten thousand four
hundred, as we speak of "horse," "guns," etc. ; for the numbers see above,
p. 5, note 7 ; also for hoplites (shields) and peltasts (targeteers) p. 82, note 1,

- For "the wall of Media" see Grotc, HisL of Greece, vol. ix. p. 87 and
foil, note T JTst ed,), and various authorities there quoted or referred to {stte
below, p. 52, note i, and p, 87, note i). The next passage eilctoscd in [ ]
may possibly be a caniraeiiuilor s or editor's note, but, on the whole, I have
thought it best to keep the words in the text instead of relegating them, as here-
tofore, to a note. Perhaps some future traveller may clear up aU difficulties.



S^ftK. I.



fCH, VII. i I5-CH. Vllt

(.§!■, Sept. 3, B.C 4ot



ships plying upon them ; they empty themselves into the
Euphrates, and are at intervals of one parasang apart, and are
spanned by bridges.]

Between the Euphrates and the trench was a narrow
passage, twenty feet only in breadth. The trench itself had
been constructed by the great king upon hearing of Cyrus's
approach, to serve as a line of defence. Through this narrow
passage then Cyrus and his army passed, and found themselves
safe inside the trench. So there was no battle to be fought
with the king that day ; only there were numerous unmistak-
able traces of horse and infantry in retreat. Here Cyrus sum-
moned SilanuSj his Ambradot soothsayer, and presented him
with three thousand darics ;^ because eleven days back^ when
sacrificing, he had told him that the king would not fight within
ten days, and Cyrus had answered : " Well, then, if he does not
fight within that time, he will not fight at all ; and if your pro-
phecy comes true, I promise you ten talents.^* So now, that the
ten days were passed, he presented him with the above sum.

But as the king had failed to hinder the passage of Cyruses
army at the trench, Cyrus himself and the rest concluded that
he must have abandoned the idea of offering battle, so that
next day Cyrus advanced with less than his former caution.
On the third day he was conducting the inarch, seated in his
carriage, with only a small body of troops drawn up in front of
him. The mass of the army was moving on in no kind of
order : the soldiers having consigned their heavy arms to be
carried in the wagons or on the backs of beasts.

VIII. — It was already about fiill market time- and
the halting-place at which the army was to take up quarters
was nearly reached, when Pategyas, a Persian, a trusty
member of Cyruses personal staff, came galloping up at full
speed on his horse, which was bathed in sweat, and to every
one he met he shouted in Greek and Persian, as fast as he

1 The daric would now be worth about £t : 2 : 2^ (see above, p. 13, note a),
but it is to be noted that "'Cyrus pays a bet of 10 Attic talents {60.000
drachmas) with 3,000 diirics. which shows that the daric was then worth 20
drachmas, or only ahout I3>^. 4d. The differonLc* in these two results connes
from the change in the proportional vaiuiaj of gold and silver. In antiquity
(at this datel the proportion was ^iLoiit 10 : i ; now it is more than 16 : 1,"
See GotKiwin and While, Attai., ad loc, ^ f,e. between 9 and 10 A.M.



. VUl. f I-$1

Sept. 3 /



ADVANCE OF THE ENEM\'



27



could ejaculate the words : " The king is advancing with a
large army ready for batdc." Then ensued a scene of wild
confusion. The Hellenes and all alike were expecting to be
attacked on the instant, and before they could form their lines.
Cyxus sprang from his carriage and donned his corselet ; then
leaping on to his charger's back, with the javelins firmly
clutched, he passed the order to the rest, to arm themselves
and fall into their several ranks.

The orders were carried out with alacrity ; the ranks shaped
themselves, Clearchus held the right of the wing resting on
the Euphrates, Proxenus was next, and after him the rest,
while Menon with his troops held the Hellenic left. Of the
Asiatics, a body of Paphlagonian cavalry, one thousand strong,
were posted beside Clearchus on the right, and with them stood
the Hellenic peltasts. On the left ^ft& Ariaeus, Cyrus's second
in command, and the rest of the barbarian host Cyrti^^wa?^,
with his bodyguard of cavalry about six hundred str(5ng^aTl
armed with corseletsf^like Cyrus) and cuisses and lielmets ;
but not so Cyrus: he went into battle with head unhelmeted.^
So too all the horses with Cyrus wore forehead -pieces and
breast-pieces, and the troopers carried short Hellenic swords.

It was now mid-day, and the enemy was not yet in sight ;
but with the approach of afternoon was seen dust like a
white cloud, and after a considerable interval a black pall as
it w^re spread far and high over the plain. As they came
nearer, very soon was seen here and there a glint of bronze and
spear-points ; and the ranks could plainly be distinguished.
On the left were troopers wearing white cuirasses.- That is
Tissaphernes in command,^ they said, and next to these a body
of men bearing wicker-shields, and next again heavy-armed
infantry, with long wooden shields reaching to the feet. ' iThese
were the Egyptians, they said, and then other cavalry, other bow-
men ; all were in national divisions, each nation marching in

' The MSS. add, "to expose oneself to the risks of war hareheaded is, it
is said, a practice common to the Persians," which I regiird eis a com-
mentator's note, if not an original marginal note of some eariy editor, pos-
sibly of the author himself. The Cyropa^dHa is full of such comments, piiccs
justificatives inserted into the text.

' Or, "Tissaphernes was in command, it was said" (see below, p, 29,
note 3).



26



(CH. VIII. § io-i6
Sept- 3, B-c. 4ot



densely-crowded squares.j, And all along their front was a line
of chariots at considerable intervals from one another, — the
famous scythe -chariots, as they were named, -= having theJw
scythes fitted to the axle-trees and stretching out slantwise* ^V.
while others protruded under the chariot-seats, facing the
ground, so as to cut through all they encountered. The design
was to let them dash full speed into the ranks of the Hellenes
and cut them through.

Curiously enough the anticipation of Cyrus, when at the
council of war be admonished the Hellenes not to mind the
shouting of the Asiatics, was not justified. Instead of shouting,
they came on in deep silence, softly and slowly, with even tread.
At this instant, Cyru^ riding past in person, accompanied by
Pigresj his interpreter, and three or four others, called aloud to
Clearchus to advance against the enemy's centre, for there the
king was to be found : "And if we strike home at this point,"
he added» " our work is finished." Clearchus, though, he could
see the compact body at the centre, and had been told by
Cyrus that the king lay outside the Hellenic left (for, owing to
numerical superiority, the king, while holding his own centre,
could well overlap Cyrus's extreme left), still hesitated to draw
off his right wing from the river, for fear of being turned on
both flanks ; and he simply replied, assuring Cyrus that he
would take care all went well.

At this time the barbarian army was evenly advancing, and
the Hellenic division was still riveted to the spot, completing
its formation as the various contingents came up. C>tus,
riding past at some distance from the lines, glanced his eye
first In one direction and then in the other, so as to take a
complete survey of friends and foes ; when Xenophon the
Athenian, seeing him, rode up from the Hellenic quarter to
meet him, asking whether he had any orders to give. Cyrus,
pulling up his horse, begged him to make the announcement
generally known that the omens from the victims, internal and
external alike, were good.^ While he was still speaking, he heard

' I-it. "that the ttpd were good, and the cr^fiyia were good." /.<?. the
omens rrom inspecting; the inwards of the victims, aiid the omens from the acts
and movements of the victims. See Goodwin and White, ad loc. ; also Sturz.
Lex, Xtn, iub verbo, rk itpd.



M



Sept, 3



THE BATTLE OF CUNAXA



99



a confused murmur passing through the ranks, and asked what
it meant. The other replied that it was the watchword being
passed down for the second time. Cyrus wondered who had
given the order, and asked what the watchword was. On being
told it was "Zeus our Saviour and Victory/' he rephed, "I
accept it : so let it be," and with that remark rode away to
his own position. And now the two battle lines were no more
than three or four furlongs apart, when the Hellenes began
chanting the paean^ and at the same time advanced against
the enemy.

But with the forward movement a certain portion of the hne
curved onwards in advance, with wave-like sinuosity,^ and the
portion left behind quickened to a run ; and simultaneously a
thrilling cry burst from all lips, like that in honour of the war-
god— eleleu ! eleleu J and the running became general. Some
say they clashed thek shields and spears, thereby causing
terror to the horses ;^iAa b^foi-e they had got within arrowshot
the barbarians swerifed and took to flight. And now the Hel-
lenes gave chas^^with might and tnain, checked only by shouts
to one another not to race, but to keep their ranks. The
enemy's chariots, reft of their charioteers, swept onwards, some
through the enemy themselves, others past the Hellenes.
They, as they saw them coming, opened a gap and let them
pass. One fellow, like some durabfoundered mortal on a race-
course, was caught by the heels,^ but even he, they said,
received no hurt ; nor indeed, with the single exception of
some one on the left wing who w as said to^have been wounde d
by an arrow, did any Heltene in this battle suffer a single
hurt.

Cyrus, seeing the Hellenes conquering, as far as they at
any rate were concerned, and in hot pursuit, was well content ;
but in spite of his joy and the salutations offered him at that



^ Or, "billowed out." See Goldsmith, Essay xvi. , on " Metaphor," who
translates the word i^acifiaive, ' ' part of the phsdajnx Jiuctuated on tiio march. "

* Some critics regard this sentence as aji editor's or commcniaior's note.
Cobet omits it. Hug encloses the wonj,s in brackets. See also Mure's //ts/.
<f Gr. Lit. vol. V. p. 368 ; History of CUuical Qk, /M. {Mahaffy), vol. ii, x.
263. I St ed, 1880.

' Or. " one Tellow, indeed, was caught, while he gazed about him in blank
astonishment, as if he had been on a racecourse."



30



ANABASIS BKL T.



(



CM. vin. I ai-a7



moment by those about him» as though he were already king,
he was not led away to join in the pursuit, but keeping his
squadron of six hundred horsemen in close order, waited and
watched to see what the king himself would do._ The king,
he knew, held the centre of the Persian army. Indeed it is
the fashion for the Asiatic monarch to occupy that position
during action, for this twofold reason : he holds the safest
place, with his troops on either side of him; while, if he
has occasion to despatch any necessary order along the linesj
his troops will receive the message in half the time. The king
accordingly on this occasion held the centre of his army, but
for all that, he was outside C>tus's left wing ; and seeing that
no one offered him battle in. front, nor yet the troops in front
of him, he wheeled as if to encircle the enemy. It was then
that Cyrus, in apprehension lest the king might get round to the
rear and cut to pieces the Hellenic body, charged to meet him.
Attacking with his six hundred, he mastered the line of troops
in front of the king, and put to flight the sLx thousand, cutting
down, as is said, with his own hand their general, Artagerses.

But as soon as the rout commenced, Cyrus's own six hundred
themselves, in the ardour of pursuit, were scattered, with the ex-
ception of a handful who were left with Cyrus himself — chiefly
his table companions, so-called. Left alone with these, he
caught sight of the king and the close throng about him.
Unable longer to contain himself, with a cr)> " I see the man/'
he rushed at him and dealt a blow at his chest, wounding
him through the corselet This, according to the statement of
Ctesias the surgeon,^ who further states that he himself healed
th^ wound. As Cyms delivered the blow, some one struck him
with a javehn under the eye severely; and in the struggle
which then ensued between the king and Cyrus and those
about them to protect one or other, we have the statement of

* " Ctesias, the son of Ctesiochus. was a physician of Cnidos. Seventeen
years of his life were passed at the court of Persia, fourteen in the senice of
Darius, three in that of Artaxentes : be returned to Greece in 398 B,c. . " and
"was employed by .Artaxerxes in diplomatic services." See Mure, of. cit,
iv. xn. § 3 ; also Ch. Miiller. ap. Didot, for his life and works. He wrote (1)
a history of Persian afi^rs in three parts — AssjTian, Median, Persjan^ttith a
chapter ■"On Tributes ;" (a) a history of Indian af&irs (written in the \-ein of
Sir John MaundevQe. Kl. | ; {3) a Periplus ; U> a treatise on Mountains ; (5)
a treatise on Rivers.



CH. Vin. |a7-CH.lf
IX. is: Sept. 3 J



CYRUS IS SLAIN



Ctesias as to the number slain on the king^s side, for he was
by his side. On the other, Cyrus himself fell, and eight of his
bravest companions lay on ihe top of him. The story says
that Artapates, the trustiest esquire among his wand-bearers^
when he saw that Cyrus had fallen to the ground, leapt from
his horse and threw his arms about him. Then, as one
account says, the king bade one slay him as a worthy victim
to his brother : others say that Artapates drew his scimitar and
slew hini%Blf43'jLJiis.ji^nhand. A golden scimitar, it is true, he
ha4^ he wore also a coI^T'^md.^^celets and the other orna-
menS such as the noblest Persiait&M^r ; for his kindliness
andfidelity had won him honours at the't^nds of Cyrus.

^T^^So died Cyrus ; a man the kingliestSand most worthy
to rule of all the Persians who have lived since the elder
Cyrus : according to the concurrent testimony of all who are
reputed to have known him intimately. To begin from the
begiiining, when still a boy^ and whilst being brought up with
his bother and the other lads, his unrivalled excellence was
recogni^d. For the sons of the noblest Persians, it must be
known, arte brought up, one and all, at the king's portals. Here
lessons of sbbriety and self-control^ may largely be laid to heart,
while there \ nothing base or ugly for eye or ear to feed upon.
There is the daily spectacle ever before the boys of some
receiving honour from the king, and again of others receiving
dishonour; and the tale of all this is in their ears, so that from
earliest boyhood they learn how to rule and to be ruled.

In this courtly training Cyrus earned a double reputation ;
first he was held to be a paragon of modesty among his fel-
lows^ rendering an obedience to his elders which exceeded that
of many of his own '"ferjy^ ; and next he bore away the palm
_ for skill in horsem anship and for love of the animal itself. Nor
less in matters of war, in the use of the bow and the javelin,

^ CI Xen. OeMn. iv. r6. The character now to be drawn is afterwards
elaborated into tbc Cyrus of the Cyropaedeia,

* Cf. Cyrop. L ii, 8, The Persian boys are taught <rw^/j<w!JMf. See Prof.
Jowett's Introd. to the Ckarmidts of Plato. " The subject of the Charmides
is temperance, or iru^/KwiJi'r?. a peculiarly Greek notion, which may also be
rendered moderation, modesty, discretion, wisdom, without completely ex-
hausting by all these tenns^the various associations of the word." And cf.
Xen. Mem. III. ix. 4; also J. S. Mill,. Dissertations and Discussions, vol. iiL
3=8.



^ABASIS — BK. I.



/CH. JX. ( 5.13
I B.C. 401



was he held by men in general to be at once the aptest of
learners and the mo^fcager practise r. As soon as his age per-
mitted, the same p^^minence showed itself in his fondness
for the chase, not without a certain appetite for perilous
adventure in facing the wild beasts themselves. Once a bear
made a furious rush at him,^ and without wincing he grappled
with her, and was pulled from his horse, receiving wounds the
scars of which were visible through life; but in the end he
slew the creature, nor did he forget him who first came to his
aid, but made him enviable in the eyes of many.

After he had been sent down by his father to be satrap of
Lydia and Great Phrygia and Cappadocia, and had been
appointed general of the forces, whose business it is to muster
in the plain of the Castolus,[npthing was more noticeable in
his conduct than the importance which he attached to the
fait hful fulfilment of every treaty or compact or undertaking
"entered into with othersj He would tell no lies to any
one. Thus doubtless it was that he won the confidence
alike of individuals and of the communities entrusted to his
care ; or in case of hostility, a treaty made with Cyrus was a
guarantee suffjjent to the combatant that he would suffer
nothing contrary to its terms. VXt^refore, in the war with
Tissaph ernes, all the states of their own accgrd chose Cyrus
in lieu of Tissaphernes, except only the men of Miletus, and
these were only alienated through fear of him, because he
refused to abandon their exiled citizens ; and his deeds and
words bore emphatic witness to his principle : even if they
were weakened in number or in fortune, he would never aban-
don those who had once become his friends.

He made no secret of his endeavour to outdo his friends
and his foes alike in reciprocity of conduct. The prayer has
been a^tllbuted-to him, " God grant I may live long enough to
recompense my friends and requite my foes with a strong arm."
However this may be, no one, at least in our days> ever drew
together so ardent a following of friends, eager to lay at his y ^
feet their money, their cities, their own lives and persons ><r
nor is it to be inferred from this that he suffered the male fact



1 Cf. Cyrop. I. iv. 8.
A boar.



The elder Cyrus, when a boy. kills not a bear but



CH. IX

lie. 401



•i •3-19 I



CHARACTER OF CYRUS



and th e. wrongdoer to Jau^h^him to scorn; on the contrary,
these he punished most unflinchingly. It was no rare sight
to see on the well-trodden highways, men who had forfeited
Jaaod or foot or eve l the result being that thraugbuiLL the
^sflt,i-ppy_nf Cvrus any one, H ellene or barba rian, provided he
were innocetilt^ might fearlessly travel^wherever he pleased, and
~"4aEe with him whatever he felt disposed. However, as all
allowed^ jt was for the brav e in war tha t^he reserve d esp ecial

honour. To take the iirsT instance to hand, he had a war

wuh the Pisidians and Mysians. Being himself at the head
of an expedition into those territories, he couJd observe those
jdlOJOIuotariJi^ ttnmujltered risks ; these he made rulers of
^m the territory which he subjected, and afterwards honoured them
^f with other gifts. So that, if the good and brave were set on
F a pinnacle of fortune, cowards were recognised as their natural
^^ slaves ; and so it befel that Cyrus never had lack of volunteers
^ft in any service of danger, whenever it was expected that his
^B eye would be upon them. ^

^M So again, wherever he might discover any one ready to
^^ distinguisli himself in the service of uprightness,^ his delight
I was to make this man ticher-thajuthose who seek Tor gain by
jiiliair^TiTeans. On the same princTpIeTliis own admlnlsiradon
was in all respects uprightly conductedj and, in particular, he
secured the services of an army worthy of the name. Generals,
and subalterns alike, came to him from across the seas, not
merely to make money, but hecauLse thgy^awjthaijpyglty \n
Cyrus was a morewofitable investment than so many pounds
a month. Let any man whatsoever render him willing ser-
vice, such enthusiasm was sur e to win its rewar d. And so
Cyrus could always commandlhe service of the best assistants,
it was said, whatever the work might be.

Or if he saw any skilful and just steward who furnished
well the countr}^ over which he ruled, and created revenues,
so far from robbing him at any time, to him who had, he
delighted to give more. So that toil was a pleasure, and
;ains were amassed with confidence, and least of all from
Cyrus would a man conceal the amount of his possessions,

' Thti Greek word is 5t*;atO(ru»'7j= justice or social uprightness (in N. T.
"righteousness,") Cf, Xeti. tl/em, IV. vi. £. 6.

D



W


34



ANABASIS — ^BK. I.



(CH, IX. § 19-27
B.C. 401



seeing that he showed no jealousy of wealth openly avowed,
but his endeavour was rather to turn to account the riches of
those who kept them secret. Towards the friends he had
made, whose kindliness he knew, or whose fitness as fellow-
workers with himself, in aught which he might wish to carry
out, he had tested, he showed himself in turn an adept in
the arts of courtesy. Just in proportion as he felt the need
of this friend or that to help him, so he tried to help each
of them in return in whatever seemed to be their heart's desire.
Many were the gifts bestowed on him, for many and
diverse reasons ; no one man, perhaps, ever received more ; no
one, certainly, was ever more ready to bestow thera on others,
with an eye ever to the taste of each, so as to gratify what he
saw to be the individual requirement. Many of these presents
were sent to him to serve as personal adornments of the body
or for battle ; and as touching these he would say, *' How am
I to deck myself out in all these ? to my mind a man's chief
ornament is the adornment of nobly-adorned friends." Indeed,
that he should trimnph over his friends in the great matters
of welldoing is not surprising, seeing that he was much more
powerful than they, but that he should go beyond them in
minute attentions, and in an eager desire to give pleasure,
seems to me, I must confess, more admirable. Frequently
when he had tasted some specially excellent wine, he would send
the half remaining flagon to some friend with a message to
say ; " Cyrus says, this is the best wine he has tasted for a long
time, that is his excuse for sending it to you. He hopes you
will drink it up to-day with a choice party of friends." Or,
perhaps, he would send the remainder of a dish of geese,
half loaves of bread, and so forth, the bearer being instructed
to say : " This is Cyrus's favourite dish, he hopes you will
taste it yourself"^ Or, perhaps, there was a great dearth of pro-
vender, when, through the number of his servants and his own
careful forethought, he was enabled to get supplies for himself;
at such times he would send to his friends in different parts,
bidding them feed their horses on his hay, since it would
not do for the horses that carried his friends to go starving.^

^ Of, " Cyrus finds this viand excellent, he hopes."
- Or, ' ' to be mere skeletons. "



1



CH . IX. I s8-CH. 1

I3; S«;pt. 3 J"



PLUNDER OF CYRUS'S CAMP



3S



hen, on any long march or expedition, where the crowd of
lookers-on would be large, he would call his friends to him and
entertain them with serious talk, as much as to say, "These
1 delight to honour."

So that, for myself^ and from all that I can hear, I should be
disposed to say that no one, Greek or barbarian, was ever so
beloved. In proof of this, I may cite the fact that, though
Cyrus was the king's vassal and slave, no one ever forsook him
to join his master, if I may except the attempt of Orontas,
which was abortive, l^hat man, indeed, had to learn that
Cyrus was closer to the heart of him on whose fidelity he
relied than he himself was. On the other hand, many a
man revolted from the king to Cyrus, after they went to
war with one another; nor were these nobodies, but rather
persons high in the king's affection; yet for all that, they
beheved that their virtues would obtain a reward more ade-
quate from Cyrus than from the king. Another great proof
at once of his own worth and of his capacity rightly to dis-
cern all loyal, loving, and iirm friendship is afforded by an
incident which belongs to the last moment of his life. He
was slain, but fighting for his life beside him fell also every
one of his faithful bodyguard of friends and table-companions,
with the sole exception of Ariaeus,^ who was in command of
the cavalry on the left, and he no sooner perceived the fall of
Cyrus than he betook himself to flightj with the whole body
of troops under his lead,

X. — Then the head of Cyrus and his right hand were
severed from the body. But the king and those about him
pursued and fell upon the Cyreian carap, and the troops of
Ariaeus no longer stood their ground, but fled through their
own camp back to the halting-place of the night before — a
distance of four parasangs, it was said. So the king and those
with him fell to ravaging right and left, and amongst other
spoil he captured the Phocaean woman, who was a concubine
of Cyrus, witty and beautiful, if fame speaks correctly. The
Milesian, who was the younger, was also seized by some of
the king's men j but, letting go her outer garmegL she made
good her escape to the Hellenes, who hacT been left among

' Cf. Xen. Oeccn. \v, 19.



36



ANABASIS— BK. I.



H. X. i 3-8

[ Sept. J, K.c. 401



the camp followers on guard These fell at once into line
and put to the sword many of the pillagers, though they lost
some men themselves ; they stuck to the place and succeeded
in saving not only that lady, but all else, whether chattels or
human beings, which lay within their reach.

At this point the king and the Hellenes were something
like three miles ^ apart ; the one set were pursuing their
opponents just as if their conquest had been general; the
others were pillaging as merrily as if their victory were already
universal. But when the Hellenes learnt that the king
and his troops were in the baggage camp ; and the king, on
his side, was informed by Tissaphernes that the Hellenes
were victorious in their quarter of the field, and had gone
forward in pursuit, the effect was instantaneous. The king
massed his troops and formed into line. Clearchus summoned
Proxenus, who was next him, and debated whether to send
a detachment or to go in a body to the camp to save it.

Meanwhile the king was seen again advancing, as it
seemed, from the rear ; and the Hellenes, turning right about,
prepared to receive his attack then and there. But, in-
stead of advancing upon them at that point, he drew off,
following the line by which he had passed earlier in the
day, outside the left wing of his opponent, and so picked up
in his passage those who had deserted to the Hellenes during
the battle,'^ as also Tissaphernes and his divisioa The latter
had not fled in the first shock of the encounter ; he had
charged parallel to the line of the Euphrates into the Greek
peltasts, and through them. But charge as he might, he did
not lay low a single man. On the contrary, the Hellenes made
a gap to let them through, hacking them with their swords and
hurling their javelins as they passed Episthenes of Amphipolis
was in command of the peltasts, and he showed himself a
sensible man, it was said. Thus it was that Tissaphernes,
having got through haphazard, with rather the worst of it,
failed to wheel round and return the way he came, but reaching



1 Lit, " about thirty stades " ; the " stade " ^ 606 ft. 9 in. ; the furlong =?
660 ft. ; about B^ slades = i mile.

* Or Jit. "those opposite lo the Hellenes who had deserted during the
battle. "



ft



the camp of the Hellenes, there fell in with the king; and falling
into order again, the two divisions advanced side by side.

When they were parallel with* the (original) left wing of
:he HelleneSj fear seized the latter lest they might take
them in flank and enfold them on both sides and cut
them down. In this apprehension they determined to ex-
tend their line and place the river on their rear. But while
they deliberated, the king passed by and ranged his troops
in line to meet them, in exactly the same position in which
he had advanced to offer battle at the commencement of
the engagement. The Hellenes, now seeing them in close
pTOxtmity and in battle order, once again raised the paean and
began the attack with still greater enthusiasm than before :
and once again the barbarians did not wait to receive them,
but took to flight, even at a greater distance than before,
he Hellenes pressed the pursuit until they reached a certain
village, where they halted, for above the village rose a mound,
on which the king and his party rallied and reformed ; they
had no infantry any longer, but the crest was crowded with
cavalry, so that it was impossible to discover what was happen-
ing. They did see, they said, the royal standard, a kind of
golden eagle, with wings extended, perched on a bar of wood
and raised upon a lance.^

But as soon as the Hellenes again moved onwards, the
hostile cavalry at once left the hillock — not in a body any
longer, but in fragments — some streaming from one side, some
from another ; and the crest was gradually stripped of its
occupants, till at last the company was gone. Accordingly,
Clearchus did not ascend the crest, but posting his army
at its base, he sent Lycius of Syracuse and another to the
summit, with orders to inspect the condition of things
on the other side, and to report results. Lycius galloped
up and reconnoitred, bringing back news that they were
fleeing might and main. Almost at that instant the sun

I ^ Lit " ill a tine with, " or " opposite. "

' ' Or, " with sprtad wings perched on iVie cusp of a lance." So Suidas

and Hesychius inlerprel ttAttj. Mr. Pretor iranslales " a. goldcAeagle upon

a shield (resting), with outstretched wings upon a staff." Some critics, r.£^.

Zobet and Hug, regard iliu words ItI fiJXoi/ (perched) *' on a bar of wood," as

flpurious.



3«



ANABASIS— BK. I.



CH. X. 5 i5-»9

I Sept. 3, H.C. 401



sank beneath the horizon. There the Hellenes halted ; they
ordered arms and rested, marvelling the while that Cyrus was
not anywhere to be seen, and that no messenger had come
from him. For they were in complete ignorance of his death,
and conjectured that either he had gone off in pursuit, or had
pushed foward to occupy some point. Left to themselves,
they now deliberated, whether they should stay where they
were and have the baggage train brought up, or should return
to camp. They resolved to return, and about supper time
reached the tents. Such was the conclusion of this day.

They found the larger portion of their property pillaged,
eatables and drinkables alike, not excepting the wagons laden
with corn and wine, which Cyrus had prepared in case of
some extreme need overtaking the expedition, to divide among
the Hellenes. There were four hundred of these wagons, it
was said, and these had now been ransacked by the king and
his men } so that the greater number of the Hellenes went
supperles.s, having already gone without their breakfasts, since
the king had appeared before the usual halt for breakfast
Accordingly, in no better plight than this they passed the
night



f



BOOK IL I. 1-4.



k


[In the previous book will be found a full account of the method by
which Cyrus collected a body of Greeks when meditating an exi^edition
against his brother .'Vrtaxerxes ; as also of various occurrences on the march
up ; of the battle itself, and of the death of Cyrus ; and lastly, a description
of the arrival of the Hellenes in camp after the battle, and as to how they
betook themselves to rest, none suspecting but what they were altogether
victorious and that Cyrus lived.]

I. — With the break of day the generals inetj and were
surprised that Cyrus should not have appeared himself, or at
any rate have sent some one to tell them what to do. Accord-
ingly, they resolved to put what they had together, to get under
arms, and to push forward until theyeffected junction with Cyrus.
Just as they were on the point of starting, with the rising sun
came Procles the ruler of Teuthrania. He was a descendant
of Damaratus' the Lacontan, and with him also came Glus the
son of Tamos. These two told them, first, that Cyrus was
dead ; next, that Ariaeus had retreated with the rest of the
barbarians to the halting-place whence they had started at dawn
on the previous day ; and wished to inform them that, if they
were minded to come, he would wait for this one day, but on
the morrow he should return home again to Ionia, whence he
came.

When they heard these tidings, the generals were sorely

' The Spartan king who was deposed in B,c, 491, whereupon hefied to King
Dariuse and settled in south-western Mysia, See Ilerod. vi. 50, 61-70, We
shall hear more of his descendant, Procles, the ruler of Teuthrania. in the last
chapter of this work, see below, p. 339 ; also Neil. 111. i. 6. For Glus see
above, p. 17 ; and for Tamos, p. 13.


distressed ; so too were the rest of the Hellenes when they
were informed of it. Then Clearchus spoke as follows :
'* Would that Cyrus were yet alive ! But since he is dead,
take back this answer to Ariaeus, that we, at any rate, have
conquered the king; and, as you yourselves may see, there
is not a man left in the field to meet us. Indeed, had you
not arrived, we should ere this have begun our march
upon the king. Now, we can promise to Ariaeus that, if he
will join us here, we will place him on the king's throne.
Surely to those who conquer empire pertains." With these
words he sent back the messengers, and with them he sent
Cheirisophus the Laconian, and Menon the Thessalian. That
was what Menon himself wished, being, as he was, a friend
and intimate of Ariaeus, and bound by mutual ties of hospitality.
So these set off, and Clearchus wailed for them.

The soldiers furnished themselves with food [and drink]
as best they might— falling back on the baggage animals, and
cutting up oxen and asses. There was no lack of firewood ;
they need only step forward a few paces from the line where
the battle was fought, and they would find arrows to hand in
abundance, which the Hellenes had forced the deserters
from the king to throw away. There were arrows and
wicker shields also, and the huge wooden shields of the
Egyptians. There were many targets also, and empty wagons
left to be carried off. Here was a store which they were not
slow to make use of to cook their meat and serve their meals
that day.

It was now about full market hour'' when heralds from the
king and Tissaphernes arrived. These were barbarians with one
exception. This was a certain Phalinus, a Hellene who lived at
the court of Tissaphernes, and was held in high esteem. He gave
himself out to be a connoisseur of tactics and the art of fighting
with heavy arms. These were the men who now came up, and
having summoned the generals of the Hellenes, they delivered
themselves of the following message ; "The great king having
won the victory and slain Cyrus, hids the Hellenes to sur-
render their arms ; to betake themselves to the gates of the
king's palace, and there obtain for themselves what terms they

^ lo A.M. See above, p. 26, note 2.


ept4 f



HERALDS FRO^r THE KING



41



can." That was what the heralds said, and the Hellenes
listened with heavy hearts; but Clearchus spoke, and his words
were few : " Conquerors do not, as a rule, give up their
arms " ; then turning to the others he added, ** I leave it
to you, my fellow- generals, to make the best and noblest
answer, that ye may,* to these gentlemen. 1 will rejoin you
presently." At the moment an official had summoned him
to come and look at the entrails which had been taken out, for,
as it chanced, he was engaged in sacrificing. As soon as he
was gone, Cleanor the Arcadian, by right of seniority, answered r
" They would sooner die than give up their arms." Then Prox-
enus the Theban said: "For my part, I marv'el if the king
demands our arms as our master, or for the sake of friendship
merely, as presents. If as our master, why need he ask for
them rather than come and take them? But if he would fain
wheedle us out of them by fine speeches, he should tell us what
the soldiers will receive in return for such kindness.'' In answer
to him Phalinus said: "The king claims to have conquered,
because he has put Cyrus to death ; and who is there now to
claim the kingdom as against himself? He further flatters him-
self that you also are in his power, since he holds you in the
heart of his country, hemmed in by impassable rivers ; and he
can at any moment bring against you a multitude so vast that
even if leave were given to rise and slay you could not kill them.'*
After him Theopompus - the Athenian spoke. " Phalinus," he
said, '*at this instant, as you yourself can see, we have nothing
left but our arms and our valour. If we keep the former we
imagine we can make use of the latter ; but if we deliver up
our arms \ve shall presently be robbed of our lives. Do not
suppose then that we are going to give up to you the only
good things which we possess. We prefer to keep them ; and
by their help we will do battle with you for the good things
which are yours.'* Phalinus laughed when he heard those

^ Or. " such fair answer as shall accorrl wiih your nobility."
* So the besl MSS. Others read '* Xenophon," which Kriigcr itinimatns
to be Ihe true reading. He suggests that 'I'keopomfus may have crept into the
text from a marginal note of a scholiast, " Theopompus" (the historian) *' gives
the remark fo Pn^xertus." See iJacori, Advancemefti of Ixarning^ I. \\\. 30.
See Charles D. Morris " On the Age of Xenophon at the time of the Anabasis,"
in the Tramactions of ihe Atturican Philological Aisociation^ ^874, No, VII.



42



ANABASIS — BK. IT.



/ CH. I. I i3-ao
\Sept. 4, B.C. 40t



words, and said : '* Spoken like a philosopher, my fine young
man, and very pretty reasoning too ; yet, let mc tell you, your
wits are somewhat scattered if you imagine that your valour will
get the better of the king's power." There were one or two
others, it was said, who with a touch of weakness in their tone
or argument, made answer : " They had proved good and trusty
friends to Cyrus, and the king might find them no less valu-
able. If he liked to be friends with them, he might turn them
to any use that pleased his fancy, say for a campaign against
Egypt Their arms were at his service; they would help to
lay that country at his feet."

Just then Clearchus retunied^ and wished to know what
answer they had given. The words were barely out of his
mouth before Phahnus interrupting, answered : " As for your
friends here, one says one thing and one another ; wil! you
please give us your opinion " ; and he replied : *' The sight of
you, Phalinus, caused me much pleasure ; and not only me, but
all of us, I feel sure; for you are a Hellene even as we are —
every one of us whom you see before you. In our present
plight we would like to take you into our counsel as to what
we had better do touching your proposals. I beg you then
solemnly, in the sight of heaven, — do you tender us such
advice as you shall deem best and worthiest, and such as shall
bring you honour in after time, when it will be said of you
how once on a time Phalinus was sent by the great king to
bid certain Hellenes yield up their arms, and when they had
taken him into their counsel, he gave them such and such
advice. You know that whatever advice you do give us cannot
fail to be reported in Hellas."

^ Clearchus threw out these leading remarks in hopes that
this man, %vho was the ambassador from the king, might him-
self be led to advise them not to give up iheir arms, in which
case the Hellenes would be still more sanguine and hopeful
But, contrary to his expectation, Phalinus turned round and
said : " I say that if you have one chance, one hope in ten
thousand to wage a war with the king successfully, do not give
up your arms. That is my advice. If, however, you have no
chance of escape without the king's consent, then 1 say sa\e
yourselves in the only way you can.'* And Clearchus answered :



Ctt. T. S 20-CH, II. 1

« 3 ; Sept. 4 /



DEBATE WITH PHALINUS



43



N



" So, then, that is your deliberate view ? \Vell, this is our
answer, take it back. We conceive that in either case, whether
we are expected to be friends with the king, we shall be worth
more as friends if we keep our arms than if we yield them to
another ; or whether we are to go to war, we shall fight better
with them than without" And Phalinus said: "That answer
we will repeat ; but the king bade me tell you this besides,
' Whilst you remain here there is truce ; but one step forward
or one step back, the truce ends; there is war.' Will you
then please inform us as to that point also ? Are you minded
to stop and keep truce, or is there to be war ? What answer
shall I take from you?" And CIcarchus replied: "Pray
answer that we hold precisely the same views on this point as
the king." — •* How say you the same views? " asked Phalinus.
Clearchus made answ^er : '* As long as we stay here there is
truce, but a step fonvard or a step backward, the truce ends ;
there is war." The other again asked : " Peace or war, what
answer shall 1 make ? " Clearchus returned answer once again
in the same words: "Truce if we stop, but if we move forwards
or backwards war." But what he was minj
that he refused to make further manifest.

ti.-^PhahnuH and those that were witli'h'ini turned and
went. But the messengers from Ariaeus, Procles, and Cheiri-
sophus came back. As to Menon, he stayed behind with
Ariaeus, They brought back this answer from Ariacus : " ^ There
are many Persians,' he says, 'better than himself who will
not suffer him to sit upon the king's throne; but if you are
minded to go back with him, you must join him this very night,
otherwise he will set off himself tomorrow on the homeward
route.'" And Clearchus said: " It had best stand thus between
us then. If we come, well and good, be it as you propose ; but
if we do not come, do whatsoever you think most conducive
to your interests." And so he kept these also in the dark as
to his real intention.

After this, when the sun was already sinking, he summoned
the generals and officers, and made the following statement :
"Sirs, I sacrificed and found the victims unfavourable to an
advance against the king. After all, it is not so suri)rising
perhaps, for, as 1 now learn, between us and the king flows



f»i



: li we move forwards V

ninded realh' to, do, / M



44



ANABASIS — BK. U.



r cH, n. 8 3-to
I, Sept. 4-5, a.c. 410



the river Tigris, navigable for big vessels, and we could not
]iossibly cross it without boats, and boats we have none. On
the other hand, to stop here is out of the question, for there is
no possibihty of getting provisions. However, the victims
were quite agreeable to our joining the friends of Cyrus. This
is what we must do then. Let each go away and sup on
whatever he has. At the first sound of the bugle to turn in,
get kit and baggage together ; at the second signal, place them
on the baggage animals ; and at the third, fall in and follow
the lead, with the baggage animals on the inside protected by
the river, and the troops outside." After hearing the orders,
the generals and officers retired and did as they were bid ;
and for the future Clearchus led, and the rest followed in
obedience to his orders, not that they had expressly chosen
him, but they saw that he alone had the sense and wisdom
requisite in a general, while thf rest were inexperienced.^

Here, under cover of the darkness which descended, the
Thracian Miltocythes, with forty horsemen and three hundred
Thracian infantr)', deserted to the king ; but the rest of the
troops — Clearchus leading and the rest following in accordance
with the orders promulgated — took their departure, and about
midnight reached their fir.st stage, having come up with Ariaeus
and his army. They grounded arms just as they stood in
rank, and the generals and officers of the Hellenes met in
the tent of Ariaeus. There they exchanged oaths — the Hellenes
on the one side and Ariaeus with his principal officers on the
other — not to betray one another, but to be true to each other
as allies. The Asiatics further solemnly pledged themselves
by oath to lead the way without treachery. The oaths were
ratified by the sacrifice of a bull, a wolf,- a boar, and a ram
over a shield. The Hellenes dipped a sword, the barbarians
a lance, into the blood of the victims.

As soon as the pledge was taken, Clearchus spoke : " And
now, Ariaeus," he said, " since you and we have one expedition

^ The MSS. add the words, "The lotal distance of the route, taking
Ephesu^ in Ionia as the starting point up to the field of battle, consisted of 93
stJigcS 535 parasaxigs, or 16,050 furlongs ; from ihc batlle-fidd to Babylon
(reckoned a three days* journey) would h-i^-e been another 360 stadcs," which
nmy well be an editor's cm- comnienUtor's marginal note.

" »» b a question wb«thef the words " a wolf" ought not to be omitted.



CH. n. I 10-16 \
Sept. 5 /



JUNCTION WITH ArUAErs



45



in prospect, will you tell us what you think about the route ;
shall we return the way we came, or have you devised a
better?" He answered : " To return the same way is to perish
to a man by hunger; for at this moment we have no pro-
visions whatsoever. During the seventeen last stages, even on
our way hither, we could extract nothing from the country ; or,
if there was now and again anything, we passed over and utterly
consumed it. At this time our project is to take another and
a longer journey certainly, but we shall not be in straits for
provisions. I'he earliest stages must be very long, as long as
we can make them ; the object is to put as large a space as pos-
sible between us and the royal armyj once we are two or
three days' journey off, the danger is over. The king will
never overtake us. With a small army he will not dare to dog
our heels, and with a vast equipment he will lack the power
to march quickly. Perhaps he, too, may even find a scarcity
of provisions. There," said he, " you asked for my opinion,
see, I have given it."

Here was a plan of the campaign, which was equivalent to
a stampede : helter-skelter they were to run away, or get into
hiding somehow ; but fortune proved a better general. For
as soon as it was day they recommenced the journey, keeping
the sun on their rights and calculating that with the westering
rays they would have reached villages in the territory of
Babylonia, and in this hope they were not deceived. While
it was yet afternoon, they thought they caught sight of some
of the enemy's cavalry; and those of the Hellenes who
were not in rank ran to their ranks ; and Ariaeus, who was
riding in a wagon to nurse a wound, got down and donned his
cuirass, the rest of his party following his example. Whilst
they were arming themselves, the scouts, who had been sent
forward, came back with the information that they were not
cavalry but baggage animals grazing. It was at once clear to
all that they must be somewhere in the neighbourhood of the
king's encampment. Smoke could actually be seen rising,
evidently from villages not far ahead. Clearchus hesitated
to advance upon the enemy, knowing that the troops were tired
and hungry ; and indeed it was already late. On the other
hand he had no mind either to swerve from his route — ^guard-



4fi



ANABASIS — BK. II.



{cH. II. % 16-CH. ni. f 3
Sept. 6, B.C. 401



ing against any appearance of flight. Accordingly he marched
straight as an arrow, and with sunset entered the nearest
villages with his vanguard and took up quarters.

These villages had been thoroughly sacked and dismantled
by the royal army^ — down to the very woodwork and furniture
of the houses. StiiL, the vanguard contrived to take up their
quarters in some sort of fashion ; but the rear division, coming
up in the dark, had to bivouac as best they could, one detach-
ment after another ; and a great noise they made, with hue
and cry to one another, so that the enemy could hear them ;
and those in their immediate proximity actually took to their
heels, left their quarters, and decamped, as was plain enough
next morning, when not a beast was to be seen, nor sign of
camp or wreath of smoke anywhere in the neighbourhood.
The king, as it would appear, was himself quite taken aback
by the advent of the army ; as he fully showed by his pro-
ceedings next day.

During the progress of this night the Hellenes had their
turn of scare, — a panic seized them, and there was a noise and
clatter, hardly to be explained except by the visitation of some
suddt^n terror. But Clearchus had with him the EleianTolmides,
the best herald of his time; him he ordered to proclaim
silence, and then to give out this proclamation of the generals :
** Whoever will give any information as to who let an ass into
the camp shall receive a talent of silver in reward." On
hearing this proclamation the soldiers made up their minds
that their fear was baseless, and their generals safe and sound.
At break of day Clearchus gave the order to the Hellenes
to get under arms in line of battle, and take up exactly the
same position as they held on the day of the battle.

iiL— And now comes the proof of what I stated above^
that the king was utterly taken aback by the sudden apparition
of the army ; only the day before, he had sent and demanded
the surrender of their arms — and now, with the rising sun,
came heralds sent by him to arrange a truce. These, having
reached the advanced guard, asked for the generals, The
guard reported their arrival; and Clearchus, who was busy in-
specting the ranks, sent back word to the heralds that they must
await his leisure. Having carefully arranged the troops so



Cit. III. § 3-IO I
S«pt. 6 /



THE PERSIANS PROPOSE A TRUCE



47



that from evei7 side they might present the appearance of a
compact battle line without a single unarmed man in sight,
he summoned the ambassadors, and himself went forward to
meet them with the soldiers, who for choice accoutrement
and noble aspect were the flower of his force ; a course which
he had invited the other generals also to adopt.

And now, being face to face with the ambassadors, he
questioned them as to what their wishes were. They replied
that they had come to arrange a truce, and were persons
competent to carry proposals from the king to the Hellenes
and from the Hellenes to the king. He returned answer to
thera : *' Take back word then to your master, that we need
a battle first, for we have had no breakfast ; and he will be
a brave man who will dare mention the word ^ truce ' to
Hellenes without providing them with breakfast." With this
message the heralds rode off, but were back again in no
time, which was a proof that the king, or some one appointed
by him to transact the business, was hard by. They reported
that " the message seemed reasonable to the king ; they had
now come bringing guides who, if a truce were arranged, would
conduct them where they would get provisions." Clearchus
inquired " whether the tmce was offered to the individual
men merely as they went and came, or to all alike." "To all,"
they replied, "until the king receives your final answer,"
When they had so spoken, Clearchus, having removed the
ambassadors, held a council ; and it was resolved to make a
truce at once, and then quietly to go and secure provisions ;
and Clearchus said : " I agree to the resolution ; still 1 do
not propose to announce it at once, but to wile away time till
the ambassadors begin to fear that we have decided against
the truce; though I suspect, '^ he added, "the same fear will
be operative on the minds of our soldiers also." As soon as
the right moment seemed to have arrived, he delivered hts
answer in favour of the truce, and bade the ambassadors at
once conduct them to the provisions.

So these led the way; and Clearchus, without relaxing
precaution, in spite of having secured a truce, marched after
them with his army in line and himself in command of the
rearguard. Over and over again they encountered trenches



48



ANABASIS — BK. 11.



{CH. III. 9 10-16
Sept. 6, 11.C. 401



and conduits so full of water that they could not be crossed
without bridges ; but they contrned well enough for these by
means of trunks of palm trees which had fallen, or which thev
cut down for the occasion. And here Clearchus's system of
superintendence was a study in itself; as he stood with a spear
in his left hand and a stick in the other ; and when it seemed
to him there was any da wdHng among the parties told off to the
work, he would pick out the right man and down would come the
stick ; nor, at the same time, was he above plunging into the
mud and lending a hand himself^ so that every one else was
forced for very shame to display equa! alacrity. The men told
off for the business were the men of thirty years of age ; but
even the elder men, when they saw the energy of Clearchus,
could not resist lending their aid also. What stimulated the
haste of Clearchus was the suspicion in his mind that these
trenches were not, as a rule, so full of water, since it was not
the season to irrigate the plain ; and he fancied that the king
had let the water on for the express purpose of vividly pre-
senting to the Hellenes the many dangers with which their
march was threatened at the very start

Proceeding on their way they reached some villages, where
their guides pointed out to them they were to take provisions.
They were found to contain plenty of corn, and wine made from
palm dates, and an acidulated beverage extracted by boiling
from the same fruit. As to the palm nuts or dates themselves,
it was noticeable that the sort which we are accustomed to see
in Hellas were set aside for the domestic servants ; those put
aside for the masters are picked specimens, and are simply
marvellous for their beauty and size, looking like great golden
lumpii of amber; some specimens they dried and preserved
as sweetmeats. Sweet enough they were as an accompani-
ment of wine, but apt to give headache. Here, too, for the
first time in their lives, the men tasted the brain * of the
palm. No one could help being struck by the beauty of this
object^ and the peculiarity of its delicious flavour ; but this,
like the dried fruits, was exceedingly apt to give headache.
When this cabbage or brain haa been removed from the palm
the whole tree withers from top to bottom.

* /.(*. the cabbegG-lik« crown.


CH. 111. S 17-23 1

Sept 6-9 J



TISSAPHERNES



In these villages they remained three days, and a depura-
tion from the great king arrived — Tissaphernes and the king's
brother-m-law and three other Persians— with a retinue of many
slaves. As soon as the generals of the Hellenes had presented
themselves,^ Tissaphernes opened the proceedings with the fol-
lowing speech, through the lips of an interpreter ; *' Men of
Hellas, 1 am your next-door neighbour in Hellas. Therefore
was it that I, when I saw into what a sea of troubles you were
fallen, regarded it as a godsend, if by any means I might
obtain, as a boon from the king, the privilege of bringing you
back in safety to your own country : and that, I take it,
will earn me gratitude from you and all Hellas. In this
determination I preferred my request to the king ; I claimed
it as a favour which was fairly my due ; for was it not 1 who
first announced to him the hostile approach of Cyrus? who
supported that announcement by tlie aid I brought ; who
alone among the officers confronted with the Hellenes in
battle did not flee, but charged right through and united my
troops with the king inside your camp, where he was arrived,
having slain Cyrus ; it was I, lastly, who gave chase to the
barbarians under Cyrus, with the help of those here present
with me at this moment, which also are among the trustiest
followers of our lord the king. On hearing my proposals,
he promised me to deliberate, and he bade me come, to ask
you for what cause you marched against him. Now, I counsel
you to give a moderate answer, so that it may be easier for
me to carry out my design, if haply I may obtain from him
some good thing in your behalf!"

Thereupon the Hellenes retired and took counsel. Then
they answered, and Clearchus was their spokesman: "We
neither mustered as a body to make war against the king, nor
was our march conducted with that object. But it was Cyrus,
as you know, who invented many and divers pretexts, that he
might take you off your guard, and transport us hither. Yet,
after a while, when we saw that he was in sore straits, we were
ashamed in the sight of God and man to betray him, whom
we had permitted for so long a season to benefit us. But
now that Cyrus is dead, we set up no claim to his kingdom
against the king himself; there is neither person nor thing for



,. f CH. in. i a3-CH. IV. { 1

"' 1 Sepe. 9-39. B.C. 401

the sake of which we would care to injure the king's country ;
we would not choose to kill him if we could, rather we would
march straight home, if we were not molested; but, God
helping us, we will retaliate on all who !• jure us. On the
other hand, if any be found to benefit us, we do not mean
to be outdone in kindly deeds, as far as in us lies."

So he spoke, and Tissaphernes listened and replied :
" That answer will 1 take back to the king and bring you
word from him again. Until I come again, let the imce
continue, and we will furnish you with a market," All next
day he did not come back, and the Hellenes were troubled
with anxieties, but on the third day he arrived with the news
that he had obtained from the king the boon he asked ; he
was permitted to save the Hellenes, though there were many
gainsayers who argued that it was not seemly for the king to
et those who had marched against him depart in peace,
ad at last he said : " You may now, if you like» take pledges
am us, that we will make the countries through which you
pass friendly to you, and will lead you back without treachery
into Hellas, and will furnish you with a market ; and wherever
you cannot purchase, we will permit you to take provisions
from the district You, on your side, must swear that you
will march as through a friendly country, without damage
— merely taking food and drink wherever we fail to supply a
market — or, if we afford a market, you shall only obtain
provisions by paying for them." This was agreed to, and
oaths and pledges exchanged between them — ^Tissaphernes and
the king's brother-in-law upon the one side, and the generals
and officers of the Hellenes on the other. After this Tissa-
phernes said : *' And now 1 go back to the king ; as soon as
I have transacted what I have a mind to, I will come back,
ready equipped, to lead you away to Hellas, and to return my-
self to my own dominion."

IV. — After these things the Hellenes and Ariaeus waited for

Tissaphernes, being encamped close to one another : for more

than twenty days they waited, during which time there came

visitors to Ariaeus, his brother and other kinsfolk. To those

him came certain other Persians, encoumgmg them

ring pledges to some of them from the king himself



H. IV. I t*7)
ejrt. g-ag /



DEU



SUSPICIONS



— that he would bear no grudge against them on account
^ of the i^art they bore in the expedition against him with
I Cyrus, or for aught else of the things which were past.
Whilst these overtures were being made, Ariaeus and his
friends gave manifest signs of paying less attention to the
Hellenes, so much so that, if for no other reason, the majority
of the latter were not well pleased, and they came to
Clearchus and the other generals, asking what they were
wailing for. "Do we not know full well," they said, "that
the king would give a great deal to destroy us, so that other
Hellenes may take warning and think twice before they march
against the king. To-day it suits his purpose to induce us to
stop here, because his army is scattered ; but as soon as he
has got together another armament,^ attack us most certainly
he will. How do we know he is not at this moment digging
away at trenches, or running up walls, to make our path
impassable. It is not to be supposed that he will desire us
to return to Hellas with a tale how a handful of men like
ourselves beat the king at his own gates, laughed him to
scorn, and then came home again." Clearchus replied: ''I
too am keenly aware of all this ; but I reason thus ; if we
turn our backs now, they will say, we mean war and are
acting contrary to the truce, and then what follows? First
of all, no one will furnish us with a market or means of pro-
viding ourselves with food. Next, we shall have no one to
guide us; moreover, such action on our part will be a signal
to Ariaeus to hold aloof from us, so that not a friend will be
left to us ; even those who were formerly our friends will
now be numbered with our enemies. What other river, or
rivers, we may find we have to cross, I do not know ; but this
we know, to cross the FAiphratcs in face of resistance is
impossible. You see, in the event of being driven to an
engagement, we have no cavalr)' to help us, but with the
enemy it is the reverse — not only the most, but the best of his
troops are cavalry, so that if we are victorious, we shall kill no
one, but if we are defeated, not a man of us can escape. For
my part, I cannot see why the king, who has so many advan-

^ Or, more liu, "got together his full armainenl;" "re-collected his
army."



SIS — BK, ri.



fen. tv. § 7-13 ; Sept.

I| 30-Oct. 4, B.C. 401



tages on his side, if he desires to destroy us, should swear
oaths and lender solemn pledges merely in order to perjure
himself in the sight of heaven, to render his word worthless
and his credit discreditable the wide world over." These
arguments he propounded at length.

Meanwhile Tissaphernes came back, apparently ready to
return home; he had his own force with him, and so had
Orontas, who was also present, his. The latter brought, more-
over, his bride -wnth him, the king s daughter, whom he had
just wedded. The journey was now at length fairly com-
menced. Tissaphernes led the way, and provided a market.
They advanced, and Ariaeus advanced too, at the head of
Cyrus's Asiatic troops, side by side with Tissaphernes and
Orontas, and with these two he also pitched his camp. The
Hellenes, holding them in suspicion, marched separately with
the guides, and they encamped on each occasion a ]iarasang
apart, or rather less ; and both parties kept watch upon each
other as if they were enemies, which hardly tended to lull
suspicion ; and sometimes, whilst foraging for wood and grass
and so forth on the same ground, blows were exchanged,
which occasioned further embitterments. Three stages they
had accomplished ere they reached the wall of Media, as
it is called, and passed within it.^ It was built of baked
bricks laid upon bitumen. It was twenty feet broad and a
hundred feet high, and the length of it was said to be twenty
parasangs.'-^ It lies at no great distance from Babylon.

From this point they marched two stages — eight para-
sangs — ^and crossed two canals, the first by a regular bridge,
the other spanned by a bridge of seven boats. These canals
issued from the Tigris^ and from them a whole system of
minor trenches was cut, leading over the country, large ones
to begin with, and then smaller and smaller, till at last they
become the merest runnels, like those in Hellas used for
watering millet fields. They reached the river Tigris. At
this praint there was a large and thickly populated city named

^ Or, "passed along it " ; the words are TapijIKdov dau aiVou. See Mr,
Pretor, Anab. of AV«., appendix 10 note on II. iv, 12 ; and Grole's note on tlie
wall of Media, already referred lo above, p. 25; also below, p. 87, note 1.

- I.e. taking the parasang as = 30 stades, nearljr 3^ English miles, or
nearly 3 geographical miles, the wall was nearly 70 miles long.



I



Oct. 5 J



PASSAGE OF THE TIGRIS



S3



Sittace, at a distance of fifteen furlongs ^ from the river. The
Hellenes accordingly encamped by the side of that city, near
a large and beautifol park, which was thick with all sorts of
trees.

The Asiatics had crossed the Tigris, but somehow were
entirely hidden from view. After supper, Proxenus and
Xenophon were walking in front of the place d'armes^ when
a pan came up and demanded of the advanced guard where
he could find Proxenus or Clearchus. He did not ask for
Menon, and that too though he came from Ariaeus, who was
Menon's friend. As soon as Proxenus had said : " I am he,
whom you seek," the man replied : " I have been sent by
Ariaeus and Artaozus, who have been trusty friends to Cyrus
in past days, and are your well-wishers. They warn you to
be on your guard, in case the barbarians attack you in the
night. There is a large body of troops in the neighbouring
park. They also warn you to send and occupy the bridge
over the Tigris, since Tissaphernes is minded to break it
down in the night, if he can, so that you may not cross, but
be caught between the river and the canal." On hearing this
they took the man to Clearchus and acquainted him with
his statement. Clearchus, on his side, was much disturbed,
and indeed alarmed at the news. But a young fellow who
was present,- struck with an idea, suggested that the two state-
ments were inconsistent ; as to the contemplated attack and the
proposed destruction of the bridge. Clearly, the attacking
party must either conquer or be worsted ; if they conquer,
what need of their breaking down the bridge? "Why! if
there were half a dozen Iiridges," said he, ""we should not
be any the more able to save ourselves by flight — there would
be no place to flee to; but,, in the opposite case, suppose we
win, with the bridge broken down, it is they who will not
be able to save themselves by flight ; and, what is worse for
them, not a single soul will be able to bring them succour
from the other side, for all their numbers, since the bridge
will be broken down.'^

Clearchus listened to the reasoning, and then he asked
the messenger, " How large the country between the Tigris and



* Lil. "fifteen stades."



Possibly Xenophon himself.



54



ANABASIS^BK. H.



/ CH. tV. % 31-36

{ Oct. 5-S, B.C. 401



the canal might be?" "A large district," he replied, "and in
it are villages and cities numerous and large." Then it dawned
upon them : the barbarians had sent the man with subtlety,
in fear lest the Hellenes should cut the bridge and occupy the
island territory, with the strong defences of the Tigris on the
one side and of the canal on the other ; supplying themselves
with provisions from the country so included, large and rich
as it was, with no lack of hands to till it ; in addition to which,
a harbour of refuge and asylum would be found for any one,
who was minded to do the king a mischief.

After this they retired to rest in peace, not^ however,
neglecting to send a guard to occupy the bridge in spite of
all ; but nothing happened^ ^nd there was no attack from any
quarter whatsoever ; nor did any of the enemy's people
approach the bridges : so the guards were able to report next
morning. But as soon as it was morning, they proceeded to
cross the bridge, which consisted of thirty-seven vessels, and
in so doing they used the utmost precaution possible ;
for reports were brought by some of the Hellenes with
Tissaphernes that an attempt was to be made to attack Ihem
while crossing. All this turned out to be false, though it is
true that while crossing they did catch sight of Glus
watching, with some others, to see if they crossed the river ;
but as soon as he had satisfied himself on that point, he rode
off and was gone.

From the river Tigris they advanced four stages — twenty
parasangs — to the river Physcus, which is a hundred feet broad
and spanned by a bridge. Here lay a large and populous
city named Opis, close to which the Hellenes were encountered
by the natural brother of Cyrus and Artaxerxes, who was lead-
ing a large army from Susa and Ecbatana to assist the king.
He halted his troops and watched the Hellenes march past.
Clearchus led them in column two abreast : and from time to
time he marched and from time to time he halted. But every
time the vanguard came to a standstill^ just so often and just
so long the effect repeated itself down to the hindmost man :
halt ! halt ! halt ! along the whole Une : so that even to the
Hellenes themselves their army seemed enormous; and the
Persian was fairly astonished at the spectacle.



n-.'otJ.'J-^i"'^"} INTERVIEW WITH TISSAPIIERNES 55

From this place they marched through Media six desert
stages — thirty parasangs — to the villages of Parysatis/ Cyrus's
and the king's mother. These Tissaphernes, in mockery of
Cyrus, delivered over to the Hellenes to plunder, except that
the folk in them were not to be made slaves. They contained
much corn, cattle, and other property. From this place they
advanced four desert stages — twenty parasangs^keeping the
Tigris on the left. On the first of these stages, on the other
side of the river, lay a large city ; it was a well-to-do place
named Caenae, from which the natives used to carry across
loaves and cheeses and wine on rafts made of skins.

V. — After this they reached the river Zapatas,^ which is four
hundred feet broad, and here they halted three days. During
the interval suspicions were rife, though no act of treachery
displayed iLself. Clearchus accordingly resolved to seek an in-
terview with Tissaphernes, and if possible to bring to an end
these feelings of mistrust, before they led to war. Conse-
quently, he sent a messenger to the Persian to say that he
desired an interview with him ; to which the other readily
consented. As soon as they were met, Clearchus spoke as
follows: "Tissaphernes," he said, "I do not forget that oaths
have been exchanged between us, and right hands shaken, in
token that we will abstain from mutual injury ; but I can see
that you watch us narrowly, as if we were foes ; and we, seeing
this, watch you narrowly in return. But as I fail to discover,
after investigation, that you are endeavouring to do us a mischief
— ^and I am quite sure that nothing of the sort has ever
entered our heads with regard to you — the best plan seemed to
me to come and talk the matter over with you, so that, if
possiblej we might dispel the mutual distrust on either side.
For I have known people ere now, the \ictims in some cases
of calumny, or possibly of mere suspicion, who in apprehension
of one another and eager to deal the first blow, have com-
mitted irreparable wrong against those who neither intended
nor so much as harboured a thought of mischief against them.



' See nbove, p. 15, note i.

' The Greater Zab, which flows into ihe Tigris near a town now called
Senn, with which most travellers identify Caenae (Katfo/). See Groie, NiiL of
Greece, vol. ix. p. 93 ( isi ed. ) See maj\



S6



ANABASIS— BK. IL



f CW- Y. I 6*11

\ Oct. ai, B,c. 401



T have come to you under a conviction that such misunder-
standings may best be put a stop to by personal intercourse,
and I wish to instruct you plainly that you are wrong in mis-
trusting us. The first and weightiest reason is that the oaths,
which we took in the sight of heaven, are a barrier to mutual
hostility. I envy not the man whose conscience tells him
that he has disregarded these! For in a war with heaven,
by what swiftness of foot can a man escape ? — in what quarter
find refuge?^ — in what darkness slink away and be hid? — to
what strong fortress scale and be out of reach ? Are not ail
things in all ways subject to the gods ? is not their lordship
over all alike outsppead_?/ As touching the gods, therefore,
and our oaths^ that is how I view this matter. To their safe
keeping we consigned the friendship which we solemnly con-
tracted.^ But turning to matters human, you I look upon as
our greatest blessing in this present time. With you every
path is plain to us, every river passablej and of provisions we
shall know no stint But without you, all our way is through
darkness ; for we know nothing concerning it, every river will
be an obstacle, each multitude a terror ; but^ worst terror of all,
the vast wilderness, so full of endless perplexity. Nay, if in a
fit of madness we murdered you, what then? in slaying our
benefactor should we not have challenged to enter the lists
against us a more formidable antagonist in the king himself?^
Let me tell you, how many high hopes I should rob myself of,
were 1 to take in hand to do you mischief.

" T coveted the friendship of Cyrus ; I believed him to be
abler than any man of his day to benefit those whom he chose ;
but to-day I look and, behold, it is you who are in his place ;

^ Reading wilh Sauppe ofrc Stroi &v rts ffteiryuv ; or, with Hug, omitting
the words offrc 6trot 6.v, iranslale "can a mail flee away and escape? into
what dej-kness," etc. ; for tho «tenlimont of the passage compare the language
of Psalm cxxxix. 7-12,

' Or, '* they witnessed our covenant of friendship ; they are the deposit-
aries of its terms."

* The (Jreek is more graphic, lit. " Ihe greatest reserve combatant," the
metaphor being ta]<en from the public games, in which "the odd man," who
has not been paired, sifs by ready to engage any athlete who shall beat his
adversary. See W, W. Goodwin and J, W. White nd ioc. ; a] so Mr. Pre tor
ad lof. { "f. Virg. Aen. xi, Q78, deviclam Asiam iubsedit adulter : of Agamem-
non. ■ ' Asia fell Ijefore him. hut the adulterer rose in her room." — L'ooington,



CH. V. I It-ljl
Oct, ai I



CLEARCHUS AND TISSAPHERNES



57



the power which helonged to Cyrus and his territory are yours
now. You have them, and your own satrapy besides, safe and
sound ; while the king's power, which was a thorn in the side
of CyruSj is your support This being so, it would be madness
not to wish to be your friend. But I will go further and state
to you the reasons of my confidence, that you on your side
will desire our friendship. I know that the Mysians are a
cause of trouble to you, apd I flatter myself that with my
present force I could render them humbly obedient to you.
This applies to the Pisidians also ; and I am told there are
many other such tribes besides, I think I can deal with
them all ; they shall cease from being a constant disturbance
to your peace and prosperity. Then there are the Egyptians.^
I know your anger against them to-day is very great. Nor can
I see what better force you will find to help you in chastising
them than this which marches at my back to-day. 'O^gamj'
if you seek the friendship of any of your neighbours round,
there shall be no friend so great as you ; if any one annoys
you, with us as your faithful servitors you shall belord it
over him ; and such service will we render you, not as hirelings
merely for pay's sake, but for the gratitude which we shall
rightly feel to you, to whom we owe our lives. As I dwell on
these matters, I confess, the idea of your feeling mistrust of
us is so astonishing, that I would give much to discover the
name of the man, who is so clever of speech that he can per-
suade you that we harbour designs against you." Clearchus
ended, and Tissaphernes responded thus— ^

" I am glad, Clearchus, to listen to your sensible remarks ;
for with the sentiments you hold, if you were to devise any
mischief against me, it could only be out of malevolence to
yourself. But if you imagine that you, on your side, have any
better reason to mistrust the king and me, than we you, listen
to me in turn, and I will undeceive you. I ask you, does it
seem to you that we lack the means, if we had the will, to de-
stroy you ? have we not horsemen enough, or infantry, or what-
ever other arm you like, whereby we may be able to injure you,

* See above, p. 42 ; we leam from, Diodorus Siculas, xiv, 35, (Jtat Ihe
Egyptians had revolted from tlie Persians towards tlie end of the reign of
Darius.



S8



ANABASIS — BK. IT.



{



cfi. V. ^ t7-a4
Oct. 21, u.c. 401



without risk of suffering in return ? or, possibly, do we seem
to you to lack the physical surroundings suitable for attacking
you ? Do you not see all these great plains, which you find it
hard enough to traverse even when they are friendly ? and all
yonder great mountain chains left for you to cross, which we
can at any time occupy in advance and render impassable?
and all those rivers, on whose banks we can deal craftily * by
you, checking and controlling and choosing the right number
of you whom wc care to fight ! Nay, there are some which
you will not be able to cross at all, unless we transport you to
the other side.

"And if at all these points we were worsted, yet *fire,'
as they say, ' is stronger than the fruit of the field ' : we
can burn it down and call up famine in arms against you ;
against which you, for all your bravery, will never be able to
contend. Why then, with all these avenues of attack, this
machinery of war, open to us, not one of which can be turned
against ourselves, why should we select from among them
all that method, which alone in the sight of God is impious
and of man abominable ? Surely it belongs to people alto-
gether without resources, who are helplessly struggling in thfe
toils of fate, and are villains to boot, to seek accomplishment
of their desires by perjury to heaven and faithlessness to their
fellows. We are not so unreasoning, Clearchus, nor so foolish.

*' Why, when we had it in our power to destroy you, did
we not proceed to do it ? Know well that the cause of this
was nothing less than my passion to prove myself faithful to
the Hellenes, and that, as Cyrus went up, relying on a foreign
force attracted by payment, I in turn might go down strong
in the same through service rendered. Various ways in which
you Hellenes may be useful to me you yourself have mentioned,
but there is one still greater. It is tlie great king's privilege
alone to wear the tiara upright upon his head, yet in your
presence it may be given to another mortal to wear it upright,
here, upon his heart."

Throughout this speech he seemed to Clearchus to be
speaking the truth, and he rejoined : " Then are not those

1 Cf. Cyrof. Ill, iii. 47. To/ueiJcffPai = to deal economically or piece-
meal by.



Oct. a\-'js I



ARREST OF T!IE GENERALS



59



worthy of the worst penalties who, in spite of all that exists to
cement our friendship, endeavour by slander to make us
enemies?" "Even so," replied Tissaphernes, "and if your
generals and captains care to come in some open and public
way, I will name to you those who tell me that you are plot-
ting against me and the army under me." " Good," replied
Clearchus. " I will bring all, and I will show you, on my side,
the source from which I derive ray information concerning
you."

After this conversation Tissaphernes, with kindliest expres-
sions, invited Clearchus to remain with him at the time, and
entertained him at dinner. Next day Clearchus returned to
the camp, and made no secret of his persuasion that he at
any rate stood high in the affections of Tissaphernes, and he
reported what he had said, insisting that those invited ought
to go to Tissaphernes, and that any Hellene convicted of
calumnious language ought to be punishedj not only as traitors
themselves, but as disaffected to their fellow - countr>'men.
The slanderer and traducer was Menon ; so, at any rate, he
suspected, because he knew that he had had meetings with
Tissaphernes whilst he was with Ariaeus, and was factiously
opposed to himself, plotting how to win over the whole army
to him, as a means of winning the good graces of Tissaphernes.
But Clearchus wanted the entire army to give its mind to no
one else, and that refractory people should be put out of the
way. Some of the soldiers protested : the captains and
generals had better not all go ; it was better not to put too
much confidence in Tissaphernes^ But Clearchus insisted so
strongly that finally it was arranged for five generals to go
and twenty captains. These were accompanied by about two
hundred of the other soldiers, who took the opportunity of
marketing.

On arrival at the doors of Tissapherness quarters the
generals were summoned inside. They were Proxenus the
Boeotian^ Menon the Thcssaliar^ Agias the Arcadian, Clear-
chus the Laconian, and Socrates the Achaean ; while the cap-
tains remained at the doors. Not long after, at one and the
same signal, those within were seized and those without cut
down ; after which some of the barbarian horsemen galloped



ANABASIS — BK. U.



( CH. V. i 33.39

I Oct. aa, a.c. 401



over the plaiiij killing every Hellene they encountered, bond
or free. The Hellenes, as they looked from the camp, viewed
that strange horsemanship with surprise, and could not explain
to themselves what it all meant, until Nicarchus the Arcadian
came tearing along for bare life with a wound in the belly,
and clutching his protruding entrails in his hands. He told
them all that had happened. Instantly the Hellenes ran to
their arms, one and all, in utter consternation, and fully ex-
pecting that the enemy would instantly be down upon the
camp. However, they did not all come: only Ariaeus came,
and Artaozus and Mithridates, who were Cyrus's most faithful
friends j but the interpreter of the Hellenes said he saw and
recognised the brother of Tissaphernes also with them. They
had at their back other Persians also, armed with cuirasses, as
many as three hundred. As soon as they were within a short
distance, they bade any general or captain of the Hellenes who
might be there to approach and hear a message from the king.
After this, two Hellene generals went out with all precautioa
These were Cleanor the Orchomenian,^ and Sophaenetus the
Slymphalian, attended by Xenophon the Athenian, who went
to learn news of Proxenus. Cheirisophus was at the time
away in a village with a party getting provisions- As soon as
they had halted within earshot, Ariaeus said : ** Hellenes,
Clearchus being shown to have committed perjury and to
have broken the truce, has suffered the penalty, and he is
dead ; but Proxenus and Menon, in return for having given
information of his treacheiy^, are in high esteem and honour.
As to yourselves, the king demands your arms. He claims
them as his, since they belonged to Cyrus, who was his slave."
To this the Hellenes made answer by the mouth of Cleanor of
Orchomeniis, their spokesman, who said, addressing Ariaeus :
"Thou villain, Ariaeus, and you the rest of you, who were
Cyrus's friends, have you no shame before God or man,
first to swear to us you would have the same friends and
the same enemies as we ourselves, and then to turn and
betray us, making common cause with Tissaphernes, that
most impious and villainous of men ? With him you have
murdered the very men to whom you gave your solemn

^ Of Orchomenus in Arcadia.



CH. V. f 39-CH. VI, I

§ 5 ; Oct. w f



EFFECT UPON THE HELLENES



word and oath, and to the rest of us turned traitors ; and,
having so done^ you join hand with our enemies to come
against us/' Ariaeus answered : "There is no doubt but that
Clearchus has been known for some time to harbour designs
against Tissaphernes and Orontas, and all of us who side with
them." Taking up this assertion, Xenophon said; "Well,
then, granting that Clearchus broke the truce contrary to our
oaths, he has his deserts, for perjurers deserve to perisli ; but
where are Proxenus and Menon, our generals and your good
friends and benefactors, as you admit ? Send them back to
us. Surely, Just because they are friends of both parties, they
will try to give the best advice for you and for us."

At this, the Asiatics stood discussing with one another for
a long while, and then they went away without vouchsafing
a word.

VI. — The generals who were thus seized were taken up to
the king and there decapitated. The first of these, Clearchus,
was a thorough soldier, and a true lover of fighting. This is
the testimony of all who knew him intimately. As long as
the war between the Ijtcedaemonians and Athenians lasted,
he could find occupation at home ; but after the peace, he
persuaded his own city that the Thracians were injuring the
Hellenes, and having secured his object, set sail, empowered
by the ephorate to make war upon the Thracians north of the
Chersonese and Perinthus, But he had no sooner fairly
started than, for some reason or other, the ephors changed
their minds, and endeavoured to bring him back again from
the isthmus. Thereupon be refused further obedience, and
went off with sails set for the Hellespont. In consequence
he was condemned to death by the Spartan authorities for
disobedience to orders ; and now, finding himself an exile, he
came to Cyrus. Working on the feelings of that prince, in
language described elsewhere,* he received from his entertainer
a present of ten thousand darics.^ Having got this money, he
did not sink into a life of ease and indolence, but collected an



' For the incident see above, Anab. I. i. 9andiii, 3, 4 ; the language, how-
ever, used by Clearchus^ is not described in either passage. Paxilazides con-
jectures fiXXots for dWij 7^7/9airTOi — " described by others." see Philistor^ HI.

^ =: about 10,000 gtiineas, Sjee above, p. s6, note i.



ANABASIS^^=1



fcH. VI.



army with it, carried on war against the Thracians and con-
quered them in battle, and from that dale onwards harried
and plundered them with war incessantly, until Cynis wanted
his army ; whereupon he at once went off, in hopes of finding
another sphere of warfare in his company.

These, I take it, were the characteristic acts of a man
whose affections are set on warfare. When it is open to
him to enjoy peace with honour, no shame, no injury attached,
still he prefers war ; when he may live at home at ease, he
insists on toil, if only it may end in fighting ; when it is given
to him to keep his riches without risk, he would rather lessen
his fortune by the pastime of battle. To put it briefly, war
was his mistress ; just as another man will spend his fortune
on a favourite, or to gratify some pleasure, so he chose to
squander his substance on soldiering.

But if the life of a soldier was a passion with him, he was
none the less a soldier born, as herein appears ; danger was a
delight to him ; he courted it, attacking the enemy by night
or by day ; and in difficulties he did not lose his head, as all
who ever served in a campaig:n with him would with one con-
sent allow. A good soldier ! the question arises, Was he
equally good as a commander ? It must be admitted that, as
far as was compatible with his quality of temper, he was :
none more so. Capable to a singular degree of devising
how his army was to get supplies, and of actually getting
them, he was also capable of impressing upon those
about him that Clearchus must be obeyed ; and that he
brought about by the very hardness of his nature. With a
scowling expression and a harshly-gratijig voice, he chastised
with severity, and at times with such fury, that he was sorry
afterwards himself for what he had done. Yet it was not
without purpose that he applied the whip; he had a theory
that there was no good to be got out of an unchastened
army. A saying of his is recorded to the effect that the
soldier who is to mount guard and keep his hands off his
friends, and be ready to dash without a moment's hesitation
against the foe — must fear his commander more than the
enemy. Accordingly, in any strait, this was the man whom
the soldiers were eager to obey, and they would have no other



CH. VI. 1



CLEARCHUS AND PKOXENUS



63



in his place. The cloud which lay upon his brow,^ at those
times lit up with brightness ; his face became radiant, and the
old sternness was so charged with vigour and knitted strength
to meet the foe, that it savoured of salvation^ not of cruelty.
But when the pinch of danger was past, and it was open to
them to go and taste subordination under some other officer,
many forsook him. So lacking in grace of manner was he ;
but was ever harsh and savage, so that the feeling of the
soldiers towards him was that of schoolboys to a master. In
other words, though it was not his good fortune ever to have
followers inspired solely by friendship or goodwillj yet those
who found themselves under him, either by State appointment
or through want, or other arch necessity, yielded him implicit
obedience. From the moment that he led them to victory,
the elements which went to make his soldiers efficient were
numerous enough. There was the feeling of confidence in
faci^ng the foe, which never left them, and there was the dread
of punishment at his hands to keep them orderly. In this way
and to this extent he knew how to rule ; but to play a sub-
ordinate part himself he had no great taste ; so, at any rate, it
was said. At the time of his death he must have been about
fifty years of age.

Proxenus, the Boeotian, was of a different temperament
It had been the dream of his boyhood to become a man cap-
able of great achievements. In obedience to this passionate
desire it was, that he paid his fee to Gorgias of Leontini.^
After enjoying that teacher's society, he flattered himself that he
must he at once qualified to rule ; and while he was on friendly
tcniis with the leaders of the age, he was not to be outdone in



^ Reading if roh irpotrunroii : or, retaining iv roh dtXXot? ■wpoaunrois of the
best MSS,, translate perhaps, as Mr, Frulor (Afiai. of Xen,, vol. ii. p. 384),
" his gloominess then shone as a bright light (reflected) in the faces of those
around him." Cf, Cyrop. V. ii. 34; AlenL III. x. 4. Cf. Walt Whitman,
Leaves cf Grass, p. 79 (ed, i36o-6i): —

" Serene sloofl the little cnptain,
He was not hurried ; his voice was neither high uor low ;
His eyes gave more light lo us than our battlt? lanterns,"

' The famoii.s rhetorician of Leontini, 485-380 B.c. His fee was 100
minae = about £^ok,. See Sir R. Jebb, Aitk Orators, vol i., iatraduction, p.
cxxiiL and foil.



64



ANABASIS— BK. IL



/til. VI.

1.8 T7-33



reciprocity of service.^ In this mood he threw himself into
the projects of Cyrus, and in return expected to derive from
this essay the reward of a great name, large power, and wide
wealth. But for all that he pitched his hopes so high, it was
none the less evident that he would refuse to gain any of the
ends he set before him wrongfully. Righteously and honour-
ably he would obtain them, if he might, or else forego them.
As a commander he had the art of leading gentlemen, but he
failed to inspire adequately either respect for himself or fear
in the soldiers under him. Indeed, he showed a more delicate
regard for his soldiers than his subordinates for him, and he
was indisputably more apprehensive of incurring their hatred
than they were of losing their fidelity. The one thing need-
ful to real and recognised generalship was, he thought, to
praise the virtuous and to withhold praise from the evildoer.
It can be easily understood, then, that of those who were
brought in contact with him, the good and noble indeed
were his well-wishers ; but he laid himself open to the
machinations of the base, who looked upon him as a person
to be dealt with as they liked. At the time of his death he
was only thirty years of age-
As to Menon the Thessalian,^ the mainspring of his action
was obvious ; wliat he sought after insatiably was wealth.
Rule he sought after only as a stepping-stone to larger spoils.
Honours and high estate he craved for simply that he might
extend the area of his gains ; and if he studied to be on friendly
terms with the powerful, it was in order that he might commit
wrong with impunity. The shortest road to the achievement
of his desires lay, he thought, through false swearing, lying,
and cheating ; for in his vocabulary simplicity and truth were
S3monyms of folly. Natural affection he clearly entertained

' Proxenus, like Cyrus (see above, p. 31. nolc 1). is lo some extent a pro-
tolyp« of the Cyrus of the Cyropaedia. In other words, the author, in dolixifat-
ing the portrait of his ideal prince, drew from the recollection of many princely
qualities observed by him in the characters of many friends. Apart from the
intrinsic charm of the story, the Anabasi."! is interesting ns containing the raw
material of t;x|>erience and reflection which "this young scholar or philo-
sopher," our friend, the author, will ant- Hny tum to literary account,

' for a less repulsive conception of Mcnon's character, however unhistori-
cal. see Phito"s .Meno, and l^of. Jowett's Introduction, Pinto, vol. i. p. 265 :
' ' He Is a Thessalian Akibiades, rich and luxurious — a spoilt child of fortune. "



i



cir. VI. T
S 23-29 f



CHAJ<ACTER 01- MENON



for nobody. If he called a man his friend, it might be looked
upon as certain that he was bent on ensnaring hint. Laughter
at an enemy he considered out of place, but his whole con-
versation turned upon the ridicule of his associates. In like
manner, the possessions of his foes were secure from his
designs, since it was no easy task, he thought, to steal from
people on their guard ; but it was his particular good for-
tune to have discovered how easy it is to rob a friend in
the midst of his security. If it were a perjured person or a
wrongdoer, he dreaded him as well armed and intrenched ;
but the honourable and the truth-loving he tried to practise
on, regarding them as weaklings devoid of manhood. And as
other men pride themselves on piety and truth and righteous-
ness, so Menon prided himself on a capacity for fraud, on the
fabrication of lies, on the mockery and scorn of friends. The
man who was not a rogue he ever looked upon as only half
educated. Did he aspire to the first place in another man's
friendship, he set about his object by slandering those who
stood nearest to him in affection. He contrived to secure the
obedience of his soldiers by making himself an accomplice in
their misdeeds, and the fluency witb which he vaunted his own
capacity and readiness for enormous guilt was a sufficient title
to be honoured and courted by them. Or if any one stood
aloof from him, he set it down as a meritorious act of kind-
ness on his part that during their intercourse he had not
robbed him of existence.

As to certain obscure charges brought against his char-
acter, these may certainly be fabrications. I confine myself
to the following facts, which are known to all. He was in
the bloom of youth when he procured from Aristippus the
command of his mercenaries ; he had not yet lost that bloom
when he became exceedingly intimate with Ariaeus, a bar-
barian, whose liking for fair young men was the explanation ;
and before he had grown a beard himself, he had contracted
a similar relationship with a bearded favourite named Tharypas.
^\^en his fellow -generals were put to death on the plea that
they had marched with Cyrus against the king, he alone,
although he had shared their conduct, was exempted from
' their fate. But after their deaths the voiigeance of the king



66 ANABASIS — BK. II. {^"^^^3;;

fell upon him, and he was put to death, not like Clearchus
and the others by what would appear to be the speediest of
deaths — decapitation — but, as report says, he lived for a year
in pain and disgrace and died the death of a felon.

Agias the Arcadian, and Socrates the Achaean were both
among the sufferers who were put to death. To the credit,
be it said, of both, no one ever derided either as cowardly in
war : no one ever had a fault to find with either on the score
of friendship. They were both about thirty-five years of age.


I



BOOK\ I



[In the j^gggjjing pages of the narrative will be found, a full account,
not only of th e^ doings of the Helleneg dt iriup '!"• iHvanfit; i >f Cyrus ti ll ihe
dale of tlie Eatlle, but of the incidents which befell them after Cyrus's
dcatlL at the commencement of the retreat, while in company with Tissa-
phernes during the truce.]

^>— After the generals had been seized, and the captains
and soldiers who formed their escort had been killed, the Hel-
lenes lay in deep perplexity^a prey to painful redections. Here
were they at the king's gates, and on every side environing
them were many hostile cities and tribes of men. Who was
there now to furnish them with a market ? Separated from
Hellas by more than a thousand miles/ they had not even a
gtlide to point the way. Impassable rivers lay athwart their
homeward route, and hemmed them in. Betrayed even by the
Asiatics, at whose side they had marched with Cyrus to the
attackj they were left in isolation. Without a single mounted
trooper to aid them in pursuit : was it not perfectly plain that
if they won a battle, their enemies would escape to a mani
hut if they were beaten themselves, not one soul of them
would survive ? |/

Haunted by such thoug;h ts, and with hearts full of despair,
few of them teste d food that evening; but few of



fjVm t-indW even a fire, and many never came into camp
at ail that night, but took their rest where each chanced to
be. They could not close their eyes for very pain and yearning
after their fatherlands or their parents, tb^iife or child whom
^ L5i. at least lo.cKwslades.



68



ANABASIS — ^BK. III.



f



CH. I. § 3-7

Oct. 22, B.C, 401



they never expected to look upon again. Such was the plight
in which each and all tried to seek repose. JS

Now there u:as..it3_that_hpsl a cerrain'mani an Atheniarij^
Xenophon , who had accompanied Cyrus, peither as a genera l.

^nor as an officer, nor v et as a private solder, but Isimply on

the invitatiot yof ati old friend, I^ro>;enus, This old frfend had

from h ume. pro mising, jf he would come,

j^t^j ntroduce liini to Cyrus. ", whom^ " |Said Proxenus> " I
consider to b e worth myJgthgtLanrl nnH ni ore to m e."

Xenopho n having read the ] k^ulted Socrates the

Alheniari, whether he should act (.'i>i tn refuse the invitat ion.

^Socrates^ who had a su s picic^ th at the State of Atjhens might
in some way look askance aUinyfriindsliip with ( yni- ,- whose'
?ealous co-operation with the Lacxdacniunians .1 .gain st Athens
ir^ the war was « ot'''^tt!^gm!ei^~ad v reetJ-: "? ?Btnijhun to ^jclIo ""
Del2jhi_aniL4h£rc to mnsu jt the god ns to the dc B J - ra bii ity o f

■ iiuc h a.^ pHrnry Xciiunhijn j^nt and ]>tit tlic question to
Apollo, tg^which of (lie gods he Jnust jtray and do sac rifice,
so that he might brst acromplisli his iiUcndcd journey and
relui*!! irr^iHtfety^ with good fortune. ^ 'I'hen Apollo answered
him : ^' ' yo. such and such gods^ must thou do sacrifice," and

^ wh en he had returned home he rep orted to Socra tes the

_ oracle.^ V Rut Ti e, w hen lie hear d Jiamed Xeno phon T haiMTe

hadnot, in the first instanc e, ijjgi^eJ'^ the god, whether it

^ere better for him t<S go or to sta y> but had taken on himself
j9 spttle th at point affirmatively, J^yM^I^^^-rinS straightWvay, how

' Tlic reader sliould turn 10 Grote's comments on the first appearance of
Xenoplion. Ht; has been mentioned, of course, more than once before ; but
he now steps, as (he protagonist, upon the scene, and as Grote says : " It is
in true Homeric vein, and in sometliing like Homeric language, that Xenophon
(to whom we owe the whole narrative of tht? expedition) describes his dream, or
the inlcrveniion of Oneiros, sent by Zeus, from which this renovating impulse
look its rise '" (Grote, Hist of Greece, vol. ix. p. \^.\\. *\\vM rts iv r^ trrpaTl^
A,fvo<fiuiv 'ABiiva.10%, &% o&re trrpvLTTpfbi , k.t.X., cf. Horn. //. v. 9, '^Hv 5i tis
*V Tptieo-tn Adpjj, a.<iiV€toi d/tu',utiw, ip€t<%''R<pai<TTOio. K.r.\. " Now there was
aniid the Trojans Dares, rich and noble, priest of Hephaistos." — Mr. W. Leaf.

' Or, "Socrates, who suspected that a friendship with Cyrus might in some
way be laid to his charge, and prejudice him with the slate." Cf. A/tw.]. i. 4.
For the pari pinyed by Cyrus during the last four years of the I'eloponnesian
Avar, B.C. 407-405, see above, He//. L iv, ; v ; II. j. Socrales' apprehension
was only too fully realised, if the story in any way be true that Xenophon wns
banished, tpl\ov x'^P^" Kt'ipov, on the ground of friendship with Cyrus, as tiie
epigram in the Lt/^e 0/ Xi»oJ>hon by Diogenes Laertius has it



\



CH. 1. i 7-13

Oct. sa



}



xenophon's dream



he might best perfonn the journey. *'!pinr.P', hflgriy^^'i" ^^V-
tinned Socrates, " you did so put the qujgsdgiji^you should do
. yr^nt thf god enjoined." Thus, and^ without further ado,
Xel P^H'^'^'^^ oiTcrt'd sacrifice to those whom the god had nam ed,
^ and x,r. >ajl on lii^, \c>y;i^^c^ He ovcrtjj H jk Proxenus ana uy rtis
^ at Sarilisj when they were just ready to start on the march up
(■(juntry, and was at once introduced to Cyrus. IVoxenus
eagerly pressed him to stop— a request which Cyrus with Hke
ardour supported, adding that as soon as the_ campaign was
■^ over he would send him home. The campaign referred to
was understood to be against the PLsidians. That is how
Xenophon came to join the expedition, deceived indeed,
though not by Proxenus, who was equally in the dark with the
rest of the Hellenes, not counting Clearchus, as to the in-
■ tended attack upon the king. However, when they reached
Cilicia, it was pretty plain to all that the expedition was really
against the king. Then, though the majority were in appre-
hension of the journey, which was not at all to their minds,
ryet, for very shame of one another and Cyrus, they continued
to follow^ him, and with the rest went Xenophon. v

And now in this season of perplexity, he too, with the rest,
was in sore distress, and could not sleep; but anon, getting a
snatch of sleep, he had a dream. It seemed to him in a
vision that there was a storm of thunder and lightning, and a
bolt fell on his father's house, and thereupon the house was all
in a blaze. He sprung up in terror, and pondering the matter,
decided that in part the dream was good : in that he had seen
a great light from Zeus, whilst in the midst of toil and
danger. But partly too he feared it, for evidently it had come
from Zeus the king. And the fire kindled all around — what
could that mean but that he was hemmed in by various
perplexities, and so could not escape from the country of the
king? The full meaning, however, is to be discovered from
what hapi>ened after the dream. L^

This is what took place. As soon as he was fully awake,
the first clear thought which came into his head was, Why am I
lying here? The night advances; with the day, it is like
enough, the enemy will be upon us. If we are to fall into the
hands of the king, what is left us but to face the most horrible



70



ANABASIS— BK. TIL



f CU. I. 8 13-21
\ Oct. as, B.C. 40t



of sights, and to suffer the most fearful pains, and then to die,
insulted, an ignominious death? I lo defend oursely pn fn ffiri
off that fate— not a hand stirs: no one is preparing, none
cares ; but here we he, as though it were time to rest and take
our ease. I too i what am I waiting for ? a general to under-
take the work ? and from what city ? am I waiting till I am
older myself and of riper age ?' older I shall never be, if to-day
I betray myself to my enemies, y^

Thereupon he got up, and called together first Proxenus's
officers ; and when they were met, he said : " Sleep, sirs,
I cannot, nor can you, I fancy, nor lie here longer, when I
see in what straits we are ._ Our enemy, we may ^^ svtG j did
nyt or^ f^ ^ar |ipnn_3is-4J1| ]|^ Mt he Jiarl evervtlimp an^iJly^.
ready i. ^et none of us_shQTCS_a correspoading anxiety to enter
the lists of battle in the bravest style.

"And yet, if wp vipid nnrgj i^lvp *! and fall into the king's
power, need we ask what our fate will be ? This man, who,
when his own brother, the son of the same parents, was dead,
was not content with that, but severed head and hand from
the body, ^nd nailed them to a cross. iVcj^ then^ wtl(i.hav£Jipt
even the tie of blood in our favour, but who marched against
him, meaning to make a slave of hijii iiisicad of [i king — and
Jy slay liim if wc could : what is likely to be our fate at his
hands? Will he not go all lengths so that, by inflicting on us
the extreme of ignominy and torture, he may rouse in the rest
of mankind a terror of ever marching against him any more ?
There is no question but that our business is to avoid by all
means getting into his clutches. ^

" For ray part, all the while the truce lasted^ 1 never ceased
pitying ourselves and congratulating the king and those with
him, as, like a helpless spectator, I surveyed the extent and
quality of their territory, the plenteousness of their provisions,
the multitude of their dependants, their cattle, their gold, and
their apparel. And then to turn and ponder the conditirun of
our soldiers, without part or lot in these good things, except
we bought it ; few, I knew, had any longer the wherewithal
to buy, and yet our oath held us down, so that we could not

' See below for n list of passages bearing on llie moot point of Xcnophon's
ag<:! at the date of the Aniibasis, p. 82.



...8 21



SPEECH TO PROXENUS'S OFFICERS



provide ourselves otherwise than by purchase. I say, as I
reasoned thus, there were ti mes when I dr ead ed the tru ce
^morc than I now dre ad^ war. _

""Tow, however, that they have abruptly etided the truce,

there is an end also to their own insolence and to our

s uspicion. A ll tligse good thinj^s of theirs, are now set as priz^es — "

for the combatants. To whichsoever of us shall prove the

better men, will they fall as guerdons ; and the gods them-

^^ selves are the Judges of the strife. The gods, who full surely

^■"will be on our side, seeing it is our enemies who have taken

^B M^ek -aames falsely ; whilst we, with much to lure us^ yet- for

^f our oath's sake, and the gods who were our witnesses, sternly

^^ held aloof. So that, it seems to me, we have a right to entej,

upon this contest with much more heart than our foes ;V«fid

I further, we are possessed of bodies more capable than theirs

of b earing cold and heat and labour ; youls 1.00 we have,

~ by tiie help of heaven, better and braver : twy, the men them-

selves are more vulnerable, more mortal, than ourselves, if so

be the gods voucTiHafe to give us victory once again.

" Howbeit, for I doubt not elsewhere similar reflections

are being made, whatsoever betide, let ua not, in heaven's

vjiame, wait for others to come and challenge us to noble deeds ;

let us rather take the lead in stimulating the rest -iQ_ialpur.

^-ShoiSL^imirseJyjss. to be the. bravest of officers, and among

generals, the worthiest to command. l-'or myself, if you

jchooselo&tartibrvmrds on this quest, I will follow; or, if you

^ bid me lead you, my age shall be aoxMCuae to stand between

me and your orders. At least I am of full age. I take it, to

ave rt misfor t 1 my nwn htadi"

Such were lii^ ^i^eaker's words ; and the ofilcers, when they
heard, all, with one excepti<)n, called upon him to put himself at
their head. This was a certain Apollonides there present, who
spoke in the Boeotian dialect. This man's opinion was that
it was mere nonsense for any one to pretend they could obtain
safety otherwise than by an appeal to the king, if he had skill
to enforce it; and at the same time he began to dilate on
the difficulties. But Xenophon cut him short. "O most
man'ellous of men ! though you have eyes to see, you do not
perceive ; though you have ears to hear, you do not recollect.



72



ANABASIS— BK. ITI.



/ CH. I. f 37-34
I Oci. as, u.c. 401



A



You were present with the rest of us now here when,
after the death of Cyrus, the kine, vaunting himself oa that-
occurrence , sent dictatorial ly to hul us lay down our arms.
But when we, instead of giving up our arms, put them on and
went and pitched our camp near him, his manner changed.
It is hard to say what he did not do, he was so at his wit's
end, sending us embassies and begging for a truce, and furnish-
ing provisions the while, until he had got it. Or to take the
contrary instance, when just now, acting precisely on your
principles, our generals and captains went, trusting to the
truce, unarmed to a conference with them, what came of it ?
what is happening at this instant ? Beaten, goaded with pricks,
insulted, poor souls, they cannot even die : though death, I
ween, would be very sweet. And you, who know all this, how
can you say that it is mere nonsense to talk of self-defence ?
how can you bid us go again and try the arts of persuasion ?
In my opinion, sirs^ we ought not to admit this fellow to the
same rank with ourselves ; rather ought we to deprive him of
his captaincy, and load him with packs and treat him as such.^
The man is a disgrace to his own fatherland and the whole of
Hellas, that, being a Hellene, he is what he is/'

H ere Agasias the Sty^mpha lian broke in, exclaiming : " Nay,
this fellow has no connection either with Boeotia or with Hellas,
none whatever. I have noted both his ears bored like a
Lydian's." And so it was. Him then they banished. But
the rest visited the ranks, and wherever a general was left, they
summoned the general ; where he was gone, the lieutenant-
general ; and where again the captain alone was left, the
captain. As soon as they were all met, they seated them-
selves in front of the piace ifarmfs : the assembled generah
and officers, numbering about a hundred. It was nearly
midnight when this took place.

^Thereupon Hieronymiis the Eleian, the eldest of Proxenus's
captains, commenced speaking as follows : " Generals and
captains, it seemed right to us, in view of the present crisis^
ourselves to assemble and to summon you, that we might
advise upon some practicable course. Would you, Xenopbon,
repeat what you said to us ? "

' Or, ^'like the creature he is,"



Oci. «45!|ht} ^'EW GENERALS T0"BE CHOSEN



73



Thereupon Xcnophon spoke as follows : " We all know
only too well, that the khig and Tissaphernes have seized
as many of us as they could, and it is clear they are plotting
to destroy the rest of us if they can. Our business is plain :
it k to du all we can to avoid getting into the power of the
barbarians ; rather, if we can, we will get them into our power.
Kely upon this then, all you^vho are here assembled, now
is your gieat-^Dpportunity. The soldiers outside have their
eyes fixed upon you ; if they think that you are faint-hearted,
they will turn cowards ; but if you show them that you are
making your _own prepataUOUa. -ttT ittac E^ the enem y, and
setting an example to the rest — follow you, be assured, they
will : imitate you they will. May be, it is but right and fair
that you should somewhat excel them, for you are generals,
you are commanders of brigades or of regiments ; and if, while
it was peace, you had the advantage in wealth and position,
so now, when it is war, you are expected to rise superior to
the common herd — to think for them, to toil for them, when-
ever there be need.

*' At this very moment you would confer a great boon on
the army, if you made it your business to appoint generals
and officers to fill the places of those that are lost. ¥ot
without leaders nothing good or noble, to put it concisely, was
ever wrought anywhere ; and in military matters this is absol-
utely true ; for if discipline is held to be of saving virtue, the
want of it has been the ruin of many ere now. Well, then f
when you have appointed all the commanders necessary, it
would only be opportune, I take it, if you were to summon
the rest of the soldiers and to speak some words of encour-
agement. Even now, I daresay you noticed yourselves the
crestfallen air with which they came into camp, the despond-
ency with which they fell to picket duty, so that, miless there
is a change for the better, I do not know for what service they
will be fit ; whether by night, if need were, or even by day.
The thing is to get them to turn their thoughts to what they
mean to do, instead of to what they are likely to suffer. Do
that, and their spirits will soon revive wonderfully. You know,
1 need hardly remind you, it is not numbers or strength that
gives victor)- in war ; but, heaven helping them, to one or other



-BK. III.



( CH. I. S 42-CH. II. g 3
\ Oct. 33, B.C. 401



of two combatants it is given to da.sh vvitli stouter hearts to
meet the foe, and such onset, in nine cases out of ten, those
others refuse to meet. This observation, also, I have laid to
heart, that they, who in matters of war seek in all ways to
save their lives, are just they who, as a rule, die dishonour-
ably ; whereas they who, recognising that death is the common
lot and destiny of all men, strive hard to die nobly : these
inore frequently, as I observe, do after all attain to old age,
or, at any rate, while life lasts, they spend their days more
happily. This lesson let all lay to heart this day, for we are
just at such a crisis of our fate. Now is the season to be
brave ourselves, and to stimulate the rest by our example."

With these words he ceased ; and after him, Cheirisophus
said: *'Xenophon, hitherto I knew only so much of you as
that you were, I heard, an Athenian, but now I must com-
mend you for your words and for your conduct. I hope that
there may be many more like you, for it would prove a public
blessing." Then turning to the officers : " And now," said he,
" let us waste no time ; retire at once, I beg you, and choose
leaders where you need them. After you have made your
elections, come back to the middle of the camp, and bring the
newly appointed officers. After that, we will there summon a
general meeting of the soldiers. Let Tolmides, the herald,"
he added, " be in attendance." With these words on his lips
he got up, in order that what was needful might be done at
once without delay. After this the generals were chosen.
These were Timasion the Dardanian, in place of Clearchus ;
Xanthicles, an Achaean, in place of Socrates ; Cleanor, an
Arcadian, in place of Agias ; Philesius, an Achaean, in place
of Menon ; and in place of Proxenus, Xenophon the
Athenian.

II.— By the time the new generals had been chosen, the
first faint glimmer of dawn had hardly commenced, as they met
in the centre of the camp, and resolved to post an advance
gtiard and to call a general meeting of the soldiers. Now,
when these had come together, Cheirisophus the Lacedae-
monian first rose and spoke as follows : " Fellow-soldiers, the
present posture of affairs is not pleasant, seeing that we are
robbed of so many generals and captains and soldiers ; and



en. n. S s-7 "I
Oct. 33 f



A COUNCIL OF WAR



more than that, our former allies, Ariaeus and his men, have
betrayed us ; still, w^e must rise above our circumstances to
prove ourselves brave men, and not give in, but try to save
ourselves by glorious victory if we can; or, if not^ at least die
gloriously, and never, while we have breath in our bodies, fall
into the hands of our enemies. In which latter case, I fear,
we shall suffer things, which I pray the gods may visit rather
upon those we hate."

At this point Cleanor the Orchomenian stood up and
spoke as follows : "You see, men, the perjury and the impiety
of the king. You see the faithlessness of Tissaphernes, pro-
fessing that he was next-door neighbour to Hellas, and would
give a good deal to save us, in confirmation of which he took
an oath to us himself, he gave us the pledge of his right
hand, and then, with a lie upon his Ups, this same man
turned round and arrested our generals. He had no reverence
even for Zeus^ the god of strangers i but, after entertaining
Clearchus at his own board as a friend^ he used his hospitality
to delude and decoy his victims. And Ariaeus, whom we
offered to make king, with whom we exchanged pledges not
to betray each other, even this man, without a particle of fear
of the gods, or respect for Cyrus in his grave, though he was
most honoured by Cyrus in lifetime, even he has turned aside
to the worst foes of Cyrus, and is doing his best to injure the
dead man's friends. Them may the gods requite as they
deserv^e ! But we, with these things before our eyes, will not
any more he cheated and cajoled by them ; we will make the
best fight we can, and having made it, whatever the gods
think fit to send, we will accept."

After him Xenophon arose ; he was arrayed for war in his
bravest apparel : ^ " For," said he to himself, "if the gods grant
victory, the finest attire will match with victory best ; or if I
must needs die, then for one who has aspired to the noblest,
it is well there should be some outward correspondence
between his expectation and his end." He began his speech



^ So it is said ol the Russian General Skobelef, that he Imtl n strange
custom of going into bnlile in his cleanest uniform, perfumed, and Avearing a
diamond -hilted sword, " in order that," as he said, "he might die in his best
altire ."



ANABASIS^BK. III.



i CH. II. 8 3-ti

I Oct. 23, B.C. 401



as follows : "Cleartor has spoken of the perjury and faithless-
ness of the barbarians, and you yourselves know them only
too well, I fancy. If then we are minded to enter a second
time into terms of friendship with them, with the experience
of what our generals, who in all confidence entrusted them-
selves to their power, have suffered, reason would we should
feel deep despondency. If, on the other hand, we purpose to
take our good swords in our hands and to inflict punishment
on them for what they have done, and from this time forward
will be on terms of downright war with them, then, God help-
ing, we have many a bright hope of safety." The words were
scarcely spoken when some one sneezed/ and with one impulse
the soldiers bowed in worship ; and Xenophon proceeded :
•* I propose, sirs, since, even as we spoke of safety, an omen
from Zeus the Saviour has appeared, wc vow a vow to sacrifice
to the Saviour tJiank-offerings for safe deliverance, wheresoever
first we reach a friendly country ; and let us couple with that
vow another of individual assent,'^ that we will offer to the
rest of the gods •according to our ability.' Let all those who
are in favour of this proposal hold up their hands." They all
held up their hands, and there and then they vowed a vow
and chanted the battle hymn. But as soon as these sacred ^
matters were duly ended, he began once more thus : " I was
saying that many and bright are the hopes we have of safety.
First of all, we it is who confirm and ratify the oaths we take
by heaven, but our enemies have taken false oaths and broken
the truce, contrary to their solemn word. This being so, it is
but natural that the gods should be opposed to our enemies,
but with ourselves allied ; the gods, who are able to make the
great ones quickly small, and out of sore perplexity can save
the little ones with ease, M'hat time it pleases them. In the
next place, let me recall to your minds the dangers of our own

^ For this ancient omen see Odrssev, xvii. 541 fButcher and Lang, p, 292):
"Even so she spake, and Teleniaclius sneezed loudly, and around ihe roof rung-
wondrously. And Penelopt; laughed." , . . "Dost thou not mark how my
son has sneezed n blessing on all my words?" See also Aristoph. Binls, 720
(I^of. Kennedy, p. 70) : " Bird an oracle of fate, bird a sneeze you designifite.'
in Greek the word "bird" tpvLS^ or, as in the text, olbiv6^ toS :ii6s, "a bird
of Zeus," means "omen." See below, p. 171, note a.

8 Cf. Afem. I. iii, 3.

' Or, "when the favour of heaven seemed secured." ,



CH. II. i fl-l6\

Oct. 33 /



OMEN AND VOW



77



forefathers^ that you may see and know that bravery is your
heirloom, and that by the aid of the gods brave men are
rescued even out of the midst of sorest straits. So was it
when the Persians canre, and their attendant hosls,^ with a very
great armament, to wipe oat Athens from the face of the earth —
the men of Athens had the heart to withstand them and con-
quered them. Then they vowed to Artemis that for every
man they slew of the enemy, they would sacrifice to the god-
dess goats so many ; and when they could not find suffi-
cient for the slain, they resolved to offer yearly five hundred ;
and to this day they perform that sacrifice. And at a somewhat
later date^ when Xerxes assembled his countless'^ hosts and
marched upon Helks, then^ too our fathers conquered the fore-
fathers of our foes by land and by sea.

" And proofs of these things are yist to be seen in trophies ;
but the greatest witness of all is the freedom of our cities, — the
liberty of that land in which you were born and bred. For
you call no man master or lord ; you bow your heads to none
save to the gods alone. Such were your forefathers, and their
sons are ye. Think not 1 am going to say that you put to
shame in any way your ancestry— far from it Not many days
since, you too were drawn up in battle face to face with these
true descendants of their ancestors, and by the help of heaven
you conquered them, though they many times outnumbered
you. At that time, it was to win a throne for Cyrus that you
showed your bravery ; to-day, when the struggle is for your
own salvation, what is more natural than that you should show
yourselves braver and more zealous still. Nay, it ts very meet
and right you should be more undaunted still to-day to face
the foe. The other day, though you had not tested them, and
before your eyes lay their immeasurable host, you had the
heart to go against them with the spirit of your fathers. To-

' Sec Herod, vi. 114. ; the allusion is to the invasion of Greece by Datis
and Artaphernes, and to ibeir defeat at Marathon, B.C. 490. "Herodotus
Mlimaies the number of those who fell 011 the Persian side at 6400 men : the
nunibtT of ALbcnian dead is accurately known, since all were collected for the
last solemn obsequies — they were iq2."- — Orole., //t's^, of Greece, voL v. p. 475,

' Herodotus (vii, 185) nifike.s tht- whole number of Xerxes' army 2,641,610
fighting: men, witii an even greater number of camp-followers.

^ Then = at Salamis, B.C. 480, and at Flataca and Mycale, B.C. 479, on
the same day.



7t



ANABASIS — BK. TTI.



{CH. 11. f i6-aa
Oct. a^ B.C. 401



day you have made trial of them, and knowing that, however
many times your number, they do not care to await your onset,
what concern have you now to be afraid of them P

"Nor let any one suppose that herein is a point of weak-
ness, in that Cyrus's troops, who before were drawn up by your
side, have now deserted us, for they are even worse cowards
still than those we worsted. At any rate they have deserted
us, and sought refuge with them. Leaders of the forlorn hope
of flight — far better is it to have them brigaded with the
enemy than shoulder to shoulder in our ranks. But if any
of you is out of heart to think that we have no cavalry, while
the enemy have many squadrons to command, lay to heart this
doctrine, that ten thousand horse equal only the ten thousand
men upon their backs, ^ neither less nor more. Did any one
ever die in battle from the bite or kick of a horse ? It is the
men, the real swordsmen, who do whatever is done in battles.
In fact we, on our stout shanks, are better mounted than those
cavalry fellows ; there they hang on to their horses* necks in
mortal dread, not only of us, but of falling off; while we, well
planted upon earth, can deal far heavier blows to our assailants,
and arm more steadily at whom we will. There is one point, I
admit, in which their cavalry have the whip-hand of us ; it is
safer for them than it is for us to run away.

" May be, however, you are in good heart about the fighting,
but annoyed to think that Tissaphernes will not guide us any
more, and that the king will not furnish us with a market any
longer. Now, consider, is it better for us to have a guide like
Tissaphernes, whom we know to be plotting against us, or to
take our chance of the stray people whom we catch and compel
to guide us, who will know that any mistake made in leading
us will be a sad mistake for their own lives ? Again, is it
better to be buying provisions in a market of their providing,
in scant measure and at high prices, without even the money
to pay for them any longer ; or, by right of conquest, to help
ourselves, applying such measure as suits our fancy best?

*'0r again, perhaps you admit that our present position
is not without its advantages, but you feel sure that the rivers
are a difficulty, and think that you were never more taken in

^ For the biiniour of this passage cf. Cyrop. IV. iii. 15.



Oct 83 /



XENOPHON'S PROPOSALS



n



than when you crossed them ; if so, consider whether, after all,
this is not perhaps the most foolish thing which the barbarians
have done. No river is impassable throughout ; whatever
difficulties it may present at some distance from its source,
you need only make your way up to the springhead, and there
you may cross it without wetting more than your ankles. But,
granted that the rivers do bar our passage, and that guides
are not forthcomingj what care we? We need feel no alarm
for all that Wc have heard of the Mysians,^ a people
whom we certainly cannot admit to he better than ourselves »
and yet they inhabit numbers of large and prosperous cities in
the king's own country without asking leave. The Pisidians ^
are an equally good instance, or the Lycaonians. We have seen
with our own eyes how they fare : seizing fortresses down in
the plains, and reaping the fruits of these men's territory.
As to us, I go so far as to assert, we ought never to have
let it be seen that we were bent on getting home : at any rate,
not so soon ; we should have begun stocking and furnishing
ourselves, as if we fully meant to settle down for life some-
where or other hereabouts. I am sure that the king would
be thrice glad to give the Mysians as many guides as they like,
or as many hostages as they care to demand, in return for a
safe conduct out of his country ; he would make carriage
roads for them, and if they preferred to lake their departure in
coaches and four, he would not say them nay. So too, I
am sure, he would be only too glad to accommodate us in the
same way, if he saw us preparing to settle down here. But,
perhaps, it is just as well that we did not stop , for 1 fear, if
once we learn to live in idleness and to batten in luxury and
dalliance ^ with these tall and handsome Median and Persian
women and maidens, we shall be like the Lotus-eaters,^ and
forget the road home altogether.

" It seems to me that it is only right, in the first instance,
to make an effort to return to Hellas and to revisit our hearths
and homes, if only to prove to other Hellenes that it is their



J Mysians. Pisidians. Lycaonians, see ahow, pp, 3, 7. 2a, 33. 57 ; cf.
Mem. 111. V. 26. ■■' Or. " to consort witli."

' See Odyssey, \x. 94 [Butcher and Lang, p. 137), " ever feeding on ihe
Lotus and forgetful of returning."



yfABASIS — m



f c». II. I 4^-31
I Oct. 33, B.C. 401



own faults if they are poor and needy,' seeing it is in their
power to give to those now living a pauper life at home a free
passage hither, and convert them into well-to-do burghers at
once,^ Now^ sirs, is it not clear that all these good things
belong to whoever has strength to hold them ?

" Let us look another matter in the face. How are we to
march most safely ? or where blows are needed, how are we
to fight to the best advantage ? That is the question.

" The first thing which I recommend is to bum the wagons
we have got, so that we may be free to march wherever the
army needs, and not, practically, make our baggage train our
general. And, next, we should throw our tents into the bon-
fire also : for these again are only a trouble to carry, and do
not contribute one grain of good either for fighting or getting
provisions. Further, let us get rid of all superfluous baggage,
save only what we require for the sake of war, or meat and
drink, so that as many of us as possible may be under arms,
and as few as possible doing porterage. I need not remind
you that, in case of defeat, the owners' goods are not their
own ; but if we master our foes, we will make them our
baggage bearers.

" It only rests for me to name the one thing which I look
upon as the greatest of all You see, the enemy did not dare
to bring war to bear upon us until they had first seized our
generals ; they felt that whilst our rulers were there, and we
obeyed them, they were no match for us in w^ar ; but having
got hold of them, they fully expected that the consequent
confusion and anarchy would prove fatal to us. What fol-
lows ? This : Officers and leaders ought to be more vigilant
even than their predecessors ; subordinates still more orderly
and obedient to those in command now than even they were
to those who are gone. And you should pass a resolution

* Here seems to be the germ — unless, indeed, the ihoughl had been
conceived above, p. 54 — here at any mle ihe first conscious expression of
the colonisation scheme, of which we shall hear more below, in reference to
Cotyora, p. 152 ; the Phasis, p. 157; Calpe, pp. 180, 183, 190. It appears
agmn fifty years later in the author's pamphlet On Jfei'fnues , chtipters i- and vi.
For the special evils of ihe fourth century h.c, and the growth of pauperism
between BX'. 4ot anti 338, see Jebb, Attic Orators, vol. i. p. 17.

- Reading TO()r vvv of/ccK dicX'^pouy iroXiWwofrai i»6a.ht Komaa/j^vovs


If CUM. I 31-371

Oct. 33 J

I that, in a
is to aid
et^emy wil
behold ter



AS TO THE ORDER OF MARCH



81



that, in case of insubordination, any one who stands by^
is to aid the officer in chastising the offender. So the
enemy will be mightily deceived ; for on this day they will
behold ten thousand Clearchuses instead of one, who will
not suffer one man to play the coward. And now it is high
time I brought my remarks to an end, for may be the enemy
will be here anon. Let those who are in favour of these
proposals confirm them with all speed, that they may be real-
ised in fact; or if any other course seem better, let not any
one, even though he be a private soldier, shrink from proposing
it. Our common safety is our common need."

After this Cheirisophus spoke. He said: ''If there is
anything else to be done, beyond what Xenophon has men-
tioned, we shall be able to carry it out presently ; but with
regard to what he has already proposed, it seems to me the
best course to vote upon the matters at once. Those who are
in favour of Xenophon's proposals, hold up their hands."
They all held them up. Xenophon rose again and said :
'• Listen, sirs, while I tell you what I think we have need of
besides. It is clear that we must march where we can get pro-
visions. Now, I am told there are some splendid villages not
more than two miles and a half distant. I should not be sur-
prised, then, if the enemy were to hang on our heels and dog us
as we retire, like cowardly curs which rush out at the passer-by
and bite him if they can, but when you turn upon them they
run away. Such will be their tactics, I take it. It may be
safer, then, to march in a hollow square, so as to place the
baggage animals and our mob of sutlers in greater security.
It will save time to make the appointments at once, and to
settle who leads the square and directs the vanguard j who
will take command of the two flanks, and who of the rear-
guard ; so that, when the enemy appears, we shall not need
to deliberate, but can at once set in motion the machinery in
existence.

" If any one has any belter plan, we need not adopt mine ;
but if not, suppose Cheirisophus takes the lead, as he is a
Lacedaemonian, and the two eldest generals take in charge the
two wings respectively, whilst Timasion and T, the two

* See below, p* 166 ; and cf. Xeu. Fo/. Lac. ii. 10.
G



82



ANABASIS — BK. IIT-



/CH. II. i 37-CH. UUl_
{ Oct. 33, B.C. 401



youngest,^ will for the present guard the rear. For the rest, we
can but make experiment of this arrangenient, and alter it
with deliberation, as from time to time any improvement
suggests itself. If any one has a better plan to propose, let
him do so." . . . No dissentient voice was heard Accordingly
he said : " Those in favour of this resolution, hold up their
hands," The resolution was carried, "And now," said
he, " it would be well to separate and carry out what we have
decreed. If any of you has set his heart on seeing his friends
again, let him remember to prove himself a man ; there is no
other way to achieve his heart's wish. Or is mere living an
object with any of you, strive to conquer ; if to slay is the
privilege of victory, to die is the doom of the defeated. Or
perhaps to gain money and wealth is your ambition, strive
again for mastery; have not conqueronj the double gain of
keeping what is their own^ whilst they seize the possessions of
the vanquished ? "

III. — The speaking was ended ; they got up and retired ;
then they burnt the wagons and the tents, and after sharing
with one another what each needed out of their various super-
fluities, they threw the remnant into the fire. Having done
that, they proceeded to make their breakfasts. While they
were breakfasting, Mithridates came with about thirty horse-
men, and summoning the generals within earshot, he thus
addressed them : " Men of Hellas^ I have been faithful to
Cyrus, as you know well, and to-day I am your well-wisher ;
indeed, I am here spending my days in great fear : if then
I could see any salutary course in prospect, 1 should be
disposed to join you with all my retainers. Please inform me,
then, as to what you propose, regarding me as your friend
and well-wisher, anxious only to pursue his march in your
company." The generals held council, and resolved to give
the following answer, Cheirisophus acting as spokesman :
"We have resolved to make our way through the country,
inflicting the least possible damage, provided we are allowed a

* See above, III, k 14 and 35. pp. 70, 71 ; and below, IIL iv. 42. p. 93 ;
IV. i. 6. ii. 16 ; V. iii. i ; \1L iiL 46 : to which should be added VIL ii.
38 ; VII. vi. 34 ; also II. vi. 15. 20. 30. The inference naturally drawn
from th«?se and other passages is thai Xenophon was a young man at the lime
of the Anahuis,



I

I



I



I
I


^ . UT. f 3-9>
OcL a3 /



PASSAGE OF THE ZAPATAS



83



free passage homewards ; but if any one tries to hinder us, he
will have to fight it out with us, and we shall bring all the
force in our power to bear." Thereat Mithridates set himself
to prove to them that their deliverance, except with the king's
good pleasure, was hopeless. Then the meaning of his mission
was plain. He was an agent in disguise ; in fact, a relation
of Tissaphernes was in attendance to keep a check on his
loyalty. After that, the generals resolved that it would be
better to proclaim open war, without truce or herald, as long
as they were in the enemy's country ; for they used to come
and corrupt the soldiers, and they were even successful with
one officer — Nicarchus/ an Arcadian, who went off in the
night with about twenty men.

After this, they breakfasted and crossed the river Zapatas,^
marching in regular order, with the beasts and camp fol-
lowers in the middle. They had not advanced far on their
route when Mithridates made his appearance again, with
about a couple of hundred horsemen at his back, and bowmen
and slingers twice as many, as nimble fellows as a man might
hope to see.^ He approached the Hellenes as if he were
friendly ; but when they had got fairly to close quarters, all of
a sudden some of them, whether mounted or on foot, began
shooting with their bows and arrows, and another set with
slings, wounding the men. The rearguard of the Hellenes
suffered for a while severely without being able to retaliate, for
the Cretans had a shorter range than the Persians, and at
the same time^ being light-armed troops, they lay cooped up
within the ranks of the heavy infantr)', while the javelin men
again did not shoot far enough to reach the enemy's slingers.
This being so, Xenophon thought there wa.s nothing for it but
to charge, and charge they did ; some of the heavy and light
infantry, who were guarding the rear^ with him ; but for all
their charging they did not catch a single man.

The dearth of cavalry told against the Hellenes ; nor were
their infantry able to overhaul the enemy's infantry, with the
long start they had, and considering the shortness of the race,
ar it was out of the question to pursue them far from the

^ Can this be ihe same man whose escape is so graphically described above,

p- 60? * Zab. ^ Ljl. "very niniblu and active."



84



ANABASIS^BK. III.



r CM- Ut ft lO^B

\ Oct. 33, &C 401



main body of the army. On the other hand, the Asiatic
cavalry, even while fleeing, poured volleys of arrows behind
their backs, and wounded the pursuers ; while the Hellenes
must fall back fighting ever>' step of the way they had meas-
ured in the pursuit ; so that by the end of that day they had
not gone much more than three miles ; but in the late after-
noon they reached the villages.

Here there was a return of the old despondency. Cheiri-
sophus and the eldest of the generals blamed Xenophon for
leaving the main body to give chase and endangering himself
thereby, while he could not damage the enemy one whit the
more. Xenophon admitted that they were right in blaming
him : no better proof of that was wanted than the result
" The fact is," he added, " I was driven to pursue ; it was too
trying to look on and see our men suifer so badly, and be
unable to retaliate. However, when we did charge, there is
no denying the truth of what you say; we were not a whit
more able to injure the enemy, while we had considerable diffi-
culty in beating a retreat ourselves. Thank heaven they did not
come upon us in any great force, but were only a handful of
men ; so that the injury they did us was not large, as it might
have been ; and at least it has served to show us what we need.
At present the enemy shoot and sling beyond our range, so
that our Cretan archers are no match for them ; our hand-
throwers cannot reach as far ; and when we pursue, it is not pos-
sible to push the pursuit to any great distance from the main
body, and within the short distance no foot-soldier, however
fleet of foot, could overtake another foot-soldier who has a bow-
shot the start of him. If, then, we are to exclude them from
all possibility of injuring us as we march, we must get slingers
as soon as possible and cavalry. I am told there are in the
army some Rhodians, most of whom, they say, know how to
sling, and their missile will reach even twice as far as the Persian
slings {which, on account of their being loaded with stones as
big as one's fist, have a comparatively short range ; but the
Rhodians are skilled in the use of leaden bullets).^ Suppose,

^ These words sound to me like an author's note, parenthetically, and per-
haps inadvertently, inserted into the text. It h an "aside" to the reader,
which in a modem book would appear as a footnote. See the Cyrof. for many
similar remarks "aside."



I



I
I

4



i^loct^i^ss"" "'■ ♦ ^^^^ ^^ SLINGERS AND CAVALRY



5i]
■fill



then, we investigate and find out first of all who among them
possess ^ slings, and for these slings offer the owner the money
value J and to another, who will plait some more, hand
over the money price ; and for a third, who will volunteer to
be enrolled as a slinger^ invent some other sort of privilege,
I think we shall soon find people to come forward capable of
helping us. There are horses in the army, I know ; some
few with myself, others belonging to Clearchus's stud, and a
good many others captured from the enemy, used for carrying
baggage. Let us take the pick of these, supplying their places
by ordinary baggage animals, and equipping the horses for
cavalry. I should not wonder if our troopers gave some annoy-
ance to these fugitives."

These proposals were carried^ and that night two hundred
slingers were enrolled, and next day as many as fifty horse and
I horsemen passed muster as duly qualified ; buff jackets and
Icuirasses were provided for them, and a commandant of
cavalry^ appointed to command — Lycius, the son of Poly-
stratus, by name, an Athenian.

L IV.— That day they remained inactive, but the next they
rose earlier than usual, and set out betimes, for they had a ravine
to cross, where they feared the enemy might attack them in the

kact of crossing. When they were across, Mithridates appeared
again with one thousand horse, and archers and slingers to the
number of four thousand. This whole body he had got by
request from Trssaphernes, and in return he undertook to deliver
up the Hellenes to Tissaphernes. He had grown contemptuous
since his late attack, when, with so small a detachment, he had
lone, as he thought, a good deal of mischief, without the
ightest loss to himself

When the Hellenes were not only right across, but had
got about a mile from the ravine, Mithridates also crossed
with his forces. An order had been passed down the lines, what
light infantry and what heavy infantry w^ere to take part in the
pursuit ; and the cavalry were instructed to follow up the

' The Greek word is viravrat, a somewhat quaint old-fashioned word,
wliich Xenophon uses inslead of the common Attic kckt7}vt(u at Litues, See
p. 155, note 1,

2 Lit. " hipparch " ; cf. the author's treatise, Hipparchikos, or a Cavalry
Generats Manual.


'86



ANABASIS BK. Til.



I Oct. a5-a6, B.c, 401



pursuit with confidence, as a considerable support was in their
rear. So, when Mithridates had come up with them, and they
were well within arrow and. sling shot, the bugle sounded the
signal to the Hellenes ; and immediately the detachment under
orders rushed to close quarters, and the cavalr)' charged. There
the enemy preferred not to wait, but fled towards the ravine.
In this pursuit the Asiatics lost several of their infantry killed,
and of their cavalry as many as eighteen were taken prisoners
in the ravine. As to those who were slain the Hellenes, acting
upon impulse,^ mutilated their bodies, by way of impressing
their enemy with as frightful an image as possible.

So fared the foe and so fell back ; but the Hellenes, con-
tinuing their march in safety for the rest of that day, reached
the river Tigris. Here they came upon a large deserted city,
the name of which was T^rissa : - a place inhabited by the
Medes in days of old ; the breadth of its walls was twenty-five
feet, and the height of them a hundred, and the circuit of the
whole two parasangs. It Avas built of clay-bricks, supported on
a stone basis twenty feet high. This city the king of the
Persians^ besieged, what time the Persians strove to snatch
their empire from the Medes, but he could in no wise take it ;
then a cloud hid the face of the sun and blotted out the light
thereof, until the inhabitants were gone out of the city, and
so it was taken. By the side of this city there was a stone
pyramid in breadth a hundred feet, and in height two hundred
feet ; in it were many of the barbarians who had fled for refuge
from the neighbouring villages.

From this place they marched one stage of six parasangs
to a great deserted fortress [which lay over against the city],
and the name of that city was Mespila.^ The Medes once

^ Lit. "self bklden."

^ t^arissa, on the site of ihe modem Nimrud (the south-west comer, as
is commonly supposed, of Nintrveh). See Goodwin and \V\M.c ad loc. The
name is said to mean "citadel/' and is given lo various Greek cities {of which
several occur in Xenophon — 10 Thessalv. Neil. VI. iv. 34 ; in the Troad,
Ilea. II!. 3. 13 ; and in the Aeolid, Hell. IIL i. 7 ; and cf. Cyrop. VIII. i. 45),
and 10 tiic citadel of Aigos. See Mr. Tozer, Geog. (f Greece, p. 379, ' " Peiasgic
names." * I.e. Cynis the Great.

■* Opposite Mosul ^ the north-west portion of the ancient Nineveh, about
*n miles above Larissa. The circuit of Niliewh is said lo have \y>sc\\
Hy-six miles. It was overthrown by Cyrus in n.c, 558. Dtod. ii. 3.



I
I

I



CH, IV. g ;o-i6l|
Oct. 2&-tJ /



PASS LARIS5A ANB MESPILA



%



dwelt in it The basement was made of polished stone full
of shells; fifty feet was the bre^idth of it, and fifty feet the
height ; and on this basement was reared a wall of brick, the
breadth whereof was fifty feet and the height thereof four
hundred ; and the circuit of the wall was six parasangs.
Hither, as the story goes, Medea, ^ the king's wife, betook her-
self in flight what time the Medes lost their empire at the
hands of the Persians. To this city also the king of the
Persians laid siege, but could not take it either by length of
days or strength of hand. But Zeus sent amazement- on the
inhabitants thereof, and so it was taken.

From this place they marched one stage, — four parasangs.
But, while still on this stage, Tissaphernes made his appearance.
He had with him his own cavalry and a force belonging to
Orontas, who had the king's daughter to wife ; and there
were, moreover, with them the Asiatics whom Cyrus had
taken with him on his march up ; together with those whom
the king's brother had brought as a reinforcement to the
king ; besides those whom Tissaphernes himself had received
as a gift from the king, so that the armament appeared to
be ver)' great. When they were close, he halted some of his
regiments at the rear and wheeled others into position on
either flank, but hesitated to attack, having no mind appar-
ently to run any risks, and contenting himself with an order
to his slingers to sling and his archers to shoot. But when
the Rhodian slingers and the bowmen,'^ posted at intervals,
retaliated, and every shot told (for with the utmost pains to miss
it would have been hard to do so under the circumstances), then
Tissaphernes with all speed retired out of range, the other
regiments follow^ing suit ; and for the rest of the day the one
party advanced and the other followed. But now the Asiatics
had ceased to be dangerous with their sharpshooting. For the

' Tlie wife of Astyages, the last king of Media. Some think " ihe wall of
Media ' (atove, pp. 25, 50) should be "Medea's wall," constructed in the
period of Queen Niiocris, D.C, 560.

- kt;ading 4/j.^povrqTOVi votti ; or with Hug, ^povr§ KaTiir\T}^e, "with
thunder aftrighltfd. "

^ The btiit MSS. read ^Kvffat, Scythians ; if this is correct, ft is only the
leclmical naniKfoir "archers." if. Arriau, y\jf/:. ii. 13. '["he police at Athens
were technically so called, as being composed of Scythian slaves. Cf. Aristoph.
7'AesfH. 1017.


88



ANABASIS BK. III.



j CH, IV. i 16-21

( Oct. 37-29, B.C. 401



Rhodians could reach further than the Persian slingersj or,
indeed, tlian most of the bowmen. The Persian bows are of
great size, so that the Cretans found the arrows which were
picket] up serviceable, and persevered in using their enemies'
arrows, and practised shooting with them, letting them fly up-
wards to a great height.^ There were also plenty of bowstrings
found in the villages — and lead, which they turned to account
for their slings. As the result of this day, then^ the Hellenes
chancing upon some villages had no sooner encamped than
the barbarians fell back, having had distinctly the worst of it
in the skirmishing.

The next was a day of inaction : they halted and took
in supplies, as there was much corn in the villages ; hut on
the day following, the march was continued through the plain
(of the Tigris), and Tissaphernes still hung on their skirts with
his skirmishers. And now it was that the Hellenes discovered
the defect of marching in a square with an enemy following.
As a matter of necessity', whenever the wings of an army so dis-
posed draw together, either where a road narrows, or hills
close in, or a bridge has to be crossed, the heavy infantry
cannot help being squeezed out of their ranks, and march with
difficulty, partly from actual pressure, and partly from the
general confusion that ensues ; and once thrown into disorder
that arm is practically useless. Or, supposing the wungs are
again extended, the troops have hardly recovered from their
former distress before they are pulled asunder, and there is
a wide space between the wings, and the men concerned lose
confidence in themselves, especially with an enemy close behind.
What happened, when a bridge had to be crossed or other
passage effected, was, that each unit of the force pressed on in
anxiety to get over first, and at these moments it was easy
for the enemy to make an attack. The generals accordingly,
having recogised the defect, set about curing it. To do so,
they made six lochi, or divisions of a hundred men apiece,
each of which had its own set of captains and undcr-ofFicers in

^ /.<•,, in practising, in order lo gel the Tiiaxiiniini ranfje they let fly the
arrows, not horizontally, Imt up iulo the ;iir. Str \\\ Kaleigh {//isL of the
WorU. III. X. 8) says that Xenophon " tmined his archers to short compass,
who had been accustomed to the point blank," but this is surely not Xunophon's
meaning. Sec Mr. Pretor ad he.



oJi.'^^N'o'v'^J NEW TACTICAL FORMATION

command of half and quarter companies. It was the diit)^ of
these new companies, during a march, whenever the flanks
needed to close in, to fall back to the rear, so as to disen-
cumber the Vrings. This they did by wheeling clear of them.
When the sides of the oblong again extended, they filled up
the interstices, if the gap were narrow, by columns of com-
panies, if broader, by columns of half companies,* or, if broader
still, by columns of quarter companies, so that the space
between was always filled up. If again it were necessary to
effect a passage by a bridge or otherwise, there was no con-
fusion, the several companies crossing in turns; or, if the
occasion arose to form in line of battle, these companies came
up to the front and fell in.'

In this way they advanced four stages, but ere the fifth
was completed, tliey came in sight of a palace of some sort,
with villages clustered round it ; they could further see that
the road leading to this place pursued its course over high
undulating hillocks, the spur of the mountain range, under
which lay the village. These knolls were a welcome sight to
the Hellenes, naturally enough, as the enemy were caval^)^
However, when they had issued from the plain and ascended
the first crest, and were m the act of descending it so as to
mount the next, at this juncture the barbarians came upon
them. From the high ground down the sheer steep they
poured a volley of darts, sling-stones, and arrows, which they
discharged "under the lash,"^ wounding many, until they got
the better of the Hellenic light troops,* and drove them for
shelter beliind the heavy infantry, so that this day that arm

^ Viifi- Thuc. V. 68 ; and Arnold's note (nf loc. ; also Prof, Jowett, 7huc.
vol. iu p. 319..

^ In the above passage I have translated Aoxot companies, and, as ustial,
Xo^a^oi captains. The half company is technically catted a pentecostyi, and
a qiiarter company an enomofj, and the officers in charge of iheni respectively
pfnicconier and efiomofarch. These would be equivalent nearly to our sub-
aUcms and sergeants, and in the evolutions described would act as guides and
raarkera in charge of their sections, Grote thinlts there were six companies
formed on euch flank — twelve in alL See Hiit. of Greea^ vol. ix. p. 123,
note (isl ed.|

^ vtth (xcurrlywy, i.e, the Persian leaders were seen flogging their men to
the attack, Cf* Herod, vii. 22. 3.

* The fJreek is yufivffTcav, including javelin men {dKOHTUTTal}, bowmen
(ro^&rai), and stingers {<r<f>ei^S<iifr}Tat),



90



ANABASIS — 13K. III.



{



CK. IV. ( a6-33
Nov- 3-7, •,c, 40T



was altogether useless, huddling in the mob of sutlers, both
^slingers and archers alike.

But when the Hellenes, being so pressed, made an attempt
to pursuCj they could barely scale to the summit, being heavy-
armed troops, while the enemy as hghtly sprung away ; and
they suflered similarly in retiring to join the rest of the army.
And then, on the second hill, the whole had to be gone
through again ; so that when ft came to the third hillock, they
determined not to move the main body of troops from their
position until they had brought up a division of light infantry^
from the right flank of the square to a point on the mountain
range. When this detachment were once posted above their
pursuers, the latter desisted from attacking the main body in
its descent, for fear of being cut off and finding themselves
between two assailants. Thus the rest of the day they moved
on in two divisions : one set keeping to the road by the
hillocks, the other marching parallel on the higher level
along the mountains : and thus they reached the villages and
appointed eight surgeons '^ to attend to the many wounded.

Here they halted three days for the sake of the wounded
chiefly, while a further inducement was the plentiful supply
of provisions which they found, wheat and wine, and large
stores of barley laid up for horses. These supplies had been
collected by ^ the ruling satrap of the country. On the fourth
day they began their descent into the plain ; but when Tissa-
phemes with his force overtook them, necessity taught them
to camp in the first village they caught sight of, and give over
the attempt of marching and fighting simultaneously, as so
many were hors de combat^ being either on the list of wounded
themselves, or else engaged in carrying the wounded, or laden
with the heavy arms of those so occupied. But when they
were once encamped, and the barbarians, advancing upon the
village, made an attempt to hamss them with their sharp-
shooters, the superiority of the Hellenes was pronounced.
To sustain a running fight with an enemy constantly attack-
ing was one thing ; to keep him at arm's length from a fixed
base of action another : and the difference was much in their
favour.



^ These are ibe "peltasts."



Cf. Cyrofi. I. vi. 15. ^ Or "for."



CH. IV. §34-39 I
Nov. 7'io I



PERSIAN TACTICS



pi



But when it was late afternoon, the time had come for
the enemy to withdraw, since the habit of the barbarian was
never to encamp within seven or eight miles ^ of the Hellenic
camp. This he did in apprehension of a night attack, for a
Persian army is good for nothing at night. Their horses are
haltered, and, as a rule, hobbled as well,^ to prevent their
escaping, as they might if loose ; so that, if any alarm occurs,
the trooper has to saddle and bridle his horse, and then he
must put on his own cuirass, and then mount — all which
performances are difficult at night and in the midst of con-
fusion. For this reason they always encamped at a distance
from the Hellenes.

When the Hellenes perceived that they were preparing to
retire, and that the order was being given, the herald's cry,
"Pack up for starting," might be heard before the enemy was
fairly out of earshot. For a while the Asiatics paused, as if
unwilling to be gone ; but as night closed in, off they went,
for it did not suit their notions of expediency to set off on a
march and arrive by night. And now, when the Hellenes saw
that they were really and clearly gone, they too broke up their
camp and pursued their march till they had traversed seven
and a half miles. Thus the distance between the two armies
grew to be so great, that the next day the enemy did not
appear at all, nor yet the third day ; but on the fourth the
barbarians had pushed on by a forced night march and occu-
pied a commanding position on the right, where the Hellenes
had to pass. It was a narrow mountain spur* overhanging the
descent into the plain.

But when Cheirisophus saw that this ridge was occupied,
he summoned Xenophon from the rear, bidding him at the
same time to bring up the peltasts to the front. That Xenophon
hesitated to do, for Tissaphernes and his whole army were
coming up and were well within sight. Galloping up to the front
himself, he asked : " Why do you summon mc ? " The other
answered him : " The reason is plain ; look yonder ; this crest
which overhangs our descent has been occupied. There is

' IJt. within 60 sindcs — 7^ English miles,

" Cf. Cyrofi. V. tii, 43 ; and also for similar Thracian luclliods, ImiIow, p.
205. ^ Lit. '*a mere nail Lip,"



93



ANABASIS — BK. IIL



I CH. IV. S 39-47
\ Nov. lo, B.C. ^oi



no passing, until we have dislodged these fellows ; why have
you not brought up the Hght mfantr>' ? " Xenophon explained :
— -he had not thought it desirable to leave the rear unprotected,
with an enemy appearing in the field of view. " However, it
is time/' he added, "to decide how we are to dislodge these
fellows from the crest." At this moment his eye fell on the
peak of the mountain, rising immediately above their array,
and he could see an approach leading froni it to the crest in
question where the enemy lay. He exclaimed : "The best
thing we can do, Cheirisophus, is to make a dash at the height
itself, and with what speed we may. If we take it, the party
in command of the road will never be able to stop. If you
like, stay in command of the army, and I will go ; or, if you
prefer, do you go at the mountain, and I will stay here."^" I
leave it to you," Cheirisophus answered, "to choose which
you like best." Xenophon remarking, " I am the younger,"
elected to go ; but he stipulated for a detachment from the
front to accompany hiro, since it was a long way to fetch up
troops from the rear. Accordingly Cheirisophus furnished
him with the light infantry from the front, reoccupying their
place by those from the centre. He also gave him, to form
part of the detachment, the three hundred of the picked
corps ^ under his own command at the head of the square.

They set out from the low ground with all the haste
imaginable. But the enemy in position on the crest no sooner
perceived their advance upon the summit of the pass than
they themselves set ofl" full tilt in a rival race for the summit
too. Hoarse were the shouts from the Hellenic troops as the
men cheered their companions forwards, and hoarse the an-
swering shout from the troops of Tissaphernes, urging on theirs.
Xenophon, mounted on his charger, rode beside his men, and
roused their ardour the while. " Now for it, brave sirs ;
bethink you that the race is for Hellas ! — now or never ! —
to find your boys, your wives ; one small effort, and the rest
of the march we shall pursue in peace, without ever a blow to
strike; now for it" But Soteridas the Sicyonian said : "We

' Some think that these three hundred aru three of the detached companies
described above, p. 88 ; otljcrs, thai they were a picked corps in attendance
on tlje commander-in-chief, ol (vlXeKTOi. Cf. Xen. Nelf. V. iii. 23 et passim.


CH. IV. 8 47 -CH. )

V, { 4, Nov. lo f



XENOPHON AND SOTERTOAS



93



are not on equal terms, Xenophon ; you are mounted on a
horse j I can hardly get along with my shield to carry ; '* and
he, on hearing the reproach, leapt from his horse. In another
instant he had pushed Soteridas from the ranks, snatched
from him his shield, and begun marching as quickly as he
might under the circumstances, having his horseman's cuirass
to carry^ as well, so that he was sore pressed ; but he continued
to cheer on the troops : exhorting those in front to lead on and
the men toiling behind to follow up.^ Soteridas was not spared
by the rest of the men. They gave him blows, they pelted
him, they showered him with abuse, till they compelled him
to take back his shield and march on ; and the other, remount-
ing, led them on horseback as long as the footing held; but
when the ground became too steep, he left his horse and
pressed fonvard on foot, and so they found themselves on the
summit before the enemy.

/^^'^^There and then the barbarians tmned and fled as best
they^might, and the Hellenes held the summit, while the troops
with Tissaphernes and Ariaeus turned aside and disappeared
by another road. The main body with Cheirisophus made its
way down into the plain and encamped in a village filled
with good things of divers sorts. Nor did this village stand
alone ; there were others not a few in this plain of the Tigris
equally overflowing with plenty. It was now afternoon ; and
all of a sudden the enemy came in sight on the plainj and
succeeded in cutting down some of the Hellenes belonging to
parties who were scattered over the flat land in quest of spoil.
Indeed, many herds of cattle had been caught whilst being
conveyed across to the other side of the riven And now
Tissaphernes and his troops made an attempt to burn the
villages, and some of the Hellenes were disposed to take the
matter deeply to heart, being apprehensive that they might
not know where to get provisions if the enemy burnt the
villages.

Cheirisophus and his men were returning from their sally
of defence when Xenophon and his party descended, and the

^ Reading roh 5i iTncSfv irapleirai ^iXis itrotiivoi^. If, with Hug and ihe
IjcUer MSS. , fi6hu eini^crot, translate ' ' and the men bebind lo pass him by,
as he could but ill keep up the pace,"



94



ANABASIS — BK. III.



j CH. V. 9 4-ia

{ Nov. IQ, B.C. 401



latter rode along the ranks as the rescuing party came op,
and greeted them thus : ^' Do you not see, men of Hellas,
they admit that the country is now ours ; what they stipulated
against our doing when they made the treaty, vi^. that we
were not to fire the king's country, they are now themselves
doing, — setting fire to it as if it were not their own. But we
will be even with them ; if they leave provisions for themselves
anyivhere, there also shall they see us marching ; " and, turning
to Cheirisophus, he added: "But it strikes me, we should
sally forth against these incendiaries and protect our country."
Cheirisophus retorted ; ** That is not quite my view ; I say, let us
do a little burning ourselves, and they will cease all the quicker."

When they had got back to the villages, while the rest were
busy about provisions, the generals and officers met : and
here there was deep despondency. For on the one side were
exceedingly high mountains; on the other a river of such
depth that they failed to reach the bottom with their spears.
In the midst of their perplexities, a Rhodian came up with a
proposal, as follows : " I am ready, sirs, to carry you across,
four thousand heavy infanlny at a time ; if you will furnish me
with what I need and give me a talent ^ into the bargain for
my pains." When asked, *' What shall you need ?" he replied :
" Two thousand wine-skins. I see there are plenty of sheep
and goats, oxen and asses. They have only to be flayed, and
their skins inflated^ and they will readily give us a passage. I
shall want also the straps which you use for the baggage
animals. With these 1 shall couple the skins to one another ;
then I shall moor each skin by attaching stones and letting
them down tike anchors into the water. Then I shall ciirry
them across, and when I have fastened the links at both ends,
I shall place layers of wood on them and a coating of earth on
the top of that. You will see in a minute that there's no
danger of your drowning, for every skin will be able to support
a couple of men without sinking, and the wood and earth will
prevent your slipping off."

The generals thought it a pretty invention enough, but its
realisation impracticable, for on the other side were masses of
cavalry posted and ready to bar the passage ; who, to begin

' Or, /"250 flhe Lalt;nt = £^43 : 15s).



CH. V. $ r2-i6 )
Nov. ti I



CONSULTATION AS TO ROUTE



95



with, would not suffer the first detachment of crossers to carry
out any item of the programme.

Under these circumstances, the next day they turned right
about face, and began retracing their steps in the direction of
Babylon to the unburnt villages, having previously set fire to
those they left, so that the enemy did not ride up to them, but
stood and stared, all agape to see^ in what direction the Hellenes
would betake themselves and what they were minded to do.
Here, again, while the rest of the soldiers were busy about
provisions, the generals and officers met in council, and after
collecting the prisoners together, submitted them to a cross-
examination touching the whole country round, the names, and
so forth, of each district.

The prisoners informed them that the regions south,
through which they had come, belonged to the district towards
Babylon and Media ; the road east led to Susa and Ecbatana,
where the king is said to spend summer and spring ; crossing
the river, the road west led to Lydia and Ionia ; and the part
through the mountains facing towards the Great Bear, led, they
said, to the Carduchians,- They were a people, so said the
prisoners, dwelling up on the hills, addicted to war, and not
subject to the king ; so much so that once, when a royal
army one hundred and twenty thousand strong had invaded
them, not a man came backj owing to the intricacies of the
country. Occasionally, however, they made truce or treaty with
the satrap in the plain, and, for the nonce, there would be
intercourse : " they will come in and out amongst us," " and
we will go in and out amongst them," said the captives.

^ Reading either jUjudcm rjtray Pavjwdfe**' with Sauppe ; or, Sfioim Tjaav
BaDfiA^oufftif mth Hug.

^^ See Dr. Kiepert, Man, Afie. Getig. (Eng. Tr. , MacmiUajii) iv. 47. The
Karduchians or Kurds belong by speeoh 1.0 the Iranian slock, forming in fact
their farthest ouiposi 10 the west, little given 10 agriculture, liul chiefly to the
breeding of cattle. Their name, pronounced h'ardu by the ancient Syrians
and .Assyrians, Kordu by the Armenians (plural Kordukh}, first appears in its
narrower sense in western literature in the pages of the eye-witness Xenophon
as Kafi^oCpt'"- Later writers knew of a small kingdom here at the time of the
Roman occupation, ruled by native princes, who after Tigranes 11. (about
80 B.c) recognised the overlordship of the Armenian king. Later it became
a province of the Sassanid kingdom, and as such was in 297 A, D, handed over
among the rcgiones tramUgritanae to the Roman empire, but in 364 was again
ceded to Persia, *



$e



ANABASIS — BK. FlI.



jf CH. V- § 17-13
(Nov. tj, B.C. 4ot



After hearing these statements, the generals seated apart
those who claimed to have any special knowledge of the
country in any direction; they put them to- sit apart without
making it clear which particular route they intended to take.
Finally the resolution to which they came was that they must
force a passage through the hills into the territory of the Kurds;
since, according to what their informants told them, when they
had once passed these, they would find themselves in Armenia
— the rich and large territory governed by Orontas ; and from
Armenia, it would be easy to proceed in any direction whatever.
Thereupon they offered sacrifice, so as to be ready to start on
the march as soon as the right moment appeared to have
arrived. Their chief fear was that the high pass over the
mountains might be occupied in advance : and a general order
was issued, that after supper every one should get his kit
together for starting, and repose, in readiness to follow as soon
as the word of command was given.



BOOK IV. [. 1-6

[In Ihe preceding portion of the narrative a full account is given of the
incidents of the march ap to the battle, and of the occurrences after the
battle during the truce which wiis established between the king and the
Hellenes, who marched up wilh Cyrus, and thirdly, of ihe hjjhting to which
the Hellenes were exposed, after the king and Tissaphernes ha<l broken
Lhe treat)', while a Persian army hung ou their rear. Having finally
reached a point at which the Tigris was absolutely impassable owing to its
depth and breadth, while there was no passage along the bank itself, and
the Carduchian hills hung sheer over the river, the generals took the resolu-
tion above mentioned of forcing a passage through the mountains. The
information derived from the prisoners laken along the way led them to
believe that once across the Carduchian mountains they would have lhe
choice either of crossing the Tigris — if they liked to do so — at its sources
in Armenia, or of going round them, if so they preferred. Report further
said that the sources of the Euphrates also were not far from those of the
Tigris, and this is actually the r^se. The advance into lhe country of the
Carduchians was conducted with a view partly to secrecy, and partly to
speed, so as to efiect their entry before the enemy could occupy the passes.^]

I. — It was now about the last watch, and enough of the
night remained to allow them to cross the valley ttnder cover
of darkness ; when, at the word of command, they rose and
set off on their march, reaching the mountains at daybreak.
At this stage of the march Cheirisophus, at the head of his
own division, with the whole of the light troops, led the van,
while Xenophon followed behind with the heavy infantry of
the rearguard, but without any light troops, since there seemed
to be no danger of pursuit or attack from the rear, while they
were making their way up hill. Cheirisophus reached the

1 Lit. " lhe heights " (commanditig the passes).
H



I



ANABASIS BK. IV.



I Nov. t3-i3, B.C. 401



summit without any of the enemy perceiving him. Then
he led on slowly, land the rest of the amiy followed, wave
upon wave, cresting the summit and descending into the
villages which nestled in the hollows and recesses of the
hills.

Thereupon the Carduchians abandoned their dwelling-
places, and with their wives and children fled to the mountains ;
so there was plenty of provisions to he got for the mere trouble
of taking, and the homesteads too were well supplied with a
copious store of bronze vessels and utensils which the Hel-
lenes kept their hands off, abstaining at the same time from all
pursuit of the folk themselves, gently handling them,^ m hopes
that the Carduchians might be willing to give them friendly
passage through their country, since they too were enemies
of the king : only they helped themselves to such provisions as
fell in their way, which indeed was a sheer necessitj'. But
the Carduchians neither gave ear, when they called to them,
nor showed any other friendly sign ; and now, as the last of
the Hellenes descended into the villages from the pass, they
were already in the dark, since, owing to the narrowness of the
road, the whole day had been spent in the ascent and
descent At that instant a party of the Carduchians, who had
collected, made an attack on the hindmost men, killing some
and wounding others with stones and arrows — though it was
quite a small body who attacked. The fact was, the approach
of the Hellenic army had taken them by surprise ; if, however,
they had mustered in larger force at this time, the ciiances are
that a large portion of the army would have been annihilated.
As it was, they got into (juarters, and bivouacked in the villages
that night, while the Carduchians kept many watch-fires blazing
in a circle on the mountains, and kept each other in sight all
round.

But with the dawn the generals and officers of the Hel-
lenes met and resolved to proceed, talcing only the necessary
number of stout baggage animals, and leaving the weaklings
behind. They resolved further to let go free all the lately-
captured slaves in the host ; for the pace of the march was
necessarily rendered slow by the quantity of animals and
^ Lit. "sparing thew a little."



rH. I. S i3i9\
Nuv. 13.14 f



AMONG THE CARDl



<S



99



prisoners, and the number of non-combatants in attendance
on these was excessive, while, with such a crowd of human
beings to satisfy,^ twice the amount of provisions had to
be procured and carried. These resolutions passed, they
caused a proclamation by herald to be made for their en-
forcement.

When they had breakfasted and the march recommenced^
the generals planted themselves a little to one side in a narrow
place, and when they found any of the aforesaid slaves or other
property still retained, they confiscated them. The soldiers
yielded obedience, except where some smuggler, prompted by
desire of a good-looking boy or woman, managed to make off
with his prize. During this day they contrived to get along
after a fashion, now fighting and now resting. But on the
next day they were visited by a great storm, in spite of
which they were obliged to continue the march, owing to in-
sufficiency of provisions. Cheirisophus was as usual leading
in front, while Xenophon headed the rearguard, when the
enemy began a violent and sustained attack. At one narrow
place after another they came up quite close, pouring in volleys
of arrows and slingstones, so that the Hellenes had no choice
but to make sallies in pursuit and thon again recoil, making
but very little progress. Over and over again Xenophon would
send an order to the front to slacken pace, when the enemy
were pressing their attack severely. As a rule, when the word
was so passed up, Cheirisophus slackened ^ but sometimes^
instead of slackening, Cheirisophus quickened, sending down
a counter-order to the rear to follow on quickly. It was clear
that there was something or other happening, but there was
no time to go to the front and discover the cause of the hurry.
Under these circumstances the march, at any rate in the rear,
became very like a rout, and here a brave man lost his life,
Cleonymus the Laconianj shot with an arrow in the ribs right
through shield and corselet, as also Basias, an Arcadian, shot
clean through the head.

As soon as they reached a halting-place, Xenophon, without
more ado, came up to Cheirisophus, and took him to task for
not having waited, " whereby, " said he, ** we were forced to
1 Or, "so raany mouths to feed." ^ Or, "on one occasion."



r ciu 1. s 19-27

{ Nov. *4, K.c. 4ot

fight and flee at the same moment ; and now it has cost us the
lives of two fine fellows ; ^ they arc dead, and we were not
able to pick up their bodies or bury them." Cheirisophus
answered : " Look up there^'^ pointing as he spoke to the
mountain, "do you see how inaccessible it all is? only this
one road, which you see, going straight up, and on it all that
crowd of men who have seized and are guarding the single
exit. That is why I hastened on, and w^hy I could not wait
for yoUj hoping to be beforehand with them yonder in seizing
the pass: the guides we have got say there is no other way."
And Xenophon replied : " But I have got two prisoners also ;
the enemy annoyed us so much that we laid an ambuscade
for them, which also gave us time to recover our breaths ; we
killed some of them, and did our best to catch one or two
alive — for this very reason — that we might have guides who
knew the country, to depend upon."

The two were brought up at once and questioned separately :
*' Did they know of any other road than the one visible ? "
The first said na ; and in spite of all sorts of terrors applied to
extract a better answer-^w^, he persisted. When nothing
could be got out of him, he was killed before the eyes of his
fellow. This latter then explained: "Yonder man said, he
did not know, because he has got a daughter married to a
husband in those parts. I can take you," he added, " by a
good road, practicable even for beasts." And when asked
whether there was any point on it difficult to pass, he replied
that there was a col which it would be impossible to pass unless
it were occupied in advance.

Then it was resolved to summon the officers of the light in-
fantry and some of those of the heavy infantry, and to acquaint
them with the state of affairs, and ask them whether any of
them were minded to distinguish themselves, and would stej)
forward as volunteers on an expedition. Two or three heavy
infantry soldiers stepped forward at once^two Arcadians, Aris-
tonymus of Methydriuni, and Agasias of St}'mphalus — and in
emulation of these, a third, also an Arcadian, Callimachus from
Parrhasia^ who said he was ready to go, and would get volun-

^ Or. "good men and true" ; lit. "two beautiful and brave men.' Cf.
ItaL "galantuommi."



Ctt. I. S a7-CH, 1

ti. § 6, Nov. t4 j"



THE PASS OCCUPIED



roi



teers from the whole army to join him. " I RiVa'A','? he added,
"there will be no lack of youngsters to follow whered leatj."
After that they asked, "Were there any captains^ of light itifiantry
willing to accompany the expedition?" Aristeas, a Chian, whtj'
on several ocaisions proved his usefulness to the army on such
service, volunteered.

n,^It was already late afternoon, when they ordered the
storming party to take a snatch of food and set off ; then they
bound the guide and handed him over to them. The agree-
ment was, that if they succeeded in taking the summit they
were to guard the position that night, and at daybreak to give
a signal by bugle. At this signal the party on the summit
were to attack the enemy in occupation of the visible pass,
while the generals with the main body would bring up their
succours ; making their way up with what speed they might.
With this understanding, off they set, two thousand strong; and
there was a heavy downpour of rain, but Xenophon, mth his
rearguard, began advancing to the visible pass, so that the enemy
might fix his attention on this road, and the party creeping
round might, as much as possible, elude observation. Now
when the rearguard, so advancing, had reached a ravine which
they must cross in order to strike up the steep, at that instant
the barbarians began rolling down great boulders, each a
wagon load,- some larger, some smaller ; against the rocks they
crashed and splintered flying like slingstones in every direction
— so that it was absolutely out of the question even to approach
the entrance of the pass. Some of the officers finding them-
selves baulked at this point, kept trying other ways, nor did
they desist till darkness set in ; and then, when they thought
they would not be seen retiring, they returned to supper.
Some of them who had been on duty in the rearguard had
had no breakfast (it so happened). However, the enemy never
ceased rolling down their stones all through the night, as was
easy to infer from the booming sound.

The party with the guide made a circuit and surprised the
enemy's guards seated round their fire, and after killing some,
and driving out the rest, took their places, thinking that they
were in possession of the height. As a matter of fact they were

' Lit. "" laxiarchs." - /.^. several ton weight.


I02



•"".AkA'BASIS — BK. IV.



f CH. ri. 5 6-13
\ Nov. 1 3, H.C. 401



not, for ab6ye».tficm lay a breast-like hill ^ skirted by the narrow
roii4 oir.whicn they had found the guards seated. Still, from

,«,tijerspot*in question there was an approach to the enemy, who

':V5fe seated on the pass before mentioned.

Here then they passed the night, but at the first glimpse
of dawn they marched stealthily and in battle order against
the enemy. There was a mist, so that they could get quite
close without being observed. But as soon as they caught
sight of one another, the trumpet sounded, and with a loud
cheer they rushed upon the fellows, who did not wait their
coming, but left the road and made off; with the loss of only
a few lives however, so nimble wcie they. Cheirisophus and
his men, catching the sound of the bugle, charged up by the
well- marked road, while others of the generals pushed their
way up by p;ith1ess routes, where each division chanced to be ;
the men mounting as they were best able, and hoisting one
another up by means of their spears ; and these were the first
to unite with the party who had already taken the position by
storm. Xenophon, with the rearguard, followed the path
which the party with the guide had taken, since it was easiest
for the beasts of burthen ; one half of his men he had posted
in rear of the baggage animals ; the other half he had with
himself. In their course they encountered a crest above the
road, occupied by the enemy, whom they must either dislodge
or be themselves cut off from the rest of the Hellenes. The
men by themselves could have taken the same route as the
rest, but the baggage animals could not mount by any otlier
way than this.

Here then, with shouts of encouragement to each other,
they dashed at the hill with their storming columns,* not from
all sides, but leaving an avenue of escape for the enemy, if he
chose to avail himself of it. For a while, as the men scrambled
up where each best could, the natives kept up a fire of arrows
and darts, yet did not receive them at close quarters, but pre-
sently left the position in flight. No sooner, however, were
the Hellenes safely past this crest, than they came in sight of
another in front of them, also occupied, and deemed it advis-
able to storm it also. But now it struck Xenophon that if



- opSioK Toii }\6xot<(.



Or, ** mnmelon. "
See below tV. viii. 9-19;



V. iv. 22.



Of. II, j i3-ao">
Nov. IS /



A HARD STRUGGLE



103



they left the ridge just taken unprotected in their rear, the
enemy might re- occupy it and attack the baggage animals as
they filed past, presenting a long extended line owing to
the narrowness of the road by which they made their way.
To obviate this, he left some officers in charge of the ridge —
Cephisodorus, son of Cephisophon, an Athenian ; Amphicrates,
the son of Amphidemus,an Athenian; and Archagoras, an Argive
exile — while he in person with the rest of the men attacked the
second ridge; this they took in the same fashion, only to find
that they had still a third knoll left, far the steepest of the
three. This was none other than the mamelon mentioned as
above the outpost, which had been captured over their fire
by the volunteer storming party in the night. But when the
Hellenes were close, the natives, to the astonishment of all,
without a struggle deserted the knoll. It was conjectured
that they had left their position from fear of being encircled
and besieged, but the fact was that they, from their higher
ground, had been able to see what was going on in the rear,
and had all made off in this fashion to attack the rearguard.

So then Xenophon, with the youngest men, scaled up to
the top, leaving orders to the rest to march on slowly, so as
to allow the hindmost companies to unite with them j they
were to advance by the road, and when they reached the
level to ground arms.^ Meanwhile the Argive Archagoras
arrived, in full flight, with the announcement that they had
been dislodged from the first ridge, and that Cephisodorus and
Amphicrates were skin, with a number of others besides,
"all in fact who had not jumped down the crags and so
reached the rearguard. After this achievement the barbarians
came to a crest facing the mamelon, and Xenophon held a
colloquy with them by means of an interpreter, to negotiate
a truce, and demanded back the dead bodies. These they
agreed to restore if he would not burn their houses, and to
these terms Xenophon agreed. Meanwhile, as the rest of the
army filed past, and the colloquy was proceeding, all the people
of the place had time to gather gradually, and the enemy
formed ; and as soon as the Hellenes began to descend from
the mamelon to join the others where the troops were halted,

^ To lake up posilion.


I04



ANABASIS BK, IV.



fCH. II. i 20-38
Nov. 15-16, B.C. 401



on rushed the foe, in full force^ with hue and cry. They
reached the summit of the maiuelon from which Xenophon
was descending, and began Tolling down crags. One man's
leg was crushed to pieces. Xenophon was left by his shield-
bearer, who carried off his shield, but Eurylochus of Lusia,'
an Arcadian hoplite, ran up to him, and threw his shield in
front to protect both of them ; so the two together beat a
retreat, and so too the rest, and joined the serried ranks of
the main body.

After this the whole Hellenic force united, and took up
their quarters there in numerous beautiful dwellings, with an
ample store of provisions, for there was wine so plentiful that
they had it in cemented cisterns. Xenophon and Cheirisophus
arranged to recover the dead, and in return restored the
guide ; afterwards they did everything for the dead, according
to the means at their disposal, with the customary honours
paid to good men.-

Next day they set off without a guide j and the enemy, by
keeping up a continuous battle and occupying in advance
every narrow place, obstructed passage after passage. Ac-
cordingly, whenever the van was obstructed, Xenophon, from
behind, made a dash up the hills and broke the barricade,
and freed the vanguard by endeavouring to get above the
obstructing enemy. Whenever the rear was the point attacked,
Cheirisophus, in the same way, made a detour, and by en-
deavouring to mount higher than the barricaderSj ireed the
passage for the rear rank ; and in this w:ay, turn and turn
about, they rescued each other, and paid unflinching attention
to their mutual needs. At times it happened that, the relief
party having mounted, encountered considerable annoyance
in their descent from the barbarians, who were so agile that
they allowed them to come up quite close, before they turned
back, and still escaped, partly no doubt because the only
weapons they had to carry were bows and slings.

They were, moreover, excellent archers, using bows nearly three
cubits long and arrows more than two cubits. When discharging
the arrow, they draw the string by getting a purchase with the

' /.<?. of Lusi (or Lusia), a town {or district) in Norlhern ArcnHin.
" Or, "brave luen," dvSpAaiv uyaOms.



Cll. II. S SE-CH. MU i

§ 5, Nov. 17-18 (■



REACH THE CENTRITES



105



left foot planted forward on the lower end of the bow. The
arrows pierced through shield and cuirass, and the Hellenes,
when they got hold of them, used them as javelins, fitting them
to their thongs. In these districts the Cretans were highly
serviceable. They were under the command of Stratocles, a
Cretan.

III. — During this day they bivouacked in the villages
which lie above the plain of the river Centrites,^ which is about
two hundred feet broad. It is the frontier river between
Armenia and the country of the Carduchians. Here the
Hellenes recruited themselves, and the sight of the plain filled
them with joy, for the river was but six or seven furlongs
distant from the mountains of the Carduchians. For the
moment then they bivouacked right happily ; ^ they had their
provisions, they had also many memories of the labours that
were now passed ; seeing that the last seven days spent in
traversing the country of the Carduchians had been one long
continuous battle, which had cost them more suffering than
the whole of their troubles at the hands of the king and
Tissaphernes put together. As though they were truly quit
of them for ever, they laid their heads to rest in sweet
content.

But with the morrow's dawn they espied horsemen at a
certain point across the river, armed cap-dr-pie^ as if they
meant to dispute the passage. Infantry, too, drawn up in line
upon the banks above the cavalry, threatened to prevent them
debouching into Armenia. These troops were Armenian and
Mardian and Chaldaean mercenaries belonging to Orontas and
Artuchas- The last of the three, the Chaldaeans, were said to be
a free and brave set of people. They were armed with long
wicker shields and lances. The banks before named on
which they were drawn up were a hundred yards or more
distant from the river, and the single road which was visible
was one leading upwards and looking like a regular artificially
constructed highway. At this point the Hellenes endeavoured

1 I.e. the Eastern Tigris,

'•^ Or, " M ith a store of provisions, recounting to each other many incidents
in the dangers now past."

^ Or, '" completely armed." Cf. Polyb. 31, 3, 9; Plut. Crass. 21, A-axd'
0paKTOi. hurries and horsemen clad in full armour.


to6



ANABASIS — BK. IV.



CH. III. I 6- to
I Nov, 18-19, "■*^- ^^*



to cross, but on their making the attempt the water proved
to be more than breast-deep, and the river bed was rough with
great slippery stones, and as to holding their arms in the
water, it was out of the question — the stream swept them
away — or if they tried to carry them over the head, the
body was left exposed to the arrows and other missiles ;
accordingly they turned back and encamped there by the
bank of the river.

At the point where they had themselves been last nighty
up on the mountains, they could see the Carduchians collected
in large numbers and under arms. A shadow of deep
despair again descended on their souls, whichever way they
turned their eyes — in front lay the river so difficult to ford ;
over, on the other side, a new enemy threatening to bar the
passage ; on the hills behind, the Carduchians ready to fall
upon their rear should they once again attempt to cross.
Thus for this day and night they halted, sunk in perplexity,
But Xenophon had a dream. In his sleep he thought
that he was bound in fetters, but these, of their own accord,
fell from off himj so that he was loosed, and could stretch
his legs as freely as he wished.^ So at the first glimpse of
daylight he came to Cheirisophus and told him that he had
hopes that all things would go well, and related to him his
dream.

The other was well pleased, and with the first faint gleam
of dawn the generals all were present and did sacrifice ;
and the victims were favourable at the first essay. Retiring
from the sacrifice, the generals and officers issued an order
to the troops to take their breakfasts ; and while Xenophon
was taking his, two young men came running up to him, for
every one knew that, breakfasting or supping, he was always
accessible, or that even if asleep any one was welcome to

^ It is impossible to give the true sense iind humour of the passage in
English, dep>ending, as it does, on ihc double meaning of Stafiaivfiv [t] to
cross (a river}, (a) 10 stride or siraddig (of the legs), Tlie anny is unable
{iia^aiytLv) to cross the CenlrJtes ; Xenophon dreams that he is fettered, but
the chaias drop off his legs and he is able {^ta§alvtiv) 10 stride as freely as
ever ; next morning the two young men come to him with the story how ihpy
had found themselves able {ha^aivtiv) to walk across the rivrr instend of
having to swim it. It is obvious to Xenophon thnt the dream is sent from
Heaven. See above, p. 69.



CH. UI. § TO-T7"\

Nov. fy i



A FORD DISCOVERED



107



I



awaken him who had anything to say bearing on the business
of war. What the two young men had at this time to say was
that they had been collecting brushwood for fire, and had pre-
sently espied on the opposite side, in among some rocks which
came down to the river's brink, an old man and some women
and little girls depositing, as it would appear^ bags of clothes
in a cavernous rock. When they saw them, it struck them
that it was safe to cross ; in any case^ the enemy's cavalry could
not approach at this point. So they stripped naked, expecting
to have to swim for it, and with their long knives in their
hands began crossing, but going forward crossed without being
wet up to the fork. Once across they captured the clothes,
and came back again.

Accordingly Xenophon at once poured out a libation him-
self, and bade the two young fellows fill the cup and pray to the
godsj who showed to him this vision and to them a passage,
to bring all other blessings for them to accomplishment.
When he had poured out the libations, he at once led the
two young men to Cheirisophus, and they repeated to him
their story. Cheirisophus, on hearing it, oflered libations also,
and when they had performed them, they sent a general
order to the troops to pack up ready for starting, while they
themselves called a meeting of the generals and took counsel
how they might best effect a passage, so as to overpower the
enemy in front without suffering any loss from the men behind.
And they resolved that Cheirisophus should lead the van and
cross with half the army, the other half still remaining behind
under Xenophon, while the baggage animals and the mob of
sutlers were to cross between the two divisions.

When all was duly ordered the move began, the young
men pioneering them, and keeping the river on their left. It
was about four furlongs' march to tlie crossing, and as they
moved along the bank, the squadrons of cavalry kept pace
with them on the opposite side.

But when they had reached a point in a line with the ford,
and the cliff-like banks of the river, they ordered arms,-
and first Cheirisophus himself placed a wreath upon his brows,^

^ Lit, "for not even." " Took, up position.

^ Cf. /•<?/. Lac, xiii. 8 ; Nt//. IV. iii. ai.



ANABASIS BK. IV.



{ CH. ni. 5 17-23
\Nov. ig, HiC. 401



and throwing off his cloak,^ resumed his arms, passing the order
to ali the rest to do the same, and bade the captains fomi their
companies in open order in deep columns, some to left and
some to right of himself. Meanwhile the soothsayers were
slaying a vicdm over the river, and the enemy were letting fly
their arrows and slingstones ; but as yet they were out of range.
As soon as the victims were favourable, all the soldiers began
singing the battle hymn, and with the notes of the paean
mingled the shouting of the men - accompanied by the shriller
chant of the women, for there were many women ^ in the camp.
So Cheirisophus with his detachment stept in. But
Xenophon, taking the most active -bodied of the rearguard,
began running back at full speed to the passage facing the
egress into the hills of Armenia^ making a feint of crossing
at that point to intercept their cavah-y on the river bank.
The enemy, seeing Cheirisophus's detachment easily cross-
ing the stream, and Xenophon's men racing back, were
seized with the fear of being intercepted, and fled at full
speed in the direction of the road which emerges from the
stream. But when they were come opposite to it they raced
up hill towards their mountains. Then Lycius, who com-
manded the cavalry, and Aeschines, who was in command
of the division of light infantry attached to Cheirisophus, no
sooner saw them fleeing so lustily than they were after them,
and the soldiers shouted not to fall behind,' but to follow
them right up to the mountains. Cheirisophus, on getting
across, forbore to pursue the cavalry, but advanced by the
bluffs which reached to the river to attack the enemy over-
head. And these, seeing their own cavalry fleeing^ seeing
also the heavy infantry advancing upon them, abandoned the
heights above the river.

^ Or, " having doflfed it," i.e. the vr&iih, an action wliich ilie soldiers would
pprfonn symbolically, if Grole is right im his inlerpreiation of the passage, //;jf/.
if Greece, vol. i.<. p. 137.

- TTie Greek words ijft}\6.\a^ov, aoyuXiikvl^ov, of llic men and women
rtspectively = " shouled .\lala," and raised the joyous oXoXiryiJ or Lhiint of
invocalion. Cf. Horn. //. Ft//, 19,

^ Lit. "coniriide-rtoruen" {fTalpai, hetaerae).

* Or, "10 stick light 10 them find not to be outdone"; or, as others
tmderstnnd, "the (infantry) soldiers clamoured not to Iw left behind, but to
follow thcni up into the mountains/' .See Mr, Preior aJ /w.



nhiifing tiu"- ■itcB of

Kt.'>'AXA. THE MEDIAN WALL. AND SITTAKE

anA. the auj^gestL-d id.rxitxlic^'bon ■ (m- Opls Ax:


I



Xenophon, as soon as he saw that things were going well on
the other side, fell back with all speed to join the troops engaged
in crossing, for by this time the Carduchians were well in sight,
descending into the plain to attack their rear.

Cheirisophus was in possession of the higher ground, and
Lycius, with his little squadron, in an attempt to follow up the
pursuit, liad captured some stragglers of their baggage-bearers,
and with them some handsome apparel and drinking- cups.
The baggage animals of the Hellenes and the mob of non-
combatants were just about to cross, when Xenophon turned
his troops right about to face the Carduchians. Vis-a-vis he
formed his line, passing the order to the captains each to form
his company into sections, and to deploy them into line to the
left, the captains of companies and lieutenants in command of
sections^ to advnnce to meet the Carduchians, while the rear
leaders would keep their position facing the river. But when
the Carduchians saw the rearguard so stript of the mass, and
looking now like a mere handful of men, they advanced all the
more quickly, singing certain songs the while. Then, as
matters were safe with him, Cheirisophus sent back the peltasts
and slingers and archers to join Xenophon, with orders to carry
out his instructions. They were in the act of recrossing, when
Xenophon, who saw their intention, sent a messenger across,
bidding them wait there at the river's brink without crossing ;
but as soon as he and his detachment began to cross they were
to step in facing him in two flanking divisions right and left
of them, as if in the act of crossing ; the javelin men with
their javelins on the thong, and the bowmen with their arrows
on the string ; but they were not to advance far into the stream.
The order passed to his own men was: ''Wait till you are
within sling-shot, and the shield rattles, then sound the paean
and charge the enemy. As soon as he turns, and the bugle
from the river sounds for * the attack/ you will face to the
right about, the rear rank leading, and the whole detachment
falling back and crossing the river as quickly as possible, every
one preserving his original rank, so as to avoid trammelling one
another : the bravest man is he who gets to the other side first."

The Carduchians, seeing that the remnant left was the

^ Locbagiies and enomotarchs. See above note s, p. 89 ; also below, p. 127.


XIO



ANABASIS — BK. IV.



f cii. Til. s 30-cH. IV. e 5

I Nov. 19-35, B,c. 401



merest handful (for many even of those whose duty it was to
remain had gone off in their anxiety to protect their beasts of
burden, or their persona! kit, or their mistresses), bore down
upon them valorously, and opened fire with slingstones and
arrows. But the Hellenes, raising the battle hymn, dashed
at them at a run, and they did not await them ; armed well
enough for mountain warfare, and with a view to sudden
attack followed by speedy flight, they were not by any means
sufficiently equipped for an engagement at close quarters.
At this instant the signal of the bugle was heard. Its notes
added wings to the flight of the barbarians, but the Hellenes
turned right about in the opposite direction, and betook them-
selves to the river with what speed they might. Some of
the enemy, here a man and there another, perceived, and
running back to the river, let fly their arrows and wounded a
few ; but the majority, even when the Hellenes were well
across, were still to be seen pursuing their flight The detach-
ment which came to meet Xenophon's men, carried away by
their valour, advanced further than they had need to, and had
to cross back again in the rear of Xenophon's men, and of
thea^iBip a few were wounded.

QTiv^The passage effected, t hey fell into line ab9 , iil^mid-
di)?ffri d mnr n ht id t h rm i gh A rmfl i ni f in t r rrir n rv«_one l yng pl^i"

Yl^j^K .^mianl-l^gl ling hJUocks . mot less ^ than fi vp pi^f^.j^^nfTs in

, distance ; for owing to jhe wars of this pHEople with the Car-
duchians th ere were no villapjes near the riyer The village

-eventually reached was larg e, and possessed a p^\ ^^ tj^lnnprnr
to the satr ap, a nd mos f pf thA hnncaa. \^ere_crQsnied-with
-turrets-; provisions fffr^ plfnttfnl

From this villa;ie they marched two stages- — t en parasangs — '

jinlil they had surmounted the s ources of the river Tigris ; arT d
fr^m r^i'^ V^ntThry "^^^-^h^rn rrirpp stages ^htteen parasangs —
to the river Teleboas^ This was a fine stream , though not
•--Uaiae ^ and there were many villajges about it Thf Hi^trirf
'^rs nnr^'"'"^ '^^"'''^^'•^ A^^or^^^ The lieut enant^overn or of it
^as Tiribazus, jhe ki ng's frien d, ancj ^wnenever theTalter paid
a visit , he alone had the privilege of mounting the king
upon his horse. Tliis^ offirfr ^f^'^*^' ^T *^ ^^^"^ Vii-]]fY\f<: ^Jfh r»
body of r^Tvali^, and siding fprw^ard an interpreter, stated



IH. IV. i 5-12^
Nov. 26-29 f



THROUGH ARMENIA



^ that ho desired a colloquy with the leaders. The generals



. resolve < :i to hear what he inad to say ; an d advancin g on their
side to within speaking distance, they demanded wha.t he
wg^ ntgd. He repli ed that h e wished j^cmjia ke a treaty w ith



in accordance with which \i^



satisfied the general s, and a treaty iy a s made nn ^the terms
suggested.

From this place they marched three stages^fifteen para-
sangs — through plain country, Tiribazus the while keeping close
Ijehind with hi s jj^wn f orces more t han a mile o ff.. ^^resentTy
— they readied -a^>akce with villages clusterecLround about it,
^ ^jwj^ ^^'^ r^ ^"^^ ^^ siippli^»ji in ^reat-varietiU^JBu t while they
^£&-eur.ampTng in t he -nifi j ^dhere was a heiivy fa ll of snow/
and in tH^ morning it was resolyyd tn h iilet niit~"tKe~dTflrfrpnf

was no enemy in sight>jmjl-lli e_ proceeding se emed prudent,

owing to the q uantity of iinaw* In these^^UMtfiTS Jhey ha^

for provision s all the good things there are — sacrificial beasts.

. co rn, old wines with an cxL^uisitc bouq uet^ d ri^^ grapes, and

^vegetable s of all ^ pf ts. \ But sngifi "f ^hf itr^rggl^]-^ frnm the

Ctrt^d. jiay^ ng seen an army, and-tlie blaze of naai Ty

wat chfires in the night. Accordingfy the generals" concluded



--that It was not pruHent to separate thpir qngytPr«i in thk w|iv

an d a resolution was passed La bring the troops iQ g^^l ^er again.
_ Aft er that they reunited, the more so that the weather promised

.to be fine with a elcar sky j but while they lay there in open
qiinrterH; during lIil' in-h: ■" thick a fall of snow

that it completely covered u\j .. ... ,;..,; ., ; nrms ami trie men

^ themselves lying down. ^Tt cram|icd iind crijipled tin; iM'jenpe
animals ^^njLtli'^i'e was great uivreadinesa lo ;;cL Jjp^-iLa-j^i:atb|L

JpM [hp snow as they lay there warm and comfortable^ and
*'"'-"ipd a l^lpTilc pt. except where it slipped of f ilic ^^ leeper's
shoulders ; and it was iiot^UfiULJCenOiiliacL-rDu.sccJ Imiiself to"
get up, and, withouL his. cloak-CiiJ. began to split wood, that

1 Or, as wc should say, " in his shirt sleeves." Doubtless he lay with his
ijujdriof or cloak loosely wrapped round him ; as he sprang to his feet he would
throw it oflf, or it would fall off, and with the simple inner covering of the



k.to be
thatit
^Bgais



IT2



ANABASIS— BK. IV.



{



Nov. 30, B.C 401



quickly first one and then another got up, and taking the log away
from hina, fell to splitting. JJQiej£at^Uie rest roUowed-Kuit, got
UJ0, and began kindling fires and oiling their bodiesj for there
was a scented unguent to be found there in abundance, which
they used instead- o£ oil It was made from pig's fat, sesame,
iJ>jtteLJlinipads, and turpentine. There was a sweet oil also
to be found, made of the same ingredients.

After this it was resolved that they must again separate

^ th»;ir quartef^^ and get under cover in the villages. At diiy ^
news the soldiers, witl vmuch iov and shouting , rushed upon
the covered houses and the provisions ; but all who in their
blind folly had set fire to the houses when they left them
before, now paid the penalty in the poor quarters they got.
^^''''^From this place one night they sent off a^piaxLtMiwlcr riemo-
cratesj a Tcmenite/ up into the mountains, where the stragglers
reported having seen watch fires. The leader selected was
a man whose judgment might be depended upon to verify
the truth of the matter. With a happy gift to distinguish
between fact and fiction, he bad often been successfully ap-
pealed to. jie__went and reported that he had sg^__np_
■^ wa t chfir(p s. but he haH^lTa man, ^hom he brouglu back.
vntft him ^ jcarrying a Persian bow and quiver, and a sagaris
or-^ft ttfeft>^ '^ yk& those worn by the Aniiizons. When asked
"irom what country he came," the prisoner answered that
he was " a _Ej£i;?ian, and was jyj ng from the army of Tiri-
bazus to get provisions." They next asked him "ho^ large
^the_army was, and for what object it had been coUected^i-
His answer was that "it consisted of Tnrjbazus at the head of
his own forces, and aided by. some Chalybian and TaochTa;i
mercenaries. Tiribazus had got it together," he added,
" meaning to attack the Hellenes on the high mountain pass,

_in a defile which was the sole passage."

When the generals heard this news, they resolved to collect
the troops, and they set off at once, taking the prisoner to act
as guide, and^Jeaving a garrison behind^ with Sophaenetus the

XtTtic to protect him, and amis frcLV he fell 10 chopping Lhe wood, only fialf
clad.

' Rciiding Tefievirrfp, t.e. a. native of Temenus, a district of SjTacuse ; <i/.
TTjf^lrrfv, i\e, from Temnus in lhe Aeohd ; a/, Tijjuei^Tip', i.e. from Ttmenuni
in Ibc Argolid. - Or, "bill."



JlS^-clt.
I J, l>ec. 1-7



CROSS THE EUPHRATES



1!J



Stymph alian in com mind of those who remained in the cump^

As soon as th ey had begunlo cross Ifii"luris, tlieU^ht infantry^

adva ncFng tn iront an a^(^IH'ctjlHg- &i 'k 1u uFi^i e campj did not



wait for the he ^vy in fantry, but with a louiLshautjriislitd upon
the enemy's entrenchme nt/ Tlie natives, hearing the din and
clatter, did not care to stop, but took rapidly to thtii hicls.^

I. But, for all their expeditioni^ome of them were kilkdj ^md
as many as twenty horses were captured, with the tent of
Tiribazus, and its contents, silver-footed couches and go blets,
^i>esides iiertain persons styling themselves the butlers and
bakers.V As soon as the {^aerals of the heavy i nfantry diyi::
sion liad learnt the news, they resol ved Jtp return lLo the camp
with all spe ed, for fear •:'[' an irrar-k lioin:.'; made on the
*^S55Q3^3fi^^*^- The iucal! was s<jULn;cil :in(i the retreat
lenced ;»..tlie camp was rt;u'Iit/d ihe same day.



coromen c

^^— TCTie^ next day It was rt:?>uived liiat they should set off
with all possible KpccJ, before the enemy had ^thne to collect
an(l occupy the defil e. Having ^ ^ot their kit and ba^^^a^^e to^
^ gethCT t. ti^ey at^nce began their ma rch tlirougn aeep snow wiin
sevfcial guides^ and ^cros sm g ine m^li pass the game "g'ay on
yvhicRTTiribaKus wa-; to have q^ttac^ce3 tlie m^ s ot: safely into
cantoqinenls. I ["tn this^point they marcHedthree desert
- stages^^fte^nj^arasangs — to the river Eiiph ratesTrmd" cfoSSed
it in water up to the waist. The sQurces of the river wer e
reported tn Ipe at no great distance. From tlifs place they
marched through deep snow over a fiat country three stages
— fi fteen par^^ ngs.^. The last of these" marches was
tr,ying, wi th the north wind blowing in their teethj _drying up
everything and^Jjenjimbijig^he ojien. Here one of the seers
suggested to them to do sacrifi ce ^f^ Ttn^-^nt^^ p»H sacrifice
wa^ ^tm e. The effect was obvious to all in the diminished
fierceness of the blast Bu t there was six feet of snow, so
that many of the baggage animals and slaves sxrc lost'^ancT
abouT thirty of the men themselves. ~

They sp ent the whole night in kindling fire ;^ for there was
fortunately no dear.th of wood at the halti ng-pla ce : only those
who ca me lat e into camp had no wood. Accordirigly those who


* AL "ten." al. "five,'"
* Or, *' they got through the night by keeping up a fire of wood. "

1



V



114



ANABASIS — BK. IV.



CH. V. i 5-I_

(Dec 8, B.C. 401



^had arrived a good while and had kindled fires were not for
allowing these late-comers near their fires, unless they would



j'n return give a s hj^^^oLt hn'" «^f?Ti or of any othyr victu
mig ht have. Here then a general exchange of goods' was



they wQuia _
ictuals t hey ■



J sei u p. Uncre the fire was kindled the snow melted, and

great trenches formed tTtpnr^plvpt^.jjriwn t p the bare earth , and

V hpre it was possible to measure the depth of the snow;,.*^-'-'^ —

)\^ Leaving these quarters, they marched the whole of the next

' aky over snow^ and many of the men were afflicted with

" bouliraia '* (or hunger-faintness). Xenophon, who was guiu-d-

ing the rear, came upon some men who had dropt down,

and he did not know what ailed them ; but some one who

was experienced in such matters suggested to him that they

had evidently got boulimia ; and if they got something to eat,

they would revive. Then he went the round of the baggage

train, and laying an embargo on any eatables he could see,

doled out with his own hands, or sent off other able-bodied

agents to distribute to the sufferers, who as soon as they had

t^cn a mouthful got on their legs again and cc^ntinued the

»^Xmarch.

^'^ On and on they marched, and about dusk Cheirisophus

reached a village, and surprised some women and girls who
had come from the village to fetch water at the fountain out-
side the stockade. These asked them who they were. The
interpreters answered for them in Persian : " They were on
their way from the king to the satrap ; '' in reply to which the
women gave them to understand that the satrap was not at
home, but was away a parasang farther on. As it was late
they entered with the water-carriers within the stockade to
visit the headman of the village. ^ Accordingly Cheirisophus
and as many of the troops as were able got into cantonrnents
there, while the rest of the soldiers— those namely who were
unable to complete the march— had to spend the night out,
without food and without fire ; under the circumstances some

't^C*^*^ the men perished

On the heels of the army hung perpetually bands of the
enemy, snatching away disabled baggage animals and fighting
with each other over the carcases. J And hi its track not
seldom were left to their fate disabled soldiers, struck down



C». V. I la- \

19, Dec a /



SUFFERINGS FROM COLD


I



^



with snow- blindness or with toes mortified by frostbiteV^As

to the ^yes, it was some all eviation against the snow^JaJHaJXh-

with something black before them ; for the feet, the only

remedy was to keep in motion withoMTstopping for an instant,

and to loose the sandal at nitiht.s y If they w ept to sleetJjy^th

sandals on, the thong worked into the feet, and the san dals^
ye re frozen fast to tji^ni. This was partly due to tlie fact
that, :sinre their old sandals had failed, they wore untanned
brogues made of newly^ayed ox-hides, i It was owing to some
such dire necessity that a party oT meTt fell out and were left
behind, and seeing a black-looking patch of ground where the
snowhad evidently disappeared, ^tbey-GGnjectuTecl it must have
^JjfigjjjlitiLtd ; and thii^ w;is jiictiially so, owing to a spring of
some sort which was tf> be seen steaming up in a dell close by.^..'-'^
To this they had turned aside and sat down, and were loth to
go a step further. But Xenophon, with his rearguard, perceived
them, and jjggge d and iiT iplored them by all manner of means
not to be left behind, tetlTng them that the enemy were after
them in large packs pursuing ; and he ended by growing angry.
They merely bade him put a knife to their throats ; not one
step farther would they stir.^ Then it seemed best to frighten
the pursuing enemy Jf possible^ and preverit their falling upon
the invalids. It was already" dusk, and the pursuers were
advancing with much noise and hubbub, wrangling and dis-
puting over their spoils. Then all of a sudden the rearguard^
in the plenitude of health and strength," sprang up out of their
lair and ran upon the enemy, whilst those weary wights'* bawled
out as loud as their sick throats could sound, and clashed their
spears against their shields ; and the enemy in terror hurled
themselves through the snow into the dell, and not one of
them ever uttered a sound again.

Xenophon and his party, telling the sick folk that next day
people would come for them, set off, and before they had gone
half a mile they fell in with some soldi ers who had laid down
to rest on the snow wit ti t tieir cloaks wrappe d: round them,
but never a guard was established, and they made them get

^ Or, ' ' for U was impossible for tbem to go a step farther."
' Hug, after Rehdantz, vvould omit the words ftre iVyjaicoi^CT = "in the
plenitude of health and slrenglh." ^ Or, " the invalids. "


ii6



ANABASIS^Bk. TV.



f CH. V. I T9-»L

\Dec. 8, ij.c, 401



up. Their explanation was that those in front would not move
on. Passing by this group he sent forward the strongest of his
light infantry in atlvance, with orders to find out what the
stoppage was. They reported that the whole army lay reposing
in the same fashion. 1,.,-^at being so, Xenophon*s men had
nothing for it bu t to bivouac in th? n^ien nir -ahkt, with nut fire
and supperless, nierely posting what pickets they eould under the
circumstances. But as soon as it drew towards day, Xenophon
despatched the youngest of his men to the sick folk behind, with
orders to make them get up and force them to proceed. Mean-
while Cheirisophus had sent some of his men quartered in the
village to enquire how they fared in the rear ; they were over-
joyed to see them, and handed over the sick folk to them to
carry into camp, while they themselves continued their march
forwards, and ere twenty furlongs were past reached the village
in which Cheirisophus was quartered. As soon as the two divi-
sions were met, the resolution was come to that it would be safe
to billet the regiments throughout the villages ; Cheirisophus
remained w^here he was, while the rest drew lots for the villages
in sight, and then, with their several detachments, marched off
to their respective destinations.

It was here that Polycrates, an Athenian and captain of a
company, asked for leave of absence — he wished to be off on
a quest of his own ; and putting himself at the head of the
active men of the division, he ran to the village which had been
allotted to Xenophoa He surprised within it the villagers with
their headman, and seventeen young horses which were being
reared as a tribute for the king, and, last of all, the headman's own
daughter, a young bride only eight days w^ed. Her husband
had gone off to cha.se hares, and so he escaped being taken with
the other villagers. The houses were underground structures
with an aperture like the mouth of a well by which to enter,
but they were broad and spacious below. The entrance for the
lueasts of burden was dug out, but the human occupants
descended by a ladder. In these dwellings were to be found
goats and sheep and cattle, and cocks and hens, with their
various progeny. The flocks and herds were all reared under
cover upon green food. There were stores within of wheat
and barley and vegetables, and wine made from barley in great



CH. V. § 26-yi \
~ ^r.. 8-J5 I



GOOD VILLAGE QUARTERS



«7



big bowls ; the grains of barley malt lay floating in the beverage

»up to the lip of the vessel, and reeds lay in them, some longer,
some shorter, without Joints ; when you were thirsty you must
take one of these into your mouth, and suck. The beverage
without admixture of water was very strong, and of a delicious
flavour to certain palates, but the taste must be acquired.

Xenophon made the headman of the village his guest at
supper, and bade him keep a good heart ; so far from robbing

»him of his children, they would fill his house full of good
things in return for what they took before they went away ;
only he must set them an example,^ and discover some blessing
or other for the army, until they found themselves with another
tribe. To this he readily assented, and with the utmost cor-
diality showed them the cellar where the wine was buried,
■hFor this night then, having taken up their several quarters as
^■^ described, they slumbered in the midst of plenty, one and
all, with the headman under watch and ward, and his children
with him safe in sight.

But on the following day Xenophon took the headman
and set off to Cheirisophus, making a round of the villages, and
at each place turning in to visit the different parties. Every-
where alike he found them faring sumptuously and merr)'-
making. There was not a single village where they did not
insist on setting a breakfa.st before them,- and on the same
table were spread half a dozen dishes at least, lamb, kid, pork,
veal, fowls, with various sorts of bread, some of wheat and
some of barley. iWhcn, as an act of courtesy, any one wished
to drink his neighbour's health, he would drag him to the big
bowl, and when there, he must duck his head and take a long
pull, drinking like an ox. , The headman, they insisted every-
where, must accept as a present whatever he !iked to have.
But he would accept nothing, except where he espied any of
his relations, when he made a point of taking them off, him
or her, with himself.

PWhen they reached Cheirisophus they found a similar scene.
* Or, " he must prove his inventiveness and give some profitable informa-
Uon to the army."

^ Or, "it was the same story everywhere, they would not let them go ItH
tliey had served them with breakfast, and had set before them half a dozen
lishes." etc.


iiH



ANABASIS — BK. IV.



\ Dec. JS-tS, B.C, 401



There too the men were feasting in their quarters, garlanded
with whisps of hay and dry grass, and Armeniao boys were
playing the part of waiters in barbaric costumes, only they
had to point out by gesture to the boys what they were to do,
like deaf and dumb. After the first formalitieSj when Cheiri-
sophus and Xenophon had greeted one another like bosom
friends, they interrogated the headman in common by means
of the Persian-speaking interpreter, " What was the country ? "
they asked : he repliedj "Armenia." And again, "For whom
are the horses being bred?" " They are tribute for the king,"
he repUed- "And the neighbouring country?" "Is the
land of the Chalybes," he said ; and he described the road
which led to it. So for the present Xenophon went off",
taking the headman back with him to his household and
friends. He also made him a present of an oldish horse
which he had got ;'he had heard that the headman was a priest
of the sun, and so he could fatten up the beast and sacrifice
him ; otherwise he was afraid it might die outright, for it
had been injured by the long marching. , For himself he
took his pick of the coltSj and gave a colt apiece to each of
his fellow -generals and officers. The horses here were
smaller than the Persian horses, but much more spirited. It
was here too that their friend the headman explained to them,
how they should wrap small bags or sacks round the feet of
the horses and other cattle when marching through the snow,
for without such precautions the creatures sank up to their
bellies.

vi. — When a week had passed^ on the eighth day Xenophon
delivered over the guide ^ (that is to say, the village headman)
to Cheirisophus. He left the headman's household safe behind
in the village, with the exception of his son, a lad in the bloom
of youth. This boy was entrusted to Episthenes of Amphipolis
to guard ; if the headman proved himself a good guide, he was
to take away his son also at his departure. They finally made his
house the repository of all the good things they could contrive
to get together ; then they broke up their camp and commenced
the march, the headman guiding them through tht: snow un-
fettered, AVhen they had reached the third stage Cheirisophus

' Liu " him (the headman) aa guide."



CW. VI. I 2-Io\

Dec. tS-iiB /



NEW ENEMIES



119



■



I



flew into a rage with him, because he had not brought them to
any villages. The headman pleaded that there were none
in this part. Cheirisophus struck hin% but forgot to bind
him, and the end of it was that the headman ran away in the
night and was gone, leaving his son behind him. This was the
sole ground of difference between Cheirisophus and Xenophon
during the marchj this combination of ill-treatment and neglect
in the case of the guide. As to the boy, Epistlienes conceived
a passion for him, and took him home with him, and found in
him the most faithful of friends.

After this they marched seven stages at the rate of five
parasangs a day, to the banks of the river Phasis,^ which is a
hundred feet broad : and thence they marched another couple
of stages, ten parasangs ; but at the pass leading down into the
plain there appeared in front of them a mixed body of Chalybes
and Taochians and Phasians. When Cheirisophus caught sight
of the enemy on the pass at a distance of about three or
four miles, he ceased marching, not caring to approach the
enemy with his troops in column, and he passed down the order
to the others : to deploy thei£_com panics to the front, that the
troops might form into line. / As soon as the rearguard had come^x
up, he assembled the generals and officers, and addressed them :
" The enemy, as you see, are in occupation of the mountain
pass, it is time we should consider how we are to make the
best fight to win it My opinion is, that we should give orders
to the troops to take their morning meal, whilst we deliberate
whether we should cross the mountains to-day or to-morrow.**
"My opinion," said Cleanor, "is, that as soon as we have
breakfasted, we should arm for the fight and attack the enemy,
without loss of time, for if we fritter away to-day, the enemy
who are now content to look at us, will grow bolder, and with
their growing courage, depend upon it, others more numerous
will join them."

After him Xenophon spoke : " This," he said, " is how I
see the matter ; if fight we must, let us make preparation to
sell our lives dearly, but if we desire to cross with the greatest ' •
ease, the point to consider is, how we may get the fewest
wounds aYid throw away the smallest number of good men.
1 Probably a tributary of the Araxes = modern Fasin-Su, possibly it had
this local name.



ANABASIS- — BK. IV.



f cH. VI. i ji-i6
l l>ec. a8, ii.c. 401



Well then, that part of the mountain which is visible stretches
nearly seven miles.^ Where are the mei|,. posted to intercept
us? except at the road itself, they are nowhere to be seen.
It is much better then to try Sf possible to steal a point of
this desert mountain unobserved, and before they know where
we are, secure the prize, than to fly at a strong position and
an enemy thoroughly prepared. Since it is much easier to
march up a mountain without fighting than to tramjj along
a level when assailants are on either hand j and provided he
has not to fight, a man will see what hes at his feet much more
plainly even at night than in broad daylight in the midst of
battle ; and a rough road to feet that roam in peace may be
pleasanter than a smooth surface with the bullets whistling
about your ears.® Nor is it so impossible, I take it, to steal a
march, since it is open to us to go by night, when we cannot
be seen, and to fall back so far that they will never notice us.
In my opinion, however, if we make a feint of attacking here,
we shall find the mountain chain all the more deserted else-
where, since the enemy will be waiting for us here in thicker
swarm.

*' But w^hat right have I to be drawing conclusions about
stealing in your presence, Cheirisophus ? for yon Lacedae-
monians, as I have often been told, you who belong to the
* peers,' practise stealing from your boyhood up; and it is
no disgrace but honourable rather to steal, except such things
as the law forbids ; and in order, I presume, to stimulate your
sense of sccretiveness, and to make you master thieves, it is
lawful for you further to get a whipping, if you are caught.
Now then you have a fine opportunity of displaying your
training. But take care we are not caught stealing over the
^mountain, or we shall catch it ourselves." j'*For all that,"
retorted Cheirisophus, " I haveTieard that you Athenians are
clever hands at stealing the public moneys ; and that too
though there is fearful risk for the person so employed ; but,
I am told, it is your best men who are most addicted to it ; if
it is your best men who are thought worthy to rule. So it is
a fine opportunity for yourself also, Xenophon, to exhibit your

' Lit. " more than sixty stades."
^ Or, more lit., "with the head a mark for missiles."



en. VI. I 17- I
85, Dec. 29 J



STEALING A MARCF



T2I



education." **And I," replied Xenophon, "am ready to
take the rear division, as soon as we have supped, and seize
the mountain chain. I have already got guides, for the light
troops laid an ambuscade, and seized some of the cut-purse
vagabonds who hung on our rear, I am further informed
by them that the mountain is not inaccessible, but is grazed
by goats and cattle, so that if we can once get hold of any
portion of it, there will be no difficulty as regards our animals
— they can cross. As to the enemy, I expect they will not
even wait for us any longer^ when they once see us on a level
with themselves on the heights, for they do not even at present
care to come down and meet us on fair ground." Cheirisophus
answered : " But why should you go and leave your command
in, the rear? Send others rather, unless a band of volunteers
will present themselves.*' Thereupon Aristonymus the Methy-
drian came forward wdth some heavy infantry, and Aristeas
the Chian with some light troops, and Nicomachus the Oetean
with another body of light troops, and they made an agree-
ment to kindle several watch-fires as soon as they held the
heights. The arrangements made, they breakfasted; and after
breakfast Cheirisophus advanced the whole army ten furlongs
closer towards the enemy, so as to strengthen the impression
that he intended to attack them at that point,

But as soon as they had supped and night had fallen, the
party under orders set off and occupied the mountain, while
the main body rested where they were. Now as soon as the
enemy perceived that the mountain was taken, tliey banished
all thought of sleep, and kept many watch-fires blazing through
the nighL But at break of day Cheirisophus offered sacrifice,
and began advancing along the road, while the detachnient
which held the mountain advanced pari passu by the high
ground. The larger mass of the enemy, on his side, remained
still on the mountain-pass, but a section of them turned to
confront the detachment on the heights. Before the main
bodies had time to draw together, the detachment on the
height came to close quarters, and the Hellenes were victori-
ous and gave chase. Meanwhile the light division of the
Hellenes, issuing from the plain, were rapidly advancing against
the serried lines of the enemy, whilst Cheirisophus followed up



ANABASIS— BK. IV.



{ CH, VI. f :3-ri!. VII. § 6

\ Dec, 30-Jan. 3, B.C. 400



with his heavj^ infantry at quick march. But the enemy on the
road no sooner saw their higher division being worsted than
they fled, and some few of them were slain, and a vast number
of wicker shields were taken, which the Hellenes hacked to
pieces with their short swords and rendered useless. So when
they had reached the summit of the pass, they sacrificed and
set up a trophy, and descending into the plain, reached villages
ab^yeding in good things of every kind.
/^ VII. A- After this they marched into the country of the
'K?iocbkms five stages — thirty parasangs — and provisions failed ;
for the Taochians lived in strong places, into which they
had carried up all their stores. Now when the army arrived
before one of these strong places — a mere fortress, without city
or houses, into which a motley crowd of men and women and
numerous flocks and herds were gathered — Cheirisophus
attacked at once. When the first regiment fell back tired^
a second advanced, and again a third, for it was impossible
to surround the place in full force, as it was encircled by
a river. Presently Xenophon came up with the rearguard,
consisting of both light and heavy infantry, whereupon
Cheirisophus hailed him with the words : " In the nick of
time you have come ; we must take this place, for the troops
have no provisions, unless we take it." Thereupon they con-
sulted together, and to Xenophon's inquiry^ "What it was
which hindered their simply walking in?" Cheirisophus
replied, ''There is just this one narrow approach which you
see ; but when we attempt to pass by it they roll down volleys
of stones from yonder overhanging crag," pointing up, " and
this is the state in which you find yourself, if you chance to be
caught;" and he pointed to some poor fellows with their legs
or ribs crushed to bits. "But when they have expended their
ammunition," said Xenophon, " there is nothing else, is there,
to hinder our passing ? Certainly, except yonder handful of
fellows, there is no one in front of us that we can see ; and of
them, only two or three apparently are armed, and the dis-
tance to be traversed under fire is, as your eyes will tell you,
about one hundred and fifty feet as near as can be, and of
this space the first hundred is thickly covered with great pines
at intervals ; under cover of these, what harm can come to our



men from a pelt of stones, flying or rolling ? So then, there
is only fifty feet left to cross, during a lull of stones."
"Ay," said Cheirisophus, "but with our first attempt to
approach the bush a galling fire of stones commences." ''The
very thing we want," said the other, " for they will use up their
ammunition all the quicker;- but let us select a point from
which we shaU have only a brief space to run across, if we
can, and from which it will be easier to get back, if we wish."

Thereupon Cheirisophus and Xenophon set out with Calli-
machus the Parrhasian, the captain in command of the offi-
cers of the rearguard that day ; the rest of the captains remained
out of danger. That done, the next step was for a party of
about seventy men to get away under the trees, not in a body,
but one by one, every one using his best precaution ; and
Agasias the Stymphalian, and Aristonyraus the Methydrian,
who w^ere also officers of the rearguard, were posted as sup-
ports outside the trees ; for it was not possible for more than
a single company to stand safely within the trees. Here Calh-
machus hit upon a pretty contrivance — he ran forward from
the tree under which he was posted two or three paces, and
as soon as the stones came whizzing, he retired easily, but
at each excursion more than ten wagon-loads of rocks were
expended. Agasias, seeing how Callimachus was amusing
himself, and the whole army looking on as spectators, was
seized with the fear that he might miss his chance of being first
to run the gauntlet of the enemy's fire and get into the place.
So, without a word of summons to his next neighbour, Aris-
tonymus, or to Eury-lochus of Lusia, both comrades of his, or
to any one else, off he set on his own account, and passed the
whole detachment. But Callimachus, seeing him tearing past,
caught hold of his shield by the rim, and in the meantime
Aristonymus the Methydrian ran past both, and after him
Eurylochus of Lusia; for they were one and all aspirants to
valour, and in that high pursuit, each was the eager rival of
the rest So in this strife of honour, the four of them took the
fortress, and when they had once rushed in, not a stone more
was hurled from overhead.

And here a terrible spectacle displayed itself : the women
first cast their infants down the cliff, and then they cast them-


BASIS — BK. IV.



f cH. va. i 13-19
\ Jan. 3-32, B.C. 4t>o



selves after their fallen little ones, and the men likewise. In
such a scene, Aeneas the Stymphalian, an officer, caught sight
of a man with a fine dress about to throw himself over, and
seized hold of him to stop him ; but the other caught him to
his arms, and both were gone in an instant headlong down the
crags, and were killed. Out of -this place the merest handful
of human beings were taken prisoners, but cattle and asses in
abundance and flocks of sheep.

V,,^'''^^ rom this place th ej marched through the Chalybes ^ seven
stages, fifty parasangs. These were the bravest -itL£a.,TKEQJ5I~
they encountered on the whole march, coming cheerily to close
quarters with them. They woreJipen corslets reaching to the
groin, and instead of the ordinary "wings" or basques^ .a
thickly-plaited fringe of cords. They were also provided with
greaves and helmets, and at the girdle a short sabre^ at

"• l ong ai tho La conian dagger, with which they cut the throats
of those they mastered, and after severing the head from
the trunk they would march along carrying it, singing and
dancing, when they drew within their enemy's field of view.*
They carried also a spear fifteen cubits long, lanced at one
end.^ This folk stayed in. regular townships,* and whenever ■
the Hellene.? passed by they invariably hung close on their
heels fighting. They had dwelling-places in their fortresses,
and into them they had carried up their supplies, so that the
Hellenes could get nothing from this district, but supported
themselves on the flocks and herds they had taken from the
Taochians, After this the Hellenes reached the river Har-
pasus, which was four hundred feet broad. Hence they
marched through the Scythenians four stages^ — twenty para-
sangs — through a long level country to more villages, among
which they halted three days, and got in supplies.

^ These are the A nnena-Chahbex , so callwl by Pliny in con ira distinction
to another mounlain tribe in Ponlias so namt^cl, who were famous for their
foffiing. and from whom steel received its Greek name xa^i'V''- With these
latter we shall make acquaintance later on. See below, p. 146 ; see Mr.
Pretor ad /oc, and Dr. Kiepert's A/a». tf Anc, Geeff. (£"&■ tf- Mr. G. A.
Macmillan), iv. 49, 58.

- Or, '* whenever they were to be seen by the enemy."

" /,*'. with n single point or spike only, the Hellenic spear having a spike
at the butt end al.so.

* Or, "remained in their townships, but whenever . . ."



cii, VII. % tg-a^l
Jail, az-^j if



THE SEA ! THE SEA !



125



Passing on from thence in four stages of twenty parasangs,
they reached a large and prosperous well -populated city, which
went by the name of Gymnias,^ from which thei^^ovenjtw of the
country sent them a guide to lead them through a district
hostile to his own. This guide told them that within five days
he would lead them to a place from which they would see the
sea, "and," he added, "if I fail of my word, you arc free to
take my life." Accordingly he put himself at their head ; but
he no sooner set foot in the country hostile to himself than he
fell to encouraging them to bum and harry the land ; indeed his
exhortations were so earnest, it was plain that it was for this he
had come, and not out of the good-will he bore the Hellenes.

On the fifth day they reached the mountain, the name of
which was Theches.*^ No sooner had the men in front
ascended it and caught sight of the sea than a great cry arosCj
and Xenophon, with the rearguard, catching the sound of it,
conjectured that another set of enemies must surely be attacking
in front ; for they were followed by the inhabitants of the
country, which was all aflame ; indeed the rearguard bad killed
some and captured others alive by laying an ambuscade ; they
had taken also about twenty wicker shields, covered with the^
raw hides of shaggy oxen.

But as the shout became louder and nearer, and those who
from time to time came up, began racing at the top of their
speed towards the shouters, and the shouting continually re-
commenced with yet greater volume as the numbers increased,
Xenophon settled in his mind that something extraordinary
must have happened, so he mounted his horse» and taking
with him Lycius and the cavalry, he galloped to the rescue.
Presently they could hear the soldiers shouting and passing on
the joyful word, ITie smjjjie sea f ^

Thereupon they ^egan running, rearguard and all, and the

^ Gymnias is supposed (by Grotc, Hht. of Greece, vol. ix. p. i6i) to be
the same as ihal which is now callted Gumisch-Knna, — perhaps '' ai no great
distance from Baibut, " Tozer, Turkish Armtnia, p. 432. Others have identi-
fied it with Erzcroum. others with Ispir. See Mr. Pretor ati iac.

' Some MSS, give "the sacred mountain." The height in question has
l«en identified with "the ridge called Tekieh-Dagh to the east of Gumisch-
Kana, nearer to the sea than that place" (Grote, ib. p, t6a), but the exact
place from which they caught sight of the sea has not been ident(fit?d as yet,
and other mountain ranges have been suggested. Sec map.


126



ANABASIS — BK. IV.



/cH. vir. f 24-CH- vm. I 3

( Jan. 27-30, B,c. 400



baggage animals and horses came galloping up. But when
they had reached the summit, then indeed they fell to embrac-
ing one another— generals and oflScers and all — and the tears
trickled down their cheeks. And on a sudden, some one, who-
ever it was, having passed down the order, the soldiers began
bringing stones and erecting a great cairn, whereon they dedi-
cated a host of untanned skins, and staves, and captured wicker
shields, and with his own hand the guide hacked the shields to
pieces, inviting the rest to follow his example.'^ After this the
Hellenes dismissed the guide with a present raised from the
common store, to wit^ a horse, a silver bowl, a Persian dress,
and ten darics ; but what he most begged to have were their
rings, and of these he got several from the soldiers. So,
after pointing out to them a village where they would find
quarters, and the road by which they would proceed towards
the land uf the Macrones, as evening fell, hf»^ turned his back
upon them in the night and was gone. L/"^
y vm. — From this point the Hellenes marched through the
^coumry of the Macrones three stages, — ten parasangs, and
on the first day they reached the .river, which formed the
boundary between the land of the Macrones and the land
of the Scythenians. Above them, on their right, they had a
country of the sternest and ruggedest character, and on their
left another river, into which the frontier river discharges itself,
and which they must cross. This was thickly fringed with
trees which, though not of any great bulk, were closely packed.
As soon as they came up to them, the Hellenes proceeded to
cut them down in their haste to get out of the place as soon
as possible. But the Macrones, armed with wicker shields
and lances and hair tunics, were dilready drawn up to receive
them immediately opposite the crossing. They were cheering
one another on, and kept up a steady pelt of stones into the
river, though they failed to reach the other side or do any
harm.

At this juncture one of the light infantry came up to Xeno-
phon ; he had been, he said, a slave at Athens, and he wished
to tell him that he recognised the speech of these people. ** I
think," said he, *' this must be my native country, and if there
is no objection I will have a talk with them," *' No objection



CM. vmTl 5-1 1 1

Jan. 30-Feb. 2



THE MACRONES ,; TITE COLCHIANS



127



at all," replied Xenophon, " pray talk to them, and ask them
first, who they are." In answer to this question they said,
"they were Macrones." "Well, then," said he, "ask them
why they are drawn up in battle and want to fight with us."
They answered, *' Because you are invading our country."
T'he generals bade him say : "' If so, it is with no intention cer-
tainly of doing it or you any harm : but we ha^e been at war
with the king, and are now returning to Hellas^ and all we want
is to reach the sea." The others asked, " Were they willing to
give them pledges to that effect ? " They replied : "Yes, they
were ready to give and receive pledges to that effect" Then
the Macrones gave a barbaric lance to the Hellenes, and the
Hellenes a Hellenic lance to them: "for these," they said,
"would serve as pledges," and both sides called upon the gods
to witness.

After the pledges were exchanged^ the Macrones fell to
vigorously hewing down trees and constructing a road to help
them across, mingling freely with the Hellenes and fraternis-
ing in their midst, and they afforded them as good a market
as they could, and for three days conducted them on their
march, until they had brought them safely to the confines
of the Colchians, ' At this point they were confronted by a
great mountain 'chain, which however was accessible, and on
it the Colchians were drawn up for battle. In the first in-
stance, the Hellenes drew up opposite, in line of battle, as
though they w^ere minded to assault the hill in that order;
but afterwards the generals determined to hold a council of
war, and consider how to make the fairest fight

Accordingly Xenophon said : "I am not for advancing in
line, but advise to form into column of sections."' To begin
with, the line," he urged, "would be scattered and thrown
into disorder at once ; tor we shall find the mountain full of
inequalities, it will be pathless here and easy to traverse there.
The mere fact of first having formed in line, and then seeing the
line thrown in\o disorder, must exercise a disheartening effect.
Again, if we advance several deep, the enemy will none the less
overlap us, and turn their superfluous numbers to account as
best they like ; wlrile, if we march in shallow order, we may

^ See above for this formation, p. loa.


Ii8



ANABASIS^BK. IV.



, . VIII. i ii-j6

. Feb. 3, B.C. 4C0



fully expect our tine to be cut through and through by the
thick rain of missiles and rush of men, and if this happen
anywhere along the line, the whole line will equally suffer.
No; my notion is to form columns by companies/ covering
ground sufficient with spaces between the companies to allow
the last companies of each flank to be outside the enemy's
flanks. Thus we shall with our extreme companies be outside
the enemy's line, and the best men at the head of their
columns will lead the attack, and every company will pick its
way where the ground is easy ; also it will be difficult for the
enemy to force his way into the intervening spaces, wiien there
are companies on both sides ; nor will it be easy for him to
cut in twain any individual company marching in column. IF,
too, any particular company should be pressed, the neighbour-
ing company will come to the rescue, or if at any point any
single company succeed in reaching the height, from that
moment not one man of the enemy will stand his ground."

This proposal was carried, and they formed into columns
by companies.^ Then Xenophon, returning from the right w ing
to the left, addressed the soldiers. " Men," he said, " these men
whom you see in front of you are the sole obstacles still inter-
posed between us and the haven of our hopes so long deferred.
We will swallow them up whole, without cotjking,^ if we can."

The several divisions fell into position, the companies were
formed into columns, and the result was a total of something
like eighty companies of heavy infantn,', each company con-
sisting on an average of a hundred men. The light infantry
and bowmen were arranged in three divisions — tw^o outside to
support the left and the right respectively, and the third in
the centre — each division consisting of about six hundred men.*

* Or. "to advance in a line of coraptiny columns."

- For this formation, sec The Retreat of the Ten Thousand; a military
study for all tim^r, by Lieut. -General J, L. Vaiighan, C.B,

^ Or, *'wc will gobble them raw." He is thinking of the Homeric line
{/Had, iv. 35) Ufxitv §£^pu&aiS npia^jior . , . " Percliance wert ttjou to enter
within the gates and long ft-alls and devour Priam raw, and PriaiuK sons and
all the Trojans, then mighlest thou assuage thine anger." — Leaf.

* This suggests 1800 as the total of the peltasts, 8000 as the total of the
hoplites, but the companies were probably not limited to 100, and iinrler
"pellasts" were perhaps included other light troops. See above, p. 5,
note 7 ; a.nd below, p. 175. note 3


cif. vtii, I i6-l
aa, Feb. 4-8 /



POIvSONOUS HONEV



129



Before starting, the generals passed the order to oflei
prayer ; and with the prayer and battle hymn rising from their
lips they commenced their advance. Cheirisophus and Xeno-
phon, and the hgbt infantry with them, advanced outside the
enemy's hne to right and left, and the enemy, seeing their
advance, made an effort to keep parallel and confront them,
but in order to do so, as he extended partly to right and partly
to left, he was pulled to pieces, and there was a large space or
hollow left in the centre of his line. Seeing them separate
thus, the light infantry attached to the Arcadian battalion, under
command of Aeschines, an Acarnanian, mistook the movement
for flight, and with a loud shout rushed on, and these were the
first to scale the mountain summit ; but they were closely
followed up by the Arcadian heavy infantry, under command
of Cleanor of Orchomenus.

When they began running in that way, the enemy stood
their ground no longer, but betook themselves to flight, one
in one direction, one in another, and the Hellenes scaled the
hill and found quarters in numerous villages which contained
supplies in abundance. Here, generally speaking, there was
nothing to excite their wonderment, but the numbers of bee-
hives were indeed astonishing, and so were certain properties
of the honey. ^ The effect upon the soldiers who tasted the
combs was, that they all went for the nonce quite off their
heads, and suffered from vomiting and diarrhoea, with a total
inability to stand steady on their legs. A small dose produced
a condition not unlike violent drunkenness, a large one an
attack very like a fit of madness, and some dropped down, appa-
rently at death's door. So they lay^ hundreds of them, as if
there had been a great defeat, a prey to the cruellest despond-
ency.- But the next day, none had died \ and almost at the
same hour of the day at which they had eaten they recovered
their senses, and on the third or fourth day got on their legs
again like convalescents after a severe course of medical treat-
ment,

^ "Modern Iravellers attest the existence, in these regions, of honey in-
toxicating atid poisonous. . , , They point out the Azalea Pontica as the
flower from which the bees imbibe this peculiar quality." — Grote, Hist, of
Greece, vol. ix. p. 155.

- Or, " and there was widesprtiarl despondency. "


jyy



f CH. vtli. i aa-a?
I Kcb. 8-



From this plnce they marched on two stages — seven para-
sangs — and reached the sea at Trapezus/ a populous Hellenic
city on the Euxine Sea, a colony of the Sinopeans, in the ter-
ritory of the Colchians. Here they halted about thirty days
in the villages of the Colchians, which they used as a base of
operations to ravage the whole territory of Colchis- The
men of Trapezus supplied the arniy with a market, entertained
them, and gave them, as gifts of hospitalitVj oxen and wheat
and wiuc. Further, they negotiated with them in behalf of
their neighbours the Colchians, who dwelt in the plain for the
most part, and from this folk also came gifts of hospitality in
the shape of cattle. And now the Hellenes made preparation
for the sacrifice which they had vowed," and a sufficient num-
ber of cattle came in for them to offer thank-oflerings for safe
guidance to Zeus the Saviour, and to Heracles,^ and to the
other gods, according to their vows. They instituted also a
gymnastic contest on the mountain side, just where they were
quartered, and chose Dracontius, a Spartan * (who had been
banished from home when a lad, having unintentionally slain
another boy with a blow of his dagger), to superintend the
course, and be president of the games.

As soon as the sacrifices were over, they handed over the
hides of the beasts to Dracontius, and bade him lead the way
to his racecourse. He merely wa-ved his hand and pointed to
where they were standing, and said, "There, this ridge is just
the place for running, anywhere, everywhere." " But how,"
it was asked, '* will they manage to wrestle on the hard scrubby
ground ? " " Oh ! worse knocks for those who are thrown," the
president rephed. There was a mile race for boys, the
majority being captive lads; and for the long race more than
sixty Cretans competed ; there was wrestling, boxing, and the
pankration.^ Altogether it was a beautiful spectacle. There
was a large number of entries, and the emulation, with their

^ TrcbizondL " See above, p. 76.

3 Or, "to Hacrifice lo Zeiis the Prtaerver, and to Heracles thank -offer Jngs
for safe guidance, *" Hrracles (EyeM-tSiy) the cmductor having special 5>'mpathy
with wandertjrs,

* For Ihe position of llie Spartam in the LaLonian constitutiaii, see MuUer's
Doriuns, bk. iit. ch. x. vol. ii. p. 195 foil. (Eng. trans.) ; Arist foL ii. 9, 15.

* Th&fianirafwn combined both wTCslling nnd boxinj^.



I



Man "i Ic! 4L) GAMES AT TRAPEZUS 131

companions, male and female, standing as spectators, m4s
immense. There was horse-racing also; the riders had to
gallop down a steep incline to the sea, and then turn and
come up again to the altar, and on the descent more than
half rolled head over heels, and then back they came toihng
up the tremendous steep, scarcely out of a walking pace. Loud
were the shouts, the laughter, and the cheers.



BOOK V. T. 1-4

[In the preceding portion of the narrative a detailed account is given
of all that ihe Hellenes did, and how idey fared on the inarch up with
Cyrvis J and also of all that befell them on their march subsequently, until
they reached the seaboard of tlie Euxine Sea, or Pontus, and the Hellenic
city of Trapezus, where they duly offered the sacniiee for safe deliverance
which they had vowed to offer as soon as they set foot on a friendly soil. J



t. — ^ After this they met and took counsel concerning the
remainder of the march. The first speaker was Antileon of
Thurii. He rose and said : " For my part, sirs, I am weary
by this time of getting kit together and packing up for a
start, of walking and ninning and carrying heavy arms, and
of tramping along in line, or mounting guard, and doing battle.
The sole desire I now have is to cease from all these pains,
and for the future, since here we have the sea before us, to
sail on and on, ' stretched out in s!eep,' like Odysseus,^ and
so to find myself in Hellas." When they heard these remarks,
the soldiers showed their approval with loud cries of " well
said," and then another spoke to the same effect, and then
another, and indeed alt present. Then Cheirisophus got up
and said: " 1 have a friend, sirs, who, as good hap will have it,
is now high admiral,^ Anaxibius. If you hke to send me to
him, I think I can safely promise to return with some men-of-
war and other vessels which will carry us. All you have to
do, if you are really minded to go home by sea, is to wait
here till I come, I will be back ere long," The soldiers were



* Sec Od. xiii. iiC,



"^ Lit. "navarch."



CH. I. S 4'io 1

Feb. a- Mar, loj



CONSUT.TATIONS AT TRAPEZUS



133



delighted at these words, and voted that Cheirisophus should
set sail on his mission without delay.

After him Xenophon got up, and spoke as follows :
" Cheirisophus, it is agreed, sets out in search of vessels, and
we are going to await him. Let me tell you what, in my
opinion, it is reasonable to do while we are waiting. First of
all, we must provide ourselves with necessaries from hostile
territory, for there is not a sufficient market, nor, if there were,
have we, with a few solitary exceptions, the means of purchase.
Now, the district is hostile, so that if you set off in search of
provisions without care and precaution, the chances are that
many of us will be lost To meet this risk, I propose that we
should organise foraging parties to capture provisions, and,
for the rest, not roam about the country at random. The
organisation of the matter should be left to us." (The
resolution was passed.) "Please listen to another proposal ;"
he continued: *'Some of you, no doubt, will be going out to
pillage. It will be best, I think, that whoever does so should
in each case before starting inform us of his intent, and in
what direction he means to go, so that we may know the
exact number of those who are out and of those who stop
behind. Thus we shall be able to help in preparing and start-
ing the expedition where necessary ; and in case of aid or re-
inforcements being called for, we shall know in what direction
to proceed ; or, again, if the attempt is to be undertaken by
raw or less expert hands, we may throw in the weight of our
experience and advice by endeavouring to discover \h^ strength
of those whom they design to attack." This proposal was also
caTried. *' Here is another point," he continued, " to which
I would draw your attention. Our enemies will not lack
leisure to make raids upon us : nor is it unnatural, that they
should lay plots against us ] for we have appropriated what is
theirs ; they are seated over us ever on the watch. ^ I propose
then that we should have regular outposts round the camp.
If we take it in succession to do picket and outlook duty,
the enemy will be less able to harry us. And here is another
point for your observation ; supposing we knew for certain
that Cheirisophus must return with a sufficient number of
' /.e, in their eyries above.


134



ANABASIS BK. V.



fcH. r. 8 io-i6
1. fcb. 8-



vessels, there would be no need of the remark, but as that
is still problematical, I propose that we should try and get to-
gether vessels on the spot also. If he comes and finds us
already provided for here, we shall have more ships than we
need, that is all ; while, if he fails to bring them, we shall have
the local supply to fall back upon. I see ships sailing past per-
petually, so we have only to ask the loan of some war-ships from
the men of Trapezus, and we can bring them into port, and
safeguard them with their rudders unshipped, until we have
enough to carry us. By this course I think we shall not fail of
finding the means of transport requisite." That resolution was
also passed. He proceeded : "Consider whether you think it
equitable to support by means of a general fund the ships' com-
panies which we so impress, while they wait here for our benefit,
and to agree upon a fare, on the principle of repaying kind-
nesses in kind." That too was passed. " Well then," said he,
" in case, after all, our endeavours should not be crowned with
success, and we find that we have not vessels enough, I propose
that we should enjoin on the cities along the seaboard the
duty of constructing and putting in order the roads, which we
hear are impassable. They will be only too glad to obey, no
doubt, out of mere terror and their desire to be rid of us."

This last proposal was met by loud cries and protestations
against the idea of going by land at all So, perceiving their
infatuation, he did not put the question to the vote, but
eventually persuaded the cities voluntarily to construct roads
by the suggestion, " If you get your roads in good order,
we shall all the sooner be gone." They further got a fifty-
oared galley from the Trapezuntines, and gave the command
of it to Dexippus, a Laconian, one of the perioeci.^ This
man altogether neglected to collect vessels on the offing, but
slunk off himself, and vanished, ship and all, out of Pontus.
Later on, however, he paid the penalty of his misdeeiis. He
became involved in some meddling and making in Thrace at
the court of Seuthes, and was put to death by the Laconian
Nicander. They also got a thirty-oared galley, the command

^ A native of the country parts of Laconia. For the position of the pcri-
oeci in ihe Laconian conslilution, see Miiller's Dorians, ii. i8. As to
Dexippus, we shall hear of hira agaii), below, pp. 172, 190 foil.



CIl. I, i ifi-CU, !I. S 5\

Mar. ID, II. t*. 40a }



THEY ATTACK THE DRILAE



»3S



of which was entrusted to Polycrates, an Athenian, and that
ofificer brought into harbour to the camp all the vessels he
could lay his hands on. If these were laden, they took out
the freights and appointed guards to keep an eye on their
preservation, whilst they used the ships themselves for transport
service on the coast. While matters stood at this point, the
Hellenes used to make forays with varying success ; sometimes
they captured prey and sometimes they failed. On one occa-
sion Cleaenetus led his own and another company against
a strong position, and was killed himself, with many others
of his party.

II, — The time came when it was no longer possible to cap-
ture provisions, going and returning to the camp in one day.
In consequence of this, Xenophon took soreie guides from the
Trapezuntines and led half the army out against the Drilae,
leaving the other half to guard the camp. That was necessary,
since the Colchians, who had been ousted from their houses,
were assembled thickly, and sat eyeing them from the heights
above ; on the other hand the Trapezuntines, being friendly to
the native inhabitants, were not for leading the Hellenes to
places where it was easy to capture provisions. But against
the Drilae, from whom they personally suffered, they would
lead them with enthusiasm, up into mountainous and scarcely
accessible fortresses, and against the most warlike people of
any in the Pontus.

But when the Hellenes had reached the uplands, the Drilae
set fire to all their fastnesses which they thought could be
taken easily, and beat a retreat ; and except here and there a
stray pig ox bullock or other animal which had escaped the
fire there was nothing to capture ; but there was one fastness
which served as their metropolis : into this the different streams
of people collected; round it ran a tremendously deep ravine,
and the approaches to the place were difficult. So the light
infantry ran forward five or six furlongs in advance of the heavy
infantry, and crossed the ravine ; and seeing quantities of
sheep and other things, proceeded to attack the place. Close
at their heels followed a number of those who had set out on
the foray armed with spears, so that the storming party across
the ravine amounted to more than two thousand But, finding


^ABASIS — BK. V,



/ cit. II. ; 5-ta



Feb. 8-



that they could not take the place by a coup-dt-main, as there
was a trench running round it^ mounded up some breadth, with
a stockade on the top of the earthwork and a close -packed
row of wooden bastions> they made an attempt to run back,
but the enemy fell upon them from the rear. To get away
by a sudden rush ^ was out of the question, since the descent
from the fortress into the ravine only admitted of moving in
single file. Under the circumstances they sent to Xenophon,
who was in command of the heavy infantry. The messenger
came and delivered his message: "There is a fastness choke
full of all sorts of stores, but we cannot take it, it is too strong ;
nor can we easily get away ; the enemy rush out and deliver
battle, and the return is difficult."

On hearing this, Xenophon pushed forward his heavy
infantry to the edge of the ravine, and there ordered them to
take up a position, while he himself with the officers crossed
over to determine whether it were better to withdraw the party
already across, or to bring over the heavy infantry also, on
the sup]>osition that the fortress might be taken. In favour of
the latter opinion it was agreed that the retreat must cost
many lives, and the officers were further disposed to think,
they could take the place. Xenophon consented, relying on
the victims, for the seers had announced, that there would be
a battle, but that the result of the expedition would be good.
So he sent the officers to bring the heavy troops across, while
he himself remained, having drawn off^ all the light infantry
and forbidden all sharp-shooting at long range. As soon as the
heavy infantry had arrived, he ordered each captain to form
his company, in whatever way he hoped to make it most
effective in the coming struggle. Side by side together they
stood, these captains, not for the first time to-day competitors
for the award of manly virtue. While they were thus employed,
he — the general — was engaged in passing down his order along
the ranks of the light infantry and archers respectively to
march with the javelin on its thong and the arrow to the string,
ready at the word ''shoot" to discharge their missiles, while
the light troops were to have their wallets well stocked with

' Lit ' * to make a bolt for it."
" Lit, " hftving retired the peltasts."


'cH. n. 9 13-ig T
Mar. ro, u.c. 400/



THEIR CITADEL STORMED



sling-stones ; lastly, he despatched his adjutants to see to the
proper carrying out of these orders.

And now the preparations were complete : the officers and
lieutenants and all others claiming to be the peers of these,
were drawn up in their several places. \Vith a glance each
was able to command the rest in the crescent -like disposi-
tion which the ground invited. Presently the notes of the
battle hymn arose, the clarion spoke, and with a thrilling
cr}"^ in honour of the warrior-god, commenced a rush of
the heavy infantry at full speed under cover of a storm of
missiles, lances, arrows, bullets^ but most of all stones hurled
from the hand with ceaseless pelt, while there were some who
brought firebrands to bear. Overwhelmed by this crowd of
missiles, the enemy left their stockades and their bastion
towers, which gave Agasias the Stymphalian and Philoxenus
of Pellene a chance not to be missed; laying aside their
heavy arms, up they went in bare tunics only, and one hauled
another up, and meantime another had mounted, and the place
was taken, as they thought. Then the peltasts and light
troops rushed in and began snatching what each man could.
Xenophon the while, posted at the gates, kept back as many of
the hoplites as he could, for there were other enemies now visible
on certain strong citadel heights ; and after a lapse of no long
time a shout arose within, and the men came running back,-
some still clutching what they had seized ; and presently here
and there a wounded man ; and mighty was the jostling about
the portals. To the questions which were put to them the out-
pouring fugitives repeated the same story : there was a citadel
within and enemies in crowds were making savage sallies and
beating the fellows inside.

At that Xenophon ordered Tolmides the herald to proclaim :
'* Enter all who are minded to capture aught," In poured the
surging multitude, and the counter-current of persons elbowing
their passage in prevailed over the stream of those who issued
forth, until they beat back and cooped up the enemy within the
cit:idel again. So outside the citadel everything was sacked
and pillaged by the Hellenes, and the heavy infantry took up

' Lit. " Eleleu," see above, p. 29 ; HcU. 11. iv. 17.
2 Or, "within, followed by a stampede of fugitives, "


138



ANABASIS — EK. V.



[en. lu I 19-27
\ Mar. 10-73



their position, some about the stockades, others along the roadJ
leading up to the citadel. Xenophon and the officers mean-^
time considered the possibility of taking the citadel, for if so,
their safety was assured ; but if otherwise, it would be very
difficult to get away. As the result of their deliberations they
agreed that the place was impregnable. Then they began
making preparations for the retreat. Each set of men proceeded '
to pull down the palisading which faced themselves ; further,
they sent away all who were useless or who had enough to
do to carry their burdens, with the mass of the heavy infantry
accomixinying them ; the officers in each case leaving behind
men whom they could severally depend upon.

But as soon as they began to retreat, out rushed upon them
from within a host of fellows, armed with wicker shields and
lances, greaves and Paphlagonian helmets. Others might be
seen scaling the houses on this side and that of the road
leading into the citadel Even pursuit in the direction of the
gates leading to the citadel was dangerous, since the enemy
kept hurling down on them great beams from above, so that
to stop and to make off w^cre alike dangerous, and night
approaching was full of terrors. But in the midst of their
fighting and their despair some god gave them a means of safety.
All of a sudden, by whatsoever hand ignited, a flame shot up ;
it came from a house on the right hand, and as this gradually
fell in, the people from the other houses on the right took to
their heels and fled.

Xenophon, laying this lesson of fortune to heart,'- gave orders
to set fire to the left-hand houses also, which being of wood
burned quickly, with the result that the occupants of these
also took to flight. The men immediately at their front were
the sole annoyance now, and these were safe to fall upon
them as they made their exit and in their descent. Here then
the word was passed for all who were out of range to bring
up logs of wood and pile them between themselves and the
enemy, and when there was enough of these they set them
on fire ; they also flred the houses along the trench- work itself,
so as to occupy the attention of the enemy. Thus they got off,
though with difficulty, and escaped from the place Ijy putting

^ Or, " taking the hint, which cltance had given him,"


a fire between them and the enemy ; and the whole city was
burnt down, houses, turrets, stockading, and everything belong-
ing to it except the citadel

Next day the Hellenes were bent on getting back with the
provisions ; but as they dreaded the descent to Trapezus,
which was precipitous and narrow, they laid a false ambuscade,
and a Mysian, called after the name of his nation (Mysus),^
took ten of the Cretans and halted in some thick brushy ground,
where he made a feint of endeavouring to escape the notice of
the enemy. The ghnt of their light shields, which were of
brass, now and again gleamed through the brushwood. The
enemy, seeing it all through the thicket, were confirmed in their
fears of an ambuscade. But the army meanwhile was quietly
making its descent ; and when it appeared that they had crept
down far enough, the signal was given to the Mysian to flee
as fast as he could, and he, springing up, fled with his men.
The rest of the party, that is the Cretans, saying, "We are
caught if we race," left the road and plunged into a wood, and
tumbling and rolling down the gullies, were saved. The
Mysian, fleeing along the road, kept crying for assistance, which
they sent him, and picked him up wounded. The party of
rescue now beat a retreat themselves with their face to the foe,
exposed to a shower of missiles, to which some of the Cretan
bowmen responded with their arrows. In this way they all
reached the camp in safety.

Ill, — Now when Chcirisophus did not arrive, and the sup-
ply of ships was insufficient, and to get provisions longer was
impossible, they resolved to depart. On board the vessels
they embarked the sick^ and those above forty years of age, with
the boys and women, and all the baggage which the soldiers
were not absolutely forced to take for their own use. The
two eldest generals, Philesius and Sophaenetus, were put in
charge, and so the party embarked, while the rest resumed
their march, for the road was now completely constructed.
Continuing their march that day and the next, on the third
they reached Cerasus, a Hellenic city on the sea, and a
colony of Sinope, in the country of the Colchians. Here ihey
halted ten days, and there was a review and numbering of the

' Lit. " Mwds (Mysus), a Mysian by birth, and Muir^f (Mysvls'^ by name."


I40



ANABASIS — BK. V.



/ CH. III. I 3-7
\ Mar. 13-93



troops under arms, when there were found to be eight thousand
six hundred men. So many had escaped ; the rest had perished
at the hands of the enemy, or by reason of the snow, or else
disease.

At this time and pkce they divided the money accruing
from the captives sold, and a tithe selected for Apollo and
Artemis of the Ephesians was divided between the generals,
each of whom took a portion to guard for the gods. Neon the
Asinaean ^ taking on behalf of Cheirisophus.

Out of the portion which fell to Xenophon he caused a
dedicatory offering to Apollo to be made and dedicated among
the treasures of the Athenians at Delphi.- It was inscribed
with his own name and that of Proxenus, his friend, who was
killed with Clearchus. The gift for Artemis of the Ephesians
was, in the first instance, left behind by him in Asia at the time
when he left that part of the world himself with Agesilaus on
the march into Boeotia.^ He left it behind in charge of Mega-
byzus, the sacristan of the goddess^ thinking that the voyage on
which he was starting was fraught with danger. In the event of
his coming out of it alive, he charged Megabyzus to restore to him
the deposit ; but should any evil happen to him, then he was to
cause to be made and to dedicate on his behalf to Artemis,
whatsoever thing he thought would be pleasing to the goddess.

In the days of his banishment,* when Xenophon was now
established by the Lacedaemonians as a colonist in Scillus,^ a

1 /.e. of Asine, perhaps the place named in Tbuc. iv. 13, 54 ; vi. 93,
situated on the western side of the Messenian bay. Strabo, however, speaks
of another Asine near Gytheum, but possibly means I^s. Sec Arnold's note
10 Thuc- iv. 13, and Smith's Z??'c^. Ge(>g. {s. I'.j

^ Cf. Herod, i, 14 ; Straho \x. 420 for such private treasuries at Delphi.

' /,f. in ihc year B.C. 394. The circumstances under which Agesilaus
was recalled from Asia, with the details of his march and the battle of Coronea.
are described by Xenophon in the fourth book of the HelUnica.

* Or, " after his banishment."

* SciUus (SKiXAot}?), a town of Triphylia, a district of Elis. In B.C. 57a
the Eleians had razed Pisa and Scillus to the ground. But between a.c 393
and 387 the Lacedaemonians, liaving previously {B.C. 400, Hell. III. ii, 30)
compelled the Eleians to renounce their supremacy ovlt their dependent cities,
colonised SctUus iind eventually gave it to Xenophon. then an exile from
AthenK. Xenophon resided here lYom fifteen to twenty years, but was, it is
said, expelled from it by the Eleians soon after the battle of Lfuctra, in ac.
371. — Did, Geog. (j* v.) The site of the place, and of Xenophon's temple,
is supposed to be in the neighbomiiood of the modern village of Chrestena,



V!c. '^* '**^ } AUTOBIOGRAPHIC t^

[place which lies on the main road to Olympia, Megabyzus

f arrived on his way to Olympia as a spectator to attend the

I games, and restored to him the deposit Xenophon took the

' money and bought for the goddess a plot of ground at a point

indicated to him by the oracle. The plot, it so happened, had

its own SeUnus river flowing through it, just as at Ephesus the

1 river Selinus flows past the temple of Artemis, and in both

Lstreams fish and mussels are to be found. On the estate at

Scilkis there is hunting and shooting of all the beasts of the

chase that are.

Here with the sacred money he built an altar and a temple,
and ever after, year by year, tithed the fruits of the land in
their season and did sacrifice to the goddess, while all the
citizens and neighbours, men and women, shared in the festival.
The goddess herself provided for the banqueters meat and
loaves and wine and sweetmeats, with portions of the victims
sacrificed from the sacred pasture, as also of those which were
slain in the chase ; for Xenophon's own ladS, with the lads of
the other citizens, always made a hunting excursion against the
festival day, in which any grown men who liked might join.
The game was captured partly from the sacred district itself,
partly from Pholoe,^ pigs and gazelles and stags. The place lies
on the direct road from L^cedaemon to Olympia, about twenty
furlongs from the temple of Zeus in Olympia, and within
the sacred enclosure there is meadow-land and wood-covered
bills, suited to the breeding of pigs and goats and cattle and
horses, so that even the sumpter animals of the pilgrims passing
to the feast fare sumptuously. The shrine is girdled by a
grove of cultivated trees, yielding dessert fruits in their season.
The temple itself is a facsimile on a small scale of the great
temple at Ephesus, and the image of the goddess is Uke the
golden statue at Ephesus, save only that it is made, not of gold,
but of cypress wood. Beside the temple stands a column
bearing this inscription i— the place is sacred to artemis,

HE WHO HOLDS IT AND ENJOYS THE FRUITS OF IT IS BOUND TO

or possibly nearer Mazi, To reach Olympia, about aj miles distant, one imist
cross the Alpheus. See map,

^ Pholoe, Tliis moumain (north of the Alpheus) is an offshool of Eiy-
manthus, crossing the Pisatis from east lo west, and separating the waters of
the Pencils and the Ladoti horn those of the Alpheus. — Dicf. Geoff. (Elis).



Mi



ANABASIS BK. V.



fell, HI. i J3-CH. TV. I to

( Mar. 24



SACRIFICE YEARLY A TITHE OF THE PRODUCE. AND FROM THE
RESIDUE THEREOF TO KEEP IN REPAIR THE SHRINE. IF ANY
MAN FAIL IN AUGHT OF THIS THE GODDESS HERSELF WILL
LOOK TO IT THAT THE MATTER SHALL NOT SLEEP.

IV.— From Cerasus they continued the march, the same
portion of the troops being conveyed by sea as before, and the
rest marching by land. When they had reached the frontiers
of the Mossynoecians ^ they sent to them Timesitheus the
Trapezuntine, who was the proxenos - of the Mossynoecians,
to inquire whether they were to pass through their territory
as friends or foes, They^ trusting in their strongholds,
replied that they would not give them passage. It was
then that Timesitheus informed them that the Mossynoecians
on the farther side of the country were hostile to these
members of the tribe f and it was resolved to invite the
former to make an alliance, if they wished it. So Timesitheus
was sent, and came back with their chiefs. On their arrival
there was a conference of the Mossynoecian chiefs and
the generals of the Hellenes, and Xenophon made a speech
which Timesitheus interpreted. He said : "Men of the Mos-
synoecians, our desire is to reach Hellas in safety ; and
since we have no vessels we must needs go by foot, but these
people who, as we hear, are your enemies, prevent us. Will
you take us for your allies? Now is your chance to exact
vengeance for any wrong, which they at any time may have put
upon you, and for the future they will be your subjects ; but if
you send us about our business, consider and ask yourselves
from what quarter will you ever again obtain so strong a force
to help you ?" To this the chief of the Mossynoecians made
answer : — that the proposal was in accordance with their
wishes and they welcomed the alliance. "Good," said Xeno-
phon, " but to what use do you propose to put us, if we be-
come your allies ? And what wtH you in your turn be able to
do to assist our passage ?" They replied : '* We can make an
incursion into this country hostile to yourselves and us, from


' J.e. dioellers in mossyns,

78. Cf. also Strabo, xi. 41.

- Or, "consul." See ffeil I. i. 35.

' Reading tovtoh with Hug.



or wooden lowers. See Herod, ii


CH. IV. I io-x6l
a.c 400 /



THE MOSSYNOECIANS



Hi



the opposite aide, and also send you ships and men to this place,
who will aid you in fighting and conduct you on the road,"

On this understanding, they exchanged pledges and were
gone. The next day they returned, bringing three hundred
canoeSj each hollowed out of a single trunk. There were three
men in each, two of whom disembarked and fell into rank, whilst
the third remained. Then the one set took the boats and sailed
back again, whilst the other two-thirds who remained marshalled
themselves in the following way. They stood in rows of about
a hundred each, like the rows of dancers in a chorus, standing
vis-^'7'is to one another, and all bearing wicker shields, made
of white oxhide, shaggj', and shaped like an ivy leaf; in the
right hand they brandished a javelin about six cubits long,
with a lance in front, and rounded like a ball at the butt end
of the shaft.

Their bodies were clad in short frocks, scarcely reaching to
ihe knees and in texture closely resembling that of a linen
bedclothes' bag ; on their heads they wore leathern helmets
just like the Pai>hlagonian helmet, with a tuft ^ of hair in the
middte, as like a tiara in shape as possible. They carried
moreover iron battle-axes. Then one of them gave, as it
were, the key-note and started, while the rest, taking up the
strain and the step, followed singing and marking time. Pass-
ing through the various corps and kfeavy armed battalions^
of the Hellenes, they marched straight against the enemy, to
what appeared the most assailable of his fortresses. It was
situated in front of the city, or mother city, as it is called,
which latter contains the high citadel of the Mossy noecians.
This citadel was the real bone of contention, the occupants at
any time being acknowledged as the masters of all the other
Mossynoecians. The present holders (so it was explained)
had no right to its possession ; for the sake of self-aggrandise-
ment they had seized what was really common property.

Some of the Hellenes followed the attacking party, not
under the orders of the generals, but for the sake of plunder.
As they advanced, the enemy for a while kept quiet ; but as

i Cf. Thuc. i. 6.

- Or, "through Um ranks and quorlers of the Hellenes"; or, "through
Ihe light and heavy infanlry divisions, "


144



ANABASIS BK.



(at. IV. $ i6-3j
L Mar. 24-



they got near the place, they made a sortie and routed them,
killing several of the barbarians as well as some of the Hellenes
who had gone up with them ; and so pursued them until
they saw the Hellenes advancing to the rescue. Then they
turned round and made off, first cutting off the heads of the
dead men and flaunting them in the face of the Hellenes and
of their own private foes, dancing the while and singing in a
measured strain. But the Hellenes were much vexed to think
that their foes had only been rendered bolder, while the
Hellenes who had formed part of the expedition had turned
tail and fled, in spite of their numbers ; a thing which
had not happened previously during the whole expedition.
So Xenophon called a meeting of the Hellenes and spoke as
follows : *' Soldiers, do not in any wise be cast down by what has
happened, be sure that good no less than evil will be the result ;
for to begin with, you now know certainly that those who are
going to guide us are in very deed hostile to those with whom
necessity drives us to quarrel ; and, in the next place, some of
our own body, these Hellenes who have made so light of
orderly array and conjoint action with oui^elves, as though they
must needs achieve in the company of barbarians all they could
with ourselves, have paid the penalty and been taught a lesson,
so that another time they will be less prone to leave our ranks.
But you must be prepared to show these friendly barbarians
that you are of a better sort, and prove to the enemy that
battle with the undisciplined is one thing, but with men like
yourselves another."

Accordingly they halted, as they were, that day. Next
day they sacrificed and finding the victims favourable, they
breakfasted, formed the companies into columns, and with the
barbarians arranged in similar order on their left, began their
march. Between the companies w^ere the archers only slightly
retired behind the front of the heavy infantry, on account of
the enemy's active light troops, who ran down and kept up
volleys of stones. These were held in check by the archers and
peltasts; and steadily step by step the mass marched on, first
to the position from which the barbarians and those with theni^
had been driven two days back, and where the enemy were
" Or, " Uicir barbaxian allies and their own men with them."



CH. JV. § 33-30 1

April J, B,c. 400 r


THEIR STRANGE CUSTOMS



now drawn up to meet them. Thus it came to pass that the
barbarians first grappled with the peltasts and maintained the
battle until the heavy infantry were close, when they turned and
fled. The peltasts followed without delay, and pursued them
right up to their city, w^hile the heavy troops in unbroken order
followed. As soon as they were up at the houses of the capital,
there and then the enemy, collecting all together in one
strong body, fought valiantly, and hurled their javelins, or else
clenched their long stout spears, almost too heavy for a man
to wield, and did their best to ward oif the attack at close
quarters.

But when the Hellenes, instead of giving way, kept massing
together more thickly, the barbarians fled from this place also,
and In a body deserted the fortress. Their king, who sat in
his wooden tower or niossyn, built on the citadel (there he sits
and there they maintain him, all at the common cost, and
guard him narrowly)/ refused to come forth, as did also those
in the fortress first taken^ and so were burnt to a cinder where
they were, their mossyns, themselves, and all. The Hellenes,
pillaging and ransacking these places, discovered in the different
houses treasures and magazines of loaves, pile upon pile, " the
ancestral stores," as the Mossynoecians told them j but the new
corn was laid up apart with the straw-stalk and ear together,
and this was for the most part spelt. Slices of dolphin were
another discovery, in narrow-necked jars, all properly salted and
pickled ; and there was blubber of dolphin in vessels, which the
Mossynoecians used precisely as the Hellenes use oil. Then
there were large stores of nuts on the upper floor, the broad
kind without a division.^ This was also a chief article of food
with them — boiled nuts and baked loaves. Wine was also
discovered. This, from its rough, dry quality, tasted sharp
when drunk pure, but mixed with water was sweet and
fragrant.

The Hellenes breakfasted and then started forward on their
march^ having first dehvered the stronghold to their allies
among the Mossynoecians. As for the other strongholds
belonging to tribes allied with their foes, which they passed ai
rouky the most accessible were either deserted by their inhabit-

* Or, " protect him. " ■* I.e. "chestnuts."


146*



ANABASIS — BK. V.



f CH. IV. 4 30-CH. V. § *
il April a-



ants or gave in their adhesion voluntarily. The following
description will apply to the majority of them : the cities were
on an average ten miles apart, some more, some less ; but
so elevated is the country and intersected by such deep clefts
that if they chose to shout across to one another, their cries
would be heard from one city to another. \Vhen, in the
course of their march^ they came upon a friendly population,
these would entertain them with exhibitions of fatted children
belonging to the wealthy classes, fed up on boiled chestnuts
until they were as white as white can be, of skin plump and
delicate, and very nearly as broad as they were long, with their
backs variegated and their breasts tattooed with patterns of
all sorts of flowers. They sought after the women in the Hel-
lenic array, and would fain have lain with them openly in broad
daylight, for that was their custom. The whole community, male
and female alike, were fair-complexioned and white-skinned.

It was agreed that this was the most barbaric and out-
landish people that they had passed through on the whole
expedition, and the furthest removed from Hellenic customs,
doing in a crowd precisely what other people would prefer
to do in solitude, and when alone behaving exactly as others
would behave in company, talking to themselves and laughing
at theiir own expense, standing still and then again capering
about, wherever they might chance to be^ without rhyme or
reason, as if their sole business were to show off to the rest of
the world.

V, — Through this country^ friendly or hostile as the chance
might be, the Hellenes marched, eight stages in all, and
reached the Chalybes.^ These were a people few in number,
and subject to the Mossy noecians. Their livelihood was for
the most part derived from mining and forging iron.

Thence they came to the Tibarenians. The country of the
Tibarenians was far more level, and their fortresses lay on the
seaboard and were less strong, whether by art or nature. The
generals wanted to attack these places, so that the army might
get some pickings,'^ and they would not accept the gifts of

See above, p. 134, note i.
* Or, ' ■ these the generals wished to attack, so that the armjr might be
benefited somewhat," but the Greek is more colloquial.



I



CH. V. § a-io 1
May xS, B.C. 400 j



AT COrv^ORA



W



hospitality which came in from the TibarenLins, but bidding
them wait till they had taken counsel, they proceeded to
offer sacrifice. After several abortive attempts, the seers at
last all pronounced an opinion that the gods in no wise coun-
tenanced war. Then they accepted the gifts of hospitality,
and marching through what was now recognised as a friendly
country, in two days reached Cotyora, a Hellenic city, and
a colony of Sinope, albeit situated in the territory of the
Tibarenians.^

Here they halted forty-five days, during which they first of
all sacrificed to the gods, and instituted processions, each set
of the Hellenes according to their several tribes, with gym-
nastic contests. Provisions they got in meanwhile, partly from
Paphlagonia, partly from the estates of the Cotyorites, for the
latter would neither provide them a market nor receive their
sick within their waUs.

Meanwhile ambassadors arrived from Sinope, full of fears,
not only for the Cotyorites and their city, which belonged to
Sinope, and brought in tribute, but also for the territory
which, as they had heard, was being pillaged. Accordingly
they came to the camp and made a speech. Hecatonymus,
who was reported to be a clever orator, acted as their spokes-
man : "Soldiers," he said, "the city of the Sinopeans has
sent us to offer you, as Hellenes, our compHments and con-
gratulations on your victories over the barbarians ; and next,
to express our joyful satisfaction that you have surmounted
all those terrible sufferings of which we have heard, and
have reached this place in safety. As Hellenes we claim
to receive at your hands, as fellow -Hellenes, kindness and
not harm.*^ We have certainly not ourselves set you an
example heretofore of evil treatment Now the Cotyorites
are our colonists. It was we who gave them this country

^ The MSS. here read, ' ' Up to this point the expedition was conducted
on land, and the distance traversed on foot from the baule-ticld near Babylon
down to Cotyora amounted lo one hundred and twonty-two stages — that is to
say, sis hundred and twenty parasangs, or eighteen thousand slades, or if
measured in time, an eight months' march," The words are probably the note
of some editor or commentator, though it is quite likely that the author him-
self may have gone through such calculations and even have inserted iheni as
a note to his text.

' Or, "some show of kindness, without taint of evil."


148



-BK. V.



/CH. V. S IO-18

\ April 3-



to dwell in, tia^nng taken it from the barbarians ; for which
reason also they, with the men of Cerasus and Tmpezus,
pay us an appointed tribute. So that, whatever mischief you
inflict on the men of Cot}'ora, the city of Si nope takes as
personal to herself At the present time we hear that you
have made forcible entry into their city, some of you^ and are
quartered in the houses, besides taking forcibly from the
Cotyorite estates whatever you need, by hook and by crook.
Now against these things we enter protest. If you mean to
go on so doing, you will drive us to make friends with Corylas
and the Paphlagonians, or any one else we can find."

To meet these charges Xenophon, in behalf of the soldiers,
rose and said : " As to ourselvea^ men of Sinope, having got so
far, we are well content to have saved our bodies and our arms.
Indeed it was impossible at one and the same moment to
keep our enemies at bay and to despoil them of their goods and
chattels. And now, since we have reached Hellenic cities,
how has it fared with us? At Trapezus they gave us a
market, and we paid for our provisions at a fair market
price. In return for the honour they did us, and the gifts
of hospitality they gave the army, we requited them with
honour Where the barbarian was friendly to them, we
stayed our hands from injury ; or under their escort, we
did damage to their enemies to the utmost of our power.
Ask them, what sort of people they found us. They are
here, some of them, to answer for themselves. Their fellow-
citizens and the state of Trapezus, for friendship's sake, have
sent them with us to act as our guides.

"But wherever we come, be it foreign or Hellenic soil, and
find no market for provisions, we are wont to help ourselves,
not out of insolence but from necessity. There have been
tribes like the Carduchians, the Taochians, the Chaldaeans,
which, albeit they Avere not subject to the great king, yet
were no less formidable than independent. These we had
to bring over by our arms. The necessity of getting provi-
sions forced us; since they refused to offer us a market
Whereas some other folk, like the Macrones, in spite of their
being barbarians, we regarded as our friends, simply because
they did afford us the best market in their power, and vre



CH. V. $ i8-34
May tS, B.C. 400 J



HECATONYMUS OF SINOPE



149



took no single thing of theirs by force. But, to come to these
Cot}'Orites, whom you claim to be your peoplCj, if we have
taken aught from them, they have themselves to blame, for
they did not deal with us as friends, but shut their gates
in our faces. They would neither welcome us within nor
furnish us with a market without. The only justification they
alleged was that your governor ^ had authorised this conduct

"As to your assertion," he continued, turning to Hecatony-
mus, *' that we have got in by force and have taken up quarters,
this is what we did. We requested them to receive our sick and
wounded under cover ; and when they refused to open their
gates, we walked in where the place itself invited us. All the
violence we have committed amounts to this, that our sick folk
are quartered under covetj paying for their expenses, and we
keep a sentry at the gates, so that our sick and wounded may
not lie at the mercy of your governor, but we may have it in our
power to remove them whenever we hke. The rest of us, you
observe, are camping under the canopy of heaven, in regular
rank and file, and we are ready to requite kindness with kind-
ness, but to repel evil vigorously. And as for your threat,"
he said, once again turning to the spokesman, "that you will,
if it suits you, make alliance with Corylas and the Paphlagonians
to attack us, for our part, we have no objection to fighting
both sets of you, if so be we must ; we have already fought
others many times more numerous than you. Besides, * if it
suits wjr,' as you put it, to make the Paphlagonian our friend
(report says that he has a hankering after your city and some
other places on the seaboard), we can enhance the value of
our friendship by helping to win for him what he covets."

Thereupon the ambassadors showed very plainly their
annoyance with Hecatonymus, on account of the style of his
remarks, and one of them stept forward to explain that their
intention in coming was not at all to raise a war, but on the

^ Lit. "harniost, " See below, pp. 175, 183, 191-, Nefl I. ii. 18;
Thuc. viii. 5. The term, denoting properly a governor of the islands and
foreign cities sent out by the Lacedaemonians during their supremacy (see L.
and S. . J. TJ, }, came, it would seem, to be adopted by other Greek communities
under somewhat similar circumstances. Cotyora receives a harmost from her
mother-city, Sinope, For the Greek colonies here mentioned, see Kiepert's
Man. And. Geog. (Eng. tr. , Mr. G. A, Macmillan), p. 63, §59.



ISO



ANABASIS — BK. V.



ICH. V. i 24 -CH. VJ. i 4
\ April 3-


contrary to demonstrate thdr friendliness. " And if you come
to Sinope itself," the speaker continued, " we will welcome
you there with gifts of hospitality. Meanwhile we will enjoin
upon the citizens of this place to give you what they can ;
for we can see that every word of what you say is true."
Thereupon the Cotyorites sent gifts of hospitality, and the
generals of the Hellenes entertained the ambassadors of the
Sinopeans. Many and friendly were the topics of conversa-
tion ; freely Rowed the talk on things in general ; and,
in particular, both parties were able to make inquiries and
satisfy their curiosity concerning the remaining portion of the
march. ^

VI. — Such was the conclusion of that day. On the following
day the generals summoned an assembly of the soldiers, when
it was resolved to invite the men of Sinope, and to take advice
with them touching the remainder of the journey. In the
event of their having to continue it on foot, the Sinopeans
through their acquaintance with Paphlagonia would be useful
to them ; while, if they had to go by sea^ the services of the
same people would be at a premium f for who but they could
furnish ships sufficient for the army? Accordingly, they
summoned their ambassadors, and took counsel with them,
begging them, on the strength of the sacred ties which bind
Hellenes to Hellenes, to inaugurate the good reception they
had spoken of, by present kindliness and their best advice.

Hecatonymus rose and wished at once to offer an apology
with regard to what he had said about the possibility of making
friends with the Paphlagonians. " The words were not intended, "
he said, " to convey a threat, as though they were minded to
go to war with the Hellenes, but as meaning rather : albeit we
have it in our power to be friendly with the barbarians, we will
choose the Hellenes." Then, being urged to aid them by some
advice, with a pious ejaculation, he commenced : " If I bestow
upon you the best counsel I am able, God grant that blessings
in abundance may descend on me ; but if the contrary, may

^ Or, "to make inquiries concerning the remaining; portion of ihe march,
and learn what each respectively stood in nued of. "

' Or, " for if they should have to continue iheir journey on foot, ihe people
of Sifio|>e appeared likely to be useful through their acquainlance vkitli Paph-
lagonia, and still raore if they had to go by sea."



I
I

I

I

I



I
I



CH. VI. 5 4-^ ]

May tS, B.C- 400 i



HIS * SACRED COUNSEL^



Ijt



evil betide me ! ' Sacred counsel,' ^ as the saying goes, — well,
sirSf if ever the saying held, it should hold I think to-day ; when,
if I be proved to have given you good counsel, I shall not lack
panegyrists, or if evil, your imprecations will be many-tongued.

" As to trouble, I am quite aware, we shall have much
more trouble if you are conveyed by sea, for we must provide
the vessels ; whereas, if you go by land, all the fighting will de-
volve on you. Still, let come what may, it behoves me to state
my views, I have an intimate acquaintance with the country
of the Paphlagonians and their power. The country possesses
the two features of hill and vale, that is to say, the fairest
plains and the highest mountains. To begin with the moun-
tains, I know the exact point at which you must make your
entry. It is precisely where the horns of a mountain tower
over both sides of the road. Let the merest handful of men
occupy these and they can hold the pass with ease ; for when
that is done ^ not all the enemies in the world could effect
a passage. I could point out the whole with my finger, if
you like to send any one with me to the scene.

" So much for the mountain barrier. But the next thing I
know is that there are plains and a cavalry which the bar-
barians themselves hold to be superior to the entire cavalry of
the great king. Why, only the other day these people re-
fused to present themselves to the summons of the king ; their
chief is too proud for that

" But now, supposing you were able to seize the mountain
barrier, by stealth or expedition, before the enemy could stop
you ; supposing further, you were able to win an engagement
in the pliin against not only their cavalry but their more than
one hundred and twenty thousand infantry, — you will only find
yourself face to face with the rivers, a series of them. First the
Thermodon, three hundred feet broad, which I take it will be
difficult to pass, especially with a host of foes in front and
another host following behind. Next comes the Iris river,
three hundred feet broad ; and thirdly, the Halys, at least two
furlongs broad, which you could not possibly cross without
vessels, and who is going to supply you with vessels ? In the

' Cf. Plato. Tfuages, 123.
3 Lit. " for when once these are so occupied not all , . ."


'52



^ABASIS^BK. V.



{^"■^UTP



same way too the Parthenius is impassable, which you will
reach if you cross the Halys. For my part, then, I consider
the land -journey, I will not say difficult, but absolutely im-
possible for you. Whereas if you go by sea, you can coast
along from here to Sinope, and from Sinope to Heraclea.
From Heraclea onwards there is no difficulty, whether by land
or by sea ; for there are plenty of vessels at Heraclea."

After he had finished his remarks, some of his hearers
thought they detected a certain bias in them. He would not
have spoken so, but for his friendship with Corylas, whose
official representative^ he was. Others guessed he had an
itching palm, and that he was hoping to receive a present for
his " sacred advice." Others again suspected that his object
was to prevent their going by foot and doing some mischief to
the country of the Sinopeans. However that might be, the
Hellenes voted in favour of continuing the journey by sea.
After this Xenophon said : " Sinopeans, the army has chosen
that method of procedure which you advise, and thus the
matter stands. If there are sure to be vessels enough to make
it impossible for a single man to be left behind, go by sea we
will ; but if part of us are to be left w^hile part go by sea,
we will not set foot on board the vessels. One fact we
plainly recognise, strength is everything to us. So long as
vfc have the mastery, we shaO be able to protect ourselves
and get provisions ; but if we are once caught at the mercy
of our foes, it is plain, we shall be reduced to slavery."-
On hearing this the ambassadors ^ bade them send an embassy,
which they did, to wit, Callimachus the Arcadian, and Ariston
the Athenian, and Samolas the Achaean.

So these set off, but meanwhile a thought shaped itself in
the mind of Xenophon, as there before his eyes lay that vast
anny of Hellene hoplites, and that other array of peltasts^
archers^ and slingers, with cavalry to boot, and all in a state
of thorough efficiency from long practice, hardened veterans^
and all collected in Pontus, where to raise so large a force
would cost a mint of money. Then * the idea dawned upon

1 Lit. " proxenos " ; see p, 142 above. The office closely resembled that of
OUT consul ' Lit. " to the level of captive slaves." ' I.e. from Sinope.

* For the colonisatioti scheme, see above, p. 80, note i.


CH. Vt. ( i5-ao \
May iB, B.C. 400/



COLONISATION SCHEME



H3



him : how noble an opportunity to acquire new territory and
power for Hellas, by the founding of a colony — -a city of no
mean size, moreover, said he to himself, as he reckoned up
their own numbers- — and besides themselves a population
planted on the shores of Pontus. Thereupon he summoned
Silanus the Ambraciot, the soothsayer of Cyrus above men-
tioned/ and before breathing a syllable to any of the soldiers,
he consulted the victims by sacrifice.

But Silanus, in apprehension lest these ideas might embody
themselves, and the army be permanently halted at some
point or other, set a tale going among the men, to the eifect
that Xenophon was minded to detain the army and found a
city in order to win himself a name and acquire power,
Silanus himself being minded to reach Hellas with all possible
speed, for the simple reason that he had still got the three
thousand darics presented to him by Cyrus on the occasion of
the sacrifice when he hit the truth so happily about the ten
days.^ Siianus's story was variously received, some few of
the soldiers thinking it would be an excellent thing to stay
in that country ; but the majority were strongly averse. The
next incident was that Timasion the Dardanian, with Thorax
the Boeotian, addressed themselves to some Heracleot and
Sinopean traders who had come to Cotyora, and told them
that if they did not find means to furnish the army with
pay sufficient to keep them in provisions on the homeward
voyage, all that great force would most likely settle down per-
manently in Pontus. " Xenophon has a pet idea," they con-
tinued, " which he urges upon us. We are to wait until the
ships come, and then we are suddenly to turn round to the
army and say: 'Soldiers, we now sec the straits we are in,
unable to keep ourselves in provisions on the return voyage,
or to make our friends at home a little present at the end
of our journey.^ But if you like to select some place on the
inhabited seaboard of the Black Sea which may take your
fancy and there put in, this is open to you to do. Those who
hke to go home, go ; those who care to stay here, stay. You

' See above, p. 26.

- Or, "when his statement proved correct" See above, p. 36.

^ Or, " to do one's friends at home a good turn."



ANABASIS — BK. V.



/ CH. VT. $ 30'2i

\ April 3'



have got vessels now, so that you can make a sudden pounce
upon any point you choose.* "

The merchants went off with this tale and reported it to
every city they came to in turn, nor did they go alone, but
Timasion the Dardanian sent a fellow -citizen of his own,
Eurymachus, with the Boeotian Thorax, to repeat the same
story. So when it reached the ears of the men of Si nope and
the Heracleots, they sent to Timasion and pressed him to
accept of a gratuity, in return for which he was to arrange for
the departure of the troops. Timasion was only too glad to
hear this, and he took the opportunity when the soldiers
were convened in meeting to make the following remarks:
"Soldiers," he said, "do not set your thoughts on staying
here ; let Hellas, and Hellas only, be the object of your
affection, for I am told that certain persons have been sacri-
ficing on this very question, without saying a word to you.
Now I can promise you, if you once leave these waters, to
furnish you with regular monthly pay, dating from the first of
the month, at the rate of one cyzicene -^ a head per month. I
will bring you to the Troad, from which part I am an exile,
and my own state is at your service. They will receive me
with open arms. I will be your guide personally, and 1 will
take you to places where you will get plenty of money. I
know every corner of the Aeolid, and Phrygia, and the Troad,
and indeed the whole satrapy of Pharnabazus, partly because
it is my birthplace, partly from campaigns in that region with
Clearchus and Dercylidas."^

No sooner had he ceased than up got Thorax the Boeotian,
This was a man who had a standing battle with Xenophon
about the generalship of the army. What he said was that, if
they once got fairly out of the Euxine, there was the Chersonese,
a beautiful and prosperous country, where they could settle
or not, as they chose. Those who liked could stay j and

1 A cyzicene j/a/fr = twenty-eight silver dmchmae of Auic money B.C. 335,
in the lime of Demosthenes ; but. like the rfari/: (see above, p. a6), this gold
coin would fluctuaie in value relatively to silver. It contained more grains of
gold than the daric.

^ Of Dercylidas we htsir more in the Hdlenka, In B.C. 411 he was
harmoit at Abydos ; in B.a 399 he superseded ITiimbron in Asia Minor ; and
was himsdf superseded by Agesilaus in b.c. 396.


i



I



I



I



I
I

I


CK. VJ. ( 25-30 \
May 18, B.C. 400/



INTRIGUES AGAINST XENOPHON



t5S



those who liked could return to their homes ; how ridiculous
then, when there was so much territory in Hellas and to spare,
to be poking about ^ in the land of the barbarian. " But
until you find yourselves there," he added, " I, no less than
Tiraasion, can guarantee you regular pay," This he said,
knowing what promises had been made Timasion by the men
of Heraclea and Sinope to induce them to set sail.

Meanwhile Xenophon held his peace. Then up got
Fhilesius and Lycon, two Achaeans : " It was monstrous," they
said, " that Xenophon should be privately persuading people
to stop there, and consulting the victims for that end^ without
letting the army into the secret, or breathing a syllable in
public about the matter," When it came to this, Xenophon
was forced to get up, and speak as follows : " Sirs, you are
well aware that my habit is to sacrifice at all times ; whether
in your own behalf or my own, I strive in every thought, word,
and deed to be directed as is best ^ for yourselves and me.
And in the present instance my sole object was to learn
whether it were better even so much as to broach the subject,
and so take action, or to have absolutely nothing to do with
the project. Now Silanus the soothsayer assured me by his
answer of what was the main point : ' the victims were favour-
able/ No doubt Silanus knew that I was not unversed myself
in his lore, as I have so often assisted at the sacrifice; but
he added that there were symptoms in the victims of some
guile or conspiracy against me. That was a happy discovery on
his part, seeing that he was himself conspiring at the moment
to traduce me before you ; since it was he who set the tale
going that I had actually made up my mind to carry out these
projects without procuring your consent. Now, for my part, if

* The word /jLaffrevstv occurs above, II T. i, 43, p. 74, and again below,
VII. iii. II, p. 310, and in other writings of our author. Cf. Ogc. v. 13;
Coftv. iv. 27; -^gtfs. i. 24 (where the parallel passage, //ell. III. iv. 15, has.
iip-eiu) ; Cyrop. II. ii. 22. It is probably Ionic or old Attic, and occurs in
poetry, e.g. Aesch. Ag, logg, irpo^i^os ^ oCrti'ar /iaffrfuojutr ; " but prophets
none are we in scent of!"' as Mr, Robert Browning translates. Cf. /xaretSeii',
which is also a sportsman's word = " to snuff" — of a dog following scent.
Perhaps we may compare the Elizabethan "coasting" (Shaitesp, Venus and
Adonis ^ 870) : " and all in haste she coasteth to the cry,"

^ Lit. "as is fairest {i.e. most beautiful) and best," Cf. the phrase


.56



ANABASIS — BK. V.



\ April 3-



I saw that you were in any difficulties, I should set myself
to discover how you might capture a city.^ on the understand-
ing of course that all wlio wished might sail away at once,
leaving those who did not wish, to follow at a later date,
with something perhaps in their pockets to benefit their friends
at home. Now, however, as I see that the men of Heraclea
and Sinope are to send you ships to assist you to sail away, and
more than one person guarantees to give you regular monthly
pay, it is, I admit, a rare chance to be safely piloted to the haven
of our hopes, and at the same time to receive pay for our
preservation. For myself I have done with that dream, and
to those;, who came to me to urge these projects, my advice is to
have done with them. In fact, this is my view. As long as you
stay together united as to-day, you will command respect and
procure provisions ; for might certainly exercises a right over
what belongs to the we^iker. But once broken up, with your
force split into little bits, you will neither be able to get sub-
sistence, nor indeed will you get off without paying dearly
for it In fact, my resolution coincides precisely with yours.
It is that we should set off for Hellas, and if any one stops
behind, or is caught deserting before the whole army is in
safety, let him be judged as an evil-doer. Pray let all who
are in favour of this proposition hold up their hands."

They all held them up ; only Silanus began shouting and
vainly striving to maintain the right of departure for all who
liked to depart. But the soldiers would not suffer him^ threat-
ening him that if he were himself caught attempting to run away
they would inflict the aforesaid penalty. After this, when the
Heracleots learnt that the departure by sea was resolved upon,
and that the measure itself emanated from Xenophon, they
sent the vessels indeed ; but as to the money which they had
promised to Timasion and Thorax as pay for the soldiers,
they were not as good as their word, in fact they cheated them
both. Thus the two who had guaranteed regular monthly pay
were utterly confounded, and stood in terror of the soldiers.
What they did then, was to take to them the other generals
to whom they had communicated their former transactions
(that is to say, all except Neon the Asinaean, who, as lieutenant-
general, was acting for Cheirisophus during his continued



CH. VI. i 36-CH. VJI. fl 61
May i&, B.C. 400 /



HE CALLS A MEETING



IS?



absence). This done they came in a body to Xenophon and said
that their views were changed. As they had now got the ships,
they thought it best to sail to the Phasis, and seize the terri-
tory of the Phasians (whose present king was a descendant of
Aeetes).^ Xenophon's reply was curt : — Not one syllable
would he have to say himseli to the army in this matter, " But,"
he added, '* if you like, you can summon an assembly and
say your say." Thereupon Timasion the Dardanian set forth
as his opinion : — It were best to hold no parliament at present,
but first to go and conciliate, each of them, his own officers.
Thus they went away and proceeded to execute their plans.

VII. — -Presently the soldiers came to learn what was in
course of agitation, and Neon gave out that Xenophon had
persuaded the other generals to adopt his views, and had a
plan to cheat the soldiers and take them back to the Phasis,
The soldiers were highly indignant ; meetings were held ; little
groups gathered ominously ; and there seemed an alarming
probability that they would repeat the violence with which
they had lately treated the heralds of the Colchians and the
clerks of the market ; when all who did not save themselves
by jumping into the sea were stoned to death. So Xenophon,
seeing what a storm was brewing, resolved to anticipate mat-
ters so far as to summon a meeting of the men without delay,
and thus prevent their collecting of their own accord, and
he ordered the herald to announce an assembly. The voice
of the herald was no sooner heard than they rushed with
great readiness to the place of meeting. Then Xenophon,
without accusing the generals of having come to him, made
the following speech : *' I hear that a charge is brought against
me. It is I apparently who am going to cheat you and carry you
off to Phasis. I beg you by all that is holy to listen to me ;
and if there be found any guilt in me, let me not leave this
place till I have paid the penalty of my misdoing ; but if my
accusers are found guilty, treat them as they deserve. I pre-
sume, sirs, you know where the sun rises and where he sets,
and that he who would go to Hellas must needs journey
towards the sunset; whereas he who seeks the land of the

* Aeetes (Aiijrijs) is the patronym of the kings of CQ|chis from itiythical
limes onwards ; e.g. Medea was the daughter of Aeetes.\


158



ANABASIS — BK. V.



fCH. VII. I 6-10

\ April 3-



barbarian must contrariwise fix his face towards the dawn.
Now is that a point in which a man might hope to cheat you ?
Could any one make you believe that the sun rises here and
sets there, or that he sets here and rises there ?^ And doubtless
you know this too, that it is Boreas, the north wind, who bears
the mariner out of Pontus towards Hellas» and the south wnnd
inwards towards the Phasis, whence the saying —

" ' When the North wind doth blow
Home lo Hellas we Awill go.'^

" He would be a clever fellow who could befool you into
embarking with a south wind blowing. That sounds all very
well, you think, only 1 may get you on board during a calm.
Granted, but I shall be on board my one ship, and you on
board another hundred at least, and how am I to constrain
you to voyage with me against your will, or by what cajolery
shall I carry you off ? But I will imagine you so far befooled
and bewitched by me, that I have got you to the Phasis ; we
proceed to disembark on dry Land At last it will come out,
that wherever you are, you are not in Hellas, and the inventor
of the trick will be one sole man, and you who have been
caught by it will number something like ten thousand with
swords in your hands. I do not know how a man could better
ensure his own punishment than by embarking on such a
policy with regard to himself and you.

" Nay, these tales are the invention of silly fellows who are
jealous of the honour you bestow on me, A most uncalled-
for jealousy ! Do 1 hinder any of them from speaking any
word of import in his power ? of striking a blow in your behalf
and his own, if that is his choice? or, finally, of keeping his
eyes and ears open to secure your safety ? What is it ? In
your choice of leaders do I stand in the way of any one, is that
it ? Let him step forward, I yield him place ; he shall be your
general ; only he must prove that he has your good at heart.

' Or, "rises in the west and sets in the east?"

' Srav Boppas Tif^

xaXot rXoi elf ttjc 'EXXdJa.

Whether this was a local saying or a proverb I cannot say. The words have
a poFiical ring about them ; ' ' WTien Borrhas blows, fair voyages to Hellas."



I

I


CH. Vtl

May



tl. % 11-17 \
18, B,c. 400/



HIS DEFENC



159



" For myself, I have done ; but for yourselves, if any of
you conceive eitlier that he himself could be the victim of a
fraud, or that he could victimise any one else in such a thing
as this, let him open his lips and explain to us how. Take
your time, but when you have sifted the matter to your hearts'
content, do not go away without suffering me to tell you of
something which I see looming. If it should burst upon us
and prove in fact anything like what it gives signs of being
now, it is time for us to take counsel for ourselves and see
that we do not prove ourselves to be the worst and basest of
men in the sight of gods and men, be they friends or be they
foes."' The words moved the curiosity of the soldiers. They
marvelled what this matter might be, and bade him explain.
Thereupon he began again : " You will not have forgotten cer-
tain places in the hills — ^barbaric fastnesses, but friendly to the
Cerasuntines — from which people used to come down and sell
us large cattle and other things which they possessed, and if I
mistake not, some of you went to the nearest of these places
and made purchases in the market and came back again.
Clearetus the captain learnt of this place, that it was but a little
one and unguarded. Why should it be guarded since it was
friendly? so the folk thought Thus he stole upon it in the dead
of night, and meant to sack it without saying a word to any of
us* His design was, if he took the place, not to return again to
the army, but to mount a vessel which, with his messmates on
board her, was sailing past^ at the time, and stowing away
what he had seized, to set sail and begone beyond the Euxine.
All this had been agreed upon and arranged with his comrades
on board the vessel, as I now discover. Accordingly, he
summoned to his side all whom he could persuade, and set
off at their head against the little place. But dawn overtook
him on his march. The men collected out of their strongholds,
and whether from a distance or close quarters, made such a
fight that they killed Clearetus and a good many of the rest,
and only a few of them got safe back to Cerasus.

" These things took place on the day on which we started to
come hither on foot ■ while some of those who were to go by
sea were still at Cerasus, not having as yet weighed anchor.

^ Or, " lay off the coast or was sailing past," etc.


i6o



ANABASIS — BK. V.



f



CH. Vtl. 5 17-34
ApriJ 3-



After this, according to what the Cerasuntines state, there
arrived three inhabitants of the place which had been attacked;
three elderly menj seeking an interview with our public as-
sembly. Not finding us, they addressed themselves to the men
of Cerasus, and told thenij they were astonished that we should
have thought it right to attack them ; however, when, as the
Cerasuntines assert, they had assured them that the occurrence
was not authorised by pubh'c consent, they were ple-ased, and
proposed to sail here, not only to state to us what had occurred,
but to oflTer that those who were interested should take up and
bury the bodies of the slain.

" But among the Hellenes still at Cerasus were some of
those who had escaped They found out in which direction
the barbarians were minded to go, and not only had the face
themselves to pelt them with stones, but vociferously en-
couraged their neighbours to do the same. The three men
— ambassadors, mark you — were slain, stoned to death.
After this occurrence, the men of Cerasus came to us and
reported the affair, and we generals^ on being informed, were
annoyed at what had taken place, and took counsel with the
Cerasuntines how the dead bodies of the Hellenes might be
buried. While seated In conclave outside the camp, we sud-
denly were aware of a great hubbub. We heard cries : ' Cut
them down 1' 'Shoot them 1' ' Stone them I ' ^ and presently
we caught sight of a mass of people racing towards us with
stones in their hands^ and others picking them up. The
Cerasuntines^ naturally enough, considering the incident they
had lately witnessed, retired in terror to their vessels, and,
upon my word, some of us did not feel too comfortable. All
I could do was to go to them and inquire what it all meant.
Some of them had not the slightest notion, although they had
stones in their hands, but chancing on some one who was
better informed, I was told by him that 'the clerks of the
market were treating the array most scandalously.' Just then
some one got sight of the market clerk, Zelarchus, making his
way off towards the sea, and lifted up his voice aloud, and

1 Lit. "strike! strike! pelt! pelt!" — ira^f racf ^oKXe /3a\Xe, iraiW
indicating a blow (of a sword or spear), jSiXXfiv a shot (of an arrow or
javelin or slingstone).


CH. VI t. S 34.30 \

May 18, B,c. 4C0/



THE CERASUNTINES



ifir



the rest responding to the cry as if a wild boar or a stag
had been started, they rushed upon him,

" The CcrasuntineSj seeing a rush in their direction, thought
that, without a doubt, it ^Yas directed against themselves,
and fled with all speed and threw themseh'es into the sea, in
which proceeding they were imitated by some few of our own
men, and all who did not know how to swim were drowned.
But now, what do you think of their case, these men of
Cerasus? They had done no wrong. They were simply
afraid that some madness had seized us, like that to whieh
dogs are liable.

" I say then, if proceedings like this are to be the order of
the day, you had better consider what the ultimate condition
of the army is like to be. As a body you will not have it in
your power to undertake war against whom you like, or to
conclude peace. But in private any one who chooses will con-
duct the army on any quest which takes his fancy. And when
ambassadors come to you to demand peace, or whatever it
may be, officious people will put them to death and pre-
vent your hearing the proposals which brought them to you.^
The next step will be that those whom you as a body may
choose as generals will be of no account ; but any one who
likes to elect himself general, and will adopt the formula
' Shoot him ! shoot him ! ' will be competent to cut down
whomsoever he pleases untried, be it general or private soldier,
if only he have sufficient followers, as was the case just now.
But just consider what these self-appointed generals have
achieved for you. Zelarchus, the clerk of the market, may
possibly have done you a \\Tong ; if so, he has sailed off and
is gone without paying you any penalty ; or he may be guilt-
less, in which case we have driven him from the army in terror
of perishing unjustly without even a trial. While those who
stoned the ambassadors have contrived so cleverly that we
alone of all Hellenes cannot approach Cerasus safely without
a strong force, and the corpses which the very men who slew
them themselves invited us to bury, we cannot now pick up
with safety even under a flag of truce. Who indeed would

^ Or, " any one who pleases will kill them, and prevent your hearing tlic
proposals of those who seek you."


ANABASIS — BK. V.



fcji. vrt. I 3o~CH. VIM. g t
I April 3^



care to carry a flag of truce, or go as a herald with the blood
of heralds upon his hands? All we could do was to implore
the Cerasuntines to bury them,

"If then you approve of such doings, have a resolution
passed to that effect, so that, with a prospect of like occur-
fences in the future, a man may privately set up a guard and
do his best to fix his tent where he can find a strong position
with a commanding site. If, however, these seem to you to
be the deeds rather of wild beasts than of human beings,
bethink you of some means by which to stay them ; or
else, in heaven's name, how shall we do sacrifice to the
gods gladly, with impious deeds to answer for ? or how shall
we, who lay the knife to each other's throats, give battle
to our enemies ? AV'hat friendly city will receive us when
they see rampant lawlessness in our midst? Who will have
the courage to afford us a market, when we prove our worth-
lessness in these weightiest concerns? and what becomes of
the praise we expect to win from the mouths of men ? wlio
will vouchsafe it to us, if this is our behaviour ? Should we
not ourselves bestow the worst of names on the perpetrators
of like deeds?"

After this they rose, and, as one man, proposed that the
ringleaders in these matters should be punislied ; and that for
the future, to set an example of lawlessness should be forbidden.
Every such ringleader was to be prosecuted on the capital
charge ; the generals were to bring all offenders to the bar of
justice; prosecutions for all other misdemeanours committed
since the death of Cyrus were to be instituted; and they
ended by constituting the officers into a board of dicasts ; ^ and
upon the strong representation of Xenophon, with the concur-
rence of the soothsayers, it was resolved to purify the army,
and this purification was made.

vni. — It was further resolved that the generals themselves
should undergo a judicial examination in reference to their con-
duct in past time. In course of investigation,^ Philesius and
Xanthicles respectively were condemned to pay a sum of

' I.e. R board of judgra or jurors. See Xen. IVarks, I. p, 30, note j.
'Or, " when the inquiry took place," lit. "they (the generals) giving an

account."


CH, VlJt. § 1-5 \
May iS, B.C. 400 J



TRIAL OF THE GENERALS



165



twenty minae,* to meet a deficiency to that amount incurred
during the guardianship of the cargoes of the merchantmen.
Sophaenetus was fined ten minae '^ for inadequate performance
of his duty as one of the chief officers selected^ Against
Xenophon a charge was brought by certain people, who asserted
that they had been beaten by him, and framed the indictment
as one of personal outrage with violence."* Xenophon got up
and demanded that the first speaker should state "where and
when it was he had received these blows." The other, so
challenged, answered, " When we were perishing of cold and
there was a great depth of snow." Xenophon said : " Upon
my word, with weather such as you describe, when our pro-
visions had run out, when the w^ine could not even be smelt,
when numbers were dropping down dead beat, so acute was
the suffering, with the enemy close on our heels ; certainly,
if at such a season as that I was guilty of outrage, I plead
guilty to being a more outrageous brute than the ass,''
which is too wanton, they say, to feel fatigue. Still, I
wish you would tell us," said he, "what led to my striking
you. Did I ask you for something and, on your refusing
it to me, did I proceed to beat you ? Was it a debt, for
which I demanded payment? or a quarrel about some boy
or other ? Was I the worse for liquor, and behaving like a
drunkard?" When the man met each of these questions
with a negative, he questioned him further: "Are you a
heavy infantr)' soldier ?" " No," said he. " A peltast, then ?"
"No, nor yet a peltast"; but he had been ordered by his

^ About ;^8i : 5s. See above, p. 16, note i. - About ^^40 : 12:6.

' Reading with .Sauppe (and codex E) Apxiav a'tpeOeu. Hug reads fire
alptBels . . . (caTi^/jtAei, and conjectures thai the words Tr/joaror^ffai or
cVtj*eXi7(?i7J'cw TwTov tov irpiiyfiaTos, or something to that effect, have fallen
out,

* See the Diet of Antiq. 622 a. HYBREOS GRAPHE. In the case of
common assaults (itA irkrpf&v) as opposed to indecent assault {5i' nXi^yfiQv^iKi],
the prosecution seems to have been allowable only when the object of a wanton
attack was a free person. Cf. Arist. Rhet. ii. 24.

^ Or, *' most typical of asses. " Mr. Pretor aptly compares Luc. Psendalog,
3, Piscat. 34, d£reX7^<rTepcki 5* twv tvusv, "more lewd than an ass" {iiai^yua.
and f^p« go hand in hand ; cf. Etem. 514., 12) ; cf. Herod, iv. 129, who tells
how the asses, by their braying (t/U^foyTCf ; cf. Cyrop. vii. 5, 62), and the
mules with their strange aspect, frightened the horses in Scythia, — where
neither Jisses nor mules can live, it is so cold.



ANABASIS — BK. V.



f CH. VIII. f 5-13
April 3-



messmates to drive a mule, although he was a free man.
Then at last he recognised him, and inquired: "Are you the
fellow who carried home the sick man?" "Yes, I am," said
he, "thanks to your driving; and you made havoc of my
messmates* kit." "Havoc!" said Xenophon: " Nay^ I dis-
tributed it ; some to one man, some to another to carry,
and bade them bring the things safely to me ; and when I got
them back I delivered them all safely to you, when you, on
your side, had rendered an account to me of the man. Let
me tell you," he continued, turning to the court, " what the
circumstances were ; it is worth hearing : —

" A man was left behind from inability to proceed farther ;
I recognised the poor fellow sufficiently to see that he was one
of ours, and I forced you, sir, to carry him to save his life. For,
if I am not much mistaken, the enemy were close at our heels ?^'
The fellow assented to this. " Well then," said Xenophon,
"after I had sent you forward, I overtook you again, as I came
up with the rearguard ; you were digging a trench with intent
to bury the man; I pulled up and said something in com-
mendation ; as we stood by the poor fellow twitched his leg,
and the bystanders all cried out, * Why, the man's alive ! ' Your
remark was : * Alive or not as he likes, I am not going to
carry him.' Then I struck you. Yes ! you are right, for it
looked very much as if you knew him to be alive." "Well,"
said he, "was he any the less dead when I reported him to
you ? " " Nay," retorted Xenophon, " by the same token ^ve
shall all one day be dead, but that is no reason -why mean-
time we should all be buried alive ? " Then there was a
general shout : *' If Xenophon had given the fellow a few more
blows, it might have been better." The others were now
called upon to slate the grounds on which they had been
beaten in each case ; but when they refused to get up, he pro-
ceeded to state them himself

" I confess, sirs, to having struck certain men for failure in
discipline,^ These were men who were quite content to owe
their safety to us. Whilst the rest of the world marched on in
rank and did whatever fighting had to be done^ they preferred
to leave the ranks, and rush forward to loot and enrich theni-

'^ Or. " for disorderly beha^'iour and want of discipline."



CH. VIII. § i3-ao \
May i8, b.c 400 J



XENOPI



rSDEFENCE



selves at our expense. Now, if this conduct were to be
the nilCj general ruin would be the result. I do not deny
that I have given blows to this man or the other who
played the poltroon and refused to get up, helplessly aban-
doning himself to the enemy * and so I forced them to
.march on. For once in the severe wintry weather I myself
happened to sit down for a long time, whilst waiting for a party
^vho were getting their kit together, and I discovered how
difficult it was to get up again and stretch one's legs. After
this personal experience, whenever I saw any one else seated
in slack and lazy mood, I tried to spur him on. The mere
movement and effort to play the man caused warmth and moist-
ure, w^hereas it was plain that sitting down and keeping quiet
helped the blood to freeze and the toes to mortify, calamities
which really befell several of the men, as you yourselves are
aware.

" I can imagine a third case, that of some straggler stopping
behind, merely to rest for rest's sake, and hindering you in
front and us behind alike from pressing on the march. If he
got a blow with the fist from me it saved him a thrust with
the lance from the enemy. In fact, the opportunity they enjoy
to-day of taking vengeance on me for any treatment which
I put upon them wrongfully, is derived from their salva-
tion then ; whereas, if they bad fallen into the enemy's hands,
let them ask themselves for what outrage^ however great,
they could expect to get satisfaction now. My defence," he
continued, **is simple: if I cliastised any one for his own
good, I claim to suffer the same penalties as parents pay their
children or masters their boys. Does not the surgeon also
cauterise and cut us for our good ? But if you really believe
that these acts are the outcome of wanton insolence, I beg
you to observe that although to-day, thank God I I am heartier
than formerly, I wear a bolder front now than then, and I drink
more wine, yet I never strike a soul ; no, for I see that you
have reached smooth water. When storm arises, and a great
sea strikes the vessel amidships, a mere shake of the head
will make the look-out man furious with the crew in the
forecastle, or the helmsman with the men in the stern sheets,
for at such a crisis even a slight slip may ruin everything.



ANABASIS — BK. V.


/ CH. vm. § 2i-j6
\ May iB, B.C. 400

But I appeal to your own verdict, already recorded, in proof
that 1 was justified in striking these men. You stood by, sirs,
with swords, not voting tablets, in your hands, and it was in your
power to aid the fellows if you liked; but, to speak the honest
truth, you neither aided them nor did you join me in striking
the disorderly. In other words, you enabled any evilly-dis-
posed person among them to give rein to his wantonness by
your passivity. For if you will be at pains to investigate, you
will find that those who were then most cowardly are the
ringleaders to-day in brutality and outrage.

" There is Boiscus the boxer, a Thessalian, what a battle
he fought then to escape carrying his shield ! so tired was
he, and to-day I am told he has stripped several citizens of
Cotyora of the clothes on their backs. If then you are wise,
you will treat this personage in a way the contrary to that in
which men treat dogs. A savage dog is tied up in the day
and loosed at night, but if you are wise you will tie this fellow
up at night and only let him loose in the day.

** But really," he added, " it does surprise me with what
keenness you remember and recount the times when I in-
curred the hatred of some one ; but some other occasions when
I eased the burthen of winter and storm for any of you, or
beat off an enemy, or helped to minister to you in sickness
and want, not a soul of you remembers these. Or when for
any noble deed done by any of yoo I praised the doer, and
according to my ability did honour to this brave man or that ;
these things have slipped from your memories, and are clean
forgotten. Yet it were surely more noble, just, and holy,
sweeter and kindlier to treasure the memory of good rather
than of evil"

He ended, and then one after another of the assembly
got up and began recalling incidents of the kind suggested,
and things ended not so unpleasantly after all



I



BOOK VI. I. 1-5



I. — After this, whilst waiting, they lived partly on supplies
from the market, partly on the fruit of raids into Paphlagonia,
The Paphlagonians, on their side, showed much skill in kid-
napping stragglers, wherever they could lay hands on them,
and in the night time tried to do mischief to those whose
quarters were at a distance from the camp. The result was
that their relations to one another were exceedingly hostile, so
much so that Corylas,^ who was the chief of Paphlagonia at
that date, sent ambassadors to the Hellenes, bearing horses
and fine apparel, and charged with a proposal on the part
of Corylas to make terms with the Hellenes on the principle
of mutual forbearance from injuries. The generals replied
that they would consult with the array about the matter.
Meanwhile they gave them a hospitable reception, to which
they invited certain members of the army whose claims
were obvious.^ They sacrificed some of the captive cattle
and other sacrificial beasts, and with these they furnished
forth a sufficiently festal entertainment, and reclining on their
truckle beds, fell to eating and drinking out of beakers made
of horn which they happened to find in the country.

But as soon as the libation was ended and they had sung
the hymn, up got first some Thracians, who performed a dance
under arms to the sound of a pipe, leaping high into the air
with much nirableness, and brandishing their swords, till at last
one man struck his fellow, and every one thought he was really

^ See above, pp. 148, 149.
^ Or, "such . . . as had tho best title to be present."


i6S



ANABAiilS BK. M.



{CH. t. § 6-1 1
May t8-



vvounded, so skilfully and artisticxilly did he fall, and the
Paphlagonians screamed out. Then he that gave the blow
stripped the other of his arms, and marched off chanting the
" Sitalcas," '^ whilst others of the Tliracians bore off the other,
who lay as if dead, though he had not received even a scratch.

After this some Aenianians^ and Magnesians got up and fell
to dancing the Carpaea, as it is called, under arms. This was
the manner of the dance : one man lays aside his arms and
proceeds to drive a yoke of oxen, and while he drives he sows,
turning him about frequently, as though he were afraid of some-
thing ; up comes a cattle-lifter, and no sooner does the plough-
man catch sight of him afar, than he snatches up his arms
and confronts him. They fight in front of his team, and all
in rhythm to the sound of the pipe. At last the robber binds
the countryman and drives off the team. Or sometimes the
cattle-driver binds the robber, and then he puts him under the
yoke beside the oxen, with his two hands tied behind his back,
and off he drives.

After this a Mysian caine in with a light shield in either
hand and danced, at one time going through a pantomime,
as if he were deahng with two assailants at once ; at another
plying his shields as if to face a single foe, and then again he
would whirl about and throw somersaults, keeping the shields
in his hands, so that it was a beautiful spectacle, I-^ast of all
he danced the Persian dance,^ clashing the shields together,
crouching down on one knee and springing up again from earth ;
and all this he did in measured time to the sound of the flute.
After him the Mantineans stepped upon the stage, and some
other Arcadians also stood up ; they had accoutred themselves
in all their warlike finery. They marched with measured tread,
pipes playing, to the tune of the 'warriors' march';* the notes

' I.e. the national Thraciiui hymn ; for Sitalcas the king, a national hero,
see Time, ii, 29.

- The Aenianians, an Aeoltan people inhabiting the upptr valley of the
Spercliius (the ancient Phthia) ; their capital was Hypata. These men be-
longed to the army collected by Menon, the Thessalian, see above, p. 5, So,
doubtless, did the Magnesians, another Aeolian tribe occupying the mountam-
ous coast district on the east of Tbessaly. See Kiepett s Man. Anct. Geog.
(Macmillan's tr,), chap. vii. 161. 170.

' Lit. " the Persian," as we say " the Schottische, " or " the Polonaise."

■' Sec Plalo, Rep. +00 B, for this ' ' war measure " ; also Ariitoph. CltiuJs, 653.



CM. I, S I i-ri5 \
May 20, B.C. ^00 [



BY SEA To SINOPE



of the paean rose, lightly their limbs moved in dance, as in
solemn procession to the holy gods. The Paphlagonians looked
upon it as something truly strange that all these dances should
be under arms ; and the Mysians, seeing their astonishment,
persuaded one of the Arcadians who had got a dancing girl to
let him introduce her, which he did after dressing her up
magnificendy and giving her a light shield. When, lithe of
limb, she danced the Pyrrhic,^ loud clapping followed ; and
the Paphlagonians asked, "If these women fought by their
side in battle ? " to which they answered, " To be sure, it was
the women who routed the great King^ and drove him out of
camp." ^ So ended the night.

But next day the generals introduced the embassy to the
army, and the soldiers passed a resolution in the sense pro-
posed : between themselves and the Paphlagonians there was
to be a mutual abstinence from injuries. After this the am-
bassadors went their way, and the Hellenes, as soon as it was
thought that sufficient vessels had arrived, went on board ship,
and voyaged a day and a night with a fair breeze, keeping
Paphlagonia on their left. And on the following day, arriving
at Sinope, they came to moorings in the harbour of Harmene,
near Sinope.^ The Sinopeans, though inhabitants of Paphla-
gonia, are really colonists of the Milesians. They sent giftis of
hospitality to the Hellenes, three thousand measures * of barley
with fifteen hundred jars of wine. At this place Cheirisophas
rejoined them with a man-of-war. The soldiers certainly
expected that, having come, he would have brought them
something, but he brought them nothing, except complimentary
phrases, on the part of Anaxibius, the high admiral, and the
rest, who sent them their congratulations, coupled with a pro-
mise on the part of Anaxibius that, as soon as they were out-
side the Euxine, pay would be forthcoming.



' For tills famous dance, supposed to be of Doric {Cretan or Spartan)
origin, see Smith's Z>/VA of Antiquities, "SaJtatio"; also Giihl and Koner,
The Life ,f the Greeks and Romam, Eng. tr. § 67. pp. 272 and foil.

=* See abo%'e, pp. 35- 3'"

^ Harmene, a port of Sinope, between four and five miles (fifty slades) west
of that important city, itself a port town. See Smith, Diet. Qeog,, "Sinope" ;
and Kiepert, op, ci(. chap, iv, 60.

* Lit. " three thousand medimni." The medtmnus=: about 1^ bushel.



170



ANABASIS^BK. VI.



I. May ao-



At Harmene the army halted five days ; and now that they
seemed to be so close to Hellas, the question how they were to
reach home not empty-handed ^ presented itself more forcibly
to their minds than heretofore. The conclusion they came to
was to appoint a single general, since one man would be better
able to handle the troops, by night or by day, than was possible
while the generalship was divided, If secrecy were desirable,
it would be easier to keep matters dark^ or if again expedition
were an object, there would be less risk of arriving a day too
late, since mutual explanations would be avoided, and what-
ever approved itself to the single judgment would at once be
carried into effect, whereas previously the generals had done
everything in obedience to the opinion of the majority.

With these ideas working in their minds, they turned to
Xenophon, and the officers came to him and told him that this
was how the soldiers viewed matters ; and each of them, display-
ing a warmth of kindly feeling, pressed him to accept the office.
Xenophon partly would have liked to do so, in the belief that
by so doing he would win to himself a higher repute in the esteem
of his friends, and that his name would be re}>orted to the city
written large ; and by some stroke of fortune he might even be
the discoverer of some blessing to the army collectively.

These and the like considerations elated hnn ; he had
a strong desire to hold the supreme command. But then
again, as he turned the matter over, the conviction deep-
ened in his mind that the issue of the future is to every man
uncertain ; and hence there was the risk of losing perhaps
such reputation as he had already acquired. He was in sore
straits, and, not knowing how to decide, it seemed best to him
to lay the matter before heaven.- Accordingly, he led two
victims to the altar and made sacrifice to Zeus the King, for
it was he and no other who had been named by the oracle
at Delphi,'^ and his belief was that the vision* which he
beheld when he first essayed to undertake the joint ad-
ministration of the army was sent to him by that god. He
also recalled to mind a circumstance which befell him still

1 Or, "with something to tho good " ; the jjhrase is colloquial,

' Or, " to lay bare his heart to heaven," an autobiographic passage,

• See above, p. 68, ■• tiee abovcj p. 69-


May'/5.1:c4oo} XENOPHON OFFERED SOLE COMMAND



»?r



earlier, when setting out from Ephesiis to associate himself
with Cyrus ;^ — how an eagle screamed on his right hand
from the east, and still remained perched, and the soothsayer
who was escorting him said that it was a great and royal
omen,2 indicating glory and yet suffering ; for the punier race
of birds only attack the eagle when seated. "Yet," added he,
" it bodes not gain in money ; for the eagle seizes his food, not
when seated, but on the wing."

Thus Xenophon sacrificed, and the god as plainly as might
be gave him a sign, neither to demand the generalship, nor, if
chosen, to accept the office. And that was how the matter
stood when the army met, and the proposal to elect a single
leader was unanimous. After this resolution was passed, they
proposed Xenophon for election, and when it seemed quite
evident that they would elect him, if he put the question to the
vote, he got up and spoke as follows : —

" Sirs, I am but mortal, and must needs be happy to be
honoured by you. I thank you, and am grateful, and my
prayer is that the gods may grant nie to be an instrument of
blessing to you. Still, when I consider it closer, thus, in the
presence of a Lacedaemonian, to be preferred by you as general,
seems to me but ill conducive either to your interests or to
mine, since you will the less readily obtain from them here-
after anything you may need, while for myself I look upon
acceptance as even somewhat dangerous. Do I not see and
know with what persistence these Lacedaemonians prosecuted
the war till finally they forced our State to acknowledge the
leadership of Lacedaemon ? ^ This confession once extorted
from their antagonists, they ceased warring at once, and the
siege of the city was at an end. If, with these facts before
my eyes, I seem to be doing all I can to neutralise their high
self-esteem, I cannot escape the reflection that personally I
may be taught wisdom by a painful process. But with regard
to your own idea that under a single general there will be less

^ Cf- Cyrfjp. 11. i. i ; an eagle appears to Cyras on the frontiers of Persia,
when about to join his unclt.' Cyaxarts, king of Media, on his expedition
against the Assyrian.

'^ It is important to note that the Greek word oluvt^, a solitary or lone-
fiying bird, also means an omen. " It was a mighty bird and a mighty omen."
See above, p. 76. note i. s Cf. Hell. il. il



172



ANABASIS — BK, VL



/CH. I. I 39.33
I May 25-



factiousness than when there were many, be assured that in
choosing some other than me you will not find me factious.
I hold that whosoever sets up factious opposition to his leader
factiously opposes his own safety. While if you detenninc to
choose me, I should not be surprised were that choice to entail
upon you and me the reaentment of other people;"

After those remarks on Xenophon's part, many more
got up, one after another, insisting on the propriety of
his undertaking the command. One of them, Agasias the
Styraphalian, said : It was really ridiculous, if things had come
to this pass that the Lacedaemonians are to fly in a rage
because a number of friends have met together to dinner, and
omitted to choose a Lacedaemonian to sit at the head of the
table. " Really, if that is how matters stand," said he, " I do
not see what right we have to be officers even, we who are
only Arcadians." That sally brought down the plaudits of the
assembly ; and Xenophon, seeing that something more was
needed, stepped forward again and spoke, "Pardon, sirs/'
he said, " let me make a clean breast of it. I swear to
you by all the gods and goddesses ; verily and indeed, I no
sooner perceived your purpose, than I consulted the victims,
whether it was belter for you to entrust this leadership to me,
and for me to undertake it, or the reverse. And the gods
vouchsafed a sign to me so plain that even a common man^
might understand it, and perceive that from such sovereignty
I must needs hold myself aloof."

Under these circumstances they chose Cheirisophus, who,
after his election, stepped forward and said : " Nay, sirs, be
well assured of this, that had you chosen some one else, I
for my part should not have set up faclious opposition. As to
Xenophon, I believe you have done him a good turn by not
appointing him ; for even now Dexippus ^ has gone some way
in traducing him to Anaxibius, as far as it lay in his power to
do so, and that, in spite of my attempts to silence him. What
he said was that he believed Xenophon would rather share
the command of Clearchus's army with Timasion, a Dardanian,
than with hiaiselfj a Laconian. But," continued Cheirisophus,

' Or, as we should say, a "layman."
" See above, p. 134; and below, pp. 190 foil.


CH. I. §33-CH. II. S4\
May 27, B.C. 400 /



A VOYAGE TO HERACLEA



173



"since your choice has fallen upon me, I will make it my
endeavour to do you all the good in my power ; so make
your preparations to weigh anchor to-morrow; wind and
weather permitting, we will voyage to Heraclea ; every one
must endeavour, therefore, to put in at that port ; and for the
rest we will consult, when we are tome thither."

II. — The next day they weighed anchor and set sail from
Harmene with a fair breeze^ two days' voyage along the coast.
[As they coasted along they came in sight of Jason's beach,'
where, as the story says, the ship Argo came to moorings ;
and then the mouths of the rivers, first the Thermodon, then
the Iris, then the Halys, and next to it the Parthenius.] Coast-
ing past [the latter], they reached Heraclea,^ a Hellenic city
and a colony of the Megarians, situated in the territory of the
Mariandynians. So they came to anchorage off the Acher-
usian Chersonese, where Heracles ^ is said to have descended
to bring up the dog Cerberus, at a point where they still
show the marks of his descent, a deep cleft more than two
furlongs down. Here the Heracleots sent the Hellenes, as
gifts of hospitality, three thousand measures"* of barley and
two thousand jars of wine, twenty beeves and one hundred
sheep. Through the flat country here flows the Lycus river,
as it is called, about two hundred feet in breadth.

The soldiers held a meeting, and took counsel about the
remainder of the journey : should they make their exit from
the Pontus by sea or by land ? and Lycon the Achaean got up
and said : " I am astonished, sirs, that the generals do not
endeavour to provide us more efficiently with provisions.

"^ T have left this passan:e in the text, although it involves, at first sight.
a topographical error on the part of whoever WTOte it, and Hug and other com-
mentators regard it as spurious. Jason's beach (the modern Yaso^n Bouronn)
and the lh.Tce first-namod rivers lie between Co tyora and Sinope. Possibly the
author, or one of his editors, somewhat loosely inserted a recapitulatory noie
concerning the scenery of this coasting voyage at this point. " By the way, I
ought to have told you that as they coasted along," etc.

- One of the most powerful of commercial cities, distinguished as -^ vovtik^,
Pontica { whence, in the middle ages, Pf/f^erai/ja), now Eregli. It was one
of the older Greek seltlements, and, like Kalchedon (to give that town its
proper namel, a Megaro-Doric colony. See Kiepert, <?/. cii. chap. iv. 6a.

^ According to another version of the legend Heracles went down to bring
up Cerberus^ not here, but at Taenamm.

■* Lit. " three thousand ^medimni." See above, p. 169, note 4.



174



ANABASIS— BK. VI.



{CH. It. f 4.-IA
June, B.C. 400



I



These gifts of hospitality will not afford three days* victuals for
the array ; nor do I see from what region we are to provide
ourselves as we march. My proposal, therefore, is to demand
of the Herackots at least three thousand cyzicenes."* Another
speaker suggested "not less than ten thousand Let us at
once, before we break up this meeting, send ambassadors to
the city and ascertain their answer to the demand and take
counsel accordingly." Thereupon they proceeded to put up
as ambassadors, ftrst and foremost Cheirisophus, as he had
been chosen general-in-chief ; others also named Xenophon.

But both Cheirisophus and Xenophon stoutly declined,
maintaining both alike that they could not compel a Hellenic
city, actually friendly, to give anything which they did not
spontaneously offer. So, since these two appeared to be back-
ward, the soldiers sent Lycon the Achaean, Callimachus the
Parrhasian, and iVgasias the Stymphalian. These three went
and announced the resolutions passed by the army. Lycon,
it was said, even went so far as to threaten certain conse-
quences in case they refused to comply. The Heracleots
said they would deliberate ; and, without more ado, they got
together their goods and chattels from their farms and fields
outside, and dismantled the market outside and transferred it
within, after which the gates were closed, and arms appeared at
the battlements of the walls.

At that check, the authors of these tumultuary measures fell
to accusing the generals^ as if they had marred the proceeding ;
and the Arcadians and Achaeans banded together, chiefly under
the auspices of the two ringleaders, Callimachus the Parrhasian
and Lycon the Achaean. The language they held was to this
effect : It was outrageous that a single Athenian and a Lace-
daemonian, who had not contributed a soldier to the expedition,
should rule Peloponnesians ;^ scandalous that they themselves
should bear the toils whilst others pocketed the spoils, and that
too though the preservation of the army was due to themselves ;

* Three thousand cyzicenes — about /3000. See above, p. 154, note i.

^ Reading with Hug nal AaKeSauntyiop . . irapexop.ii'oi'S w.r.X. This
seems prt-ferablc to the vulgale Kal AaKeSaifrnvidji' . . . irapex^^f*'°*'- " l'''^'- a.
single Athenian, who liad not contributed, etc., should rule Peloponnesians
and Lacedaemonians." The Lacedaemonian Referred to is of course Cbeiri-
sophus.


CH, n. I 10-16 \
June /



DIVISION OF THE ARMY



17s



for, as every one must admit, to the Arcadians and Achaeans
the credit of that achievement was due, and the rest of the
army went for nothing (which was indeed so far true that the
Arcadians and Achaeans did form numerically the larger half
of the whole army). What then did common sense suggest ?
Why, that they, the Arcadians and Achaeans, should make
common cause, choose generals for themselves independently,
continue the march, and try somewhat to better their condition.
This proposal was carried. All the Arcadians and Achaeans
who chanced to be with Cheirisophus left him and Xenophon,
setting up for themselves and choosing ten generals of their own.
These ten, it was decreed, were to put into effect such measures
as approved themselves to the majority. Thus the absolute
authority vested in Cheirisophus was terminated there and
then, within less than a week of his appointment.

Xenophon however was minded to prosecute the journey
in their company, thinking that this would be a safer plan than
for each to start on his own account. But Neon threw in his
weight in favour of separate action.^ " Every one for himself,"
he said, for he had heard from Cheirisophus that Cleander, the
Spartan governor-general at Byzantium, talked of coming to
Caipe Haven with some war vessels. Neon's advice was due
to his desire to secure a passage home in these war vessels for
themselves and their soldiers, without allowing any one else to
share in their good-fortune. As for Cheirisophus, he was at
once so out of heart at the turn things had taken, and soured
with the whole army, that he left it to his subordinate, Neon,
to do just what he liked. Xenophon, on his side, would still
have been glad to be quit of the expedition and sail homej^
but on offering sacrifice to Heracles the Leader, and seeking
advice, whether it were better and more desirable to continue
the march in charge of the soldiers who had remained faith-
ful, or to take his departure, the god indicated to him by the
victims that he should adopt the former course.

In this way the army was now split up into three divisions.^
First, the Arcadians and Achaeans, over four thousand five

* Or, " urged him" (Xenophon) "to take separate action."
'* See above, p. 156 ; and for thp use of Irt.. cf, Plato, Proiag. 310 C.
' The total now amounted to 8640 and over. See ahjove, p. 5, note 7 :
p. 128 note 4.



i



ANABASIf; BK. VI,



[lH. II. i 16-CH, ill. I 4

I July, B.C. 400


hundred men, aJl heavy infantr)^ Secondly, Cheirisophus and
his men, viz. one thousand four hundred lieavy infantry and
the seven hundred peltasts, or Clearchus's Thracians. Thirdly,
Xenophon's division of one thousand seven hundred heavy
infantry, and three hundred peltasts ; but then he alone had
the cavalry — about forty troopers.

The Arcadians, who had bargained with the Heracleots and
got some vessels from them, were the first to set sail ; they
hoped, by pouncing suddenly on the Bithynians, to make as
large a haul as possible. With that object they disembarked
at ^Calpe Haven/ pretty nearly at a middle point in Thrace.
Cheirisophus setting off straight from Heraclea, commenced a
land march through the country ; but having entered into
Thrace, he preferred to cling to the seaboard, health and
strength failing him. Xenophon, lastly, took vessels, and dis-
embarking on the confines of Thrace and the Heracleotid,
pushed forward through the heart of the country.*

III. — The Arcadians, disembarking under cover of night at
Calpe Haven, marched against the nearest villages about thirty
furlongs from the sea ■ and as soon as it was light, each of the
ten generals led his company to attack one village, or if the
village were large, a couple of companies advanced under their
combined generals. They further agreed upon a certain knoll,
where they were all eventually to assemble. So sudden was
their attack that they seized a number of captives and enclosed
a multitude of small cattle. But the Thracians who escaped
began to collect again; for being light -armed troops they
had slipped in large numbers through the hands of the heavy
infantry; and now that they were got together they first
attacked the company of the Arcadian general, Smicres, who
had done his work and was retiring to the appointed meeting-
place,^ driving along a large train of captives and cattle. For

' The HaveTi of Calpe, KdXir:;? Xt/ui^c^Kirpe LimAn or Karpe in the
modern maps. The name is interesting as being also the ancient name of the
rock fortress of Gibraltar. See llie Dk/. »f Geog^ s. t>.

^ Some MSS. ht-re read, " In ilie prior chapter will be found a description
of the manner in which the absolute ronimand of Cheirisophus was abruptly
terminated and the army of the Hellenes broken up. The sequel will show
how each of these divisions fared." The passage is probably one of those
commentators' notes, with which we are now familiar.

* Lit. "who was already retirinij,"



I
I

I



I



I



I


cii. rii. I s-iol
July f



THE ARCADIANS



177



a good while the Hellenes maintained a running fight;' hut
at the passage of a gorge the enemy routed them, slaying
Smicres himself and those with him to a man. The fate of
another company under command of Hegesander, another of
the ten, was nearly as bad ; only eight men escaped, Heges-
ander being one of them. The remaining captains * eventually
met, some with somewhat to show for their pains, others
empty-handed.

The Thracians, having achieved this success, kept up a
continual shouting and clatter of conversation to one another
during the night ; but with day-dawn they marshalled them-
selves right round the knoll on which the Hellenes were en-
camped — both cavalry in large numbers and light-armed troops
— while every minute the stream of new-comers grew greater.
Then they commenced an attack on the heavy infantry in all
security; for the Hellenes had not a single bowman, javelin-
man, or mounted trooper among.st them ; while the enemy
rushed forward on foot or galloped up on horseback and let
fly their javelins. It was vain to attempt to retaliate, so lightly
did they spring back and escape ; and ever the attack renewed
itself from every point, so that on one side man after man
was wounded, on the other not a soul was touched ; the result
being that they could not stir from their position, and the
Thracians ended by cutting them off even from their waten
In their despair they began to parley about a truce, and finally
various concessions were made and terms agreed to between
them ; but the Thracians would not hear of giving hostages in
answer to the demand of the Hellenes ; at that point the
matter rested.^ So fared it with the Arcadians,

As to Cheirisophus, that general prosecuted his march

1 Lit. *' marched and fought," as did the forlorn hope imder SirC, Wilson
making its way from Abu Klea to the Nile in Jan. 1885,

2 " Captains" Aoxa7oi — so the MSS, read — but the emendation of Panta-
ddes is almost certainly right X(ix<M "companies." It will be rtHzollected that
the ten seceding Arcadian companies were led by ten separate * ' generals,"
ffTpaTTjryoi, of whom the ill-starred Smicres was one. Hug remarks that
XAxw*" and X&x^T'*''' ^'^ ^P^ *° ^^ confounded in the MSS., as f,^. below, p.
215, VIl. iii. 46.

* Or, " but when, the terms were liut all concluded, the Thracians refused to
give the hostages which the Hellenes required, and there was nothing more to
be done."


178



ANABASIS BK- VI.


/ CH. III. § 10-17

1 July, B.C. 400



along the seaboard, and without check reached Caipe Haven,
Xenophon advanced through the heart of the coutntr)' ; and
his cavalry pushing on in front, came upon some old men pur-
suing their road somewhither, who were brought to him, and
in answer to his question, whether they had caught sight of
another Hellenic army anywhere, told him all that had lately
taken place, adding that at present they were being besieged
upon a knoll with all the Thracians in close circle round
them. Thereupon he kept the old men under strict guard to
serve as guides in case of need ; next, having appointed out-
posts, he called a meeting of the soldiers, and addressed them :
"Soldiers, some of the Arcadians are dead and the rest are
being besieged upon a certain knoll. Now my own belief
is, that if they are to perish, with their deaths the seal is
set to our own fate : since ive must reckon with an enemy
at once numerous and emboldened. Clearly our best course
is to hasten to their rescue, if haply we may find them still
alive, and do battle by their side rather than suffer isolation,
confronting danger single-handed.

** Let us then at once push forward as far as may seem
opportune till supper-time, and then encamp. As long as we
are marching, let Tiraasion, with the cavalry, gallop on in front,
but without losing sight of us ; and let hira examine all closely
in front, so that nothing may escape our observation." (At
the same time too^ he sent out some nimble fellows of the
light-armed troops to the flanks and to the high top.s, who w^ere
to give a signal if they espied anything anywhere; ordering
them to burn ever}'thing inflammable which lay in their path.)*
" As for ourselves," he continued, " we need not look to find
cover in any direction j for it is a long step back to Heraclea
and a long leap across to Chrysopolis, and the enemy is at the
door. The shortest road is to Calpe Haven, where we sup-
pose Cheirisophus, if safe, to be; but then, when we get
there, at Calpe Haven there are no vessels for us to sail away
in ; and if we stop here, we have not provisions for a single day.
Suppose the beleaguered Arcadians left to their fjite, we shall
find it but a sorry alternative to run the gauntlet with Cheiri-



which



' Hug; following Rehdantz, inserts this paragraph at ttie end of the speech,
lich It somewhat intemipis, after the words " he led the way " Ijelow,



I



I



I



I



CH. III. § 17.2

July



RESCUED BV XENOPHON



in



sophus's delachmeiit alone ; better to save them if we can,
and with united forces work out our deliverance in common.
But if so, we must set out with minds prepared, since to-day
either a glorious death awaits us or the achievement of a
deed of noblest emprise in the rescue of so many Hellene lives.
Maybe it is God who leads us thus, God who chooses to
humble the proud boaster, boasting as though he were exceed-
ing wise, but for us, the beginning of whose every act is by
heaven's grace, that same God reserves a higher grade of
honour. One duty I would recall to you, to apply your minds
to the execution of the orders with promptitude."

With these words he led the way.^ The cavalry, scattering
as far in advance as was prudent, wherever they set foot, set
fire. The peltasts moving parallel on the high ground were
similarly employed, burning everything combustible they could
discover. While the main army, wherever they came upon
anything which had accidentally escaped, completed the
work, 50 that the whole country looked as if it were ablaze ^
and the army might easily pass for a larger one. When the
hour had come, they turned aside to a knoll and took up
quarters ; and there they espied the enemy's watch-fires. He
was about forty furlongs distant.^ On their side also they
kindled as many watch-fires as possible ; but as soon as they
had dined the order was passed to quench all the fires. So
during the night they posted guards and slept. But at
daybreak they offered prayers to the gods, and drawing up in
order of battle, began marching with what speed they might.
Timasion and the cavalry, who had the guides with them,
and were moving on briskly in front, found themselves with-
out knowing it at the very knoll upon which the Hellenes
had been beleaguered- But no army could they discover,
whether of friend or foe ; only some starveling old women and
men, with a few sheep and oxen which had been left behind.
This news they reported to Xenophon and the main body.
At first the marvel was what had happened ; but ere long tliey
found out by inquiries from the folk who had been left
behind, that the Thracians had set off immediately after sun-
down, and were gone ; the Hellenes had waited till morning
^ Or. "set fire wherever tliey came." - LiU "about forty stades. "


i8o



5IS — ^^BK.



yy fCH. III. ft 33-CH. IV. f 3

*^*' I July, B-c. ^oo


before they made off, but in what direction, they could not
say.

On hearing this, Xenophon's troops first breakfasted,
and then getting their kit together began their march, desiring
to unite with the rest at Calpe's Haven without loss of time.
As they continued their march, they came across the track of
the Arcadians and Achaeans along the road to Calpe, and both
divisions arriving eventually at the same place, were overjoyed
to see one another again^ and they embraced each other like
brothers. Then the Arcadians inquired of Xenophon's officers
— why they had quenched the watch-fires ? " At first," said
they, " when we lost sight of your watch-fires, we expected you
to attack the enemy in the night ; and the enemy, so at least
we imagined,^ must have been afraid of that and so set off.
The time at any rate at which they set off would correspond.
But when the requisite time had elapsed and you did not come,
we concluded that you must have learnt what was happening
to us, and in terror had made a bolt for it to the seaboard.^
We resolved not to be left behind by you ; and that is how
we also came to march hither."

IV. — During this day they contented themselves with
bivouacking there on the beach at the harbour. The place
which goes by the name of Calpe Haven is in Asiatic Thrace,
the name given to a region extending from the mouth of the
Euxine all the way to Heraclea, which lies on the right hand
as you sail into the Euxine. It is a long day's voyage for a
war-ship, using her three banks of oars, from Byzantium to
Heraclea, and between these two there is not a single Hellenic
or friendly city, but only these Bithynian Thracians, who have
a bad reputation for the savagery with which they treat any
Hellenes cast ashore by shipwreck or otherwise thrown into
their power.

Now the haven of Calpe lies exactly midway, halving the
voyage between Byzantium and Heracleia. It is a long pro-
montory running out into the sea ; the seaward portion being
a rocky precipice, at no point less than twenty fathoms ^ high ;

^ Or. "we itnagineJ, " lit, "as we at Ifast imagined."
* Or, "had made off in terror to the seaboard, " he. like runaway slaves
skulking into hiding. ' Or, " one hundred and twenty feet."



CH. IV- 5 3-9 1
July I



CALPE HAVEN



tSf



byt on the landward side there is a neck about fotir hundred
feet wide ; and the space inside the neck is capable of accom-
modating ten thousand inhabitants, and there is a haven im-
mediately under the crag with a beach facing the west. Then
there is a copious spring of fresh water flowing on the very
marge of the sea^ commanded by the stronghold. Again, there
is plenty of wood of various sorts ; but most plentiful of all, fme
shipbuilding timber down to the very edge of the sea. The
upland stretches into the heart of the country for twenty fur-
longs at least. It is good loamy soil, free from stones. For a
still greater distance the seaboard is thickly growTi with large
timber trees of every description. The surrounding country is
beautiful and spacious, containing numerous well populated
villages. The soil produces barley and wheat, and pulse of all
sorts, millet and sesame, figs in ample supply, with numerous
vines producing sweet wines, and indeed ever>i;hing else except
olives. Such is the character of the country.

The tents were pitched on the seaward-facing beach, the
soldiers being altogether averse to camping on ground which
might so easily be converted into a city. Indeed, their
arrival at the place at all seemed ver)^ like the crafty design
of some persons who were minded to found a city. The
aversion was not unnatural, since the majority of the soldiers
had not left their homes on so long a voyage from scantiness
of subsistence, but attracted by the fame of Cyrus's virtues ;
some of them bringing followers, while others had expended
money on the expedition. And amongst them was a third
set who had run away from fathers and mothers ; while a
different class had left children behind, hoping to return to
them with money or other gains. Other people with Cyrus
won great success, they were told ;^ why should it not be so
with them ? Being persons then of this description, the one
longing of their hearts was to reach Hellas safely.

It was on the day after their meeting that Xenophon
sacrificed as a preliminary to a military expedition , for it was
needful to march out in search of provisions, besides which

* Or, "mthin easy reach of the haven ; plenty of wood of v.-irious sorts,
most especially fine shipbuilding timber, " etc.

""' I.e, " his society was itself a passport to good fortune."


i82 ANABASIS— BK. VI. (jdVriuJ.'^

he designed burying the dead. As soon as the victims proved
favourable they all set out, the Arcadians following ^ with the
rest. The majority of the dead, who had lain akeady five
days, they buried just where they had fallen, in groups ; to
remove their bodies now would have been impossible. Some
few, who lay olT the roads, they got together and buried with
what splendour they could, considering the means in their
power. Others they could not find, and for these they erected
a great cenotaph,^ and covered it with wreaths. When it was
all done, they returned home to camp. At that time they
supped, and went to rest.

Next day there was a general meeting of the soldiers,
collected chiefly by Agasias the Stymphalian^ a captain, and
HieronymuSj an EJeian, also a captain, and other seniors oi
the Arcadians ; and they passed a resolution that, for the
future, whoever revived the idea of breaking up the army
should be punished by death. And the army, it was decided,
would now resume its old position under the command of its
former generals. Though Cheirisophus, indeed, had already
died under medical treatment for fever ;3 and Neon tlie
Asinaean had taken his place.

After these resolutions Xenophon got up and said :
" Soldiers, the journey must now, I presume, be conducted on
foot ; indeed this is clear, since we have no vessels ; and we
are driven to commence it at once, for we have no provisions
if we stop. We then," he continued, "will sacrifice, and you
must prepare yourselves to fight now, if ever, for the spirit of
the enemy has revived.'*"

Thereupon the generals sacrificed, in the presence of the
Arcadian seer, Arexion ; for Silanus the Ambraciot had char-
tered a vessel at Heraclea and made his escape ere this,

* I.e. in ihe cortege.

^ "Cenotaph, " f.ir. "an empty tomb." ITie word is interesting as cwcur-
ring only in Xenophon, until we come to live w-riters of the ifotj'i^ or common
diaUci, Compare tWj(t5o/coT. " hyuscyaiiius," hogbeaii. our henbane, which
we also owe to Xenophon. Oecon. i. 13, see Sauppe, LexiL Xen. ^.w.

' lliis I take to be the meaiiingr of th*- words, whicJi are necessarily am-
biguous, since ^dp^EtfcOM. " a drug," also means " iJoison," Did Cheirisophus
conceivably die of fever brought on by some poisonous draught ? or did he
lake poison whilst suffering from fever? or did he die under ircjvtmeiit?

* Af. • ' his courage is at the flood."



1



CK. IV. ! 13-aaY
July /



VICTIMS UNFAVOURABLE



m



Sacrificing with a view to departare, the victims proved un-
favourable to them. Accordingly they waited that day. Certain
people were bold enough to say that Xenophon, out of his
desire to colonise the place, had persuaded the seer to say
that the victims were unfavourable to departure. Consequently
he proclaimed by herald next morning that any one who Uked
should be present at the sacrifice ; or if he were a seer he was
bidden to be present and help to inspect the victims. Then
he sacrificed, and there were numbers present ; but though the
sacrifice on the question of departure was repeated as many
as tluree times, the victims were persistently unfavourable.
Thereat the soldiers were in high dudgeon, for the provisions
they had brought with them had reached the lowest ebb^ and
there was no market to be had.

Consequently there was another meeting, and Xenophon
spoke again : " Men,'' said he, " the victims are, as you may
see for yourselves, not yet favourable to the march ; but
meanwhile, as I can see for myself, you are in need of pro-
visions ; accordingly we must narrow the sacrifice to the
particular point." Some one got up and said: ''Naturally
enough the victims are unfavourable, for, as I learnt from
some one on a vessel which arrived here yesterday by acci-
dent, Cleander, the governor at Byzantium, intends coming
here with ships and men-of-war." Thereat they were all in
favour of stopping ; but they must needs go out for provisions,
and with this object he again sacrificed tliree times, and the
victims remained adverse. Things had now reached such
a pass that the men actually came to Xenophon's tent to pro-
claim that they had no provisions. His sole answer was that
he would not lead them out till the victims were favourable.

So again the next day he sacrificed ; and nearly the whole
army, so strong was the general anxiety, flocked round the
victims ; and now the very victims themselves failed. So
the generals, instead of leading out the army, called the men
together. Xenophon, as was incumbent on him, spoke : "It
is quite possible that the enemy are collected in a body, and
we shall have to fight. If we were to leave our baggage in
the strong place " (pointing overhead) " and sally forth prepared
for battle, the victims might favour us." But the soldiers, on



i84



ANABASIS^ — BK. VI.



/ CH. TV. I m-<:h. v. S 1
\ July, B.C. 400



hearing this proposal, cried out, " No need to take us inside that
place ; better sacrifice with all speed." Now sheep there were
none any longer. So they purchased oxen from under a wagon
and sacrificed ; and Xenophon begged Cleanor the Arcadian to
superintend the sacrifice on his behalf, in case there might be
some change now. But even so there was no improvement.

Now Neon was general in place of Cheirisophus, and seeing
the men suffering so cruelly from want, he was willing to do
them a good turn. So he got hold of some Heracleot or other
who said he knew of villages close by from which they could
get provisions, and proclaimed by herald r " If any one liked
to come out and get provisions, be it known that he, Neon,
would be their leader." So out came the men with spears,
and wine skins and sacks and other vessels — ^two thousand
strong in all. But when they had reached the villages and
began to scatter for the purpose of foraging, Phamabazus's
cavalry were the first to fall upon them. They had come to
the aid of the Bithynians, wishing, if possible, in conjunction
with the latter, to hinder the Hellenes from entering Phrygta,
These troopers killed no less than five hundred of the men ;
the rest fled for their lives up into the hill country.

News of the catastrophe was presently brought into camp
by one of those who had escaped, and Xenophon, seeing that
the victims had not been favourable on that day, took a
wagon bullock, in the absence of other sacrificial beasts,
offered it up, and started for the rescue, he and the rest under
thirty years of age ^ to the last man. Thus they picked up the
remnant of Neon's party and returned to camp. It was now
about sunset; and the Hellenes in deep despondency were
making their evening meal, when all of a sudden, through
bush and brake, a party of Bithynians fell upon the pickets,
cutting down some and chasing the rest into camp. In the
midst of screams and shouts the Hellenes ran to their arms,
one and all ; yet to pursue or move the camp in the night
seemed hardly safe, for the ground was thickly grown with
bush ; all they could do was to strengthen the outposts and
keep watch under arms the livelong night.

V. — And so they spent the night, but with day-dawn the

' Some MSS. give " fifty," but '• thirty " is more likdy to be right



I

I



C«. V. I I'J]
July J



THE BITm^NIANS



i«S



generals led the way into the natural fastness, and the others
picked up their arms and baggage and followed the lead.
Before the breakfast-hour arrived, they had fenced oft" with a
ditch the only side on which lay ingress into the place, and
had palisaded off the whole, leaving only three gates. Anon
a ship from Heraclea arrived bringing barley meal, victim
animals, and wine.

Xenophon was up betimes, and made the usual offering
before starting on an expedition, and at the first victim the
sacrifice was favourable. Just as the sacrifice ended, the
seerj Arexion the Parrhasian, caught sight of an eagle, which
boded well, and hade Xenophon lead on. So they crossed the
trench and grounded arms. Then proclamation was made by
herald for the soldiers to breakfast and start on an expedition
under arms ; the mob of sutlers and the captured slaves would
be left in camp. Accordingly the mass of the troops set out.
Neon alone remained ; for it seemed best to leave that general
and his men to guard the contents of the camp. But when the
officers and soldiers had left them ' in the lurch, they were so
ashamed to stop in camp while the rest marched out, that they
too set out, leaving only those above five-and-forty years of age.

These then stayed, while the rest set out on the march.
Before they had gone two miles, they stumbled upon dead
bodies, and when they had brought up the rear of the column
in a line with the first bodies to be seen, they began digging
graves and burying all included in the column from end to
end. After burying the first batch, they advanced, and again
bringing the rear even with the first unburied bodies which
appeared, they buried in the same way all which the line of
troops included. Finally, reaching the road that led out of
the villages where the bodies lay thick together, they collected
them and laid them in a common grave.

It was now about midday, when pushing forward the troops
up to the villages ^ without entering them, they proceeded to
seize provisions, laying hands on everything they could set eyes

^ Reading dirAtiro*' atToi/i ; or, reading with Hug, airfXEnrok aMv —
"but when his officers and soldiers were for leaving Neon in the lurch, as
ibey were ashamed to stop in camp while the rest of the army marched out,
the generals ended by leaving beliind ordy those above five-and-forty years
of age." *■' Or, * ' to the outer edge of the villages."


i86



ANABASIS — BK, VI.



(July, B.C. 400



on under cover of their lines ; when suddenly they caught sight
of the enemy cresting certain hillocks in front of them, duly
marshalled in line — a large body of cavalry and infantry. It
was Spithridates and Rhathines, sent by Fharnabazus with their
force at their backs. As soon as the enemy caught sight of the
Hellenes, they stood still, about two miles distant Then
Arexion the seer sacrificed, and at the first essay the victims
were favourable. ^Vhereupon Xenophon addressed the other
generals : " I would advise, sirs, that we should detach one
or more flying columns ^ to support our main attack, so that
in case of need at any point we may have reserves in readiness
to assist our main body, and the enemy, in the confusion of
battle, may find himself attacking the unbroken lines of troops
not hitherto engaged." These views approved themselves to all
" Do you then," said he, *' lead on the vanguard straight at the
enemy. Do not let us stand parleying here, now that we have
caught sight of him and he of us. I will detach the hindmost
companies in the way wc have decided upon and follow you."
After that they quietly advanced, and he, withdrawing the rear-
rank companies in three brigades consisting of a couple of
hundred men apiece, commissioned the first on the right to
follow the main body at the distance of a hundred feet. Samolas
the Achaean was in command of this brigade. The duty of
the second^ under the command of Pyrrhias the Arcadian,
was to follow in the centre. The last was posted on the
left, wiLh Phrasias, an Athenian, in command As they ad-
vanced, the vanguard reached a large and difficult woody glctif
and halted, not knowing whether the obstacle needed to be
crossed or not. They passed down the word for the generals
and officers to come forward to the front Xenophon, won-
dering what it was that stopped the march, and presently hear-
ing the above order passed along the ranks, rode up with all
speed. As soon as they were met, Sophaenetus, as the eldest
general, stated his opinion that the question, whether a gully
of that kind ought to be crossed or not, was not worth dis-
cussing- Xenophon, with some ardour, retorted: "You know,
sirs, I have not been in the habit hitherto of introducing you
to danger which you might avoid. It is not your reputation
* Or, " reserve companies/' X^^our ^t^Xoirai. See Mr. Pretor, ad /oc.



CH. V. t 14'71 \

July /



RETALIATI



187



for courage surely that is at stake, but your safe return home.
But now the matter stands thus : It is impossible to retire
from this point without a battle ; if we do not advance against
the enemy ourselves, he will follow us as soon as we have
turned our backs and attack us. Consider, then ; is it better
to go and meet the foe with arms advanced, or with arms
reversed to watch him as he assails us on our rear ? You
know this at any rate, that to retire before an enemy has
nothing glorious about it, whereas attack engenders courage
even in a coward. For my part, I would rather at any time
attack with half my men than retreat wnth twice the number.
As to these fellows, if we attack them, I am sure you do not
really expect them to await us ; though, if we retreat, we know
for certain they will be emboldened to pursue us. Nay, if the
result of crossing is to place a difficult gully behind us when
wt are on the point of engaging, surely that is an advantage
ifforth seizing. At least, if it were left to me, 1 would choose
that everything should appear smooth and passable to the
enemy, which may invite retreat; but for ourselves we may
bless the ground which teaches us that except in victory we
have no deliverance. It astonishes me that any one should
deem this particular gully a whit more terrible than any of the
other barriers which we have successfully passed. How im-
passable was the plain, had we failed to conquer their cavalry I
how insurmountable the mountains already traversed by us,
with all their peltasts in hot pursuit at our heels I Nay, when
we have safely reached the sea, the Pontus will present a some-
what formidable gully, when we have neither vessels to convey
us away nor corn to keep us alive whilst we stop. But we shall
no sooner be there than we must be off again to get provisions.
Surely it is better to fight to-day after a good breakfast than
to-morrow on an empty stomach. Sirs, the offerings are favour-
able to us, the omens are propitious, the victims more than
promising ; let us attack the enemy ! Now that they have
had a good look at us, these fellows must not be allowed to
enjoy their dinners or choose a camp^ at their own sweet will."
After that the officers bade him lead on. None gainsaid,
and he led the way. His orders were to cross the gully, where
* Or, " choose where they Viill to camp."


I88



ANABASIS — BK. "^^.



July-



each man chanced to find himself. By this method, as it
seemed to him, the troops would more quickly mass them-
selves on the far side than was possible, if they defiled along ^
the bridge which spanned the gully. But once across he
passed along the line and addressed the troops : " Sirs, call to
mind what by help of the gods you have already done.
Bethink you of the battles you have won at close quarters with
the foe ; of the fate which awaits those who flee before their
foes. Forget not that we stand at the very doors of Hellas.
Folloiv in the steps of Heracles, our guide, and cheer each
the other onwards by name." Sweet were it surely by some
brave and noble word or deed, spoken or done this day, to
leave the memory of oneself in the hearts of those one loves."
These words were spoken as he rode past, and simultane-
ously he began leading on the troops in battle hne ; and, plac-
ing the peltasts on either flank of the main body, they moved
against the enemy. Along the line the order had sped '^ to
keep their spears at rest on the right shoulder until the bugle
signal ; then lower them for the charge, slow march^ and
even pace, no one to quicken into a rua" Lastly, the watch-
word was passed, " Zeus the Saviour, Heracles our Guide."
The enemy waited their approach, confident in the excellence
of his position ; but as they drew closer the Hellene light troops,
with a loud alalal^ without waiting for the order, dashed
against the foe. The latter, on their side, came forward
eagerly to meet the charge, both the cavalry and the mass of
the Bithynians ; and these turned the peltasts. But when with
counter- wave the phalanx of the heavy infantry rapidly advan-
cing, faced them, and at the same time the bugle sounded,
and the battle hytun rose from all lips, and after this a loud
cheer rose, and at the same instant they couched their spears ;
— at this conjuncture the enemy no longer welcomed them,
but fled. Timasion with his cavalry followed close, and,
considering their scant numbers, they did great execution.
It was the left wing of the enemy^ in a line with which the
Hellene cavalry were posted, that was so speedily scattered,

* Lit. "had they wound off thread by thread"; the metaphor is from
imwinding a baU of wool. - Or. " fonvards by his Highest naiBe,"

^ Or, as we say, " with a loud hurrah."



LH. V. i aS-CH. VI. J 2 1

August, B.C. ^OO }



VICTORY



189



But the right, which was not so hotly pursued, collected
upon a knoll; and when the Hellenes saw them standing
firm^ it seeraed the easiest and least dangerous course to
go against them at once. Raising the battle hymn, they
straightway fell upon them, but the others did not await their
coming. Thereupon the peltasts gave chase until the right
of the enemy was in its turn scattered, though with slight
loss in killed J for the enemy's cavalry was numerous and
threatening.

But when the Hellenes saw the cavalry' of Phamabazus
still standing in compact order, and the Bithynian horsemen
massing together as if to join it, and like spectators gazing
down from a knoll at the occurrences below ; though weary,
they determined to attack the enemy as best they could, and
not suffer him to recover breath with reviving courage. So
they formed in compact line and advanced. Thereupon the
hostile cavalry turned and fled down the steep as swiftly as if
they had been pursued by cavalry.-' In fact they sought the
shelter of a gully, the existence of which was unknown to the
Hellenes. "I'he latter accordingly turned aside too soon and
gave up the chase, for it was late. Returning to the point
where the first encounter took place they erected a trophy,
and went back to the sea about sunset. It was something like
seven miles ^ to camp.

VI. — After this the enemy confined themselves to their
own concerns, and removed their households and property as
far away as possible. The Hellenes, on their side, were still
awaiting the arrival of Cleander with the ships of war and
transports, which ought to be there soon. So each day they
went out with the baggage animals and slaves and fearlessly
brought in wheat and barley, wine and vegetables, millet and
figs ; since the district produced all good things, the olive alone
excepted. When the army stayed in camp to rest, pillaging
parties were allowed to go out, and those who went out appro-
priated the spoils; but when the whole army went out, if

^ Reading uith Hug, Sjfftrtp inrit iTnrii!}v 5iu}K6}X£voi, or, if iccrirep ol rri
(tQv) lirw'Eitiv SitM}K6fievoi ; translate, "as if they would fain rival the agflity
of those who had beea pursued by the cavalry," referring lo Tiniaiiion's charge,
described above, ^ Lit. " sixty stades. "


xgo



ANABASIS BK. VI.



f CH- VI. ( ar-1

1 Augrust, B.C. 400



any one went off" apart and seized anything, it was voted to
be public property. Ere long there was an ample abundance
of supplies of all sorts, for marketables arrived from Hellenic
cities on all sides, and marts were established. Mariners
coasting by, and hearing that a city was being founded and
that there was a harbour, were glad to put in. Even the
hostile tribes dwelling in the neighbourhood presently began
to send envoys to Xenophon. It was he who was forming
the place into a city, as they understood, and they would be
glad to learn on what terms they might secure his friend-
ship. He made a point of introducing these visitors to the
soldiers.

Meanwhile Cleander arrived with two ships of war, but not
a single transport At the moment of his arrival, as it hap-
pened, the army had taken the field, and a separate party
had gone off on a pillaging excursion into the hills and had
captured a number of small cattle. In their apprehension of
being deprived of them, these same people spoke to Dexippus
(this was the man who had made off from Trapezus with the
fifty-oared galley), and urged him to save their sheep for
them. "Take some for yourself," said they, "and give the
rest back to us." So, without more ado, he drove off the soldiers
standing near, who kept repeating that the spoil was public
[iroperty. Then off he went to Cleander. " Here is an
attempt," said he, "at robbery." Cleander bade him to bring
up the culprit to him. Dexippus seized on some one, and
was for haling him to the Spartan governor. Just then
Agasias came across him and rescued the man, who wais a
member of his company ; and the rest of the soldiers present
set to work to stone Dexippus, calhng him "traitor." Things
looked so ill that a number of the crew of the ships of war
took fright and fled to the sea, and with the rest Cleander
himself Xenophon and the other generals tried to hold the
men back, assuring Cleander that the affair signified nothing
at all, and that the origin of it was a decree passed by the
army. That was to blame, if anything. But Cleander, goaded
on liy Dexippus, and personally annoyed at the fright which
he had experienced, threatened to sail away and publish an
interdict against them, forbidding any city to receive them,



1

4



cit. VI. Sg-Js")

August if



CLEANDER ARRIVES



as being public enemies. For at this date the Lacedae-
monians held sway over the whole Hellenic world.

Thereat the affair began to wear an ugly look, and the
Hellenes begged and implored Cleander to reconsider his
intention. He replied that he would be as good as his word,
and that nothing should stop him, unless the man who set the
example of stoning, with the other who rescued the prisoner,
were given up to him. Now, one of the two whose persons
were thus demanded — Agasias — had been a friend to Xeno-
phon throughout ; and that was just why Dexippus was all the
more anxious to accuse him. In their perplexity the generals
summoned a full meeting of the soldiers, and some speakers
were disposed to make very light of Cleander and set him
at naught. But Xenophon took a more serious view of the
matter; he rose and addressed the meeting thus : "Soldiers, I
cannot say that I feel disposed to make light of this business,
if Cleander be allowed to go away, as he threatens to do, in
his present temper towards us. There are Hellenic cities
close by ; but then the Lacedaemonians are the lords of
Hellas, and they can, any one of them, carry out whatever
they like in the cities. If then the fir.st thing this Lacedae-
monian does is to close the gates of Byzantium, and next to
pass an order to the other governors, city by city, not to receive
us because we are a set of lawless ruffians disloyal to the
Lacedaemonians ; and if, further, this report of us should reach
the ears of their admiral, Anaxibius, to stay or to sail away will
alike be difiicult. Remember, the Lacedaemonians at the
present time are lords alike on land and on sea. For the
sake then of a single man, or for tiv^o men's sake, it is not
right that the rest of us should be debarred from Hellas;
but whatever they enjoin we must obey. Do not the cities
which gave us birth yield them obedience also ? For my
own part, inasmuch as Dexippus, I believe, keeps telling
Cleander that Agasias would never have done this had not
I, Xenophon, bidden him, I absolve you of all complicity, and
Agasias too, if Agasias himself states that I am in any way
a prime mover in this matter. If I have set the fashion of
stone-throwing or any other sort of violence I condemn my-
self — I say that I deserve the extreme penalty, and I will


192



-BK. VI.



1 August, B.C. 400



submit to undergo it. I further say that if any one else is
accused, that man is bound to surrender himself to Cleander
for judgment, for by this means you will be absolved entirely
from the accusation. But as the matter now stands, it is
cruel that just when we were aspiring to win praise and honour
throughout Hellas, we are destined to sink below the level
of the rest of the world, banned from the Hellenic cities whose
common name we boast."

After him Agasias got up, and said : '' I swear to you, sirs,
by the gods and goddesses, verily and indeed, neither Xenophon
nor any one else among you bade me rescue the man. I saw
an honest man — one of my own company — being taken up
by Dexippus, the man who betrayed you, as you know full
well. That I could not endure ; I rescued him, I admit the
fact. Do not you deliver me up. I will surrender myselfi as
Xenophon suggests, to Cleander to pass w^hat verdict on me
he thinks right. Do not, for the sake of such a matter, make
foes of the Lacedaemonians ; rather God grant that ^ each of
you may safely reach the goal of his desire. Only do you
choose from among yourselves and send with me to Cleander
those who, in case of any omission on my part, may by their
words and acts supply what is lacking." Thereupon the army
granter! him to choose for himself whom he would have go
wHth him and to go ; and he at once chose the generals. After
this they all set off to Cleander — Agasias and the generals and
the man who had been rescued by Agasias — and the generals
spoke as follows : " The army has sent us to you, Cleander,
and this is their bidding : * If you have fault to find with all,
they say, you ought to pass sentence on all, and do with them
what seems best ; or if the charge is against one man or two,
or possibly seveml, what they expect of these people is to sur-
render themselves to you for judgment.' Accordingly, if you
lay anything to the charge of us generals, here we stand at
your bar. Or do you impute the fault to some one not here?
tell us whom. Short of flying in the face of our authority,
there is no one who will absent himself"

At that point Agasias stepped forward and said: "It



I

I

I
I
I



I


August



DEXIPPUS AND AGASIAS



was I, Cleander, who rescued the man before you yonder
from Dexippus, when the latter was carrying him ofif, and it
was I who gave the order to strike Dexippus. My plea is
that I know the prisoner to be an honest man. As to
Dexippus, I know that he was chosen by the army to com-
mand a fifty-oared galley, which we had obtained by request
from the men of Trapezus for the express purpose of collecting
vessels to carry us safely home. But this same Dexippus
betrayed his fellow-soldi era, with whom he had been delivered
from so many perils, and made off into hiding like a runaway
slave, whereby we have robbed the Trapezuntines of their
frigate, and must needs appear as knaves in their eyes for this
man's sake. As to ourselves, as far as he could, he has
ruined us ; for, like the rest of us, he had heard how all but
impossible it was for us to retreat by foot across the rivers
and to reach Hellas in safety. That is the stamp of man
whom I robbed of his prey. Now, had it been you your-
self who carried him off, or one of your emissaries, or indeed
any one short of a runaway from ourselves, be sure that 1
should have acted far otherwise. Be assured that if you put
me to death at this time you are sacrificing a good, honest
man for the sake of a coward and a scamp."

When he had listened to these remarks, Cleander replied
that if such had been the conduct of Dexippus he could not
congratulate him. " But still," he added, turning to the generals,
"were Dexippus ever so great a scamp he ought not to suffer
violence ; but in the language of your own demand he was
entitled to a fair trial, and so to obtain his deserts. What
I have to say at present therefore is: leave your friend
here and go your way, and when I give the order be present
at the trial. I have no further charge against the army or
any one, since the prisoner himself admits that he rescued
the man." Then the man who had been rescued said : "In
behalf of myself, Cleander, if possibly you think that I was
being taken up for some misdeed, it is not so ^ I neither struck
nor shot ; I merely said, * The sheep are public property ; * for
it was a resolution of the soldiers that whenever the army
went out as a body any booty privately obtained was to be
public property. That was all 1 said, and thereupon yonder


194



ANABASIS^BK. \^.



{



CH. VI. I a8.35
ALguat, B<c. 4CO



fellow seked me and began dragging me off. He wanted to
stop our mouths, so that he might have a share of the things
himself, and keep the rest for these buccaneers, contrary to
the ordinance." In answer to that Cleander said: "Very
well, if that is your disposition you can stay behind too, and
we will take your case into consideration also."

Thereupon Cleander and his party proceeded to breakfast ;
but Xenophon collected the army in assembly, and advised
their sending a deputation to Cleander to intercede in behalf
of the men. Accordingly it was resolved to send some
generals and officers with Dracontius the Spartan, and of the
rest those who seemed best fitted to go. The deputation was
to request Cleander by all means to release the two men.
Accordingly Xenophon came and addressed him thus :
'* Cleander, you have the men ; the array has bowed to you
and assented to do what you wished with respect to these two
members of their body and themsehes in general. But now
they beg and pray you to give up these two men, and not to
put them to death. Many a good service have these two
wrought for our army in past days. Let them but obtain
this from you, and in return the army promises that, if you
will put yourself at their head and the gracious gods approve,
they will show you how orderly they are, how apt to obey
their general, and, with heaven's help, to face their foes un-
flinchingly. They make this further request to you, that
you will present yourself and take command of thera and
make trial of them. 'Test us ourselves,' they say, *and test
Dexippus, what each of us is like, and afterwards assign to
each his due,' " When Cleander heard these things, he an-
swered ; " Nay, by the twin gods, I will answer you quickly
enough. Here I make you a present of the two men, and I
will as you say present myself, and tben^ if the gods vouchsafe,
I will put myself at your head and lead you into Hellas.
Very different is your language from the tale I used to hear
concerning you from certain peopIe> that you wanted to with-
draw the army from allegiance to the Lacedaemonians."

After this the deputation thanked him and retired, taking
w^ith them the two men; then Cleander sacrificed as a pre-
liminary to marching, and consorted friendlily with Xenophon,



CH. VI. 9 35*38 >
August f



THEY REACH CHRYSOPOLIS



m



and the two struck up an alliance. When the Spartan
saw with what good discipline the men carried out their
orders, he was still more anxious to become their leader.
Howeverj in spite of sacrifices repeated on three successive
days, the victims steadily remained unfavourable. So he sum-
moned the generals and said to them : *'The victims smile
not on me/ they suffer me not to lead you home ; but be not
out of heart at that. To you it is given, as it would appear,
to bring your men safe home. Fonvards then, and for our
part, whenever you come yonder, we will bestow on you as
warm a welcome as we may."

Then the soldiers resolved to make him a present of the
public cattle, which he accepted, but again gave back to
them. So he sailed away ; but the soldiers made division of
the corn which they had collected and of the other captured
property, and commenced their homeward march through the
territory of the Bithynians.

At first they confined themselves to the main road ; but
not chancing upon anything whereby they might reach a
friendly territory with something in their pockets for them-
selves, they resolved to turn sharp round, and marched for
one day and night in the opposite direction. By this proceed-
ing they captured many slaves and much small cattle ; and on
the sixth day reached Chrysopolis in Chalcedonia.^ Here they
halted seven days while they disposed of their booty by sale.

^ Or, " the victims are not on my side."

' For the spelling of this name see Diet. Geogr. "Chalcedon." (The
name should, as there explained, te WTitten " Calchedonia, " The false form
drove out the more correct, probably through a mispronunciation, based on
a wTong derivation, at some date long ago.) The sites of Chrysopolis and
Calchedon correspond respectively to the modem Scutari and Kadikoi.


BOOK VII I. r-6

[In the earlier portion of the narrative will be fotmd a detailed history
of the fortunes of the Hellenes during their march up country with Cyrus
down to the date of the battle ; and, subsequently to his death, until they
reached the Euxine ; as also of all their doings in their efforts to escape
from the Emxine, partly by land marches and partly under sail by sea,
until they found themselves outside the mouth of the Black Sea (south
of the Bosphorus) at Chrysopolis in Asia.]



L— At this point Pharnabazos, who was afraid that the
army might undertake a campaign against his satrapy, sent to
Anaxibius, the Spartan high admiral, who chanced to be in
Byzantium, and begged htm to convey the army out of Asia,
undertaking to comply with his wishes in every respect An-
axibius accordingly sent to summon the generals and officers
to Byzantium, and promised that the soldiers should not lack
pay for service, if they crossed the strait The officers said
that they would deliberate and retm-n an answer. Xeno-
phon individually informed him that he was about to quit
the army at once, and was only anxious to set sail Anaxibius
pressed him not to be in so great a hurry : " Cross over with
the rest," he said, "and then it will be time enough to think
about quitting the army."^ This the other undertook to do.

Now Seuthes the Thracian sent Medosades and begged

Xenophon to use his influence to get the army across, *'TelI

Xenophon, if he will do his best for me in this matter, he

will not regret it." Xenophon answered : " The army is in

any case going to cross ; so that, as far as that is concerned,

^ Or. more lit. "Anaxibius pressed him to wait and cross over with the
rest ; when," said he, " il will be time enough," etc.



CH. T. S 6-13>

Auk. -Oct. l"



CROSS TO BYZANTIUM



197



Seuthes is under no obligation to me or to any one else ; but as
soon as it is once across, I personally shall be quit of it. Let
Seuthes therefore, as far as he may deem consistent with
prudence, apply to those who are going to remain and will
have a voice in affair s."

After this the whole body of troops crossed to Byzantium.
But Anaxibius, instead of proceeding to give pay, made pro-
clamation that, "The soldiers were to take up their arms
and baggage and go forth," as if all he wished were to ascer-
tain their numbers and bid them god-speed at the same
moment. The soldiers were not well pleased at that, because
they had no money to furnish themselves with provisions
for the march ; and they sluggishly set about getting their
baggage together. Xenophon meanwhile, being on terms of
intimacy with the governor, Cleander, came to pay his host a
final visit, and bid him adieu, being on the point of setting
saiL But the other protested ; " Do not do so, or else,'' said
he, *' you will be blamed, for even now certain people are dis-
posed to hold you to account because the army is so slow in
getting under weigh." The other answered, " Nay, I am not
to blame for that. It is the men themselves, who are in want
of provisions ; that is why they are out of heart at their
exodus." " All the same," he replied, " I advise you to go out,
as if you intended to march with them, and when you are
well outside, it will be time enough to take yourself off."
"Well then," said Xenophon, "we will go and arrange all
this with Anaxibius.'' They went and stated the case to the
admiral, who insisted that they must do as he had said, and
march out, bag and baggage, by the quickest road ; and as an
appendix to the former edict, he added, " Any one absenting
himself from the review and the muster will have himself to
blame for the consequences," This was peremptorj*. So out
marched, the generals first, and then the rest ; and now, w^ith
the exception of here a man and there, they were all outside ;
it was * a clean sweep ;' and Eteonicus stood posted near the
gates, ready to close them, as soon as the men were fairly out,
and to thrust in the bolt pin.

Then Anaxibius summoned the generals and captains, and
addressed them : " Provisions you had better get from the


198



ANABASIS— BK. VTI.



( CH, I. f 13-19

< October, B.C. 400



Thracian villages ; you will find plenty of barley, wheat, and
other necessaries in them ; and when you have got them, off
with you to the Chersonese, where Cyniscus will take you
into his service." Some of the soldiers overheard what was
said, or possibly one of the oflficers was the medium of com-
munication ; however it was, the news was handed on to
the array. As to the generals, their immediate concern was
to try and gain some information as to Seuthes : " Was he
hostile or friendly ? also, would they have to march through the
Sacred mountain,^ or round ahnout through the middle of
l^hrace ? "

While they were discussing these points, the soldiers
snatched up their arms and made a rush full speed at the gates,
with the intention of getting inside the fortification again. But
Eteonicus and his men, seeing the heavy infantry coming up
at a run promptly closed the gates and thrust in the bolt
pin.* Then the soldiers fell to battering the gates, exclaiming
that it was iniquitous to thrust them forth' in this fashion into
the jaws of their enemies. " If you do not of your own accord
open the gates," they cried, "we will split them in half"; and
another set rushed down to the sea, and so along the break-
water and over the wall into the city ; while a third set, consist-
ing of those few who were stiil inside, having never left the city,
seeing the affair at the gates^ severed the bars with axes and
flung the portals wide open ; and the rest came pouring in.

Xenophon^ seeing what was happening, was seized with
alarm lest the army should betake itself to pillage, and ills
incurable be wrought to the city, to himself and to the soldiers.
Then he set olT, and, plunging into the throng, was swept
through the gates with the crowd. The Byzantines no
sooner saw the soldiers forcibly rushing in than they left the
open square, and fled, some to the shipping, others to their
homes, while those already indoors came racing out, and
some fell to dragging down their ships of war^ hoping possibly
to be safe on board these ; while there was not a soul who



* So the mountain-range is named which runs panillel to the Proponiis
(Sea of Marmora) from lat. 41" N. ctrtra to lat. 40° 30'; from Bi&anthe
(Rhodosto) lo the neck of the Chersonese (GaUipoli).

'closed and barred the Kales." See Thuc. ii.


cw. t. $ ii3-a7l
October /



FRAUD iWD RETALIATION



199



doubted but that the city wa<s taken, and that they were all un-
done. Eteonicus made a swift retreat to the citadel. Anaxibius
ran down to the sea, and, getting on board a fishemian's
smack, sailed round to the acropolis, and at once sent off to
fetch over the garrison troops from Chalcedon, since those
already in the acropolis seemed hardly sufficient to keep the
men in check.

The soldiers, catching sight of Xenophon, threw themselves
upon him, crying: "Now, Xenophon, is the time to prove
yourself a man. You have got a city, you have got triremes, you
have got money, you have got men ; to-day, if you only choose,
you can do us a good turn, and we will make you a great man."
He replied : " Nay, I like what you say, and I will do it all ;
but if that is what you have set your hearts on, fall into rank
and take up position at once." This he said, wishing to quiet
them, and so passed the order along the lines himself, while
bidding the rest to do the same: "Take up position; stand
easy." But the men themselves, by a species of self-marshalling,
fell into rank, and were soon formed, the heavy infantry eight
deep, while the light infantry had run up to cover either
wing. The Thractan Square^ as it is called, is a fine site for
manoeuvring, being bare of buildings and level. As soon
as the arms were stacked and the men's tempers cooled,
Xenophon called a general meeting of the soldiers, and made
the following speech : —

" Soldiers, I am not surprised at your wrath, or that you
deem it monstrous treatment so to be cheated : but con-
sider what will be the consequences if we gratify our Indig-
nation, and in return for such deception, avenge ourselves on
the l,acedaemonians here present, and plunder an innocent
city. We shall be declared enemies of the Lacedaemonians
and their allies ; and what sort of war that will be, we need
not go far to conjecture. I take it, you have not forgotten some
quite recent occurrences. We Athenians entered into war
against the Lacedaemonians and their allies with a fleet con-
sisting of not less than three hundred line -of- battle ships,
including those in dock as well as those afloat. We had vast
treasures stored up in the city, and a yearly income which,
derived from home or foreign sources, amounted to no less


ANABASIS — BK. VH.



< CH- r. i 27-13
(October, b.c. 400



than a thousand talents.' Our empire included all the islands,
and we were possessed of numerous cities both in Asia and
in Europe. Amongst others, this very Byzantium, where we
now are, was ours ; and yet in the end we were vanquished,
as you all very well know.

"What, must we anticipate, will now be our fate? The
Lacedaemonians have not only their old allies, but the
Athenians and those who were at that time allies of Athens are
added to them. Tissapheraes and all the rest of the Asiatics
on the seaboard are our foes, not to speak of our arch-enemy,
the king himself, up yonder, whom we came to deprive of his
empire, and to kill, if possible. I ask then, with all these
banded together against us, is there any one so insensate as to
imagine that we can survive the contest ? For heaven's sake,
let us not go mad or loosely throw away our lives in war
with our own native cities — nay, our own friends, our kith and
our kin ; for in one or other of the cities they are all included.
Every city will march against us, and not unjustly, if, after
refusing to hold one single barbarian city by right of conquest,
we seize the first Hellenic city that we come to and make it a
ruinous heap. For my part, my prayer is that before I see
such things wrought by you, I, at any rate, may lie ten
thousand fathoms under ground ! My counsel to you, as
Hellenes, is to try and obtain your just rights, through obedi-
ence to those who stand at the head of Hellas ; and if so
be that you fail in those demands, why, being more sinned
against than sinning, need we rob ourselves of Hellas too?
At present, I propose that we should send to Anaxibius and
tell him that we have made an entrance into the city, not medi-
tating violence, but merely to discover if he and his will show
us any good ; for if so, it is well ; but if otherwise, at least we
will let him see that he does not shut the door upon us as
dupes and fools. We know the meaning of discipline ; ^ we
turn our backs and go."

This resolution was passed, and they sent Hieronymus an
Eleian, with two others, Eur>'lochus an Arcadian and Philesius
an Achaean, to deliver the message. So these set off on their
errand. But while the soldiers were still seated in conclave,

^ /240,ooo. ^ Or, "we choose to obey and go"


CM. t. 4 33-38 I
October »



COERATADAS



Coeratadas/ of Thebes, arrived. He was a Theban not
in exile, but with a taste for generalship, who made it
his business to go the round of Hellas to see if any city or
nation were in need of his services. Thus, on the present
occasion, he presented himself, and begged to state that he
was ready to put himself at their head, and lead them into the
Delta of Thrace,- as it is called, where they would find them-
selves in a land of plenty ; but until they got there, he would
provide them with meat and drink enough and to spare.
While they were still listening to this tale, the return message
from Anaxibius came. His answer was : " The discipline, they
had spoken of, was not a thing they would regret; indeed he
would report their l>ehaviour to the authorities at home ; and
for himself, he would take advice and do the best he could for
them."

Thereupon the soldiers accepted Coeratadas as their general,
and retired without the walls. Their new general undertook
to present himself to the troops next day with sacrificial beasts
and a soothsayer, with eatables also and drinkables for the army.
Now, as soon as they were gone out, Anaxibius closed the gates
and issued a proclamation to the effect that " any of the soldiers
caught inside should be knocked down to the hammer and
sold at once." Next day, Coeratadas arrived with the victims
and the soothsayer, A string of twenty bearers bearing
barleymeal followed at his heels, succeeded by other twenty
canning wine, and three laden with a supply of olives, and two
others carr}dng, the one about as much garlic as a single man
could lift, and the other a similar load of onions. These various
supplies he set down, apparently for distribution, and proceeded
to sacrifice.

Now Xenophon sent to Clean der, begging him to arrange
matters so that he might be allowed to enter the walls, with a
view to starting from Byzantium on his homeward voyage,

^ Sec /fell. I. iii. 16 foil., for an earlier pa5!s>age in the life of this same
person, since it seems there is little doubt they axe the same,

■^ The exact locality, so called, is not known ; doubtless it lay somewhere
between Byzantium and Salmydessus, possibly at Delcus (mod. Dorkos) ; or
possibly the narrow portion of Thrace between the Euxine. Bosphorus, and
Propontis went by this name. See note in Pretor ad loc., and Did, Geog.
" Thracia.,"


J02 ANABASIS — BK. VII. I"" oi^'^



1


Cleander came, and this is what he said : " I have come ; but
I was barely able to arrange what you want. Anaxibius in-
sisted : • It was not convenient Ihat Xcnophon should be inside
while the soldiers are close to the walls without ; the Byzantines
at sixes and sevens moreover ; and no love lost between the
one party of them and the other.* Still, he ended by bidding
you to come inside, if you were really minded to leave the town
by sea with himself," Accordingly Xenophon bade the soldiers
good-bye, and returned with Cleander within the walls.

To return to Coeratadas. The first day he failed to
get favourable signs at the sacrifice, and never a dole of
rations did he make to the soldiers. On the second day
the victims were standing ready near the altar, and so was
Coeratadas, with chaplet crowned, all ready to sacrifice, when
up comes Timasion the Dardanian, with Neon the Asinaean,
and Cleanor of Orchomenus, forbidding Coeratadas to sacri-
fice : ' He must understand there was an end to his general-
ship, unless he gave them provisions.' The other bade them
measure out the supplies, "Pray, dole them out." But when
he found that he had a good deal short of a single day's pro-
visions for each man, he picked up his paraphernalia of sacrifice
and withdrew. As to being general, he would have nothing
more to say to it

II, — Now these five were left — Neon the Asinaean, Phry-
niscus the Achaean, Philesius the Achaean, Xanthicles the
Achaean, Timasion the Dardanian— at the head of the army,
and they pushed on to some villages of the Thracians facing
Byzantium, and there encamped Now the generals could not
agree. Cleanor and Phryniscus wished to march to join
Seuthes, who had worked upon their feelings by presenting
one with a horse and the other with a woman to wife. But
Neon's object was to come to the Chersonese : ** When we are
under the wing of the Lacedaemonians," he thought, "I shall
step to the front and command the whole army."

Timasion's one ambition was to cross back again into Asia,
hoping to be reinstated at home and end his exile. The
soldiers shared the wishes of the last general. But, as time
dragged on, many of the men sold their arms at different
places and set sail as best they could ; others [actually gave



CH. IT. S 3-9 I
Nov.-Dccu f



DISSENTIENT VIEWS



^-



away their arms, some here, some there, and*] became absorbed
in the cities. One man rejoiced. This was Anaxibius, to
whom the break-op of the army was a blessing. " That is the
way," he said to himself, " I can best gratify Phamabazus."

But Anaxibius, while prosecuting his voyage from Byzantium,
was met at Cyzicus by Aristarchus, the new governor, who was
to succeed Cleander at Byzantium ; and report said that a new
admiral, Polus, if he had not actually arrived, would presently
reach the Hellespont and relieve Anaxibius. The latter sent
a parting injunction to Aristarchus to be sure and sell all
the Cyreian soldiers he could lay hands on still lingering in
Byzantium ; for Cleander had not sold a single man of them ;
on the contrary, he had made it his business to tend the sick
and wounded, pitying them, and insisting on their being
received in the houses. Aristarchus changed all that, and was
no sooner arrived in Byzantium than he sold no less than four
hundred of them. Meanwhile Anaxibius, on his coasting
voyage, reached Parium, and, according to the terms of their
agreement, he sent to Phamabazus. But the latter, learning
that Aristarchus was the new governor at Byzantium, and
that Anax^ibius had ceased to be admiral, turned upon him a
cold shoulder, and set about concocting the same measures
concerning the Cyreian army with Aristarchus, as he had lately
been at work upon with ^naxibius.

Anaxibius thereupon summoned Xenophon and bade him,
by every manner of means, sail to the army with the utmost
speed, and keep it together. "He was to collect the scat-
tered fragments and march them down to Perinthus, and
thence convey them across to Asia without loss of time."
And herewith he put a thirty-oared galley at his service, and
gave him a letter of authority and an officer to accompany him,
with an order to the Perinthians " to escort Xenophon without
delay on horseback to the army." So it was that Xenophon
sailed across and eventually reached the army. The soldiers
gave him a joyous w^ekome, and would have been only too
glad to cross from Thrace into Asia under his leadership.

1 The MSS. give the words so rendered — ol M (cii [StSivra ri ST\a Kari.
Toi'^j x**"/"*"*]' which some critics emend diaSiMyret, others bracket as sus-
pected, others cxpange.


•04



ANABASIS BK. VIL



j CB. II. I lo-i;

( December, bjo 400



Hut Jiculhes, hearing that Xenophon had arrived, sent
MctlosatJcs again, by sea to meet him, and begged him to bring
llic nrniy to him ; and whatever he thought would make his
sprt'ch persuasive, he was ready to promise him. But the
other replied, that none of these things were open to him to
do ; and svith this answer Medosades departed, and the Hellenes
proceeded to Pcrinthus,^ Here on arrival Neon withdrew his
troops and encamped apart, having about eight hundred men ;
while the remainder of the army lay in one place under the
walls of Perinlhus.

After this, Xenophon set himself to find vessels, so as to
lose no time in crossing. But in the interval Aristarchus,
t!\e governor from Byzantium, arrived with a couple of war
ships, being moved to do so by Pharnabazus. To make
doubly sure, he first forbade the skippers and shipmasters to
rarry the troops across, and then he visited the camp and
inftjrnied the soldiers that their passage into Asia was for-
bidden. Xenojihon replied that he was acting under the
orders of Anaxibius, who had sent him thither for this express
purpose ; to which Aristarchus retorted, *' For the matter of
that, Anaxibius is no longer admiralj and I am governor in
this quarter ; if I catch any of you at sea, I will sink you."
With these remarks he retired within the walls of Perinthus.

Next day, he sent for the generals and officers of the
army. They had already reached the fortification walls, when
some one brought word to Xenophon that if he set foot inside,
he would be seized, and either meet some ill fate there or more
likely be delivered up to Pharnabazus. On hearing this Xeno-
phon sent forward the rest of the party, but for himself pleaded
that there was a sacrifice which he wished to offer. In this
way he contrived to turn back and consult the victims,
" Would the gods allow him to try and bring the army over to
Seuthes ? " On the one hand it was plain that the idea of
crossing over to Asia in the face of this man with his ships
of war, who meant to bar the passage, was too dangerous.
Nor did he altogether like the notion of being blocked up
in the Chersonese with an army in dire need of everything ;

' Lit. ' ' When llie Hellenes bad reached Perinthus, Neon," etc. The inter-
view mth Medosades took place at Selymhria. See below, p, 207-.


CH. II. I 15-ai

December



}



DESIGNS OF ARISTARCHUS



205



where, besides being at the beck and call of the governor of
the place, they would be debarred from the necessaries of life.

While Xenophon was thus employed, the generals and
officers came back with a message from Aristarchus, who had
told them they might retire for the present, but in the after-
noon he should expect them. The former suspicions of a plot
had now ripened to a certainty. Xenophon meantime had
ascertained that the victims were favourable to his project.
He personally, and the army as a whole, might with safety pro-
ceed to Seuthes^ they seemed to say. Accordingly, he took with
him Polycrates, the Athenian captain, and from each of the
generals, not including Neon, some one man whom they could
in each case trust, and in the night they set off to visit the
army of Seuthes, sixty furlongs ^ distant.

As they approached, they came upon some deserted
watch-fires, and their first impression was that Seuthes had
shifted his position ; but presently perceiving a confused
sound (the voices of Seuthes* people signalling to one
another), the explanation dawned on him : Seuthes kept his
watch-fires kindled in front of, instead of behind, his night
pickets, in order that the outposts, being in the dark, might
escape notice, their numbers and position being thus a mystery ;
whilst any party approaching from the outside, so far from
escaping notice, would, through the glare of the fire, stand
out conspicuously. Perceiving how matters stood, Xenophon
sent forward his interpreter, who was one of the party,
and bade him inform Seuthes that Xenophon was there
and craved conference with him. The others asked if he
were an Athenian from the army yonder, and no sooner had
the interpreter replied, "Yes, the same,*' than up they leapt
and galloped off; and in less time than it takes to tell a couple
of hundred pel lasts had come up who seized and carried off
Xenophon and those with him and brought them to Seuthes.
The latter was in a tower right well guarded, and there were
horses round it in a circle, standing all ready bitted and
bridled ; for his alarm was so great that he gave his horses
their provender during the day,^ and during the nights he

* Lit. "sixty stades," btitween seven and eight miles,
'■* l.t. "instead of letting them graze."


ANABASIS



kept watch and ward with the brutes thus bitted and bridled.
It was stated in explanation tbat in old days an ancestor of
his, named Teres^ had been in this very country with a large
army, several of whom he had lost at the hands of the native
inhabitants, besides being robbed of his baggage train. The
inhabitants of the country are Thynians, and they are reputed
to be far the most warlike set of fighters — especially at night
When they drew near, Seuthes bade Xenophon enter,
and bring with him any two he might choose. As soon as they
were inside, they first greeted one another warmly, and then,
according to the Thracian custom, pledged themselves in bowls
of wine. There was further present at the elbow of Seuth^
Medosades, w^ho on all occasions acted as his ambassador-
in -chief. Xenophon took the initiative and spoke as fol-
lows : " You have sent to me, Seuthes, once and again.
On the first occasion you sent Medosades yonder, to Chal-
cedon, • and you begged me to use ray influence in favour
of the army crossing over from Asia, You promised me,
in return for this conduct on my part, various kindnesses;
at least that is what Medosades stated"; and before pro-
ceeding further he turned to Medosades and asked, " Is
not that soi*" The other assented. "Again, on a second
occasion, the same Medosades came when I had crossed
over from Parium to rejoin the army ; and he promised me
that if I would bring you the army^ you would in various
respects treat me as a friend and brother. He said especi-
ally with regard to certain seaboard places of which you
are the owner and lord, that you were minded to make me a
present of them." At this point he again questioned Medo-
sades, "Whether the words attributed to him were exact?"
and Medosades once more fully assented " Come now%" pro-
ceeded Xenophon, "recount what answer I made you, and
iirst at Chalcedon." "You answered that the army was, in
any case, about to cross over to Byzantium ; and as far as that
went, there was no need to pay you or any one else anything ;
and for yourself, you added, that once across you were minded
to leave the army, which thing came to pass even as you said."

1 Or, " who far above all other tribes have the repatation of being
formidable foes al night," as Mr. Pretor suggests.



;aia. ■
: mostfl



CM. n. I a8-33 1

December !



TXTERXIEW WITH SEUTHES



207



|^*Well ! what did I say/* he asked, "at your next visit, when
you caine to me in Selybria ? " " You said that the proposal
was impossible ; you were all going to Peri nth us to cross into
^fcsia." ** Good," said Xenophon, " and in spite of all, at the
present moment, here I am myself, and Phryniscus, one of my
colleagues, and Poly crates yonder, a captain ; and outside, to
represent the O^er generals (all except Neon the Laconian),
the trustiest men thej* could find to send. So that if you wish
to give these transactions the seal of still greater security, you
have nothing to do but to summon them also ; and do you,
Polycrates, go and say from me, that I bid them leave their arms
outside, and you can leave your own sword outside before you
enter with ihem on your return. ''

When Seuthes had heard so far, he interposed : " I should
never mistrust an Athenian, for we are relatives already,^ I
know ; and the best of friends, I believe, we shall be." After
that, as soon as the right men entered, Xenophon first ques-
tioned Seuthes as to what use he intended to make of the
army, and he replied as follows : " Maesades was my father ;
his sway extended over the Melanditae, the Thynians, and
the Tranipsae. Then the affairs of the Odrysians took a bad
turn, and my father was driven out of this country, and later
on died himself of sickness, leaving me to be brought up as an
orphan at the court of Medocus, the present king. But I,
when I had grown to man's estate, could not endure to live
with my eyes fixed on another's board. So I seated myself on
the seat by him as a suppliant, and begged him to give me as
many men as he could spare, that I might wreak what mischief
I could on those who had driven us forth from our land;
that thus I might cease to live in dependence upon another's
board, like a dog watching his master's hand. In answer to

^ Tradition said that thc^ Thracians and Athenians were connected, through
the marriage of a former prince Terem (or Teres) with Procne, the daughter of
Pandion. This old story, discredited by Thucydides, iL 29, is referred to in Arist.
Birds, 36B foil. Tlie Birds are about to charge ihc two Athenian intruders, when
Epops, king of the Birds, formerly Tenms, king of Thrace, but long ago trans-
formed into a hoopoe, intercedes in t>ehatf of two men, ttjs ifiijs yvvcuKiis Am-c
triryyei'Tj icfti ^pvXira, " \^ho are of my lady's tribe and kin." As a matter of
historic, the Athenians had in the year B.C. 431 made alliance with Sitalces, king
of the'Odrysians (the son of Teres, the first founder of their empire), and made his
son, Sadocus, an Athenian ciiisten. Cf. Thuc, U. ; Arist. AeAarnians. 142 foil.


( CH. II. 9 3*-cM. til. I y
\ Decern Wr, a.c. 400

my petition, he gave me the men and the horses which you
will see at break of day» and nowadays I live with these,
pillaging my own ancestral land. But if you would join me, I
think, with the help of heaven, we might easily recover my
empire. That is what I want of you." '' Well then," said
Xenophon, ''supposing we came, what should you be able to
give us ? the soldiers, the officers, and the generals ? Tell us
that these witnesses may report your answer." And he pro-
mised to give *4o the common soldiers a cyzicene,^ to a cap-
tain twice as much,^ and to a general four times as much,'*
with as much land as ever they liked, some yoke uf oxen,
and a fortified place upon the seaboard." "But now suppos-
ing," said Xenophon, "we fail of success, in spite of our
endeavours ; suppose any intimidation on the part of the
Lacedaemonians should arise ; will you receive into your country
any of us who may seek to find a refuge with you?" He
answered : " Nay, not only so, but I shall look upon you as my
brothers, entitled to share my seat, and the joint possessors of
all the wealth which we may be able to acquire. And to you
yourself, O Xenophon ! I will give my daughter, and if you
have a daughter, 1 will buy her in Thracian fashion ; and 1
will give you Bisanthe as a dwelling-place, which is the fairest
of all my possessions on the seaboard"*

in. — After listening to these proposals, they gave and
accepted pledges of good faith ; and so the deputation rode
off. Before day they were back again in camp, and severally
rendered a report to those who sent them. At dawn Aristarchus
again summoned the generals and officers, but the latter
resolved to have done with the visit to Aristarchus, and to
summon a meeting of the array. In full conclave the soldiers
met, with the exception of Neon's men, who remained about
ten furlongs off. When they were met together Xenophon rose,
and made the following announcement : " Men, Aristarchus
with his ships of war hinders us from sailing where we fain

* A cyztcone monthly is to Ix* unclerstcx>d. See above, p, 154 note i, J
' Lit. " ii diwatria, or double share. " ^
' Lit, "a ieirammria, or n fourfold portion."

* Bisanthe, one of the Ionic colonies founded by Samoa, with the Thracian
name Rhaedestus (now Rodosto), strongly placed so as to cormn^ind the
entrance into the Sacred mouittaln. See above, p. 198, note r.



i



t. III. 5 3-9 1
ecember f



December



ARISTARCHUS FOILED



209



would go ; it is not even safe to set foot on board a
vessel. But if he hinders us here, he hastens us there. * Be
off to the Chersonese,' says he, * force a passage through
the Sacred mountain.' If we master it and succeed in
getting to the place, he has something in store for us. He
promises that he will not sell you any more, as he did at
Byzantium ; you shall not be cheated again ; you shall have
pay ; he will no longer, as now, suffer you to remain in
want of provisions. That is his proposal. But Seuthes says
that if you will go to him be will treat you well. What
you have now to consider is, whether you will stay to debate
this question, or leave its settlement till we have gone up into
a land of provisions. If you ask me my opinion, it is this :
Since here we have neither money to buy, nor leave to take
without money what we need, why should we not go up into
these villages where the right to help ourselves is conferred by
might? There, unhampered by the want of bare necessaries,
you can listen to what this man and the other wants of you and
choose whichever sounds best. Let those," he added, " who
agree to this, hold up their hands." They all held them up.
" Retire then," said he, " and get your kit together, and at the
word of command, follow your leader."

After this, Xenophon put himself at the head and the rest
followed. Neon, indeed, and other agents from Aristarchus
tried to turn them from their purpose, but to their persuasions
they turned a deaf ear. They had not advanced much more
than three miles,^ when Seuthes met them ; and Xenophon,
seeing him, bade him ride up. He wished to tell him what
they felt to be conducive to their interests, and in the pre-
sence of as many witnesses as possible. As soon as he had
approached^ Xenophon said : " We are going where the troops
will have enough to live upon ; when we are there, we will
listen to you and to the emissaries of the Laconian, and
choose between you both whatever seems best If then you
will lead us where provisions are to be got in plenty, we shall
fed indebted to you for your hospitality." And Seuthes
answered : " For the matter of that, I know many villages,
close-packed and stocked with all kinds of provisions, just far

^ Lit. "thirty stades."
P


»io



IS ^BK. VII.



/ CH. III. i 9-16

\ December, b.C 400



enough ofT to give you a good appetite for your breakfasts."
" Lead on then 1" said Xenophon. When they had reached
the villages in the afternoon, the soldiers met, and Seuthes made
the following speech : " My request to you, sirs, is that you
will take the field with ine, and my promise to you is that I
will give every man of you a cyzicene/ and to the officers and
generals at the customary rate ; besides this I will honour those
who show special merit. Food and drink you will get as now
for yourselves from the country ; but whatever is captured, I
shall claim to have myself, so that by distribution of it I may
provide you with pay. Let them flee, let them creep into
hiding-places, we shall be able to pursue after them, we will
track them out ; ^ or if they resist, along with you we will en-
deavour to subdue them to our hands." Xenophon inquired:
" And how far from the sea shall you expect the army to follow
you?" "Nowhere more than seven days' journey," he answered,
"and in many pkces less,"

After this, permission was given to all who wished to speak,
and many spoke, but ever to one and the same tune : " ivhat
Seuthes said, was very right. It was winter, and for a man to
sail home, even if he had the will to do so, was impossible.
On the other hand, to continue long in a friendly countrj',
where they must depend upon what they could purchase, was
equally beyond their power. If they were to wear away time
and support life in a hostile country, it was safer to do so
with Seuthes than by themselves, not to speak of all these
good things j but if they were going to get pay into the
bargain, that indeed was a godsend." To complete the pro-
ceedings, Xenophon said : "If any one opposes the measure,
let him state his views ; if not, let the officer put the proposi-
tion to the vote." No one opposed ; they put it to the vote,
and the resolution was carried ; and without loss of time, he
informed Seuthes that they would take the field with him.

After this the troops messed in their separate divisions,
but the generals and officers were invited by Seuthes to
dinner at a neighbouring village which was in his possession.
When they were at the doorsj and on the point of stepping

^ See above, p. 154, note i.
■ Or, "nose"' them out. See above, p. 155, mole i.



1


CM. III. § j6-3o)



December



I



A ROYAL ENTERTAINMENT



211



in to dinner, they were met by a certain Herackides, of
Maronea.^ He came up to each guest, addressing himself
particularly to those who, as he conjectured, ought to be
able to make a present to Seuthes. He addressed himself
first to some Parians who were there to arrange a friendship
with Medocus, the king of the Odrj'sians, and were bearers
of presents to the king and to his wife, Heracleides re-
minded them : " Medocus is up country twelve days' journey
from the sea ; but Seuthes, now that he has got this army,
will be lord on the sea-coast; as your neighbour^ then» he
is the man to do you good or do you ill If you are
wise, you will give him whatever he asks of you. On the
whole, it will be laid out at better interest than if you gave
it to Medocus, who lives so far off," That was his mode
of persuasion in their case. Next he came to Timasion
the Dardanian, who, some one had told him, was the happy
possessor of certain goblets and oriental carpets. What he
said to him was : " It is customary when people are invited to
dinner by Seuthes for the guests to make him a present ; now
if he should become a great person in these parts, he will be
able to restore you to your native land, or to make you a
rich man here.'' Such were the solicitations which he applied
to each man in turn whom he accosted. Presently he came
to Xenophon and said : " You are at once a citizen of no mean
city, and with Seuthes also your own name is very great.
Maybe you expect to obtain a fort or two in this country, Just
as others of your countrymen have done,^ and territory, It is
only right and proper therefore that you should honour
Seuthes in the most magnificent style. Be sure, I give this
advice out of pure friendliness, for I know that the greater
the gift that you are ready to bestow on him, the better the
treatment you will receive at his hands." Xenophon, on
hearing this, was in a sad dilemma, for he had brought with
him, when he crossed from Parium, nothing but one boy and
just enough to pay his travelling expenses.

^ A Greek colony in Thrace. Among Asiatico- Ionian colonies were
Abdera, founded by Teos, and Maroneia, celebrated for its wine, founded
by Chios alxnut 540 B.C.- — Kiepert, A/ufi. And. Geqg. viii. tSs.

^ Notably Alcibiades, who possessed two or three such fortresses See
bdow, p. 220, note 2.


212 ANABASIS— BK. VIL {DecemiJI.'lJc'iS

As soon as the company, consisting of the most power-
ful Thracians there present, with the generals and captains
of the Hellenes, and any embassy from a state which might
be there, had arrived, they were seated in a circle, and the
dinner was served. Thereupon three-legged stools were
brought in and placed in front of the assembled guests.
They were laden with pieces of meat, piled up, and there
were huge leavened- loaves fastened on to the pieces of meat
with long skewers. The tables, as a ru!e, were set beside the
guests at intervals. That was the custom; and Seuthes set
the fashion of the performance. He took up the loaves which
lay by his side and broke them into little pieces, and then threw
the fragments here to one and there to another as seemed
him good ; and so with the meat likewise, leaving for himself
the merest taste. Then the rest fell to following the fashion
set them, those that is who had tables placed beside them.

Now there was an Arcadian, Arystas by name, a huge eater ;
he soon got tired of throwing the pieces about, and seized a
good three-quartern loaf in his two hands, placed some pieces
of meat upon his knees, and proceeded to discuss his dinner.
Then beakers of wine were brought round, and every one
partook in turn ; but when the cupbearer came to Arystas and
handed him the bowl, he looked up^ and seeing that Xenophon
had done eating : " Give it him" quoth he, " he is more at
leisure. I have something better to do at present.^' Seuthes,
hearing a remark, asked the cupbearer what was said, and the
cupbearer, who knew how to talk Greek, explained Then
followed a peal of laughter.

When the drinking had advanced somewhat, in came a
Thracian with a white horse, who snatched the brimming bowl
and said : " Here's a health to thee, O Seuthes ! Let roe
present thee with this horse. Mounted on him, thou shall
capture whom thou choosest to pursue, or retiring from battle,
thou shall not dread the foe." He was followed by one who
brought in a boy, and presented him in proper style with
" Here's a health to thee, O Seuthes ! " A third had " clothes
for his wife." Timasion, the Dardanian, pledged Seuthes, and
presented a silver bowl ^ and a carpet worth ten niinae.*

^ Or rather "saucer" (0i(iXtj). ' jC^f*"



i



" CM. III. I a8'33\
Deccmter /



SPEECHES AFTER DINNER



213



Gnesippus, an Athenian, got up and said: "It was a good
old custom, and a fine one too, that those who had, should
give to the king for honour's sake, but to those who had not,
the king should give; whereby, my lord," he added, "1 too
may one day have the wherewithal to give thee gifts and
honour," Xenophon the while was racking his brains what
he was to do ; he was not the happier because he was seated
in the seat next Seuthes as a mark of honour ; and Herac
leides bade the cupbearer hand him the bowl. The wine
had perhaps a little mounted to his head ; he rose, and man-
fully seized the cup, and spoke : " I also, Seuthes, have to present
you with myself and these my dear comrades to be your trusty
friends, and not one of them against his will. They are more
ready, one and all, still more than I, to be your friends. Here
they are ; they ask nothing from you in return, rather they are
forward to labour in your behalf; it will be their pleasure to
bear the brunt of battle in voluntary service. With them, God
willing, you will gain vast territory ; you will recover what was
once your forefathers'; you will win for yourself new lands ; and
not lands only, but horses many, and of men a multitude, and
many a fair dame besides. You will not need to seize upon
them in robber fashion ; it is your friends here who, of their
own accord, shall take and bring them to you, they shall lay
thera at your feet as gifts." Up got Seuthes and drained with
him the cup, and with him sprinkled the last drops fraternally.^
At this stage entered musicians blowing upon horns such
as they use for signal calls, and trumpeting on trumpets, made
of raw oxhide, tunes and airs, like the music of the double-
octave harp.^ Seuthes himself got up and shouted, trolling
forth a war song; then he sprang from his place and leapt
about as though he would guard himself against a missile, in
right nimble style. Then came in a set of clowns and jesters.

* For the Thracian custom, vide Siiidas. jr. v. Ka.Ta.ffKtM^ti»,

* Or, "ma^adisu" This is said to have been one of the most perfect in-
stTUinents. It comprised two full octaves, the left hand playing the same notes
as the right an octave lower* Guhl and Koner, p. 203, Engl, transl. See
also ZJtc/, Antiq, "Musica"; and Arist. ProbLySx, t8, AtA ri \ 5ti 1raffu^r
exsyui^fliL ^SfTat fjiiurf ; fiayaSi^oviTi yip ra^uTTiVy HWijv S^ oi'Sefdav^ i.e, " since
no interval except the octave {Si6. TaffCw) could be magadised (the effect of
any other is well known to be intolerable), therefore no other interval was
employed at all."


214



dABASIS BK. VII



I:. Dcodiiber, B.C 40a



But when the sun began to set, the Hellenes rose from
their seats, ll was time, they said, to place the night sen-
tinels and to pass the watchword ; further, they b^ged of
Seuthes to issue an order that none of the Thracians were to
enter the Hellenic camp at night, "since between your
Thracian foes and our Thracian friends there might be some
confusion." As they sallied forth, Seuthes rose to accom-
pany them, like the soberest of men. When they were
outside,^ he summoned the generals apart and said: "Sirs,
our enemies are not aware as yet of our alliance. If, there-
fore, we attack them before they take precautions not to
be caught, or are prepared to repel assault, we shall make
a fine haul of captives and other stock." The generals fully
approved of these views, and bade him lead on. He answered :
" Prepare and wait ; as soon as the right time comes I will be
with you. I shall pick up the peltasts and yourselves, and
with the help of the gods,* I will lead on." " But con-
sider one point," urged Xenophon ; "if we are to march
by night, is not the Hellemc fashion best? ^\^len march-
ing in the daytime that part of the army leads the van
which seems best suited to the nature of the country to be
traversed — heavy or light infantry, or cavalry ; but by m'ght
our rule is that the slowest arm should take the lead. Thus
we avoid the risk of being pulled to pieces : and it is not
so easy for a man to give his neighbour the slip without
intending, whereas the scattered fragments of an army are
apt to fall foul of one another, and to cause damage or incur
it in sheer ignorance." To this Seuthes replied : *' You reason
weD, and I will adopt your custom. I will furnish you with
guides chosen from the oldest experts of the countr>% and I
will myself follow with the cavalr)- in the rear ; it will not take
me long, if need be, to present myself at the front." Then,
for kinship's sake, they chose " Athenaia "^ as their watchword
With this, they turned and sought repose.

It was about midnight when Seuthes presented himself
with his cavalry troopers armed with corselets, and his light in-



Lit. • ' When he was come forth, "



the



^ Or. reading irinr r«t Imrou with Hug after Hirschig« translate ' " and with
caTsliy I will lead on. " ' "Our Lady of Athens.*'


fcH. HI. % 4D-4^"i
iJecember J



A THRACIAN CAMPAIGN



2iS



fan try under arms. As soon as he had handed over to them
the promised guides, the heavy infantry took the van, followed
by the light troops in the centre, while the cavalry brought up
the rear. At daybreak Seuthes rode up to the front. He
complimented them on their method : so often had he him-
self, while marching by night with a mere handful of men,
been separated with his cavalry from his infantry. " But now,"
said he, " we find ourselves at dawn of day all happily together,
just as we ought to be. Do you wait for me here," he proceeded^
" and recruit yourselves. I will take a look round and rejoin
you." So saying he took a certain path over hill and rode off.
As soon as he had reached deep snow, he looked to see whether
there were footprints of human beings leading forward or in
the opposite direction ; and having satisfied himself that the
road was untrodden, back he came, exclaiming : " God will-
ing, sirs, it will be all right; we shall fall on the fellows,
before they know where they are. I will lead on with the
cavalry; so that if we catch sight of any one, he shall not
escape and give warning to the enemy. Do you follow, and
if you are left behind, keep to the trail of the horses. Once
on the other side of the mountains, we shall find ourselves
in numerous thriving villages."

By the middle of the day he had already gained the top
of the pass and looked down upon the villages below. Back
he came riding to the heavy infantry and said : " I will
at once send off the cavalry into the plain below, and the
peltasts too, to attack the villages. Do you follow with what
speed you may, so that in case of resistance you may lend us
your aid." Hearing this, Xenophon dismounted, and the
other asked : " Why do you dismount just when speed is the
thing we want ? " The other answered : •* But you do not
want me alone, I am sure. The hoplites will run all the
quicker and more cheerily if I lead them on foot"

Thereupon Seuthes went off, and Timasion with him, taking
the Hellene squadron of something like forty troopers. Then
Xenophon passed the order : the active young fellows up to
thirty years of age from the different companies to the front ;
and off with these he went himself, bowhng along ;^ while

' irf>6xa(fi a frwoiirite word with our author, Cf. C/r. II. iv. 3 ; IMl.


-BK. vir.



I CK. iir. i 4«5-CM. IV. t 5
I December, b,c, 4k



Cleanor led the other Hellenes. WTien they had reached
the villages, Seiithes, with about thirty troopers, rode up, ex-
claiming : " Well, Xenophon, this is just what you said ! the
fellows are caught, but now look here. My cavalry have gone
off unsupported ; they are scattered in pursuit, one here^ one
there, and upon my word, I am more than half afraid the
enemy will collect somewhere and do them a mischief. Some
of us must remain in the villages, for they are swarming with
human beings." "Well then," said Xenophon, ** 1 will seize
the heights with the men I have with me, and do you bid
Cieanor extend his line along the level beside the villages. "
When they had done so, there were enclosed — of captives for
the slave market, one thousand ; of cattle^ two thousand ; and
of other small cattle, ten thousand For the time being they
took up quarters there.

IV. — But next day Seuthes burnt the villages to the ground ;
he left not a single house, being minded to inspire terror in the
rest of his enemies, and to show them what they also were to
expect, if they refused obedience ; and so he went back again.
As to the booty, he sent off Heracleides to Perinthus to dis-
pose of it, with a view to future pay for the soldiers. But for
himself he encamped with the Hellenes in the lowland country
of the Thynians, the natives leaving the flats and betaking
themselves in flight to the uplands.

There was deep snow, and cold so intense that the water
brought in for dinner and the wine within the jars froze ; and
many of the Hellenes had their noses and ears frost-bitten.
Now they came to understand why the Thracians wear fox-
skin caps on their heads and about their ears; and' why, on the
same principle, they are frocked not only about the chest and
bust but so as to cover the loins and thighs as well ; and why
on horseback they envelop themselves in long shawls which
reach down to the feet, instead of the ordinary short rider's
cloak. Seuthes sent off some of the prisoners to the hills with
a message to say that if they did not come down to their
homes, and live quietly and obey him, he would burn down

VII. ii. 32. Herodotus uses it, ix. 66 i so does ArisioL //. .1. viii. a4. 4 ;
so also Polybius. x. ao. s ; but the Atticists condemn it. Lobeck, Phryn. 58* ,
except of course in poetry, e.g, Eur. Hel. 724.



CM. IV. 5 5-ia\
DecciTibcr r



EPISTHENES



«y



their villages and their corn, and leave them lo perish with
hunger. Thereupon down they came, women and children
and the older men ; the younger men preferred to quarter
themselves in the villages on the skirts of the hills. On
discovering this, Seuthes bade Xenophon take the youngest
of the heavy infantry and join him on an expedition. They
rose in the night, and by daybreak had reached the villages ;
but the majority of the inhabitants made good their escape,
for the hills were close at hand. Those whom he did catch,
Seuthes unsparingly shot down.

Now there was a certain Olynthian, named Episthenes ; he
was a great lover of boys, and seeing a handsome lad, just
in the bloom of youth and canying a light shield, about to
be slain, he ran up to Xenophon and supplicated him to rescue
the fair youth. Xenophon went to Seuthes and begged him
not to put the boy to death. He explained to him the
disposition of Episthenes ; ho\v he had once enrolled a com-
pany, the only qualification required being that of personal
beauty; and with these handsome young men at his side there
was none so brave as he. Seuthes put the que.'stion, " Would
you like to die in his behalf, Episthenes ?" whereat the other
stretched out his neck, and said, "Strike, if the boy bids you,
and will thank his preser\'er." Seuthes, turning to the boy,
asked, "Shall I smite him instead of you?" The boy shook
his head, imploring him to slay neither the one nor the other^
whereupon Episthenes caught the lad in his arms, exclaiming,
"It is time you did battle with me, Seuthes, for my boy; never
will I yield him up," and Seuthes laughed : ' what must be
must,' and so consented.

In these villages he decided that they must bivouac, so
that the men on the mountains might be still further deprived
of subsistence. Stealthily descending he himself found quar-
ters in the plain ; while Xenophon with his picked troops '■
encamped in the highest village on the skirts of the hills ; and
the rest of the Hellenes hard by, among the highland Thracians,'^
as they are called.

After this, not many days had idly slipt away before the
Thracians from the mountains came down and wished to



1 See above, p. 92, note r.



5 Cf, "Highlanders."


2lS



ANABASIS — BK. VIL



/ CH. fY. i T3-I7

t December, b.c. 40a



arrange with Seuthes for terms of truce and hostages. Siraul-
luneously came Xenophon and informed Seuthes that they
were camped in bad quarters, with the enemy next door ; "it
would be pleasanler too," he added, "to bivouac in a strong
position in the open, than under cover on the edge of
destruction/* The other bade him take heart and pointed
to some of their hostages, as much as to say " Look there \"
Parlies also from the mountaineers came down and pleaded
with Xenophon himself, to help arrange a truce for them
This he agreed to do, bidding them pluck up heart, and
assuring them that they would meet with no mischief, if they
yielded obedience to Seuthes. All their parleying, however,
was, as it turned out, merely to get a closer inspection of
things. This happened in the day, and in the following night
the Thynians descended from the hill country and made an
attack. In each case, the guide was the master of the house
attacked ; otherwise it would have taxed their powers to discover
the houses in the dark, which, for the sake of their flocks and
herds, were pahsaded all round with great stockades. As
soon as they had reached the doors of any particular house, the
attack began, some hurling in their speais, others belabouring
with their clubs, which they carried, it was said, for the purpose
of knocking off the lance points from the shaft Others were
busy setting the place on iire ; and they kept calling Xenophon
by name : *' Come out, Xenophon, and die like a man, or we
will roast you alive inside."

By this time too the flames were making their appearance
thfough the roof, and Xenophon and his followers were within,
with their coats of mail on, and big shields, swords, and helmets.
Then Silanus, a Macistian,^ a youth of some eighteen years,
signalled on the trumpet ; and in an instant, out they all leapt
with their drawn swords, and the inmates of the other quarters
as well The Thracians took to their heels, according to their
custom, swinging their light shields round their backs. As
they leapt over the stockade some were captured, hanging on
the top with their shields caught in the palings ; others missed
the way out, and so were slain ; and the Hellenes chased them
hotly, till they were outside the village.

* " Of Macistus," a town in ihe Triphylia near Scillus.


CH. TV. I Ifl-CH. V. S 1

December



THE THYNIANS SUBMIT



A party of Thynians turned back, and as the men ran past
in tjold relief against a blazing house, they let fly a volley of
javelins, out of the darkness into the glare, and wounded two
captains, Hieronymus, an Euodean/ and Theogenes, a Locrian.
No one was killed, only the clothes and baggage of some
of the men were consumed in the flames. Presently up came
Seuthes to the rescue with seven troopers, the first to hand,
and his Thracian trumpeter by his side. Seeing that some-
thing had happened, he hastened to the rescue, and ever the
while his bugler wound his horn, which music added terror to
the foe. Arrived at length, he greeted them with outstretched
hand, exclaiming, " I thought to find you all dead mea"

After that, Xenophon begged him to hand over the hostages
to himself, and if so disposed, to join him on an expedition
to the hills, or if not, to let him go alone. Accordingly the
next day Seuthes delivered up the hostages. They were men
akeady advanced in years, but the pick of the mountaineers,
as they themselves gave out. Not merely did Seuthes do this,
but he came himself, with his force at his back (and by this
time he had treble his former force, for many of the Odry-
sians, hearing of his proceedings, came down to join in the
campaign) ; and the Thynians, espying from the mountains
the vast array of heavy infantry and light infantry and cavalry,
rank upon rank, came down and supplicated him to make
terms. "They were ready," they professed, "to do all that he
demanded ; let him take pledges of their good faith." So
Seuthes summoned Xenophon and explained their proposals,
adding that he should make no terms with them, if Xenophon
wished to punish them for their night attack. The latter
replied : *' For my part I should think their punishment is great
enough already, if they are to be slaves instead of free men ;
still," he added, " I advise you for the future to take as hostages
those who are most capable of doing mischief, and to let the
old men bide in peace at home," So to a man they gave in
their adhesion in that quarter of the countrj'.

V. — Crossing over in the direction of the Thracians above

* If Lhis is the same man as Hieronymus of Elis, who has been mention (jd
two or tliree times already (see above, pp. 72. i&a, 200), possibly the word
E^Sia points to some town or district of Elis ; or perbAps the lexl is corrupt.


ANABASIS — ^BK. VII.



{CH. V. i t-8
Jannary, B.c 399



Byzantium, ihey reached the Delta, as it is called. Here they
were no longer in the territory of Maesades, but in the country
of Teres the Odrysian [an ancient worthy].^ Here Heracleide
noiet them with the proceeds of the spoil, and Seuthes picked"
out three pairs of mules (there were only three, the other teams
being oxen) ] then he summoned Xenophon and bade him take
them, and divide the rest between the generals and officers,
to which Xenophon replied that for himself, he was content to
receive his share another time, but added : "Make a present
of these to my friends here, the generals who have served
with me, and to the officers." So of the pairs of mules Tima-
sion the Dardanian received one, Cleanor the Orchomenian
one, and Phryniscus the Achaean one. The teams of oxen were
divided among the officers. Then Seuthes proceeded to remit
pay due for the month already passed, but all he could give
was the equivalent of twenty days. Heracleides insisted that
this was all he had got by his trafficking. Whereupon Xeno-
phon with some warmth exclaimed : *' Upon my word, Hera-
cleides, I do not think you care for Seuthes' interest as you
should. If you did, you would have been at pains to bring
back the full amount of the pay, even if you had had to raise
a loan to do so, and, if by no other means:, by selling the coat
off your own back."

What he said annoyed Heracleides, who was afraid of
being ousted from the friendship of Seuthes, and from that
day forward he did his best to calumniate Xenophon before
Seuthes. The soldiers, on their side, kid the blame of couree
on Xenophon : *' Where was their pay ?" and Seuthes was vexed
with him for persistently demanding it for them. Up to this
date he had frequently referred to what he would do when he
got to the seaboard again ; how he intended to hand over
to him Bisanthe, Ganos, and Neontichos.^ But from this
time forward he never mentioned one of them again. The
slanderous tongue of Heracleides had whispered him : — it was

^ See above, p. 207 ; the words " an ancient worthy " may possibly be an
editor's or commentator's note.

For Bisanthe see above, p, ao8, note 4. Ganos, a little lower do^n
the coast, with Neontichos once belonged to Alcibiades, if we may believe
Cornelius Nepos, Ak. \ii. 4, and Plutarch, A/i, c, 36. See above, p. 211,
note 2.


CH. ¥. 9 B-I4\

January /



HERACLEIDES



Mt



not safe to hand over fortified towns to a man with a force
at his back.

Consequeiritiy Xenophon fell to considering what he ought
to do as regards marching any further up the country ; and
Heracleides introduced the other generals to Seuthes, urging
them to say that they were quite as well able to lead the army
as Xenophon, and promising them that within a day or two
they should have ftill pay for two months, and he again im-
plored them to continue the campaign M'ith Seuthes. To which
Timasion replied that for his part he would continue no cam-
paign without Xenophon ; not even if they were to give him
pay for five months ;" and what Timasion said, Phryniscus
and Cleanor repeated ; the views of all three coincided.

Seuthes fell to upbraiding Heracleides in round terms.
"Why had he not invited Xenophon with the others?" and
presently they invited him, but by himself alone. He, per-
ceiving the knavery of Heracleides, and that his object was
to calumniate him with the other generals, presented himself j
but at the same time he took care to bring all the generals and
the officers- After their joint consent had been secured^ they
continued the campaign. Keeping the Pontus on their right,
they passed through the millet-eating ^ Thracians, as they are
called^ and reached Salmydessus. This is a point at which
many trading vessels bound for the Black Sea run aground
and are wrecked, owing to a sort of marshy ledge or sandbank
which runs out for a considerable distance into the sea.^ The
Thracians, who dwell in these parts, have set up pillars as
boundary marks, and each set of them has the pillage of its
own flotsom and jetsom ; for in old days, before they set up
these landmarks, the wreckers, it is said, used freely to fall
foul of and slay one another. Here was a rich treasure

' Or, " tbe Melitiophagi."

^ See, for a description of this savage coast, Aesch. Prom. vine. 726, etc-.*

"The rugged Salmydesian jaw of the Black Sea,
Inhospitable to sailors, stepmother of ships."

But the poet is at fault in his geography, since he connects "the Salmydesian
jaw "with the Tlicrmodon.


«2 ^^^ ANABASIS— BKL VIL (™ Fcbrii'rJ.Vc.j^J

trove, of beds and boxes numberless, with a mass of wTJtten
books, and all the various things which mariners carry in their
wooden chests. Having reduced this district, they turned
round and went back again. By this time the army of Seuthes
had grown to be considerably larger than the Hellenic army ;
for on the one hand, the Odr>'sians flocked down in still larger
numbers, and on the other, the tribes which gave in their
adhesion from time to time were amalgamated with his arma-
ment. They got into quarters on the flat country above
Selybrta at about three miles ^ distance from the sea. As
to pay, not a penny was as yet forthcoming, and the soldiers
were cruelly disaffected to Xenophon^ whilst Seuthes, on his
side, was no longer so friendlily dis{X5sed. If Xenophon ever
wished to come face to face with him, want of leisure or some
other difficulty always seemed to present itself.

VI. ^ — At this date, when nearly two months had already
passed, an embassy arrived. These were two agents from
Thibron— Charminus, a Lacedaemonian, and Polynicus. They
were sent to say that the Lacedaemonians had resolved to
open a campaign against TissaphemeSj and that Thibron, who
had set sail to conduct the war, was anxious to avail himself
of the troops. He would guarantee that each soldier should
receive a daric a month as pay, the ofiScers double pay, and
the generals quadruple. The Lacedaemonian emissaries had
no sooner arrived than Heracleides, having learnt that they
had come in search of the Hellenic troops, goes off himself
to Seuthes and says : ** The best thing that could have hap-
pened ; the Lacedaemonians want these troops and you have
done with them, so that if you hand over the troops to them,
you will do the Lacedaemonians a good turn and will cease
to be bothered for pay any more. The country will be quit of
them once and for ever."

On hearing this Seuthes bade him introduce the emissaries.
As soon as they had stated that the object of their coming
was to treat for the Hellenic troops, he replied that he would
willingly give them up, that his one desire was to be the
friend and ally of Lacedaemon. So he invited them to par-

1 Lit. ■ ' thirty stades. " Seljrmbria is about forty -four miles from Byzantium,
two^thirds of the way to Periiilhus. See above, p. 207.



CH. VI. f 3*io"l
FelmLary /



LACONIAN ENVOYS



233



take of hospitality, and entertained them magnificently ; but
he did not invite Xenophon, nor indeed any of the other
generals. Presently the Lacedaemonians asked : " What sort
of man is Xenophon ? " and Seuthes answered : " Not a bad
fellow in most respects; but he is too much the soldiers'
friend ; and that is why it goes ill with him." They asked :
"Does he play the popular leader?" and Heracleides an-
swered: "Exactly so," "Well then," said they, "he will
oppose our taking away the troops, will he not?" *'To be
sure he will," said Heracleides ; "but you have only to call a
meeting of the whole body, and promise them pay, and little
further heed will they pay to him ; they will run off with you."
"How then are we to get them conected?" they asked.
" Early to-morrow," said Heracleides, ** we will bring you to
them ; and I know," he added once more^. "as soon as they
set eyes on you, they will flock to you with alacrity." ^ Thus
the day ended.

The next day Seuthes and Heracleides brought the two
Laconian agents to the army, and the troops were collected,
and the agents made a statement as follows : " The Lacedae-
monians have resolved on war with Tissaphemes, who did you
so much wrong. By going with us therefore you will punish
your enemy, and each of you will get a daric a month, the
officers twice that sum, and the generals quadruple." The
soldiers lent willing ears, and up jumped one "of the Arcadians
at once, to find fault with Xenophon. Seuthes also was hard
by, wishing to know what was going to happen. He stood
within ear shot, and liis interpreter by his side ; not but what
he could understand most of what was said in Greek himself
At this point the Arcadian spoke : " For the matter of that,
Lacedaemonians, we should have been by your sides long ago,
if Xenophon had not persuaded us and brought us hither.
We have never ceased campaigning, night and day, the dismal
winter through, but he reaps the fruit of our toils. Seuthes
has enriched him privately, but deprives us of our honest
earnings \^ so that, standing here as I do to address you fii^t,
all I can say is, that if I might see the fellow stoned to death

^ Or, ' ' they will only be loo glad to concur hi your wishes."
* Or, "Of our pay," " our seruce-money. "


^4



ANABASIS— BK. VIT.



r CH. VI. i T0-16
{ February, b.c, 39^



as a penalt>' for all the long dance he has led us, I should feel
I had got my pay in foil, and no longer grudge the pains we
have undergone." The speaker was followed by another and
then another in the same strain; and after that Xenophon
made the following speech : —

" True is the old adage ; there is nothing which mortal
man may not expect to see. Here am I being accused by you
to-day, just where my conscience tells me that I have displayed
the greatest zeal in your behalf W^as I not actually on my road
home when I turned back ? Not, God knows, because I learned
that you were in luck's way, but because I heard that you
were in sore straits, and I wished to help you, if in any way
I could. I returned, and Seuthes yonder sent me messenger
after messenger, and made me promise upon promise, if only
I could persuade you to come to him. Yet, as you your-
selves will bear me witness, I M'as not to be diverted. In-
stead of setting to my hand to do that, I simply led you to a
point from which, with least loss of time, I thought you could
cross into Asia. This I believed was the best thing for you,
and you I knew desired it.

"But when Aristarchus came with his ships of war and
hindered our passage acrosSj you will hardly quarrel with me
for the step I then took in calling you together that we might
advisedly consider our best course. Having heard both sides,
— ^first Aristarchus, who ordered you to march to the Cher-
sonese, then Seuthes, who pleaded wth you to undertake a
campaign with himself, — you all proposed to go with Seuthes ;
and you all gave your votes to that effect. What wrong
did I commit in bringing you, whither you were eager to go ?
If, indeed, since the time when Seuthes began to tell lies and
cheat us about the pay, I have supported him in this, you
may justly find fault with me and hate me. But if I, who at
first was most of all his friend, to-day am more than any one
else at variance with him, how can I, who have chosen you
and rejected Seuthes, in fairness be blamed by you for the
very thing which has been the gronnd of quarrel between him
and me? But you will tell me, perhaps, that I get from
Seuthes what is by right yours, and that I deal subtly by
you? But is it not clear that, if Seuthes has paid me any-



r

^■CM. VI. I t

February



vi. I t6>a4\
/



xenophon's speech



225



hL



thing, he has at any rate not done so with the intention of
losing by what he gives me, whilst he is still your debtor?
If he gave to me, he gave in order thatj by a small gift to
me, he might escape a larger payment to yourselves. But if
that is what you really think has happened, you can render
this whole scheme of ours null and void in an instant by
exacting from him the money which is your due. It is clear,
Seuthes will demand back from me whatever I have got from
him, and he will have ail the more right to do so, if I
have failed to secure for him what he bargained for when I
took his gifts. But indeed I am far removed from enjoy-
ing what is yours, and I swear to you by all the gods and
goddesses that I have not taken even what Seuthes promised
me in private. He is present himself and listening, and he
is aware in his own heart whether I swear falsely. And
what will surprise you the more, I can swear besides, that I
have not received even what the other generals have received,
no, nor yet what some of the officers have received. But how
so? why have I managed my affairs no better? I thought,
sirSj the more I helped him to bear his poverty at the time, the
more I should make him my friend in the day of his power.
Whereas, it is just when I see the star of his good fortune
rising, that I have come to divine the secret of his character.

"Some one may say, are you not ashamed to be so taken
in like a fool ? Yes, I should be ashamed, if it had been an
open enemy who had so deceived me. But, to my mind, when
friend cheats friend, a deeper stain attaches to the perpetrator
than to the victim of deceit. Whatever precaution a man
may take against his friend^ that we took in full. We certainly
gave him no pretext for refusing to pay us what he promised.
We were perfectly upright in our dealings with him. We did
not dawdle over his affairs, nor did we shrink from any work
to which he challenged us.

" But you will say, I ought to have taken security of him
the time, so that had he fostered the wish, he might have
lacked the ability to deceive. To meet that retort, I must
beg you to hsten to certain things, which I should never have
said in his presence, except for your utter want of feeling
towards me, or your extraordinary ingratitude. Try and recall

Q


ANABASIS — BK. VI L



r CM. VI. §a4-30
(. February, B.C 395



the posture of your affairs, when I extricated you and brought
you to Seuthes, Do you not recollect how at Perinthus Aris-
tarchus shut the gates in your faces each time you offered to
approach the town,^ and how you were driven to camp outside
under the canopy of heaven ? It was midwinter ; you were
thrown upon the resources of a market wherein few were the
articles offered for sale, and scanty the wherewithal to purchase
them. Yet stay in Thrace you must, for there were ships
of war riding at anchor in the bay, ready to hinder your
passage across; and what did that stay imply? It meant
being in a hostile country, confronted by countless cavalry,
legions of light infantry- And what had we ? A heavy infantry-
force certainly, with which we could have dashed at villages
in a body possibly, and seized a modicum of food at most ;
but as to pursuing the enemy with such a force as ours, or
capturing men or cattle, the thing was out of the question ; for
when I rejoined you your original cavalry and light infanti)*
divisions had disappeared. In such sore straits you lay 1

"Supposing that, without making any demands for pay what-
ever, I had merely won for you the alliance of Seuthes — whose
cavalry and light infantry were just what you needed— would
you not have thought that I had planned very well for you?
I presume, it was through your partnership with him and his
that you were able to find such complete stores of corn in the
villages^ when the Thracians were driven to take to their heels
in such hot haste, and you had so large a share of captives
and cattle. Why I from the day on which his cavalry force
was attached to us, we never set eyes on a single foeman in
the field, though up to that date the enemy with his cavalrj'
and his light infantry used undauntedly to hang on our heels,
and eflectLially prevented us from scattering in small bodies and
reaping a rich har\'est of provisions. But if he who pardy
gave you this security has failed to pay in full the wages due
to you therefrom, is not that a terrible misfortune ? So mon-
strous indeed that you think I ought not to go forth alive.-

^ Reading ft vpocryre r^ ir6\€t, 'Apiffrapxoi iifiai k.t.K; or, if. with Hug
and others, reading oi;jf its fxiv H. rpoe^Tfe t^v iriXtv, 'Aplffrapxoi S'vuat, —
" Arisiarchus shui ihe gates in your fjacc, atid you never entered the town."
For the incident referred to see above.



I
I

I

I



I


CH. VI. f 31-37
February



}



IN SELF-DEFENCE



227



" But let me ask you, in what condition do you turn your
backs on this land to-day ? Have you not wintered here in
the lap of plenty ? Whatever you have got from Seuthes has
been surplus gain. Your enemies have had to meet the bill of
your expenses, whilst you led a merry round of existence, in
which you have not once set eyes on the dead body of a com-
rade or lost one living man. Again, if you have achieved any,
(or rather many) noble deeds against the Asiatic barbarian,
you have them safe. And in addition to these to-day you have
won for yourselves a second glory. You undertook a campaign
against the European Thracians, and have mastered them.
What I say then is, that these very matters which you make
a ground of quaiTel against myself, are rather blessings for
which you ought to show gratitude to heaven.

I " Thus far I have confined myself to your side of the matter.
Bear with me, I beg you, whilst we examine mine. When I
first essayed to part with you and journey homewards, I was
doubly blest From your lips I had won some praise, and,
thanks to you, I had obtained glory from the rest of Hellas.
I was trusted by the Lacedaemonians ; else would they not
have sent me back to you. WTiereas to-day I turn to go,
calumniated before the Lacedaemonians by yourselves, detested
in your behalf by Seuthes, whom I meant so to benefit, by
help of you, that I should find in him a refuge for myself and
for my children, if children I might have, in after time. And
you the while, for whose sake I have incurred so much hate,
the hate of people far superior to me in strength, you, for
whom I have not yet ceased to devise all the good I can,
entertain such sentiments about me* Why ? I am no rene-
gade or runaway slave, you have got hold of. If you carry
out what you say, be sure you will have done to death a man
who has passed many a vigil in watching over you ; who has
shared with you many a toil and run many a risk in turn and

•out of turn ; who, thanks to the gracious gods ! has by your
side set up full many a trophy over the barbarian ; who, lastly,
to save you from becoming the foes of your owm countrymen,
has strained every nerve in his body to protect you against
yourselves. And so it is, that to-day you can move freely,
where you choose, by sea or by land, and no one can say you


228



ANABASIS — BK. VIL



f CH. VI. »37M,,
\ February, B,c. 39^



nay ; and you, on whom this large Hberty dawns, who are
sailing to a long desired goal, who are sought after by the
greatest of military powerSj who have pay in prospect, and
for leaders these Lacedaemonians, our acknowledged chiefs :
now is the appointed time, you think, to put me to a speedy
death. But in the days of our difficulties it was very
different, O ye men of marvellous memory ! No ! in those
days you called me * father ! ' and you promised you would
bear me ever in mind, 'your benefactor,' Not so, however,
not so ungracious are those who have come to you to-day ;
nor, if I mistake not, have you bettered yourselves in their eyes
by your treatment of me."

With these words he paused, and Charminus the Lacedae-
monian got up and said: *' Nay, by the Twins, you are wrong,
surely, in your anger against this man ; I myself can bear
testimony in his favour. When Polynicus and I asked Seuthes,
what sort of a man he was ? Seuthes answered : — he had but
one fault to find with him, that he was too much the soldiers'
friend, which also was the cause why things went wrong with
him, whether as regards us Lacedaemonians or himself,
Seuthes."

Upon that Eurylochus of Lusia, an Arcadian, got up and
said (addressing the two Lacedaemonians), "Yes, sirs; and
what strikes me is that you cannot begin your generalship of us
better than by exacting from Seuthes our pay. Whether he like
it or no, let him pay in full ; and do not take us away before."

Polycrates the Athenian, who was put forward by Xeno-
phon,i said : "If my eyes do not deceive me, sirs, there stands
Heracleides yonder, the man who received the property won
by our toil, who took and sold it, and never gave back either to
Seuthes or to us the proceeds of the sale, but kept the money
to himself, like the thief he is. If we are wise, w^e will lay
hold of him, for he is no Thracian, but a Hellene ; and against
Hellenes is the wrongs he has committed."

When Heracleides heard these words, he was in great con-
sternation ; so he came to Seuthes and said : *' If we are wise
we will get away from here out of reach of these fellows." So
they mounted their horses and were gone in a trice, galloping to
^ Cf. Cyr&j^. L vl ig* ; and see above, p. u. note 2.



I
I



I



BK. VI. I 4a-CH. VII. f 5 ^
February i



MEDOSADES



M9



their own camp. Subsequently Seuthes sent Abrozelmes, his
private interpreter, to Xenophon, begging him to stay behind
with one thousand heavy troops; and engaging duly to deliver
to him the places on the seaboard, and the other things which
he had promised ; and then, as a great secret, he told him, that
he had heard from Polynicus that if he once got into the
clutches of the Lacedaemonians, Thibron was certain to put
him to death. Similar messages kept coming to Xenophon
by letter or otherwise from several quarters, warning him that
he was calumniated, and had best be on his guard. Hearing
which, he took two victims and sacrificed to Zeus the King :
" Whether it were better and happier to stay with Seuthes on
the terms proposed, or depart with the army?" The answer
he received was, "Depart"

viL— 'After this, Seuthes removed his camp to some con-
siderable distance ; and the Hellenes took up their quarters
in some villages, selecting those in which they could best supply
their commissariat, on the road to the sea. Now these par-
ticular villages had been given by Seuthes to Medosades.
Accordingly, when the latter saw his property in the villages
being expended by the Hellenes, he was not over well pleased ;
and taking with him an Odrysian, a powerful person amongst
those who had come down from the interior, and about thirty
mounted troopers, he came and challenged Xenophon to come
forth from the Hellenic host. He, taking some of the officers
and others of a character to be relied upon, came forward.
Then Medosades, addressing Xenophon, said : " You are doing
wrong to pillage our villages; we give you fair warning^I,
in behalf of Seuthes, and this man by my side, who comes
from Medocus, the king up country — to be gone out of the
land. If you refuse, understand, we have no notion of hand-
ing it over to you ; but if you injure our country we will
retaliate upon you as foes."

Xenophon, hearing what they had to say, replied : " Such
language addressed to us by you, of all people, is hard to
answer. Yet for the sake of the young man with you, I will
attempt to do so, that at least he may learn how different your
nature is from ours. We," he continued, " before we were your
friends, had the free mn of this countrj', moving this way or


230



ffABASIS — BK. VII,



{



CH. VIJ. I 5-14

February, b.c 399



►



that, as it took our fancy, pillaging and burning just as we
chose; and you yourself, Medosades, whenever you came to
us on an embassy, camped with us, without apprehension of
any foe. As a tribe collectively you scarcely approached the
country at all, or if you found yourselves in it, you bivouacked
with your horses bitted and bridled, as being in the territory of
your superiors. Presently you made friends with us, and, thanks
to usj by God's help you won this countr)-, out of which to-day
you seek to drive us ] a country which we held by our own
strength and gave to you. No hostile force, as you well know,
was capable of expelling us. It might have been expected of
you personally to speed us on our -way with some gift, in return
for the good we did you. Not so ; even though our backs are
turned to go, we are too slow in our movements for you.
You will not suffer us to take up quarters even, if you can help
it, and these words arouse no shame in you, either before
the gods, or this Odrj'sian, in whose eyes to-day you are a
man of means, though until you cultivated our friendship you
lived a robber's life, as you have told us. However, why do
you address yourself to me ? I am no longer in command.
Our generals are the Lacedaemonians, to whom you and yours
delivered over the army for withdrawal ; and that, without even
inviting me to attend, you most marvellous of men, so that if
I lost their favour^ w^hen I brought you the troops, I might
now win their gratitude by restoring them."

As soon as the Odrysian had heard this statement, he
exclaimed : " For my part, Medosades, I sink under the earth
for very shame at what I hear. If I had known the truth
before, I would never have accompanied you. As it is, I return
at once. Never would King Medocus applaud me, if I drove
forth his benefactors." With these words, he mounted his
horse and rode away, and with him the rest of his horse-
men, except four or five. But Medosades, still vexed by
the pillaging of the country, urged Xenophon to summon
the two Lacedaemonians ; and he, taking the pick of his men,
came to Charminus and Polynicus and informed them that
they were summoned by Medosades ; probably they, like
himself, would be warned to leave the country ; " if so," he
^ Or lit *'so that just as I incurred their hatred when," etc.


\



I



4



I

I
I



*



CH. vn. i t4-ao
February



}



CHARMINUS



n«



^



added, " you will be able to recover the pay which is owing to
the army. You can say to them, that the army has requested
you to assist in exacting their pay from Seuthes, whether he like
it or not ; that they have promised, as soon as they get this,
cheerfully to follow you ; that the demand seems to you to be
only just, and that you have accordingly promised not to leavCj
until the soldiers have got their dues/' The Lacedaemonians
accepted the suggestion : they would apply these arguments
and others the most forcible they could hit upon ; and with the
proper representatives of the army^"^ they immediately set ofE

On their arrival Charminus spoke : " If you have anything
to say to us, Medosades, say it ; but if not, we have something
to say to you." And Medosades submissively made answer :
'I say," said he, "and Seuthes says the same: we think
we have a right to ask that those who have become our
friends should not be ill-treated by you ; whatever ill you do
to them you really do to us, for they are a part of us."
^'Good !" replied the Lacedaemonians, "and we intend to go
away as soon as those who won for you the people and the
territory in question have got their pay. Failing that, we are
I coming without further delay to assist them and to punish
certain others who have broken their oaths and done them
wrong. If it should turn out that you come under this
head, when we come to exact justice we shall begin with you."
Xenophon added : " Would you prefer, Medosades, to leave it
to these people themselves, in whose country we are (your
friends, since that is the designation you prefer),^ to decide
by ballot, which of the two should leave the country, you or
we ?" To that proposal he shook his head, but he trusted
the two Laconians might be induced to go to Seuthes about
the pay, adding, " Seuthes, I am sure, will lend a willing ear ; "
or if they could not go, then he prayed them to send Xenophon
with himself, promising to lend the latter all the aid in his
power, and finally he begged them not to burn the villages.

E" igly they sent Xenophon, and with him a serviceable
Being arrived, he addressed Seuthes thus : —



' Or, "with the more important members."

^ Or, " they are your friends, you lell us."

' Or, "those who seemed fittest for such an expeditioa."



ANABASIS— BK. VII. { Febr^'lJc '^J^^

" Seuthes, I am here to advance no claims, but to shoxv you,
if I can, how unjust it was on your part to be angered with me
because I zealously demanded of you on behalf of the soldiers
what you promised them. According to my belief, it was no
less to your interest to deliver it up, than it was to theirs to
receive it. I cannot forget that, next to the gods, it was they
who raised you up to a conspicuous eminence, when they
made you king of large territory and many men, a position
in which you cannot escape notice, whether you do good or
do evil For a man so circumstanced, I regarded it as a great
thing that he should avoid the suspicion even of ungrateful part-
ing with his benefactors. It was a great thing, I thought, that
you should be well spoken of by six thousand human beings ;
but the greatest thing of all, that you should in no wise dis-
credit the sincerity of your own word. For what of the man
who cannot be trusted? I see that the words of his mouth
are but vain words, powerless, and unhonoured ; but with him
who is seen to regard truth, the case is otherwise. He can
achieve by his words what another achieves by force. If he
seeks to bring the foolish to their senses — ^his very kovm, I
perceive, has a more sobering effect than the chastisement
inflicted by another. Or in negotiations the ver}^ promises of
such an one are of equal weight with the gifts of another.

"Try and recall to mind in your own case, what advance
of money you made to us to purchase our alliance. You know
you did not advance one penny. It was simply confidence
in the sincerity of your word which incited all these men to
assist you in your campaign, and so to acquire for you an
empire, worth many times more than thirty talents,^ which
is all they now claim to receive- Here then, first of all,
goes the credit which won for you your kingdom, sold for so
mean a sum. Let me remind you of the great importance
which you then attached to the acquisition of your present
conquests. I am certain that to achieve what stands achieved
tonday, you would wilHngly have foregone the gain of fifty
times that paltry sum. To me it seems that to lose your
present fortune were a more serious loss than never to have
won it ; since surely it is harder to be poor after being rich



CH. rri. I 98-j5\
Fcbmarj' /



XENOPIION AND SEUTHES



233



^



than never to have tasted wealth at all, and more painful to
sink to the level of a subject, being a king, than ne\Tr to have
worn a crown.

** You cannot forget that your present vassals were not per-
suaded to become your subjects out of love for you, but by
sheer force; and but for some restraining dread they would
endeavour to be free again to-morrow. And how do you pro-
pose to stimulate their sense of awe, and keep thera in good
behaviour towards you? Shall they see our soldiers so dis-
posed towards you that a word on your part would suffice to
keep them now, or if necessary would bring them back again
to-morrow ? while others hearing from us a hundred stories in
your praise, hasten to present themselves at your desire? Or
will you drive them to conclude adversely, that through mistrust
of what has happened now, no second set of soldiers will come
to help you, for even these troops of ours are more their friends
than yours ? And indeed it was not because they fell short of
us in numbers that they became your subjects, but from lack
of proper leaders. There is a danger, therefore, now lest they
should choose as their protectors some of us who regard our-
selves as wronged by you, or even better men than us — the
Lacedaemonians themselves ; supposing our soldiers undertake
to serve with more enthusiasm, if the debt you owe to them be
first exacted ; and the Lacedaemonians, who need their ser-
vices, consent to this request. It is plain, at any rate, that
the Thracians, now prostrate at your feet, would display far
more enthusiasm in attacking, than in assisting you ; for your
mastery means their slavery, and your defeat their liberty.

"Again, the country is now yours, and from this time for-
ward you have to make provision for what is yours ; and how
will you best secure it an immunity from ill ? Either these
soldiers receive their dues and go, leaving a legacy of peace
behind, or they stay and occupy an enemy's country*, whilst
you endeavour, by aid of a still larger army, to open a new
campaign and turn them out ; and your new troops will also
need provisions. Or again, which will be the greater drain
on your purse ? to pay off your present debt, or, with that still
owing, to bid for more troops, and of a better quality ?

*' Heracleides, as he used to prove to me, finds the sum


234



ANABASIS — BK. VIT.



f CH. VTI. i 35-43
1 February, B.C. 399



excessive. But surely it is a far less serious thing for you to
take and pay it back to-day than it would have been to pay
the tithe of it, before we came to you ; since the limit between
less and tnore is no fixed number, but depends on the relative
capacity of payer and recipient, and your yearly income now is
larger than the whole property which you possessed in earlier
days.

" Well, Seuthes, for myself these remarks are the expression
of friendly forethought for a friend. They are expressed in the
double hope that you may show yourself worthy of the good
things which the gods have given you, and that my reputation
may not be ruined with the army. For I must assure you that
to-day, if I wished to injure a foe, I could not do so with this
army. Nor again, if I wished to come and help you, should I
be competent to the task ; such is the disposition of the
troops towards me. And yet I call you to witness, along with
the gods who know, that never have I received anything from
you on account of the soldiers. Never to this day have I, to
my private gain, asked for what was theirs, nor even claimed
the promises which were made to myself; and I swear to you,
not even had you proposed to pay me my dues, would I have
accepted them, unless the soldiers also had been going to
receive theirs too ; how could I ? How shameful it would
have been in me, so to have secured my own interests, whilst I
disregarded the disastrous state of theirs, I being so honoured
by them. Of course to the mind of Heracleides this is all silly
talk ; since the one great object is to keep money by whatever
means. That is not my tenet, Seuthes.^ I believe that no fairer
or brighter jewel can be given to a man, and most of all a prince,
than the threefold grace of valour, justice, and generosity. He
that possesses these is rich in the multitude of friends which
surround him ; rich also in the desire of others to be included
in their number. While he prospers, he is surrounded by
those who will rejoice with him in his joy; or if misfortune
overtake him, he has no lack of sympathisers to give him help.
However, if you have failed to learn from my deeds that I was,
heart and soul, your friend ; if my words are powerless to
reveal the fact to-day, I would at least direct your attention to

^ Or more lit, " but for my part, Sculhes, I believe," utc.


en. vu. § 43-51 \
February /



I



what the soldiers said ; you were standing by and heard what
those who sought to blame me said- They accused me to the
Lacedaemonians J and the point of their indictment was that I
set greater store by yourself than by the Lacedaemonians ;
but, as regards themselves, the charge was that I took more
pains to secure the success of your interests than their own.
They suggested that I had actually taken gifts from you. Was
it, do you suppose, because they detected some ill-will in me
towards you that they made the allegation ? Was it not rather,
that they had noticed my abundant zeal on your behalf?

"All men believe, I think, that a fund of kindly feeling
is due to him from whom we accept gifts. But what is your
behaviour? Before I had ministered to you in any way, or
done you a single service, you welcomed me kindly with
your eyes, your voice, your hospitality, and you could not
sate yourself with promises of all the fine things that were to
follow. But having once achieved your object, and become
the great man you now are, as great indeed as I could make
you, you can stand by and see me degraded among my own
soldiers ! Well, time will teach you — that I fully believe — to
pay whatever seems to you right, and even without the lessons
of that teacher you will hardly care to see those who have
spent themselves in benefiting you, become your accusers.
Only, when you do pay your debt, I beg of you to use your best
endeavour to right me with the soldiers. Leave me at least
where you found me ; that is all I ask."

After listening to this appeal, Seuthes called down curses
on him, whose fault it was, that the debt had not long ago been
paid, and, if the general suspicion was correct, this wag Hera-
cleides. "For myself," said Seuthes, "I never had any idea
of robbing you of your just dues. I will repay." Then Xeno-
phon rejoined : " Since you are minded to pay, I only ask that
you will do so through me, and will not suffer me on your
account to hold a different position in the army from what I
held when we joined you." He replied : ** As far as that
goes, so far from holding a less honoured position among your
own men on my account, if you will stay with me, keeping
only a thousand heavy infantry, I will deliver to you the forti-
fied places and everything I promised." The other answered :



4

4



-I



236



^ABASIS — BK. VIL



f CH. VII. S 51-CH. VIII. I t

\ February, B.C. 399



I



** On these terms I may not accept them, only let us go free."
" Nay, but I know," said SeotheSt *' that it is safer for you to
bide with me than to go away." Then Xenophon again : "For
your forethought I thank you, but I may not stay. Some-
where I may rise to honour, and that, be sure, shall redound
to your gain also." ^ Thereupon Seuthes spoke : "Of silver
I have but little ; thai little, however, I give to you, one talent ;
but of beeves I can give you six hundred head, and of sheep
four thousand, and of slaves six score. These take, and the
hostages^ besides, who wronged you, and begone." Xeno-
phon laughed and said : " But supposing these all together
do not amount to the pay ; for whom is the talent, shall I say ?
It is a little dangerous for myself, is it not ? I think I had
better be on the look-out for stones when I return.^ You
heard the threats?"

So for the moment he stayed there, but the next day
Seuthes gave up to them what he had promised, and sent an
escort to drive the cattle. The soldiers at first maintained
that Xenophon had gone to take up his abode with Seuthes,
and to receive what he had been promised ; so when they saw
him they were pleased, and ran to meet him. And Xenophon,
seeing Chamiinus and Polynicus, said : ** Thanks to your inter-
vention, thus much has been saved for the army. My duty is
to deliver this fraction over to your keeping ; do you divide and
distribute it to the soldiers." Accordingly they took the pro-
perty and appointed official vendors of the booty, and in the
end incurred considerable blame. Xenophon held aloof. In
fact it was no secret that he was making his preparations to
return home, for as yet the vote of banishment had not been
passed at Athens.* But the authorities in the camp came to
him and begged him not to go away until he had conducted
the array to its destination, and handed it over to Thibron.

vni. — From this place they sailed across to Lampsacus,

1 Vide HelUnica, III. iu 9. ' See above, p. 319.

' See above, p. 323.

* i.t. "at ihis momenl the vole of banishment had not been passed which
would prevent his relum to Athens." The natural inference from these words
is, I think, that the vole of banishment was presently passed, at any rate con-
siderably earlier than the battle of Coronea in B,c, 394, five years and a haU^
afterwards.


FebSiV'^} MEETS EUCLEIDES AT LAM PSACUS 237

and here Xenophon was met by Eudeides the soothsayer, a
Phliasian, the son of Cleagoras, who painted '^the dreams"^ in
the Lyceum. Eucleides congratulated Xenophon upon his
safe return, and asked him how much gold he had got ? and
Xenophon had to confess : " Upon my word, 1 shall have
barely enough to get home, unless I sell my horse, and what
I have about my person." The other could not credit the
statement. Now when the Lampsacenes sent gifts of hos-
pitality to Xenophon, and he was sacrificing to Apollo, he
requested the presence of Eucleides ; and the latter, seeing the
victims, said: "Now I believe what you said about having
no money. Bat I am certain, " he continued, " if it were
ever to come, there is an obstacle in the way. If nothing else,
you are that obstacle yourself." Xenophon admitted the
force of that remark. Then the other : " Zeus Meilichios ^ is
an obstacle to you, I am sure," adding in another tone of voice,
" have you tried sacrificing to that god, as I was wont to
sacrifice and offer whole burnt offerings for you at home ? "
Xenophon replied that since he had been abroad, he had
not sacrificed to that god. Accordingly Eucleides counselled
him to sacrifice in the old customary way : he was sure that
his fortune would improve. The next day Xenophon went on
to Ophrynium and sacrificed, offering a holocaust of swine, after
the custom of his family, and the signs which he obtained were
favourable. That very day Bion and Nausicleides arrived laden
with gifts for the army. These two were hospitably entertained
by Xenophon, and were kind enough to repurchase the horse he
had sold in Lampsacus for fifty darics ;^ suspecting that he had
parted with it out of need, and hearing that he was fond of the
beast they restored it to him, refusing to be remunerated

From this place they marched through the Troad, and, cross-
ing Mount Ida, arrived at Antandrus, and then pushed along the
seaboard of Mysia to the plain of Thebe.* Thence they made

^ Reading ra i^^'yTrrto, or if ri iyrolj^ia with Hug and others, translale
" the wall-paintings " or the " frescoes." Others think that a writing, not a
painting, is referred to.

3 Zeus Meilichios, or the gentle one. See Thur. i. 126. The festival of
the Diasia at Athens was in honour of that god, or rather of Zeus under that
aspect. Cf Arist. Clouds, 40B. * About " fifty guineas."

* Thebe, a famous ancient town in Mysia, at the southern foot of Mt,


AXASASSS BK. TIL


dM vaf thiXfo^ Adamjuam and Ce i Tooos* fay- AtMnaa,
eooM^ into tbc plaao of the Caioa^ axKi so readied Png<iaBri
in MfRL

HefeXenophoo vashosjjifiablj cmeitznied at diefaoose of
Hdht, the wile of Gongjius the Eietnan,* the mother of
Corgioa and Goagyhis. Fioa her he leant that Asadaits,
a Peraan notahie^ vai m the pfatin. ** If joa take tfaiitj men
and go by nig^ yoo wiU take him pnsoDer," she said,
"wife, diildren, money, and all ; of moaey he has a store ;**
and to show them the way to these treasures^ she sent her ovn
cousin and Daphnagoras, whom she set great store by. So
then Xenophon, with these two to assist, did sacrifice ; and
Basias, an Eleian, the soothsayer in attendance, said that the
victims were as promising as could be, and the great man
would be an easy prey. Accordingly, after dinner he set oSt,
taking with him the officers who had been his staunchest
friends and confidants throughout ; as he wished to do them
a good turn. A number of others came thrusting themselves
on their company, to the number of six hundred, but the
officers repelled them : " They had no notion of sharing their
portion of the spoil," they said, "just as though the property
lay already at their feet."

About midnight they arrived The slaves occupying the
precincts of the tower, with the mass of goods and chattels,
slipped through their fingers, their sole anxiety being to
capture Asidates and his belongings. So they brought their
batteries to bear, but failing to take the tower by assault
(since it was high and solid, and well supplied with ramparts,
besides having a large body of warlike defenders), they en-
deavoured to undermine it The wall was eight clay bricks
thick, but by daybreak the passage was effected and the wall
undermined. At the first gleam of light through the aperture,

Haciiw, which is often Tnenlioned in Homer (//, j. 366, vi. 397. xxii. 479,
11. 691). Sec Dkt. 6'rtjf. J. v. The name GiJ^^j ireSloy preserves the site.
f:f. above Kadtrrpov irfdiaift and such modern nnmes as "the Campagtia "
ur " Piano di Sorrento," " Salisbury Plain " etc

' The site of Ccrtonus is not asoertained. Some critics have conjectured
ihat the name should be Cytoniuni, a place between Mysia and Lydia ; and
Hlig, who reads KMTuiflev, ornhs oSivffavTa rap" ATappia," they made their
way by Atarneus," as a gloss.

» a. Thuc, i. ia8 ; also ffi/i. III. i. 6.


CH. vm. § x+'ia't

February /



CAPTURE OF ASIDATES



^9



one of the defendanls inside, with a large ox-spit, smote right
through the thigh of the man nearest the hole, and the rest
discharged their arrows so hotJy that it was dangerous to
come anywhere near the passage ; and what with their shout-
ings and kindling of beacon fires, a relief party at length
arrived, consisting of Itabelius at the head of his force, and
a body of Assyrian heavy infantry from Comania, and some
Hyrcanian cavalry,^ the latter also being mercenaries of the king.
There were eighty of them, and another detachment of light
troops, about eight hundred, and more from Parthenium, and
more again from Apollonia and the neighbouring places, also
cavalry.

It was now high time to consider how they were to beat a
retreat So seizing all the cattle and sheep to be had, with the
slavesj they put them within a hollow square and proceeded to
drive them off. Not that they had a thought to give to the
spoils now, but for precaution's sake and for fear lest if they
left the goods and chattels behind and made off, the retreat
would rapidly degenerate into a stampede, the enemy growing
bolder as the troops lost heart For the present then they
retired as if they meant to do battle for the spoils. As soon
as Gongylus espied how few the Hellenes were and how large
the attacking party, out he came himself, in spite of his mother,
with his private force, wishing to share in the action. Another
too joined in the rescue,^ — Procles, from Halisarna and Teu-
thrania, a descendant of Damaratus. By this time Xenophon
and his men were being sore pressed by the arrows and sling-
stones, though they marched in a curve so as to keep their
shields facing the missiles, and even so, barely crossed the
river Carcasus, nearly half of them wounded. Here it was
that Agasias of Stymphalus, the captain, received his wound,
while keeping up a steady unflagging fight against the enemy
from beginning to end. And so they reached home in safety
with about two hundred captives, and sheep enough for
sacrifices,

^ The H>Tcanian cavalry play an imporiant part in the Cyropaedeia,
They are the Scirites of the Assyrian army who came over to Cyrus after the
lirst battle. Their country is the fertile land touching the south-eastern corner
of the Caspian. Cf. Cyrop. IV. ii, 3, where the author (or an editor) appends
a note on the present status of the Hyncanians.


240



ANABASIS BK. VIL



(en. yui. i fl»9«
\Mudi. B.C 399



The next day Xenophon sacrificed and led out the whole
army under cover of night, intending to pierce far into the
heart of Lydia with a view to lulling to sleep the enemy's
alarm at his proximity^ and so in fact to put him ofT his guard.
But Asidates, hearing that Xenophon had again sacrificed with
the intention of another attack, and was approaching with his
whole army, left his tower and took up quarters in some
villages lying under the town of Farthenium. Here Xenophon's
party fell in with him, and took hira prisoner, with his wife, his
children^ his horses, and all that he had ; and so the promise
of the earlier victims was literally fulfilled. After that they
returned again to Pergamus, and here Xenophon might well
thank dod with a warm heart, for the I^conians, the officers,
the other generals, and the soldiers as a body united to give
him the pick of horses and cattle teams, and the rest ; so that
he was now in a position himself to do another a good turn.

Meanwhile Thibron arrived and received the troops, which
he incorporated with the rest of his Hellenic forces,* and
so proceeded to prosecute a war against Tissaphernes and
Pharnabazus.-

^ The MSS, add : **The following is a list of the governors of die
several territories of the king which were traversed by us during the expedi-
tion ; Artituas, governor of Lydia ; Artacanias, of Phrygia ; Mithridates,
of Lycaonia and Cappadoda ; Syennesis, of Cilicia ; Demes, of Phoemcin
and Arabia ; Belesys, of Syria and Assyria ; Rhoparas, of Babylon ;
Arbacas, of Media j Tiribazus, of the Phasians antl Hespe rites, Then
some independent tribes— the Carduchians or Kurds, and Chalybes, and
Chaldaeans, and Macrones, and Colchians, and Mossynoecians, and
Coetians, and Tibarenians. Then Corylas, the governor of Paphlagonia ;
Phamabazus, of the Bithynians ; Seuthes, of the European Thracians.
The entire journey, ascent and descent, consisted of two hundred and fifteen
stages = one thousand one hundred and fifty-five parasangs = thirty- four
thousand six hundred and fifty stades. Computed in lime, the length of
ascent and descent together amounted to one year and three months."
The annotator apparently computes the distance from Ephesus to Cotyora,
See above, j^ttak 11. ii. 6, p. 44, note i, coippaied with j4nad. V. v. 4,
p. i47j note 1,


.


TBJ; S£^


*'



SI

ti
o.
ai
A
s<
C
C
P
T

St

tfc
as
T
S«
P-


Abrocomas, an enemy of Cyriis, posted
on llie Euphrates, Anai, L iii, 20,
p. 12 ; some Greek mercenaries
revolt from him to Cjtus. I. iv, 3.
p. 14; makes no defence, I. iv. 5,
p. 14 ; had burnt ships to prevent
Cyrus crossing the Euphrates, I. iv.
18, p. 17; arrived five days too late
for the battle, I. vii. 12. p. 35

Abrozelroes, Seulhes" private inter -
preier. Ana5. VII. vi. 43, p. 229

Achaean s, the, with the Arcadians
formed numerically the larger half
of the army, A nab, VI. ii. lo^ p,
175, See under Arcadians

Acherixsian Chersonese, Anat. VI. ii.
2, p. 173

Adramjlium , A nab. VII. viii. 8, p.
238

Aeetes, Anab. V. vi.. 37, p. 157

P Aeneas of Stympbalus killed, AnaL
IV. viL 13, p. 124
Aenianians. the, among the troops of
Menon, Anab. I. ii. 6, p. 6 ; and
the Magnesians dance the Carpaea,
VI. i 7, p. 16a
Aeolid, Anab. V. vi. 24, p. 154
Aeschines, an Acamanian, Anab. IV.
iii, 22, p. 108 ; IV. viii. 18, p- 129
^ Aga^ias of Stymphalus, an officer oi
the heavy infantry, Anab. III. i. 37,
p. 73: IV. i. 27, p. 100; his
bravery, IV. vii, ii, p. 123; V.
ii. 15, p. 137 ; ridicule.'i the eager-
ness of the Lacedaemonians for


power, VT, i. 30, p. 173 ; goes as
ambassador to Heraclea, VI. ii. 7,
p. 174 ; with other seniors of the
Arcadians disapproves of renniting
the army at Calpe, VI. iv. lo, p.
183 ; rescues a soldier from Dex-
ippus, VI. vi. 7, p. 190 : his de-
fence before Clean der, VI, vi. 17,
p. 192 foil.; is wounded, VII. viii.

19. P- 239

Agesilaus, his march into Boeolia,
Anab. V. iii. 6, p. 130

Agias, an Arcadian, one of the five
generals arrested by Tissaphenies,
Anab. II. v. 31, p. 59 ; decapi-
tated, II. vi. I, p. 61 ; his fine
character, IL vi. 30, p. 66

Amazons, battle-axe like these worn
by the, Anab. IV. iv. 16, p. 112

AmbracioL See Silanus

Amphicrates, an Athenian officer,
Anab. IV. ii. 13 foil,, p. 103

Anaxibius, Lacedaemonian admiral,
friend of Cheirisophus, Anab. V. i.
4 J p. 132 ; sends compliments and
promises by Cheirisophus to army
at Sinope, VI. i. 16, p. 169 ; his
power, VL vi. 13, p, 191 ; Phama-
bazus begs him to convey the array
out of Asia ; promises compliance
with his wishes, VII. i. i. p. 196;
promises pay to the army if they
cross the strait ^ presses Xenophoti
not to leave till then. ib. 3 foil.,
p. 196 ; breaks faith and orders



R



INDEX



ihem off, id. 7 folL* p, 197 ; adds
further threats, ik n, p. 197;
orders them off to the Chersonese,
it. 13, p. 1^7 r flees in terror lo
the citadel, ik ao, p. 199 ; takes
further steps lo be rid of them, ib.
34 foil, p. aoi ; admits Xenophon
on certain terms, ii» 39, p. 202 ;
leaves Byjantium, VIL ii. 5, p.
203 ; deceived in Phamabazus.
sends Xenophon back to the army,
ib. 8, p. 203 ; Aristarchus's opposi-
tion to, f*. 13. p. 204
Aniandrus, A nab, VII. vjil 7, p,

Antileon, of Thurii, Ana6. V. i. 3, p,

I3»

Apollo, and Marsyas, Anab. I. ii, 8,
p. 5 ; Xenophon' 5 dedicatory offer-
ing to, V. iii. 4. p. 140 ; Xenophon
sacrifices at Lampsaciis to, \'ll.
viii, 3, p. 237

Apollonia, a town of Mysia, Anab.
VIL viii. 15, p. 239

Apolionides, a faint-hearted officer,
degraded, AnaL III. i. 36'32, p.
71 foil.

Arabia, Anaib. I. v. i, p. 17 ; VI 1.
viti, 35, p. 240 note

Araxes, the river, Artab. I, iv, jg, p,

«7

Arbaces, one of the four generals of
Artaxerxes, Anab, 1. vii. 13, p. 35 ;
governor of Media, VII. viii. 35, p,
240 nott

Arcadians and Achaeans form numeri-
cally Ihe larger half of the array,
Anab, VL ii. 10 foil., p. 175 foil. ;
separate at Heraclea, with the
Achaeans, from the rest of the
army, V[. ii. 12, p. 175 ; set snil
first and disembark at Caipe Haven,
VI, jii, I foil,, p. 176 ; get into
great danger and are rescued by
Xenophon 's division, VI. iii. r/foll.,
p. i79folL; their dance, VI. L 11,
p. 1 68 ; an Arcadian blanies Xeno-
phon before the Laconian envoy.
VIL vi. 8, p. 223

Archagoras, an Argive exile, an officer.
Anab, IV. ii. 13-17, p, 103

Arexion, an Arcadian soothsayer,



Anab. VI. iv. 13, p. 182 ; VT. -v,
2, p. 185 ; VI. V. 8, p. 186
Argo, the ship, Anab. VI. iii. i, p,

.\riaeus, the friend of Cyrus, com-
mands his left wing in the battle,
Anab. L viii. 5. p. 27 ; perceiving
fall of Cyms, betakes himself to
flight, I. ix. 31, p, 35 ; the generals
offer to place him on the king's
throne, II. i. 4, p. 40; declines, II.
ii, I , p. 43 ; exchange of oaths be-
tween, and the Hellenes, II, ii. 8
foil., p. 44; his proposed route
home, H. ii, 11, p. 44 ; receives over-
tures from the king, and pays less
attention to the Hellenes, IL iv. i
foil, p. 50 foil, ; suspicious be-
haviour on the part of, IL iv. 9
foil., p. 52 ; at the Tigris, ii. 15
foil., p. S3 ; brings a message from
the king after the arrest of the
generals, 11. v. 35, p. 60; is
answered by Cleanor and Xeno-
phon, ib. 39 foil., p. 60 foil.

Aristarchus succeeds Cleander as
Laconian governor at Byzaniitim ;
sells no less than four hundred of m
the Cyreian troops, AnaA. VIL ii.
5 foil. , p. 303 ; instigated by Phar-
nabazus, prevents the army crossing
over from Perinthus into Asia, VII.
ii. 12, p. 204 ; VII. vi, 13. p. 224 ;
VIL vi. 24, p. 226 ; plots against
Xenophon, VIL ii, 14, p. 204; is
foiled, VIL iii. a foil,, p. ao8 foil.

Aristeas, of Chios, a captain of light
infantry, Anab. IV. i. a8, p. 101 ;
IV. vi. 20. p. 121

Aristippus, the Thessalian, receives
money and troops from Cyrus,
Anab. I. i. 10, p. 3 ; friendship
with Menon, IL vi 28. p, 65

Arislon, an Athenian, Anab, V, vi,
14, p. 152

.^ristonjTnus, of Methydrium, a heavy
infantry officer, Anab. IV. L 27, p.
100 ; IV. vi. 20, p. lai ; his
bravery, IV. vii. 9. p, 123

Armenia, Anai. HI, v, 17, p. 96;
sources of Tigris and Euphr.ates in,
IV. i. 3, p. 97 ; the Centriies, the



INDEX



S43



fronljer river between, and the
country of the Carduchians, IV. iii.
I, p. 105 ; the hills of, IV. iiu ao,
p. 108

Arroenia, Western, .4 nab. IV. iv. 4, p.
ito ; boys play the part of waiters,
IV. V. 33, p, 118 ; the horses of.
IV. V. 36 foil., p. 118 foil

Artacamas, Eovemorof Phrygia./iwa^.
VII. viii. 25, p. 240 noie

Artagerses, general in command of
Artaxerxes' cavalry, J-/ wtf^. I. vii. 11,
p. 25 ; slain by Cyrus with hU own
hand, I. viii. 24, p. 30

Arlaozm, like Ariaeus, had been a
tnisty friend to Cyrus, Anah, II.
Iv. 16, p. 53 ; his conduct after the
murder of the generals, II. v. 35,
p. 60

Artapates. the trustiest of Cyrus's
M'and- bearers, A nab. I. vi. 11, p.
23 ; slain upon the body of Cyrus,
I. viii, 28, p, 3 J

Artaxerxes, elder brother to Cyrus ;
Ana/r. I. i. r, p. 1 ; succeeds his
father Darius. I. i. 3, p. i ; wounded
by Cyrus, attended by Ctesias, I.
viii. 26, p. 30 ; plunders the camp
of CjTus, 1. X. I. p. 3S : bids the
Hellenes surrender their arms, II. i.
id, p. 40; is taken aback by the
approach of the army, II. iii. i, p.
46 ; oaths and pledges exchanged
between him and the Hellenes, II.
iii. 25, p. so ; his natural brother
leads an army to assist him, II. iv.

25- P- 54

Artemis of the Ephesians, temple of,
Anab. I. vi, 7, p. 22 ; yearly sacri-
fice at Athens to, III. ii, t%, p, 77 ;
a tiihe of the spoils selected for
Apollo and, divided between the
generals at Cerasus, V. iii. 4, p.
140 ; what Xenophon did with the
gift for, V, iii. 9, p. 141

Artimas, governor of Lydia, Anab.
VI L viii. 35, p. 240 note

Artudias, mercenaries of, Anab. IV.
iii. 4, p. 105

Arystas, an Arcadian, a huge eater,
^^ Anab. VII. iii. 33, p. 21a
^^Asidates, a Persian notable, Ana^.



I

I



VII. viii. 9, p. 238: VIL viii. 15,

p. 239 ; capture of, by Xenophon,

VII. viii. 22, p. 340
Aspendians, Anab. 1, ii, 12, p. 6
Assyria, Anab. VII. \Hii. 25, p. 240

note
Assyrian heavy infantry from Coniania.

Anab. VII, viii. 15, p. 239
Atarneus, a city in the Aeolid, Anab.

VII. viii, 8, p. 238
Athenaia, Anab. VI 1. iii. 39, p. 214
Athenians, the, valour of, in Persian

wars, Anab. III. ii. 11, p. 77 ; ' are

clever at stealing public moneys,'

IV, vi. 16, p. j2or power of, at
beginning of Peloponnesian war,
VII, i. 27 foil., p. J99 foil. ; rela-
tionship of, to Thracians, VII. ii.
31, p. 207 and note ; treasury of, at
Delphi, V. iii. 5, p. 1+0

Babylon, Anab. II. ii. 6, p. 44 note ;

V. V. 4, p. 147 node
Babylonia, Anab. I, vii, i, p, 23 ; !I.

ii. 13, p. 45 .
Basias, an Arcadian, Anab. IV. i. 18,
p. 99
. Bosias, an Eleian, a soothsaj^r, Anab
' VII. viji. 10. p. 238
] Belesys, ruler of Sj-ria, Anab. I. iv.
10, p, 5 ; governor of Syria and
Assyria, VI l. viii. 35, p. 240 note
Bioti, a Laconian envoy, buys back
Xenophons horse for him. Anab.
VII. viii. 6, p. 237
Bisanthe, a fortress on the Proponlis,
Afiab. VIL ii. 38, p. 208 ; VII. v.

8, p. S20

Bithynians, the, Anab. VI. ii. 17, p.

176
Bithynian Thracians, the, .4nab. VI.

iv. 2, p. l3o; VII. viii. 25, p. 240

note
Boeoda, Anal), V. iii, 6, p. 140
Boiscus, the boxer, a Thessalian,

Anab. V. viii. 23, p. 166
Bj'zanlines, the, in panic, Anab. VII.

i. 19, p. 198 ; al sixes and sevens,

it. 39, p. 302
Byzantium, Cleander the Spartan,

governor at, -^i«fl^. VI. ii. 13, p. 175;

Anaxiblus, Spartan admiral, being



244



1NI>EX


in, agrees with Phamabarus to
convey Ihe Hellenic army out of
Asia, VI!. 1. 1. p. 196; Ihe Hellenes
cross to, it. 7, p. 197 ; in danger
of being sacked « U. 13, p. 198 ;
before the war, Iwlonged to Athens,
ih. 27, p. 200 ; Xenophon asks to
enter, ib. 38, p. 201 ; Aristarchus
succeeds Cleander as governor of,
VII. il 5, p. 203 ; four buudred of
the Cyreians sold by ,\ristarchus in,
i^. 6, p. 203

Caenae, eity on the Tigris, Anair. TIL
iv. 28, p. ss

Calcus, the plain of the, A nab. VII.
viii. 8, p. 238

Callimachus, an Arcadian, captain of
the heavy armed, Anah. IV. i. 27,
p. 100; IV. vii. 8, p. 123; his
bravery. IV. vii. 10, p. 123 ; sent
as ambassador to Si nope, V. vi.
14, p, 153 ; to Heraclca, VI. li. 7,
p. 174 foil. ; a ringleader in detach-
ing the Arcadians and Acbaeans
from the army, VI. ii. 9 foil. , p, 174

Caipe Haven, Anai. VI. ii. 13, p.
175 ; VI, ii. 17, p. 176 ; VI. iiL i,
p. 176 ; VI. iv. I, p. 180

Cappadocia, Anat. I. ii. ao, p. 7 ; T. ix.
7, p. 32 ; VII. viii. 25, p. 240 nok

Carcasus, the river, A nab. VII. viii.
18, p. 239

Carduchians, the, or Kurds, a people
dwelling on the hills addicted to war
and not subject to the king, Anai.
III. V. 16 foil., p. 95 foil. ; V. V,
17, p, 148 ; VII. viLi. 35, p. 240
foil.; Hellenes resolve to force a
passage into territory of, III. v. 17,
p. 96 ; IV. i, 2, p. 97 folL ; will
not be friendly, IV. i. 8 foil., p. 98;
harassing attacks of. IV. i. 16 foil.,
p. 99 foil; occupy a pass, IV. i.
19 foil, , p. 100 ; are with difficulty
dislodged, IV, ii. i foil, p. loi ;
dwellings of, had their wine in
cemented cisterns, IV. i. 22, p.
104 ; methods of fighting, excellent
archers, IV. ii. 24folL,p. 104 foil.;
the seven days spent in traversing
the country of, a continuous battle,



IV. iiL 2, p. 105 ; threaten the rear
of the enemy at the passage of the
Centrites, IV. iiL 7 foil., p. 106
fofl.

Carsus, a river of Cilicia, Anab, I. iv.

4, {>• 14
Castolus, plain of the, Anab. I. i. 2,

p. I ; 1. ix. 7, p. 32
Caystm-pedion, Anab. 1. ii. tl. p. 6
Cclaenae, city of Phrygia, Anai. I. ii.

7 foil., p. 5
Centrites, frontier river between Ar-
menia and Carduchia, Anai. IV.

ill. I, p. 105 : IV. iii. 15, p. 107
Cephisodoms, an Athenian, Anai. TV.

ii. 13, p, 103 ; is killed, IV. ii. 17,

p. 103
Ceram6a -agora, a populous city on

the confines of Mysia, Anai. I. ii,

10, p. 6
Cerasus, a Hellenic city on the sea.

colony of Sinope in Colchis, Anai.

V. iii. 2, p. 139 ; V. v. 10, p. 148 ;
V. viii. 13 fall., p. 159 foil,

Cerberus, the dog, Anab. VI. ii. a, p.

173

Certonus, perhaps this should be
Cjrtonium, Anai. VII. viii. 8, p. 238 4
and note i

Chalccdon, or Calchcdon, Anai. VII.
i. 20, p. 199; VII, ii. 24-36, p. 206

Chakedonis, or more properly Ca.1-
chedonia, Anab. VI. vi. 38, p. 195

Chaldaean mercenaries, Anab. IV. iii.
4, p. 105 ; V. V. 17, p. 148 ; VII.
viii. 25, p, 240 no/(

Chalus, the river. Anai. L iv. 9, p. 15

Chalybes, the Armenian, Anai. IV.
Y. 34, p, 118 ; VII. viii. 25, p. 240
na/e ; mercenaries of Tiribajrus. IV.
iv. 18, p. 112 : encounter Hellenes,
IV. vi. 5, p. 119 ; their bravery and
dress, IV. vii. 15, p. 124 ; a differ-
ent tribe, subject to the Moss)rnoe-
cians, V. v. i, p, 146

Charmande, city on the Euphrates,
Anai. !. v. 10, p. 19

Chamiinus. a Lacedaemonian, an
agent of Thibron, Anab. VII, vL 1,
p. 222 ; VII. vi, 39, p.

Cheirisophus, the Lacedaemonian,
joins Cyrus with seven



I
I



I



O. V II, VL I, H
228 ■

?daemoniant H
en hundredfl



INDEX



24S



hoplites, Anab. I. iv. 3, p. 13 ; sent
by Clearchus to Ariaeus, II. i. 5, p.
40 ; and Xenophon, III. i. 45, p.
74; IlL iii. II, p. 84 ; III. iv. 38
foil., p, 91 folL ; IlL V. 4, p. 93
foil.; IV, i.-Wu passim, p. 97 foil.;

■ IV. V. 9, p, 114; addresses the
new generals, III. ii. a folL, p. 74
foil.; and MiLhndates. IlL iii. 3, p,
82 foil. ; sole ground of difference
between, and Xenophon, IV. vi. i
foil., p. 118 foil.; raillery between,
and Xenophon about stealing;. IV.
vi. 16, p. lao ; storms a Taochian
fortress, IV. vii. 2 foil., p. 12a foil.;
IV. viii. 16, p. 129 ; at Trapezus.
proposes to go and get vessels from
Anaxibitis, and is sent, V. i. 4 foil.,
p. 132 foil. ; delay in returning, V.
iii. I foil., p. 139 foil.; represented
by Neon at Cerasus, V, iii. 4, p,
140 ; rejoins army at Sin ope with a
single ship, V'l. i. 16. p. 169 ; chosen
sole commander, VI. i. 32, p. 172;
deprived of sole command within
less than a week, VL ii. i^, p. 175;
marches with one division from
V Heraclea, VI. ii. r8,p. 176; reaches
Calpe Haven, VL iii. lOj p. 17S ;
dies, VI. iv. ii, p. 182

Chersonese, the Tbracian, Anat. I. i,
9, p. 3 ; n. vi. 2, p. 67 ; V. vi. 25,
p. 154 ; VI 1. i. i3j p, 198

Chrysopolis, in Chalcedonia, Anab.
VL iii. 16, p. 178; VL vi. 38, p.
'95 ; VIII, i. I, p. 196

Cilicia, Anab. L ii. 21, p. 8 ; I. iv. 4,

P- 14
Cleaenetus, a captaJti, killed in a foray
near Trapfizus, Anab. V, i, 17, p.

Cleagoras, a painter ? father of Eu-
cleides, Anab. VI L viii. i, p. 237
Cleander, Laconian governor of By-
zantium, Anab. VL iv. 18, p. 183;
arrives at Caipe, VI. vi. 5^ p. 190
foil ; his friendship with Xenophon,
VI. vi. 35, p. 194 ; kindly disposi-
tion to the army, VL vi. 36, p. 195 ;
Xenophon and, at Byzantium, VI 1.
^_ L 8 fall., p. 197 foil; his conduct
^B contrasted with that of his suc-



cessor Aristarcbtts, VI T. Ii. 5 foil,,
P- 203

Cleanor, the Arcadian, of Orchomenus,
the senior general, Anab. I!., i. 10,
p. 41 ; inveighs against Ariaeus, IL
V. 39, p. 60 ; appointed general in
place of Agias, HI. i. 47, p. 74;
his speech in the council of war, IIJ,
ii. 4, p. 75 ; commands the Arca-
dian heavy infantry. IV. viii. 18, p.
129 ; Xenophon requests him to
superintend sacrifice, VL iv. 22, p.
184 ; in favour of joining Seuthes,
VIL ii, 2, p. 202 ; his loyalty to
Xenophon, VIL v. 10, p. 22t

Clearchus, in exile, associated with
CjTus, Anab. I. i, g, p. 2 ; joins
CyriLS with a large force, I. ii. 9, p,
5 ' <x(ramands Hellenic left in the
review at Tyriaeum, L ii. 15, p, 7;
tries to force his men to continue
the march, L iii, 3, p, 9 ; sentences
one of Menon's men to be flogged,
and the consequence, I. v. 12, p.
19 ; invited by Cynis to assist at
the trial of Oronlas, I. vi. 5, p, 21;
commands the right in the mid-
night review of the army, I, viu i, p.
23 ; in the battle, I. viii. 4, p. 27 ;
Cyrus and, as to a question of tac-
tics, I. viii. 13, p. 28 ; conduct
during the battle, 1. x. 3 folL, p. 36
foil. ; message of, to Ariaeus, 11. i.
4, p. 40 ; his answer to heralds
from the king, IL i. 9, p. 41 ;
leadership tacitly accepted, II. ii. 5,
p. 44 ; his energy and generalship,
IL iii. II, p. 48; his interview
with Tissapheraes, IL v. 1-25. pp.
55-59 ; is entrapped by Tissa-
phernes, IL v. 31, p. 59; his death,
IL vi, I, p. 61 ; his character, II.
vi. 1-16, pp. 6r, 62 ; alone in
Cyrus's secret, III. i. 10, p. 69 ;
his horses, III. iii. 19, p. 85 ; his
campaigns in the Aeolid, etc., V.
vi. 24, p. 154

Clearettis, a captain, Anab. V, vii.
14-16, p. 159

Cleonymus, the Laconiau, Anab, IV,
i. iS. p. 99

Coeratadas, the Boeotian general, of



146



INDEX


Thebes. Anai. VII. I 33 foil. . p.
2ot foil.

Coetians, Anat, VH, viiL 25, p. 240
note

Colchians, ihe, Anab, IV. viij. 9. p,
137; rV. viii. 23. p, 130; V. vii. 2.
p. 157 ; VII. viii. 25. p. 240 note

Colchis, Anab. W'. viii. 23, p. 130 ;
V. iii. 2. p. 139

Colossae, a city of Phrygia, Anab. I.
ii. 6, p. 4

Comania, Ass3rrian heavy infantry
from, Anab. VH. vin. 15, p. 239

Corylas, the chief of Paphlagonia.
Antib. V. V. is-23, pp. 148, 149 ;
V. VI. II, p. 153 ; VI. i. 2, p. 167 ;
VI L viii. 25, p. 240 note

Cotyora. a Hellenic city, colony of
Sinope, in the territory of the Tibar-
enians, Anab. V. v. 3 foil., p. 147
foU.

Cretans, archers, Anab. 1. ii. 9, p. 5 ;
their range itt shooting, III, iii. 7.
p. 83 ; ih. 15, p. 84 ; of great ser-
vice, IV. ii. 28, p. 105 ; IV, iii, 29,
p, 109 ; at Trapezus compete for
the long race, IV. viii. 37, p. 130

Ctesias, the surgeon , heals Artaxerxes'
wound, j^na*. 1. viii. 26, p. 30 and
note ; his testimony quoted, ib. 27,
p. 30 foil.

Cydnus, a river flowing through the
city of Tarsus iix Cilicia, Anak. I.
ii. 33, p. B

Cyniseus, Anai. VII. i. 13, p. 198

Cyreian camp, during the battle plun-
dered by the king. Anab. I. x. i, p,
35; the Cyreian army, i.e. Cyrus's
Hellenic force, Phamabazus trans-
acts with Aristarchus concerning,
VI!. ii. 7. p. 203

Cyrus (the younger), accompanied by
a body of Hellenes, Anab. I. i, 2,
p. i; imprisoned by Artaxerxes on
the accusation of Tissapheraes, ib.
3, p. i; liberated at the intercession
of his mother Parysatis, returns to
his province and secretly collects
forces to dethrone and attack Arta-
jterxcs, I*. 6 foil, p. a foil; begins
his march from Sardis, 1. ii. 5, p,
4 ; and Epyaxa, ib. 12, p. 6 ; and



Clearchus, I. iii. 1 foil., p. 9 foU:
joined by his fleet, 1. iv. 28, p. 13 :
Xenias and Pasion desert, at Myri*
andus, ib. 8, p. 14 ; at Thapsacus
announces his designs, ib. 11, p. 16;
miraculous passage of Euphrates
by, ib. 17, p. 17: inler^'cnes be-
tween Men on and Clearchus, L v.
15 foil., p. 20 ; and Orontas, 1. vi.
I foil., p. 21 foil.; preparations for
battle, I, viL i foU. , p. 23 ; and
Gaulites, ib. 5, p. 24 ; and iSilanus,
ib. iS. p, 26 : goes into battle un-
helmeted, I. viii. 6, p. 27 ; and
Xencphon, ib. 15, p. 28 ; slays
Artagerses, ib. 24, p. 30 ; wounds
Artaxerxes, ib, 26. p. 30 ; is sLiin,
ii. 27, p. 31 ; hi.5 body mutilated,
1. X. I, p. 35 ; his character, I. ix-
i foil., p. 31 foil.
Cyrus, the elder. Anab. I. ix. i, p. 31
Cytonium. see Certonus, Anat. VII.

viii. 8, p, 238 note
Cyzicus, Anaxibius and Aristarchns at.
Anab. VII, ii, 5, p. 203

Damaratu.^, the Laconian, a descend-
ant of Procles, AnaA IL i. 3. p. 39:
VIL viii. 17, p. 239

Dana, or Tyana, a city of Cappadocia^
Anal/, I. ii. 20, p. 7

Daphnagoras, Anab, VM, viii, 9, p.
238

Dardas, the river, Anab. I, iv. 10, p.

IS
Darius, Anab. 1. i. i, p. 2
Delphi, Xenophon consults Apollo at,

Anab. Ill, i. 5, p, 68 ; Athenian

treasury at, V. iii. 5. p. 140 ; Zeus,

the King, named in the oracle given

to Xenophon at, VI. i. 2, p. 170
Delta of Thrace, Anab. VII, i. 33, p.

201 and note; Vll. v. t, p. 220
Democrates, a Temenite, Anab. IV.

iv. 15, p. Tia and note
Dercylidas, the Laconian, A nod. V.

vi. 24. p. 155
Dernes, governor of Phoenicia and

Arabia, Anai, VII. viii. 25, p. 240

note
Dexippus, a Laconian, his treacherous

departure from Trapecus, meddling



I


INDEX



247



u



in Thrace, and subsequent death.
Anab. V. i. 15, p. 134 ; how he
traduced Xenophon to Anaxibius,
VI, i. 32, p, 172 ; and the soldiers
at Calpe, VI. vi. 5 foU., p. 190;
and Agastas, Vl. vi. 22, p. 193

Dolopes, the, a Thessalian tribe, A nab.
I. ii. 6, p. 5

Dracontius, a Spartan, presides over
the games .it Trapezus, A nab, TV,
viii. 25, p. 130 ; sent by Xenophon
with deputation to Cleander, VI, vi.
30. p. 1^4
_ Drilae, the, a hill tribe, near Trapezus,
.4nab. V. ii. r. p. 135



Ecbatana, capital of Media, Anab. II.
iv. 25, p. 54; II L V. rs. p. 95

Enyaliua, the god of battle, Anab. L
viii. r8, p. 29; V. ii. 14, p. 137

Ephesus, Anab. I. i v. 2, p. 13 ; II. ii,
6, p. 44 jtoie; the temple and statue
at, V. iiL 8 foil., p. 141; an in-
cident which befell Xenophon when
setting out from, VL i. £3, p. 171

Episthenes, of Aniphipolis, in com-
mand of the peltEists, Anah. I. x. 7,
p. 36 ; the Armenian headman's
son entrusted to him, IV. vi. i, p.
118 ; takes the boy home with him,
IV. vi. 3, p. 119

Episthenes, of 01)Tithus, Anab. VII.
iv. 7, p. ai7

Epyaxa, wife of Syennesis, king of the
Cilicians, Anab. I. iL la, p. 6

Eteonicus, a Lacedaemoniati, at By-
zantium, Anab, VII. i, la, p. 197 ;
VII, i, 20, p. ig9

Euclcides. the soothsayer, a Phliasiau,
meets Xenophon, Anab. VIL viii.
I, p. 237

Euphrates, the river, Anab. I. iv, ji,
p, 15 ; ib, 15, p. 16; ib. 17, p. 17;
IV, V. 2, p. 113

Eurylochus of Lusia, an Arcidian
hoplite protects Xenophon with his
shield, Anab. IV. ii. 21, p. 104 ; his
valour in storming a Taochian for.
tress, IV. vii. 11 foil., p. 123; sent
to Anaxibius, VII. i, 3s, p. a 00 ;
agrees with Xenophon in demanding
pay from Seuthes, VII. vi. 40, p. 228



Eurymachus, a Dardanian, Anab. V.
vi. 21, p. 154

Ganos, a Thracian fortress;, Anab.

VII. v, 8, p, 220 and note
Galea, the. of Babylonia, Anab. I. v.

5. P- 18

Gates, the, of Cilicia and Syria, Anab.
L iv. 4, p. 14

Gaulites, a Samian exile, a friend of
Cyrus, .Anab. I. vii. 5;, p. 24

Glus, one of Cyrus's officers, Anab. I.
iv. 16, p. 17; I. V. 7, p, 18 ; son
of Tamos, IT. i. 3, p. 39 ; an-
nounces the death of Cyrus, II. iv.

34. p. 54

Gnesippus, an Athenian, his after-
dinner speech, Anab. VII. iii. aS, p.
213

Gobryas, one of Artaxerxes* generals,
Anab. 1. vii. 13, p. 25

Gongylus, Eretrians, father and son,
Anab. VIL viii. 8, p. 236; the son's
part in the capture of Asidates, ib.

GorEia'i, of Leontini, Anab. II. vi. 16,

p. 163 and note z
Gorgion, son of Hellas and Gongylus,

Anab. VII, viii. 8, p. 23S
Gymnias, a city, perhaps at no great

distance from Baibut, Anab. IV.

vii. 19, p. 125 and note i

Halisama, Anab. VII. viii. 17. p. 239
Halys. the river, Anab. V. vi, 9, p.

153 ; ^'i- "• I. p- 173

Hamiene, a port near Sinope, Anab.

VL i. 15, p. 169 foil., and note 3
Harpasus, the river, Anab. IV. vii,

i8. p. 124
Hecatonymx:s, ambassador from Sin-
ope, Anab. V. v. 7. p. 147 ; ib. 20,

p. 149; V. vi. 3, p. 150
Hegesander, an Arcadian, Anab. VI,

iii. s. p. 177
Helios, Anab. IV. v, 35, p. 11 8. See

Sun
Hellas. Anab. I. ii. 8, p. 5; II. iv.

13, p. 52 ; V. vi. IS, p, 153 ; ib.

8a, p. 154; ib. 33, p. 156 ; V. vii.

6. p, 157 ; ib. 7, p. 158



INDEX



Hellas, the wife of Gongylus, A nab.

VII. viii. 8, p. 238
Hellenes, numbers of, with Cyrus,

Ana^. I. ii. 9 foil, p. 5 foil.; 1. vji.

ro, p. 25 ; their reluctance to go

against Artaxerxes, I. iii, 1, p. 9;

I. iv. 12, p. 16; position of, aad
achievements in the battle, L viii. a
foil., p. 27 foil. ; gaJlatitrj' of, left
to guard the camp, I. x. 3 foil,, p.
35 foil. ; second victory of the. ib.
4 foil., p. 36 foil. ; return to camp,
ib. 17, p. 38 ; learn that Cyrus is
detid, II. i. 4 foU. . p. 40 foil.; re-
ceive a summons from the king;, t&.

7 foil,, p. 40 foil.; rejoin Ariaeus,

II. ii. B, p. 44; panic in the camp
of, it. 19, p, 46 ; receive new pro-
posals from the king, II. iii. i foil.,
p. 46 foil. ; and Ti ssaph ernes , ik
17 foil., p. 49 foil. ; suspicions of
the, against ,4riaeus, II. iv. i foil.,
p- 50 foil ; naarch and encarap apart
from Tissaphernes and Ariaeus, ib,

8 foil., p. 52 ; reach and cross
Tigris, ib, 13 foil, , p, 52 foil, ; al the
Zapatas their generals are treacher-
ously slain by Tissaphernes ; indig-
nant interview of the, with Ariaeus,
IL V. 32 foil. , p. S9 foil ; in deep
perplexity, III. i. i, p. 67 ; choose
new generals, ib. 47, p. 74 ; hold a
general meeting, and adopt Xeno-
phon's resolutions. III, ii. i foil., p,
74 foil.; cross the Zapaias, III, iii.
6, p. 83 ; sufferings of their rear-
guard, iL 7, p. 83 ; enrol slingers
and cavalry, ib. 20, p. 85 ; after an
encounter with Mithridales reach
Larissa on the Tigris, III, iv. 3 foil.,
p. 86 ; skirmish successfully with
Tissaphernes, ib. 15 foil., p. 87
folL; discover and remedy defect of
marching in a square with enemy
behind, ib. 19 foil., p. 88 foil, ;
their diflficulties in hilly ground, ib.
25 foil. , p. 89 foil. ; appoint eight
surgeons, ib. 30, p. 90 ; outmarch
the Persians, ib. 34, p. 91 ; dis-
lodge the enemy from a mountain
spur, ib. 44 foil., p. 92 foil. ; de-
spondency of the, m the plain of the



Tigris, and at burning of villages
by enemy, HI. v. i foil., p. 93
foil. ; retrace steps towards Babylon
to unbumt villages, ib, 13, p. 95 ;
cross a pass and descend into Car-
duchia, IV. i. 7, p. 98 ; hard light-
ing of the, in Carduchia during
seven days. ib. 11, p. 99 folL ; use
Carduchian arrows as javelins, I\'.
ii. 28. p. 105; recruit themselves in
villages above the Centrites, IV. iii.
I, p. 105; difficulty in crossing the
Cenlrites, and despondency of the,
ib. 5, p. 105 foil. ; effect the passage,
ib. 31 foil., p. 110; march through
plain of W^estem Armenia to ihe
Teleboas, meet and make a treaty
with Tiribazus the governor, IV.
iv. I foil., p. no foil.; thetr suffer-
ings from snow and cold, ib. 11
foil., p. Ill foil. ; out-manoeuvre
Tiribazus and capture his camp, ih.
15 foil. , p. iia foil. ; ford Euphrates;
march through snow ; sacrifice to
Boreas, IV. v. i foil, p. 113 foil. ;
extreme misery of the, from cold and
hunger, ii, 5 foil., p. 114 foil.; rest
in good village quarters, ib. 22 foil. ,
p. 116 foil. : after a week's rest
march onwards ; their guide runs
away, IV. vi. i foil., p. iiS foil.;
cross Phasis [Pasin-Su) ; encounter
Chalybes, Taochians, Pbasians on
a pass, ib. 5 foil., p. 119; force
the pass by a flank march, ib. aa
foil. , p. 121 foil. ; storm a Taochian
fortress, IV. vii. i foil., p. 122 foil;
march through the Chalybes; reach
the Harpasus ; march through the
Scythemans, i7'. 15 foil, p. 124;
reach Gjinnias ; catch sight of the
sea from Mount Theches ; their
delight, IV. vii. 9 foil., p. 125 foil;
dismiss the guide, ib. 27, p, ia6 ;
march through country of the Ma-
crones, with whom they exchange
pledges, IV. viii. i foil, p. 126 foil.;
encounter the Colchians r storm
their position by columns of sec-
tions, ib. 9 foil,, p. 127 foil ;
suffer from poisonous honey, ib. rg
foil. , p, 129 ; reach Trapems ; pay



1

I



I



INDEX



349



»



L



their vows ; celebrate games, ib. 22
foil,, p. 130 foil. ; desire to reach
Hellas without further trouble, V.
i. I foil., p. 133; send Cheirisophus
to Byzantium for vessels; plans and
occupation of the, meanwhile, ib. 4
foil,, p. 133 foil.; attack the Drilae
nnd capture provisions, V, ii. r foil.,
p. 135 folL ; reach Cerasus, partly by
sea, partly by land, V. iii. i foE. , p.
139 ; divide money realised by sale
of captives, ii>. 4, p. 140; continue
march, again by sea and land, from
Cerasus through the territory of the
Mossy noecians, V, iv. t foil., p.
142 ; reach the Chalybe.s ; through
the territory of the Tibarenians to
Cotyora, V. v. i foil., p, 146 folK;
halt forty-five days ; do sacrifice ;
their tribal processions and gym-
nastic contests, id. 5 foil., p, 147 ;
receive ambassadors from Si nope,
ib. 7 foil., p. 147 foil. ; vote in
fiivour of continuing journey by sea ;
send three ambassadors to Sinope
for vessels, V. vL 11 foil., p. 152 ;
how they viewed certain colonisation
schemes, Of. 17 foil., p, 153 foil.;
hold indignation meetings ; con-
vened in general assembly, hear
Xenophon's defence and protest in
reference to certain late excesses at
Cerasus, V. vii, 1 foil., p. 157 foil.;
pass resolutions to mEiintain dis-
ciphne ; make purification, ib, 34
foil., p. 162 ; their generals submit
to a judicial examination. V. viii.
I foil., p. i6a foil.; and Paphla-
gonians, VI. i. i foil., p. 167 foil.;
pass by sea to Sinope ; mooring in
the harbour of Harmonc, ib. 14, p.
169; disappointment of the, at return
of Cheirisophtis with a single ship,
ib. 15, p. I&9T resolve to appoint
a single general ; Xenophon declin-
ing, appoint Cheirisophus, ib, 17
foil., p. 1 70 foil; voyage to Heraclea,
VI. ii, I foil., p. 173 foil.; deter-
mine to extort money from the
Heracleots, but fail in the attempt,
ib. 4, p. 174 foil, ; dissatisfaction
among, they split into three divi-



sions, ib. 9 foil., p. T74 foil, ; after
various fortune, reunite at Calpe, ib.
16, p. 175; VI, iv. i^ p. 180;
desire to return home ; averse to
camping on ground suitable for a
city, ib. 7, p. 181 ; march out for
provisions and to bury their dead,
ib. 9 foil., p. iBi foil.; reappoint
old board of generals, 1*^, 10, p.
182 ; their distress for provisions
and inability to move in the face of
unfavourable sacrifices, ib. 12 foil.,
p, iSa foil. ; a catastrophe which
befell thera during this deadlock, ib.
23 foil., p. 184; after a night
attack of the Bithytiians. follow the
generals into the natural fastness,
which they fortify, VI. v. 1 foil., p.
184 foil.; sacrifices favourable ; re-
taliation and victor)' of the, over Phar-
nabaius" cavalry and the Bitbynians,
ib. 2-32, pp. 185-189; organisation
of the, whilst awaiting Cleander, VI.
vi. J foil., p. 189 foil.: and Clean-
der, in the matter of Dexippus and
Agasias, ib. 5-37, pp. 190-195;
after capturing much booty in Bi-
thynia, reach Chrysopolis and dis-
pose of booty by sale, ib. 38, p. 195;
cross to Byzantium, VIL i. 7, p,
197 ; and Anaxibius, ib. 13 folL, p.
197 foil.; threaten to seize Byzan-
tium, ib. 15 foil., p. 198 foil. ; in
conclave, pacified by Xenophon ;
revert to discipline, ib. 22 foil., p»
199 ; and Coeratadas, ib. 33 foE, ,
p. 201 ; and Aristarehus, VI I. \u
6, p. 203 ; proceed to Perinthus, ib.
II, p. 204 and 7iote ; hindered by
Aristarehus ; accept ser\nce under
Seuthes, ib. 12 — Vll. iii. 14, pp.
204-210; the generals and captains
of the. at a royal entertainment, ib.
15 foil., p, 210 foil. ; Thracian cam-
paign of the, with Seuthes ; conquer
the Thynians, ib. 33 — VII, iv. 24,
pp. 214-219 ; and Heradeides, VII.
V. T , p. 220 foil. ; reach Salmydessus,
ib. 12 foil, p. 221; get into quarters
above Selybria, ib. 15, p. 222 ; and
two Laconian agents from Thibron.
VIL vi. I foil, p. 222 foil; and



250



INDEX



Medosades, touching certain vil-
lages, VII. vii, I foil., p. 229 foil;
cross to Lampsacus, VII. viii. i.
p. 336 ; march through the Troad
to Pergaraus, i^. 8, p. 257 foil. ;
incorporated with the rest of Thib-
ron's Hellenic forces, ib, 26, p. 240

Heraclea Pontics. Anab. V. vi, ro,
p. 152 - Hellenic city, colony of the
Megarians, VK ii. i. p. 173; dis-
tance of, from Byzanlium, VI. iv. 2,
p. r 80 ; and often

Heracleides, of Maronea, Anab, VII,
ill. 16, p, atr; sent by Seuthes to
Perinthtis to dispose of booty, VII,
Iv. 2, p. 216; returns with proceeds
of spoil, VII. V, 5, p. 220 ; calum-
niates Xenophon. etc. , id, 6 foil. , p.
220 foil. ; a Hellene, VII, vi 41, p.
228 ; Xenophon 's criticism of, VII.
vii. 35 foil, , p, 233 foil.

Heracleots, the, traders, Anab. V. vi.
^9- P- 153 ' 'tifi Arcadians get ves-
sels from the, VI. ii. 19, p. 176

Heracles, the thank-offerings to, Anab.

IV. viii, 24, p, 130 and note 3 ;
Xenophon consults, VI. ii. 15, p.
175 J "Zeus the Saviour, Heracles
our Guide," used as watchword, VI.

V. 25, p. 188; where he descended
to bring up Cerberus, VI. iL 2. p.

173

Hesperites, the, Anab. VII. viii. 25,
p. 240 »o/e s

HieronjTOus, the Eleian, eldest of
Pro.icenus's captains, Anab. III. i.
34, p. 72- VI. iv, 10, p. 182; sent
to Anaxibius as the bearer of a re-
solution, VII. i. 32, p, 200

llieronymus, an Euadean, A»ai. VI L
iv. 18, p. 219 and nofe i

Hyrcanian cavalry^ Anab. VII, viii. 15,
p, 239 note

Iconiura, city of Phrygia, A»ab. I. ii.

19. P' 7
Ida, Mount, Anab. VII, viii. 7, p.

337
Ionia, Anab. I. 1. 6, p. 2 ; I, ii. 21, p.

8; I. iv. 13. P- 16: JI- •• 3. P- 39:
H. ii. 6. p. 44 7ioU I ; III, v. ig,

P- 95



Iris, river, Anab, V. vi, 9, p. 151; VI.

ii. I, p. 173
Issi, city of CiUcia, Anab, L ii. 24, p.

8 ; I. iv. I, p. 13
Itabelius, relieves Asidatcs, Anab. VII.

viii. 15, p. 239

Jason's beach, Anab. VI. ii. i. p. 173

L.acedaemon, Anab. V. iii. 11, p. 141

Lacedaemonians, the, and Tliracians,
Anab, II. vi. 2, p. 61 ; "the peers
of," taught stealing as boys, IV. vi.
15, p. 120 ; persistent effort of, to
win the "leadership" throughout
the war, VI. L 27, p. 171 ; "are
the lords of Hellas," VI. vi. 12. p.
tgr ; the power of the, ubiquitous, '
V'll, i, a8< p. 200

Laconian dagger, Anab. IV. vii. 16,
p. 124

I^ampsactts, Anab. VII, viii. i, p. 236;
ib. ft, p. 237

Larissa, 00 the Tigris, Anab. III. iv.
7, p, 86 and noie 2

Lotus-eaters, the, Anab. 111. ii. 25, p.
79 nole 3

Lycaea, the, an Arcadian festival,
Anab. I. ii. 10, p, 6 and noU i

Lycaonia, Anab, I, ii. 19, p. 7 ; VII.
viii. 25, p, 240 noie t

Lycaonians, Anab. IIL ii. 23, p. 79
and nofe i

Lycieum, the gymnasium at Athens,
Anab. VU. viii. t, p. 237

Lycius, son of Polystratus. an Athen-
ian, commandant of cavalry, Anab-,
III. iii. 20, p. 85; IV. iii. aa, p.
108 ; ib. 34, p. 109 ; IV. vii. 24,

P- 125
Lycius, of Syracuse, Anab. I. x. 14,

p. 37
Lycon, an Achaean, Anab. V. vi. 27,
p. 155; VI. ii, 4, p. 173; VI. ii.

7 foil, p, 174
Lycus, the river. Anab. VI. ii. 3, p.

173
Lydia, Anab. I, ii. 5. p. 4 ; I. ix. 7,

p. 32; III. V, 15, p. 95 ; VII. viii.

20, p. 240
Lydian, Apollonides's ears bored like

a, Anah. III. i. 31, p. 72



INDEX



«Sl



Lfditin market, the. Cyrus's Asiatic
army. /inat. I. v. 6. p. i8

Macistian, Silanus a, Anab. VII. iv.

i6, p, 218
Macrones, the, their territory and

arms ; exchange pledges with the

Hellenes, Anak IV. viii. i foil., p.

ia6 foil.; their conduct contrasted

with that of the Cotyorites, V. v.

r8, p. 14S ; Vn. viii. 25. p. 240

note
Maeander, the river, ArtaA I. ii. 5

foil. , p. 4 foil.
Maesades, the father of Seuthes, Anab.

VH. ii. 32, p. 207 ; VII. v. i, p.

Magtiesians, the, dance the Carpaea.

Anab. VI. i. 7, p. 168 and nofe a
Mantineans, the, dance the ' ' warriors'

march," Anab. VI. i. 11, p. i68

atld note 4
Mardian mcrccmaries of Orontas,

Anai. IV. iii. 4. p. 105
Mariandynians. Anab. VI, ii. i, p,

173
Maronea, Heracleides of, Anab. VI I.

iii. 16. p. 2ti
Marsyas, the river, sources near

Celaenae, tributary of Maeander,

here Apollo flayed Marsyas, Anafi.

I. ii. 8, p. 5
Mascas, the river, Anab. 1, v. 4, p.

16
Medea, wife of the king of the Medes,

Anab. III. iv. ir, p. 87 and n^t/r i
Medes, revolt of, from Darius, Anab.

III. iv. 8 foil,, p. 86 foil.
Media, Anab. U. iv. 27, p. 55; HI.

V. 15, p. 95 ; wall of, L vii. 15, p,

25 and ftofg 2 ; II. iv, 12, p. 52
Median and Persian women, their

beauty, Anab. III.' ii. 25. p. 79
Medocus, king of the Odrysians, Anab.

VII. il 32, p. 207 ; VII. iii. 16. p,

211 ; VIL viL 3, p. 229; ib, 11, p,

230
Medosades, an agetit of Scathes,

Anab. VIL i. 5, p. 196; sent a

second time, Vll. ii. 10-24, pp.

204-206 ; aad Xeaophon, \'II, vii

X foil., p. 339 foil.



Megabytus, sacristan of the goddess
Artemis at Ephesus. Anab. V. iii.
6, p. 140 ; restores Xenophon bis
deposit, V. iii. 7, p. 141

Megaphernra, a Persian nobleman, a
wearer of the royal purple, put lo
death by Cyrus, Anab^ I. ii, 20,

P- 7

Melanditae, the, AnaK VIL ii. 3a, p.
307

Melinophagi, the, or millet - rating
Thracians, Anab. VII, v. 12, p.
221

Menon, the Thessalian, joins Cyrus
with one thousand hoplites and
five bimdred peltasts, Anab. I. ii,
6, p. 5 ; in command of the right
at Tyriaeum, tb^ 15, p, 7 ; sent to
escort Epyaxa into Cilicia, /A ao,
p. 7 ; two of his companies lost, ib.
25, p. 8 ; his troops crossing the
Euphrates first, is rewarded by
Cyrus, L iv. 13 foil., p. 16 foil.; dis-
pute between bis soldiers and those
of Clearchus, L v. 11, p. 19 folU ;
commands the Hellenic left wing at
midnight review, I. vii. i, p. 23 ;
and in the battle, I. viii. 4, p. 27 ;
sent by Clearchus to Ariaeus, his
friend, II. i. 5, p. 40 ; stays behind
with Ariaeus, II. ii, i, p. 43 ;
suspected of slander by Clearchus.
IL V. a 8, p. 59 ; arrested with the
others by Tissaphemes, ib. 31, p.
59 folL ; his character, IL vi- 21
foil, p. 64 ; dies the death of a
felon, ib. ag, p. 66

Mespila, the city, Anab. HI. iv. 10-12.
p, 86 noie 4

Midas, spring of, the king of Phrygia,
.4 nab. L il. 13, p. 6

Milesian, the^ concubine of Cyrus, her
escape, Anab. I. x. 3, p. 35

Miletus, besieged by Cyrus, Anab. I,
i. 7 foil , p. 2 ; Tamos's blockading
squadron from, I. iv. a, p. 13 ; why
men of, did not choose Cyrus, I, ix.
9. P- 33

Miltocyihes, the Thracian, deserts to
the king, Anab. II. ii. 7, p. 44

Mithridates (or Mithradates, Hug,
with C. ), a friend of Cyrus, Anad.



3$S



INDEX



I^- V. 35. p. 60: addresses the
generals, III. iii. i foil., p. 82;
appears again, ib. 6. p. 83 ; ap-
pears for the last time, III. iv. 2
foil., p. 85 foil.; governor of Lyca-
onia and Cappadocia, VIL viii 35,
p. 240 note

.Mossynoeciaits, Hellenes reach the ;
confer with chiefs of, Anab. V, iv. 3
foil. , p, 1 4a fii?te 1 ; their order of
iKitlle and arms, ib. 11, p. 143;
the high ciladel of, id. 15, p. 143 ;
their king burnt in his mossyn. ib.
36, p. 145 ; (heir strange customs,
ib, 30 foil., p. 146 ; Chalybes sub-
ject to, V. V. I, p. 146 ; an inde-
pendent tribe, VIL viii. 25, p. 340
note

Myriandus, a sea-coast city of Phoe-
tlicia, A nail. 1. iv, 6, p. 4

Mysia, A nab. VII. viii 8, p. 238

Mysians, the, and Orontas, Anab. I.
vi- 7, p. 22 ; Pisidians and, I. ix.
I*' P- 33 '' th^i Pisidians, and
Egyptians a source of trouble to
Persia, 11. v. 13 foil., p. 57; the,
Pisidians, and Lycaonians main-
tain their independence against the
king. III. il. 23, p. 79 note r ; their
dance, VI. i. 9 foil., p, 168 foil,

Mysus, a Mysian, his ambuscade,
Anab. V. ii. 29, p. 139

Nausicleides, and Bion, Anab. VIL
viii. 6, p. 237

Neon, the Asinaean. acts for Cheiri-
sophus during his absence, A nab. V.
vi. 36, p, 156 ; tells tales against
Xenophon, V. vii. 1, p. 157; at
the division of the army, advises
.separate action, VI, ii. 13, p. 175 ;
succeeds Cheirisophus, VI. iv. 11.,
p, 182 ; at Calpe, rashly leads out
a pillaging pai-ty and loses five
hundred men. ib. 23 foil., p. 184 ;
left to griard the camp, VI. v. 4,
p. 185 ; aspires to command the
whole army, VII. ii. 2 foil,, p, 202;
encamps apiart at Pcrinthus, ii. 11,
p. 204 ; and holds aloof from the
other generals, ik 17, p, 205 ; ?/.
39, p. 207; VII. iii, 2, p. 208 ;



plays into the hands of Arisiardnis.
ib. 7, p. 209

Ncontichos, a Thracian fortress pro-
mised by Seuthes. with Bisanthe
and Ganos, to Xenophon, Anab.
VIL V. 8. p. 220 note

Nicander. a Laoedaeroonian, puts
Dexippus to death, Anab. V^ i. 15,
P- 134

Nicarchus. the ^\rcadian, bow he came
riding into camp after the arrest of
the generals, Anab. 11. v. 33, p. 60:
{the icune, or another) Arcadian
oflroer, deserts to the Persians with
twenty men, IIL iii. 5. p. 83

Nicomachus, the Oetaean, in command
of light infantry, his prowess as a
volunteer, Anab. \V. \\. 20, p. 121

Odrysians, the, a Thracian tribe, and
the Athenians related, Anab. VII.
ii. 32, p. 207 and nate ; Medocus,
king of the, V'lL iiL 16, p. 211 ;
join Seuthes in his campaign, VII.
iv. 21, p. 219 ; the, flock down to
join Seuthes, VII. v. 15. p. 222 ;
Teres, an ancient hero of the, ib. i.
p. 2ZO ; a young man of the, with
Medosades, VII. vii. i folL, p. 229
foil.

Odysseus, "stretched out in sleep,"
like, Anab. V. i. 2, p. 133

Oeta^ji, Nicomachus tlie, Anab. IV.
vL 20, p. 121

Olympia, Scillus lies on the road to,
Anab. V. iii. 7,, p. 141 ; Temple of
Zeus in, ib, u, p. 141

Olynthians, in service of Menon, Anab.
I. ii. 6, p. 5

Ophrynium, a tOAvn in the Troad.
A /tab. V'lL viii. 5, p. 237

Opis, a large city on the river Physcus.
Anab, IL iv, 25, p. 54

Orontas, a Persian of the royal tamily,
his plot against Cyrus ; trial and
death of, Anab. I. vL i-io. pp. 21-
23 ; his disloyalty to Cyrus excep-
tional, I. ix. 29, p. 35

Orontas, son-in-law of Artaxerxes, ac-
companies the Greeks with Ariaeus
and Tissaphernes, Anab, IL iv. 8
folL, p. 52 : II. V. 40. p. 61 ; his


INDEX



m



force employed against the Hellenes,
III. iv. 13, p. 87; Armenia governed
by, III. V. 17, p. 96; mercenaries
belonging 10, ^lard ihe Centrites,
]V. iii. 4, p. 105

Paphl^onia, Hellenes gel in pro-
visions from, whilst at Cotyora,
A Mai. V. V. 6, p. 147 ; Sinopeans
acquainted mth, V. vi. i, p. 150^
described, ifi. 6, p. 151 : Corylas,
the chief of, VI. i. a, p. 167; VII.
vttL 35, p. 340 »ofe

Paphlagonian helmets, Atiai. V. ii.
22, p. 138; V. \v. 13, p. 143

Paphlagonians, Corylas and the, Anab.
V. V. 12, p. 148; ambassadors sent
by Corylasi, VI. i. 2, p. 167; enier-
taincd by the Hellenes, ib. 6 foil.,
p. 168 foil.; a truce between the,
and the Hellenes, ih. 14, p. i6g

Parrum, Anaxibius at, Anab. VI L ii.
7, p. 203 ; Xenophon crosses from
I^arium to Selybria, it. 25, p. ao6;
bringing widi him only one boy,
VII. iii. 30. p. 311 ; Heracleides
and the ambassadors from, il>. 16,
p. 211

PLiriheniiini, a town in Mysia. Anal>.
VII. viii. 15, p. 239 ; Asidates at,
ii). 21, p- 240

Parthenius, the river, Anab, V. vi. 9,
p. 152 ; VL ii. I, p. 173

Pary satis, wife of Darius, mother of
Artaxerxes and Cyrus, Anab. I. i.

I, p. I ; loves Cyrus best, ifi. 5, p.
I ; helps him in his demands aigamst
Tissaphemes, ik 7, p. 2 ; villages
belonging to, as girdle money, I. iv. \
g, p. 15 and note i ; the villages of, j
in Media, delivered over by Tissa- j
phemes to the Hellenes to plunder, j

II. iv. 27, p. 5S

Pasion, of Megara, joins Cyrus, Anab. \
I. ii- 3, p, 4 ; with Xenias the .'
Arcadian deserts Cyrus at M}Tian-
dus, I. iv. 7 folL, p. 14 foil.

Pategyas, a Persian, on Cyrus's staff,
announces advance of the king,
Aftab. I. viti. I, p. 26

Peloponnesians, picked bodies of, col-
lected in CyTus's cities, Anab. I. i.



6, p. a ; outrageous that a single
Athenian should rule {i.e. Arcadians
and Achaeans), VI. ii, to, p. 174

Pcliae, a town of Pbrygia, Anad. I.
ii. 10, p. 6

Pergaraus, a city in Mysia, Anab.
VII. viii. 8, p. 238 ; VII. viii. 23,
p. 240

i'erinthus, Anad. IL vi. 2, p. 61 ;
Anaxibius bids Xenophon collect the
Cyreians at, and cross to Asia, VI i.
ii. B, p. 203 ; ib. 28, p. 207 ; Aris-
tarchus hinders them crossing from,
db. II, p, 304 ; VII. vi. 24, p. 236;
Seuthes sends Heracleides to, to
dispose of booty, VII. iv. a, p.
si6

Persian women, tall and handsome,
Anab. III. ii. 25, p. 79 ; stings, III,
iii. 16, p. 85 ; bows of great size,
III. iv. 17, p. 88; a, army good
for nothing at night, III. iv. 35, p.
91 ; a, prisoner, IV. iv, 16, p. iia;
the, dance, VI, i. 10, p. 168

Persians, the, subdue the Medes,
Anab. III. iv. 8, p. 86 ; HI. iv. 11,

P- 87
Phalinus, a Hellene, a professor of
tactics, etc., with Tissaphernes,
Anab. II. i. 7, p. 40 ; sent as a
herald by the king, his language in
debate, ib. 13 foll.> p. 41 foil. :
retires with the other heralds, II. ii.

I. P- 43

Phamabazus, satrapy of, Anab. V. vi.
24, p. 154 ; the cavalry of, aid the
Bithynians to hinder the Hellenes
from entering Phryg^a, VI. iv. 24,
p. 184 foil, ; cavalry of, flee before
the Hellenes, VI, v, 30, p. 1S9;
and Anaxibius, in reference to the
C}Teians, VI 1. i. 2. p. 196 ; and
Aristarchus ditto, VII. ii. 7, p. 203;
governor of the Bithynians, VII,
viii. 35, p. 240 note

Phasians, the Chalybes, Taochians,
and, hold a pass, but are turned,
Anab. IV, vi, 5, p, itg; a scheme
to seize the territory of the, in
Colchis, V, vi. 36, p. 157 ; VII.
viii. 25, p. 240 nofe

Phasisi, the river, probably = Pasin Su ;



INDEX



a tribtjury of the Araxes, AhoA, IV.
vi. 4, p. 119

Phasis, the river, in Colchis, Anab.
V. vi. 36 folii , p. 157

Philtstus. an Achaean general, chosen
in place of Menon. A nab. III. i. 47,
p. 74 ; and Sophaenetus, as the two
eldest generals, tn charge of those
sent by sea fromTrapezus toCerasuSj

V. iii. t. p. 139: and Lycon, in
opposition to Xenophon, V. vi. 27,
p. 155; fined, V. viii, i, p. 162;
sent on an embassy to Anaxibius,
VII. i. 3a, p. 200 ; left with four
others at the head of the army. V] l.
ii. I, p. S03

Philoxenus, of Pellene, his valour in

attacking a fortress of the I>nlae,

Anah. V. li. 15. p. 137
Fhocaean, the, concubine of Cyrus,

witty and beautiful, captured by the

king, A nab. I. x. 2, p. 35
Phoenicia, Abrocomas leaves, with

three hundred thousand men, Anab.

I. iv. 7, p. 14 ; I. vii. 12, p. 25 ;

VII. viii. 25. p. 240 note
Phoenicians, Myriandus inhabited by,

Anad. I. iv. 6, p. 14
Pholoe, Mount, game captured on, by

Xenophon's sons, Anab. V. iii. 10,

p. 141 ; its site, ib. note i
Phrasias, an Athenian officer, Anab.

VI. V. u, p. 186

Phrygia, Cyrus marches through,
Anab. I, ii, 6, p. 4 ; Cyrus satrap of
Lydia and Great, and Cappadocia,
I. ix. 7, p. 32 ; Timasion knows
every corner of the .'Xeolid and, and
the Troad, V. vi. 24, p. 154 ; VII.
viii. 25, p. 340 note

Pbryniscus, an Achaean general, with
Cleanor wishes to join Seuthes,
Anab. VII. ii. i, p. aoa ; with
Xenopbon visits Seuthes, ib. 29,
p. 207 ; receives a pair of raules.

VII. v. 4, p. 230 ; refuses to go on
a campaign with Seuthes without
Xenophon, ib. 10, p. 221

Physcus, the river, ^«a*. 1 1, iv. 25. p.

54
Pigrcs, a Persian, Cyrus's interpreter,

Anab, I. ii, 17, p. 7 ; Glus and,



ordered to extricate wagons, I. v. 7,
p. i8 ; with Cyrus before the battle,
I. viii. 12, p. 28
j Pisidians, Cyrus meditates an expedi-
tion against the, Annb. Li. 11 ; I.
ii. I, p. 3 ; his war with the, and
Mysians. I. ix. 14, p. 33; the, a
source of trouble to the Persians, II.
v* *3' P- 57 : t^l^^'r indepwndeDce,

III. ii. 23, p. 79 and note \
Polus, a Laconian, succeeds Anasdbius

as admiral, Anab. VII. ii. 5. p. 203
Polycrates, an Athenian captain, sur-
prises an Armenian village, Anab.

IV. V. 24. p. 116; sent with a
thirty-oared galley to collect vessels
at Trapezus, V. i. 16, p. 135 ; visits
Seuthes with Xenophon, VII. ii. 17,
p. 305; ib. 29, p. 207; put forward
by Xenophon, denounces Hera-
cleides, VII. vi, 41, p. 328

Polynicus, a X^cedaenaonian, agent of

Thibron, with Charrainus, Anal.

VII. vi. 1, p. 322 ; ib. 29, p. 228 ;

ib. 43, p. 229; VII. vii. 13, p. 230 ;

ib. 56, p. 236
Pontus, or Black Sea, Anab. V. i. 15,

p. 134; V. vL 15 foil., p. 152 foil.;

V. vii. 7, p. 158 ; VL ii. 4, p. 173;

VI. V. 20, p. 187 ; or Eiudne,
IV. viiL 22, p. 130: VII. V. la,

p. 331

Prodes, ruler of Teuthrania, a de-
scendant of Damaratus, the Lacon-
ian, Anab, II. i, 3, p. 39 and nafe
1 ; 11. ii. I, p. 43 ; rescues the party
attacking Asidaies, VI I. viii. 17, p.

239
Proxenus, a Floeotian. a friend of
Cyrus, joins him on an expedition
against the Pisidians, Anab. L i.
II, p. 3; with 1500 hoplites and
500 peltasts, I. ii. 3, p. 4 ; as an
old friend invites Xenophon to join
Cyrus on this expedition. III. i. 4,
p. 68 ; tries to reconcile Clearchus
and Menon, L v. 14, p. 20 ; holds
Hellenic centre in the battle, L viii.
4, p. 27 ; Clearchus consults with,
]■ ^- Si P' 36 ; replies to the
heralds from the king, II. i. 10, p.
41 ; Xenophon and, IL iv. 15, p.


INDEX



SIS



I



S3 ; made prisoner with the others
by Tissaphernes, II. v. 31, p. 59;
decapitaited, II. vL i, p. 61 ; his
character, 11. vi, 16, p. 63, and
note I p. 64 : Xenophon s speech
to his oflRcers, III. i. 15 foil., p.
70 ; dedicatory offering to ApoLo,
inscribed with names of Xenophon
and, V. iii, 5, p. 140
Psarus, a river in Cilicia, Anab. I, w,

I. P- 13

Pylae, Babylonian and Cilician, see

"Gates"
Pyramus. a river in Cilicia, Anab. I,

iv. t, p. 13
Pyrrhias, an Arcadian, Anab, VI. v.

II. p. i86

Pythagoras, the I^cedaetnonian ad-
miral, joins Cyrus with thirty-five
ships at Issi, Anab. I. iv. 3, p. 13

Khathines, Spithridates and, sent by
Pharnabajiuis with their force to
assist Bithynians, Anai. VI. v, 7,
p. 186

Rhodian slingers, a corps of, enrolled,
their skill, Anab. ML iii, 16 foU., p.
84 foil. ; more than a match for ihc
Persians, III, iv. 15, p. S7 ; the
clever device of a, to cross Tigris,

III. V. 8, p. 94

Rhoparas, governor of Babylon? y^aaA
VII, viii. 25, p. 340 note

Sacred Mountain, Anab, VII. i, 14,
and note i p. 198 ; VII. iii. 3, p,
209

Salamis, the battle of, Anab. III. ii.

13, and nate 3 p. 77
Salmydessus, the Hellenes with Seu-

thes reach, Anab. VII. v. 12, and

no/6 2 p. 331

Samolas, the Achaean, sent on an
embassy to Sinope, Anab. V. vi.

14, p. 152; in command of a
brigade, VL v. 11, p. 186

Sardis, Cyrus collects his various
armaments at, Anab. L ii. a, p, 3;
sets out from, ib. 6, p. 4 ; Xeno-
phon overtaltes Proxenus and Cjrrus
.It, HI. i. 8. p. 69



Satyr, the. and Midas, king of Phrygia,

Attain. L ii. 13, p. 6
Scillus, Xenophon' s estate at, in

Triphylia, Anab. V. iii. 7, and note

5 P- 140
Scythenians, the, Anab. IV. vii. 19,

p. 124

Scythians, the, bowmen. Anab. III.
iv. 15 and note 3 p. 87

Selinus, a river, at Scillus, like the,
river at Ephesus, Antib. V. iii, 8,
p. 141

Selybria, or Selymbria, Medosades
meets Xenophon at, Anab. VII. ii.
28, p. 207 ; Seuthes' Hellenic army
quartered above, VII. v. 15. and
note I p. S33

Seuthes, a Thracian prince, son of
Maesad^ {ex-king of the Odrysians.
now dead), brought up at the court
of Medoctis, seeks to recover his
empire, Anab. Vll, ii. 32 foil.,
p. 207 foil. ; sends Medosades to
Xenophon at Chalcedon with over-
tures to the array, VII. i. 5, p. 196;
later on Cleanor and Phryniscus
wish to join, VII. ii. 2, p. 20a ;
renews overtrnTCS to Xenophon at
Selybria, ib, 10, p. 204 ; from
Perinihus Xenophon visits, bynight,
ib, 17, p, 205; claims relationship
with the Athenians, ib. 31 and note
1 p. 207 ; meets the Hellenes, who
agree to take the field with him,
VII. iii. 7 foil., p. 209 foil. ; his
royal entertainment, ib. 16 foil. p.
a 10 foil. ; adopts Hellenic fashion
of marching by night, ib, 37 foil.,
p. 314 foil, ; captures, ib. 48, p.
ai6 ; and burns certain villages,
VII. iv. I foil., p. 216; sends
Heracleides to Perinthus to dispose
of booty ; his further proceedings
against the Thynians and treatment
of prisoners, ib. ib. foil. ; the
Thynians submit to, ib, 22, p. 219 ;
in "the Delta," VII. v. i, p. 220 ;
proceeds of spoil, how distributed
by, ib. 3 foil., p. 220; his alienation
from Xenophon, tb. 7 foil., p. 220
foil. ; reaches Salmydessus, ib, 13,
p. 221 foil. ; augmented by Odr)-



i5fi



INDEX



sians encamps above Selybria, ib,

1 5, p. 222 ; and ibe Laconian
envoys, V'll. vu 3 foil., p, 32a foil.;

[ introduces them to the Cjnreians and
listens to the debate, ib. 7 folL.
p. 223 foil. ; makes overtures to
Xeuophoii through Abrozelaies. id.
42. p, 329 ; Xenophon sent hy the
Laconian envoys reads, a lecture,
VII. vii, 20 foil., p. 231 foil, ; satis-
fies the claims of the troops as far
as is possible, ib. 55. p. 236

Silanus. the Ambraciol, Cyrm's sooth-
sayer, receives ten talents, A nab.
1. vii. 18, p. a6 ; V, vi. 18, p. 153;
spreads a story about Xenophon , ib.
17 foILt p. 153 foil. ; is threatened
by the soldiers, ib. 34, p. 156 ;
charters a vessel and escapes from
Heraclea, VI. iv. 13, p. 183

Silanus, of Macistus, in Triphylia, a
young trumpeter, Anab. VII. iv.

16, p. aiS

Sinope, Hellenic city in Paphlagonia,
a colony of Miletus, mother city of
Cotyora ; with port Harmene.yiwtiA,
VI, i. 15, p. i6g ; a debate with
ambassadors from, at Cotyora, V.

V. 7, p. 147 foil, ; an embassy sent
to, V, vi, 13, p. 152 ; traders from
Heraclea and, ib. 19, p. 153

Sitalcas, the national Thracian hymn,

Anab. VI. j, 6, p. 168
Sittace, a city of Babylonia, on the

Tigris, Anab. II. iv. 13, p. 53
Smicres, the Arcadian general, Anab.

VI. iii. 4, p. 176 ; is slain, ib, 5, p,
17?

Socrates, the Athenian, son of Sophron-
iscus, his feeling and advice to
Xenophon in reference to Pro-
xenus's invitation to join Cyrus,
Anab. IIL i. s> 3^^ note 2 p.
68

Socrates, the Achaean, a friend of
Cyrus, collects troops for him against
Tis&aphernes, Anab. I, i. 11, p. 3 ;
joins Cyrus at Sardis. I, ii. 3, p. 4;
is seized by Tissaphernea, IL v, 31,
p, 59 ; and put to death, II, vi. i,
p. 6t ; his blameless character, IL
vi. 30, p. 66



Soli, a city of Cilicia, Anab. I. ii. 24
p. 8

Sophaenetus, an Arcadian (possibly
Agias), joins Cyrus at Celaenae with
one thousand hopbtes, Anab. 1. ii.
9, p, 5 and noU 6

Sophaenetus. the Styraphalian, a friend
of Cyrus, collects troops for him
against Tissaphernes, .J rtjiiJ, I. i. 11,
p. 3 ; joins C>tus at Sardis with one
thousand hoplites, I. ii. 3, p. 4 ;
with Cleanor and Xenophon inter-
views Ariaeus, II. V. 37, p. 60 ;
left in command of the camp, IV.
iv. 19, p. 113; and Philesius, as
eldest generals, put in charge of the
detachment going by sea frotn
Trapezns. V. iii. 1, p. 139; fined
for inadequate performance of a
duty, V. viii. i, p. 163; his cautious
advice as to crossing a gully. \'I. v.
13, p. 186

Sosis, of Syracuse, joins Cyrus at
Celaenae with a thousand hoplites,
Anab. I. ii. 9. p. 5

Soteridas, of Sicyon, and Xenophon,
Anab. III. iv. 47, p. 92

Spartan, Dracontius a, Anab. IV. viii.
25, p. 130

Spithridates and Rhathines sent by
Phamabams with their force to
assiit the Bithynians, Anab. VI. v.
7, p. 186

Stratocles, a Cretan commander.
Anab. IV. ii, 29, p, 105

Sun, an .\rmenian headman priest of
the, Anab. IV, v. 35, p. 118

Susa, Anab. II. iv. 25, p. 54; III. v.

IS' P- 95
Syennesis, king of the Cilicians, Anab.

I. ii. 12, p. 6 ; his palace, ib. 21.

p. 8 ; the Ciliciao gates held by, I.

iv. 4, p, 14 ; exchanges gifts with

Cynis, I. ii. 27, p. 9
SjTia, the gates of Cilicia and. Anab.

T. iv. 3 foil., p. 14 ; the palace of

Belesys, ruler of, ib. 9, p. 15
Syrians, regard fish as gods, Anab. I.

iv. 9, p. 15

Tamos, the Egyptian ^ Cyrus's admiral.
Anab. 1. ii. ai, p. 8 ; brings fleet



INDEX



257



from Ephesus to Issi, I. iv. 2, p.
13 ; Glus the son of, II. i. 3, p.

37
Taochians, flbe, Chalybians and, mer-
cenaries with Tiribazus, Anab. IV.

iv. 18, p. iia ; occupy a pass with

Chalybes and Phasians, IV. vi. 5,

p. 119 ; their strong places, one of

which is stormed, IV. vii. s foil.,

p. 122 foil. ; independent of the

king of Persia, V. v. 17, p. 148
Tarsus, a city of Cilicia, Anab. I. ii.

23. p- 8 ; pillaged by Menon's

soldiers, ib. 26, p. 8
Teleboas, the river, Anab. IV. iv. 3,

p. no •

Temenite, Democrates a, Anab. IV.

iv. IS sca^note i p. 112
Teres, the Odrysian, an ancestor of

Seuthes, Anab. VII. ii. 22, p. 206 ;

VII. V. I and note i p. 220
Teuthrania, Procles, ruler of, Anab.

II. i. 3, p. 39 ; Halisarna and, VII.

viii. 17, p. 239
Thapsacus, a city of Syria on the

Euphrates, Anab. I. iv. iz, 18, p.
: 16 foil.
♦^ Tharypas, and Menon, Anab. II. vi.

28, p. 65
Thebe, the plain of, in Mysia, Anab.

VII. viii. 7,^ p. 237 and note 4
Theches, Mount, whence the Hellenes

saw the sea, Anab, IV. vii. 21, and

note 2 p. 125
Theogenes, a Locrian captain, Anab.

VII. iv. i8, p. 219
Theopompus, the Athenian, Anab. II.

i. 12 and note 2 p. 41
Thermodon, the river, in Paphlagonia,

Anab. V. vi. 9, p. 151 ; VI. ii. 1,

P- 173

Thibron, a Lacedaemonian, his agents
visit Seuthes to engage the Cyreians
for a campaign against Tissaphernes,
Anab. VII. vi. i foil. , p. 222 ;
means to put Xenophon to death,
Seuthes has been told, ib. 43, p.
229 ; Xenophon persuaded to hand
over army in person to, VII. vii.
S7> P- 236 ; arrives and receives the
troops, VII, viii. 24, p. 240

Thorax, the Boeotian, Timasion and.



make use of certain traders from
Heraclea and Sinope, Anab. V. vi.
19 foil., p. 153 foil. ; his rivalry
with Xenophon, ib. 25, p. 154

Thrace, Anab. VII. i. 15, p. 198 ;
Asiatic Thrace, Anab. VI. iv. i, p.
180

Thracian, the, square in Byzantium,
Anab. VII. i. 24, p. 199

Thracians, the, Clearchus and, Anab.
I. i. 9, p. 3 ; I. iii. 4, p. 9 ; II. vi.
5, p. 61 ; his 800, peltasts, I. ii. 9,
p. 5 ; his corps of mounted, I. v.
13, p. 20 ; their dance, VI. i. 5 foil.,
p. 167 foil. ; Clearchus" s peltasts
with Cheirisophus, VI. ii. 16, p.
176 ; customs of the, at table, VII.
iii. 21 foil., p. 212 ; their dress to
resist cold, VII. iv. 4, p. 216 ; the
highland, ib. 11, p. 217 ; their
mode of flight, ib. 17, p. 218 ; the
millet-eating, VII. v. 12, p. 221 ;
at Salmydessus, wreckers, ib. 13, p.
221 ; Asiatic, and the Arcadian
division, near Calpe, VI. iii. 4 foil.,
p. 176 foil.

Thymbrium, a city in Phrygia, Anab.
I. ii. 13, p. 6

Thynians, the, the most warlike people
of European Thrace, Anab. VII.
ii. 22, p. 206; ib. 31, p. 207; VII.
iv. I, p. 216 ; ib. 14, p. 218 ; sub-
mit to Seuthes, ib. 18, p. 219

Tibarenians, the, Anab. V. v. 2 foil.,
p. 146 foil. ; VII. viii. 25, p. 240
note

Tigris, the river, canals connecting,
and Euphrates, Anab. I. vii. 15,
p. 25 ; passage of, at Sittace, II.
iv. 13, p. 52 ; ib. 21, p. S3 ;
Larissa upon the. III. iv. 6, p. 86
and note 2 ; sources of, surmounted
by the troops, IV. iv. 3, p. no

Timasion, the Dardanian, chosen gen-
eral in place of Clearchus, Anab.
III. i. 47, p. 74; VI. i. 32, p.
172 ; and Xenophon, being the two
youngest generals in command of
the rear, III. ii. 37, p. 81 ; an
exile from the Troad, knows every
corner of the Aeolid, etc., having
served under Clearchus and Dercy-



4S8



INDEX



lidas, V. vi. 23. p. 154 ; informs
certain traders from Heraclea and
Sinope of Xenophon's colonisaEion
scheme, il>, tg, p, 153 foil. ; re-
vives the scheme, il>. 36, p. T57;
commands the cavalry in Xeno-
phon's division, M'hile rescuing the
Arcadians, V'L iii. la, p. 178 ; and
against the Bithynians, VL v, a8,
p. 188 ; and during the Thracian
campaig^n with Seuihes, Vll. iii. 46,
p. 215 ; his gobkts and Pifrstan
carpets, and present to Seuthes, if>.
18 foil, p. 211 foil. ; receives a pair
of mules, VI I. v, 3, p, 220 ; refuses
to campaign without Xenophon, i&.

10, p. 221

Timesitheus, the Trapexuntine, pro-
xcnus of the Mossynoecians, Anad.
V, iv, 3-4, p. 142

Tiribazus, governor of Western
Armenia, the "king's friend,"
Anab. IV. iv. 4, p. no; VII.
viii. 25, p. 240 note ; makes a treaty
with the Hellenes, and marches
beside ihcm 10 certain villages, IV.
iv. 4 foil, , p. T :o : plans to attack the
Hellenic army as they cross a pass,
ib. 18, p. iia ; the camp with the
tent, etc of, captured, if>. 21, p.

Tissaphemes, goes with Cjrras to
Darius ; accuses Cynis to Arta-
xerxes. Anab. I. i. 2 foil, p. i ;
Ionian cities belonging' to, with the
exception of Miletus, revolt to
Cyrus ; to defeat a similar con-
spiracy in Miletus, he kills some
of the citizens and banishes others,
ib. 6, p. 2 ; see I. ix, 9, p. 32 : war
between, and Cyrus. if>. 8. p. a ;
warns Artaxerxes of Cyrus's designs.
I. ii. 4, p. 4 ; is one of the king's
four generals, I. vii. 12, p. 25 ; 1.
viii, 9, p. 27 ; what became of, and
his division in the battle, I. x. 5
foil. , p. 36 ; Phalinus and other
heralds arrive from the king andi

11. i. 7, p. 40; sent on a deputa-
tion with others, promises to conduct
the army back to Hellas, II, iii. 17
foil. , p. 49 ; oaths and pledges ex-



changed between, and the Hellenes,
ib. 26, p. 50 ; his suspicious delay
and conduct when the march com- M
mences, IL iv. i, p. 50 foil.; hands H
over the villages of Parysatis to the *
Hellenes to plunder, ih. 27, p. 55 ;
interview of Clearchiis wath, IL v.
2-25, pp. 55-59 ; entraps and puts
to death five generals and twenty
captains of the Hellenes, ib, 32, p. A
59 ; Mithridalrs and a relation of, ■
present themselves at the Zapatos, "
III, iii. 4, p. 83; compact between
iMithridates and, III. iv. 2, p. 85 ;
abortive .ittack of, with a large army
upon the Hellenes,, i*. 13, p. 87 ;
hangs on the skins of the Hellenic
army with his skirmishers, ib. 18,
p. 88 ; bis army out-marched and
ou t-manoeuvred, witnesses the stortn-
ing of a pass, and finally retires
burning their own villages, ib. 32
foil, , pp. 90-93; the Lacedaemonians
open a campaign against him, \^1L M
vi. I, p. 222; ib. 7, p. 223; Thib- H
ron with the Cyreians prosecutes
the war against, and Pharoabazus,
V^ll. viii. 24, p. 240 4

Tolmides, the Efeian, "the best herald
of his lime," with Clearchus. Anab.
H. ii. 20, p. 46; tU. 1. 46, p. 74;
V. ii 18, p. 137

Tralles, a town in Caria, Anab, I. iv.
8. p. 15

Tranipsae. a Thracian tribe, Anab.
VII, ii. 32, p. 207

Trapjezus, a town of PonCus {mod.
Trebizond), a colony of Sinope in
Colchis, Anab. IV. viii, 2a, p. 130 ;
pays trihuie to Sinope, V. v, 10. p,
148

Triphylia, see Scillus, p. J40

Tro.T;d, the, Anab. V. vi. 24, p. 154 ;
VIL viii. 7, p. 237

Tyriaeum, a town of Phrygia, Anab.
I. ii 14. p. 6

Xanthides, an Achaean, chosen as
general in place of Socrates, A nab.
ill. i 47, p. 74; condemned to
pay a fine, V. viii. i, p, 162

Xenias, of Fairrhasia \tt Arcadia, accoin-



INDEX



359



^
P



I



N



lies Cyrus with three hundred
hoplites on his visit to Darius.
Anai>. I. i, 2, p. I : in command of
CjTus's foreign troops in the cities ;
joins Cyrus at Sardis. K ii. 3, p. 4 ;
celebrates the Lycaea at Peltae, 1*.
10, p, 6 ; in jealousy of Clcarchus,
with Pasion deserts Cyrus at Myri-
andus, I. iv. 7, p. 14
Xenophon, an Athenian, customary
worship in his family, Anai. VII.
viii, 5, |). 237; how he came to
accompany Cyrus at the imvitation
of Proxeiius his friend ; the advice
Socrates gave him on the subject,
and how he followed it, III. i. 4,
p. 68 ; a sign from Zeus the King
sent him, as he sets out from Ephe- j
sus to associate himself with Cyrus ;
at Sardis (cf. Cyrop. II. I i), VI. i.
23, p. 171 ; agrees to join in an I
excursion against the Pisidians, III.
i- 8, p. 69 ; his motive for con-
tinuing the expedilion when, in
Cilicia, Cyrus's object was plain, U.

10, p. 6g ; his conversation with
Cyrus just before the battle, I. viii.
15 foil., p. 28 foil; and Proxenus,

11, iv. 15, p. 53 ; with Cleatior
and Sophaenetus interviews Ariaeus
wishing to hear news of Proxenus,
after the seizure of the generals,
Oct, 22, B.C. 401, II. vL 37, p. 60
folle; his answer to Ariaeus, ih. 41,
p- 61 ; his dream on the night of
tbe 32nd, sent him by Zeus the King;
its import, its immediate effect upon
him, III, i. II foil,, p. 69; gets
up and calls together Proxenus's
officers; his speech to them^ offer-
ing to lead or follow as they thiiJc
best, ib. 15-25, pp. 69-71 ; they,
with one exception, ApoUonidcs,
beg him to lead, ib, 36 foU. , p, 71
foil ; with Proxenus's officers sum-
mons the generals and officers of
the other divisions, about one |
hundred, who meet in the place of
arms about midnight ; his speech,
ifr. 33 foil. , p. 72 foil. ; and Cheiri-
sophus ; is chosen among the five
new generals in place of Proxenus,



ib. 47. p. 74 ; speaks (for the third
time) after Cheirisophus and Cleaner
to the general meeting of the soldiers,
in the early morning, arrayed in bis
finest apparel. III. ii. 7 folL, p* 75
foil. ; turns an omen from Zeus
the Saviour happily to account, il,
8. P' 76 ; at his suggestion they
register a vow to pay offerings of
salvation "according to their ability "
(cf. Mem. I. iii. 3) ; continuing
speech illustrates from Mysians and
Pisidians (cf. Mem, III. v. a6) ;
quotes Homer {Od. ix. 94}; the
germ, of his colonisation scheme, ib.
a6, p. 79 foil, and nole i p. 80 ;
his proposals (i) to bum wagons,
etc. ,(2) as to discipline, are put to the
assembly by Cheirisophus and car-
ried, it, 27-33. P' ^° '^^'' ! ^^^ further
proposab as to order of march and
divisional commands; Cheirisophus,
the Lacedaemonian, in the van, Cle-
anor and Sophaenetus on the wings.
Timasion and himself, as the two
youngest, in the rear,also carried, ib,
34-38, p. Si foil, ; his final speech,
ib. 39, p. 82 ; his probable age,
HOta I p. 82 ; his method of work-
ing the rearguard ; blamed by Chei-
risophus and the elder generals for
useless exposure of himself and men ;
admits the mistake ; his excuse ;
points out need of slingcrs and
cavalry ; his proposals to supply
the defect ; his own horses ; his
proposals carried, a corps of slingers
and fifty horse equipped {cf. Hip-
parch.). III. iii. 8-20, pp. 83-85; his
remarks on new tactical formation,
III. iv, ig foil., p m foil. ;
summoned by Cheirisophus to tbe
front ; consulted as to how the
enemy should be dislodged from a
commanding position oil the right
where the army must pass ; offers
as the younger to occupy a height
above the point in question, but
stipulates for a division of light
infantry ; races the enemy, and
seizes the point, ib, 38-49, pp. 91-
93 ; and Soteridas, it, 47 foil., p.



^



INDEX



92 ; and Cbeirisopbus ; his happy
remark when ibe Persians took to
(Mming their own villages. III. v.
4'6, p. 93 foil. ; in command of
the rear (as usual f as they enter Car-
duchia ; difficulties sustained by :
takes Cheirisophus to task for not
waiting: his two prisoners ques-
tioned as to the road, IV. i. 6-25,
pp. 97-100; with his rearguard
draws off the enemy's attention
from th*! storming party ; with
the rearguard follows the path
taken by the storming party as
being best for beasts ; bis conduct
of this division through a hard
struggle ; at one point is left by
bis shieUl-bearer and protected by
Eurylochus of Lusia ; with Cbeiri-
sopbus arranges to recover the dead,
IV. ii. 2-23, pp. 101-104; his pro-
phetic dream at the Cenlril^ (see
above, p. 69), his stratagem to
cross, iV. iii. 8-34, pp. 106-110;
rouses himself to get up in the snow ;
his example, IV. iv. la foil. , p.
Ill foil.; relieves some men suffer-
ing from boulimia ; saves a party of
men who had fallen out owing to
cold and fatigue ; with bis men forced
to bivouac in the open without
fire and supperless ; kindly entreats
the head-man of an Armenian vil-
lage, and presents him with a
favourite old horse, IV. v, 7-28, pp.
114- 117; his one quarrel with
Cheirisophus ; his plan for steal-
ing across a mountain barrier, and
exchange of raillery with Cheiriso-
phusas to stealing, IV. vi. i-ig, pp.
ii8-I3t; his suggestions for storm-
ing a Taochian fortress adopted,
IV. vii. 4 foIL, p. 122 foil. ; with
the rearguard appro;iching Motint
■^Theches, ii. 23 foil., p. 125; and
the light infantry soldier who re-
cognises the speech of the Ma-
crones. IV. viii. 4 foil, p. 126 foil;
advises a change of tactics in storm-
ing a hill held by the Colchians, his
proposal carried, and carried out
successfully ; quotes Horaer (//. is .



35), i6. 10 folL, p. 127 folL ; his
advice how to employ their time
at TrapcTtis whilst avi-aiting Cheiri-
sophuss return *nth vessels; his
proposals with one exception car-
ried : his advice to the cities to con-
struct roads, V. L 5-14. p. 133 folL;
leads half the army to attack the
Drilae, his tactics in storming their
chief fastness and in retiring from
the place, V. \L 8 foIL , pp. 135-138;
receives his portion as one of the
five generals of the tiihe selected for
Apollo and Artemis at Cerasos ;
history of what he did with biS share,
V. iii. 4-13. pp. 140-142 (see below);
and the Mossynoecian chiefs, V, iv-
4, p. 142; his Speech at a meeting of
the soldiers in reference to a disaster
shared by some of themselves who
had fought without orders, id. 19
foil. , p. 144 ; his speech to the am-
bassadors from Sinope defending
the conduct of the army towards
the Cotyorites. V. v. 13 folL, p.
148 foil. ; states to the ambassadors
their decision to go by sea, if the
Sinopeans will supply ships, V. vi. ,
1 3 folL , p. 1 52 ; his colonisation
scheme : how the thought shaped
itself in his mind ; with Silanos
constilts the victims ; intrigues in
consequence ; and Timasion and
Thorax, /A 15-25, pp. 152-155; his
apology ; explains his habit of
sacrificing ; as to the particular pro-
ject has " done with that dream " ;
his proposal to keep the army to-
gether by all means and set off for
Hellas carried, Silanus alone dis-
senting, 7*. 28-34, pp. 152-156; the
Heracleots and, 1*. 35, p. 156 ; the
generals and, ii. 36, p. 157 ; Neon
sets a new storj' afloat conc«rmng,
V. vii. I foil., p, 157; calls a general
meeting; his speech in self-defence,
and warning against a real danger
looming ; in reference to what
happened at Cerasus, resolutions
are passed and prosecutions insti-
tuted, and further upon his repre-
sentation, with the concurrence of



I



I



INDEX



26 r



I


the soothsayers, it is resohrwl to
purify the army, ik 3*35, pp. 157-
162 ; it being further resolved thai
the jjenerals themselves should
undergo a judicial cxamiaation in
reference to their conduct in past
time, he is accused of i^^pif, and
defends himself successfully against
that charge, V^. viii. 1-26, pp. 163-
166 ; offer of the sole command to,
at Harmene ; his reflections thereon ,
and refusal on religious grounds, VI.
i. 19-31, pp. 170-172; Dexippus's
evil words against, according to
Cheirisophus, lA 32, p. 172 ; and
Cheirisophus decline to exact money
from the Heracleots against their
will, VI. ii. 6, p. 174 ; at the
division of the army into three, at
Heraclea, h at a loss with whom to
go ; wished to be quit of the expedi-
tion and sail home, but on sacrificing
to Heracles the Leader, "'whether
he should stay in charge of the
faithful soldiers, or depart," the god
said "stay," i^. 13-15, p. 175 ; bis
division, seventeen hundred hoplites,
three hundred peltasls, and the
squadron of forty horse, lA 16, p.
176 ; takes ship and disembarks on
the confines of Thrace and the
Heracleotid, and so inio the heart
of the country, lA ig, p, 176 ;
hearing of a disaster to the Arcadian
divisiou pushes on to rescue Ihoni,
joins them at Calpe, VI. iii. 10-26,
pp. 178-180 ; the idea that "some-
body" wished to found a city there,
res'^nted by the soldiers, VI. iv. 9,
p. fSi ; the army next day ha^nng
voted to resume its old position
under the former generals, he pro-
poses to sacrifice for battle, and the
li'ictinjs prosing unfavourable it is
said that he has persuaded the seer
to say so in bis desire to colonise
the place, H. 12-14, P- 182 foil. ;
sacrifices again without success ; his
speech ; and again, his speech pro-
posing to fortify Calpe, and leave
a detachment in possession, ik 17-
2o, p. 183 ; sacrifices and goes out



to rescue Neon and a party of men ;
retunis at night, id. 25, p. 184 ;
after a harassing night, with the
other generals leads the men inside
the fastness, VI. v. i, p. 185 ; sacri-
fices next morning for an expedi-
tion ; omen of an eagle j bidden by
the seer Arexion to lead on ; Neon
being left to guard the camp, id. 2
foil , p. 185 ; his flying columns, id.
9, p. 186 ; and Sophaenelus, as to
crossing a gully, lA 14, p. 187;
his watchword, Zeus the Saviour,
Heracles the Guide, his victory over
the Bithynians and Pharnabazus's
cavalry; returns toCalpc, iA a 2 foil. ,
p. t88 foil. ; envoys come to hira, as
founder of the new city, he introduces
ihcm to the soldiers, VI, vi. 4 foil. ,
p. 190 foil. ; on Cleander's arrival aids
the other generals in restraining the
men who are for stoning Dcxippus,
and explains the matter to Cleander,
id. 5 foil, p. 190 foil.; and Agasias
and Cleander, who is pacified, jA
9 foil., p. 191 foil.; consorts with
Cleander friendlily, id. 35, p. 195;
continues the march through
Bilhynia until they reach Chrysopol is
where they dispose of the booty by
sale, id. 38, p. 195 ; his answer to
AnEixibius's envoys ; his desire to
return home ; persuaded to remain
until they had crossed to Bytantiumf
VII. i. 4. p. 196 ; and Medosades,
agent of Seuthes, iL 5, p. 196;
crosses to Byzantium ; pays a fare-
well visit to Cleander ; detained
again, id. E, p, 197 ; prevents
soldiers sacking Byzantium, id. 18
foil,, pp. 198-200; through Cleander
obtains leave to enter Byzantium, as
he is stalling homewards ; is to go
■with Anaxibius ; bids the soldiers
good-bye, id. 38 foil., p. aoi ;
accompanies Anaxibius to Cyeicus
and Parium, where Aristarchus,
Clean der's successor, meets them ;
is bidden by Anaxibius, who finds
Pharnabazus cold, to rejoin the
CjTcian array which has marched to
Chersonese, and keep it together



262



INDEX



(Anaxibius puts a triaconler al his
service and gives him a letter to
the Perinthians) ; rejoins army at
Selybria, Vil. ii. 8 foU., p. '203
foil, and Aristarchus, the new
harmost, who intervenes, and al
Herinthiis forbids him to take the
troops across to Asia, ib. 12, p.
204; getting wind of a plot "he
would be seized and either meet
some ill fate there or be dehvercd up
to Phartiaba^Ms," turns back on the
ground that he has a sacrifice to
make; he asks, "would the gods
allow him to try and bring the army
over to Seuthes?" since to cross was
unsafe and to be cooped up in
Chersonese terrible ; the victims are
favourable to his project, if>. m foli, ,
p. 204 foil.; with Polycrates and
others visits Seuthes by night, i/>.
17, p. 205 ; and Seuthes, ii. 20
foil., p. 206 foil ; in case of diffi-
ciilties (with Laccdaeraon) Seuthes
offers to make him his son-in-law
and to give him Bisanthe, and so
the deputation returns, ik 35 foil. ,
p. ao8 : explains the situation to
the soldiers, proposing they should
go where ihey can get provisions
and decide between Seuthes and
Aristarchus; addresses the soldiers,
not counting Neon's men ; with the
array meets Seuthes who leads them
to some villages to get provisions ;
Seuthes stipulates with, that the
army, if they follow him, should
never be more than seven days'
journey from the sea ; at a meeting
puts the motion to the vote ; it is
carried unanimously and they take
the field with Seuthes, VII. iii. x
foil., p. so8 foil.; in a dilemma at
the royal entertainment ; his after
dinner speech ; presents the soldiers ;
drains the cup fraternally, ii. 20
foil., p. air foil. ; his advice to
•Seuthes to follow Hellenic order on
the night march, ii. 37. p. 214 ;
an instance of his youthful activity ;
part played by him in capturing
some Tbracian villages, ik 45 foil, ,


p. 215 folL; sent with the youngest
hoplitesagainstsomeupland villages:
explains the nature of Episthenes to
Seuthes ; encamped with a picked
force in dangerous quartei^ on the
hills ; interviewed by a party of
the mountaineers, undertakes to
arrange a truce, but is attacked
next night by a party who set the
village on fire ; gallant escape and
defeat of the assailants ; successful
expedition with Seuthes against
these mountaineers who supplicate
for terms ; his generous answer to
Seuthes concerning their fate, VII.
iv. 6 foil, p. 2:17 foil.; offered the
pick of the spoils on the return
of Heracleides, begs that his col-
leagues should be rewarded first ;
reproaches Heracleides for having
brought back by his trafficking only
two- thirds of the pay due ; annoys
Heracleides thus, and Seilthes. by
constantly demanding the soldiers*
pay, so that the latter seems to
forget all about the sea - board
fortresses ; consequently hesitates as
to marching farther up the country ;
Timasion, Phryniscus. and Cleanor
will not continue the campaign
without ; overtures to, who with the
r^st agrees Id a further campaign
to Salmydessus and back toSelybria;
annoyance of the soldiers with,
because there is no pay, V^II. v. 2
foil,, p. 220 foil.; his character as
described by Seuthes and Hera-
cleides to two Laconian agents from
Thibron, who is anxious to avail
himself of the troops, VIL vi. 4
foil. , p. 223 ; an Arcadian upbraids
him to the Laconian envoys for
selfishly keeping them in Thrace
instead of letting them join the
Laconians ; defends himself, show-
ing that his conduct was un-
selfish ; the testimony of the
I.aconian agent Charminus, who
rp[jeats what they had been lold of
his character, ii. 8-39, pp. 223-228 ;
Polycrates put forward by, pro-
poses to seize Heracleides, who is



i



INDEX



263



a false Hellene, ib. 41, p. 228 ;
Seuthes sends his private interpreter
to, begging him to stay with a
thousand hoplites, renews his
promise about the sea-board places,
and advises him that Thibron means
to put him to death ; similar
messages coming from other quarters
warning him that he was calum-
niated and should be on his g^uard ;
he sacrifices to Zeus the King, ' ' shall
he stay with Seuthes or depart,"
and the god answers "depart," ib.
43 foil. , p. 229 ; Medosades in the
presence of an Odrysian chief orders
him to be gone out of the land and
not injure his territory ; his reply to
this attack ; Medosades urges him
to summon the two Laconians to
hear his expostulations ; he does so,
suggesting to the Laconians what
answer to make, so as to recover
the pay that is due ; he puts to
Medosades a crucial question ; as a
result of the interview is sent with a
serviceable staff, along with Medo-
sades, to Seuthes, VII. vii. 2-19, pp.
229-231 ; reads Seuthes a lecture,
ib. 20-47, pp. 229-235 ; Seuthes
penitently promises to pay, and
renews his offers to, who courteously
refuses and with friendly assurances
departs ; his jest touching the
talent ; his words ' ' somewhere I
may rise to honour " (cf. Hell. III.
ii. 9), ib. 48-54, p. 23s foil. ;
soldiers glad to see him back, he
hands over the property to the
Laconian agents, ib. 55 foil., p.
236 ; his own intention to return
home (which he was free to do at
this date) postponed, at the request
of the authorities, who begged him
first to hand over the army to
Thibron, ib. 57, p. 236 ; crossing
with the troops to Lampsacus meets
Eucleides, the soothsayer of his
family, who congratulates him on
his safety, but is surprised at his
lack of gold ; Eucleides can hardly
believe it, but seeing how sorry a
sacrifice he offers to Apollo in his



presence, is persuaded of the fact ;
the real obstacle discovered by the
soothsayer to be Xenophon's self, and
Zeus Meilichios a further obstacle,
he is persuaded to sacrifice in the
' ' old customary way " ; does so at
Ophrynium, offering a holocaust of
swine after the custom, of his
family, and the signs are favourable,
VII. viii. 1-5, p. 237 ; Bion and
Nausicleides, two agents, hospitably
entertained by, repurchase for him
a horse which he had sold at
Lampsacus for fifty darics, sus-
pecting that he had parted with it
out of need, and hearing he was
fond of the beast, refuse to be
remunerated, ib. 6, p. 237 ; at
Pergamus, is entertained at the
house of Hellas, wife of Gongylus,
the Eretrian, and mother of Gorgion
and Gongylus (cf. Hell. III. i. 6);
she siiggests to him the capture of
Asidates, a Persian notable (her
cousin and a friend, Daphnagoras,
are to go too) ; he and they
sacrifice ; victims promise success ;
he takes the pick of his friends, e.g.
Agasias, as he wishes to do them a
good turn ; misadventure ; with his
friends, rescued by Procles, ib.
8-18, p. 238 foil. ; sacrifices next
day ; leads out the whole army ;
captures Asidates and all that he
had ; his cause for gratitude to God,
since the Laconians, the officers,
the other generals, and the soldiers
united to give him the pick of horses,
cattle teams, etc., so that he was
now in a position himself to do
another a good Xxnm, ib. 20-23, p.
240; incorporated the troops with
Thibron's Hellenic forces who pro-
ceed to prosecute a war against
Tissaphemes and Pharnabazus, ib.
24, p. 240
Xerxes, his palace and citadel at
Celaenae, Anab. I. ii. 9, p. 5 ;
conquered by land and sea, III. ii.
13. P- 77

Zapatas, the river (the greater Zab),



264



INDEX



a tributary of the Tigris, Anab. 11.
V. I, p. 55 ; passage of the. III. iii.
6. p. 83

Zelarchus, clerk of the market at
Cerasus, Anab. V. vii. 24, p. 160 ;
ib. 29, p. 161

Zeus, the Saviour, an omen firom,
Anab. III. ii. 9, p. 76 ; thank-
offerings to, at Trapezus, IV. viii.
24, p. 130 ; a watchword, VI. v.
35, p. 188 ; the King, named to



Xenoi^on by the oracle at Del(^.
VI. L 22, jx 170 ; gjives Xenof^on
a sign when setting out &x>m Ephe-
sus. ib. 33, p. 171 : Xenof^on's
dream on the night of the murder of
the officers, sent to him by, ib. and
III. i. 13, p. 69 : Afeilichios, an
obstacle to Xenophon, VII. viii. 4,
p. 237 and note
Zeus, the temple of, in Oljrmpia,
Anab. V. iiL 11, p. 141



NOTE on Anabasis V. iii. 4 foil, p. 140 foil.

History of what Xenophon did with his share of the tithe selected for Apollo
and Artemis of the Ephesians, as described above p. 140 foil.

Out of the one portion he caused a dedicatory ofiTering to be made and
dedicated among the treasures of the Athenians at Delphi. It was inscribed
with his own name and that of Proxenus his friend. The gift for Artemis was
first left buried in /\sia, when he left that part of the world himself (in
B.C. 394) with Agesilaus on the march into Boeotia. It was entrusted to
Megabyzus, the sacristan of the goddess, who, if he came alive out of the
expedition, was to restore him the deposit ; but should evil befall him, was to
cause to be made and dedicated on his behalf to Artemis whatsoever thing he
thought would be pleasing to the goddess. After his banishment, when
established by the Lacedaemonians as a colonist in Scillus near Olympia,
Megabyzus arrived on his way to Olympia, as a spectator to attend the games
[probably anno 384 B.C.], and restored to him the deposit. With the money
Xenophon bought for the goddess a plot of ground, at a point indicated to him
by the oracle, the scenery of which curiously resembled that of the shrine at
Ephesus. Here with the sacred money he built an altar and a temple, and
every year tilled the fruits and did sacrifice to the goddess. His own lads
with those of the other citizens always made a hunting excursion against the
festival day. [Xenophon left Scillus at a certain date, as the imperfects in the
above passage show ; possibly he was driven out when the Eleians recovered
the Triphylia soon after the battle of Leuctra, b.c. 371.]



Printtdbf R. & R. Clask, Limitbd, BeB$tlmrgh.



THE WOEKS OF XENOPHON.

TRANSLATED BY

H. G. DAKYNS, M.A.,

LATE ASSISTANT MASTER IN CLIFTON COLLEGE

In Four Volumes. Crown Zvo.

Volume I. Hellenica, Books I. and II. and Anabasis, ios. 6d.

[Macmillan and Co., 1890.

CLASSICAL REVIEW.— " h sound and interesting piece of work which it is
exceedingly desirable should be brought as soon as possible to completion."

SPEAKER. — "The translator has contrived to be both vigorous and accurate . . .
The translation is a really sound and excellent piece of work. "

SPECTA 7 OR.— "If the whole be kept up to the level reached in this part, it will
be a really admirable piece of work."

Volume II. Hellenica, Books III.-VII., Agesilaus: an
tncomium ; The Polity of the Athenians; The Polity
OF THE Lacedaemonians ; Ways and Means, a Pamphlet
on Revenues ids. 6d. [Macmillan and Co., 1892.

ACADEMY. — " Mr. Dakyns is doing scholarship a real service, no less by ventilating
these questions about Xenophon, than by giving us a complete translation. His rendering
of the Greek is careful and accurate ; and he supplies maps, analyses, and all necessary
information."

JOURNAL OF EDUCA TION.—" Mr. Dakyns has fulfilled the promise given by
his first volume of producing a thoroughly readable book. He is never dull. As a rule the
force of tha original is given in vigorous, racy language."

CAMBRIDGE REVIEW.— "No serious student of Greek history should be with-
out Mr. Dakyns' volumes. Of the translation we need only say that it stands on a level
with the translations, in the truest sense classical, of Jowett and Verrall."

Volume III. Part I. THE MEMORABILIA and Apology; the
Economist (Oeconomic) : a Treatise on the Science of the
Household in the form of a Dialogue; Symposium (Con-
vivium) or The Banquet; Hiero, or "The Tyrant": a
Discourse on Despotic Rule. los. 6d.

ACADEMY. — "Every page that NJr. Dakyns writes testifies to his own sterling
scholarship and to his intimate acquaintance with the subjects of which he treats."

Volume III. Part II. Three Essays : on the Duties of a Cavalry
General (Hipparch) ; on Horsemanship ; and on Hunting
(Cynegeticus). 5s. [Macmillan and Co., 1897.

NA TURE.—" We may pass to Mr. Dakyns' translation of the Cynegeticus. . . . The
work is a marvellous display of close and intelligent observation by an enthusiastic sports-



man, and will be full of interest to persons of similar taste in the present day. . . . Any
sportsman into whose hand the book falls will feel grateful to him for ren ' '
the work of, pertiaps, the acutest observer of outdoor life in antiquity."



Volume IV. The Cyropaedia. \In preparation.

MACMILLAN AND CO., Ltd., LONDON



TRANSLATIONS FROM THE GREEK.



With Translation by T. G.
With Translation by



By E. POSTE-
8vo. 1 25, 6d.
By E. POSTE,



^SGHYLUS.— THE SUPPLICES.

Tucker, I.itt.D. Sviv los. 6d.

THE SEVEN AGAINST THEBES.

A. VV. VKRKALL.'T.itUD. Svo. 7S. 6d.

THE CHOEPHORI. With Translation by A. W. Verrall,

Litt.D. Bvo. 13S.

EUMENIDES, With Vers© Translation by BERNARD Drake,

M.A. Bvo. 5s.

ABISTOPHA!nES.— THE BIRDS. Translated into English

Verse by li. H, Ken NKDV. Bvo. 6s.

AEISTOTLE.— THE FALLACIES; or, The Sophistici

Elenchi, With Traxislatjoia by E* PosTE, M.A. Bvo. 83. 6d.

THE FIRST BOOK OF THE METAPHYSICS. Translated

into En§r|ish Prose by a Cambridge Graduate. Svo. 5s»

THE POLITICS. Translated by Bishop Welldon. Crown

&va IDS. 6d.

THE RHETORIC. Translated by Bishop Welldon. Crown

Svo. 7s. 6d.

THE NICOMACHEAN ETHICS. Translated by Bishop

Wellijon', Crown flvo. 7s. 6d.

ON THE CONSTITUTION OF ATHENS.

Second Editioa Crown Bva 3,a 6d.

THE POETICS. By S. H. Butcher, Liit.D.

neL Text and Translation, 4s. 6cl. net.

BACOBTLIDES.— A PROSE TRANSLATION.

M.A., Fellow of Oriel College, Oxford. Crown Bvo. as.

EUEIPIDBS.-THE TRAGEDIES IN ENGLISH VERSE.

By A. S. Way, M.A. Three vols. Crowii Svo, 68. net each.

ALCESTIS, HECUBA, MEDEA. Separately, sewed. is.6d.

e^ch,

HEEODOTUS.— THE HISTORY. Translated by G. C.

Macai;laVj M.A, Two vols. Crown Bvo. tBs.

HOMER.— THE ODYSSEY DONE INTO ENGLISH PROSE.

By S. H. Butch RR, M.A., and A. Lang, M.A. Crown Bvo. 7s. 6d. net.

THE ODYSSEY. Books I.-XII. Tranblated into English

Verse by Earl of Carnabvow. Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d.

THE ILIAD DONE INTO ENGLISH PROSE. By

Andrew I ang, Walter Lraf, and Ernest Mykks. Crown Bvo. las. 6d.

THE ILIAD DONE INTO ENGLISH VERSE. By A. S.

Wav, M.A. Two vols. 410. i«a. 6d. net,

PAUSAmAS--~DESCRIPT10N OF GREECE. By J. G.

FftAZER, M.A, Kcllow of Trinity College, Cambridge. Six vols. Bva 126$. net

PINDAR.— THE EXTANT ODES. Translated by Ernest

MvERS. Crown &vo. 5a.

PLATO,— THE TI M^ U S. W^ith Translation by R. D. Archer-

Hind, M.A. Bvo. 16s.

POLYBIUS. — THE HISTORIES. Translated by E. S,

SHUCKPUfiCH. Crown Bvo. S4s.

SOPHOOLES.— CEDIPUSTHE KING. Translated into English

Verse by E. D. A. Mokshead, M.A. Fcap. Bvo. 3s. 6d.

Specimens of Greek Tragedy. Translated by Goldwin Smith,

Ei.C.L. Two vols. Globe Svo, icm,

THEOCBITUS, BION, AND MOSCHUS, Rendered into English

Prose by A- Lang, M.A. Pott Bvo. as. 6d, net.

MACMILLAN AND CO., Ltd., LONDON.



w


■.*^



Stanford Uoiversity Library

Stanford, California



In order that others may use this book,
please retura it as soon as possible, but
not {ater than the date due.
