A Vision (W. B. Yeats, 1925; public domain)
===============================================================================
Yeats's occult system of history and personality channeled through automatic writing — the central esoteric text of the 1920s literary occult revival. Source: Internet Archive.

A VISION

AN EXPLANATION OF LIFE
FOUNDED UPON THE WRITINGS
OF GIRALDUS AND UPON CER-
TAIN DOCTRINES ATTRIBUTED

TO KUSTA BEN LUKA

By
WILLIAM
BUTLER
YEATS

LONDON
PRIVATELY PRINTED FOR SUBSCRIBERS ONLY BY
T. WERNER LAURIE, LTD.
1925

+h, |

[ thank Messrs Macmillan & Co., the
publishers of my book ** Later Poems,”’
for permission to reprint from that
work ‘*‘ The Phases of the Moon.’’
W.0Bs x

Printed in Great Britain by
The Dunedin Press, Limited, Edinburgh.

A VISION

This edition consists of siw hundred
copies numbered and signed.

This és No...J.5A.......

er My 4

oa es TiFy

a hfe ee re | |
Fou ” } % = a ria
Af +> abe fe 04 ees Bae

LJ
, im

“Sere hs + D and’ i z fe ei ey i - eos | | a ih

a a PCy ng 72 Oe a > we

ee PER Lary rN #t4 ctsial B stre tay te
CS Saree ee eres AON er ee

~~ a ‘ ® 7
| 36 i-*

a]

c
-

pe ee es ah ads
Se ee. Te) SOS Rigas

ae |

— J

CONTENTS

PAGE
DEDICATION ; F b . ; 4 4
INTRODUCTION . : ™ > ; : ; XV
Book I.—WuHAT THE CALIPH PARTLY LEARNED , 3

Boox I].—WzuHatT THE CALIPH REFUSED TO LEARN . 121
Boox III.—Dovre or Swan - : ss ; 179

’ Boox I1V.—Tue Gates oF PLUTO  . : - 219

vil

e {'«

—w _*

oh ntl

ie. +" ee) tog = c
ra i
~ wae an oer Pe eee
& : 0 at — — ; Pe = ee
fe) ee ere | a
i —< - oe _ é& on —e P #
& q q =

\

: |
1 ,
a, «
he
eS
sy
a
ai
‘
1 |
? >
ie
-_
7
‘ +
ary
Pa
— -
¢ \
1°, = -
Tak 7
abel
S33
, vo
ae ak Nae te
»
pe -
\
\
a
ve
(
r
|
ley
, ;
i
4

=
s

'
*
i
-
aa
‘-

i i
. “. i ‘ ~ ~~“ - * hi er or ~ ‘oe ~ ‘ - — = *
a ~ “7 ' F ; = os | . A — a i = _ we
eo ” = 7 a - , = ai ’
’ ¥ ~ as i- “ a oe hn = Nl rr
a + ; 7 ~ ;
—_ i > : vw
| ‘ei ’ Bee gh ego ry ! pee
i a c - = : J
— ¢ é = ‘ P : » Fr’ a P
a a... rT t 7 ,
] tape! a -- 7 —,
~ - a ae ut | 2 a : 4 Lad - 4 ll . - f — '
‘ wily ? ia P Bad . i ? ~ af ® a
nal a= = 7 — a ~ - i 4 ‘ ae 7 —'
— “i a a
a. ag ee ae? ae od | . ~ le
a @ P >
.. »* — s a ge 4 — a - 4 7 =
i i a " mS ad a j - J - , ‘
P ~ ~ ¢ pal . 7 J ‘ - — » —
i= : \4 . ‘ i ? - ae - :
a = \ : '? _ . ; | Wry
_ i] > 3 a naa ; . Z Lowe Z Me
— i ‘ ry ‘ 7 '
~~ i. ~~ é sd <, “« — 2 ~
- ; —— a d ; |
> i — ee fa ‘ iy = + alt bh
. a he
} = . ; “ f ~ mgt Tt
. ’ o
uy 4 ; z
« I
, - sS «A - bd .
=
the, i ™ ae? 4 oa
- A. a
q P™ | 9 il
P 7 be
—_-” , 3 a » y —_
» i ~
7k e - _ o A : 5 cs @ 2 - 7 2 = | ae i : . “nr r = r = — = ?
- yf a "thw op i, = b ake ’ - - re Ae ee eee ; 7) = “9 oe * } S alll beg.
e als “J ‘ a - | a é é ad a ” ry | ee . sh. ° = & - — ia 7 . i
4s v, ™ wd a : ‘ a e | . be i,

— i ap
, ; -~ ,
hs 2 +
* ®
Ps ind
° =,
, . ~
= \
: > *
* 4
 ™ . “78 ,
a ee ae th. c
" 7 = 7 te +
aT el ba
' 2 -_ ma
7 a ak
- a e :
’
i ~~“
= a .
Tt bow wp.
a i
: a oJ
. 2 =
fe, we a a :
‘ 4
é «
<
i
- ~ ar
igi bd ve '
U
, ‘=
hes ~ ht tel J > aa
te ee | rr ee | . .

Sot ieee oo Fp ry a = tl : — .
AA "meee rp ae ey ee : -— ee ee Sue k
f *, tetas” es te . " _ < — a . . . sl oh a = 9 » i = - « wi : om : 7 -
oa. — 7 rs a i ae ~~. «' “- ee ee , ~ © . : ~ ;
od ee ee eee ee Rei a! ® wa a al <
~ ail ce Der ~ res - a “24 esr: _— - — 2 i”
ia ‘aint fe, Totti! OP Ss aetio T pill piel | mage a ee a7 |
7 a . d . : «7 “2 rw — ae ‘ d
i or oe J Meetann-S ef ps

a

2
-

4 ‘
=
a Lad
*
&

= a. a ee “y } — cS
owt Cw Vlogs «ieee en ee aan 5, eee aid

- sae —
¢ ‘ > . i . = ,
ae a PPro
J = ra ft 4. p<) 5 a — o al =
s j uJ a . , =| a , ad
aia t A . ae ad es 7 © > a - aa : an of , | ‘ > inn as : a A - r 7 * = 2¢ . of ' ‘ be 4 <* a oa b
: ‘ i a 4 at 3 bad 4 ’ a » & “ a* ¢y™ vend é ? Pp a a - : l = a - = = z : ; --* - " ™ ' 7 p ” id "
‘ af om . ,_' i =e «<" = | ' _ é um a FE : : ed ' \ ail = - . nf ‘ : —_ 4 ee oo _= _—
= Sa = o-_ = , —_ rt , = ja _ = we . - ‘ " by P : f t . =. LC : et

i-4
rey

TO VESTIGIA

“IT; is a constant shotight of mine that what we write is
. often a commendation of, or expostulation with the
Bs friends of our youth, and that even if we survive all our
i friends we continue to prolong or to amend conversations
. ae ee that took place before our five-and-twentieth year.
us ~ Perhaps this book has been written because a number
% ie of young men and women, you and I among the number,
@ zi] ‘met nearly forty years ago in London and in Paris to
_ discuss mystical philosophy. You with your beauty and
your learning and your mysterious gifts were held by
all in affection, and though, when the first draft of this
_ dedication was written, I had not seen you for more than
_ thirty years, nor knew where you were nor what you
were doing, and though much had happened since we
copied the Jewish Schemahamphorasch with its seventy-
two Names of God in Hebrew characters, it was
_ plain that I must dedicate my book to you. All
other students who were once friends or friends’
friends were dead or estranged. Florence Farr coming
to her fiftieth year, dreading old age and fading
beauty, had made a decision we all dreamt of at one
time or another, and accepted a position as English
* ix

» oy

teacher in a native school in Ceylon that she might study
oriental thought, and had died there. Another had
become a Buddhist monk, and some ten years ago
a traveller of my acquaintance found him in a
Burmese monastery. A third lived through that
strange adventure, perhaps the strangest of all adven-
tures—Platonic love. When he was a child his nurse
said to him—** An Angel bent over your bed last night,’
and in his seventeenth year he awoke to see the phantom
of a beautiful woman at his bedside. Presently he gave
himself up to all kinds of amorous adventures, until at
last, in I think his fiftieth year but when he had still
all his physical vigour, he thought ** I do not need women
but God.’’ Then he and a very good, charming, young
fellow-student fell in love with one another and though
he could only keep down his passion with the most bitter
struggle, they lived together platonically, and this they
did, not from prejudice, for I think they had none, but
from a clear sense of something to be attained by what
seemed a most needless trampling of the grapes of life.
She died, and he survived her but a little time during
which he saw her in apparition and attained through her
certain of the traditional experiences of the saint. He
was my close friend, and had he lived I would have asked
him to accept the dedication of a book I could not expect
him to approve, for in his later life he cared for little but
what seemed to him a very simple piety. We all, so
far as 1 can remember, differed from ordinary students
of philosophy or religion through our belief that truth
cannot be discovered but may be revealed, and that if
a man do not lose faith, and if he go through certain
preparations, revelation will find him at the fitting
moment. J remember a learned brassfounder in the
North of England who visited us occasionally, and was
convinced that there was a certain moment in every
year which, once known, brought with it ** The Summum

<i:

Bonum, the Stone of the Wise.’* But others, for it was
clear that there must be a vehicle or symbol of commun-
ication, were of opinion that some messenger would make
himself known, in a railway train let us say, or might
be found after search in some distant land. I look
back to it as a time when we were full of a phantasy
that has been handed down for generations, and is now
an interpretation, now an enlargement of the folk-lore
of the villages. That phantasy did not explain the world
to our intellects which were after all very modern, but
it recalled certain forgotten methods of meditation and
_ chiefly how so to suspend the will that the mind became
automatic, a possible vehicle for spiritual beings. It
carried us to what we had learned to call Hodos
Chameliontos.

IT

_ SOME were looking for spiritual happiness or for some
of unknown power, but I had a practical object.
\I wished for a system of thought that would leave my
‘imagination free to create as it chose and yet make all
that it created, or could create, part of the one history,
and that the soul’s. The Greeks certainly had such a
‘system, and Dante—though Boccaccio thought him a
bitter partisan and therefore a modern abstract man—
and [ think no man since. Then when I had ceased all
active search, yet had not ceased from desire, the
documents upon which this book is founded were put
into my hands, and I had what I needed, though it may
_be too late. What I have found indeed is nothing new,
for I will show presently that Swedenborg and Blake
and many before them knew that all things had their
gyres; but Swedenborg and Blake preferred to explain
them figuratively, and so I am the first to substitute for

xii
Biblical or mythological figures, historical movements
and actual men and women.

it

I HAVE moments of exaltation like that in which I
wrote ** All Souls’ Night,’? but 1 have other momenis
when remembering my ignorance of philosophy I doubt
if I can make another share my excitement. As I most
fear to disappoint those that come to this book through
some interest in my poetry and in that alone, I warn them
from that part of the book called **‘ The Great Wheel ”
and from the whole of Book II, and beg them to dip
here and there in the verse and into my comments upon
life and history. Upon the other hand my old fellow
students may confine themselves to what is most
technical and explanatory; thought is nothing without
action, but if they will master what is most abstract
there and make it the foundation of their visions, the
curtain May ring up on a new drama.

I could I daresay make the book richer, perhaps
immeasurably so, if I were to keep it by me for another
year, and I have not even dealt with the whole of
my subject, perhaps not even with what is most
important, writing nothing about the Beatific Vision,
little of sexual love; but I am longing to put it out of
reach that I may write the poetry it seems to have made
possible. I can now, if I have the energy, find the
simplicity I have sought in vain. I need no longer write
poems like *‘ The Phases of the Moon’”’ nor “* Ego
Dominus Tuus,”’ nor spend barren years, as I have done
some three or four times, striving with abstractions that
substituted themselves for the play that I had planned.

xili

IV

DOUBTLESS I must someday complete what I have
begun, but for the moment my imagination dwells upon
_a copy of Powys Mather’s ** Arabian Nights ” that awaits
my return home. I would forget the wisdom of the
East and remember its grossness and its romance. Yet
when I wander upon the cliffs where Augustus and
Tiberius wandered, I know that the new intensity that
seems to have come into all visible and tangible things
is not a reaction from that wisdom but its very self.
Yesterday when I saw the dry and leafless vineyards at
the very edge of the motionless sea, or lifting their brown
stems from almost inaccessible patches of earth high up
_ on the cliff-side, or met at the turn of the path the orange

and lemon trees in full fruit, or the crimson cactus flower,
or felt the warm sunlight falling between blue and blue,
I murmured, as I have countless times, ** I have been
part of it always and there is maybe no escape, forgetting
and returning life after life like an insect in the roots

of the grass.’?’ But murmured it without terror, in
- exultation almost.

Ws BY:

Capri, February, 1925.

The Great Wheel

INTRODUCTION

By OWEN AHERNE

IN the spring of 1917 I met in the National Gallery a
nan whom I had known in the late Eighties and early
Jineties, and had never thought to see again. Michael
tobartes and I had been intimate friends and fellow-
tudents for a time, and later, after matters of theological
lifference arose between us, I lost sight of him, but
heard a vague rumour that he was wandering or settled
jomewhere in the Near Kast. At first I was not certain
f this were indeed he, and passed him in hesitation
jeveral times, but his athletic body, and his skin that
had seemed, even when I first met him, sundried and sun-
larkened, his hawk-like profile, could belong to no other
nan. I wish the thirty years had changed me as little,
or I saw no change in that erect body except that the
1air that had been some kind of red, was grey, and in
places, fading into white. I had known him as an
uncompromising Pre-Raphaelite, and there he stood
pefore the story of Griselda pictured in a number of
episodes, the sort of thing he had admired thirty years
ago. Even when I had made him understand who I
"was I drew him from the picture with difficulty, because
is indignation that the authorities of the gallery
had not thought it was worth saving from the German
bombs had heightened his admiration for all pictures of

* a
xy = 5 wt
“4 LISA,
. ; eit ri
- i . he ‘a ‘ Al a,
hat VP
= '
a a 4
: ; Pe
i c

xvi

that type and his need for its expression. ‘* The old |

painters,’’ he said, *“* painted women with whom they

would if they could have spent the night or a life, battles —

they would if they could have fought in, and all manner

of desirable houses and places, but now all is changed, —
and God knows why anybody paints anything. But

why should we complain, things move by mathematica]

necessity, all changes can be dated by gyre and cone, ©
and pricked beforehand upon the Calendar.” J[-
brought him to a seat in the middle of the room, |
and I had begun to speak of the changed world
we met in when he said: ** Where is Yeats? I want his |

address. . L am lost in this town and I don’t know where

to find anybody or anything.”’ I felt a slight chill, for ,
we had both quarrelled with Mr Yeats on what I |

considered good grounds. Mr Yeats had given the name

of Michael Robartes and that of Owen Aherne to fictitious
characters, and made those characters live through |
events that were a travesty of real events. ‘* Remem- |
ber,’? I said, ‘* that he not only described your death |
but represented it as taking place amid associations which ©
must, I should have thought, have been highly disagree- ©
able to an honourable man.’’ ‘* I was fool enough to ©
mind once,’”’ he said, ** but I soon found that he had

done me a service. His story started a rumour of my

death that became more and more circumstantial as it |
grew. One by one my correspondents ceased to write.

My name had become known to a large number of fellow-

students, and but for that rumour I could not have lived
in peace even in the desert. If I had left no address! _
could never have got it out of my head that there was
a vast heap of their letters lying somewhere, or even —
crossing the desert upon camel back.”? I did not know
where Mr Yeats lived, but said that we could find out

from Mr Watkins the book-seller in Cecil’s Court: and

having so found out, he said we must call upon Mr Yeats, ©

XVil

and we started, keeping as much as possible from the

ne main streets that we might have silence for our talk.
P

‘¢ What have you to say to Yeats? ’’ I said, and instead
of answering he began to describe his own life since our
last meeting. ‘* You will remember the village riot
_ which Yeats exaggerated in ‘ Rosa Alchemica.’ A couple
of old friends died of their injuries, and that, and certain
evil results of another kind, turned me for a long time
from my favourite studies. I had all through my early
life periods of pleasure, or at least of excitement, that
alternated with periods of asceticism. I went from Paris
ito Rome, and from Rome to Vienna, in pursuit of a
ballet dancer, and in Vienna we quarrelled. I tried to
forget my sorrow in wine, but in a few weeks I had tired
of that, and then, with some faint stirring of the old
interest I went to Cracow, partly because of its fame

as a centre of printing, but more I think because Dr.
Dee and his friend Edward Kelly had in Cracow practised
alchemy and scrying. There I took up with a fiery
handsome girl of the poorer classes, and hired a couple
of rooms in an old tumble-down house. One night I
was thrown out of bed and when I lit my tallow candle
found that the bed, which had fallen at one end, had
been propped up by a joint stool and an old book bound
in calf. In the morning I found that the book was called

¢ Speculum Angelorum et Hominorum,’ had been written
_ by Giraldus and printed at Cracow in 1594, a good

many years before the celebrated Cracow publications,

and was of a very much earlier style both as to woodcut
and type. It was very dilapidated and all the middle
_ pages had been torn out; but at the end of the book
were a number of curious allegorical pictures; a woman
with a stone in one hand and an arrow in the other; a
man whipping his shadow; a man being torn in two by
an eagle and some kind of wild beast; and so on to the
‘= of eight and twenty; a portrait of Giraldus and

XVill
a unicorn; and many diagrams where gyres and circles —
grew out of one another like strange vegetables; and
there was a large diagram at the beginning where lunar —
phases and zodiacal signs were mixed with various
unintelligible symbols—an apple, an acorn, a cup. My
beggar maid had found it, she told me, on the
top shelf in a wall cupboard where it had been left by
the last tenant, an unfrocked priest who had joined g
troup of gypsies and disappeared, and she had tom ~
out the middle pages to light our fire. What little
remained of the text was in Latin, and I was piecing the -
passages together and getting a little light on two or
three of the diagrams when a quarrel with my beggar
maid plunged me into wine and gloom once more. Then
turning violently from all sensual pleasure I decided to
say my prayers at the Holy Sepulchre, and from there I
went to Damascus that I might learn Arabic for I had
decided to continue my prayers at Mecca, and hoped to
get there in disguise. I had gone the greater portion oi
the way when I saw certain markings upon the sands —
which corresponded almost exactly to a diagram in the
‘Speculum.’ Nobody could explain them or say who
made them, but when I discovered that an unknown
tribe of Arabs had camped near by a couple of nights —
before and that they had moved in a northerly direction, —
I took the first opportunity of plunging into the desert
in pursuit. I went from tribe to tribe for several months,
learnt nothing and found myself at last in a remote town
where, thanks to a small medicine chest which I always |
carry, I became first doctor, and then a kind of steward
to an Arab chief or petty king. I constantly spoke about
those markings upon the sand but learnt nothing till
our town or village was visited by a tribe of Judwalis.
There are several tribes of this strange sect, who are _
known among the Arabs for the violent contrasts of —
character amongst them, for their licentiousness and

pS. <
‘their sanctity. Fanatical in matters of doctrine, they
seem tolerant of human frailty beyond any believing
people I have met. One of them, an old man well known
for his piety, asked me to prescribe for some complaint
of his. When he came into my house, the book lay open
upon a table, the frontispiece spread out: he turned
towards it because it was European, and everything
European filled him with curiosity, and then, pointing
to the lunar phases and the mythological emblems,
declared that he saw the doctrines of his tribe. The
Judwali had once possessed a learned book called ** The
WwW ay of the Soul between the Sun and the Moon ” and
attributed to a certain Kusta ben Luka, Christian
Philosopher at the Court of Harun Al-Raschid, and
though this, and a smaller book describing the personal
life of the philosopher, had been lost or destroyed in
desert fighting some generations before his time, its
doctrines were remembered, for they had always consti-
tuted the beliefs of the Judwalis who look upon Kusta
ben Luka as their founder. As my attempt to under-
‘stand the diagrams of Giraldus, in the absence of other
intellectual interests, had come to fill all my thoughts,
[ persuaded him to accept me into his tribe and for
some years wandered with the Judwalis, though not
always with the same tribe. I found that though their
sacred Book had been lost they had a vast doctrine
which was constantly explained to their growing boys
and girls by the aid of diagrams drawn by old religious
men upon the sands, and that these diagrams were in
many cases identical with those in the ‘* Speculum
Angelorum et Hominorum.’? I am convinced, however,
_ that this doctrine did not originate with Kusta ben Luka,
for certain terms and forms of expression suggest some
Temote Syriac origin. I once told an old Judwali of
n ey conviction upon this point but he merely said that
Kusta ben Luka had doubtless been taught by the desert

djinns who lived to a great age and remembered ancient
languages.’

We had come by this to the little Bloomsbury court
where Mr Yeats had his lodging; but when I told him
so, he said, ** No, it will be better to write and make
an appointment. He is almost certain to be out.’’ The
evening had begun to darken and I pointed to a gleam
of light through a slit in the curtain of the room on the
second floor, but he said ‘* No, no, I will write,’’ and
then *‘I have great gifts In my hands and I stand
between two enemies; Yeats that I quarrelled with and
have not forgiven; you that quarrelled with me and have
not forgiven me.’’ He began to walk away and I
followed, and presently we fell into talk about indifferent
things. I dined with him at the hotel and after dinner
he brought out diagrams and notes, and began explaining
their general drift. The sheets of paper which were
often soiled and torn were rolled up in a bit of old camel -
skin and tied in bundles with bits of cord and bits of
an old shoe-lace. This bundle, he explained, described |
the mathematical law of history, that bundle the |
adventure of the soul after death, that other the inter- |
action between the living and the dead and so on. He |
saw that I was interested and asked if I would arrange |
them for publication. Such things fascinate me and I |
consented and from then on for months we were travelling |
companions, and he explained notes and diagrams in
words almost as obscure. Certainly no man had ever
less gift of expression. He came with me to France and
later on to Ireland because of his wish to see once more
places that he had known. In Dublin we stayed for
a, time in my Dominick Street house, described so extrava-
gantly in *‘ The Tables of the Law,’’ which keeps its |
eighteenth century state, though slum children play upon
its steps and the windows of the next house are patched
with brown paper. On a walking tour in Connaught we

xxi
passed Thoor Ballylee where Mr Yeats had settled for the
“summer, and words were spoken between us slightly
resembling those in ** The Phases of the Moon,’’ and J
noticed that as his friendship with me grew closer, his
animosity against Mr Yeats revived.
we Suddenly, however, our friendship was shattered by a
violent scene like those of our youth. We had returned
to London and I had there written eighty or ninety
pages of exposition. He complained in exaggerated
language that I interpreted the system as a form of
4 ie istianity, that only those aspects of character that
“were an expression of Christianity interested me—
"primary character to use the terms of the philosophy—
_ and that I was neither informed nor interested when I
% came to the opposite type. I contended that there could
be nothing incompatible between his system and
_ Christianity. St. Clement of Alexandria had taught the
_ fe-birth of the Soul and had remained a saint, and in
A our own time the Capuchin Archbishop Passivalli has
t aught it and keeps his mitre. Through lack of it, I said,
a the medieval Church got into a labyrinth of absurdity
a about Limbo and unbaptised children, but a certain num-
hink that God may

_ ber of modern Catholics have come to thi
7e, very well command a soul that has left its work unfinished
to leave Purgatory and return to the world. Nothing,
_ however, would persuade him, and he declared that he
v ould give all his material to Mr Yeats and let him do
what he liked with it. Now it was my turn to get angry,
for I had spent much toil upon his often confused and
pe bling notes. ‘** You will give them to a man,’’ I
aid, ‘who has thought more of the love of woman
i, 7 ‘than of the love of God.”’ ** Yes,’’ he replied, ** I want
a \ i lyric poet, and if he cares for nothing but expression,
8c p much the better, my desert geometry will take care
A a the truth.’ I replied—I think it better to set my
words down without disguise—** Mr Yeats has intellectual

xxii

belief but he is entirely without moral faith, without
that sense, which should come to a man with terror and
joy, of a Divine Presence, and though he may seek, and
may have always sought it, I am certain that he will not
find it in this life.’? This increased Robartes’ anger, for I
had almost repeated words of his own, and he accused
Christianity of destroying Greco-Roman art and science,
because it thought nothing mattered but faith. I denied
this but said that even barbarism had not been too great a
price to pay for pity and a conscience, and I reminded
him that the system itself made the realisation of God
one half of life. He then used ungenerous words, revived
a quarrel of thirty years before, said that I was always
the same, that I was but a free man for a moment, and
even asked if I had consulted my confessor.* He called

next day with some kind of an apology but said I must »
come to see Mr Yeats and that he had made an appoint- |
ment for us both. At. Mr Yeats’s Bloomsbury lodging —

he talked of his travels and his discovery, and as during

the night I had thought the matter over and thought
myself well out of a troublesome and thankless work, I |

helped his exposition. He had brought the Giraldus
diagrams, and they seemed to interest Mr Yeats at first
sight as much as they had Robartes himself. Mr Yeats

consented to write the exposition on the condition that
I wrote the introduction and any notes I pleased, and |

would have persuaded me to accept a portion of the
profits but this I refused as later on I may ge si my
own commentary.

Two days later Robartes returned to Mesopotamia,

for the armistice had made some spot, where he planned

to spend his declining years, habitable oace more, and |

from that day to this I have heard neither of nor
from him. This silence that has closed round him has

* I think Mr Aherne has remembered his own part in this
conversation more accurately than that of his oppenent.—W. B. Y.

‘made it natural to write, as I know he wished that I
‘should , as if his conversation and his foibles were already
‘a part of history. In all probability he will never read
what Mr Yeats or I have written, and he has lived so
long out of Europe that he has no friends to find offence
in a too candid record.

Mr Yeats’s completed manuscript now lies before me.
‘The system itself has grown clearer for his concrete
expression of it, but I notice that if I made too little
of the antithetical phases he has done no better by the
primary. I think too that Mr Yeats himself must feel
‘that the abstract foundation needs some such explora-
tion as I myself had attempted. The twelve rotations
associated with the lunar and solar months of the Great
Year first arose, as Mr Yeats understands, from the
meeting and separation of certain spheres. I consider
that the form should be called elliptoid, and that rotation
as we know it is not the movement that corresponds
most closely to reality. At any rate I can remember
Robartes saying in one of his paradoxical figurative
moods that he pictured reality as a number of great
eggs laid by the Phoenix and that these eggs turn inside
out perpetually without breaking the shell.

) O. a he
LONDON, May, 1925.

BOOK I
WHAT THE CALIPH PARTLY LEARNED

J. THE WHEEL AND THE PHASES OF THE MOON

An old man cocked his ear upon a bridge;

He and his friend, their faces to the South,

Had trod the uneven road. Their boots were soiled,
Their Connemara cloth worn out of shape;

They had kept a steady pace as though their beds,
Despite a dwindling and late risen moon,

Were distant still. An old man cocked his ear.

AHERNE
W at made that sound?

ROBARTES
A rat or water-hen
Splashed, or an otter slid into the stream.
We are on the bridge; that shadow is the tower,
And the light proves that he is reading still.
He has found, after the manner of his kind,
Mere images ; chosen this place to live in
| mane , it may be, of the candle light
From oii far tower where Milton’s platonist
Sa Piste. or Shelley’s visionary prince :

The lonely light that Samuel Palmer engraved,
8

4,
An image of mysterious wisdom won by toil;
And now he seeks in book or manuscript
What he shall never find.

Why should not you
Who know it all ring at his door, and speak
Just truth enough to show that his whole life
Will scarcely find for him a broken crust
Of all those truths that are your daily bread;
_ And when you have spoken take the roads again?

ROBARTES
He wrote of me in that extravagant style
He had learned from Pater, and to round his tale
Said I was dead; and dead I choose to be.

AHERNE
Sing me the changes of the moon once more;
True song, though speech : ** mine author sung it me.”

ROBARTES
Twenty-and-eight the phases of the moon,
The full and the moon’s dark and all the crescents,
Twenty-and-eight, and yet but six-and-twenty
The cradles that a man must needs be rocked in:
For there’s no human life at the full or the dark.
From the first crescent to the half, the dream
But summons to adventure and the man -
Is always happy lke a bird or a beast;
But while the moon is rounding towards the full
He follows whatever whim’s most difficult
Among whims not impossible, and though scarred,
As with the cat-o’-nine-tales of the mind,
His body moulded from within his body
Grows comelier. Kleven pass, and then

5

Athena takes Achilles by the hair,

Hector is in the dust, Nietzsche is born,
Because the hero’s crescent is the twelfth.

And yet, twice born, twice buried, grow he must,
Before the full moon, helpless as a worm.
The thirteenth moon but sets the soul at war
In its own being, and when that war’s begun
There is no muscle in the arm; and after

Inder the frenzy of the fourteenth moon

The soul begins to tremble into stillness,

To die into the labyrinth of itself!

AHERNE
Sing out the song; sing to the end, and sing
The strange reward of all that discipline.

ROBARTES

f 4 thought becomes an image and the soul
Becomes a body : that body and that soul
Too perfect at the full to lie in a cradle,
Too lonely for the traffic of the world:

Body and soul cast out and cast away

F end the visible world.

AHERNE

All dreams of the soul
End in a beautiful man’s or woman’s body.

ROBARTES
Have you not always known it?

AHERNE
The song will have it
: ¥ at those that we have loved got their long fingers
irom death, and wounds, or on Sinai’s top,
| 0 from some bloody whip in their own hands.

6
They ran from cradle to cradle till at last
Their beauty dropped out of the loneliness
Of body and soul.
ROBARTES
The lover’s heart knows that.

AHERNE
It must be that the terror in their eyes

Is memory or foreknowledge of the hour
When all is. fed with light and heaven is bare.

ROBARTES

When the moon’s full those creatures of the full
Are met on the waste hills by country men
Who shudder and hurry by: body and soul
Estranged amid the strangeness of themselves,
Caught up in contemplation, the mind’s eye
Fixed upon images that once were thought,
For separate, perfect, and immovable

Images can break the solitude

Of lovely, satisfied, indifferent eyes.

And thereupon with aged, high-pitched voice
Aherne laughed, thinking of the man within,
His sleepless candle and laborious pen.

ROBARTES
And after that the crumbling of the moon:
The soul remembering its loneliness
Shudders in many cradles; all is changed,
It would be the world’s servant, and as it serves,
Choosing whatever task’s most difficult
Among tasks not impossible, it takes
Upon the body and upon the soul
The coarseness of the drudge.

7

Before the full |
It sought itsclf and afterwards the world.

ROBARTES

Because you are forgotten, half out of life,
And never wrote a book, your thought is clear.
Reformer, merchant, statesman, learned man,
Dutiful husband, honest wife by turn,

Cradle upon cradle, and all in flight and all |
Deformed because there is no deformity

But saves us from a dream.

AHERNE
And what of those
That the last servile crescent has set free?

ROBARTES
Because all dark, like those that are all light,
They are cast beyond the verge, and in a cloud,
Crying to one another like the bats;

_And having no desire they cannot tell __
What’s good or bad, or what it is to triumph
At the perfection of one’s own obedience;

And yet they speak what’s blown into the mind;
Deformed beyond deformity, unformed,
Insipid as the dough before it is baked,
They change their bodies at a word.

And thenP

ROBARTES

_ When all the dough has been so kneaded up
That it can take what form cook Nature fancy
The first thin crescent is wheeled round once more.

8
AHERNE
But the escape; the song’s not finished yet.

ROBARTES

Hunchback and Saint and Fool are the last crescents.
The burning bow that once could shoot an arrow

Out of the up and down, the wagon wheel

Of beauty’s cruelty and wisdom’s chatter—

Out of that raving tide—is drawn betwixt

Deformity of body and of mind.

AHERNE

Were not our beds far off I’d ring the bell,
Stand under the rough roof-timbers of the hall
Beside the castle door, where all is stark
Austerity, a place set out for wisdom

That he will never find; I’d play a part;

He would never know me after all these years
But take me for some drunken country man;
I’d stand and mutter there until he caught

** Hunchback and Saint and Fool,”’ and that they came
Under the three last crescents of the moon,
And then I’d stagger out. He’d crack his wits
Day after day, yet never find the meaning.

And then he laughed to think that what seemed hard
Should be so simple—a bat rose from the hazels

And circled round him with its squeaky cry,

The light in the tower window was put out.

2. THE DANCE OF THE FOUR ROYAL
PERSONS
By OWEN AHERNE

MICHAEL ROBARTES gives the following account of
the diagram called **‘ The Great Wheel ”’ in Giraldus.
A Caliph who reigned after the death of Harun Al-Raschid
discovered one of his companions climbing the wall
that encircled the garden of his favourite slave, and
because he had believed this companion entirely devoted
to his interests, gave himself up to astonishment. After
much consideration he offered a large sum of money to
any man who could explain human nature so completely
that he should never be astonished again. Kusta ben
Luka, now a very old man, went to the palace with his
book of geometrical figures, but the Caliph, after he had
explained them for an hour, banished him from the
palace, and declared that all unintelligible visitors were
to be put to death. A few days later four black but
splendidly dressed persons. stood at the city gate and
announced that they had come from a most distant
country to explain human nature, but that the Caliph
ust meet them on the edge of the desert. He came
attended by his Vizir, and asked their country. ‘* We
are,’’ said the eldest of the four, ** the King, the Queen,
the Prince and the Princess of the Country of Wisdom.
it has reached our ears that a certain man has pretended
that wisdom is difficult, but it is our intention to reveal
all in a dance.” After they had danced for several
9

10

minutes the Caliph said : ‘* Their dance is dull, and they
dance without accompaniment, and I consider that no-
body has ever been more unintelligible.”’ The Vizir gave
the order for their execution, and while waiting the
tightening of the bow-strings, each dancer said to the
executioner : **‘ In the Name of Allah, smooth out the
mark of my footfall on the sand.’’ And the executioner
replied, ‘‘ If the Caliph permit.?? | When the Caliph
heard what the dancers had said, he thought, ** There
is certainly some great secret in the marks of their feet.”
He went at once to the dancing place, and, having stood
for a long time looking at the marks, he said: ** Send
us Kusta ben Luka, and tell him that he shall not die.”
Kusta ben Luka was sent for, and from sunrise to sunset
of the day after, and for many days, he explained the
markings of the sand. At last the Caliph said: ** I now
understand human nature; I can never be surprised
again : I will put the amount of the reward into a tomb
for the four dancers.’’ Kusta ben Luka answered : ** No,
Sire, for the reward belongs to me.’’ ‘* How can that
be? ”? said the other, *‘ for you have but explained the
marks upon the sand, and those marks were not made
by your feet.”” ‘* They were made by the feet of my
pupils,’’ said ben Luka. ‘* When you banished me from
the Palace they gathered in my house to console me,
and the wisest amongst them said, ‘ He that dies is the
chief person in the story,’ and he and three others offered
to dance what I chose.’’ ‘* The reward is yours,”’ said
the Caliph, “‘ and henceforth let the figure marked by
their feet be called the Dance of the Four Royal Persons,
for it is right that your pupils be rewarded for dying.”

According to the Robartes MSS. the Dance of the Four
Royal Persons is one of the names for the first figure
drawn by the Judwali elders for the instruction of youth
and is identical with the ‘* Great Wheel ”’ of Giraldus.

I am inclined to see in the story of its origin a later

11
'

embodiment of a story that it was the first diagram drawn
upon the sand by the wife of Kusta ben Luka, and that
its connection with the lunar phases, the movements and
the nature of the Four Faculties and their general appli-
cation to the facts of human life, were fully explained
before its geometrical composition was touched upon.
The Judwali doctor of Bagdad, who is mentioned else-
where in this book, said that the whole philosophy was
so expounded in a series of fragments which only dis-
played their meaning, like one of those child’s pictures
which are made up out of separate cubes, when all were
put together. The object of this was, it seems, to pre-
vent the intellect from forming its own conclusions, and
so thwarting the Djinn who could only speak to curiosity
and passivity. I cannot, however, let this pass without
saying that I doubt the authenticity of this story, which
Mr Yeats has expanded into the poem ** Desert Geometry
r The Gift of Harun Al-Raschid,”’ at least in its present
form, and that an almost similar adventure is attributed
in one of the Robartes documents to a Mahometan
grammarian of a much later date. I will, however,
discuss all these matters at length in my own book upon
the philosophy and its sources.
| O. A.
May, 1925.

PART I
3. THE GREAT WHEEL

I
ANTITHETICAL AND PRIMARY

THE diagram of the Great Wheel shows a series of
numbers and symbols which represent the Lunar phases;
and all possible human types can be classified under one
or other of these twenty-eight phases. Their number is
that of the Arabic Mansions of the Moon but they are used
merely as a method of classification and for simplicity
of classification their symbols are composed in an entirely
arbitrary way. As the lunar circle narrows to a crescent
and as the crescent narrows to a still narrower crescent,
the Moon approaches the Sun, falls as it were under his
influence; and for this reason the Sun and Moon in
diagram 1 are considered to be imposed one upon another.

They may be coloured gold and silver respectively.
The first phase is therefore full Sun as it were, and the
15th Phase full Moon, while Phases 8 and 22 are hali
Sun and half Moon. In Book II is described the
geometrical foundation of this symbolism and of the
other characters of the wheel. When one uses the
phases, in popular exposition or for certain symbolic
purposes, one considers full Sun as merely the night
when there is no moon, and in representing any phase
visibly one makes the part which is not lunar dark. The

12

18

BSun is objective man and the Moon subjective man, or
more properly the Sun is primary man and the Moon
“antithetical man—terms that will be explained later.
Objective and Subjective are not used in their nets
physical but in their colloquial sense. Murray’s diction-

——— SWEST

ahs

Discovery -

@” scnaneh
@.:

COMPLETE OBJECTIVITY
NORTH

ary describes the colloquial use of the word ** objective ”’
thus. All that ** is presented to consciousness as opposed
to consciousness of self, that is the object of perception
or thought, the non-ego.”? And again, objective when
used in describing works of art means ** dealing with or
laying stress upon that which is external to the mind,
treating of outward things and events rather than inward
thought ”’, ** treating a subject so as to exhibit the

t.

14

actual facts, not coloured by the opinions or feelings of
the writer.’*’ The volume of Murray’s dictionary con-
taining letter S is not yet published, but as ‘* subjective ”
is the contrary to ‘** objective ’’ it needs no further
definition. Under the Sun’s light we see things as they
are, and go about our day’s work, while under that of
the Moon, we see things dimly, mysteriously, all is sleep
and dream. All men are characterised upon a first
analysis by the proportion in which these two characters
or Tinctures, the objective or primary, the subjective or
antithetical, are combined. Man is said to have a series
of embodiments (any one of which may be repeated) that
correspond to the twenty-eight fundamental types. The
First and Fifteenth, being wholly objective and sub-
jective respectively, are not human embodiments, as
human life is impossible without the strife between the
Tinctures,

II
THe Four FACULTIES

INCARNATE man has Four Faculties which constitute
the Tinctures—the Will, the Creative Mind, the Body of
Fate, and the Mask. The Will and Mask are pre-
dominately Lunar or antithetical, the Creative Mind and
the Body of Fate predominately Solar or primary. When
thought of in isolation, they take upon themselves the
nature now of one phase, now of another. By Will* is
understood feeling that has not become desire because
*T have changed the “ creative genius’ of the Documents
into Creative Mind to avoid confusion between “ genius” and
Daimon; and ‘‘ Ego”’ into Will for ‘‘ Ego”’ suggests the total
man who is all Four Faculties. Will or self-will was the only word
I could find not for man but Man’s root. If Blake had not
given ‘* selfhood ” a special meaning it might have served my
turn.
September, 1925.

15

there is no object to desire; a bias by which the soul is
classified and its phase fixed but which as yet is without
result in action; an energy as yet uninfluenced by
thought, action, or emotion; the first matter of a certain
personality—choice. If a man’s Will is at say Phase 17
we say that he is a man of Phase 17, andsoon. By Masi
is understood the image of what we wish to become, or of
hat to which we give our reverence. Under certain cir-
cumstances it is called the Image. By Creative Mind is
meant intellect, as intellect was understood before the
close of the seventeenth century—all the mind that is
‘consciously constructive. By Body of Fate is understood
the physical and mental environment, the changing
uman body, the stream of Phenomena as this affects a
particular individual, all that is forced upon us from
without, Time as it affects sensation. The Will when
represented in the diagram is always opposite the Mask,
the Creative Mind always opposite the Body of Fate.
The Will looks into a painted picture. The Creative
Mind looks into a photograph, but both look into some-
thing which is the opposite of themselves. The picture
is that which is chosen, while the photograph is hetero-
geneous. The photograph is fated, because by fate is
understood that which comes from without, whereas the
Mask is predestined, Destiny being that which comes to
is from within. We best express the heterogeneous-
hess of the photograph if we call it a photograph of a
rowded street, which the Creative Mind—when not
under the influence of the Mask—contemplates coldly;
while the picture contains but few objects and the con-
templating Will is impassioned and solitary.

All Four Faculties influence each other and the object
xt the diagram of the Wheel is to show when and in what
Proportions. When the Will predominates, and there
18 strong desire, the Mask or Image is sensuous, but
when Creative Mind predominates it is abstract. When

16
the Mask predominates it is idealised, when Body of Fate
predominates it is concrete, and so on. An object is
sensuous if I relate it to myself, ‘* my fire, my chair,”
etc., but it is concrete if I say ‘‘ a chair, a fire,”? and
abstract if I but speak of it as the representative of a
class—‘* the chair, the fire,’’ etc.

Ul
THE PLACE OF THE Four FACULTIES ON THE WHEEL

A MAN whose Will is at Phase 17 will have his Creative
Mind at Phase 18 and his Mask at Phase 8 and his Body
of Fate at Phase 27; while a man whose Will is at Phase
8 would have all these positions exactly reversed. When
Will is at Phase 15, Creative Mind is there also. On the
other hand, when Will is at Phase 22, Will and Body of
Fate are superimposed, while Creative Mind and Mask are
superimposed at Phase 8. The points on diagram 1
marked Head, Heart, Loins and Fall mark where the
four faculties are at equal distances from one another
and that in part is why they are also represented by
cardinal signs. They have also another significance which
will be explained later.

Will and Mask are opposite in Tincture, Creative Mind
and Body of Fate are opposite in Tincture. The one has.
the primary in the exact strength of the antithetical in
the other, and vice versa. The primary and antithetical
define the inclination of the Will, and through the Will
affect the other three; this may be called the difference
in quality. A Will at Phase 18 would have the exact
amount of antithetical inclination that a Will at Phase 4
would have of primary. On the other hand, a Will at
Phase 18 and Creative Mind at Phase 12 are exactly the
same in the proportions of their Tinctures, have exactly |

i7
the same quality of Tincture but move in opposite
directions—one is going from Phase 1 to Phase 28 and
the other from Phase 28 to Phase 1. It is therefore

_ necessary to consider both direction and quality.

The relations between Will and Mask, Creative Mind
and Body of Fate are called oppositions, and upon some
occasions contrasts, while those between Will and
Creative Mind, Mask and Body of Fate are called—for
reasons which will appear later—discords.

Between Phase 12 and Phase 18, and between Phase
4 and Phase 5 in diagram 1 occurs what is called ** the
opening of the tinctures,’ and between Phase 18 and
Phase 19, and between Phase 4 and Phase 5 what is called
‘* the closing.”’ This means that between Phase 12 and
Phase 18 each Tincture divides into two, and closes up
again between Phase 18 and Phase 19. Between Phase
26 and Phase 27 the Tinctures become one Tincture, and
between Phase 4 and Phase 5 become two again. The
antithetical before Phase 15 becomes the primary after
Phase 15, and vice versa—that is to say, the thoughts
and emotions that are in nature antithetical before Phase
15 are in nature primary after Phase 15; the man who
before Phase 15 is harsh in his judgment of himself will
turn that harshness to others after Phase 15.

The geometrical reasons both for this interchange and
for the closing and opening of the Tinctures are dis-
cussed in Book II.

IV
DRAMA OF THE FACULTIES AND OF THE TINCTURES, ETC.

ONE can describe antithetical man by comparing him
to the Commedia del Arte or improvised drama of Italy.
The stage manager having chosen his actor, the Will,
chooses for this actor, that he may display him the better,

B

18

a scenario, Body of Fate, which offers to his Creative
Mind the greatest possible difficulty that it can face
without despair, and in which he must play a role and
wear a Mask as unlike as possible to his natural character
(or Will) and leaves him to improvise, through Creative
Mind, the dialogue and the details of the plot. He must
discover a beiny which only exists with extreme effort,
when his muscles are as it were all taut and all his energies
active, and for that reason the Mask is described as * A
form created by passion to unite us to ourselves.”” Much
of what follows will be a definition or description of this
deeper being, which may become the unity described by
Dante in the Convito.

For Primary Man one must go to the Decline of the
Commedia del Arte for anexample. The Will is weak and
cannot create a role, and so, if it transform itself, does
so aiter an accepted pattern, some traditional clown or
pantaloon. It has perhaps no object but to move the
crowd, and if it ** gags ”’ it is that there may be plenty
of topical allusions. In the primary phases Man must
cease to desire Mask and Image by ceasing from self-
expression, and substitute a motive of service for that
of self-expression. Instead of the created Mask he has
an imitative Mask; and when he recognises this, his Mask
may become an image of mankind. The author of ** The
Imitation of Christ’? was certainly a man of a late
primary phase. It is said that the antithetical Mask is
free, and the primary Mask enforced; and the free Mask
is personality, a union of qualities, while the enforced
mask is character, a union of quantities, and of their
limitations—that is to say, of those limitations which
give strength precisely because they are enforced.
Personality, no matter how habitual, is a constantly
renewed choice, and varies from an individual charm,
in the more antithetical phases, to a hard objective
dramatisation, which differs from character mainly

19

‘because it is a dramatisation, in phases where the
antithetical Tincture holds its predominance with diffi-
culty.

Antithetical men are, like Landor, violent in them-
selves because they hate all that impedes their person-
ality, but are in their intellect (Creative Mind) gentle,
but primary men whose hatreds are impersonal are
violent in their intellect but gentle in themselves as
doubtless Robespierre was gentle.

The Mask before Phase 15 is described as °° a revela-
tion’? because through it the being obtains knowledge
of itself, sees itself in personality ; while after Phase 15 it
is a ** concealment,’’ for the being grows incoherent,
vague and broken, as its intellect (Creative Mind) is more
and more concerned with objects that have no relation to
its unity but a relation to the unity of Society or
of material things, known through the Body of Fate,
and adopts a personality which it more and more
casts outward, more and more dramatises. It is
now a dissolving violent phantom which would grip
itself and hold itself together. The being of Antithetical
Man is described as full of rage before Phase 12,
against all in the world that hinders its expression,
but after Phase 12 the rage is a knife turned against
itself. After Phase 15, but before Phase 19, the being
is full of phantasy, a continual escape from, and yet
acknowledgment of all that allures in the world, a
continual playing with all that must engulf it. The
primary is that which serves, the antithetical is that
‘which creates.

_ At Phase 8 is the ‘* Discovery of Strength,’ an
embodiment in sensuality, for the imitation that held it
to the norm of the race has ceased and the personality
with its own norm has not begun. Primary and
antithetical are equal and fight for mastery; and when
this fight is ended through the conviction of weakness

20

and the preparation for rage, the Mask becomes once more
voluntary. At Phase 22 is the ‘* Breaking of Strength,”
for here the being makes its last attempt to impose its _
personality upon the world, before the Mask becomes
enforced once more and Character is once more born.

To these two phases, perhaps to all phases, the being
may return up to four times before it can pass on. It
is claimed, however, that four times is the utmost _
possible. By being is understood that which divides
into Four Faculties, by individual the Will analysed in
relation to itself, by personality the Will analysed in
relation to the Mask. It is because of the antithesis
between Will and Mask that subjective natures are called —
antithetical, while those in whom individuality and
Creative Mind predominate, and who are content with ~
things as they find them, are called primary. Personality
is strongest near Phase 15, individuality near Phase 22 ©
and Phase 8.

Vv
RULE FOR DISCOVERING TRUE AND FALSE MASKS

WHEN the Will is in antithetical phases the True Mask
is the effect of Creative Mind of opposite phase upon
that phase; and the False Mask is the effect of Body of
Fate of opposite phase upon that phase.

The True Mask of Phase 17 for instance is ** Simplifica-
tion by intensity ”’ and is derived from Phase 8 modified
by the Creative Mind of that phase, which is described
as ** Simplicity ’? and is from Phase 27 which is that of
the Saint.

The False Mask of Phase 17 is ‘* Dispersal ’? and is
derived from Phase 8, modified by the Body of Fate
which is from Phase 18 and is described as ‘* Interest.”

21
It will be found that this word describes with great
‘accuracy the kind of ‘‘ Dispersal ’’ which weakens men
of Phase 17 when they try to live in the jibaheesth
ay’ Pincture.
_ When the Will is in primary phases the True Mask
is the effect of Body of Fate of opposite phase upon that
Bs phase; ; and the False Mask is the effect of Creative Mind
ie of opposite phase upon that phase.
i : The True Mask of Phase 8, is ‘* Innocence ”’ and it is
derived from Phase 17 modified by its Body of Fate
a which is described as ** Loss ”’ and eaaktee from Phase
: 2 '7, which is that of the Saint.
i The False Mask of Phase 8 is ** Folly ’’ and is derived
of om Phase 17 modified by Creative Mind of that phase
which is described as ‘‘ Creative imagination through
Net antithetical emotion.’? The primary Phase 8 when it
i to live antithetically gives itself up to incon-
. Sequence because it cannot be creative in the Mask.
a ter n the other hand, when it lives according to the
rt ent Primary, and is true to phase, it takes from its opposite
a phase delight in passing things, sees * a world in a grain
Fi fe f sand, Heaven in a wild flower *”? and becomes a child
om aying, knows nothing of consequence and purpose.
© Loss *” effects Phase 17 itself as an enforced withdrawal
| primary desire for the Body of Fate is inimical to
¢ Gntithetical natures.
Only long familiarity with the system can make the
whole table of Masks, Creative Minds, ete.—see sec. xii
—intelligible; it should be studied by the help of these
two following rules :—
In an antithetical phase the being seeks by the help
of the Creative Mind to deliver the Mask from Body of
Fate.
In a primary phase the being seeks by the help of

the Body of Fate to deliver the Creative sah jrom the
Mask.

Fi

22

VI
RULE FOR FINDING THE TRUE AND FALSE CREATIVE Minp

WHEN the Will is in antithetical phases the True
Creative Mind is derived from the Creative Mind Phase
modified by the Creative Mind of that phase; while the
False Creative Mind is derived from the Creative Mind
Phase, modified by the Body of Fate of that Phase,

For instance the True Creative Mind of Phase 17
** Creative Imagination through antithetical Emotion ”
is derived from Phase 18 as that Phase is modified by
its Creative Mind which is described as ‘“ Sincere
expression of Self.’’

The False Creative Mind of Phase 17 ** Artificial self-
realisation ’’ is derived from Phase 18 as that phase is
modified by its Body of Fate ** Enforced Love.”’

Phase 17 has the same proportion of Tinctures as
Phase 18 but a different direction, is growing more
Primary and so has intellectually what Phase 18 has
emotionally, and is turning outward what Phase 18
turned inward.

Phase 18 stirred to creation by ‘“‘ Sincere expression
of self ’’ stirs Phase 17 to creation of images; on the
other hand Phase 18 stirred by ‘* Enforced love ’?’—which
had to Phase 18 itself been an influence forcing the
being to seek what to it was an impossible primary
activity and so to a morbid self-absorption—becomes in
Phase 17 an “ artificial dramatisation of the Self.”

When the Will is in Primary Phases the True Creative
Mind is derived from Creative Mind phase, modified by
the Body of Fate of that phase; while the False Creative
Mind is derived from the Creative Mind Phase modified
by the False Creative Mind of that Phase.

For instance the True Creative Mind of Phase 27 is

28

described as “ Spiritual Receptivity ’? and is derived
from Phase 8 as that phase is modified by its Body of
Fate derived from Phase 18, and described as
 *€Tnterest.’? While its false Creative Mind is described
as ** Pride’? and is derived from Phase 8, modified by
the False Creative Mind of that Phase which is
derived from Phase 27 and described as ** Abstraction.”’
As will be seen later the phase of the Saint, Phase 27,
has ‘* Abstraction ”? for its great sin and escapes from
this sin by ** Humility.’’

3 Again two mirrors face one another. Phase 3 and
| Phase 27 are alike in Tincture but different in direction.
The meaning of the interchange between ** Pride ’’ and
** Abstraction ”’ will grow clear from the exposition of
the phase.

VII
RULE FOR FINDING Bopy or FATE

THE Body of Fate of any particular phase is the effect
of the whole nature of its Body of Fate phase upon that
particular phase. As, however, the Body of Fate is
always primary it is in sympathy with the primary phase
while it opposes the antithetical phase; in this it is the

reverse of the Mask which is sympathetic to an
antithetical phase but opposes a primary.

vViit

SUBDIVISIONS OF THE WHEEL

EXCLUDING the four phases of crisis (Phases 8, 22,
15, 1,) each quarter consists of six phases, or of two
Sets of three. In every case the first phase of each set

24

can be described as a manifestation of power, the second
of a code or arrangement of powers, and the third of a
belief, the belief being an appreciation of, or submission
to some quality which becomes power in the next phase,
The reason of this is that each set of three is itself a
wheel, and has the same character as the Great Wheel.
The Phases 1 to 8 are associated with elemental earth,
being phases of germination and sprouting ; those between
Phase 8 and Phase 15 with elemental water, because
there the image-making power is at its height; those
between Phase 15 and Phase 22 with elemental air,
because through air, or space, things are divided from
one another, and here intellect is at its height; those
between Phase 22 and Phase 1 with elemental fire because
here all things are made simple. The Will is strongest
in First Quarter, Mask in second, Creative Mind in third,
and the Body of Fate in fourth.

There are other divisions and attributions to be con-
sidered later.

IX
DiscorpDs, OPPOSITIONS AND CONTRASTS.

THE being becomes conscious of itself as a separate
being, because of certain facts of opposition and
discord, the emotional opposition of Will and Mask, the
intellectual opposition of Creative Mind and Body of
Fate, discords between Will and Creative Mind, Creative
Mind and Mask, Mask and Body of Fate, Body of Fate
and Will. A discord is always the enforced under-
standing of the unlikeness of Will and Mask or of Creative
Mind and Body of Fate. There is an enforced attraction
between opposites, for the Will has a natural desire for
the Mask and the Creative Mind a natural perception

25

of the Body of Fate; in one the dog bays the Moon, in
_ the other the eagle stares on the Sun by natural right.
- When, however, the Creative Mind deceives the Will, by
a offering it some primary image of the Mask, or when the
Will offers to the Creative Mind an emotion that should
be turned towards the Mask alone, the opposition
emerges again in its simplicity because of the jarring of
the emotion, the grinding out of the Image. On the
other hand it may be the Mask that slips on to the
Body of Fate till we confuse what we would be with what
we must be. As the discords through the circling of the
Four Faculties approach opposition, when as at Phase 15
(say) the Creative Mind comes to be opposite the Mask,
they share the qualities of Opposition. As the Faculties
approach to one another, on the other hand, Discord
gradually becomes identity, and one or other, according
to whether it takes place at Phase 1 or Phase 15, is
weakened and finally absorbed, Creative Mind in Will
at Phase 15, Will in Creative Mind at Phase 1 and so on.
While if it be at Phase 8 or Phase 22 first one predomin-
ates and then the other and there is instability.

Without this continual discord through deception
there would be no conscience, no activity; and it will
_ be seen later that deception is used as a technical term
and may be substituted for “ desire.”’ Life is an
endeavour, made vain by the Four Sails of its Mill, to
come to a double contemplation, that of the chosen
Image, that of the Fated Image.

There are also harmonies but these which are
geometrically connected with the centre of the figure
can be best considered in relation to another part of the
System.

26
xX
THE Four PERFECTIONS AND THE Four AUTOMATONISMS
||

THE Four Perfections can only be understood when their
phases come to be considered; it will be obvious for
instance that self-sacrifice must be the typical virtue
of phases where instinct or race is predominant, and
especially in those three phases that come before
reflection. Automatonism in antithetical phases arises
from the Mask and Creative Mind, when separated from
the Body of Fate and Will, through refusal of, or rest
from conflict; and in primary phases from the Body of
Fate and Will, when weary of the struggle for complete
primary existence or when they refuse that struggle. It
does not necessarily mean that the man is not true to
phase or, as it is said, out of phase; the most powerful
natures are precisely those who most often need
automatonism as a rest. It is perhaps an element in our
enjoyment of art and literature, being awakened in our
minds by rhythm and by pattern. He is, however, out
of phase, if ,he refuse for anything but need of rest
the conflict with the Body of Fate which is the source
of antithetical energy and so falls under imitative or
creative automatonism, or if in primary phases he refuse
conflict with the Mask and so falls under obedient or
instinctive automatonism. f

THE DAIMON, THE SEXES, UNITY oF Betnc, NATURAL AND
SUPERNATURAL UNITY.

THE Will and the Creative Mind are in the light, but the
Body of Fate working through accident, in dark, while

27

Mask, or Image, is a form selected instinctively for those
- emotional associations which come out of the dark, and
- this form is itself set before us by accident, or swims up
from the dark portion of the mind. But there is another
mind, or another part of our mind in this darkness, that is
_ yet to its own perceptions in the light; and we in our turn
are dark to that mind. These two minds (one always
_ light* and one always dark, when considered by one mind
alone), make up man and Daimon, the Will of the man
being the Mask of the Daimon, the Creative Mind of the
_ man being the Body of Fate of the Daimon and so on.
Ne The Wheel is in this way reversed, as St. Peter at his
ae crucifixion reversed by the position of his body the
_ position of the crucified Christ: ‘* Demon est Deus
‘ Inversus.’? Man’s Daimon has therefore her energy and
a bias, in man’s Mask, and her constructive power in man’s
fate, and man and Daimon face each other in a perpetual
a conflict or embrace. This relation (the Daimon being
i sin of the opposite sex to that of man) may create a passion
a Pe? like that of sexual love. The relation of man and
Bi e “woman, in so far as it is passionate, reproduces the
i, q relation of man and Daimon, and becomes an element
Bh where man and Daimon sport, pursue one another, and
_do one another good or evil. This does not mean,
hs icdéver that the men and women of opposite phases
_ love one another, for a man generally chooses a woman
whose Mask falls between his Mask and his Body of Fate,
or just outside one or other; but that every man is, in
the right of his sex, a wheel, or group of Four Faculties,
and that every woman is, in the right of her sex, a
_ wheel which reverses the masculine wheel. In so far as
man and woman are swayed by their sex they interact

* Light and dark are not used in this section as in the description
of the phases, but as it were cross that light and dark at right
angles. See diagrams in Sec. XVII, Book II.

September, 1925.

28

as man and Daimon interact, though at other moments
their phases may be side by side. The Daimon carries
on her conflict, or friendship with a man, not only through
the events of life, but in the mind itself, for she is in
possession of the entire dark of the mind. The things
we dream, or that come suddenly into our heads, are
therefore her Creative Mind (our Creative Mind is her
Body of Fate) through which her energy, or bias, finds
expression; one can therefore, if one will, think of man
as Will and Creative Mind alone, perpetually face to face
with another being who is also but Will and Creative
Mind, though these appear to man as the object of desire,
or beauty, and as fate in all its forms. If man seeks to
live wholly in the light, the Daimon will seek to quench
that light in what is to man wholly darkness, and there
is conflict and Mask and Body of Fate become evil; when
however in antithetical man the Daimonic mind is
permitted to flow through the events of his life (the
Daimonic Creative Mind) and so to animate his Creative
Mind, without putting out its light, there is Unity of
Being. A man becomes passionate and this passion
makes the Daimonic thought luminous with its peculiar
light—this is the object of the Daitmon—and she so
creates a very personal form of heroism or of poetry.
The Daimon herself is now passionless and has a form
of thought, which has no need of premise and deduction,
nor of any language, for it apprehends the truth by a
faculty which is analogous to sight, and hearing, and
taste, and touch, and smell, though without organs. He
who attains Unity of Being is some man, who, while
struggling with his fate and his destiny until every
energy of his being has been roused, is content that he
should so struggle with no final conquest. For him fate
and freedom are not to be distinguished; he is no longer
bitter, he may even love tragedy like those ‘* who love
the gods and withstand them ”?; such men are able to

29
bring all that happens, as well as all that they desire,
into an emotional or intellectual synthesis and so to
possess not the Vision of Good only but that of Evil.
They are described as coming after death into dark and
into light, whereas primary men, who do not receive
revelation by conflict, are in dark or in light. In the
Convito Dante speaks of his exile, and the gregariousness
it thrust upon him, as a great misfortune for such as he;
and yet as poet he must have accepted, not only that
exile, but his grief for the death of Beatrice as that
which made him Daimonic, not a writer of poetry alone
like Guido Cavalcanti. Intellectual creation accompanies
__ or follows in antithetical man, the struggle of the being to
overthrow its fate and this is symbolised by placing the

Creative Mind in the phase opposite to that of the Body
_ Of Fate. Unity of Being becomes possible at Phase 12,
____and ceases to be possible at Phase 18, but is rare before

Phase 18 and after Phase 17 , and is most common at
_ Phase 17. When man is in his most antithetical phases

$ ra the Daimon is most primary; man pursues, loves, or
3 tf _ hates, or both loves and hates—a form of passion, an

ie: _ antithetical image is imposed upon the Daimonic thought
__ —but in man’s most primary phases the Daimon is at her

most antithetical, Man is now pursued with hatred, or
with love; must receive an alien terror or joy; and it

_ 1s to this final acceptance of the Image that we apply
_ the phrases “* Unity with God,” ** Unity with Nature.’
Unity with God is possible after Phase 26, though almost
impossible before Phase 27 which is called ** The Saint,??
while Unity with Nature may take place after Phase 1,
and in its turn becomes impossible after Phase 4. But
for the possibility of this union mam in his primary
phases would sink into a mechanical objectivity, become
wholly automatic. At Phase 26, however, he can escape
from that which he apprehends through the organs of
sense, by submission to that which he can apprehend

80

by the mind’s eye and ear, its palate and its touch,
When he is content to be pursued, to be ignored, to be
hated even by that he so apprehends, he becomes the
object not of hatred but of love, for the Daimonic mind,
being now antithetical, has passed from thought to
passion. Antithetical man pursuing, or hungry, with a
passion like that of the beasts, may be exalted with a
passion first discovered and expressed by finer minds
than his; and the Daimon so pursuing, so hungry, is also
so exalted, and we have therefore the right to describe
our union with it, as union with Nature, or with God,
When Phase 1 has been passed, the union is with nature,

According to the Solar symbolism, which is explained
in Book II, two are not in light and two in dark, but
all four in light as contrasted to Four Principles that are
solar and entirely dark.

XII
TABLE OF THE Four FACULTIES

EACH Faculty is placed after the number of the phase
where it is formed, not after the phase which it affects.

CREATIVE
i. No |description except) entire plasticity.

2. Beginning of| True. Illusion. |True. Physical | Enforced
Energy. False. Delusion,| activity. love uf the
False. Cunning.| world.

3. Beginning of | Tvue. Simplifi- | Zrue. Super- Enforced
Ambition. | cation through] sensitive recep-| love of
| intensity. | tivity. another.

False. Dispersal.| False. Pride. |

WILL.

4, Desire for
Primary
objects.

_ §. Separation
| from
innocence,

dividuality.

| 1. Assertion of
Individu-

ality.

8. War be-

viduality
and race.

_ 9. Belief takes

dividu-
ality.

10. The image-

6, Artificial Tn:

tween indi- |
place of in-

True,

81

NA Creative | Bopy or
Mask. MIND. | Fate.
True. Intensity | True. A bstract | Enforced
through emo- supersensitive | intellec-
tions, thought. |} tual
Faise. Curiosity.| False. Fascina- | action.
tion of sin.
True. Convic- |True. Rhetoric. | Enforced
tion. | False. Spiritual} belief.
False. Domina-| arrogance,
SS tLOn
True. Fatalism.| Tyve, Construc- | Enforced
False. Supersti-| tive emotion. emotion.
tion. False. Authority.
True. Self- True. Creation | Enforced
analysis, through pity. sensu-
False. Self- False. Self- ality.
adaptation. driven desire.
True. Self-immo- | | The begin-
lation, ning of
False. Self- true
assurance, strength.
True, Wisdom. | True. Intellec- | Adventure
False, Self-pity.| tual domina- | that ex-
_ tion. I indi

Dramat-

Self- | True.
breaker, reliance, ization of Mask. |
| False. Isolation.| False. Self-
| desecration,
11. The con- True. Conscious- True. Emotional | Natural
sumer, ness of self. | intellect. law.
The pyre- | false. Self-con- | False. The Un- |
builder, | sciousness. faithful,
(12. The Fore- | Tyue. Self- True. Emptional Search,
| runner. realization. philosophy.
False. Self- | False. Enforced
| abandonment,

law.

32

CREATIVE - Bopy or |
WILL. | MASK. MIND. FAte.
13. The sensu- | Tyvve. Renuncia-| True. Creative | Interest,
ous man, tion. - imagination
| False. Emula- through anti-
tion. | thetical emo-
tion,
False. Enforced
self-realization.
14, The ob- | True. Oblivion. | Tyvue, Vehe- None
sessed |Ffalse. Malig- | mence. except |
man. | nity. False. Opinion- | monotony |
ated will. | &§
15. No| description except! entire beauty.

16, The positive | True. Playeron | True. Emotional | Fool is his
man. | Pan's Pipes. will. | own Body |
False. Fury. | False. Terror. | of Fate, ff

17. The Dai- | True. Innocence. | True. Subject- | None ex-

monic man.| False. Folly. ive Truth. cept im-
| False. Mor- personal
| bidity, | action,
18. The emo- |Zvue. Passion. | True. Subject- | Hunchback ©
tional man | False. Will. ive philosophy. | is his Oowh
| False. War be-| Body of
tween two Fate,
forms of ex-
pression. |

19. The asser- | lvue. Excess. True. Moral | Persecu-

tive man, | False. Limita- | iconoclasm. | tion.
tion. | False. Self-asser- |
tion.

20. Theconcrete| True. Justice. | True. Domina- | Objective
man. False. Tyranny.| tion through | action.
emotional con-

| striction, |
| False. Reforma-
| tion.

21. The acquisi- | True. Altruism. True. Self- Success,
tive man. | False. Efficiency.| dramatization,
False. Anarchy.

WILL. MASK. MIND.

tween am- False. Impo-
bition and .. tence.
contem-

plation.

True. | Facility.

| 3. The Recep- i
False. Obscurity.

tive Man. sentiment.

24. The end of |
: ambition, | ti

E. 95. The condi- True. Rejection.
, tional man,| False. Moral re-

formation,

26, The Multiple| True. Self-ex-

called The} False. Self-aban-| acter.
Hunchback.| donment, |

| a 2
ion ? '
7 bed ~~

p -

False. Self-ab- | tion.
| sorption.

False.  Self-dis- | False. Morose-
trust. | mess.

XIIT
CHARACTERS OF CERTAIN PHASES

Four PERFECTIONS
At P, 2,P.8,P.4... Self-sacrifice
f ees AS: | cas oe Self-knowledge
At P.16,P.17,P.18 Unity of Being
7 ee --- Sanctity

|

9: . Balance be- True. Courage. | Tyuwe. Versatility.

True. Heroic

| False. Dogmatic
| sentimentality.

| True. -Ideality.
False. LDerision. |

Man also | aggeration. | ception of char-

bees 2" i The Saint. |Zyrue. Self-ex- | True. Simplicity. |
| ae pression. False. Abstrac-

28. The Fool. True. Serenity. | True. | Hope.

| Bopy or

FATE.

Temptation

versus

strength.

Enforced

triumph
ofachieve-
ment.

\nforceda

success in
action.

Enforced :

failure of
action.

Enforced

34

Four Typres or WISDOM
At P. 4 ts ... Wisdom of Desire
Ate ate ee ..-» Wisdom of Intellect
AGES AS Wi tices ... Wisdom of Heart
ALP. 26)) tec ... Wisdom of Knowledge

Four CONTESTS
At'P. Tt ae .-- Moral
At P. 8 sie ... Emotional
Ber. LO ties. ... Physical
AtePs 202i =... ... Spiritual or supersensual

RAGE, PHANTASY, ETC.
From P. 8 to P. 12 Rage
From P. 12 to P. 15 Spiritual or supersensual Rage
From P.15to P.19 Phantasy
From P. 19 to P. 22 Power

* GENERAL CHARACTER OF CREATIVE MIND AFFECTING

CERTAIN PHASES

(1) Affecting 28, 1, 2, from 2, 1, 28. Controlled.

(2) » 8, 4, 5, 6 from 27, 26, 25, 24, Tran
formatory.
(3) * 7, 8, 9 from 28, 22, 21. Mathematical.
(4) » 10,11, 12 from 20,19, 18. Intellectually
passionate. :
(5) -< 18 from 17. Stillxess.

* This and the following Table are divided into ten divisions
because they were given me ix this form, and I have not sufficient
confidence in my knowledge to turn them into the more convenient
twelve-fold divisions. The relation of the Great Wheel and the
Year is explained in Book II, and the makers of these tables may
have had the old tenfold year in their minds.—W. B. Y.

35

) Affecting 14, 15 16 from 16, 15, 14. Emotional.

17, 18, 19, 20 from 18, 12, 11, 10.
Emotionally passionate.

»» 21, 22, 28 from 9, 8, 7. Rational.

»  24from 6. Obedient. |

. 25, 26, 27 from 8, 4, 5.° Serenity.

39

XV
GENERAL CHARACTER OF Bopy OF FATE

Affecting 28, 1, 2 from 16, 15, 14. Joy.
7 8, 4, 5, 6, from 18, 12, 11, 10. Breathing.
of 7, 8, 9 from 9, 8, 7. Tumult.
5 10, 11, 12 from 6, 5, 4. Tension.
e. 18 from 8. Disease.
+ 14, 15, 16 from 2, 1, 28. The world.
» 17, 18, 19, 20 from 27, 26, 25, 24.
SOrrow.
»» 21, 22, 28 from 28, 22,21. Ambition.
F 24 from 20. Success.
p 25, 26, 27 from 19, 18, 17. Absorption.

XVI

TABLE OF THE QUARTERS

THe Four CONTESTS OF THE ANTITHETICAL WITHIN ITSELF

First quarter. With body.
cond ,, With heart.

eT With mind.
Fourth _,, With soul. —

In the first quarter body
saould win, in second
heart, etc.

-
» = 1
4

ba
MO es ri
; —s
oz.

36

Four AUTOMATONISMS
First quarter. Instinctive.
Second ,,  Imitative.
Third 3 Creative.
Fourth ,, Obedient.

Four ConpITIons OF THE WILL
First quarter. Instinctive.
Second  ,, Emotional.
Fourth ,,  ##Moral.

Four CONDITIONS OF THE MASK
First quarter. Intensity (affecting Third Quarter)
Second ,, ‘Tolerance (affecting Fourth Quarter),
Third 5, Convention or systematization (affect.
ing First Quarter).
Fourth ,, ~~ Self-analysis (affecting Second Quarter),

DEFECTS OF F'ALSE CREATIVE MIND WHICH BRING THE
FALSE Mask

First quarter. Sentimentality.
Second ,, Brutality (desire for root facts of life).
Third AA Hatred.
Fourth ,,  Insensitiveness. |

-Note.—In primary Phases these defects separate Mask
from Body of Fate, in antithetical, Creative Mind from
Body of Fate. :

ELEMENTAL ATTRIBUTIONS

Earth ts First quarter se
Water _... Second quarter

Air 7 Third quarter...
Fire oes Fourth quarter ...

oy
XVII
UNCLASSIFIED ATTRIBUTES

Mask worn — moral and emotional.
Mask carried —emotional.

ABSTRACTION

strong at 6, 7, 8. a
Strongest at 22, 28, 24, 25.
Begins at 19, less at 20, increase again at 21.

Images from self give emotion.
Images from world give passion.
Images from the supersensual give will.

4, THE TWENTY-EIGHT EMBODIMENTS

=
PHASE ONE AND THE INTERCHANGE OF THE TINCTURES

AS will be seen, when late phases are described, every
achievement of a being, after Phase 22, is an elimination
of the individual intellect and a discovery of the moral
life. When the individual intellect lingers on, it is
arrogance, self-assertion, a sterile abstraction, for the
being is forced by the growing primary Tincture to
accept first the service of, and later on absorption in, the
primary whole, a sensual or supersensual objectivity.

When the old antithetical becomes the new primary,
moral feeling is changed into an organisation of exper-
ience which must in its turn seek a unity, the whole of
experience. When the old primary becomes the new
antithetical, the old realisation of an objective moral law
is changed into a subconscious turbulent instinct. The
world of rigid custom and law is broken up by “ the
uncontrollable mystery upon the bestial floor.”

Phase 1 not being human can better be described
aiter Phase 28.

58

89
II
PHASE Two

Will—Beginning of Energy.
Mask (from P. 16). True—Player on Pan’s Pipes.

~ False—Fury.

Creative Mind (from P. 28). True—Hope. False—
Moroseness.
Body of Fate (from P. 14)—‘* None except monotony.”

When the man lives out of phase and desires the Mask,
and so permits it to dominate the Creative Mind, he
copies the emotional explosion of Phase 16 in so far as
difference of phase permits. He gives himself to a violent
animal assertion and can only destroy, strike right and
left as in the rage of a child, seek satisfaction of bodily
need full of ignorance and gloom.

** But when they find the frowning Babe,

Terror strikes through the region wide :

They cry ‘ The babe! the babe is born! ”

And flee away on every side.”’
But if he live according to phase, he uses the Body of
Fate to clear the intellect of the influence of the Mask.
He frees himself from emotion; and the Body of Fate,
derived from Phase 14, pulls back the mind into the
Supersensual, so changes it that it grows obedient to all

_ that recurs; and the Mask, now entirely enforced, is a

rhythmical impulse. He gives himself up to the function
of the moment, the hope of the moment, and yet is
neither immoral nor violent but innocent; he is as it
were the breath stirring on the face of the deep; the

‘Smile on the face of a but half-awakened child. Nobody

of our age has, it may be, met him, certainly no record
of such meeting exists, but, were such meeting possible,
he would be remembered as a form of joy, for he would

40
seem more entirely living than all other men, a personi-
fication or summing up of the life of all other men. He
would decide on this or that by no balance of the reason
but by an infallible joy, and if born amid a rigid
mechanical order, he would make for himself a place, as
a dog will scratch a hole for itself in loose earth.

Here, as at Phase 16, the ordinary condition is some-
times reversed, and instead of ugliness, otherwise
characteristic of this as of all primary phases, there igs
beauty. The new antithetical Tincture (the old primary
reborn) is violent. A new birth, when the product of an
extreme contrast in the past life of the individual, is
sometimes so violent that lacking foreign admixture it
forestalls its ultimate physical destiny. It forces upon
the primary and upon itself a beautiful form. It has
the muscular balance and force of an animal good-
humour with all appropriate comeliness as in the dancing
faun. If this rare accident does not occur, the body is
coarse; not deformed, but coarse from lack of sensitive-
ness and is most fitted for rough physical labour.

Seen by those lyrical poets who draw their Masks
from early phases, the man of Phase 2 is transfigured.
Weary of an energy that defines and judges, weary of
intellectual self expression, they desire some ‘* conceal-
ment,’? some transcendent intoxication. The bodily
instincts, subjectively perceived, become the cup
wreathed with ivy. Perhaps even a Body of Fate from
any early phase may suffice to create this Image, but
when it affects Phase 18 and Phase 14 the Image will
be more sensuous, more like immediate experience.

‘‘ The Kings of Inde their jewelled sceptres vail,
And from their treasures scatter pearled hail;
Great Brama from his mystic heaven groans
And all his priesthood moans ;

Before young Bacchus’ eye-wink turning pale.”

41
1

PHASE ‘THREE

Fi _ Will—Beginning of Ambition.
_ Mask (from P. 17). True—Innocence. False—Folly.

Creative Mind (from P. 27). True—Simplicity. False
_—Abstraction. _
_ Body of Fate (from P. 13)—Interest.

__ QOut of phase and copying the opposite phase, he gives
himself up to a kind of clodhopper folly, that keeps his
intellect moving among conventional ideas with a sort of
A : make-believe. Incapable of consecutive thought and of
moral purpose, he lives miserably seeking to hold together
some consistent plan of life, patching rags upon rags
a ecause that is expected of him, or out of egotism. If
| ic the other hand he uses his Body of Fate to purify

‘1 Creative Mind of the Mask, if he is content to permit
fy a My lis senses and his subconscious nature to dominate his

intellect, he takes delight in all that passes; but because
he claims nothing of his own, chooses nothing, thinks
Bthat no one thing is better than another, he will not
endure a pang because all passes. Almost without
intellect, it is a phase of perfect bodily sanity, for, though
_ the body is still in close contact with supersensual
rhythm, it is no longer absorbed in that rhythm; eyes
_ and ears are open; one instinct balances another; every
season brings its delight.

** He who bends to himself a joy
Does the winged life destroy,
But he who kisses the joy as it flies
Lives in eternity’s sunrise.”

42

Seen by lyrical poets, of whom so many have belonged
to the fantastic Phase 17, the man of this phase becomes
an Image where simplicity and intensity are united, he
seems to move among yellowing corn or under over-
hanging grapes. He gave to Landor his shepherds and
hamadryads, to Morris his ‘* Water of the Wondrous
Isles,’’ to Shelley his wandering lovers and sages, and
to Theocritus all his flocks and pastures; and of what
else did Bembo think when he cried, ** Would that I
were a shepherd that I might look daily down upon
Urbino.”’? Imagined in some antithetical mind, seasonal
change and bodily sanity seem images of lasting passion
and the body’s beauty.

lV
PHASE Four

Will—Desire for Exterior World.

Mask (from P. 18). True—Passion. False—Will.

C.M. (from P. 26). True—First Perception of
Character. f'alse—Mutilation.

B.F, (from P. 12)—Search.

When out of phase he attempts antithetical wisdom
(for reflection has begun), separates himself from instinct
(hence ** mutilation ’’), and tries to enforce upon himself
and others all kinds of abstract or conventional ideas
which are for him, being outside his experience, mere
make-believe. Lacking antithetical capacity, and all of
primary that is founded upon observation, he is aimless
and blundering, possesses nothing except the knowledge
that there is something known to others that is not mere
instinct. True to phase, his interest in everything that

43

happens, in all that excites his instinct (‘* search ’’), is
so keen that he has no desire to claim anything for his
own will; nature still dominates his thought as passion ;
yet instinct grows reflective. He is full of practical
wisdom, a wisdom of saws and proverbs, or founded upon
concrete examples. He can see nothing beyond sense, but
sense expands and contracts to meet his needs, and the
needs of those who trust him. It is as though he woke
suddenly out of sleep and thereupon saw more and
remembered more than others. He has ** the wisdom of
instinct,’’ a wisdom perpetually excited by all those hopes
and needs which concern his well-being or that of the race
(Creative Mind from Phase 12 and so acting from that in
race which corresponds to personality when personality is
unified in thought). The men of the opposite phase, or
of the phases nearly opposite, worn out by a wisdom
held with labour and uncertainty, seé persons of this
phase as images of peace. Two passages of Browning
come to mind:

** An old hunter, talking with gods
Or sailing with troops of friends to Tenedos.”’

** A King lived long ago,
In the morning of the world,
When Earth was nigher Heaven than now:
And the King’s locks curled,
Disparting o’er a forehead full
As the milk-white space betwixt horn and horn
Of some sacrificial bull—
Only calm as a babe new-born :
For he was got to a sleepy mood,
So safe from all decrepitude,
Age with its bane, so sure gone by,
(The gods so loved him while he dreamed)
That, having lived thus long, there seemed
No need the King should ever die.”?

44,
V
THE OPENING OF THE TINCTURES

SINCE Phase 26 the Primary Tincture has so predom-
mated, man is so sunk in Fate, in life, that there is no
reflection, no experience, because that which reflects,
that which acquires experience has been drowned. Man
cannot think of himself as separate from that which he
sees with the bodily eye or in the mind’s eye. He
neither loves nor hates though he may be in hatred or in
love. Birdalone in ** The Water of the Wondrous Isles ”
(a woman of Phase 8 reflected in an antithetical mind)
falls in love with her friend’s lover and he with her,
There is great sorrow but no struggle, her decision to
disappear is sudden as if some power over which she
has no control compelled. Has she not perhaps but
decided as her unknown fathers and mothers compelled,
but conformed to the lineaments of her race? Is she not
a child of *‘ Weird,”’ are not all in the most primary
phases children of ‘‘ Weird ” exercising an unconscious
discrimination towards all that before Phase 1 defines
their Fate, and after Phase 1 their race. Every achieve-
ment of their souls, Phase 1 being passed, springs up
out of the body, and their work, now it is passed, is to
substitute for a life, where all is Fate frozen into rule
and custom, a life where all is fused by instinct; with
them to hunger, to taste, to desire, is to grow wise.
Between Phase 4 and Phase 5, the Tinctures separate,
are said to open, and reflection begins. When closed,
there is an approach to absolute surrender of the Will,
first to God, then, as Phase 1 passes away, to Nature, and
the surrender is the most complete form of the freedom
of the Body of Fate which has been increasing since
Phase 22. When Man identifies himself with his Fate,
when he is able to say ** Thy Will is our freedom ” or

45
when he is perfectly natural, that is to say perfectly
a portion of his surroundings, he is free even though
all his actions can be foreseen, even though every action
is a logical deduction from that that went before it. He
is all Fate but has no Destiny.

VI
PHASE FIVE

Will—Separation from Innocence.

Mask (from P. 19). True—Excess. False—Limita-
tion.

Creative Mind (from P. 25). True—Social Intellect.
False—Limitation.

Body of Fate (from P. 11)—Natural Law.

Out of phase, and seeking antithetical emotion, he is
sterile, passing from one insincere attitude to another,
moving through a round of moral images torn from
their context and so without meaning. He is so proud
of each separation from experience that he becomes a
sort of angry or smiling Punch with a lath between his
wooden arms striking here and there. His Body of Fate
is enforced, for he has reversed the condition of his phase
and finds himself at conflict with a world which offers
him nothing but temptation and affront. True to phase,
he is the direct opposite of all this. Abstraction has

indeed begun, but it comes to him as a portion of

experience cut off from everything but itself and there-
fore fitted to be the object of reflection. He no longer
touches, eats, drinks, thinks and feels nature, but sees

46

it as something from which he is separating himself,
something that he may dominate, though only for a
moment and by some fragmentary violence of sensation
or of thought. Nature is half gone but the laws of nature
have appeared and he can change her rhythms and her
seasons by his knowledge. He lives in the moment but
with an intensity Phases 2, 8 and 4 have never known,
the Will approaches its climax, he is no longer like
man but half-awakened. He is a corrupter, disturber,
wanderer, a founder of sects and peoples, and works
with extravagant energy, and his reward is but to live
in its glare.

Seen by a poet of the opposite phase, by a man hiding
fading emotion under broken emphasis, he is Don Juan
or the Giaour.

Vil
PHASE Srx

Will—Artificial Individuality.

Mask (from Phase 20). True—Justice. False—
Tyranny.

Creative Mind (from Phase 24). True—Ideality.
False—Derision.

Body of Fate (from Phase 10)—Humanity.

Example : Walt Whitman.

Had Walt Whitman lived out of phase, desire to prove
that all his emotions were healthy and intelligible, to set
his practical sanity above all not made in his fashion,
to cry “‘ thirty years old and in perfect health! ’? would
have turned him into some kind of jibing demagogue;

47
and to think of him would be to remember that Thoreau
when he had picked up the jaw-bone of a pig that had
not a tooth missing, recorded that there also was

* perfect health. He would, that he might believe in

himself, have compelled others to believe. But using
his Body of Fate (his interest in crowds, in casual loves
and affections, in all summary human experience) to
clear intellect of antithetical emotion (always insincere
from Phase 1 to Phase 8), and haunted and hunted by
the now involuntary Mask, he creates an Image of vague,
half-civilised man, while all his thought and impulse is
a product of democratic bonhomie, of schools, of colleges,
of public discussion. Abstraction has been born but it
is the abstraction of a community, of a tradition, a
synthesis starting, not as with Phases 19, 20 and 21 with
logical deduction from an observed fact, but from some

experience or from the whole experience of the individual

or of the community : ** I have such and such a feeling.
I have such and such a belief. What follows from
feeling, what from belief? ’? While Thomas Aquinas,
whose historical epoch was nearly of this phase, would
sum in abstract categories all possible experience, not
that he may know but that he may feel, Walt Whitman
makes catalogues of all that has moved him, or amused
his eye, that he may grow more poetical. Experience
is all absorbing, subordinating, observed fact, drowning
even truth itself (where truth is conceived of as some-
thing apart from impulse and instinct and from the Will,
where impulse or instinct begins to be all in all). Ina
little while, though not yet, impulse and instinct,
Sweeping away catalogue and category, will fill the mind
with terror.

48
VIL

PHASE SEVEN

.
Will—Assertion of individuality.
Mask (from phase 21). True—Altruism. False ‘
Efficiency.

Creative Mind (from phase 28). True—Heroic sent.
ment. false—Dogmatic sentimentality.

Body of Fate (from phase 9)—Adventure that excites
the individu ality. |

Examples : George Borrow, Alexandre Dumas, Thomy
Carlyle, James Macpherson.

At Phases 2, 8 and 4 the man moved within tradition —
or seasonable limits, but since Phase 5 limits have grom
indefinite ; public codes, all that depend upon habit, ar
all but dissolved, even the catalogues and categories of
Phase 6 are no longer sufficient. If out of phase the ma
desires to be the man of Phase 21; an impossible desire,
for that man is all but the climax of intellectual con-
plexity and all men, from Phase 2 to Phase 7 inclusive,
are intellectually simple. His instincts are all but at their -
apex of complexity, and he is bewildered and must som
be helpless. The dissolving character, out of phase,
desires the breaking personality, and though it cannot
possess, or even conceive of personality, seeing that
its thoughts and emotions are common to all, it cat
create a grandiloquent phantom and by deceiving others
deceive itself; and presently we shall discover Phase 21,
out of phase, bragging of an imaginary naiveté.

Phase 7 when true to phase surrenders to the Body
of Fate which, being derived from the phase where

Een, .™®,

7 =
~ ay

49

personality first shows itself, is excited into forms of

character so dissolved in Will, in instinct, that they are
hardly distinguishable from personality. These forms of
character, not being self-dependent like personality, are
however inseparable from circumstance: a gesture, or
a pose born of a situation and forgotten when the situa-
tion has passed; a last act of courage, a defiance of the
dogs that must soon tear the man into pieces. Such
men have a passion for history, for the scene, for the
adventure. They delight in actions, which they cannot
see apart from setting sun or a storm at sea or some
great battle, and that are inspired by emotions that move
all hearers because such that all understand.

_ Alexander Dumas was the phase in its perfection,
George Borrow when it halts a little, for Borrow was at
moments sufficiently out of phase to know that he was
Naive and to brag of imaginary intellectual subjectivity,
as when he paraded an unbelievable fit of the horrors, or
his mastery of many tongues. Carlyle like Macpherson
showed the phase at its worst. He neither could, nor
should have cared for anything but the personalities of
history, but he used them as so many metaphors in a vast
popular rhetoric, for the expression of thoughts that
seemed his own and were the work of preachers to angry
ignorant congregations. So noisy, so threatening that

rhetoric, so great his own energy that two generations

passed before men noticed that he had written no sentence
not of coarse humour that clings to the memory. Sexual
impotence had doubtless weakened the Body of Fate and
so strengthened the False Mask, yet one doubts if any
mere plaster of ant’s eggs could have helped where there
Was so great insincerity.

50
IX
F PHASE EIGHT

Will—War between race and individuality.

Mask (from Phase 22). True—Courage. False—Fear,
Creative Mind (from Phase 22). ‘'rue—Versatility,

False—Impotence.

Body of Fate (from Phase 8)—The beginning of
strength.

Example : The Idiot of Dostoieffsky perhaps.

Out of phase, a condition of terror, when true to phase, ©

of courage unbroken through defeat.
From Phase 1 to Phase 7, there has been a gradual

Fi

"

a
i

weakening in the character of all that is primary. Char.
acter has taken the disguise of individuality (the will _
analysed in relation to itself), but now, though individu |

ality persists through another phase, personality
(the Will analysed in relation to the Mask) must pre-
dominate. So long as the primary Tincture predominated,
the antithetical Tincture accepted its manner of percept-
tion; and character has been enlarged by the vegetative
and sensitive faculties excited by the Body of Fate,
which are the nearest a primary nature can come to
antithetical emotion. But now the bottle must be burst.

The struggle of idealised, or habitual theologised thought —

with instinct, and that between mind and body, of the
waning primary with the growing antithetical, must be
decided, and the vegetative and sensitive faculties must
for a while take the sway. Only then can the Will be
forced to recognise the weakness of the Creative Mind
when unaided by the Mask, and so to permit the involun-

51
tary Mask to change into the voluntary. Every modifica-
tion or codification of morality has been its attempt,
acting through the Creative Mind, to set order upon the
instinctive and vegetative faculties, and it must now feel
that it can create order no longer. It is the very nature
of a struggle, where the soul must lose all form received
from the objectively accepted conscience of the world,
that it denies us an historical example. One thinks of
possible examples only to decide that Hartley Coleridge
is not amongst them, that the brother of the Brontés
may only seem to be because we know so little about
him, but that Dostoieffsky’s Idiot is almost certainly an
example. But Dostoieffsky’s Idiot was too matured a
type, he had passed too many times through the twenty-
eight phases to help our understanding. Here for the
most part are those obscure wastrels who seem powerless
to free themselves from some sensual temptation—drink,
women, drugs—and who cannot in a life of continual
crisis create any lasting thing. The being is often
born up to four times at this one phase, it is said, before
the antithetical Tincture attains its mastery. The being
clings like a man drowning to every straw, and it is
precisely this clinging, this seemingly vain reaching forth
for strength, amidst the collapse of all those public
thoughts and habits that are the support of primary
man, that enables it to enter at last upon Phase 9. It
has to find its strength by a transformation of that very
instinct which has hitherto been its weakness and so to
gather up the strewn and broken members. The union
of Creative Mind and Mask in opposition to Body of Fate
and Will, intensifies this struggle by dividing the nature
into halves which have no interchange of qualities. The
man is inseparable from his fate, he cannot see himself
apart, nor can he distinguish between emotion and in-
tellect. He is will-less, dragged hither and thither, and
his unemotionalised intellect, gathered up into the mathe-

52
matical Phase 22, shows him perpetually for object of
desire, an emotion that is like a mechanical energy,
thought that is like wheel and piston. He is suspended;
he is without bias, and until bias comes, till he has begun |
groping for strength within his own being, his thought
and his emotion bring him to judgment but they cannot _
help. As those at Phase 22 must dissolve the dramatis- |
ing Mask in abstract mind that they may discover the _
concrete world, he must dissolve thought into mere im.
personal instinct, into mere race that he may discover
the dramatising Mask: he chooses himself and not his
Fate. Courage is his true Mask, and diversity, that has

no habitual purpose, his true Creative Mind, because these —

are all that the phase of the greatest possible weakness

can take into itself from the phase of the greatest possible ©

strength. When his fingers close upon a straw, that is _
courage, and his versatility is that any wave may float
a straw. At Phase 7, he had tried out of ambition to
change his nature, as though a man should make love
who had no heart, but now shock can give him back his ©
heart. Only a shock resulting from the greatest possible |
conflict can make the greatest possible change, that from —
primary to antithetical or from antithetical to primary
again. Nor can anything intervene. He must be aware
of nothing but the conflict, his despair is necessary, he
is of all men the most tempted—*‘ Eloi, Eloi, why hast
thou forsaken me? ”’

There are two human types found at each phase and
called Victim and Sage, the first predominantly
emotional, the other predominantly intellectual. Thougll
not necessary to a first understanding of ** The Wheel,”
they must be touched on when describing Phase 22 (a
phase of such great importance at the present moment
of history that it will be described at greater length than
the other phases), and for this reason it is necessary to
say that they have an interchange at Phase 8 or at

r

58
Phase 22, corresponding to the interchange of the Tinc-
tures. Their diagram will be given, while expounding
another portion of the system.

x
PHASE NINE

Will—Belief instead of individuality.

Mask (from Phase 28). True—Facility. False—
Obscurity.

Creative Mind (from Phase 21). True—Self-Dramatis-
ation. False—Anarchy.
- Body of Fate (from Phase 7)—Enforced sensuality.

Example : An unnamed artist.

Out of phase, blundering and ignorant, the man be-
comes when in phase powerful and accomplished; all that
strength as of metallic rod and wheel discovered within
himself. He should seek to liberate the Mask by the

help of the Creative Mind from the Body of Fate—that

is to say, to carve out and wear the now voluntary Mask
and so to protect and to deliver the Image. In so far
as he does so, there is immense confidence in self-ex-
pression, a vehement self, working through mathematical
calculation, a delight in straight line and right angle;
but if he seek to live according to the primary Tincture,
to use the Body of Fate to rid the Creative Mind of its
Mask, to live with objective ambition and curiosity, all
is confused, the Will asserts itself with a savage, terrified
violence. Ali these phases of incipient personality when
out of phase are brutal, but after Phase 12, when true

o4

personality begins, brutality gives place to an evasive
capricious coldness—** false, fleeting, perjured Clarence ”
—a lack of good faith in their primary relation, oftey
accompanied in their antithetical relation by the most
self-torturing scruples. When an antithetical man is out
of phase, he reproduces the primary condition, but with
an emotional inversion, love for Image or Mask becomes
dread, or after Phase 15, hatred, and the Mask clings to
the man or pursues him in the Image. It may even he
that he is haunted by a delusive hope, cherished in secret,
or bragged of aloud, that he may inherit the Body oj
Fate and Mask of a phase opposed to his own. He seeks
to avoid antithetical conflict by accepting what opposes
him and his antithetical life is invaded. At Phase 9, the
Body of Fate that could alone purify the mind of a
Carlyle, or of a Whitman, is the enemy of a unity which
it breaks with sensuality (the rising flood of instinct from
Phase 7) and the man if out of phase, instead of master- ©
ing this through his dramatisation of himself as a form
of passionate self-mastery, and of seeking some like form
as Image, grows stupid and blundering. Hence one finds
at this phase, more often than at any other, men who
dread, despise and persecute the women whom they love.
Yet behind all that muddy, flooded, brutal self, there
is perhaps a vague timid soul knowing itself caught in an
antithesis, an alternation it cannot control. It is said
of it, ** the soul having found its weakness at Phase 8
begins the inward discipline of the soul in the fury of
Phase 9.” And again, ** Phase 9 has the most sincere
belief any man has ever had in his own desire.”’

There is a certain artist who said to a student of these
symbols, speaking of a notable man, and his mistress
and their children, ** She no longer cares for his work,
no longer gives him the sympathy he needs, why does he
not leave her, what does he owe to her or to her
children? *”? The student discovered this artist to be 4

P= 593
z ‘cubist of powerful imagination and noticed that his head

_ suggested a sullen obstinacy, but that his manner and his
speech were generally sympathetic and gentle.

<1
PHASE TEN

Will—The Image Breaker.

Mask (from Phase 24). True—Organisation. False—
Inertia.

Creative Mind (from Phase 20). JTrue—Domination
through emotional construction. F'alse—Reformation.

Body of Fate (from Phase 6)—Enforced emotion.
Example : Parnell.

If he live like the opposite phase, conceived as primary
condition—the phase where ambition dies—he lacks
all emotional power (False Mask: ‘* Inertia ’’), and
gives himself up to rudderless change, reform without
a vision of form. He accepts what form (Mask and
Image) those about him admire and, on discovering that
it is alien, casts it away with brutal violence, to choose
some other form as alien. He disturbs his own life, and
he disturbs all who come near him more than does
Phase 9, for Phase 9 has no interest in others except in
relation to itself. If, on the other hand, he be true to
phase, and use his intellect to liberate from mere race
(Body of Fate at Phase 6 where race is codified), and so
create some code of personal conduct, which implies
always ‘* divine right,’’ he becomes proud, masterful and
practical. He cannot wholly escape the influence of his
Body of Fate, but he will be subject to its most

56
personal form; instead of gregarious sympathies, to some
woman’s tragic love almost certainly. Though the Body
of Fate must seek to destroy his Mask, it may now
impose upon him a struggle which leaves victory stil]
possible. As Body of Fate phase and Mask phase
approach one another they share somewhat of each
other’s nature; the effect of mutual hate grows more
diffused, less harsh and obvious. The effect of the Body
of Fate of Phase 10 for instance is slightly less harsh
and obvious than that of the ** enforced sensuality ” of
Phase 9. It is now ‘‘ enforced emotion.’’ Phase 9 was
without restraint, but now restraint has come and with
it pride; there is slightly less need to insist upon the
brutal facts of life that he may escape from their charm;
the subjective fury is less uncalculating, and the opposi-
tion of Will and Mask no longer produces a delight in an
impersonal precision and power like that of machinery
(machinery that is emotion and thought) but rather a
kind of burning restraint, a something that suggests a
savage statue to which one offers sacrifice. This sacrifice
is code, personality no longer perceived as power only.
He seeks by its help to free the creative power from mass
emotion, but never wholly succeeds, and so the life re-
mains troubled, a conflict between pride and race, and
passes from crisis to crisis. At Phase 9 there was little
sexual discrimination, and now there is emotion created
by circumstance rather than by any unique beauty of
body or of character. One remembers Faust, who will
find every wench a Helen, now that he has drunk the
witches’ dram, and yet loves his Gretchen with all bis
being. Perhaps one thinks of that man who gave 4
lifetime of love, because a young woman in capricious
idleness had written his name with her parasol upon the
snow. Here is rage, desire to escape but not now by
mere destruction of the opposing fate; for a vague
abstract sense of some world, some image, some circum-

57

stance, harmonious to emotion, has begun, or of some-
F thing harmonious to emotion that may be set upon the
empty pedestal, once visible world, image, or circum-
stance has been destroyed. With less desire of expression

than at Phase 9, and with more desire of action and of
command, the man (Creative Mind from Phase 20, phase
of greatest dramatic power) sees all his life as a stage
play where there is only one good acting part; yet no one

_ will accuse him of being a stage player for he will wear

always that stony Mask (Phase 24 ‘* The end of ambi-
tion ’? antithetically perceived). He, too, if he triumph,
may end ambition through the command of multitudes,
for he is like that god of Norse mythology, who hung
from the cliff’s side for three days a sacrifice to himself.
Perhaps Moses when he descended the mountain-side
had a like stony Mask, and had cut out of the one rock
Mask and table.

John Morley says of Parnell, whose life proves him of
the Phase, that he had the least discursive mind he had
ever known, and that is always characteristic of a phase
where all practical curiosity has been lost wherever some
personal aim is not involved, while philosophical and
artistic curiosity are still undiscovered. He made upon
his contemporaries an impression of impassivity, and yet
alter a speech that seemed brutal and callous, a follower
has recorded that his hands were full of blood because he
had torn them with his nails. One of his followers was
shocked during the impassioned discussion in Committee
Room No. 15, that led to his abandonment, by this most
reticent man’s lack of reticence in allusion to the opera-
tions of sex, an indifference as of a mathematician deal-
ing with some arithmetical quantity, and yet Mrs Parnell
tells how upon a night of storm on Brighton pier, and
at the height of his power, he held her out over the waters
and she lay still, stretched upon his two hands, knowing
that if she moved, he would drown himself and her.

58
XIT
PHASE ELEVEN

Will—The Image Burner.
Mask (from Phase 25). TJ rue—Rejection. False—
Moral Indifference.

Creative Mind (from Phase 19). True—Moral reforma-

tion. /alse—Self-Assertion. 7
Body of Fate (from Phase 5)—Enforced belief.

Examples : Spinoza, Savonarola.

While Phase 9 was kept from its subjectivity by

personal relations, by sensuality, by various kinds of

grossness; and Phase 10 by associations of men for prac- _
tical purposes, and by the emotions that arise out of such —

associations, or by some tragic love where there is an
element of common interest; Phase 11 is impeded by the
excitement of conviction, by the contagion of organised
belief, or by its interest in organisation for its own sake.
The man of the phase is a half solitary, one who defends
a solitude he cannot or will not inhabit, his Mask being
from a phase of abstract belief, which offers him always
some bundle of mathematical formulae, or its like,
opposed to his nature. It will presently be seen that the
man of Phase 25, where the Mask is, creates his system
of belief, just as Phase 24 creates his code, to exclude all
that is too difficult for dolt or knave; but the man of
Phase 11 systematises, runs to some frenzy of conviction,
to make intellect, intellect for its own sake, possible, and
perhaps, in his rage against rough-and-ready customary
thought, to make all but intellect impossible. He will
be the antithesis of all this, should he be conquered by
his Body of Fate (from Phase 5, where the common in-
stinct first unites itself to reflection) being carried off by

“Ot
Y Tt
— a ‘

59

iF some contagion of belief, some general interest, and com-
- pelled to substitute for intellectual rage some form of

personal pride and so to become the proud prelate of
tradition.

In Spinoza one finds the phase in its most pure and
powerful shape. He saw the divine energy in whatever
was the most individual expression of the soul, and spent
his life in showing that such expression was for the
world’s welfare and not, as might seem, a form of
anarchy. His Mask, under the influence of his Body of
Fate, would have forced him to seek happiness in sub-
mission to something hard and exterior; but the Mask,
set free by a Creative Mind that would destroy exterior
popular sanction, makes possible for the first time the
solitary conception of God. One imagines him among
the theologians of his time, who sought always some

formula perhaps, some sheep-dog for common minds,

turning himself into pure wolf, and making for the
wilderness. Certainly his pantheism, however pleasing
to his own bare bench of scholars, was little likely to help
the oratory of any bench of judges or of bishops.
Through all his cold definitions, on whose mathematical
form he prided himself, one divines some quarrel, not
recorded in his biography, with the thought of his fathers
and his kin, foreed upon him almost to the breaking of
his heart : no nature without the stroke of fate divides
itself in two.

XITt
THE OPENING OF THE TINCTURE, ETC.
JUST before the place in the Great Wheel, where the

word Heart is written, the splitting or opening of each
Tincture begins, and increases till Phase 15 and then

60
decreases, until the place where Head is written ; at which
point they close once more. The antithetical Tincture
is said to open at Phase 11, the primary at Phase 19,
When the Tinctures open, that is to say when observation —

gives place to experience, when the being attains gelf

knowledge or its possibility, the Four Faculties reflect
themselves in the experience or knowledge as the Four
Qualities, the Will as instinct (or race), the Mask as
emotion, the Creative Mind as reason, the Body of Fate
as desire. |
Before the interchange of the Tinctures at Phase 15 the —

antithetical is reflected as reason and desire, the primary —

as emotion and instinct, while after Phase 15 this js
reversed. Hmotion and instinct when acting as one are
love, reason and desire hatred; and in all phases before
Phase 11 and after Phase 19, except those between Phase
26 and Phase 4, and especially in those phases round
Phase 8 and Phase 22 the man knows himself through
acted love and acted hate. Between Phase 26 and Phase
4 love and hate should be themselves unknown being only
known as one, as that which is fated.

By love is meant love of that particular unity towards
which the nature is tending, or of those images and
ideas which define it, and by hate, hate of all that
impedes that unity. In the phases between Phase 12
and Phase 18, the unity sought is Unity of Being,
which is not to be confused with the complete
subjectivity of Phase 15, for it implies a harmony of
antithetical and primary life, and Phase 15 has no
primary. Between Phase 12 and Phase 18 the
struggle for this unity becomes conscious and its attain-
ment possible. All the antithetical control over primary
faculties increases; and the being may become almost
wholly predestined, as distinguished from the primary
phases which are fated. It struggles within itself, for
it must now harmonise its instinct with its emotion, its

61
reason with its desire, and not in relation to, or for the
sake of, some particular action; but in relation to a
conception of itself as Unity. With this change sexual
love becomes the most important event of the life, for
the opposite sex is nature chosen and fated—Image and
Body of Fate.

At the approach of Unity of Being the greatest beauty
of literary style becomes possible, for thought becomes
sensuous and musical. All that moves us is related to
our possible Unity; we lose interest in the abstract and
concrete alike, only when we have said, ** My fire,’’ and
so distinguished it from ‘‘ the fire ”’ and ** a fire,’’ does
the fire seem bright. Every emotion begins to be related,
as musical notes are related, to every other. It is as
though we touched a musical string that set other strings
into sympathetic vibration.

XIV
PHASE TWELVE

Will—The Forerunner.

Mask (from Phase 26). True—Self-exaggeration.
false—Self-abandonment.

Creative Mind (from Phase 18). True—Subjective
Philosophy. False—War between two forms of
Expression. |

Body of Fate (from Phase 4)—Enforced Intellectual
Action.

Example : Nietzsche.

Ihe man of this phase is out of phase, is all a reaction,
is driven from one self-conscious pose to another, is full
of hesitation ; or he is true to phase, a cup that remembers
but its own fullness. His phase is called the ‘* Fore-

62
runner *’ because fragmentary and violent. The phase;
of action where the man mainly defines himself by his
practical relations are finished, or finishing, and the
phases where he defines himself mainly through ap
image of the mind begun or beginning; phases of hatred —
for some external fate are giving way to phases of self.
hatred. It is a phase of immense energy because the
Four Faculties are equisdistant. The oppositions (Wi) |
and Mask, Creative Mind and Body of Fate) are balanced |
by the discords and these, being equidistant between

identity and opposition, are at their utmost intensity,

The nature is conscious of the most extreme degree of
deception, and is wrought to a frenzy of desire for truth
of self. If Phase 9 had the greatest possible “ belief
in its own desire,’’ there is now the greatest possible
belief in all values created by personality. It is therefore
before all else the phase of the hero, of the man who
overcomes himself, and so no longer needs, like Phase
10, the submission of others, or like Phase 11 conviction
of others to prove his victory. Solitude has been bor
at last, though solitude invaded, and hard to defend.
Nor is there need any longer of the bare anatomy of
Phase 11; every thought comes with sound and
metaphor, and the sanity of the being is no longer from
its relation to facts, but from its approximation to its
own unity, and from this on we shall meet with men and
women to whom facts are a dangerous narcotic or
intoxicant. Facts are from the Body of Fate, and the
Body of Fate is from the phase where instinct, before
the complications of reflection, reached its most
persuasive strength. The man is pursued by a series
of accidents, which, unless he meet them antithetically,
drive him into all sorts of temporary ambitions, opposed
to his nature, unite him perhaps to some small protesting
sect (the family or neighbourhood of Phase 4 intellectu-
alised); and these ambitions he defends by some kind of

63
superficial intellectual action, the pamphlet, the violent
speech, the sword of the swashbuckler. He spends his
life in oscillation between the violent assertion of some
commonplace pose, and a dogmatism which means
nothing, apart from the circumstance that created it.
If, however, he meets these accidents by the awakening
of his antithetical being there is a noble extravagance,
an overflowing fountain of personal life. He turns
towards the True Mask and having by philosophic
intellect (Creative Mind) delivered it from all that is
topical and temporary, announces a philosophy, which
is the logical expression of a mind alone with the object
of its desire. The True Mask, derived from the terrible
Phase 26, called the phase of the Hunchback, is the
reverse of all that is emotional, being emotionally cold;

- not mathematical, for intellectual abstraction ceased at

Phase 11, but marble pure. In the presence of the Mask,
the Creative Mind has the isolation of a fountain under
moonlight; yet one must always distinguish between the
emotional Will—now approaching the greatest subtlety
of sensitiveness, and more and more conscious of its
frailty—and that which it would be, the lonely, imper-
turbable, proud Mask, as between the Will and its
discord in the Creative Mind where is no shrinking from
life. The inan follows an Image, created or chosen by
the Creative Mind from what fate offers; would
persecute and dominate it; and this Image wavers
between the concrete and sensuous Image. It has become
personal; there is now, though not so decisively as later,
but one form of chosen beauty, and the sexual Image
is drawn as with a diamond, and tinted those pale colours
Sculptors sometimes put upon a statue. Like all before
Phase 15 the man is overwhelmed with the thought of
his Own weakness and knows of no strength but that of
Image and Mask.

64,
XV
PHASE THIRTEEN

_Wiall—Sensuous Ego.

Mask (from Phase 27). True—Self-expression. False
—Self-absorption.

Creative. Mind (from Phase 17). True—Subjective
Truth. False—Morbidity.

Body of Fate (from Phase 8)—Enforced Love.

Examples : Baudelaire, Beardsley, Ernest Dowson.

This is said to be the only phase where entire sensuality
is possible, that is to say sensuality without the inter-
mixture of any other element. There is now a possible
complete intellectual unity, Unity of Being apprehended
through the images of the mind; and this is opposed by
the fate (Phase 3 where body becomes deliberate and
whole) which offers an equal roundness and wholeness
of sensation. The Will is now a mirror of emotional
experience, or sensation, according to whether it is
swayed by Mask or Fate. Though wax to every
impression of emotion, or of sense, it would yet through
its passion for truth (Creative Mind) become its opposite
and receive from the Mask (Phase 27), which is at the
phase of the Saint, a virginal purity of emotion. If it
live objectively, that is to say surrender itself te
sensation, it becomes morbid, it sees every sensation
separate from every other under the light of its perpetual
analysis (Creative Mind at a phase of dispersal). Phase
18 is a phase of great importance, because the most
intellectually subjective phase, and because only here
can be achieved in perfection that in the antithetical life

: = ‘ea @& & it oo 2 _ a “a. & -
* * - J

65

_ which corresponds to sanctity in the primary : not self-

denial but expression for expression’s sake. Its influence
indeed upon certain writers has caused them in their
literary criticism to exalt intellectual sincerity to the place
in literature, which is held by sanctity in theology. At
this phase the self discovers, within itself, while struggling
with the Body of Fate, forms of emotional morbidity,
which others recognise as their own; as the saint may
take upon himself the physical diseases of others. There
is almost always a preoccupation with those metaphors
and symbols and mythological images through which
we define whatever seems most strange or most morbid.
Self-hatred now reaches its height, and through this
hatred comes the slow liberation of intellectual love.
There are moments of triumph and moments of defeat,
each in its extreme form, for the subjective intellect
knows nothing of moderation. As the primary Tincture
has weakened the sense of quantity has weakened, for
the antithetical Tincture is preoccupied with quality.

From now, if not from Phase 12, and until Phases 17
or 18 have passed, happy love is rare for seeing that the
man must find a woman whose Mask falls within or but
just outside his Body of Fate and Mask, if he is to find
strong sexual attraction, the range of choice grows
smaller, and all life grows more tragic. As the woman
grows harder to find, so does every beloved object.
Lacking suitable objects of desire, the relation between
man and Daimon becomes more clearly a struggle or even
a relation of enmity.

66
XVI
PHASE FOURTEEN

Will—The Obsessed Man.

Mask (from Phase 28). Yrue—Serenity. False—Self-
distrust.

Creative Mind (from Phase 16). True—Emotional
Will. alse—Terror.

Body of Fate (from Phase 2)—Enforced Love of the
World.

Examples : Keats, Giorgione, Many Beautiful Women.

As we approach Phase 15 personal beauty increases
and at Phase 14 and Phase 16 the greatest human beauty
becomes possible. The aim of the being should be to
disengage those objects which are images of desire from
the excitement and disorder of the Body of Fate, and
under certain circumstances to impress upon these the
full character of the Mask which, being from Phase 28,
is a folding up, or fading into themselves. It is this
act of the intellect, begun at conception, which has given
the body its beauty. The Body of Fate, derived from -
the phase of the utmost possible physical energy, but
of an energy without aim, like that of a child, works
against this folding up yet offers little more of objects
than their excitement, their essential honey. The images
of desire, disengaged and subject to the Mask, are
separate and still (Creative Mind from a phase of violent
scattering). The images of Phase 18 and even of Phase
12 have in a lesser degree this character. When we
compare these images with those of any subsequent
phase, each seems studied for its own sake; they float

67

as in serene air, or lie hidden in some valley, and if they
move it is to music that returns always to the same note,
or in a dance that so returns into itself that they seem
immortal.

When the being is out of phase, when it is allured by
primary curiosity, it is aware of its primary feebleness
and its intellect becomes but a passion of apprehension,
or a shrinking from solitude; it may even become mad;
or it may use its conscious feebleness and its consequent
terror as a magnet for the sympathy of others, as a
means of domination. At Phase 16 will be discovered
a, desire to accept every possible responsibility ; but now
responsibility is renounced and this renunciation becomes
an instrument of power, dropped burdens being taken up
by others. Here are born those women who are most
touching in their beauty. Helen was of the phase; and
‘she comes before the mind’s eye elaborating a delicate
personal discipline, as though she would make her whole
life an image of a unified antithetical energy. While
seeming an image of softness, and of quiet, she draws
perpetually upon glass with a diamond. Yet she will
not number among her sins anything that does not break
that personal discipline, no matter what it may seem
according to others’ discipline; but if she fail in
her own discipline she will not deceive herself, and for
all the languor of her movements, and her indifference
to the acts of others, her mind is never at peace. She
will wander much alone as though she consciously
meditated her masterpiece that shall be at the full moon,
yet unseen by human eye, and when she returns to her
house she will look upon her household with timid eyes,
as though she knew that all powers of self-protection
had been taken away, and that of her once violent
primary Tincture nothing remained but a strange irres-
ponsible innocence. Her early life has perhaps been
perilous because of that nobility, that excess of antithe-

68

tical energies, which may have so constrained the fading
primary that, instead of its becoming the expression of
those energies, it is but a vague beating of the wings, or
their folding up into a melancholy stillness. The greater
the peril the nearer has she approached to the final
union of primary and antithetical, where she will desire
nothing; and already perhaps, through weakness of
desire, she understands nothing yet seems to understand
everything; already serves nothing, while alone seeming
of service. Is it not because she desires so little and
gives so little that men will die and murder in her
service? One thinks of THE ETERNAL Ipou of Rodin:
that kneeling man with hands clasped behind his back
in humble adoration, kissing a young girl a little below
the breast, while she gazes down, without compre-
hending, under her half-closed eyelids. Perhaps could
we see her a little later, with flushed cheeks casting her
money upon some gaming-table, we would wonder that
action and form could so belie each other, not under-
standing that the Fool’s Mask is her chosen motley, nor
her terror before death and stillness. One thinks too
of the women of Burne-Jones, but not of Botticelli’s
women, who have too much curiosity, nor Rossetti’s
women, who have too much passion; and as we see
before the mind’s eye those pure faces gathered about

the Sleep of Arthur, or crowded upon the Golden Stair, ©

we wonder if they too would not have filled us with
surprise, or dismay, because of some craze, some passion
for mere excitement, or slavery to a drug.

In the poets too, who are of the phase, one finds the
impression of the Body of Fate as intoxication or
narcotic. Wordsworth, shuddering at his solitude, has
filled his art in all but a few pages with common opinion,
common sentiment; while in the poetry of Keats there
is an exaggerated sensuousness, though little sexual
passion, that compels us to remember the pepper on the

pre ay
——_——..  e ee, ———

69

tongue as though that were his symbol. Thought
is disappearing in image; and in Keats, in some
ways a perfect type, intellectual curiosity is at its
weakest; there is scarcely an image, where his poetry is
at its best, whose subjectivity has not been heightened
by its use in many great poets, painters, sculptors,
artificers. The being has almost reached the end of
that elaboration of itself which has for its climax an
absorption in time, where space can be but symbols or
images in the mind. There is little observation even
in detail of expression, all is reverie, while in Wordsworth
the soul’s deepening solitude has reduced mankind, when
seen objectively, to a few slight figures outlined for a
moment amid mountain and lake. The corresponding
genius in painting is that of Monticelli, after 1870, and
perhaps that of Condor, though in Condor there are
elements suggesting the preceding phase.

All born at antithetical phases before Phase 15, are
subject to violence, because of the indeterminate energy
of the Body of Fate; this violence seems accidental,
unforeseen and cruel—and here are women carried off by
robbers and ravished by clowns.

XVII

PHASE |

Will. No description ex-
Mask (from Phase 1). cept that this is a
Creative Mind (from Phase 15). | phase of complete
Body of Fate (from Phase 1). beauty.

Body of Fate and Mask are now identical; and Will
and Creative Mind identical; or rather the Creative Mind
is dissolved in the Will and the Body of Fate in the Mask.

Thought and Will are indistinguishable, effort and attain- ae

70
ment are indistinguishable; and this is the consumma-
tion of a slow process; nothing is apparent but dreaming
Will and the Image that it dreams. Since Phase 12 all
images, and cadences of the mind, have been satisfying
to that mind just in so far as they have expressed this
converging of will and thought, effort and attainment.
The words musical, sensuous, are but descriptions of that
converging process. Thought has been pursued, not as
a means but as an end—the poem, the painting, the
reverie has been sufficient of itself. It is not possible,
however, to separate in the understanding this running
into one of Will and Creative Mind from the running
into one of Mask and Body of Fate. Without Mask and
Body of Fate the Will would have nothing to desire, the
Creative Mind nothing to apprehend. Since Phase 12
the Creative Mind has been so interfused by the antithe-
tical Tincture, that it has more and more confined its
contemplation of actual things to those that resemble
images of the mind desired by the Will. The being has
selected, moulded and remoulded, narrowed its circle of
living, been more and more the artist, grown more and
more ‘* distinguished ”’ in all preference. Now contem-
plation and desire, united into one, inhabit a world where
every beloved image has bodily form, and every bodily
form is loved. This love knows nothing of desire, for
desire implies effort, and though there is still separation ~
from the loved object, love accepts the separation as
necessary to its own existence. Fate is known for the
boundary that gives our Destiny its form, and—as we
can desire nothing outside that form—as an expression
of our freedom. Chance and Choice have become inter-
changeable without losing their identity. As all effort
has ceased, all thought has become image, because no
thought could exist if it were not carried towards its
own extinction, amid fear or in contemplation; and
every image is separate from every other, for if image

71

were linked to image, the soul would awake from its
immovable trance. All that the being has experienced
as thought is visible to its eyes as a whole, and in this
way it perceives, not as they are to others, but according
to its own perception, all orders of existence. Its own
body possesses the greatest possible beauty, being indeed
that body which the soul will permanently inhabit, when
all its phases have been repeated according to the number
allotted : that which we call the clarified or Celestial Body.
Where the being has lived out of phase, seeking to live
through antithetical phases as though they had been
primary, there is now terror of solitude, its forced, painful
and slow acceptance and a life haunted by terrible
dreams, Kven for the most perfect, there is a time of
pain, a passage through a vision, where evil reveals itself
in its final meaning. In this passage Christ, it is said,
mourned over the length of time and the unworthiness
of man’s lot to man, whereas his forerunner mourned
and his successor will mourn over the shortness of time
and the unworthiness of man to his lot; but this cannot
yet be understood.

XVIII
PHASE SIXTEEN

Will—The Positive Man.

Mask (from Phase 2). True—Illusion. False—
Delusion.

Creative Mind (from Phase 14). True—Vehemence.
False—Opinionated Will.

Body of Fate (from Phase 28)—Enforced Delusion.

Examples : William Blake, Rabelais, Aretino, Paracel-
sus, some beautiful women.

72

Phase 16 is in contrast to Phase 14, in spite of their
resemblance of extreme subjectivity, in that it has a
Body of Fate from the phase of the Fool, a phase of
absorption, and its Mask from what might have been
called the phase of the Child, a phase of aimless energy,
of physical life for its own sake; while Phase 14 had its
Body of Fate from the phase of the Child and its Mask
from that of the Fool. Fate thrusts an aimless excite-
ment upon Phase 14, while Phase 14 finds within itself
an antithetical dream; whereas Phase 16 has a dream
thrust upon it and finds within itself an aimless excite-
ment. This excitement, and the dream, are both illusions,
so that the Will, which is itself a violent scattering
energy, has to use its intellect (Creative Mind) to discrim-
inate between illusions. They are both illusions, because,
so small is the primary nature, sense of fact is an impos-
sibility. If it use its intellect, which is the most narrow,
the most unflinching, even the most cruel in synthesis,
possible to man, to disengage the aimless child (1.e., to
find Mask and Image in the child’s toy), it finds the
soul’s most radiant expression and surrounds itself with
some fairyland, some mythology of wisdom or laughter;
its own scattering, its mere rushing out into the
disordered and unbounded, after the still trance of Phase
15, has found its antithesis, and therefore self-knowledge
and self-mastery. If, however, it subordinate its intellect
to the Body of Fate all the cruelty and narrowness of
that intellect are displayed in service of preposterous
purpose after purpose till there is nothing left_but the
fixed idea and some hysterical hatred. By these pur-
poses, derived from a phase of absorption, the Body of
Fate drives the Will back upon its subjectivity, deform-
ing the Mask until the Will can only see the object of its
desire in these purposes. It does not hate because it
dreads, as do the phases of increasing antithetical
emotion, but hates that which opposes desire. Capable

ish ao fo CL
7 oF - . 0

78

of nothing but an incapable idealism (for it has no
thought but in myth, or in defence of myth), it must
because it sees one side is all white, see the other side
all black; what but a dragon could dream of thwarting
a St. George. In men of the phase there will commonly
be both natures for to be true to phase is a ceaseless
struggle. At one moment they are full of hate—Blake
writes of ‘* Flemish and Venetian demons ”’ and of some
picture of his own destroyed “ by some vile spell of
Stoddart’s ’’—and their hate is always close to madness ;
and at the next they produce the comedy of Aretino
and of Rabelais or the mythology of Blake, and discover
symbolism to express the overflowing and bursting of the
mind. There is always an element of frenzy, and almost
always a delight in certain glowing or shining images of
concentrated force; in the smith’s forge; in the heart; in
the human form in its most vigorous development; in
the solar disc; in some symbolical representation of the
sexual organs; for the being must brag of its triumph
over its own incoherence.

Since Phase 8 the man has more and more judged what
is right in relation to time, a right action, or a right
motive, has been one that he thought possible or desir-
able to think or do eternally; his soul would ‘* come into
possession of itself for ever in one single moment ”’; but
now he begins once more to judge an action or motive in
relation to space. A right action or motive must soon
be right for any other man in similar circumstance.
Hitherto an action, or motive, has been right precisely
because it is exactly right for one person only though
for that person always. After the change, the belief in
the soul’s immortality declines though the decline is
slow, and it may only be recovered when Phase 1 is
passed.

Among those who are of this phase may be great
satirists, great caricaturists, but they pity the beautiful,

74

for that is their Mask, and hate the ugly, for that is
their Body of Fate, and so are unlike those of the primary
phases, Rembrandt for instance, who pity the ugly, and
sentimentalise the beautiful, or call it insipid, and turn
away or secretly despise and hate it. Here too are
beautiful women, whose bodies have taken upon them-
selves the image of the True Mask, and in these there is.
a radiant intensity, something of ** The Burning Babe ”’
of the Elizabethan lyric. They walk like queens, and
seem to carry upon their backs a quiver of arrows, but
they are gentle only to those whom they have chosen or
subdued, or to the dogs that follow at their heels.
Boundless in generosity, and in illusion, they will give
themselves to a beggar because he resembles a religious
picture and be faithful all their lives, or if they
take another turn and choose a dozen lovers, die con-
vinced that none but the first or last has ever touched
their lips, for they are of those whose “* virginity renews
itself like the moon.’’? Out of phase they turn termagant,
if their lover take a wrong step in a quadrille where all
the figures are of their own composition and changed
without notice when the fancy takes them. Indeed,
perhaps if the body have great perfection, there is always
something imperfect in the mind, some rejection of, or
inadequacy of Mask: Venus out of phase chose lame
Vulcan. Here also are several very ugly persons, their
bodies torn and twisted by the violence of the new
primary, but where the body has this ugliness great
beauty of mind is possible. This is indeed the only
antithetical phase where ugliness is possible, it bemg
complementary to Phase 2, the only primary phase where
beauty is possible.

From this phase on we meet with those who do
violence, instead of those who suffer it; and prepare for
those who love some living person, and not an image of
the mind, but as yet this love is hardly more than the

75

‘¢ fixed idea ”’ of faithfulness. As the new love grows the
sense of beauty will fade.

xITX
PHASE SEVENTEEN

Will—The Daimonic Man.

Mask (from Phase 8). True—Simplification through
intensity. False—Dispersal

Creative Mind (from Phase 18). True—Creative
imagination through antithetical emotion. False—En-
forced self-realization.

Body of Fate (from Phase 27)—Loss.
Examples : Dante, Shelley.

He is called the Daimonic man because Unity of Being,
and consequent expression of Daimonic thought, is now
more easy than at any other phase. As contrasted with
Phase 18 and Phase 14, where mental images were
separated from one another that they might be subject
to knowledge, all now flow, change, flutter, cry out, or
mix into something else; but without, as at Phase 16,
breaking and bruising one another, for Phase 17, the
central phase of its triad, is without frenzy. The Will
is falling asunder, but without explosion and noise. The
separated fragments seek images rather than ideas, and
these the intellect, seated in Phase 18, must synthesise
in vain, drawing with its compass point a line that shall
but represent the outline of a bursting pod. The being
has for its supreme aim, as it had at Phase 16 (and as
all subsequent antithetical phases shall have) to hide
from itself and others this separation and disorder, and

76
it conceals them under the emotional /mage of Phase 8;
as Phase 16 concealed its greater violence under that of
Phase 2. When true to phase the intellect must turn all
its synthetic power to this task. It finds, not the im-
passioned myth that Phase 16 found, but a Mask of
simplicity that is also intensity. This Mask may repre-
sent intellectual, or sexual passion; seem some Ahasuerus
or Athanase; be the gaunt Dante of The Divine Comedy;
its corresponding Image may be Shelley’s Venus Urania,
Dante’s Beatrice, or even the Great Yellow Rose of the
Paradiso. The Will, when true to phase, assumes, in
assuming the Mask, an intensity, which is never dramatic
but always lyrical and personal, and this intensity,
though always a deliberate assumption, is to others but
the charm of the being; and yet the Will is always aware
of the Body of Fate, which perpetually destroys this
intensity, thereby leaving the Will to its own “* dis-
persal.”? At Phase 8, not as Mask but as Phase, there
should be perfect physical well-being or balance, though
not beauty or emotional intensity, but at Phase 27 are
those who turn away from all that Phase 3 represents and
seek all those things it is blind to. The Body of Fate
therefore, derived from a phase of renunciation, is
** loss,”” and works to make impossible ‘* simplification
by intensity.’’ The being, through the intellect, selects
some object of desire for a representation of the Mask
as Image, some woman perhaps, and the Body of Fate
snatches away the object. Then the intellect (Creative
Mind), which in the most antithetical phases were better
described as imagination, must substitute some new
image of desire; and in the degree of its power and of its
attainment of unity, relate that which is lost, that which
has snatched it away, to the new image of desire, that
which threatens the new image to the being’s unity. If its
unity be already past, or if unity be still to come,
it may for all that be true to phase. It will then use its

i

77

intellect merely to isolate Mask and Image, as chosen
forms or as conceptions of the mind. [If it be out of
phase it will avoid the subjective conflict, acquiesce,
hope that the Body of Fate may die away; and then the
Mask will cling to it and the Image lure it. It will feel
itself betrayed, and persecuted till, entangled in primary
conflict, it rages against all that destroys Mask and
Image. It-will be subject to nightmare, for its Creative
Mind (deflected from the Image and Mask to the Body
of Fate) gives an isolated mythological or abstract form
to all that excites its hatred. It may even dream of
escaping from ill-luck by possessing the impersonal Body
of Fate of its opposite phase and of exchanging passion
for desk and ledger. Because of the habit of synthesis,

and of the growing complexity of the energy, which gives

many interests, and the still faint perception of things
in their weight and mass, men of this phase are almost
always partisans, propagandists and gregarious; yet
because of the Mask of simplification, which holds up
before them the solitary life of hunters and of fishers
and ‘‘ the groves pale passion loves,’’ they hate parties,
crowds, propaganda. Shelley out of phase writes pamph-
lets, and dreams of converting the world, or of turning
man of affairs and upsetting governments, and yet re-
turns again and again to these two images of solitude,
a young man whose hair has grown white from the burden
of his thoughts, an old man in some shell-strewn cave
whom it is possible to call, when speaking to the sultan,
** as inaccessible as God or thou.’? On the other hand,
how subject he is to nightmare! He sees the devil leaning
against a tree, is attacked by imaginary assassins and in
obedience to what he considers a supernatural voice,
creates ** The Cenci *’ that he may give to Beatrice Cenci
her incredible father. His political enemies are mon-
strous, meaningless images. And unlike Byron, who is
two phases later, he can never see anything that opposes

78

him as it really is. Dante, who laments his exile as of
all possible things the worst for such as he, and sighs for
his lost solitude, and yet could never keep from politics,
was such a partisan, says a contemporary, that if a
child, or a woman, spoke against his party he would pelt
this child or woman with stones. Yet Dante, having
attained, as poet, to Unity of Being, as poet saw all
things set in order, had an intellect that served the Mask
alone, and that compelled even those things that opposed
it to serve, was content to see both good and evil.
Shelley, upon the other hand, in whom even as poet unity
was but in part attained, found compensation for his
** loss,”? for the taking away of his children, for his
quarrel with his first wife, for later sexual disappoint-
ment, for his exile, for his obloguy—there were but some
three or four persons, he said, who did not consider him
a monster of iniquity—in his hopes for the future of
mankind. He lacked the Vision of Evil, could not con-
ceive of the world as a continual conflict, so, though
great poet he certainly was, he was not of the greatest
kind. Dante suffering injustice and the loss of Beatrice,
found divine justice and the heavenly Beatrice, but the
justice of Prometheus Unbound is a vague propagandist
emotion and the women that await its coming are but
clouds. This is in part because the age in which Shelley
lived was in itself so broken that true Unity of Being
was almost impossible, but partly because being out of
phase so far as his practical reason was concerned, he
was subject to an automatonism which he mistook for
poetical invention, especially in his longer poems. Anti-
thetical men (Phase 15 once passed) use this automaton-
ism to evade hatred, or rather to hide it from their own
eyes; perhaps all at some time or other, in moments of
fatigue, give themselves up to fantastic, constructed
images, or to an almost mechanical laughter.

Landor has been examined in ‘‘ Per Amica Silentia

. @ | eS => ee ii laa = —— =
eal ee

Sie ars eet

79
Lune? The most violent of men, he uses his intellect
to disengage a visionary image of perfect sanity (Mask
at Phase 8) seen always in the most serene and classic
art imaginable. He had perhaps as much Unity of Being
as his age permitted, and possessed, thongn not in any full
measure, the Vision of Evil.

XX
PHASE EIGHTEEN

Will—The Emotional Man.

Mask (from Phase 4). True—Intensity through
emotion. False—Curiosity.

Creative Mind (from Phase 12). True—Emotional
Philosophy. False—Enforced lure.

Body of Fate (from Phase 26)—Enforced disillusion-
ment.

Examples : Goethe, Matthew Arnold.

The antithetical tincture closes during this phase, the
being is losing direct knowledge of its old antithetical
life. The conflict between that portion of the life of
feeling, which appertains to his unity, with that portion
he has in common with others, coming to an end, has
begun to destroy that knowledge. ‘* A Lover’s Noc-
turne ”’ or ** An Ode to the West Wind ”’ are probably
no more possible, certainly no more characteristic. He
can hardly, if action and the intellect that concerns
action, are taken from him, recreate his dream life; and
when he says ** who am JI,” he finds it difficult to
examine his thoughts in relation to one another, his

80

emotions in relation to one another, but begins to find
it easy to examine them in relation to action. He can
examine those actions themselves with a new clearness.
Now for the first time since Phase 12, Goethe’s saying is
almost true: ** Man knows himself by action only, by
thought never.’? Meanwhile the antithetical Tincture
begins to attain, without previous struggle or self-analysis,
its active form which is love—love being the union of
emotion and instinct—or when out of phase, sentiment-
ality. The Will seeks by some form of emotional philos-
ophy to free a form of emotional beauty (Mask) from a
** disillusionment,”’ differing from the ‘* delusions ”’ of
Phase 16, which are continuous, in that it permits inter-
mittent awakening. The Will, with its closing anti-
thetical, is turning away from the life of images to that of
ideas, it is vacillating and curious, and it seeks in this
Mask from a phase where all the functions can be perfect,
what becomes, when considered antithetically, a wisdom
of the emotions. At its next phase it will have fallen
asunder; already it can only preserve its unity by a
deliberate balancing of experiences (Creative Mind at
Phase 12, Body of Fate at Phase 26), and so it must desire
that phase (though that transformed into the emotional
life), where wisdom seems a physical accident. Its object
of desire is no longer a single image of passion, for it must
relate all to social life; the man seeks to become not a
sage, but a wise king, no longer Ahasuerus, and seeks a
woman who looks the wise mother of children. Perhaps
now, and for the first time, the love of a living woman
(** disillusionment ”’ once accepted), as apart from beauty
or function, is an admitted aim, though not yet wholly
achieved. The Body of Fate is from the phase where the
** wisdom of knowledge ”’ has compelled Mask and Image
to become not objects of desire but objects of knowledge.
Goethe did not, as Beddoes said, marry his cook, but he
certainly did not marry the woman he had desired, and his

81

grief at her death showed that, unlike Phase 16 or Phase
17, which forget their broken toys, he could love what dis-
illusionment gave. When he seeks to live objectively,
he will substitute curiosity for emotional wisdom, he will
invent objects of desire artificially, he will say perhaps,
though this was said by a man who was probably still
later in phase, ** l was never in love with a serpent-
charmer before ’’?; the False Mask will press upon him,
pursue him and, refusing conflict, he will fly from the
True Mask at each artificial choice. The nightingale will
refuse the thorn and so remain among images instead of
passing to ideas. He is still disillusioned but he can no
longer through philosophy substitute for the desire that
life has taken away love for what life has brought. The
Will is near the place marked Head upon the great chart,
which enables it to choose its Mask even when true to
phase almost coldly and always deliberately, whereas the
Creative Mind is derived from the phase which is called
*‘ the wisdom of heart,’’ and is therefore more impas-
sioned and less subtle and delicate than if Phase 16 or
Phase 17 were the place of the Will, though not yet argu-
mentative or heated. The Will at Head uses the heart
with perfect mastery and, because of the growing
primary, begins to be aware of an audience, though
as yet it will not dramatise the Mask deliberately for the
sake of effect as will Phase 19.

§2
XX
PHASE NINETEEN

Will—The Assertive Man.

Mask (from Phase 5). True—Conviction. False—
Domination.

Creative Mind (from Phase 11). True—Emotional In-
tellect. False—The Unfaithful.

Body of Fate (from Phase 25)—Enforced failure of
Action.

Examples: Gabriele d’Annunzio (perhaps), Oscar
Wilde, Byron, a certain actress.

This Phase is the beginning of the artificial, the
abstract, the fragmentary, and the dramatic. Unity of
Being is no longer possible, for the being is compelled to
live in a fragment of itself and to dramatise that frag-
ment. The primary Tincture is closing, direct knowledge
of self in relation to action is ceasing to be possible.
The being only completely knows that portion of
itself which judges fact for the sake of actions. When
the man lives according to phase, he is now governed
by conviction, instead of by a ruling mood, and
is effective only in so far as he can find this con-
viction. His aim is to use an intellect, which turns
easily to declamation, emotional emphasis, so that it saves
conviction in a life where effort, just in so far as its
object is passionately desired, comes to nothing. He
desires to be strong and stable, but as Unity of Being and
self-knowledge are both gone, and it is too soon to grasp
at another unity through primary mind, he passes from
emphasis to emphasis. The strength from conviction,

83

being derived from a Mask of the first quarter, is not
founded upon social duty, though that may seem so to
others, but is temperamentally formed to fit some crisis
of personal life. His thought is immensely effective and
dramatic, arising always from some immediate situation,
a situation found or created by himself, and may have
great permanent value as the expression of an exciting
personality. This thought is always an open attack; or
a sudden emphasis, an extravagance, or an impassioned
declamation of some general idea, which is a more veiled
attack. The Creative Mind being derived from Phase 11,
he is doomed to attempt the destruction of all that breaks
or encumbers personality, but this personality is con-
ceived of as a fragmentary, momentary intensity. The
mastery of images, threatened or lost at Phase 18, may
however be completely recovered, but there is less
symbol, more fact. Vitality from dreams has died out,
and a vitality from fact has begun which has for its
ultimate aim the mastery of the real world. The water-
course after an abrupt fall continues upon a Jower level;
ice turns to water, or water to vapour: there is a new
chemical phase.

__ When lived out of phase there is a hatred or contempt
of others, and instead of seeking conviction for its own
Sake, the man takes up opinions that he may impose
himself upon others. He is tyrannical and capricious,
and his intellect is called ** The Unfaithful,’’ because,
being used for victory alone, it will change its ground in
& moment and delight in some new emphasis, not caring
whether old or new have consistency. The Mask is
derived from that phase where perversity begins, where
artifice begins, and has its discord from Phase 25, the
Jast phase where the artificial is possible; the Body of
Fate is therefore enforced failure of action, and many
at this phase desire action above all things as a means of
expression. Whether the man be in or out of phase,

84,

there is the desire to escape from Unity of Being or any
approximation towards it, for Unity can be but a
simulacrum now. And in so far as the soul keeps its
memory of that potential Unity there is conscious anti-
thetical weakness. He must now dramatise the Mask
through the Will and dreads the Image, deep within, of
the old antithetical Tincture at its strongest, and yet this
Image may seem infinitely desirable if he could but find
the desire. When so torn into two, escape when it comes
may be so violent that it brings him under the False Mask
and the False Creative Mind. A certain actress is typical,
for she surrounds herself with drawings by Burne-Jones
in his latest period, and reverse them as they were holy
pictures, while her manners are boisterous, dominating
and egotistical. They are faces of silent women, and she
is never silent for a moment; yet these faces are not, as
I once thought, the True Mask but a part of that inco-
herence the True Mask must conceal. Were she to sur-
render to their influence she would become insincere in
her art and exploit an emotion that is no longer hers.
I find in Wilde, too, something pretty, feminine, and
insincere, derived from his admiration for writers of the
17th and earlier phases, and much that is violent,
arbitrary and insolent, derived from his desire to escape.

The antithetical Mask comes to men of Phase 17 and
Phase 18 as a form of strength, and when they are
tempted to dramatise it, the dramatisation is fitful, and
brings no conviction of strength, for they dislike
emphasis; but now the weakness of the avzitithetical has
begun, for though still the stronger it cannot ignore the
growing primary. It is no longer an absolute monarch,
and it permits power to pass to statesman or demagogue
whom however it will constantly change.

Here one finds men and women who love those who
rob them or beat them, as though the soul were intoxi-
cated by its discovery of human nature, or found even 4

85
secret delight in the shattering of the image of its desire.
It is as though it cried, “‘ I would be possessed by *’ or
‘© T would possess that which is Human. What do I
care if it is good or bad? *”? There is no “ disillusion-
ment,’? for they have found that which they have sought,
but that which they have sought and found is a fragment.

xX XI
PHASE TWENTY

Willi—The Concrete Man.

Mask (from Phase 6). True—Fatalism. False—
Superstition.

Creative Mind (from Phase 10). True—Dramatisation
of Mask. False—Self-desecration.

Body of Fate (from Phase 24)—Enforced Success of
Action.

Examples : Shakespeare, Balzac, Napoleon.

Like the phase before it, and those that follow it im-
mediately, a phase of the breaking up and subdivision
of the being. The energy is always seeking those facts
which being separable can be seen more clearly, or €x-
pressed more clearly, but when there is truth to phase
there is a similitude of the old unity, or rather a new
unity, which is not a Unity of Being but a unity of the
creative act. He no longer seeks to unify what is broken
through conviction, by imposing those very convictions
upon himself and others, but by projecting a dramatisa-
tion or many dramatisations. He can create, just in that
degree in which he can see these dramatisations as

86
separate from himself, and yet as an epitome of his whole
nature. His Mask is derived from Phase 6, where man
first becomes a generalised form, according to the
primary Tincture, as in the poetry of Walt Whitman,
but this Mask he must by dramatisation rescue from a
Body of Fate derived from Phase 24, where moral domi-
nation dies out before that of the exterior world conceived
as a whole. The Body of Fate is called ‘* enforced
success,”’ a success that rolls out and smooths away, that
dissolves through creation, that seems to delight in all
outward flowing, that drenches all with grease and oil;
that turns dramatisation into desecration : ** I have made
myself a motley to the view.’? Owing to the need of
seeing the dramatic image, or images, as individuals, that
is to say as set amongst concrete or fixed surroundings,
he seeks some field of action, some mirror not of his own
creation. Unlike Phase 19 he fails in situations wholly
created by himself, or in works of art where character
or story has gained nothing from history. His phase is
called ** The Concrete Man,’’ because the isolation of
parts that began at Phase 19, is overcome at the second
phase of the triad; subordination of parts is achieved by
the discovery of concrete relations. His abstraction too,
affected by these relations, may be no more than an
emotional interest in such generalisations as ‘* God,”
** man,’’ a Napoleon may but point to the starry heavens
and say that they prove the existence of God. There is
a delight in concrete images that, unlike the impassioned
images of Phase 17 and Phase 18, or the declamatory
images of Phase 19, reveal through complex suffering the
general destiny of man. He must, however, to express
this suffering, personify rather than characterise, create
not observe that multitude, which is but his Mask as
in a multiplying mirror, for the primary is not yet strong
enough to substitute for the lost Unity of Being that of
the external world perceived as fact. In a man of action

87

this multiplicity gives the greatest possible richness or
resource where he is not thwarted by his horoscope,
great ductability, a gift for adopting any role that stirs
imagination, a philosophy of impulse and audacity; but
in the man of action a part of the nature must be crushed,
one main dramatisation or group of images preferred to
all others.

Napoleon sees himself as Alexander moving to the
conquest of the East, Mask and Image must take an
historical and not a mythological or dream form, a
form found but not created; he is crowned in the dress
of a Roman Emperor. Shakespeare, the other supreme
figure of the phase, was—if we may judge by the few
biographical facts, and by such adjectives as “* sweet *’
and ‘* gentle ’’? applied to him by his contemporaries—
a man whose actual personality seemed faint and
passionless. Unlike Ben Jonson he fought no duels; he
kept out of quarrels in a quarrelsome age; not even
complaining when somebody pirated his sonnets; he

dominated no Mermaid Tavern, but—through Mask and

Image, reflected in a multiplying mirror—he created the
most passionate art that exists. He was the greatest
of modern poets, partly because entirely true to phase,
creating always from Mask and Creative Mind, never
irom situation alone, never from Body of Fate alone;
and if we knew all we would find that success came to
him, as to others of this phase, as something hostile
and unforeseen; something that sought to impose an
intuition of fate (the condition of Phase 6) as from
without and therefore as a form of superstition. Both
Shakespeare and Balzac used the False Mask imagina-
tively, explored it to impose the True, and what *Lake
Harris, the half-charlatan American visionary, said of

* I quote from a book circulated privately among his followers.

I saw it years ago but seem to remember it, as now vague, now
vulgar, and now magnificent in style.

=
i

88
Shakespeare might be said of both: ** Often the hair oj
his head stood up and all life became the echoing
chambers of the tomb.’’

At Phase 19 we create through the externalised Mask
an imaginary world, in whose real existence we believe,
while remaining separate from it; at Phase 20 we enter
that world and become a portion of it; we study it, we
amass historical evidence, and, that we may dominate
it the more, drive out myth and symbol, and compel it
to seem the real world where our lives are lived.

A phase of ambition; in Napoleon the dramatist’s own
ambition; in Shakespeare that of the persons of his art;
and this ambition is not that of the solitary law-giver,
that of Phase 10 (where the Creative Mind is placed)
which rejects, resists and narrows, but a creative energy.

XXII
PHASE TWENTY-ONE

Will. The acquisitive Man.

Mask (from Phase 7). True—Self-analysis. False—
Self-adaption.

Creative Mind (from Phase 9). True—Domination of
the Intellect. False—Distortion.

Body of Fate (from Phase 23)—Triumph of Achieve-
ment.

Examples : Lamarck, Mr Bernard Shaw, Mr Wells,
Mr George Moore.

The antithetical Tincture has a predominance so slight
that the Creative Mind and Body of Fate almost equal

89

it in control of desire. The Will can scarcely conceive
of a Mask separate from or predominant over Creative
Mind and Body of Fate, yet because it can do so there
is personality not character. It is better, however, to
use a different word, and therefore Phases 21, 22 and
23 are described as, like the phases opposite, phases
of individuality where the Will is studied less in relation
to the Mask than in relation to itself. At Phase 28 the
new relation to the Mask, as something to escape from,
will have grown clear.

The antithetical Tincture is noble, and, judged by the
standards of the primary, evil, whereas the primary is
good and banal; and this phase, the last before the
antithetical surrenders its control, would be almost wholly
good did it not hate its own banality. Personality has
almost the rigidity, almost the permanence of character,
but it is not character, for it is still always assumed.
When we contemplate Napoleon we can see ourselves,
perhaps even think of ourselves as Napoleons, but a man
of Phase 21 has a personality that seems a creation of
his circumstance and his faults, a manner peculiar to
himself and impossible to others. We say at once, ‘* How
individual he is.”? In theory whatever one has chosen
must be within the choice of others, at some moment
or for some purpose, but we find in practice that nobody
of this phase has personal imitators, or has given his
name to a form of manners. The Will has driven
intellectual complexity into its final entanglement, an
entanglement created by the continual adaption to new
circumstances of a logical sequence; and the aim of the
individual, when true to phase, is to realise, by his own
complete domination over all circumstance, a self-
analysing, self-conscious simplicity. Phase 7 shud-
dered at its own simplicity, whereas he must shudder
at his own complexity. Out of phase, instead of seeking
this simplicity through his own dominating constructive

90
will, he will parade an imaginary naiveté, even blunder
in his work, encourage in himself stupidities of spite or
sentiment, or commit calculated indiscretions simulating
impulse. He is under the False Mask (emotional self-
adaption) and the False Creative Mind (distortion : the
furious Phase 9 acted upon by “* enforced sensuality ’’),
He sees the antithetical as evil, and desires the evil, for
he is subject to a sort of possession by the devil, which
is in reality but a theatrical scene. Precisely because
his adaptability can be turned in any direction, when
lived according to the primary, he is driven into all that
is freakish or grotesque, mind-created passions, simulated
emotions; he adopts all that can suggest the burning
heart he longs for in vain; he turns braggart or buffoon.
Like somebody in Dostoieffsky’s ‘** Idiot,’’ he will invite
others to tell their worst deeds that he may himself
confess that he stole a half-crown and left a servant-girl
to bear the blame. When all turn upon him he will be
full of wonder for he knows that the confession is not
true, or if true that the deed itself was but a trick, or
a pose, and that all the time he is full of a goodness that
fills him with shame. Whether he live according to
phase and regard life without emotion, or live out’ of
phase, and simulate emotion, his Body of Fate drags him
away from intellectual unity; but in so far as he lives out
of phase he weakens conflict, refuses to resist, floats upon
the stream. In phase he strengthens conflict to the
utmost by refusing all activity that is not antithetical:
he becomes intellectually dominating, intellectually
unique. He apprehends the simplicity of his opposite
phase as some vast systematisation, in which the will
imposes itself upon the multiplicity of living images, or
events, upon all in Shakespeare, in Napoleon even, that
delighted in its independent life; for he is a tyrant and
must kill his adversary. If he is a novelist, his characters
must go his road, and not theirs, and perpetually demon-

91

strate his thesis; he will love construction better than
the flow of life, and as a dramatist he will create without
passion, and without liking, character and situation;
and yet he is a master of surprise, for one can never be
sure where even a charge of shot will fall. Style exists
now but as a sign of work well done, a certain energy
and precision of movement; in the artistic sense it is
no longer possible, for the tension of the will is too great
to allow of suggestion. Writers of the phase are great
public men and they exist after death as historical monu-
ments, for they are without meaning apart from time
and circumstance.

XXTIT
PHASE TWENTY-TWO

Will—Balance between Ambition and Contemplation.

Mask (from Phase 8). True—Self-immolation. False
—Self-assurance.

Creative Mind (from Phase 8). Truwe—Amalgamation.
False—Despair.

Body of Fate (from Phase 22)—The Breaking of»
Strength.

Examples : Flaubert, Herbert Spenser, Swedenborg,
Dostoieffsky.

The aim of the being, until the point of balance has
been reached, will be that of Phase 21 except that
synthesis will be more complete, and the sense of identity
between the individual and his thought, between his
desire and his synthesis will be closer; but the character

92
of the phase is precisely that here balance is reached and
passed, though it is stated that the individual may have
to return to this phase more than once, though not more
than four times, before it is passed. Once balance hag
been reached, the aim must be to use the Body of Fate
to deliver the Creative Mind from the Mask, and not to
use the Creative Mind to deliver the Mask from the Body
of Fate. The being does this by so using the intellect
upon the facts of the world that the last vestige of
personality disappears. The Will, engaged in its last
struggle with external fact (Body of Fate), must submit,
until it sees itself as inseparable from nature perceived
as fact, and it must see itself as merged into that nature
through the Mask, either as a conqueror lost in what he
conquers, or dying at the moment of conquest, or as
renouncing conquest, whether it come by might of logic,
or might of drama, or might of hand. The Will
since Phase 8 has more and more seen itself as a Mask,
as a form of personal power, but now it must see that
power broken. From Phase 12 to Phase 18 it was or
should have been a power wielded by the whole nature;
but since Phase 19 it has been wielded by a fragment
only, as something more and more professional, tempera-
mental or technical. It has become abstract, and the

more it has sought the whole of natural fact, the more —

abstract it has become. One thinks of some spilt liquid

which grows thinner the wider it spreads till at last it
is but a film. That which at Phase 21 was a longing for |
self-conscious simplicity, as an escape from logical com- |
plication and subdivision, is now (through the Mask from —
Phase 8) a desire for the death of the intellect. At Phase —
21 it still sought to change the world, could still bea —

Shaw, a Wells, but now it will seek to change nothing, if

needs nothing but what it may call * reality,’’ © truth,”
** God’s Will ”? : confused and weary, through trying |

grasp too much, the hand must loosen.

93

Here takes place an interchange between portions of
the mind which corresponds, though to represent it in
the diagram of the Wheel would complicate the figure, to
the interchange between the old and new primary, the old
and new antithetical at Phase 1 and Phase 15. The mind
that has shown a predominately emotional character,
called that of the Victim, through the antithetical phases,
now shows a predominately intellectual character, called |
that of the Sage (though until Phase 1 has been passed
it can but use intellect when true to phase to eliminate
intellect) ; whereas the mind that has been predominately
that of the Sage puts on Victimage.1 An element in the
nature is exhausted at the point of balance, and the
opposite element controls the mind. One thinks of the
gusts of sentimentality that overtake violent men, the
gusts of cruelty that overtake the sentimental. At
Phase 8 there is a similar interchange, but it does not
display its significance at that blinded and throttled
phase. A man of Phase 22 will commonly not only
Systematise, to the exhaustion of his will, but discover
this exhaustion of will in all that he studies. If Lamarck,
as is probable, was of Phase 21, Darwin was probably
a man of Phase 22, for his theory of development by the
survival of fortunate accidental varieties seems to express
this exhaustion. The man himself is never weak, never
vague or fluctuating in his thought, for if he brings all
to silence, it is a silence that results from tension, and
till the moment of balance, nothing interests him that is
not wrought up to the greatest effort of which it is cap-
able. Flaubert is the supreme literary genius of the
phase, and his ‘‘ Temptation of St. Anthony ” and his
** Bouvard and Pécuchet ”’ are the sacred books of the
phase, one describing its effect upon a mind where all is

(1) These terms will be explained later. They are touched on

here to draw attention to a change in Swedenborg, Flaubert and
Dostoieffsky at the point of balance.

94

concrete and sensuous, the other upon the more logical,
matter-of-fact, curious, modern mind. In both the mind
exhausts all knowledge within its reach and sinks
exhausted to a conscious futility. But the matter is not
more of the phase than is the method. One never doubts
for a moment that Flaubert was of the phase; all must be
impersonal; he must neither like nor dislike character or
event; he is ** the mirror dawdling down a road,’ of
Stendhal, with a clear brightness that is not Stendhal’s:
and when we make his mind our own, we seem to have
renounced our own ambition under the influence of some
strange, far-reaching, impartial gaze.

We feel too that this man who systematised by but
linking one emotional association to another has become
strangely hard, cold and invulnerable, that this mirror
is not brittle but of unbreakable steel. ** Systematised ”
is the only word that comes to mind, but it implies too
much deliberation, for association has ranged itself by
association as little bits of paper and little chips of wood
cling to one another upon the water in a bowl. In
Dostoieffsky the ** amalgamation ” is less intellectual,
less orderly, he, one feels, has reached the point of bal-
ance through life, and not through the process of his art;
and his whole will, and not merely his intellectual will,
has been shaken, and his characters, in whom is reflected
this broken will, are aware, unlike those of ‘* Bouvard
and Pécuchet,”’ and those of the ** Temptation ”’ even,
of some ungraspable whole to which they have given the
name of God. For a moment that fragment, ‘that rela-
tion, which is our very being, is broken; they are at
Udan Adan *‘ wailing upon the edge of nonentity, wail-
ing for Jerusalem, with weak voices almost inarticu-
late *?; and yet full submission has not come. Sweden-
borg passed through his balance after fifty, and a mind
incredibly dry and arid, hard and tangible, like the
minerals he assayed for the Swedish government, studies

95

a new branch of science : the economics and the natural
history of Heaven, and notes that there nothing but
emotion, nothing but the ruling love exists. The desire
to dominate has so completely vanished, ** amalgama-
tion ”? has pushed its way so far into the subconscious,
_ into that which is dark, that we call it a vision. Had he
been out of phase, had he attempted to arrange his life
according to the personal Mask, he would have been
pedantic and arrogant, a Bouvard, or a Pécuchet, passing
from absurdity to absurdity, hopeless and insatiable. In
the world of action such absurdity may become terrible,
for men will die and murder for an abstract synthesis,
and the more abstract it is the further it carries them
from compunction and compromise; and as obstacles to
that synthesis increase, the violence of their will increases.
It is a phase as tragic as its opposite, and more terrible,
for the man of this phase may, before the point of bal-
ance has been reached, become a destroyer and
persecutor, a figure of tumult and of violence; or as
is more probable—for the violence of such a man
must be checked by moments of resignation or despair,
premonitions of balance—his system will become an in-
strument of destruction and of persecution in the hands
of others.

The seeking of Unity of Fact by a single faculty,
instead of Unity of Being by the use of all, has separated
a man from his genius. This is symbolised in the Wheel
by the gradual separation (as we recede from Phase 15)
of Will and Creative Mind, Mask and Body of Fate.
During the supernatural incarnation of Phase 15, we were
compelled to assume an absolute identity of the Will, or
self, with its creative power, of beauty with body; but
for some time self and creative power, though separating,
have been neighbours and kin. A Landor, or a Morris,
however violent, however much of a child he seem, is
always a remarkable man; in Phases 19, 20 and 21 genius

96

grows professional, something taken up when work jg
taken up, it begins to be possible to record the stupidities _
of men of genius in a scrapbook; Bouvard and Pécuchet —
have that refuge for their old age. Someone has said that

Balzac at noonday was a very ignorant man, but at
midnight over a cup of coffee knew everything in the

world. In the man of action, in a Napoleon, let us say,
the stupidities lie hidden, for action is a form of abstrac. _
tion that crushes everything it cannot express. At Phase
22 stupidity is obvious, one finds it in the correspondence _
of Karl Marx, in his banal abusiveness, while to Gon. —
court, Flaubert, as man, seemed full of unconsidered
thought. Flaubert, says Anatole France, was not intelli-
gent. Dostoieffsky, to those who first acclaimed his —
genius, seemed when he laid down his pen an hysterical a
fool. One remembers Herbert Spencer dabbing the F
grapes upon a lodging-house carpet with an inky cork ©
that he might tint them to his favourite colour, “‘ impure _
purple.”? On the other hand, as the Will moves further
from the Creative Mind, it approaches the Body of Fate, —
and with this comes an increasing delight in impersonal
energy and in inanimate objects, and as the Mask _
separates from the Body of Fate and approaches the
Creative Mind we delight more and more in all that is _
artificial, all that is deliberately invented. Symbols may
become hateful to us, the ugly and the arbitrary delight _
ful that we may the more quickly kill all memory of ©
Unity of Being. We identify ourselves in our surround- ~
ings—in our surroundings perceived as fact—while at the
same time the intellect so slips from our grasp as it wert, —
that we contemplate its energies as something we can n0
longer control, and give to each of those energies an appro- ;
priate name as though it were an animate being. Now
that Will and Body of Fate are one, Creative Mind and —
Mask one also, we are no longer four but two, and life, —
the balance reached, becomes an act of contemplation. ;

tira

» ro el
= \ Dee

97

There is no longer a desired object, as distinct from
thought itself, no longer a Will, as distinct from the pro-
cess of nature seen as fact; and so thought itself, seeing
that it can neither begin nor end, is stationary. Intellect
knows itself as its own object of desire; and the Will
knows itself to be the world; there is neither change nor
desire of change. For the moment the desire for a form
has ceased and an absolute realism becomes possible.

XXIV
PHASE TWENTY-THREE

Will—The Receptive Man.

Mask (from Phase 9). True—Wisdom. False—Self-
pity.

Creative Mind (from Phase 7). True—Creation
through Pity. False—Self-driven desire.

Body of Fate (irom Phase 21)—Success.
Examples : Rembrandt, Synge.

When out of phase, for reasons that will appear later,
he is tyrannical, gloomy and self-absorbed. In phase his
energy has a character analogous to the longing of
Phase 16 to escape from complete subjectivity : it escapes
in a condition of explosive joy from systematisation and
abstraction. The clock has run down and must be wound
up again. The primary Tincture is now greater than the
antithetical, and the man must free the intellect from
all motives founded upon personal desire, by the help of
the external world, now for the first time studied and -

mastered for its own sake. He must kill al] thought
G

98

that would systematise the world, by doing a thing, not
because he wants to, or because he should, but because
he can; that is to say he sees all things from the point -
of view of his own technique, touches and tastes and
investigates technically. He is, however, because of
the nature of his energy, violent, anarchic, like all who
are of the first phase of a quarter. Because he is without
systematisation he is without a master, and only by his
technical mastery can he escape from the sense of being ©
thwarted and opposed by other men; and his technical ©
mastery must exist, not for its own sake, though
for its own sake it has been done, but for that which
it reveals, for its laying bare—to hand and eye,
as distinguished from thought and emotion—general
humanity. Yet this laying bare is a perpetual surprise, _
is an unforeseen reward of skill. And unlike antithetical
man he must use his Body of Fate (now always his

‘€ success ”’) to liberate his intellect from personality, and ©
only when he has done this, only when he escapes the
voluntary Mask, does he find his true intellect, is he found
by his True Mask. The True Mask is from the frenzied
Phase 9 where personal life is made visible for the first
time, but from that phase mastered by its Body of Fate,
** enforced sensuality,’’ derived from Phase 7 where the a
instinctive flood is almost above the lips. It is called
‘* wisdom ”’ and this wisdom (personality reflected in 3
primary mirror), is general humanity experienced asi
form of involuntary emotion, and involuntary delight |
in the ** minute particulars ”’ of life. The man wipes hi
breath from the window pane, and laughs in his delight |
at all the varied scene. His Creative Mind being at Phase |
7—where instinctive life, all but reaching utmost com:
plexity, suffers an external abstract synthesis—his Bod) i
of Fate compelling him to intellectual life being at Phas —
21; his Will phase that of the revolt from every inte: —
lectual summary, from all intellectual abstraction, thi —

= —_—
=
n

09
delight is not mere delight, he would construct a whole,
but that whole must seem all event, all picture. That
whole must not be instinctive, bodily, natural, however,
though it may seem so, for in reality he cares only
for what is human, individual and moral. To others
he may seem to care for the immoral and inhuman only,
for he will be hostile, or indifferent to moral as to
intellectual summaries; if he is Rembrandt he discovers
his Christ through anatomical curiosity, or through
curiosity as to light and shade, and if he is Synge he
takes a malicious pleasure in the contrast between his
hero, whom he discovers through his instinct for comedy,
and any hero in men’s minds. Indeed, whether he be
Synge or Rembrandt, he is ready to sacrifice every con-
vention, perhaps all that men have agreed to reverence,
for a startling theme, or a model one delights in painting;
and yet all the while, because of the nature of his Mask,
there is another summary working through bone and
nerve. He is never the mere technician that he seems,
though when you ask his meaning he will have nothing
to say, or will say something irrelevant or childish.
Artists and writers of Phase 21 and Phase 22 have
eliminated all that is personal from their style, seeking
cold metal and pure water, but he will delight in colour
and idiosyncrasy, though these he must find rather than
create. Synge must find rhythm and syntax in the Aran
Islands, Rembrandt delight in all accidents of the visible
world ; yet neither, no matter what his delight in reality,
shows it without exaggeration, for both delight in all
that is wilful, in all that flouts intellectual coherence,
and conceive of the world as if it were an overflowing
cauldron. Both will work in toil and in pain, finding
what they do not seek, for, after Phase 22, desire creates
no longer, will has taken its place; but that which they
reveal is joyous. Whereas Shakespeare showed through
a style, full of joy, a melancholy vision sought from afar :

100
a style at play, a mind that served; Synge must fill many
notebooks, clap his ear to that hole in the ceiling; and
what patience Rembrandt must have spent in the
painting of a lace collar though to find his subject he
had but to open his eyes. When out of phase, when the
man seeks to choose his Mask, the man is gloomy with
the gloom of others, and tyrannical with the tyranny of
others, because he cannot create. Phase 9 was dominated
by desire, was described as having the greatest belief
in its own desire possible to man, yet from it Phase 28
receives not desire but pity, and not belief but wisdom.
Pity needs wisdom as desire needs belief, for pity is
primary, whereas desire is antithetical. When pity is
separated from wisdom we have the False Mask, a pity
like that of a drunken man, self-pity, whether offered
in seeming to another or only to oneself : pity corrupted
by desire. Who does not feel the pity in Rembrandt,
in Synge, and know that it is inseparable from wisdom.
In the works of Synge there is much self-pity, ennobled
to a pity for all that lived; and once an actress, playing
his Deirdre, put all into a gesture. Concubar, who had
murdered Deirdre’s husband and her friends, was in
altercation with Fergus who had demanded vengeance;
** Move a little further off,’? she cried, ‘* with the
babbling of fools ’’; and a moment later, moving like
a somnambulist, she touched Concubar upon the arm,
a gesture full of gentleness and compassion, as though
she had said, ‘* You also live.’? In Synge’s early
unpublished work, written before he found the dialects
of Aran and of Wicklow, there is brooding melancholy
and morbid self-pity. He had to undergo an esthetic
transformation, analogous to religious conversion, before
he became the audacious joyous ironical man we know.
The emotional life in so far as it was deliberate had to
be transferred from Phase 9 to Phase 28, from a seli-
regarding melancholy condition of soul to its direct

101

opposite. This transformation must have seemed to him
a discovery of his true self, of his true moral being;
whereas Shelley’s came at the moment when he first
created a passionate image which made him forgetful
of himself. It came perhaps when he had passed from
the litigious rhetoric of Queen Mab to the lonely reveries
of Alastor. Primary art values above all things sincerity
to the self or Will but to the self active, translating and
perceiving.

The quarter of intellect was a quarter of dispersal
and generalisation, a play of shuttlecock with the first
quarter of animal burgeoning, but the fourth quarter
is a quarter of withdrawal and concentration, in which
active moral man should receive into himself, and trans-
form into primary sympathy the emotional self-realisation
of the second quarter. If he does not so receive and
transform he sinks into stupidity and stagnation,
perceives nothing but his own interests, or becomes a
tool in the hands of others; and at Phase 23, because
there must be delight in the unforeseen, he may be brutal
and outrageous. He does not, however, hate, like a man
of the third quarter, being but ignorant of or indifferent
to the feelings of others. Rembrandt pitied ugliness,
for what we call ugliness was to him an escape from all
that is summarised and known, but had he painted a
beautiful face, as antithetical man understands beauty,
it would have remained a convention, he would have
seen it through a mirage of boredom.

When one compares the work of Rembrandt with that
of David, whose phase was Phase 21; or the work of
Synge with that of Mr Wells; one sees that in the one the
antithetical Tincture is breaking up and dissolving, while
in the other it is tightening as for a last resistance,
concentrating, levelling, transforming, tabulating. Rem-
brandt and Synge but look on and clap their hands.
There is indeed as much selection among the events

102
in one case as in the other, but at Phase 28 events seem
startling because they elude intellect.

All phases after Phase 15 and before Phase 22 unweave
that which is woven by the equivalent phases before
Phase 15 and after Phase 8. The man of Phase 28 has in
the Mask, at Phase 9, a contrary that seems his very self
until he use the discord of that contrary, his Body of Fate
at Phase 21, to drive away the Mask and free the intellect
and rid pity of desire and turn belief into wisdom. The
Creative Mind, a discord to the Will, is from a phase of
instinctive dispersal, and must turn the violent
objectivity of the self or Will into a delight in all that
breathes and moves : ** The gay fishes on the wave when
the moon sucks up the dew.”’

xX V
PHASE TWENTY-FOUR

Will—The End of Ambition.

Mask (from Phase 10). True—Self-reliance. False—
Isolation.

Creative Mind (from Phase 6). True—Construction
through humanitarianism. False—Authority.

Body of Fate (from Phase 20)—Objective Action.

Examples: Queen Victoria, Galsworthy, a certain
friend.

As the Mask now seems the natural self, which he
must escape; the man labours to turn all within him
that is from Phase 10, into some quality of Phase 24. At

103

Phase 23, when in what seemed the natural self, the
man was full of gloomy self-absorption and its appro-
priate abstractions, but now the abstractions are those
that feed self-righteousness and scorn of others, the
nearest the natural self can come to the self-expressing
mastery of Phase 10. Morality, grown passive and
pompous, dwindles to unmeaning forms and formulae.
Under the influence of the Body of Fate, the unweaver
and discord of Phase 10, the man frees the intellect from
the Mask by unflagging impersonal activity. Instead of
burning intellectual abstraction, as did Phase 23, in a
technical fire, it grinds moral abstraction in a mill. This
mill, created by the freed intellect, is a code of personal
conduct, which being formed from social and historical
tradition, remains always concrete in the mind. All is
sacrificed to this code; moral strength reaches its climax;
the rage of Phase 10 to destroy all that trammels the
being from without is now all self-surrender. There is
great humility—** she died every day she lived *”—and
pride as great, pride in the code’s acceptance, an
impersonal pride, as though one were to sign ‘** servant
of servants.” There is no philosophic capacity, no
intellectual curiosity, but there is no dislike for either
philosophy or science; they are a part of the world and
that world is accepted. There may be great intolerance
for all who break or resist the code, and great tolerance
for all the evil of the world that is clearly beyond it
whether above it or below. The code must rule, and
because that code cannot be an intellectual choice, it is
always a tradition bound up with family, or office, or
trade, always a part of history. It is always seemingly
fated, for its sub-conscious purpose is to compel surrender
of every personal ambition; and though it is obeyed in
pain—can there be mercy in a rigid code ?—the man is
flooded with the joy of self-surrender; and flooded with
mercy—what else can there be in self-surrender?—for

(104

those over whom the code can have no rights, children
and the nameless multitude. Unmerciful to those who
serve and to himself, merciful in contemplating those
who are served, he never wearies of forgiveness.

Men and women of the phase create an art where
individuals only exist to express some historical code,
or some historical tradition of action and of feeling,
things written in what Raftery called the Book of the
People, or settled by social or official station, even as
set forth in directory or peerage. The judge upon the
bench is but a judge, the prisoner in the dock is but
the eternal offender, whom we may study in legend or
in Blue Book. They despise the Bohemian above all
men till he turn gypsy, tinker, convict, or the like, and
so find historical sanction, attain as it were to some
inherited code or recognised relation to such code. They
submit all their actions to the most unflinching examina-
tion, and yet are without psychology, or self-knowledge,
or self-created standard of any kind, for they but ask
without ceasing, ‘‘ Have I done my duty as well as
so-and-soP ”? ** Am JI as unflinching as my fathers before
me? ’? and though they can stand utterly alone,
indifferent though all the world condemn, it is not that
they have found themselves, but that they have been
found faithful. The very Bohemians are not wholly
individual men in their eyes, and but fulfil the curse,
laid upon them before they were born, by God or social
necessity.

Out of phase, seeking emotion instead of impersonal
action, there is—desire being impossible—self-pity, and
therefore discontent with people and with circumstance,
and an overwhelming sense of loneliness, of being
abandoned. All criticism is resented, and small personal
rights and predilections, especially if supported by habit
or position, are asserted with violence; there is great
indifference to others’ rights and predilections; we have

105
the bureaucrat or the ecclesiastic of satire, a tyrant who
is incapable of insight or of hesitation.

Their intellect being from Phase 6, but their energy,
or will, or bias, from Phase 24, they must, if in phase,
see their code expressed in multiform human life, the
mind of Victoria at its best, as distinguished from that
of Walt Whitman. Their emotional life is a reversal of
Phase 10, as what was autocratic in Victoria reversed
the personal autocracy of Parnell. They fly the Mask,
that it may become, when enforced, that form of pride
and of humility that holds together a professional or
social order.

When out of phase they take from Phase 10 isolation,
which is good for that phase but destructive to a phase
that should live for others and from others; and they
take from Phase 6 a bundle of race instincts, and turn
them to abstract moral, or social convention, and so
contrast with Phase 6, as the mind of Victoria at its
worst contrasts with that of Walt Whitman. When in
phase they turn these instincts to a concrete code,
founded upon dead or living example.

That which characterises all phases of the last quarter,
with an increasing intensity, begins now to be plain:
persecution of instinct—race is transformed into a moral
conception—whereas the intellectual phases, with increas-
ing intensity as they approached Phase 22, persecuted
emotion. Morality and intellect persecute instinct and
emotion respectively, which seek their protection.

106

XXXVI
PHASE TWENTY-FIVE

Will—The Conditional Man.

Mask (from Phase 11). True—Consciousness of Self.
False—Self-consciousness.

Creative Mind (from Phase 5). True—Rhetoric. False
—Spiritual Arrogance.

Body of Fate (from Phase 19)—Persecution.

Examples : Cardinal Newman, Luther, Calvin, George
Herbert, Mr George Russell (A.E.).

Born as it seems to the arrogance of belief, as Phase
24 was born to mora! arrogance, the man of the phase
must reverse himself, must change from Phase 11 to
Phase 25; use the Body of Fate to purify the intellect
from the Mask, till this intellect accepts some organized
belief : belief rooted in social order: the convictions of
Christendom let us say. He must eliminate all that is
personal from belief; eliminate the necessity for intellect
by the contagion of some common agreement, as did
Phase 23 by its technique, Phase 24 by its code. Witha
Will of subsidence, an intellect of loosening and separat-
ing, he must, like Phases 28 or 24, find himself in such a
situation that he is compelled to concrete synthesis (Body
of Fate at Phase 19 the discord of Phase 11) but this
situation compels the Will, if it pursue the False Mask,
to the persecution of others, if found by the True Mask,
to suffer persecution. Phase 19, phase of the Body of
Fate, is a phase of breaking, and when the Will is at
Phase 25 of breaking by belief. In this it finds its
inspiration and its joy. It is called the Conditional Man,

wo -_ —_ &

107

perhaps because all the man’s thought arises out of some
particular condition of actual life, or is an attempt to
change that condition with a moral object. He is still
strong, full of initiative, full of social intellect ; absorption
has scarce begun; but his object is to limit and bind,
to make men better, by making it impossible that they
should be otherwise, to so arrange prohibitions and
habits that men may be naturally good, as they are
naturally black, or white, or yellow. There may be
great eloquence, a mastery of all concrete imagery that
is not personal expression, because though as yet there
is no sinking into the world but much distinctness, clear
identity, there is an overflowing social conscience. No
man of any other phase can produce the same instant
effect upon great crowds; for codes have passed, the

universal conscience takes their place. He should not

appeal to a personal interest, should make little use of
argument which requires a long train of reasons, or many
technical terms, for his power rests in certain simplifying
convictions which have grown with his character; he
needs intellect for their expression, not for proof, and
taken away from these convictions is without emotion
and momentum. He has but one overwhelming passion,
to make all men good, and this good is something at
once concrete and impersonal; and though he has hitherto
given it the name of some church, or state, he is ready
at any moment to give it a new name for, unlike Phase
24, he has no pride to nourish upon the past. Moved
by all that is impersonal, he becomes powerful as, in a
community tired of elaborate meals, that man might
become powerful who had the strongest appetite for
bread and water.

When out of phase he may, because Phase 11 is a phase
oi diffused personality and pantheistic dreaming, grow
sentimental and vague, drift into some emotional
abstract, his head full of images long separated from

108

life, and ideas long separated from experience, turn
tactless and tasteless, affirm his position with the greatest
arrogance possible to man. Even when nearly wholly
good he can scarce escape from arrogance; what old
friend did Cardinal Newman cut because of some shade
of theological difference

Living in the False Creative Mind produces, in ail
primary phases, insensitiveness, as living in the False
Mask produces emotional conventionality and banality,
because that False Creative Mind, having received no
influence from the Body of Fate, no mould from
individuals and interests, is as it were self-suspended,
At Phase 25 this insensitiveness may be that of a judge
who orders a man to the torture, that of a statesman who
accepts massacre as a historical necessity. One thinks
of Luther’s apparent indifference to atrocities committed,
now by the peasants, now against them, according to the
way his incitements veered.

The genius of Synge and Rembrandt has been
described as typical of Phase 23. The first phase of a
triad is an expression of unrelated power. They surprised
the multitude, they did not seek to master it; while those
chosen for examples of Phase 24 turn the multitude into
a moral norm. At Phase 25 men seek to master the
multitude, not through expressing it, nor through
surprising it, but by imposing upon it an intellectual
norm. Synge, reborn at Phase 25, might interest himself,
not in the primary vigour and tragedy of his Aran Island
countrymen but in their beliefs, and through some
eccentricity (not of phase but horoscope) not in those
they hold in common with fellow Catholics, as Newman
would, but of those they share with Japanese peasants,
or in their belief as a part of all folk belief considered
as religion and philosophy. He would use this religion
and philosophy to kill within himself the last trace of
individual abstract speculation, yet this religion and this

109

philosophy, as present before his mind, would be artificial
and selected, though always concrete. Subsidence upon,
or absorption in, the spiritual primary is not yet possible
or even conceivable.

Poets of this phase are always stirred to an imaginative
intensity by some form of propaganda. George Herbert
was doubtless of this phase; and Mr George Russell
(A.E.), though the signs are obscured by the influence
upon his early years of poets and painters of middle
antithetical phases. Neither Mr Russell’s visionary
painting, nor his visions of “* nature spirits *? are, upon
this supposition, true to phase. Every poem, where he is
moved to write by some form of philosophical propaganda,
is precise, delicate and original, while in his visionary
painting one discovers the influence of other men, Gustave

- Moreau, for instance. This painting is like many of his

*‘ visions,’? an attempt to live in the Mask, caused by
critical ideas founded upon antithetical art. What dialect
was to Synge, his practical work as a co-operative
organiser is to him, and he finds precise ideas and sincere
emotion in the expression of conviction. He has learned
practically, but not theoretically, that he must fly the
Mask, His work should neither be consciously esthetic
nor consciously speculative but imitative of a central
Being—the Mask as his pursuer—consciously appre-
hended as something distinct, as something never
imminent though eternally united to the soul.

His False Mask has shown him what purport to be
‘nature spirits *? because all phases before Phase 15 are
in nature, as distinguished from God, and at Phase 11
that nature becomes intellectually conscious of its
relations to all created things. "When he desires the
Mask, instead of flying that it may follow, it gives,
instead of the intuition of God, a simulated intuition of
nature. That simulated intuition is arrayed in ideal
conventional images of sense, instead of in some form of

110

abstract opinion, because of the character of his
horoscope.

PHASE TWENTY-SIX

Will—The Multiple Man, also called ** The Hunch-
back.”’

Mask (from Phase 12). True—Self-realisation. False
—Self-abandonment.

Creative Mind (from Phase 4). True—Beginning of
Supersensual thought. /alse—Fascination of Sin.

Body of Fate (irom Phase 18)—The Hunchback is
his own Body of Fate.

The most difficult of the phases, and the first of those
phases for which one can find few or no examples from
personal experience. I think that in Asia it might not
be difficult to discover examples at least of Phases 26,
27 and 28, final phases of a cycle. If such embodiments
occur in our present European civilisation they remain
obscure, through lacking the instruments for seli-
expression. One must create the type from its symbols
without the help of experience.

All the old abstraction, whether of morality or of belief,
has now been exhausted, but in the seemingly natural
man, in Phase 26 out of phase, there is an attempt to sub-
stitute a new abstraction, a simulacrum of self-expression.
Desiring emotion the man becomes the most completely
solitary of all possible men, for all emotional communion
with his kind, that of a common study, that of an interest
in work done, that of a code accepted, that of a belief

111

shared, has passed; and without personality he is forced
to create its artificial semblance. It is perhaps a slander
of history that makes us see Nero so, for he lacked the
physical deformity which is, we are told, first among
this phase’s inhibitions of personality. The deformity
may be of any kind, great or little, for it is but symbolised
in the hump that thwarts what seems the ambition of a
Cresar or of an Achilles. He commits crimes, not because
he wants to, or like Phase 28 out of phase, because he
can, but because he wants to feel certain that he can;
and he is full of malice because, finding no impulse but
in his own ambition, he is made jealous by the impulse
of others. He is all emphasis, and the greater that
emphasis the more does he show himself incapable of
emotion, the more does he display his sterility. If he
live amid a theologically minded people, his greatest

_ temptation may be to defy God, to become a Judas, who

betrays, not for thirty pieces of silver, but that he may
call himself creator.

In examining how he becomes true to phase, one is
perplexed by the obscure description of the Body of Fate,
** the Hunchback is his own Body of Fate.’’ This Body
of Fate is derived from Phase 18, and (being reflected in
the physical being of Phase 26), can only be such a
separation of function—deformity—as breaks the self-
regarding False Mask (Phase 18 being the breaking of
Phase 12). All phases from Phase 26 to Phase 11
inclusive are gregarious; and from Phase 26 to Phase
28 there is, when the phase is truly lived, contact with
supersensual life, or a sinking in of the body upon its
supersensual source, or desire for that contact and
sinking. At Phase 26 has come a_ subconscious
exhaustion of the moral life, whether in belief or in
conduct, and of the life of imitation, the life of judgment
and approval. The Will must find a substitute, and as
always in the first phase of a triad energy is violent and

112

fragmentary. The moral abstract being no longer
possible, the Will may seek this substitute through the
knowledge of the lives of men and beasts, plucked up,
as it were, by the roots, lacking in all mutual relations;
there may be hatred of solitude, perpetual forced bon-
homie; yet that which it seeks is without social morality,
something radical and incredible. When Ezekiel lay upon
his ** right and left side ’? and ate dung, to raise ** other
men to a perception of the infinite,’? he may so have
sought, and so did perhaps the Indian sage or saint who
coupled with the roe.

If the man of this phase seeks, not life, but knowledge
of each separated life in relation to supersensual unity;
and above all of each separated physical life, or action,
—that alone is entirely concrete—he will, because he can
see lives and actions in relation to their source and
not in their relations to one another, see their deformities
and incapacities with extraordinary acuteness, and we
shall *discover, when we come to consider the nature of
victimage, that their images beset him in states analogous
to hypnogogic vision. His own past actions also he must
judge as isolated and each in relation to its source; and
this source, experienced not as love but as knowledge,
will be present in his mind as a terrible unflinching
judgment. Hitherto he could say to primary man, ** Am
I as good as So-and-So? ”? and when still antithetiéal he
could say, ‘* After all I have not failed in my good
intentions taken as a whole ’’; he could pardon himself;
but how pardon where every action is judged alone and
no good action can turn judgment from the evil action by
its side. He stands in the presence of a terrible blinding
light, and would, were that possible, be born as worm or
mole.

* This topic belongs to the psychology of the system, which
I have not yet mastered. I have yet to put together and study
many obscure scattered passages in the documents.—W.B.Y.,
July, 1925.

113
XXVIII
PHASE TWENTY-SEVEN

Mask (from Phase 18). True—Renunciation. False—
Emulation.

Creative Mind (from Phase 8). True—Spiritual
Receptivity. 'alse—Pride.

Body of Fate (from Phase 17)—None except Imper-
sonal Action.

Examples : Socrates, Pascal.

In his seemingly natural man, derived from Mask,
there is an extreme desire for spiritual authority; and
thought and action have for their object display of zeal
or some claim of authority. Emulation is all the greater
because not based on argument but on psychological or
physiological difference. At Phase 27, the central phase
of the soul, of a triad that is occupied with the relations of
the soul, the man asserts when out of phase his claim to
faculty or to supersensitive privilege beyond that of other
men; he has a secret that makes him better than other
men.

True to phase, he substitutes for emulation an emotion
of renunciation, and for the old toil of judgment and
acknowledgement of sin, a beating upon his breast and an
ecstatical crying out that he must do penance, that he
is even the worst of men. He does not, like Phase 26,
perceive separated lives and actions more clearly than the
total life, for the total life has suddenly displayed its
source. If he possess intellect he will use it but to

serve perception and renunciation. His joy is to be
H

114

nothing, to do nothing, to think nothing; but to permit
the total life, expressed in its humanity, to flow in upon
him and to express itself through his acts and thoughts,
He is not identical with it, he is not absorbed in it, for
if he were he would not know that he is nothing, that
he no longer even possesses his own body, that he must
renounce even his desire for his own salvation, and that
this total life is in love with his nothingness.

Before the self passes from Phase 22 it is said to attain
what is called the ‘*‘ Emotion of Sanctity,’’ and this
emotion is described as a contact with life beyond death.
It comes at the instant when synthesis is abandoned,
when fate is accepted. At Phases 28, 24 and 25 we are
said to use this emotion, but not to pass from Phase 25
till we have intellectually realised the nature of sanctity
itself, and sanctity is described as the renunciation of
personal salvation. The ‘* Emotion of Sanctity ”’ is the
reverse of that realisation of incipient personality at
Phase 8, which the Will related to collective action till
Phase 11 had passed. After Phase 22 the man becomes
aware of something which the intellect cannot grasp and
this something is a supersensual environment of the soul.
At Phases 28, 24 and 25 he subdues all attempts at its
intellectual comprehension, while relating it to his bodily
senses and faculties, through technical achievement,
through morality, through belief. At Phases 26, 27 and
28 he permits those senses and those faculties to sink
in upon their environment. He will, if it be possible,
not even touch or taste or see : ** Man does not perceive
the truth; God perceives the truth in man.”’

115

XXITX

PHASE TWENTY-EIGHT

Will—The Fool.

Mask (from Phase 14). True—Oblivion. False—
Malignity.

Creative Mind (from Phase: 2). True—Physical
Activity. False—Cunning.

Body of Fate (from Phase 16)—The Fool is his own
Body of Fate.

The natural man, the fool desiring his Mask, grows
malignant, not as the Hunchback, who is jealous of those
that can still feel, but through terror and out of jealousy
of all that can act with intelligence and effect. It is
his true business to become his own opposite, to pass
from a semblance of Phase 14 to the reality of Phase
28, and this he does under the influence of his own mind
and body—he is his own Body of Fate—for having no
active intelligence he owns nothing of the exterior world
but his mind and body. He is but a straw blown by
_ the wind, with no mind but the wind and no act but a
nameless drifting and turning, and is sometimes called
** The Child of God.”? At his worst his hands and feet
and eyes, his will and his feelings, obey obscure sub-
conscious fantasies, while at his best he would know all
wisdom if he could know anything. The physical world
suggests to his mind pictures and events that have no
relation to his needs or even to his desires; his thoughts
are an aimless reverie; his acts are aimless like his
thoughts; and it is in this aimlessness that he finds his
joy. His importance will become clear as the system
elaborates itself, yet for the moment no more need be

116

said but that one finds his many shapes on passing from
the village fool to the fool of Shakespeare.

** Out of the pool,
Where love the slain with love the slayer lies,
Bubbles the wan mirth of the mirthless fool.”’

PHASE ONE

Will,

Mask (from Phase 15). No description except
Creative Mind (from Phase 1). | complete plasticity,
Body of Fate (from Phase 15).

This is a supernatural incarnation, like Phase 15,
because there is complete objectivity, and human life
cannot be completely objective. At Phase 15 mind was
completely absorbed by Being, but now body is
completely absorbed in its supernatural environment.
The images of mind are no longer irrelevant even, for
there is no longer anything to which they can be relevant,
and acts can no longer be immoral or stupid for there is
no one there that can be judged. Thought and inclina-
tion, fact and object of desire, are indistinguishable
(Mask is submerged in Body of Fate, Will in Creative
Mind), that is to say there is complete passivity, complete
plasticity. Mind has become indifferent to good and evil,
to truth and falsehood; body has become undiffer-
entiated, dough-like; the more perfect be the soul, the
more indifferent the mind, the more dough-like the body;
and mind and body take whatever shape, accept whatever
image is imprinted upon them, transact whatever
purpose is imposed upon them, and are indeed the instru-
ments of supernatural manifestation, being the final link
between the living and more powerful beings. There

117

may be great joy; but it is the joy of a conscious
plasticity; and it is this plasticity, this liquefaction,
or pounding up, whereby all that has been knowledge
becomes instinct and faculty. All plasticities do not
obey all masters, and when we have considered cycle and
horoscope it will be seen how those that are the instru-
ments of subtle supernatural will differ from the instru-
ments of cruder energy; but all, highest and lowest, are
alike in being automatic.

Finished at Thoor, Ballylee, 1922,
in 2 time of Civil War.

ey
= 7
( aa -
i ill =
_ = d I 5 7
7
2 - f
: ‘ a q
Pw ,
- ~~ a | 7
° ~ . -
“a hong 4 rs
ie ; ut
> ‘
ves A od Fite
»
i —<—
ay =
4
= "i
J]
= 4
- a! a _-
= =
| a
= J
i
=
C
i A A
ai EE yt
“Ss .
|
(a? a

.
‘
'’ = oa B14 eos SS ee

1... = s

BOOK II
WHAT THE CALIPH REFUSED TO
LEARN

_—
’ , im

TF lam’
ae

— ritoka
4

ie
a i a

iz s — = r ™ *
"] I « a oat a j -
= . - 7 — a 2 > a
. “ = | > 4 _ hi v nll f ” 7 - 7 - ie~F a= a ha - ay - 5
_— oa - — : *. a i , 5 i 7 ad 7 ' P
72 4 " - ' x é ,. = i had | *. <~ a | haw b= i a
os -' _ A —_ . aa e al .. a A > a & « p e
<— t alll id a, a ow, _ ae ies ae s i igs -
- — f wl « 7 ~ “P’ w “ oom = - ~- ru f es a fu4 2
of (* 5 e - es 7 4, se nt O% wr nied
F, — * ah - “~ 5 »* . 7 = 7 2 of - 7 a rg Si : aoe od
eee ee SS en ee tae oe
4 a ae . el endl a 5 i =
(i—_ nS _ - “= . ~~ es a <2.
- e >, 7 = alae ah ¥T er - — mes : -_ 7 e »
© = get | ~~ —_ 4 = ata al fi. ' = .. “ = 7 ‘
“ ,s ; - ill . = ae
i} F ad : r re r _— Pd a oe a ia _ P ; :
— e é <i — = d _— “ -
hal ry Fae ie ning OM ro — a = « 7 . ’ + Se
am eT “ . a. of 18 ee = Goh wh = «eer a d 1
— im ' wy yy ™ . Pe ie — = is ’ ~ “4 a T > «
J Fa. aot: F me - _ ) - bP Ua — gah = * = " j « : a : e a ¥
: E ”” . a » . om a = | 5 ——_ i e & ai 7 :
| Rr", a ~ ~ i _ ‘ a “ST : ’ ; ey : _
+ ’ y= = ; mS | en Ae : 1 es : A as ae ) .
ates > ee, teh Sethe ee a ey el OO del et ee | Ye Lb ieee I a law — . wes = -
4 a By } . a, ; . i 4 ~~ { o] + a a i ” _ = 7d Pr =, padi a _ I eo) a | —e — —s , r ° - aaa , _ : P { = i ; t J as &£ _— & $ o ’ : = y .
. ; " [: ai ’ y =| a“ apy ay ‘a a a. = - Ht eee | 4 — = ams - ~ Pi. ee es = eis .* o " . Dds 7 Fe i=, “i 7 Ee < ’ - ney s ae oi
f= — 8K Ss a i 7 —) ao “ (ve , .= or. — * 7. ae  — * a — "tn f — eee Wee PP poe. oe ee i. = 7 er ee I —  ———— &» = rs ie 2

1, DESERT GEOMETRY OR THE GIFT.
OF HARUN AL-RASCHID

Kusta ben Luka is my name, I write
To Abd Al-Rabban; fellow roysterer once,
Now the good Caliph’s learned Treasurer,
And for no ear but his.
Carry this letter
Through the great gallery of the Treasure House
Where banners of the Caliphs hang, night-coloured
But brilliant as the night’s embroidery,
And wait war’s music; pass the little gallery;
Pass books of learning from Byzantium
Written in gold upon a purple stain,
And pause at last, I was about to say,

_ At the great book of Sappho’s song; but no!
For should you leave my letter there, a boy’s
Love-lorn, indifferent hands might come upon it
And let it fall unnoticed to the floor.

Pause at the Treatise of Parmenides

And hide it there, for Caliphs to world’s end

a Must keep that perfect, as they keep her song,

q So great its fame.

When fitting time has passed,

The parchment will disclose to some learned man

A mystery that else had found no chronicler

But the wild Bedouin. Though I approve

Those wanderers that welcomed in their tents

121

122
What great Harun Al-Raschid, occupied
With Persian embassy or Grecian war,
Or those who need his bounty or his law,
Must needs neglect; I cannot hide the truth
That wandering in a desert, featureless
As air under a wing, can give bird’s wit.
In after time they will speak much of me
And speak but phantasy. Recall the year
When our beloved Caliph put to death
His Vizir Jaffer for an unknown reason.
** Tf but the shirt upon my body knew it
I’d tear it off and throw it in the fire.”’
That speech was all that the town knew, but he
Seemed for a while to have grown young again;
Seemed so on purpose, muttered Jaffer’s friends,
That none might know that he was conscience struck—
But that’s a traitor’s thought. Enough for me
That in the early summer of the year
The mightiest of the princes of the world
Came to the least considered of his courtiers;
Sat down upon the fountain’s marble edge,
One hand amid the goldfish in the pool: »
And thereupon a colloquy took place
That I commend to all the chroniclers
To show how violent great hearts can lose
Their bitterness and find the honeycomb.

‘* T have brought a slender bride into the house;

You know the saying ‘ Change the bride with Spring,’
And she and I, being sunk in happiness,

Cannot endure to think you tread these paths

When evening stirs the jasmine, and yet

Are brideless.”’

** IT am falling into years.”’

128

‘‘ But such as you and I do not seem old
Like men who live by habit. Every day

I ride with falcon to the water’s edge

Or carry the ringed mail upon my back,
Or court a woman; neither enemy,
Gamebird, nor woman does the same thing twice;
And so a hunter carries in the eye

A mimicry of youth. Can poet’s thought
That springs from body and in body falls
Like this pure jet, now lost amid blue sky,
Now bathing lily leaf and fishes’ scale,

Be mimicry? ”

‘* What matter if our souls
Are nearer to the surface of the body
Than souls that start no game and turn no rhyme!
The soul’s own youth and not the body’s youth
Shows through our lineaments. My candle’s bright;
My lantern is too loyal not to show
That it was made in your great father’s reign.”’

“And yet the jasmine season warms our blood.”’

** Great prince, forgive the freedom of my speech;
You think that love has seasons, and you think
That if the spring bear off what the spring gave
The heart need suffer no defeat; but I

Who have accepted the Byzantine faith

That seems unnatural to Arabian minds,

Think when I choose a bride I choose for ever;
And if her eye should not grow bright for mine,
Or brighten only for some younger eye,

My heart could never turn from daily ruin

Nor find a remedy.”?

** But what if I
Have lit upon a woman who so shares

124
Your thirst for those old crabbed mysteries,
So strains to look beyond our life, an eye
That never knew that strain would scarce seem bright;
And yet herself can seem youth’s very fountain,
Being all brimmed with life.’’

** Were it but true
I would have found the best that life can give,
Companionship in those mysterious things
That make a man’s soul or a woman’s soul
Itself and not some other soul.’’

** That love
Must needs be in this life and in what follows
Unchanging and at peace, and it is right
Every philosopher should praise that love;
But I being none can praise its opposite.
It makes my passion stronger but to think
Like passion stirs the peacock and his mate,
The wild stag and the doe; that mouth to mouth
Is a man’s mockery of the changeless soul.”’

And thereupon his bounty gave what now

Can shake more blossom from autumnal chill
Than all my bursting springtime knew. A girl
Perched in some window of her mother’s house
Had watched my daily passage to and fro;
Had heard impossible history of my past;
Imagined some impossible history

Lived at my side; thought Time’s disfiguring touch —
Gave but more reason for a woman’s care.

Yet was it love of me, or was it love

Of the stark mystery that has dazed my sight,
Perplexed her phantasy and planned her care?
Or did the torchlight of that mystery

Pick out my features in such light and shade

125

Two contemplating passions chose one theme
Through sheer bewilderment? She had not paced
The garden paths, nor counted up the rooms,
Before she had spread a book upon her knees
And asked about the pictures or the text;
And often those first days I saw her stare
On old dry writing in a learned tongue,
On old dry faggots that could never please
The extravagance of spring; or move a hand
As if that writing or the figured page
Were some dear cheek.

Upon a moonless night
I sat where I could watch her sleeping form,
And wrote by candle-light; but her form moved,
And fearing that my light disturbed her sleep
T rose that I might screen it with a cloth.
I heard her voice ** Turn that 1 may expound
What’s bowed your shoulder and made pale your cheek ”’ 5
And saw her sitting upright on the bed;
Or was it she that spoke or some great Djinn?
I say that a Djinn spoke. A live-long hour
She seemed the learned man and I the child;
Truths without father came, truths that no book
Of all the uncounted books that I have read,
Nor thought out of her mind or mine begot,
Self-born, high-born, and solitary truths,
Those terrible implacable straight lines
Drawn through the wondering vegetative dream,
Even those truths that when my bones are dust
Must drive the Arabian host.

The voice grew still,
And she lay down upon her bed and slept,
But woke at the first gleam of day, rose up
And swept the house and sang about her work
In childish ignorance of all that passed.

126

A dozen nights of natural sleep, and then
When the full moon swam to its greatest height
She rose, and with her eyes shut fast in sleep
Walked through the house. Unnoticed and unfelt
I wrapped her in a heavy hooded cloak, and she
Half running, dropped at the first ridge of the desert
And there marked out those emblems on the sand
That day by day I study and marvel at,

With her white finger. I led her home asleep
And once again she rose and swept the house
In childish ignorance of all that passed.

Even to-day, after some seven years

When maybe thrice in every moon her mouth
Has murmured wisdom of the desert Dyjinns,
She keeps that ignorance, nor has she now
That first unnatural interest in my books.

It seems enough that I am there; and yet,
Old fellow student, whose most patient ear
Heard all the anxiety of my passionate youth,
It seems I must buy knowledge with my peace.
What if she lose her ignorance and so

Dream that I love her only for the voice,

That every gift and every word of praise

Is but a payment for that midnight voice

That is to age what milk is to a child!

Were she to lose her love, because she had lost
Her confidence in mine, or even lose

Its first simplicity, love, voice, and all,

All my fine feathers would be plucked away —
And I left shivering. The voice has drawn

A quality of wisdom from her love’s

Particular quality. The signs and shapes;

All those abstractions that you fancied were
From the great Treatise of Parmenides;

All, all those gyres and cubes and midnight things
Are but a new expression of her body

127
Drunk with the bitter-sweetness of her youth.
And now my utmost mystery is out :
A woman’s beauty is a storm-tossed banner;
Under it wisdom stands, and I alone—
Of all Arabia’s lovers I alone—
Nor dazzled by the embroidery, nor lost
In the confusion of its night-dark folds,
Can hear the armed man speak.

1928.

2. THE GEOMETRICAL FOUNDATION
OF THE WHEEL

I
THe GYRE

FLAUBERT talked much of writing a story called * La
Spirale *’ and died before he began it, but since his death
an editor has collected the scheme from various sources,
It would have concerned a man whose dreams during
sleep grew in magnificence as his life became more and
more unlucky. He dreamt of marriage with a princess
when all went wrong with his own love adventure.
Swedenborg wrote occasionally of gyrations, especially
in his ** Spiritual Diary,’’ and in ** The Principia ”’ where
the physical universe is described as built up by the spiral
movement of points, and by vortexes which were com-
binations of these; but very obscurely except where
describing the physical universe, perhaps because he
was compelled as he thought to keep silent upon
all that concerned Fate. I remember that certain
Irish countrymen whom I questioned some twenty years
ago had seen Spirits departing from them in an ascending
gyre; and there is that gyring ‘‘ tangle of world lines
in a fourth dimensional space ” of later discoverers, and
of course Descartes and his vortex, Boehme and his
gyre, and perhaps, were I learned enough to discover
128

129

jt, allusions in many writers back to antiquity. Arrived
there | am attracted to a passage in Heraclitus which I
can, I think, explain more clearly than his English
commentators.

II
EXPANDING AND CONTRASTING GYRES

HAVING the concrete mind of the poet, I am unhappy
when I find myself among abstract things, and yet I
need them to set my experience in order. I must speak
of time and space, though as I accept the argument of
Berkeley I think of them as abstract creations of the
human mind, limits which it has chosen for itself.

A line is the symbol of time and it expresses a move-
ment—without extension in space—and because emotion
has no extension in that space, however much
connected with objects that have, a line symbolises
the emotional subjective mind, the self in its simplest
form. A plane cutiing the line at right angles constitutes,
in combination with the moving line, a space of three or
more dimensions, and is the symbol of all that is objec-
tive, and so for certain purposes of nature and, because
intellect 1s the understanding of objects in space, of intei-
lect as opposed to emotion. Line and plane are combined
in a gyre, and as one tendency or the other must be always
the stronger, the gyre is always expanding or contracting.
or simplicity of representation the gyre is drawn as a
cone. Sometimes this cone represents the individual soul,
and that soul’s history—these things are inseparable—
sometimes general life. When general life, we give to its
narrow end, to its unexpanded gyre, the name of Anima
Hominis, and to its broad end, or its expanded gyre,
Anima Mundi; but understanding that neither the soul

of man nor the soul of nature can be expressed without
I

180

conflict or vicissitude we substitute for this cone two
cones, one which is the contact of the mind with Fate,
and the other the contact of the mind with Destiny,
Destiny being understood to mean all external acts and
forms created by the Will itself and out of itself, whereas
Fate is all those acts or forms imposed upon the Will
from without. It is as though the first act of being, after
creating limit, was to divide itself into male and female,
each dying the other’s life living the other’s death.

These cones are associated with the line and the space
wherein it moves respectively, as though the first gyre
met with another and opposing gyre which has its
greatest expansion, not in space, as we perceive it by
the senses, but in a space perceived by the mind only.
We can consider the cones as fixed and use disks or
lines to represent the opposing gyres. It will be seen
presently that these opposing gyres are also beauty and
truth, value and fact, particular and universal, quality
and quantity, the bundle of separated threads as dis-
tinguished from those still in the pattern, abstracted
types and forms as distinguished from those that are

181

still concrete, Man and Daimon, the living and the dead,
and all other images of our first parents.

When the life of man is growing more predestined,
there is something within the depth of his being that
resists, that desires the exact contrary; and if his life
is growing more fated it desires the exact contrary of that
also. As these contraries become sharper in their con-
trast, as they pull farther apart, consciousness grows
more intense, for consciousness is choice. The energy
of the one tendency being in exact mathematical pro-

portion to that of the other, the wide gyre marked B for
instance in the cone of Fate is at exactly the same dis-
tance from its widest expanse that the gyre marked C
is from its widest expansion. When each gyre has
reached the widest expansion, the contradiction in the
being will have reached its height. But beside these two
expanding gyres there are the two narrowing gyres,
marked A D in the figure. As man’s intellect, say,
expands, the emotional nature contracts in equal degree
and vice versa; when, however, a narrowing and a widen-
ing gyre reach theirlimit, the one the utmost contraction
the other the utmost expansion, they change places, point
to circle, circle to point, for this system conceives the

182

world as catastrophic, and continue as before, one always
narrowing, one always expanding, and yet bound for ever
to one another. Of this fourfold—two expanding gyres,
in nature opposite to one another and two contracting
gyres, Opposite to one another—we consider the one we
identify with the Will as deciding the nature of the being,
If now we consider these opposing gyres or cones ag
expressing Man and Daimon—those two first portions of
being that suffer vicissitude into which Anima Hominis
and Anima Mundi resolve—we can explain much in
Parmenides and Empedocles, but especially this in
Heraclitus : ** I shall retrace my steps over the paths of
song that I had travelled before, drawing from my saying
a new saying. When Strife was fallen to the lowest
depth of the vortex.’’ (** Not as might be supposed,”
Birkett explains, ‘* the centre but the extreme bound.”)
** and love has reached the centre of the whirl, in it
do all things come together so as to be one only; not all
at once, but coming together gradually from different
quarters; and as they came together Strife retired to the
extreme boundary .. . but in proportion as it kept
rushing out, a soft immortal stream of blameless love
kept running in.”’ So far all is plain, and it may be this
very passage that suggested Flaubert’s dreaming man
whose life goes wrong as his dream comes right. “* For
of a truth they (Love and Strife) were afore time and
shall be, nor ever can (?) boundless time be emptied of
the pair, and they prevail in turn as the circle comes
round, and pass away before one another arid increase
in their appointed time.”’

And had we more than a few fragments of Empedocles
and his school it might not be hard to relate the four
gyres of our symbol to heat and cold, light and dark,
the pairs of opposites, whether in the moral or physical
universe, which permeate his thought. The single cone
whose extreme limits are described as Anima Hominis,

183

Anima Mundi, is said in our documents to be formed by
the whirling of a sphere which moves onward leaving an
empty coil behind it; and the double cones by the
separating of two whirling spheres that have been one,
and it may be that we have here what suggested to
Parmenides thoughts that seemed to forestall certain of
our latest mathematical speculations. ‘* Where then it
has its furthest boundary it is complete on every side,
equally poised from the centre in every direction like the
mass of a rounded sphere, for it cannot be greater or
smaller in one place than another . . . and there is not,
and never shall be any time, other than that which is
present, since Fate has chained it so as to be whole and
immoveable.”’

WI

BuLAKE’s USE OF THE GYRES

BLAKE, in the Mental Traveller, describes a struggle, a
struggle perpetually repeated between a man and a
woman, and as ‘the one ages, the other grows young. A
child is given to an old woman and

Her fingers number every nerve

Just as a miser counts his gold;

She lives upon his shrieks and cries

And she grows young as he grows old.

Till he becomes a bleeding youth

And she becomes a virgin bright;

Then he rends up his manacles
And bends her down to his delight.

Then he in his turn becomes “* an aged shadow ” and
is driven from his door, where *‘ From the fire on the
hearth a little female babe doth spring.’? He must
wander ‘* until he can a maiden win” and then all is
repeated for

le
s
ig

> Ls

184
** The honey of her infant lips
The bread and wine of her sweet smile
The wild game of her roving eye
Does him to infancy beguile.”’
Till he becomes a wayward babe
And she a weeping woman old ”’

When Edwin J. Ellis and I had finished our big book
on the philosophy of William Blake, I felt that we had
no understanding of this poem: we had explained its
details, for they occur elsewhere in his verse or his
pictures, but not the poem as a whole, not the myth,
the perpetual return to the same thing; not that which
certainly moved Blake to write it; but when I had under-
stood the double cones, I understood it also. The woman
and the man are two competing gyres growing at one
another’s expense, but with Blake it is not enough to
say that one is beauty and one is wisdom, for he conceives
this conflict as that in all love—whether between the
elements as in Parmenides, *‘ the wanton love” of
Aristotle, or between man and woman—which compels
each to be slave and tyrant by turn. In our system also
it is a cardinal principle that anything separated from its
opposite—and victory is separation—** consumes itself
away.’ The existence of the one depends upon the
existence of the other.

Blake and his wife signed, in 1789, a document approv-
ing the foundation of the Swedenborgian Church, his
brother remained a Swedenborgian to the end of his life,
his friend Flaxman was a Swedenborgian and a very
learned man, and it is possible therefore that he found
among fellow-believers a knowledge of gyres and vortexes
obtained from Swedenborg himself, though at that time
inaccessible in print. Or, upon the other hand, those
beings which gave that knowledge as it is in “ The
Spiritual Diary ’? may have given it to Blake also.

185
IV
Tue Parrs OF OPPOSITES AND THE DANCE OF THE FouR
ROYAL PERSONS

ONE must fix the character of the pairs of opposites,
Blake’s tyrant and slave, or, to follow Empedocles to the
end, ** Fire and Water, Earth and the mighty height
of Air.”? Our documents arrange them as in diagram.

The cone of Fate and Mind is shaded, and all that is
external to the Will is assumed to be dark, for the light
that makes all things visible to the mind comes from the

ni
:

vi

WILL

efi ih

_ DESTINY

a

Will itself, our perception of objects, being, as Plotinus
insisted, not a passive reception but a state of activity.
Destiny is here the utmost range possible to the Will
if left in freedom, and its other name is beauty, whereas
Fate is the utmost range of the mind when left in its
freedom and its other name is truth. But we are no
longer dealing with the simple elements but with mix-
tures, and so we impose these cones, Or gyres, upon cer-
tain other cones or gyres, which remain fixed and are their
containing sphere, and which for simplicity of representa-
tion we may place end to end though they are in reality
one within the other,—as in the first figure in Sec. II.

By moving the two dotted cones in and out, we can
express to the eye the unalterable relation between A

186
which is the energy, and B which is its Destiny or beauty,
and that between C, which is mind, and D which is its
Fate or Truth. As BB approaches the wide end of the
right hand cone, A approaches the narrow end of its
cone, and when this movement is reversed, and BB
recedes from the wide end, A recedes from the narrow end
of its cone. That is to say when B is three quarter
primary and one quarter antithetical A is three quarter
antithetical and one quarter primary, and so on; and

D -B

nm
|
~ |
|
I
t
I
'
!
'
1
t
I
[
}
f
l
!
|
t
I
1
!
|
I
wa

Ys:

the movements of D D and C coincide exactly with these
movements. That is to say each gyre, for the extremities
of the moving cones are gyres in the fixed cones, preserves
its relation to its own opposite unbroken, though the
nature of each perpetually changes. In the documents
the fixed cones are left out and the relation between the
opposites symbolised by the various relations of the
approaching and separating cones; or the approaching
and separating cones are left out and the opposites
represented by lines cutting the fixed cones.

It is, however, cumbersome to use four gyres if two
will serve, as they do if we combine two sets of cones
so that one line includes BB, CC, and another DD,

187
A A, and so that the same movement causes one line to
contract as the other expands.

We reach the same end if we consider both sides of
the fixed cones as having different meanings, and these
fixed cones as placed one within the other. We now
obtain our pairs of opposites by considering the four
points touched by the two gyres.

The pzirs A B and C D are now so placed that opposites
confront one another from opposite sides of the figure,

188

and if we study their movements we have those of the
Great Wheel or the Dance of the Four Royal Persons.
Will is Will, Mind is Creative Mind, Destiny is Mask,
Fate is Body of Fate. They are the Four Faculties, and }
must leave the definition of their function, given in the
section describing the Great Wheel, to explain itself as the
system grows familiar, that I may not write at too great
length. The figure in the two diagrams just given is that
of a person at Phase 12, and as each gyre is now considered

to MASK
eo P.26 ae 15

has P.12 >
B.F WILL 13

as a whirling disc, passing through both inner and outer
cones it shows the exact proportion of antithetical and
primary in each of the Four Faculties. This proportion is
represented in the Great Wheel by the size of the illumin-
ated portion of the Lunar disc at each particular phase.
At Phase 12 the Moon is approaching the full in the exact
measure as that in which the gyre A C is approaching its
greatest expansion. When the greatest expansion of the
gyre is reached the phase is Full Moon and so on, and Will
and Creative Mind pass each other at its greatest expan-
sion exactly as in the Great Wheel. When we make a
symbol combining Sun and Moon, we express the sameé

189

thing more completely, for as we have already seen the
primary may be called Solar, the antithetical Lunar.
The converse is not always true, for the Tinctures belong
to a man’s life while in the body, and Solar and Lunar
may transcend that body. The Great Wheel is not, how-
ever, an arbitrary symbol for it is a single gyre of a great
cone containing, as we shall see presently, twelve cycles
of embodiment. Eivery gyre of every cone is in the same
way equal to an entire cone revolving through twenty-
eight phases or their equivalent.

V
BLAKE AND THE GREAT WHEEL

WE interpret the symbol differently from Blake because
his tyrant and slave, slave and tyrant are man and
woman out of phase, and their youth occurs at Phases
8 and 22 of our symbol because there is the greatest
passion, whereas their old age is at Phase 1 and Phase
15 respectively because at those phases the Primary
Tincture and the Antithetical Tincture conquer com-
pletely and passion ceases. With us these are the
moments of the greatest Beauty and Wisdom respectively
because we have mainly studied men true to phase, and
when man is true to phase he attains at Phase 1 and
Phase 15 relation with his opposite not through conflict
but, in so far as one Faculty or group of Faculties is
concerned, through harmony, and is in a Sphere and
not a cone. Had I studied men out of phase mainly, I
would have had constantly to use Blake’s interpretation,
as indeed Homer did when he put into the same poem
Helen and the Siege of Troy, and as Avicenna did when
he wrote ** All life proceeds out of corruption.’ As it is,
the system constantly compels us to consider beauty an
accompaniment of war, and wisdom of decay.

140
VI

THe SYMBOLISM OF THE SUN’S PRECESSION AND ANNUAL
MovEMENTS

HITHERTO I have considered the Wheel in relation to
the symbolic days of the months, but there are also the
twelve symbolic months of the Lunar and Solar year, and

3
the Solar day. All circles are but a single archetypal
circle seen according to different measures of time, and
Solar Kast, West, the spring and autumn equinoxes,
and sunrise and sunset, the critical points between
the two Solar extremes, are held to fall upon Phases
15 and 1 respectively of the Lunar circle; and for
simplicity we sometimes call Phase 22 Lunar Hast because
of the Moonrise, Phase 8 Lunar West, Phase 15 Lunar
South, and Phase 1 Lunar North. The fullness of antt-
thetical life at Phase 15, and of primary life at Phase 1,
fall at moments of extreme strain and shock in all that the
Solar circle symbolises. We may represent the two

141
qualities of life by two circles one within the other which
move in opposite directions, the Lunar from West to
East according to the Moon’s zodiacal movements, the
Solar from Hast to West according to the Sun’s daily
movement, or as we shall presently see, according to
his precessional movement,

The Solar circle represents all that comes from outside
the man and is therefore the Bride, the Enemy, the
Spiritual Life, the Physical World, though it is only
through the Faculties, separated form, that he appre-
hends it. Because there is between the Lunar or natural
world and the Solar or spiritual world conflict, the creation
of philosophy ‘* from experience ”’ is said ** to burn ”’ (?
‘‘ to consume itself away ’’) whereas that from revelation
gives life. For the same reason spiritual beings are
said ** to deceive us if they can.”’ The condition of truth
is that neither world separate from the other and become
© abstract.”

vit
Toe GyreEs AND LUNAR MONTHS OF THE GREAT YEAR
WHEN we come to number gyres and Lunar months in
relation to the signs we consider the first gyre as coin-
ciding with the first Lunar phase and as beginning at
the centre of a zodiacal sign. We mean by the zodiacal
signs not the constellations but mathematical divisions
which we shall presently consider.
I, Phase One (Mid Autumn, Lunar North, Cancer,
Solar West, Libra).
It, Phases Two, Three and Four.
Til. Phases Five, Six and Seven.
IV. Phase Eight (Mid Winter).
V. Phases Nine, Ten and Eleven.
VI. Phases Twelve, Thirteen and Fourteen.
VI. Phase Fifteen (Mid Spring, Solar East, Aries,
Lunar South, Capricorn). |

142
VIII. Phases Sixteen, Seventeen and Eighteen Ue
Lunar Month of Great Year).
IX. Phases Nineteen, Twenty and Twenty-one,
X. Phase Twenty-two (Mid Summer).
XI. Phases Twenty-three, ead and Twenty-
five.
XII. Phases Twenty-six, Twenty-seven and Tventy.
eight.

The Solar Months coincide with the signs.

Such a figure as that on page 140 is, however,
without movement, for it is without error, it is
but the frame, the circle which encloses all, and to show
reality we create another figure in the midst consisting
of two more circles, the one Solar and the other Lunar,
reflections as it were of the Fixed Circles. But for
convenience sake I substitute cones for these two inner
circles, and when the equinoctial point has just entered
Aries—is at Aries 80 that is—superimpose them one
upon another and assume that the Solar or Diamond
shaped cone has a movement from East to West, and
that like an Hour-Glass from West to East.

Pi
}

143
Tur CONES OF THE LUNAR AND SOLAR YEAR

I USE two cones with their narrow ends meeting for
Mask and Will, which I will call the Lunar cones, and two
with their broad ends meeting for the Creative Mind and
Body of Fate which I will call the Solar cones. At the

present moment as the equinox is in Pisces, the Creative
Mind, which is always identified with the Hast and so
with the equinoctial point, has moved from the historical
starting point in Aries 80 through somewhat more than
one twelfth of the entire circle.

When the Sun at the vernal equinox passed from
Taurus into Aries, Eternal Man had his Will and Mask
at Phase 15 and Phase 1 respectively, and so at Lunar
South and North, and his Creative Mind and his Body
of Fate at Solar East and West. During the passage
of Creative Mind through one sign, starting from solar

144

Kast, the interior gyre of these Solar and Lunar cones
will have made one rotation out of the twelve that
complete their circles, and in the Lunar cones that hag
been a passage from South to North and from North to
South again.

It is necessary to notice that as Aries 80, let us say, is
the extreme end or East of the Solar cone, and Capricorn
80 the extreme end of the Lunar cone, the 15th Lunar
Phase does not begin at Solar East, but that its central
moment corresponds to Hast and so to Aries 80. This
means that each of the twelve Lunar divisions begins in
the middle of one of the twelve Solar divisions. Starting
at East and South we say that the gyre or division corres-
ponding to Phase 15 ends and that corresponding to Phases
16, 17 and 18 begins in the middle of the Solar division
that corresponds to Aries, or, if we turn it all into astrono-
mical symbolism, that the first new Moon occurs one half
of a Solar month after the Sun has entered Aries. Our
figure is based on the Great Year of some twenty-six
thousand years, and therefore the Sun enters Aries at the
80th degree and not at 0 as in the annual movement. But
the new Moon is always North for it is at the beginning of
the twenty-eight phases, and so we get the symbolism
of the Cardinal Points once more, for each Solar division
begins at East and has West for its central point. The
Will of Eternal Man during the civilisation that climaxed
in Athens and in Rome was passing through a gyre which
corresponded to Phase 15 of the Lunar cone and had
therefore the greatest possible artistic capacity, and at
the foundation of Christianity entered upon the gyre of
Phases 16, 17 and 18, while His Creative Mind entered
upon that of Phases 14, 18 and 12; and at the foundation
of the next civilisation His Will will have entered the gyre
of Phases 19, 20 and 21, while His Creative Mind at the
moment when the Solar equinox touches the central point
of Pisces will have entered that of Phases 11, 10 and 9. As

|
j
‘
i

145
the Great Year begins at its vernal equinox—Aries 80 not
Aries 0O—the next civilisation will correspond to its second
lunar month. These revolving cones, however, as we
shall see presently, belong to all periods, whether of
history or of individual life, which involve the interaction
of primary and antithetical.

When the Lunar and Solar cones are considered
together, there are two gyres in the Lunar for Mask and
Will respectively, and two in the Solar for Creative Mind
and Body of Fate, and they complete their revolutions
once in the course of the Great Year. The Creative Mind
and the Body of Fate are only present in the Lunar cones
as an outward limit or obstruction—we shall return to
them presently—as they should act through Will and
Mask; and the Will and Mask are present in the same
way in the Solar cones as they should act through Creative
Mind and Body of Fate. During the antithetical half
of the circle, the mind of the man, as we shall see
presently, is in the Lunar cones, and during the primary
half in the Solar. When they are considered separately,
each can move at its own will for it is a complete being,
but we can still keep the same two cones, putting four
gyres into each, and in this case the Faculties are not
defined by the points where the gyres touch but by the
gyres themselves, or we may use a double set of cones
in each case with two gyres in each.

And now the essential movement is that when Will
and Mask in the Hour-glass, moving from North to South
respectively, reach ** the centre of the whirl ’? or East
and West respectively, the gyres of Creative Mind and
Body of Fate start from the extreme ends of the
Diamond, each that is ‘‘ from the lowest depths of the
vortex.’’ Sometimes man is said to have only one gyre
in the Solar cones and this is because that of the Body
of Fate lies outside his mind, whereas both Mask and
Will are within the mind of antithetical man. The Body

K

146 ,
of Fate is of course the Creative Mind of the Daimon,
whereas the man’s Creative Mind is the Daimon’s Body
of Fate, and so outside the being of the Daimon. When
the Lunar and Solar cones are considered separately, we
call the first the cone of the Faculties and the second the
cone of the Principles; and we divide that of the Faculties
into two cones, the one Solar and the other Lunar; and
divide the cone of the Principles in the same way. The
Four Principles are Spirit, Celestial Body, Husk and

oe.

TS*,

Passionate Body—we shall describe each presently—and
they correspond to Creative Mind, Body of Fate, Will
and Mask respectively. In the cone of the Faculites we
place Will and Mask in the Lunar cone or the Hour-glass,
Creative Mind and Body of Fate in the Diamond or Solar
cone; and in the cone of the Principles, Husk and
Passionate Body in the Hour-glass, Spirit and Celestial
Body in the Diamond. In each set the revolutions of
Diamond and Hour-glass round one another create the
months, the Solar month being in the cone of the Prin-
ciples which is superimposed.

Upon the diagram of the Great Wheel the words Head,

147

Heart, Loins and Fall are written, and they correspond
to Spirit, Passionate Body, Husk and Celestial Body at
the opening of the next civilisation, which will be reached
when the Will of the Great Year is between phase 18
and phase 19. These points have, however, no direct
connection with the Great Wheel itself and imply another
figure obtained by reducing two pairs of cones to one
cone each and crossing them at right angles.

b/+ Th

SPIRIT

This arrangement is not used by me and is only
described here because if superimposed upon the Great
Wheel it explains the position upon it by Head, Heart,
Loins and Fall. They are very confusing unless one
remembers that they are made necessary if a single Zodiac
with Cancer and Capricorn at North and South respect-
ively is made to represent an entire Wheel.

The Diamond in this figure represents a form of
existence which lasts through the entire period of twenty-
six thousand years, and the Hour-glass—really Hour-
glass and Diamond—the Great Wheel or period of

148
twenty-eight embodiments, say 2200 years, a single
gyre made by the whirling of the two parts of the
Diamond or cone of 26,000 years. The Faculties and
Principles marked upon the figure keep their position
almost unchanged through the Wheel’s domination,

Ix
THe MONTHS ALTERNATELY PRIMARY AND ANTITHETICAL

BUT each month in addition to its separate passage
through the phases from 1 to 28 is part of a period of
two months which is itself an entire cone or wheel, and
therefore the months are alternately antithetical and
primary, the lunar months corresponding to 16, 17 and
18, and so to our civilisation, being for instance primary.
The Principles are properly speaking beyond the
Tinctures, which are physical, but they have a corres-
ponding change, and so it follows that we may say that
Christ gave a primary revelation at the climax of an
antithetical civilisation and will be followed by His
contrary. Measured by the single month, considered
as the Divine influx of that month alone, He is always
the Eternal Sage—Libra—but measured on the wheel
or cone of the double months He is now Victim and now
Sage, at East always Victim, the sacrificial ram, He who
offers himself in sacrifice to the pitiless antithetical mind,
for in this the life of the Principle resembles that of the
Faculty and at East strength is renounced. But each
quarter of the Great Year is also a cone, and so we say
that the months are in sets of three; and measured by
this measure He is first Victim and then Sage, and
then once more Victim, and so we say that He 1
Three Fountains, the first born of Aries and Taurus,
the second of Libra and Scorpio, and the third

149
of Aries and Taurus once more; and the greater circle
is always primary in relation to that which turns more
quickly and within.

I see the Lunar and Solar cones first, before they start
their whirling movement, as two worlds lying one within
another—nothing exterior, nothing interior, Sun in Moon
and Moon in Sun—a single being like man and woman
in Plato’s Myth, and then a separation and a whirling
for countless ages, and I see man and woman as
reflecting the greater movement, each with zodiac, pre--
} cession, and separate measure of time, and all whirling
perpetually. But this whirling, though it is creative, is
\ not evil, for evil is from the disturbance of the harmony,
| so that those that should come in their season come all
at once or straggle here and there, the gyres thrown
together in confusion, and hatred takes possession of all.

>.4
THe GREAT YEAR IN CLASSICAL ANTIQUITY

BEFORE further explaining these cones which the reader
must have found very troublesome, I would discover if
Antiquity had similar measures. Remembering that
elaborate geometry of the Timaeus and certain numerical
calculations in the Republic of which modern scholars
have seventeen incompatible explanations, we may be
certain that a Platonist would have found our measures
naive in their simplicity.

Milton was the first English writer who made philoso-
phical use of the obliquity of the ecliptic, but it was
the Sun’s annual and not his precessional movement that
enabled Milton in the tenth book of Paradise Lost to
explain the sudden ruin of the climate when Adam was

150 |
driven out of Eden. Yet he must have known of the
precession for he had in his library the Byzantine
historian Georgius Syncellus who comments upon it and
upon the Great Year that it defines. It is only now when
we realise the antiquity of man that we can know how
vast and how important was the conception of that Year,

Certain English and German scholars associate the
changes of ancient mythology with the retreat of the Sun
through the Zodiacal Signs, and attribute to his passage
at the Vernal Equinox through Gemini such double
Gods and Worthies as Castor and Pollux, Adam
and Eve, Cain and Abel; and all Ox-like Deities
to his passage through Taurus and so on, and discover
in the Zodiac a history of the human soul through life
and death, sin and salvation, and consider that Baby-
lonian and other Antiquity meant the Constellations
when it spoke of the Book of Life, the zodiacal consti-
tuting the text and those to North and South the
commentary. There are indeed later scholars—I think
of M. Cumont especially—who write about this view as
if they were Protestant theologians denouncing the errors
of Rome, and insist that nobody knew anything about
the equinoctial precession until Hipparchus discovered
it a hundred and fifty years before Christ. Dr Alfred
Jeremias and Dr Fritz Homell, however, writing,
the one upon the Babylonian Calendar, the other upon the
Babylonian Ages of the world, in ** The Encyclopaedia
of Religion and Ethics,” proffer recent evidence and
declare that the older view is proved. Dr Homell fixes
the date of the first Vernal rising of the various signs
as Cancer 7000 B.c., Gemini 5000 B.c., Taurus 8000 B.C.,
and Aries 1000 s.c. He evidently prefers these round
numbers to the actual periods of a little under 2200
years because we do not know precisely where the
ancient mathematical divisions of the Zodiac, if such
there were, began and ended; or even where the ancient

151

constellations began and ended; and the symbolism ex-
pounded in this book is based upon the same dates and
round numbers. He defines a mathematical division or
sion for the opening month of the Great Year which does
not correspond with any possible month of the ordinary
year, for the first month of the ordinary year, as we
shall presently see, has its symbolical starting point—its
0 of Aries—at his 15th or central degree, if anything so
vague as his division can have degrees.

Our authorities for the Greek and Roman use of the
Great Year which was, Dr Alfred Jeremias and Dr Fritz
Homell think, founded like the Babylonian upon the
precessional movement through the signs, are passages
in the Timaeus—39.D.ff.—in the Republic—545.C.ff.—
in Cicero’s Dream of Scipio, and, for its relation to

another smaller cycle, in the Fourth Eclogue of Virgil,
and in various commentators upon them. The Baby-
lonian Great Year began when Aries rose at the Vernal
Equinox, and Syncellus says that this was the doctrine of
the ‘* Greeks and Egyptians. . . as stated in the Genica
of Hermes, and in the Cyrannid Books,”’ but words put by
Cicero into the mouth of a shade give no especial signi-
ficance to any particular sign : ** By common custom men
measure the year merely by the return of the Sun, or in
other words by the revolutions of one star. But when
the whole of the constellations shall return to the posi-
tions from which they once set forth, thus after a long
interval re-making that first map of the Heavens, that
may indeed be called the Great Year wherein I scarce
dare say how many are the generations of men. As
when in old days, at the coming of Romulus into this
sacred house, the Sun seemed to fail and to be extin-
guished, so shall fhe Sun at the same time and position
fail once more and the signs of the Zodiac all return
to their first position and the stars be recalled, and then
Shall the cycle of the Great Year be full, and of that vast

152

cycle know that not one twentieth part has passed
away.’ Macrobius translated Cicero’s Greek into Latin
at the end of the fifth century and said in his commentary
that Cicero considered that the Great Year began with
an eclipse that coincided with the death of Romulus,
** The World Year ”’ or ** Revolution of the Universe,”
as he names it also, ‘* developed only in a profusion of
centuries and the idea of it is as follows. All the lumin-
aries and stars that seem fixed in Heaven and whose
individual motion human wisdom is unable to perceive
or detect are moved for all that. . . . The end of the
Great Year is then when all the luminaries and other
fixed stars have returned to some one definite position.”
Thereupon he adds,—and Plato has the same thought
which five minutes’ arithmetic would have refuted—
‘¢ The luminaries and the five planets must be in the same
position that they were at the beginning of the world
year.”’ And this will come about, he thinks, in (fifteen
thousand years. Twelve thousand, nine hundred and
fifty-four, however, is the number Tacitus gives, quoting
from a lost work of Cicero’s, but to-day we know that
the true number is some twenty-six thousand years.

The Fourth Eclogue seems at first sight contradictory
for it announces not that the Year has but lately begun
but that it is coming to an end. ‘* The latest age of
Cumean Song is at hand; the cycles in their vast array
begin anew; Virgin Astrea comes, the reign of Saturn
comes, and from the heights of Heaven a new generation
of mankind descends. . . Apollo now is King and in your
consulship, in yours, Pollio, the age of glory shall com-
mence and the mighty months begin to run their course.”

Virgil had in his mind not the Great Year as it seems
but a period of Ten Ages of upon an average a hundred
years apiece, and if we call them a Year, or as I preier

1. The Greek or Roman Great Year if derived from Hipparchus
would surely have been founded upon that 86” which he thought
the least possible annual movement.

158
half a Year, it can but be because as Macrobius says *‘ a
month is the Moon’s Year.’’? This period which was as
Mr Kirby Flower Smith says ** divided according to the
ancient solar year ’’ probably began, when a Roman
period, at the Foundation of Rome or at the death of
Romulus; and among the KEtruscans according to
tradition at 966 B.C., the date of their coming into Italy
perhaps. May I not consider it as stretching from the
beginning of the Great Year according to the dates
selected for that event by Etruscan and Roman
respectively, to the moment when the equinox reaches the
centre of Homell’s Aries? Macrobius may have named
fifteen thousand years for its length because the time
from the Foundation of Rome to what may have seemed
to him the end of the Tenth Age—4 B.C.1—was exactly
one-twentieth of the whole, that is to say one half of a
Solar month if he divided the Great Year by ten. Popular
thought may have seen in the Ten Ages the life period
of the Etruscan polity alone, for it is known that the
Etruscans divided a man’s life into ten ages and con-
sidered that the tenth began with his seventieth year
when, even though he lived to be ninety, soul and body
parted, but I assume that in the Temples, or among those
that spoke through the Sibyl’s mouth, the larger measures
of time were known. One might consider that the Great
Year and the lesser period had but an accidental
connection were it not that Virgil announced for the
dawn of the Tenth Age an event too great to be expected
once in a thousand years, and certainly expected else-
where as the supreme event of the world. Plutarch
records a trumpet shrilling from the sky to announce the
Ninth Age, Sulla’s rise, the long misery of the Roman Civil
War, and Servius, a contemporary of Macrobius, quotes
from the Memoirs of Augustus to prove that the Tenth or

1. Some one gave this date for close of Tenth Age, perhaps some
Etruscan, but I am correcting these pages at [hoor Ballylee and
there is not a reference book in the house.—July 1925.

154

Solar Age and a comet came together in 44 B.C., a little ]

before Virgil wrote his Eclogue; while a scholar of the
third century remembers that Etruscan soothsayers fore-

told that the Tenth Age would bring the Etruscan State

_toanend. That age brought to the one state death, and
to the other re-birth as Empire and three hundred years of
peace. So considered Virgil’s prophecy ceases to be an
act of individual genius and is united to something more
profound and mysterious, to an apprehension of a mathe-
matical world order. Salomon Reinach upon discovering
therein thoughts from some Dionysian mystery of Magna
Grecia refused to consider it a poem of compliment upon
the expected birth of Cesar, but I am ready to believe
that Virgil to find familiar form for strange and perhaps
hitherto unknown emotions summoned up in the
same instant the Spiritual and the Physical Primary.
Upon the other hand I see no reason to explain away
a prophecy which only differs from many others by its
connection with an ancient sideral faith. Kepler
foretold the rise of Gustavus Adolphus and even the
exact year in which he would die, and Savonarola the
Sack of Rome and in what Pope’s reign it would be, and
many obscure people foresee in the night’s dream or the
day’s premonition events great or trivial.

Cicero’s belief that the Sun must be eclipsed upon the
same place once more, and that of Macrobius that aiter
fifteen thousand years the planets must return to the
same position, and that of somebody else that a line
drawn from the centre of the earth must thereon pass
through them all, suggests that the doctrine of the Great
Year was accepted without examination because of its
antiquity. Greek and Chaldean astronomers had known
for centuries the periods which bring the planets back
to the same point, and Macrobius enumerates them—
Mars returns in ** two of our years,’’ Jupiter in twelve
years, and Saturn in thirty, and so on; and that n0

|

155 :

one, not even Plato with all his mathematical calcula-
tions, calculated the periods back through the World Year
implies an acceptance or half acceptance of that Year,
not for its astronomical but for its moral value. Our
interest in Plato’s comment is precisely that he does use
it as we use the lunar phases, as if it were the moving
hands upon a vast clock, or a picturesque symbolism
that helped him to make more vivid, and perhaps date,
developments of the human mind that can be proved
dialectically. In the Republic he identifies the passage
of his typical community through Timocracy, Oligarchy,
Democracy, Tyranny, and so back to Aristocracy again,
as a passage through Ages of Gold, Silver, etc., that may
have seemed to the eyes of the Sibyl and perhaps to the
eyes of Virgil identical with some classification of the Ten
Ages: he saw what had seemed Fate as Destiny. In
another passage he makes his typical community bring
its different periods to an end by carrying some character
to excess, and attributes the changes of the year to a
like cause.

Macchiavelli may but have spoken as Plato’s disciple
when he contended that all States must decay, and that
all the reformer can do to check decay is bring them back
to an earlier condition, his thought being too summary
to show him that to push the State backward could but
leave it out of phase and so in illusion.

Though I have assumed that the Birth of Christ took
place at the symbolic centre of the first Solar month of
the Great Year, I do not think it likely that He was
born at its exact centre. Indeed the documents from
which I have worked say two or three times that the age
which preceded the Birth of Christ was longer than that
which followed, but as I am unable to find an explanation
of this statement—they insist that there is a mathematical
explanation—I have ignored it. We have considered that
every Divine Birth occurs at a symbolical New Moon, and

156

as that of Christ occurred at or near the middle of the first
Solar Month we may describe it as marking the First Day
of the Lunar Great Year. A departure from symmetry,
a separation between the Full Moon and the first day of
the Solar Month, and of the New Moon from its Fifteenth
Day, would according to our system accompany the
discord of life. What we have called the First Day of
the Lunar Great Year falls at a remarkable place among
the Constellations. The Constellations being of varying
lengths and sometimes overlapping have but a vague
connection either with the Twelve Divisions of the Solar
Great Year, or with the Twelve Divisions of the ordinary
year, but they must have dominated the ancient imagina-
tion much more than any abstract division of the ecliptic.
When I find the position of the vernal equinox at the
birth of Christ upon the only star map within my reach
which has the ancient mythological Zodiacal creatures—
Plate 3 in E. M. Plunkett’s ** Ancient Calendars ”’—it
falls exactly upon the line dividing the Horn of the
Ram from the Side of the Fish. Probably the Zodiacal
creatures were never drawn precisely alike on any two
maps but the difference was not great, the stars of Ram
and Fish are packed particularly close to one another,
and neither Virgil nor his Sibyl, if they knew anything
of the Great Year, could have failed to find the position
of the precessional Sun significant. Three hundred years,
two degrees of the Great Year, would but correspond to
two days of the Sun’s annual journey, and his transition
from Pisces to Aries had for generations been associated
with the ceremonial death and resurrection of Dionysus.
Near that transition the women wailed him, and night
showed the full moon separating from the constellation
Virgo, with the star in the wheatsheaf, or in the
child, for in the old maps she is represented carrying
now one now the other. It may be that instead
of a vague line, the Sibyl knew some star that

157
fixed the exact moment of transition. I find but
four explanations compatible with man’s agency, and all
four incredible, for Christ being born at or near the
moment of transition : that it came of pure chance—that
prophecy founded upon observation of the stars created
a so general expectation that prophecy brought its own
fulfilment—that there has been from time immemorial so
exact and unvarying correspondence between the history
of mankind and the passage of the constellations men
could date at some remote millenium, perhaps when the
firs; month was first described as the month of the
Sacrifice of Righteousness, and given the sacrificial Ram
as its symbol, the rise and fall of civilisations as the
manager of an office can tell what his clerks will be doing
after lunch by a morning consideration of the clock,—
that Christianity, like the religion of Serapis at the time
of Ptolemy Soter, was deliberately created by unknown
men out of what they found.

To show a Redeemer was expected for the middle of a
period—in our system the first solar month of an Age,
and I suggest in that of Rome—we have not only the
Stoical argument that improvement in the arts and
sciences was at the expense of the individual soul, and
that therefore the moment of maturity was the moment
of the soul’s need, but the early Christian doctrine that
Christ was born in the middle of the sixth period from
Adam, and the Persian that Zarathustra was born in
the middle of a period of six thousand years “‘ as the
heart in the middle of the body.’? One remembers too,
‘* Times and times and half a time.’’ The Persian and
Christian doctrines were identical in essentials, for the
Age is a microcosm of the whole. However I but suggest
and wait judgment, being no scholar; and it may be, but
seek a background for my thought, a painted scene.

The alternation of antithetical and primary months is
certainly Platonic, for his Golden Age men are born

r.]
'
i

158
old and grow young, whereas in that which follows they

are born young and grow old. He, however, made Gold

antithetical; upon the other hand the Babylonians had
the same alternation but began we are told with Silver
and the Moon. |

XI
Tue Deap AND THE Fixep Stars

BECAUSE the visible world is the sum of the Bodies of
Fate of all living things, or the sum of the Creative Minds
of all Daimons whether of the living or the dead, what
we call Fate is, as much as our most voluntary acts, a
part of a single logical stream; and the Fixed Stars being
the least changing things are the acts of whatever in
that stream changes least, and therefore of all souls that
have found an almost changeless rest. Berkeley thought
if his study table remained when he closed his eyes it
could only be because it was the thought of a more
powerful spirit which he named God, but the mathe-
matician Poincaré considers time and space the work of
our ancestors. With the system in my bones I must
declare that those ancestors still live and that time and
space would vanish if they closed their eyes.

XIT
THe Cones OF INDIVIDUAL LIFE

WHEN we consider the Lunar and Solar cones in relation
to individual life, the lower half of one or other, according
to whether that life be primary or antithetical, is the
individual phase, and the opposite half the Mask or the
Body of Fate as the case may be, and during the waking

- 159

life while in the body, the man may not pass beyond the
central point. The opposite state of his being, that
which is the activity of his Daimon, meets him at the
centre, and contact with it is now death and now
creation. After death, or ina trance or in ordinary sleep,
he enters into that state, as man is always antithetical
in relation to his Daimon whatever his own phase may
be, or whatever that. of his Daimon, and to die or to
sleep is to pass from the Lunar to the Solar cones.

When we translate this into the life of the Faculties
we mean that in the cones of the Faculties, Will starting
at lunar South, physical maturity, reaches lunar East
(Phase 22) at death, and that then life passes into the -
Creative Mind which is in the solar cones—the Diamond—
and that, instead of Will and Mask dominating
the being, Creative Mind and Body of Fate are
dominant until the Will reaches lunar West (Phase
8) birth. If we translate it imto the life of the
Principles, which are those of spiritual life and, while
Natural life continues, of subconscious life, life remains in
the Husk until East is reached and then passes into
Spirit which is in the Solar cones at Capricorn. Then
the Spirit together with the Celestial Body which is at
Cancer, dominate instead of Passionate Body and Husk,
and continue to do so, moving as we have already
described until the Husk reaches lunar West.

The Principles and the Faculties change quality and
operation according to the side of the cone upon which
they travel, for the sides of the Lunar cone where Aries
is are associated with Spirit or Creative Mind, and those
where Libra is with Celestial Body or Body of Fate;
whereas in the Solar cones the sides where Capricorn is
are associated with Husk or Will, and those where Cancer
is with Passionate Body or Mask. This change of quality
or operation chiefly concerns us in the part of the cones
where the mind is, and, as we shall presently see, Spirit

160

during all the first part of the life after death struggles
to separate itself from the Passionate Body upon whose
side of the cone it travels, whereas in the second part
of that life it re-unites itself with Husk; and during later
natural life the Mask travels upon the side of its cone
influenced by the Celestial Body, whereas in the earlier
part upon that side influenced by the Husk.

It is sometimes said that there is only one gyre in the
Diamond, but that means that man can know but one
gyre, that of Spirit or of Creative Mind as the case may
be, and sees the Celestial Body or Body of Fate as beyond
himself; whereas a man during natural life is in both
Will and Mask, and after death—if Husk and Passionate
Body be sublimated and transformed—he may enter
through Spirit and Celestial Body into the nature of both,
and that is why antithetical man after death is in good
and evil, or in light and dark, whereas primary man is
in good or evil, light or dark.

TIT

THe Four PRINCIPLES
THE Husk is sensuous and instinctive, almost the
physical body during life, and after death its record. ~

The Passionate Body is passion, but unlike the Mask—
which if permitted to govern the mind is os passion,
—is without solitude. -

The Celestial Body is the portion of Eternal Life
which can be separated away.

The Spirit is almost abstract mind, for it has neither
substance nor life unless united to the Passionate Body
or Celestial Body.

Unlike the Faculties they do not create separated or
abstracted form.

161

XIV
Lire AFTER DEATH

AFTER death the consciousness or choice passes into the
Spirit and that should turn wholly to the Celestial Body
and submit to it; not to the Passionate Body which is now
inseparable from the Body of Fate and inaugurates what
is called the Dreaming Back. If for the sake of simplicity
I count the life before death and the life after as the
two halves of a single Wheel and measure it upon that,
this state probably lasts till that part which corresponds
to Phase 25 is over. It is succeeded by a state called the
Shiftings which lasts until the Spirit escapes from the
Passionate Body, and the Celestial Body from the Husk
and they face one another in contemplation and in rest.
Then comes a brief state called Beatitude corresponding
perhaps to that moment of contemplation and to Phase 1.
This is followed by the Going Forth and the Foreknowing
during which the Spirit is reunited to the Husk, and
Celestial Body to Passionate Body—now love, not passion
—and after Phase 4 the Soul is dominated by the thought
of the coming life. While the Soul was passing first
through the lower half and then through the upper half of
the cone, the cone itself moved so that the Soul is born a
phase further on than that of its previous embodiment.
I have touched upon these things to set them in their
place in the system and touched upon them only, for
I shall describe them in detail later on.

KV.
Tar Sun’s ANNUAL JOURNEY AND THE CHRISTIAN YEAR

WHEN we adopt, as in the Christian Calendar, the Sun’s
annual journey as the symbol, we identify the Celestial

Body with the Sun, because it moves from Aries to
L

162
Pisces and not in reverse order like the Spirit and the
Creative Mind; and we attribute the Birth of Christ ip
the winter solstice when the Husk is at Phase 8, and His
Conception and also His Crucifixion—He 1s ** slain on the
stems of generations *—to the moment when, at the

vernal equinox, the Husk is at Phase 15. At least that

is the way we put it in our symmetrical system, but to
the early Christian the problem was more difficult, for
he, or those from whom he learnt, was perplexed by the
different beginning and end of the lunar and solar Years,

They tried to settle the matter by a tradition that the —
world, and one may conclude the Sun, was created at —
the vernal equinox, and the Moon created at the full two —

days later, and that as Christ’s life must copy the Great
Year so begun, His Crucifixion and His Conception took

place two days after the vernal equinox. They did not,
however, celebrate the anniversaries of these events upon —

a fixed date but, as if to draw attention to the annual
symbolism and so to the events as always present and
recurrent, they selected for their Easter Ceremonies the
first full Moon after the Vernal equinox no matter what
the day of the month, or the Sunday nearest to that moon.
One notices with surprise, however, that though the date
of Conception changed from year to year the Date oi
Christ’s Birth did not. For the first four hundred years
of our era January the 6th was kept Holy as the day of
His Birth. The Christian explanation of the date was an
arbitrary and fantastic calculation, or some childish alle-
gory. Sometimes they calculated the age of the world, and

so Christ’s relation to the Great Year, by putting together |

the lives of Patriarchs, and sometimes pointed out that

January 6th, being twelve days after the winter solstice,

glorified the Twelve Apostles. They had plainly receivel
the date, as I think Macrobius and Cicero had the doctrine
of the Great Year, from the learned men of an oldet

civilisation, from Greeks and Chaldeans perhaps, perhaps -

168

even from those worshippers of Kore at Alexandria who
upon that day carried up from a Temple Crypt a wooden
figure marked upon head and hands and knees with a
Cross and a Star, crying out ** The Virgin has given Birth
to the God.’’ If, however, one counts nine lunar months,
allowing as the Greeks did twenty-nine and thirty days
for each alternately, from the first new Moon after the
Annunciation, one finds that the night of the 6th of
January is the first upon which the faint Crescent of the
Tenth Moon could have shown. ‘The nine and a half
months of gestation had passed by, and the Divine Life
had been identified with that of the Seasons.

‘‘The White hand of Moses from the bough
Puts forth, and Jesu from the ground suspires.”’

The choice of the date, the hesitation which after
four centuries chose the winter solstice itself for the birth
of Christ, seem much the same choice and hesitation
that we ourselves would have gone through, if compelled
to decide between Phase 8, where the need for personality
first arises, and Phase 9 where personality displays itself.
When I was a boy it was customary to consider that
the association of events in the Life of Christ with one
or other of the four solstices, was the result of competition
with Pagan Festivals, but we know now that the associa-
tion came before competition and that Christianity itself
is part of the Sidereal Faith.

Did the great victims of Antiquity, Christ, Cesar,
Socrates—Love, Justice, Truth—die under the first full
Moon after the vernal equinox? Christ did, as the date
of Kaster shows; Cesar did,—Beware the Ides of March
—and the sentence upon Socrates was pronounced when
the Sacred Ship sailed for what recent research considers
a March Festival at Delos, the renewal of Apollo and the
Earth. Did that Festival begin at the new Moon, and
the Moon show all but full on the Pireus when the Ship

164

put in to port, and was it full when Socrates drank the
Hemlock? When I write these words, and recall the
place of the precessional Sun, should there not be a
stirring in the roots of my hair? What did ancient
Thaumaturgy guard in silence?

According to St. Chrysostom, John the Baptist was
conceived at the Autumnal and Christ at the Spring
Equinox, which makes them respectively primary and
antithetical when considered in relation to one another,
a mid-summer and a mid-winter child. Did Da Vinci,
when he painted a St. John that seemed a Dionysus,
know that St. John’s father begot him when the grape
was ripe, and that his mother bore him at the Mediter-
ranean ripening of the corn?

XVI
THE OPENING AND CLOSING OF THE TINCTURES

THE closing of the Tinctures as described in the section
about the Great Wheel is caused by the preoccupation
with one another of the Celestial Body and the Spirit,
of the Creative Mind and the Body of Fate, when the
Will is between Phase 26 and Phase 4, where Unity with
God is possible; whereas their opening between Phases
12 and 18 is caused by the fact that the Faculties can be
apprehended in their separation within the united being.
The fact that one Tincture opens or closes before the —
other is no doubt the effect of the gyres mounting a little ©
higher upon one side of the cone than upon the other. ©

XVII
THe GYRES OF THE GREAT MyTHOLOGIES

A RELIGION or a civilisation belongs also to the lowe! —
half of the double cone, and the religion which is the

165

originating cause of the civilisation is begotten and dies
at the centre. When the lower half of the double cone
is separated off and becomes itself a double cone, what
was the centre is now its North. When it reaches South
of this cone, which I shall now call the History Cone,
it finds its doctrinal unity and vigour, its form of Unity
of Being. When later on I study this movement in detail
I will divide this history cone yet once more so that there
is one cone from North to South and yet another from

iS

is

South to North again. Whereas when I examine the life
alter death and compare it with this life I shall symbolize
each state as one half of a double cone for I have neither
the knowledge nor the talent for an analysis which would
approach the Divine Comedy in complexity.

These are the historical cones in their simplest form,
the ordinary double cone of the phases.

Will leaves North at the birth of Christ, and the Body
of Fate leaves South, and then when Will reaches South
and Body of Fate North they change sides and return :
at, say 1200 a.p., they show the position in the figure.
But we can also arrange them thus for the same date.

166

Will starting at A.D.1 travels along the lower side of
the shaded cone, reaches 1000 A.D. or South and then
moves upon the upper side. The Creative Mind starting
at 1 A.D. moves along the upper side of the cone till jt
reaches 1000 A.D. at South and then travels down the
lower side. The Mask and the Body of Fate start also
from the North, but whereas the other two Faculties had
started from the wide ends of the shaded cone, they travel
from the narrow end of the unshaded cone. They also

;

travel to South and there change sides and return towards
the North. A single line is in this way made to show the
position of all the Four Faculties as those Faculties are
placed on the cone of the entire Era of two thousand
years, for if this line be itself divided into 28 divisions
the 15th in the centre and the Ist at the point nearest
the starting point of the Will at A.D. 1, it will be
found that the points where the sides of cones intersect
will show the place of the Four Faculties on this
greater cone. When the Will is so placed that any of
the other Faculties, if placed upon the line, would lie in
the future the corresponding date in a previous Millenium

167
is taken. When the two thousand years are divided into
cones of a millenium each this line has the same office
as Head, Heart, Loins and Fall upon the Great Wheel,
it shows the relation of the lesser to the greater division.

We show the antithetical or primary nature of a
Faculty at a particular period of time by the converging
or diverging nature of the line where it is, without
forgetting that each cone has its general primary or
antithetical character. If we consider this figure with a
similar figure, which represents the upper half of the
cone, there will be two lines parallel, each marking the
place of the Four Faculties of its half, and we shall get
the third diagram in Sec. LY.

Our figure is the ground work of the historical diagram
facing page 180 and was probably chosen for it, because it
shows at a glance what epochs are affected by what
Faculties, and there, as it covers two thousand years
and shows a movement from North to North (or if you
count it upon the whole Wheel from centre to centre)
it is divided into two portions of twenty-eight phases.
It is upon this figure that the documents I work from
place historical events with ‘‘ approximate accuracy.”
The movement to South of the entire era is a sinking
wave of civilisation, a mounting physical or religious
wave; the movement to North the converse. At South
of each millennium is a period of artistic creation, that
of the first millennium of mainly religious art, that of the
other of mainly secular. And as North of the era is
solar West, the South solar East, in the first thought is
growing more Eastern, and in the second more Western.
In the similar period before Christ, that of the Fifth Cen-
tury B.C., thought was growing Western. Epoch, how-
ever, influences epoch as part of the cone of the entire
era, by supersensual or ghostly interaction. The diagram
facing page 180 is drawn for our epoch and the place of
Will is affected through its Creative Mind by the Age of

168

Constantine, and when I was at Oxford a few years
ago, a distinguished scholar, now dead, showed me much
elaborate written evidence to prove that an apparition
seen by herself and a friend in the Louvre was the
Emperor Constantine. This influence of age upon age
is sald to be through the agency of certain *spirits who
have come to possess what is called a simulacrum, or
permanent illusionary body, created from the representa-
tion of themselves most present to the imagination of
their time.

But this figure differs in form from that which preceded
it and symbolised the preceding period of two thousand
years, and will differ in form from any figure drawn to
record the influence of a Second Fountain. ‘This difference
is caused by a movement analogous to the exchange of
the Tinctures but instead of the words primary and
antithetical we substitute Solar and Lunar. At each
Fountain the civilisation gyres, those of Creative Mind
and Will which in this connection we call Lunar, and the
gyres of Mask and Body of Fate which we call Solar,
change cones. Before the birth of Christ, for instance the
Lunar gyres came to the narrow end of their cone, and at
His birth passed into the broad end of the other cone and
so continued to converge. The Solar gyre upon the other
hand passed from broad to narrow. The Solar is religious
and physical and the Lunar emotional and intellectual.
This means that as the civil life grew more and more
antithetical in nature the religious grew more and more
primary till the instant of creation was reached. At

* T once heard Sir William Crookes tell how he was informed
through an automatic writer that if he would make a certain
incense *“‘ The Magi would be present,’’ and that there followed
words in an unknown tongue which turned out to be ancient
Persian. When read with great difficulty they proved to be a list
of herbs, but no one living seemed to know to what herbs the
names applied. I suspect that the link between periods arising
from their place among the gyres is never broken, no matter how
great the passage of time.

169
South, however, there is no interchange, but a return,
a change of direction, the gyres which diverged now
converge and vice versa, and this change is called reflex
to distinguish it from that of the North which is active.

XVIII
THe THREE FOUNTAINS AND THE CYCLES OF EMBODIMENT

THE Fountains fall into four sets of three, three in each
quarter of Wheel, first of each set beginning at centre
of Phases 1, 8, 15, 22 respectively, second at centre of
next three, third at centre of last three Phases of each
quarter. They may correspond to gold, silver, copper
ages adopted by the Greek poet Aratus instead
of Hesiod’s four. But what is most clear is that
they are alternately Victim and Sage, the Victim being
called the strong soul because he attains the greatest
strength and renounces it, and the Sage the frail soul
because his strength is in that which surrounds him, in
his doctrine let us say. Christ, though Sage—discovery
of strength, the frail soul—when measured upon the Great
Wheel, when placed as one of the Three Fountains of
His quarter, is Victim, Aries, surrenders strength, and
He that is to come will be the frail soul, and as Christ
was the primary revelation to an antithetical age, He
that is to come will be the antithetical revelation to a
primary age. The cycles of human rebirth, unlike those
of the Eternal Man, are measured upon the Lunar cone,
and the first is at Lunar North, and these months or
cycles had at first their symmetrical relation to the Solar
months of the Great Year, each Lunar cycle starting in
the middle of Solar, but a wheel does not cease to turn
when its first revolution is over, and so it comes about at

. 240

last that all the months Solar and Lunar, as it were fel}
together and were confused one with the other, and yet as
if by a kind of crystallisation these months so arranged
themselves that all the twelve Lunar months had their
beginning in a certain order within each era. So we
say that the first cycle sent its first soul into the world
at the birth of Christ, and that the twelfth will send its
last soul immediately before the birth of the New
Fountain. Then there will come the first of a new series,
the Thirteenth Cycle, which is a Sphere and not a
cone. And yet when I say the first and last souls of a
cycle, I do not mean that that cycle comes to an end
for it is always beginning and always ending. When we
arrange these beginnings within the two thousand years
of an era we find that three cycles have their approximate
beginning in each five hundred years, and so give that
time their character.

There is much else that I must leave to my student,
if such there be, to discover as he compares symbol with
symbol. His task will be easier than mine, for I had
to discoyer all from unconnected psychological notes and
from a few inadequate diagrams. These few pages have
taken me many months of exhausting labour, but never
once have note and diagram failed to support each other.
In judging a man one should not only know his phase
but his cycle, for every cycle has a different character,
but into these characters I cannot go at present, for I
lack information. We retain the same sex for a cycle,
and then change it for another cycle, and there are said
to be certain cycles between which love is more fortunate
than between others, and some where physical beauty is
greater and some where mental. The general law is that
they follow the same development as the phases.

171
XIX
Cones OF NATIONS AND MOVEMENTS OF THOUGHT

WE have to remember that among the solar and lunar
cones that revolve in the circle of the great year are
the cones of each separate nation and of every school of
thought and action. We give to these cones the name
of Covens. The Covens depend exactly as individuals do
upon contact for their intensity, and separated from
their opposites ** Consume themselves away.’’ Four
Covens, constituting four Faculties, may for instance
move round the wheel and pass through their phases as
do individual men and women. When a movement of
thought, the philosophy of religious spiritualism for
instance, becomes vague and sentimental, that may be
because contact through the physical or spiritual primary
with some school of psychological investigation at the
place, say, of the Creative Mind has come to anend. The
Covens are formed by their Daimons out of groups of
men and women who become the bodies of the Dazmons
and the Daimon of each Coven seeks to impress his will
upon the three associated Covens. When a Coven has
carried its creative life as far as phase and _ historical
epoch permit, there is a re-birth, or a movement to the
next phase.

I myself chose the name Coven, that being the name
of the’ groups of Scotch Witches described in the witch
trials, for I imagine the Nations and Philosophies as
having each, as it were, a witches’ cauldron of medicinal
or devil’s broth in the midst. That which we must deduce
from the doctrine is that there can be no philosophy,
nation, or movement that is not a being or congeries of
beings, and that which we call the proof of some philoso-
phy is but that which enables it to be born. The world is

172

a drama where person follows person, and though the
dialogue prepares for all the entrances, that preparation
is not the person’s proof, nor is Polonius disproved when
Hamlet seems to kill him. Once the philosophy, nation
or movement has clearly shown its face, we know that
its chief characteristic has not arisen out of any proof,
or even out of all the past, or out of the present tension
of the drama, or out of any visible cause whatever, but is
unique, life in itself. There can be neither cause nor
effect when all things are co-eternal.

xX
THe Cones OF SEXUAL LOVE

I CAN but touch upon the symbolism of sexual love as
it needs more detailed consideration than I can give it
in this book. In all pairs of lovers each is to himself
or herself, Will, and the other Body of Fate. The cones
of their passion are constituted, as the solar and lunar
cones are, out of the first fixed circles, and its progress
should mirror the cones containing the three Fountains
or if we consider the matter differently and take a smaller —
Wheel, those from Fountain to Fountain. Love which
in this way mirrors the fated and predestined, has three
forms of crisis, each at the end of a constituent
cone, called the first and second Critical Moments and
the Beatific Vision. Such love has a relation with the
dead similar to that of the Fountains and comes at each
crisis under the sway of the thirteenth cone. That
is to say there is harmonization or the substitution of
the sphere for the cone. The Four Faculties of passion,
before harmonization, are Desire, which is Creative Mind,
Cruelty, which is Body of Fate, Service, which is Will,

178

and Domination, which is Mask. After harmonization
the Creative Mind becomes Wisdom, Body of Fate Truth,
Will Love, and Mask Beauty. There are also Initiatory
Moments which create the domination of the symbol,
as Critical Moments destroy that domination, and these
fall where the gyres touch the sides of cones—North and
South—and are of an indefinite number. All antithe-
tical life, for primary life has but a single movement,
is seen as if it were a form of sexual life. It becomes
vital through conflict and happy through harmonization,
and without either is self-consumed. Harmonization is
made possible by the recognition of fate—the Lunar
cone’s recognition of the Solar—but as each is Solar to
the other, the destiny of the one is the fate of the other.
It is the recognition by Lunar man of the Solar spiritual
opposite that is called faith, and it inaugurates religious
emotional and philosophical experience.

XXII
COMPLEMENTARY DREAMS

I USE in the section about the state of man after death
the term complementary dream. When two people
meditate upon the one theme, who have established a
supersensual link, they will invariably in my experience,
no matter how many miles apart, see pass before the
mind’s eye complementary images, images that complete
one another. One for instance may see a boat upon a still
sea full of tumultuous people, and the other a boat full of
motionless people upon a tumultuous sea. Even when
the link is momentary and superficial this takes place,
and sometimes includes within its range a considerable
number of people. One, for instance, will receive from

174
a dream figure a ripe apple, another an unripe; one a
lighted and one an unlighted candle, and so on.

On the same night a mother will dream that her child
is dead or dying, the child that her mother is dead, while
the father will wake in the night with a sudden inex-
plicable anxiety for some material treasure. I put an
experience of the kind into the poem that begins—

Was it the double of my dream,
The woman that by me lay
Dreamed, or did we halve a dream
Under the first cold gleam of day.
A whole age may be bound in a single dream, or
wheel, so that its creations have all the same character
though there is no visible influence.

.

THE whole world is regarded as a single being with a
relation between East and West like that between comple-
mentary dreams, Europe being antithetical and Asia
primary. The cardinal points in the Solar and Lunar
cones are not merely symbols of the Sun and Moon’s
path, but are held to refer to the actual geographical
points. Probably those in the Solar cones refer to the
movement of ideas, and their places of origin, and I shall
so consider them, and those in the Lunar cones to the
origin of the races themselves in so far as they keep
the impression of their first surroundings.

When Joseph Strzygowski says *‘ the inhabitants oi
the South from the very beginning applied pictorial art
to the representation of living creatures ’’ he describes
the antithetical nature of the South, and he defines the
primary North when he attributes to it geometrical form
and various ** non-representational ”? decorations derived

175

from handicrafts, and he certainly describes the symbolic
East when he attributes to his eastern nations conceptions
that dazzle and astonish by an impression of power
whether in Priest or King. Perhaps too in his description
of the West as that which absorbs and uses, and is a
kind of matrix, he describes our symbolic West also.

XXITI
THe CONES—HIGHER DIMENSIONS

ONE of the notes upon which I have based this book
says that all existence within a cone has a larger number
of dimensions than are known to us, and another identifies
Creative Mind, Will and Mask with our three dimensions,
but Body of Fate with the unknown fourth, time exter-
nally perceived. When I saw this I tried to understand a
little of modern research into this matter but found that I
lacked the necessary training. I have therefore ignored
it hitherto in writing this book. The difference between
a higher and a lower dimension explains, however, the
continual breaking up of cones and wheels into smaller
cones and wheels without changing the main movement
better than Swedenborg’s vortex, his gyre made up of
many gyres. Every dimension is at right angles to all
dimensions below it in the scale. If the Great Wheel, say,
be a rotating plane, and the movement of any constituent
cone a rotation at right angles to that plane the second
movement cannot affect the first in any way. In the same
way the rotation of the sphere will be a movement at right
angles to a circumference which includes all movements
known to us. We can only imagine a perpetual turning
in and out of that sphere, hence the sentence quoted by
Aherne about the great eggs which turn inside out
without breaking the shell.

176
It seems that ancient men except the Persian and the
Jew who looked to an upward progression, held Nietsche’s
doctrine of the eternal return, but if religion and mathe-
matics are right, and time an illusion, it makes no differ-
ence except in the moral effect.

CLV.
THe Four PRINCIPLES AND NEO-PLATONIC PHILOSOPHY

I HAVE not considered the ultimate origin of things, nor
have my documents thrown a direct light upon it. The
word Anima Mundi frequently occurs and is used very
much as in the philosophy of Plotinus. I am inclined
to discover in the Celestial Body, the Spirit, the
Passionate Body, and the Husk, emanations from or
reflections from his One, his Intellectual Principle, his
Soul of the World, and his Nature respectively. The
Passionate Body is described as that which links one
being to another, and that which rescues the Celestial
Body from solitude, and this is part of the office of the
Soul of the World in Plotinus. As actually used in the
documents Anima Mundi is the receptacle of emotional
images when purified from whatever unites them to one
man rather than to another. The 18th, 14th and 15th
cycles are described as Spheres, and are certainly emana-
tions from the Soul of the World, the Irtellectual
Principle and the One respectively, but there is a funda-
mental difference, though perhaps only of expression,
between the system and that of Plotinus. In Plotinus the
One is the Good, whereas in the system Good and Evil
are eliminated before the Soul can be united to Reality,
being that stream of phenomena that drowns us.

BOOK III
DOVE OR SWAN

7 vx
5
1.” —)
- ~~." —_——

gre Ses y
eg - al ag ae a” gp a mt «

22k -
ae “ ¥ —*
4

’ 1 ae et i
a - a s gt — & 7 > Tenia . , 4
a . - aon 1

: ‘
4 : 1. : . “ t ° = ’ - .
ad -_ ; = ' J . “=
~ ° ¥ ee . - i . "
g =r ; -_ 5 * ' - ~ 2 > - - ' » nail
ry y . = @ = 5 way ® ' — J ‘ > .
. i Me , a - ° 7
> e F . A . = i « . ; . ' .
° * i a :
4 5 o ; :

\ *
: ~ ~ is i an. ry - ~ ws |
it em aad f a. ' il il ‘ -' - »
a, ee Ss | :
all , _ — -_ y & « ao
: > . ° * *
— a “tr — a ™ * e
g ‘ a oe —
“ 2 ' r 4 J
* * x mm ke % _ be
; ’ - *~ we U
' > ”** > 2) > ~ er - ~~" : - "
£ bs , 7 -_ * 7.
, Wo a P :
' |) a i * ad '
Pr oy - ~~ - id 7?
ad a ~ - d 4
fa a _ - . . "
4 ef = a zB es =. =
°
q J -
i —
“ a ——
= ®
= . a ‘
= & )
a 7
. ; - a | -
a ’ 4
 - Fad ’ é .
* — >. é.
; = Ly a veh
. , - ¥ _ = -_ @ -
zee | | . “ ny A
’ “a > Oe ia i vx a ~~ ? =
ts SO fal se " i
- = © o-. ~
‘ , at >
' =
“ e » j 5 .
= , p
ae, 4 >
i 4 A -_” - E 1 v
- Tl Ni elt .* ; .
= } ty ‘ % j — ) J
_ p- — ‘a - a , ~ ' ‘ae

THE HISTORICAL CONES.

The numbers in brackets refer to phases, and the other
numbers to dates A.D. The line cutting the cones a

little below 250, goo, 1180 and 1927 shows four historical

Faculties related to the present moment.

$00(12-13- bn ’

(1}1050

ft. be
a Foe te

hea
a . gs a

e a

Ut a ij

| :

T eh &

4 t . ‘ ¥ ‘ * » _ }

} i. “ iS ' es, Sade - a roe 42
BY fe? a 7 SES tea 7. a ¥
<< =~ 7 + ' ? 77h ome
- * - ; /* - 4 .*
beg P roa eet Ah AE Oe Ail OAM 5 OS Bs REY cm eee Bm ae re
! - i F 7 . : “

=—< | | \ivic Tees

F ' : . 7 pe gee eee = ey ee r oe tae
. . Z ta” ” ’ of
= F = 7
s
Sh tm “
> ” i. > a ' =~ ’ =. h
5 4 betty ' — —_@ a =>: ~~ hye
‘+. ee eee re
, a: oh, et a reo
. + Nal r
7 Fi o 7 e LI
“ail é
‘ & ° = a? ee @ - 4e- yee ee a et ©
r
q

=
~ uae sd ' 1 : ri
‘ h |
4 s r)
: ¢
| » ee 4 ;
a Ya 4 % 4 f = - 4
- o = Pi = aa . -
C | - “
: I
1 a i
|
. n i‘ j K iy. = 14 P
uJ Ti sa ~ t r
v be Xu
9 | .
iF
= . a a , i A, ’ f.
: : 7 as '
= er Y q > .
i : \ 1 Tre Beaten
=
’ 7
; Ss F >
, . =n a 7 a
Pury 7 . q ceed
: ‘n LJ j = ——ie mnt ome? €— a oo ® r= |
; 4
b ‘
a]
b 5
. pas 2
e495 j j
- P a he
ti." ‘79 + "les + -” ~ a a
a
| -
= ‘ «
- F i me ae ht F
Pe 1 * » - ~~ * lal
* r J
# > a - Fi - —_™ . i i + 4
= v . ‘
i ™: 3
i he =
— ‘yt rs ‘a t sy |
. See ee —

a)

7 9
j Dal eee © ‘
. v

I. LEDA.

A sudden blow: the great wings beating still
Above the staggering girl, her thighs caressed
By the dark webs, her nape caught in his bill,
He holds her helpless breast upon his breast.

How can those terrified vague fingers push
The feathered glory from her loosening thighs,
And how can body, laid in that white rush,
But feel the strange heart beating where it lies;
A shudder in the loins engenders there
The broken wall, the burning roof and tower
And Agamemnon dead.

Being so caught up,
So mastered by the brute blood of the air,
Did she put on his knowledge with his power
Before the indifferent beak could let her drop?

179

2. THE GREAT WHEEL AND HISTORY.

I
STRAY THOUGHTS ©

ONE must bear in mind that the Christian Era, like the
two thousand years, let us say, that went before it, is
an entire wheel, and each half of it an entire wheel,
that each half when it comes to its 28th Phase reaches
the 15th Phase of the entire era. It follows therefore
that the 15th Phase of each millenium, to keep the
symbolic measure of time, is Phase 8 or Phase 22 of the
entire era, that Aphrodite rises from a stormy sea,
that Helen could not be Helen but for beleaguered Troy,
The era itself is but half of a greater era and its Phase —
15 comes also at a period of war or trouble. The greater
number is always more primary than the lesser and |
precisely because it contains it. A millenium is the
symbolic measure of a being that attains its flexible
maturity and then sinks into rigid age.

A civilisation is a struggle to keep self-control, and
in this it is like some great tragic person, some Niobe —
who must display an almost superhuman will or the cry
will not touch our sympathy. The loss of control over
thought comes towards the end; first a sinking in upon
the moral being, then the last surrender, the irrational —
ery, revelation—the scream of Juno’s peacock.

180

181
II
2000 B.C. to 1 A.D.

I IMAGINE the annunciation that founded Greece as
made to Leda, remembering that they showed in a
Spartan Temple, strung up to the roof as a holy relic, an
unhatched egg of hers; and that from one of her eggs
came Love and from the other War. But all things
are from antithesis, and when in my ignorance I try to
imagine what older civilisation she refuted I can but see
bird and woman blotting out some corner of the Baby-
lonian mathematical starlight.

Did the older civilisation like the Jewish think a long
life a proof of Heavenly favour that the Greek races
should affirm so clearly that those whom the Gods love
die young, hurling upon some age of crowded comedy
their tragic senser Certainly their tribes, after a first
multitudinous revelation—dominated each by its Daimon
and oracle-driven—broke up a great Empire and estab-
lished in its stead an intellectual anarchy. At ‘some
1000 years before Christ I imagine their religious system
complete and they themselves grown barbaric and Asiatic.
Then came Homer, civil life, a desire for civil order
dependent doubtless on some oracle, and then (Phase
10 of second Greek millennium) for independent civil life
and thought. At, let me say, the sixth century B.c. (Phase
12) personality begins, but there is as yet no intellectual
solitude. A man may rule his tribe or town but he
cannot separate himself from the general mass. With
the first discovery of solitude (Phases 18 and 14) comes,
as I think, the visible art that interests us most to-day,
for Phidian art, like the art of Raphael, has for the
moment exhausted our attention. I recall a Nike at the
Ashmolean Museum with a natural unsystematised

182
beauty like that before Raphael, and above all certain
pots with strange half supernatural horses dark on a light
ground. Self-realisation attained will bring desire of
power—systematisation for its instrument—but as yet
clarity, meaning, elegance, all things separated from one
another in luminous space, seem to exceed all other
virtues. One compares this art with the thought of
Greek Philosophers before Anaxagoras, where one dis-
covers the same phases, always more concerned with the
truth than with its moral or political effects. One
longs for the lost dramatists, the plays that were enacted
before Aeschylus and Sophocles arose, both Phidian men.

But one must consider not the movement only from the
beginning to the end of the historical cone, but the
gyres that touch its sides, the horizontal movement.
There is that continual oscillation which I have symbol-
ised elsewhere as a King and Queen, who are Sun and
Moon also, and whirl round and round as they mount
up through a Round Tower.

Side by side with Ionic elegance there comes after the
Persian wars a Doric vigour, and the light-limbed dandy
of the potters, the Parisian-looking young woman of the
sculptors, her hair elaborately curled, give place to the
athlete. One suspects a deliberate turning away from all
that is Eastern, or a moral propaganda like that which
turned the poets out of Plato’s Republic, and yet it may
be that the preparation for the final systematisation had
for its apparent cause the destruction, let us say, of Ionic
studios by the Persian invaders, and that all came from
the resistance of the Body of Fate to the growing solitude
of the soul. Then in Phidias Ionic and Doric influence
unite—one remembers Titian—and all is transformed by
the full moon, and all abounds and flows. With Calli-
machus pure Ionic revives again, as Furtwingler has
proved, and upon the only example of his work known to
us, a marble chair, a Persian is represented, and may one

1838

not discover a Persian symbol in that bronze lamp,
shaped like a palm, known to us by a description in
Pausanias? but he was an archaistic workman, and
those who set him to work brought back public life to
an older form. One may see in masters and man a
momentary dip into ebbing Asia.

Each age unwinds the thread another age had wound,
and it amuses one to remember that before Phidias, and
his westward moving art, Persia fell, and that when full
moon came round again, amid eastward moving thought,
and brought Byzantine glory, Rome fell; and that at
the outset of our westward moving Renaissance
Byzantium fell; all things dying each other’s life, living
each other’s death.

After Phidias the life of Greece, which being antithe-
tical had moved slowly and richly through the antithetical
phases, comes rapidly to an end. Some Greek or Roman
writer whose name I forget will soon speak of the declin-
ing comeliness of the people, and in the arts all is sys-
tematised more and more, and the antagonist recedes.
Aristophanes’ passion-clouded eye falls before what one
must believe, from Roman stage copies, an idler glance.
(Phases 19, 20, 21). Aristotle and Plato end creative
system—to die into the truth is still to die—and formula
begins. Yet even the truth into which Plato dies is a
form of death, for when he separates the Eternal Ideas
irom Nature and shows them self-sustained he prepares
the Christian desert and the Stoic suicide.

I identify the conquest of Alexander and the break-up
of his kingdom, when Greek civilisation, formalised and
codified, loses itself in Asia, with the beginning and end
of the 22nd Phase, and his intention recorded by some
historian to turn his arms westward shows that he is but
a part of the impulse that creates Hellenised Rome and
Asia. There are everywhere statues where every muscle
has been measured, every position debated, and these

184
statues represent man with nothing more to achieve,
physical man finished and complacent, the women
slightly tinted, but the men, it may be, who exercise
naked in the open air, the colour of mahogany. Every
discovery after the epoch of victory and defeat (Phase 22)
which substitutes mechanics for power, is an elimination
of intellect by delight in technical skill (Phase 28),
by a sense of the past (Phase 24) by some dominant
belief (Phase 25). After Plato and Aristotle, the mind
is as exhausted as were the armies of Alexander at his
death, but the Stoics can discover morals and turn phil-
osophy into a rule of life. Among them doubtless—the
‘ first beneficiaries of Plato’s hatred of imitation—we may
discover the first benefactors of our modern individuality,
sincerity of the trivial face, the mask torn away. Then
in the last three phases of the wheel, a Greece that
Rome has conquered, and a Rome conquered by Greece,
must adore, desire being dead, physical or spiritual force.
This adoration which begins in the second century before
Christ creates a world-wide religious movement as the
world was then known, which, being swallowed up in what
came after, has left no adequate record. One knows not
into how great extravagance Asia, accustomed to abase
itself, may have carried what soon sent Greeks and
Romans to stand naked in a Mithraic pit, moving their
bodies as under a shower-bath that those bodies might
receive the blood of the bull even to the last drop. The
adored image took everywhere the only form possible as
the antithetical age died into its last violence—a human
or animal form. Even before Plato that collective image
of man dear to Stoic and Epicurean alike, the moral
double of bronze or marble athlete, had been invoked by
Anaxagoras when he declared that thought and not the
warring opposites created the world. At that sentence
the heroic life, passionate fragmentary man, all that had
been imagined by great poets and sculptors began to

185

pass away, and instead of seeking noble antagonists,
imagination moved towards divine man and the ridicu-
lous devil. And now sages lure men away from the arms
of women because in those arms man becomes a frag-
ment; and all is ready for revelation. When revelation
comes athlete and sage are merged; the earliest sculp-
tured image of Christ is copied from that of the
Apotheosis of Alexander the Great; the tradition is
founded which declares even to our own day that Christ
alone is exactly six feet high, perfect physical man. Yet
as perfect physical man He must die, for only so can
primary power reach antithetical mankind shut within
the circle of its senses, touching outward things alone in
that which seems most personal and physical. When
I think of the moment before revelation I think of
Salome—she too, delicately tinted or maybe mahogany
dark—dancing before Herod and receiving the Prophet’s
head in her indifferent hands, and wonder if what seems
to us decadence was not in reality the exultation of the
muscular flesh and of civilisation perfectly achieved.
Seeking images, I see her anoint her bare limbs accord-
ing to a medical prescription of that time, with lion’s
fat, for lack of the sun’s ray, that she may gain the
favour of a king, and remember that the same impulse
will create the Galilean revelation and deify Roman
Emperors whose sculptured heads will be surrounded by
the solar disk. Upon the throne and upon the cross alike
the myth becomes a biography.

Tit
A.D. 1 To A.D. 1050

GOD is now conceived of as something outside man and
man’s handiwork, and it follows that it must be idolatry
to worship that which Phidias and Scopas made, and

186

seeing that He is a Father in Heaven that Heaven wil]
be found presently in the Thebaid, where the world js
changed into featureless clay and can be run through
the fingers; and these things are testified to from books
that are outside human genius, being miraculous, and
by a miraculous church, and this church, as the gyre
sweeps wider, will make man also featureless as
clay or sand. Night will fall upon man’s wisdom now
that man has been taught that he is nothing. He had
discovered, or half-discovered, that the world is round
and one of many like it, but now he must believe that
the sky 1s but a tent spread above a level floor, and—that
he may be stirred into a frenzy of anxiety and so to moral
transformation—blot out the knowledge or half-know-
ledge that he has lived many times, and think that all
eternity depends upon a moment’s decision, and Heaven
itseli—transformation finished—must appear so vague
and motionless that it seems but a concession to human
weakness. It is even essential to this faith to declare that
God’s messengers, those beings who show His will in
dreams or announce it in visionary speech were never
men. The Greeks thought them often great men of the
past but now that concession to mankind is forbidden.
All must be narrowed into the sun’s image cast out of a
burning-glass and man be ignorant of all but the image.

The mind that brought the change, if considered as
man only, is a climax of whatever Greek and Roman
thought was most a contradiction to its age; but con-
sidered as more than man He controlled what Neo-
Pythagorean and Stoic could not—irrational force. He
could announce the new age, all that had not been
thought of or touched or seen, because He could sub-
stitute for reason, miracle.

The sacrifice of the 22nd Phase is voluntary and so we
say of Him that He was love itself, and yet that part of
Him which made Christendom was not love but pity, and

187
not pity for intellectual despair, though the man in Him,
being antithetical like His age, knew it in the Garden,
but primary pity, that for the common lot, man’s death
seeing that He raised Lazarus, sickness seeing that He
healed many, sin seeing that He died.

Love is created and preserved by intellectual analysis,
for we love only that which is unique, and it belongs to
contemplation not to action, for we would not change
that which we love. A lover will admit a greater beauty
than that of his mistress but not its like, and surrenders
his days to a delighted laborious study of all her ways
and looks, and he pities only if something threatens that
which has never been before and can never be again.
Fragment delights in fragment and seeks possession, not
service; whereas the Good Samaritan discovers himself in
the likeness of another, covered with sores and abandoned
by thieves upon the roadside, and in that other serves
himself. The opposites are gone; he does not need his
Lazarus; they do not each die the other’s life, live the
other’s death.

It is of course impossible to do more than select a
more or less arbitrary general date for the beginning of
Roman decay (Phases 2 to 7, A.D. 1 to A.D. 250).
Roman sculpture—sculpture made under Roman influ-
ence whatever the sculptor’s blood—did not for instance
reach its full vigour, if we consider what it had of Roman
as distinct from Greek, until the Christian Era. It even
made a discovery which affected ali sculpture to come.
The Greeks painted the eyes of marble statues and made
out of enamel or glass or precious stones those of their
bronze statues, but the Roman was the first to drill a
round hole to represent the pupil, and because, as I
think, of a preoccupation with the glance characteristic
of a civilisation in its final phase. The colours must have
already faded from the marbles of the great period, and
a shadow and a spot of light, especially where there is

188

much sunlight, are more vivid than paint, enamel,
coloured glass or precious stone. They could now express
in stone a perfect composure, the administrative mind,
alert attention where all had been rhythm, an exaltation
of the body, uncommitted energy. May it not have been
precisely a talent for this alert attention that had enabled
Rome and not Greece to express those final primary
phases? One sees on the pediments troops of marble
Senators, officials serene and watchful as befits men who
know that all the power of the world moves before their
eyes, and needs, that it may not dash itself to pieces,
their unhurried unanxious never-ceasing care. Those
riders upon the Parthenon had all the world’s power in
their moving bodies, and in a movement that seemed,
so were the hearts of man and beast set upon it, that of
a dance; but presently all would change and measure-
ment succeed to pleasure, the dancing-master outlive the
dance. What need had those young lads for careful eyes?
But in Rome of the first and second centuries where the
dancing-master himself has died, the delineation of
character as shown in face and head, as with us of recent
years, is all in all, and sculptors seeking the custom of
occupied officials stock in their workshops toga’d marble
bodies upon which can be screwed with the least possible
delay heads modelled from the sitters with the most
scrupulous realism. When I think of Rome I see always
those heads with their world-considering eyes, and those
bodies as conventional as the metaphors in a leading
article, and compare in my imagination vague Grecian
eyes gazing at nothing, Byzantine eyes of drilled ivory
staring upon a vision, and those eyelids of China and of
India, those veiled or half-veiled eyes weary of world
and vision alike.

Meanwhile the irrational force that would create con-
fusion and uproar as with the cry ** The Babe, the Babe,
is born ?—the women speaking unknown tongues, the

189
barbers and weavers expounding Divine revelation with
all the vulgarity of their servitude, the tables that move
or resound with raps—still but creates a negligible sect.
All about it is an antithetical aristocratic civilisation
in its completed form, every detail of life hierarchical,
every great man’s door crowded at dawn by petitioners,
great wealth everywhere in few men’s hands, all depend-
ent upon a few, up to the Emperor himself who is a God
dependent upon a greater God, and everywhere in court,
in the family, an inequality made law, and floating over
all the Romanised Gods of Greece in their physical
superiority. All is rigid and stationary, men fight for
centuries with the same sword and spear, and though in
naval warfare there is some change of tactics to avoid
those single combats of ship with ship that needed the
seamanship of a more skilful age, the speed of a sailing
ship remains unchanged from the time of Pericles to that
of Constantine. Though sculpture grows more and more
realistic and so renews its vigour, this realism is without
curiosity. The athlete becomes the boxer that he may
show lips and nose beaten out of shape, the individual
hairs show at the navel of the bronze centaur, but the
theme has not changed. Philosophy alone, where in
contact with irrational foree—holding to Egyptian thau-
maturgy and the Judean miracle but at arms length—can
startle and create. Yet Plotinus is as primary, as much
a contradiction of all that created Roman civilisation as
St. Peter, and his thought has its roots almost as deep
among the primary masses. The founder of his school
was Ammonius Sacca, an Alexandrine porter. His
thought and that of Origen, which I skimmed in my
youth, seem to me to express the abstract synthesis of a
quality like that of race, and so to display a character
which must always precede Phase 8. Origen, because the
Judean miracle has a stronger hold upon the masses than
Alexandrian thaumaturgy, triumphs when Constantine

190

(Phase 8) puts the Cross upon the shields of his soldiers
and makes the bit of his war-horse from a nail of the
True Cross, an act equivalent to man’s cry for strength
amid the animal chaos at the close of the first lunar
quarter. Seeing that Constantine was not converted till
upon his deathbed I see him as half statesman, half
thaumaturgist, accepting in blind obedience to a dream
the new fashionable talisman, two sticks nailed together,
The Christians were but six millions of the sixty or
seventy of the Roman Empire but, spending nothing
upon pleasure, exceedingly rich like some Nonconformist
sect of the eighteenth century; and the world became
Christian and ‘* that fabulous formless darkness ”’ as it
seemed to a philosopher of the fourth century, blotted
out ** every beautiful thing,”’ not through the conversion
of crowds or general change of opinion, or through any
pressure from below, for civilization was antithetical still,
but by an act of power.

I have not the knowledge (it may be that no man has
the knowledge) to trace the rise of the Byzantine state
through Phases 9, 10 and 11. My diagram tells me that
a hundred and sixty years brought that state to its 15th
Phase, but I that know nothing but the arts and of these
little, cannot revise the series of dates ** approximately
correct ’’ but given it may be for suggestion only. With
a desire for simplicity of statement I would have preferred
to find in the middle, not at the end, of the fifth century
Phase 12, for that was, so far as the known evidence
carries us, the moment when Byzantium~ became
Byzantine and substituted for formal Roman magnifi-
cence, with its glorification of physical power, an archi-
tecture that suggests the Sacred City in the Apocalypse
of St. John. I think if I could be given a month of
Antiquity and leave to spend it where I chose, I would
spend it in Byzantium a little before Justinian opened
St. Sophia and closed the Academy of Plato. I think I

191

could find in some little wine shop some philosophical
worker in mosaic who could answer all my questions, the
supernatural descending nearer to him than to Plotinus
even, for the pride of his delicate skill would make what
was an instrument of power to Princes and Clerics and
a murderous madness in the mob, show as a lovely
flexible presence like that of a perfect human body.

I think that in early Byzantium, and maybe never
before or since in recorded history, religious, aesthetic
and practical life were one, and that architect and
artificers—though not, it may be, poets, for language had
been the instrument of controversy and must have grown
abstract—spoke to the multitude and the few alike. The
painter and the mosaic worker, the worker in gold and
silver, the illuminator of Sacred Books were almost im-
personal, almost perhaps without the consciousness of
individual design, absorbed in their subject matter and
that the vision of a whole people. They could copy out
of old Gospel books those pictures that seemed as sacred
as the text, and yet weave all into a vast design, the
work of many that seemed the work of one, that made
building, picture, pattern, metal work of rail and lamp,
seem but a single image; and this vision, this proclama-
tion of their invisible master had the Greek nobility,
Satan always the still half divine Serpent, never the
horned scarecrow of the didactic Middle Ages.

The ascetic, called in Alexandria ** God’s Athlete,”’
has taken the place of those Greek athletes whose statues
have been melted or broken up or stand deserted in the
midst of cornfields, but all about him is an incredible
splendour like that which we see pass under our closed
eyelids as we lie between sleep and waking, no representa-
tion of a living world but the dream of a somnambulist.
Even the drilled pupil of the eye, when the drill is in the
hand of some Byzantine worker in ivory, undergoes a
somnambulistic change for its deep shadow among the

192

faint lines of the tablet, its mechanical circle, where all else
is rhythmical and flowing, give to Saint or Angel a look
of some great bird staring at miracle. Could any vision-
ary of those days, passing through the Church named
with so un-theological a grace **‘ The Holy Wisdom,”
can even a visionary of to-day wandering among the
mosaics of Rome and Sicily, fail to recognise some one
image seen under his closed eyelids? To me it seems
that He, who among the first Christian communities
was little but a ghostly exorcist, had in His assent to a
full Divinity made possible this sinking in upon a super-
natural splendour, these walls with their little glimmer-
ing cubes of blue and green and gold.

I think that I might discover an oscillation, a revolu-
tion of the horizontal gyre like that between Doric and
Ionic art, between the two principal characters of
Byzantine art. Recent criticism distinguishes between
the figures which come from Greece and Rome, their
stern faces suggesting Greek wall-painting at Palmyra,
Greco-Egyptian painting upon the cases of mummies,
where characteristic lines are exaggerated as in much
work of our time, and that decoration which seems to
undermine our self-control, and is it seems of Persian
origin, and has for its appropriate symbol a vine whose
tendrils climb everywhere and display among their leaves
all those strange images of bird and beast, those forms
that represent no creature eye has ever seen, yet are
begotten one upon the other as if they were themselves
living creatures. May I consider the domination of the
first late antithetical and that of the second primary, and
see in their alternation the work of the horizontal gyre?
Strzygowski thinks that the church decorations where
there are visible representations of holy persons were
especially dear to those who believed in Christ’s double
nature and that wherever Christ is represented by a bare
Cross and all the rest is bird and beast and tree, we may

198

discover an Asiatic art dear to those who thought Christ
contained nothing human.

If I were left to myself I would make Phase 15 coincide
with Justinian’s reign, that great age of building in
which one may conclude Byzantine art was perfected;
but the meaning of the diagram may be that a building
like St. Sophia where all, to judge by the contemporary
description, pictured ecstasy, must unlike the declama-
tory St. Peter’s precede the moment of climax. Of the
moment of climax itself I can say nothing and of what
followed from Phase 17 to Phase 21 almost nothing, for
I have no knowledge of the time; and no analogy from
the age after Phidias, or after our own Renaissance can
help. We and the Greeks moved towards intellect but
Byzantium and the western Europe of that day moved
from it. If Strzygowski is right we may see in the
destruction of images but a destruction of what was Greek
in decoration accompanied perhaps by a renewed splen-
dour in all that came down from the ancient Persian
Paradise, an episode in some attempt to make theology
more ascetic, spiritual and abstract. Destruction was
apparently suggested to the first iconoclastic Emperor
by fcllowers of a Monophysite Bishop, Xenaias, who had
his See in that part of the Empire where Persian influence
had been strongest. The return of the images must, as
I see things, have been the failure of synthesis (Phase 22)
and the first sinking in and dying down of Christendom
into the heterogeneous loam. Europe grew animal and
literal; the strength of the victorious party came from
zealots who were as ready as their opponents to destroy
an image if permitted to grind it into powder, mix it
with some liquid and swallow it as a medicine. Mankind
for a season would do, not what it would, or should, but
what it could, and accept the past and the current belief
because they prevented thought. In western Europe

I think I may see in Johannes Scotus Erigena the last
N

194

intellectual synthesis before the death of philosophy, but —

I know little of him except that he is founded upon a
Greek book of the sixth century, put into circulation by
a last iconoclastic Emperor, though its Angelic Orders
might have given, and perhaps did give a theme to
the image makers. I notice too that my diagram
makes Phase 22 coincide with the break up of Charle-
magne’s Empire and so clearly likens him to Alexander,
but I do not want to concern myself, except where I
must, with political events.

Then follows, as always must in the last quarter, hetero-
geneous art; hesitation amid architectural forms, some
book tells me; an interest in Greek and Roman literature;
much copying out and gathering together; yet outside
a few courts and monasteries I seem to discover an Asiatic
and anarchic Europe. The intellectual cone has so
narrowed that secular intellect has gone, and the strong
man rules with the aid of local custom that needs none,
and everywhere the supernatural is sudden, violent, and
as dark to the intellect as a stroke or St. Vitus’ dance.
Men under the Cesars, my documents tell me, were
physically one but intellectually many, but that is now
reversed, for there is one common thought or doctrine
and town is shut off from town, village from village,
clan from clan. The spiritual life is alone overflowing,
its cone expanded, and yet this life—secular intellect

extinguished—has little effect upon men’s conduct, is

perhaps a dream which passes beyond the reach of
conscious mind but for some rare miracle or vision. |
think of it as like that profound reverie of the somnam-
bulist which may be accompanied by a sensuous dream—
a Tomanesque stream perhaps of bird and beast images—
and yet neither affect the dream nor be affected by it.
It is indeed precisely because this double mind is created
at the South that the antithetical phases are but, at the
best, phases of a momentary illumination like that of 8

195

lightning flash. But the South that now concerns us,
is not only Phase 15 of its greater era, but the final phase,
Phase 28, of its millennium and, in its physical form,
human life grown once more automatic. I knew a man
once who, seeking for an image of the absolute, saw one
persistent image, a slug, as though it were suggested
to him that Being which is beyond human comprehension
is mirrored in the least organised forms of life. Intel-
lectual creation has ceased but men have come to terms
with the supernatural and are agreed that, if you make
the usual offerings, it will remember to live and let live;
even Saint or Angel does not seem very different
from themselves, a man thinks his guardian Angel jealous
of his mistress; a King, dragging some Saint’s body
to a new Church, meets some difficulty upon the road,
assumes a miracle, and denounces the Saint as a churl.
- Three Roman Courtesans who have one after another
got their favourite lovers chosen Pope have, it pleases
one’s mockery to think, confessed their sins, with full
belief in the supernatural efficacy of the act, to ears that
have heard their cries of love, or received the Body of God
from hands that have played with their own bodies.
Interest has narrowed to what is near and personal
and, seeing that all abstract secular thought has faded,
_ those interests have taken the most physical forms. In
monasteries and in hermit cells men freed from the
intellect at last can seek their God upon all fours like
beasts or children. Ecclesiastical Law, in sd far as that
law is concerned not with government, Church or State,
but with the individual soul, is complete; all that is
necessary to salvation is known, but as I conceive the
age there is much apathy. Man awaits death and
judgment with nothing to occupy the worldly faculties
and is helpless before the world’s disorder, and this may
have dragged up out of the subconscious the conviction
that the world was about to end. Hidden, except at rare

196

moments of excitement or revelation, and even then
shown but in symbol, the stream of recurrence,* set in
motion by the Galilean Symbol, has filled its basin, and
seems motionless for an instant before it falls over the
rim, and in the midst of the basin I imagine in motionless
contemplation, blood that is not His blood upon His
Hands and Feet, One that feels but for the common lot,
and mourns over the length of years and the inadequacy
of man’s fate to man. Two thousand years before, His
predecessor, careful of heroic men alone, had so stood and
mourned over the shortness of time, and man’s
inadequacy to his fate.

Full moon over, that last Embodiment shall grow more
like ourselves, putting off that stern majesty, borrowed
it may be from the Phidean Zeus—if we can trust Cefalu
and Monreale—and His Mother—putting off her harsh
Byzantine image—stand at His side.

LV
A.D. 1050 TO THE PRESENT DAY

WHEN the tide changed and God no longer sufficed,
something must have happened in the courts and castles
of which history has perhaps no record, for with the first
vague dawn of the ultimate antithetical revelation man,
under the eyes of the Virgin, or upon the breast of
his mistress, became but a fragment. Instead of that
old alternation, brute or ascetic, came something obscure

* The documents distinguish between recurrence which is an
impulse that begins strongly and dies out by degrees, and sequence
where every part of the impulse is related to every other. Hvery
phase is a recurrence, and sequence is related to Unity of Being.
If I understand rightly Plato’s perfect and imperfect numbers
they have much the same meaning. The documents distinguish
both recurrence and sequence from an allusion, or unrelated fact.
A spirit at Phase 1 sees allusion only.

'
]
{
{
|

197

or uncertain that could not find its full explanation for
a thousand years. A certain Byzantine Bishop had said
upon seeing a singer of Antioch, *‘ I looked long upon
her beauty, knowing that I would behold it upon the day
of judgment, and 1 wept to remember that I had taken
less care of my soul than she of her body,’’ but when in
the Arabian Nights Harun Al-Raschid looked at the
singer Heart’s Miracle, and on the instant loved her, hé
covered her head with a little silk veil to show that her
beauty ‘* had already retreated into the mystery of our
faith.’? The Bishop saw a beauty that would be sanctified
but the Caliph that which was its own sanctity, and it
was this latter sanctity, come back from the first Crusade
or up from Arabian Spain or half Asiatic Provence and
Sicily, that created romance. What forgotten reverie,
what initiation it may be, separated wisdom from the
monastery and, creating Merlin, joined it to passion.
When Merlin in Cretien de Troyes loved Ninian he showed
her a cavern adorned with gold mosaics and made by a
prince for his beloved, and told her that those lovers died
upon the same day and were laid ‘* in the chamber where
they found delight.”” He thereupon lifted a slab of red
marble that his art alone could lift and showed them
wrapped in winding sheets of white samite. The tomb
remained open, for Ninian asked that she and Merlin
might return to the cavern and spend their night near
those dead lovers, but before night came Merlin grew sad
and fell asleep, and she and her attendants took him ** by
head and foot *’ and laid him ** in the tomb and replaced
the stone,’? for Merlin had taught her the magic words,
and ‘from that hour none beheld Merlin dead or
alive.” Throughout the German “ Parsifal *’ there is no
ceremony of the Church, neither Marriage nor Mass nor
Baptism, but instead we discover that strangest creation
of romance or of life, ** the love trance.’’? Parsifal in
such a trance, seeing nothing before his eyes but the

198

image of his absent love, overcame knight after knight,
and awakening at last looked amazed upon his dinted
sword and shield; and it is to his lady and not to God
or the Virgin that Parsifal prayed upon the day of
battle, and it was his lady’s soul, separated from her
entranced or sleeping body, that went beside him and
gave victory.

The period from 1005 to 1180 is attributed in the
diagram to the first two gyres of our millenium, and
what interests me in this period, which corresponds to
the Homeric period some two thousand years before,
is the creation of the Arthurian Tales and Romanesque
architecture. I see in Romanesque the first movement
to a secular Europe, but a movement so instinctive that

as yet there is no antagonism to the old condition. Every

architect, every man who lifts a chisel, may be a cleric of
some kind, yet in the overflowing ornament where the
human form has all but disappeared and where no bird
or beast is copied from nature, where all is more Asiatic
than Byzantium itself, one discovers the same impulse
that created Merlin and his jugglery. I do not see in
Gothic architecture, which is a character of the next
gyre, that of Phases 5, 6 and 7, as did the nineteenth
century historians ever looking for the image of their own
age, the creation of a new communal freedom but a
creation of authority, a suppression of that freedom
though with its consent, and certainly St. Bernard when
he denounced the extravagance of Romanesque saw it in
that light. I think of that curious sketchbook of Villars
de Honecourt with its insistence upon mathematical form,
and I see that form in Mont St. Michel—Church, Abbey,
Fort and town, all that dark geometry that makes Byzan-
tium seem a sunlit cloud—and it seems to me that the
Church grows secular that it may fight a new-born secular
world. Its avowed appeal is to religion alone : nobles and
great ladies join the crowds that drag the Cathedral

199

stones, not out of love for beauty but because the stones
as they are trundled down the road cure the halt and the
blind; yet the stones once set up traffic with the enemy.
The mosaic pictures grown transparent fill the windows,
and draw all eyes and quarrel one with the other as if
they were pretty women, and upon the faces of the statues
flits once more the smile that disappeared with archaic
Greece. That smile is physical, primary joy, the escape
from supernatural terror, a moment of irresponsible
common life before antithetical sadness begins. It is as
though the pretty worshippers, while the Dominican was
preaching with a new and perhaps incredible sternness,
let their imaginations stray and the observant sculptor,
or worker in ivory, in modelling his Holy Women has.
remembered their smiling lips.

Are not the Cathedrals «and the Philosophy of St.
Thomas the product of the abstraction that comes a
little before the Phases 8 and 22, and of the moral
synthesis that at the end of the first quarter seeks to
control the general anarchy? That anarchy must have
been exceedingly great, or man must have found a hitherto
unknown sensitiveness, for it was the shock that created
modern civilisation. The diagram makes the period from
1250 to 1800 correspond to Phase 8, certainly because in
or near that period, chivalry and Christendom having
proved insufficient, the King mastered the one, the
Church the other, reversing the achievement of
Constantine, for it was now the mitre and the crown that
protected the Cross. I prefer, however, to find my
example of the first victory of personality where I have
more knowledge. Dante in the ** Convito ”? mourns for
solitude, lost through poverty, and writes the first
sentence of modern autobiography, and in the Divine
Comedy imposes his own personality upon a system and
a phantasmagoria hitherto impersonal; the King every-
where has found his kingdom.

200

The period from 1800 to 1880 is attributed to the fourth
gyre, that of Phases 9,10 and 11, which finds its character
in painting from Giotto to Fra Angelico, in the chronicles
of Froissart and in the elaborate canopy upon the stained
glass of the windows. Every old tale is alive, Christen-
dom still unbroken; painter and poet alike find new
ornament for the tale, they feel the charm of everything
but the more poignantly because that charm is
archaistic; they smell a pot of dried roses. The practical
men, face to face with rebellion and heresy, are violent
as they have not been for generations, but the artists
separated from life by the tradition of Byzantium can
even exaggerate their gentleness, and gentleness and
_violence alike express the gyre’s hesitation. The public
certainty that sufficed for Dante and St. Thomas has
disappeared, and there is yet no private certainty. Is
it that the human mind now longs for solitude, for escape
from all that hereditary splendour, and does not know
what ails it; or is it that the Image itself encouraged by
the new technical method, the flexible brush-stroke
instead of the unchanging cube of glass, and wearied
of its part in a crowded ghostly dance longs for a solitary
human body? That body comes in the period from 13880
to 1450 and is discovered by Masaccio, and by Chaucer
who is partly of the old gyre, and by Villon who is wholly
of the new. Masaccio, a precocious and abundant man,
dying like Aubrey Beardsley in his six-and-twentieth
year, cannot move us, as he did his immediate successors,
for he discovered a naturalism that begins to weary us
a little, making the naked young man awaiting baptism
shiver with the cold, and St. Peter grow red with exertion
as he drags the money out of the miraculous fish’s mouth,
and Adam and Eve, flying before the sword of the Angel,
show faces disfigured by their suffering. It is very likely
because I am a poet and not a painter that I feel so much
more keenly that suffering of Villon—of the 13th Phase

201

as man, and of it or near it in epoch—in whom the human
soul for the first time stands alone before a death ever
present to imagination, without help from a Church that
is fading away, or is it that I remember Aubrey
Beardsley, a man of like phase though so different epoch,
and so read into Villon’s suffering our modern conscience
which gathers intensity as we approach the close of an
era? Intensity that has seemed to me pitiless self-
judgment may have been but heroic gaiety. With the
approach of solitude bringing with it an ever increasing
struggle with that which opposes solitude—sensuality,
greed, ambition, physical curiosity in all its species—
philosophy has returned driving dogma out. Even
amongst the most pious the worshipper is preoccupied
with himself, and when I look for the drilled eyeball,
which reveals so much, I notice that its edge is no longer
so mechanically perfect, nor, if 1 can judge by casts
at the Victoria and Albert Museum, is the hollow so deep.
Angel and Florentine noble must look upward with an eye
that seems dim and abashed as though to recognise duties
to Heaven, an example to be set before men, and finding
both difficult seem a little giddy. There are no miracles
to stare at, for man descends the hill he once climbed
with so great toil, and all grows but natural again.

As we approach the 15th Phase, as the general move-
ment grows more and more westward in character, we
notice the oscillation of the horizontal gyres, as though
what no unity of being, yet possible, can completely fuse
displays itself in triumph.

Donatello, as later Michaelangelo, reflects the hardness
and astringency of Myron, and foretells what must follow
the Renaissance; while Jacopo della Guercia, and most
of the painters seem by contrast, as Raphael later on,
Jonic and Asiatic. The period from 1450 to 1550 is
allotted to the gyre of Phase 15, and these dates are no
doubt intended to mark somewhat vaguely a period that

202

begins in one country earlier and in another later. I do
not myself find it possible to make more than the first
half coincide with the central moment, Phase 15 of the
Italian Renaissance—Phase 22 of the cone of the entire
era—the breaking of the Christian synthesis as the corres-
ponding period before Christ, the age of Phidias, was the
breaking of great traditional faith. The first half covers
the principal activity of the Academy of Florence which
formulated the reconciliation of Paganism and Christian-
ity. This reconciliation which to Pope Julius meant that
Greek and Roman Antiquity were as sacred as that of
Judea, and like it ** a vestibule of Christianity,’? became
in the theoretic exploration of Diirer who had visited
Venice within the movement of the gyre, that the human
norm, discovered from the measurement of ancient
statues, was God’s first handiwork, that ** perfectly pro-
portioned human body ”? which had seemed to Dante
unity of being symbolised. The ascetic, who had a
thousand years before attained his transfiguration upon
the golden ground of Byzantine mosaic, had not turned
athlete but into that unlabouring form the athlete
dreamed of: the second Adam had become the first.
Because the 15th Phase can never find direct human
expression, being a supernatural incarnation, it impressed
upon work and thought an element of strain and artifice, a
desire to combine elements which may be incompatible,
or which suggest by their combination something super-
natural. Had some Florentine Platonist read to Botticelli
Porphyry upon the Cave of the Nymphs? for I seem to
recognise it in that curious cave, with a thatched roof
over the nearer entrance to make it resemble the conven-
tional manger, in his *** Nativity ’? in the National

* There is a Greek inscription at the top of the picture which
says that Botticelli’s world is in the ‘‘ second woe” of the
Apocalypse, and that after certain other Apocalyptic events the

Christ of the picture will appear. He had probably found in
some utterance of Savonarola’s promise of an ultimate Marriage

2038

Gallery. Certainly the glimpse of forest trees, dim in the
evening light, through the far entrance, and the deliberate
strangeness everywhere, gives one an emotion of mystery
which is new to painting.

Botticelli, Crivelli, Mantegna, Da Vinci, who fall within
the period, make Masaccio and his school seem heavy and
common by something we may call intellectual beauty
or compare perhaps to that kind of bodily beauty which
Castiglione called ** the spoil or monument of the victory
of the soul.’’ Intellect and emotion, primary curiosity
and the antithetical dream, are for the moment one.
Since the rebirth of the secular intellect in the eleventh
century, faculty has been separating from faculty, poetry
from music, the worshipper from the worshipped, but all
have remained within a common fading circle—
Christendom—and so within the human soul image has
been separated from image but always as an exploration
of the soul itself; forms have been displayed in an always
clear light, have been perfected by separation from one
another till their link with one another and with common
associations has been broken; but, Phase 15 past, these
forms begin to jostle and fall into confusion, there is as
it were a sudden rush and storm. In the mind of the
artist a desire for power succeeds to that for knowledge,
and this desire is communicated to the forms and to the
onlooker. The eighth gyre, which corresponds to Phases
16, 17 and 18 and completes itself say between 1550 and
1650, begins with Raphael, Michaelangelo and Titian,

of Heaven and Earth, sacred and profane, and pictures it by
the Angels and shepherds embracing, and as I suggest by Cave
and Manger. When I saw the Cave of Mithra at Capri I wondered
if that were Porphyry’s Cave. The two entrances are there, one
reached by a stair of a hundred feet or so from the sea and once
trodden by devout sailors, and one reached from above by some
hundred and fifty steps and used, my guide-book tells me, by
Priests. If he knew that cave, which may have had its recognised
symbolism, he would have been the more ready to discover symbols
in the cave where Odysseus landed in Ithaca.

204

and the forms, as in Titian, awaken sexual desire—we
had not desired to touch the forms of Botticelli or even
of Da Vinci—or they threaten us like those of Michael-
angelo, and the painter himself handles his brush with
a conscious facility or exultation. The subject matter
may arise out of some propaganda as when Raphael in
the Camera della Segnatura, and Michaelangelo in the
Sistine Chapel put, by direction of the Pope, Greek
Sages and Doctors of the Church, Roman Sibyls and
Hebrew Prophets, opposite one another in apparent
equality. From this on, all is changed and where the
Mother of God sat enthroned, now that the Soul’s unity
has been found and lost, Nature seats herself, and the
painter can paint what he desires in the flesh alone, and
soon, asking less and less for himself, will make it a
matter of pride to paint what he does not at all desire,
I think Raphael almost of the earlier gyre—perhaps a
transitional figure—but Michaelangelo, Rabelais, Aretino,
Shakespeare, Titian—Titian is so markedly of the 14th
Phase as a man that he seems less characteristic—I associ-
ate with the mythopzic and ungovernable beginning of the
eighth gyre. I see in Shakespeare a man in whom human
personality, hitherto restrained by its dependence upon
Christendom or by its own need for self-control, burst
like a shell. Perhaps secular intellect, setting itself free
after five hundred years of struggle has made him the
greatest of dramatists, and yet because an antithetical
art could create a hundred plays which preserved—
whether made by a hundred hands or by one—the unity
of a painting or of a Temple pediment, we might, had the
total works of Sophocles survived—they too born of a like
struggle though with a different enemy—not think him
greatest. Do we not feel an unrest like that of travel
itself when we watch those personages, who are so much
more living than ourselves, amidst so much that is
irrelevant and heterogeneous, amid so much primary

205

curiosity, and are carried from Rome to Venice, from
Egypt to Saxon England, or in the one play from Roman
to Christian mythology.

Were he not himself of a later phase, were he of the
16th phase like his age and so drunk with his own wine
he had not written plays at all, but as it is he finds
his opportunity among a crowd of men and women who
are still shaken by thought that passes from man to man
in psychological contagion. I see in Milton who is
characteristic of the moment when the first violence of
the gyre has begun to sink, an attempted return to the
synthesis of the Camera Segnatura and the Sistine Chapel.
It is this attempt made too late that, amid all the music
and magnificence of the still violent gyre, gives him his
unreality and his cold rhetoric. The two elements have
fallen apart in the hymn ‘* On the Morning of Christ’s
Nativity,’ the one is called sacred, the other profane,
and his classical mythology has become artificial
ornament, whereas no great Italian artist from 1450 to
the sack of Rome saw any difference between them, and
when difference came, as it did with Titian, it was God
and the Angels that seemed artificial.

The gyre ebbs out in order and reason, the Jacobean
poets succeed the Elizabethan, Cowley and Dryden the
Jacobean as belief dies out. Elsewhere Christendom keeps
a kind of spectral unity for a while, now with one, now
with the other element of the synthesis dominant;
declamatory statues deface old Churches, innumerable
Tritons and Neptunes pour water from their mouths.
What had been a beauty like the burning sun fades out
in Vandyke’s: noble ineffectual faces, and the Low
Countries, which have reached the new gyre long before
the rest of Europe, convert the world to a still limited
curiosity, to certain recognised forms of the picturesque
constantly repeated, chance travellers at an inn door,
men about a fire, men skating, the same pose or grouping,

206

where the subject is different, passing from picture to
picture. The world begins to long for the arbitrary and
accidental, for the grotesque, the repulsive and the
terrible, that it may be cured of desire, and the moment
has come for the ninth gyre, Phases 19, 20 and 21, and
for the period that begins for the greater part of Europe
with 1650 and lasts it may be to 1875.

The beginning of the gyre like that of its forerunner
is violent, a breaking of the soul and world into frag-
ments, and has for a chief character the materialistic
movement at the end of the seventeenth century, all that
comes out of Bacon perhaps, the foundation of our
modern inductive reasoning, the declamatory religious
sects and controversies that first in England and then
in France destroy the sense of form, all that has its very
image and idol in Bernini’s big Altar in St. Peter’s with
its figures contorted and convulsed by religion as though
by the devil. Men change rapidly from deduction to
deduction, opinion to opinion, have but one impression
at a time and utter it always, no matter how often they
change, with the same emphasis. Then the gyre develops
a new coherence in the external scene; and violent men,
each master of some generalisation, arise one after
another: Napoleon, a man of the 20th Phase in the
historical 21st—personality in its hard final generalisation
—typical of all. The artistic life, where most character-
istic of the general movement, shows the effect of the
closing of the Tinctures. It is external, sentimental and
logical,—the poetry of Pope and Gray, the philosophy of
Johnson and of Rousseau—equally simple in emotion or
in thought, the old oscillation in a new form. Person-

ality is everywhere spreading out its fingers in vain, OF ,

grasping with an always more convulsive grasp a world
where the predominance of physical science, of finance
and economics in all their forms, of democratic politics,
of vast populations, of architecture where styles jostle

207

one another, of newspapers where all is heterogenous,
show that mechanical force will in a moment become
supreme.

That art discovered by Dante of marshalling into a
vast antithetical structure antithetical material became
through Milton Latinised and artificial—the Shades, as
Sir Thomas Browne said, *‘ steal or contrive a body ’’—
and now it changes that it may marshal into a still Anti-
thetical structure Primary material, and the modern novel
is created, but even before the gyre is drawn to its end,
the happy ending, the admired hero, the preoccupation
with desirable things, all that is undisguisedly Anti-
thetical disappears.

All the art of the gyre that is not derived from the
external scene, is a Renaissance echo growing always
more conventional or more shadowy, but since the
- Renaissance—Phase 22 of the cone of the era—the
** Emotion of Sanctity,”’ that first relation to the Spiritual
Primary has been possible in those things that are most
intimate and personal, but not until Phase 22 of the
millennium cone will general thought be ready for its
expression. A mysterious contact is perceptible first in
painting and then in poetry and last in prose. In painting
it comes where the influence of the Low Countries and
that of Italy mingle, but always rarely and faintly. Ido
not find it in Watteau but there is a preparation for it,
a sense of exhaustion of old interests—‘* they do not
believe even in their own happiness,’’ Verlaine said—and
then suddenly it is present in the faces of Gainsborough’s
women as it has been in no face since the Egyptian
sculptor buried in a tomb that image of a princess carved
in wood. Reynolds had nothing of it, an ostentatious
fashionable man fresh from Rome, he stayed content
with fading Renaissance emotion and modern curiosity.
In frail women’s faces—Lady Bessborough’s rises before
me—the soul awakes—all its prepossession, the accumu-

208

lated learning of centuries swept away—and looks out
upon us wise and foolish like the dawn. Then it js
everywhere, it finds the village providence of the
eighteenth century and turns him into Goethe, who
for all that comes to no conclusion, his Faust after his
hundred years but reclaiming land like some Sir Charles
Grandison or Voltaire in his old age. It makes the
heroines of Jane Austen seek, not as their grandfathers
and grandmothers would have done, theological or
political truth, but simply good breeding, as though to
increase it were more than any practical accomplishment.
In poetry alone it finds its full expression for it is
a quality of the emotional nature (Celestial Body acting
through Mask); and creates all that is most beautiful in
modern English poetry from Blake to Arnold, all that is
not a fading echo, and one discovers it in those symbolist
writers like Verhaeren who substitute an entirely personal
wisdom for the physical beauty or passionate emotion
of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. In painting it
shows most often where the aim has been archaistic, as
though it were an accompaniment of what the popular
writers call decadence, as though old emotions had first
to be exhausted. I think of the French portrait painter
Ricard to whom it was more a vision of the mind than ~
a research, for he would say to his sitter ** you are so
fortunate as to resemble your picture,’’ and of Mr Charles
Ricketts, my education in so many things. How often
his imagination moves stiffly as though in fancy dress,
and then there is something,—Sphinx, Danaides—that
makes me remember Callimachus’ return to [onic
elaboration and shudder as though I stared into an
abyss full of eagles. Everywhere this vision or rather
this contact is faint or intermittent and it is always
fragile; Dickens was able with a single book, Pickwick,
to substitute for Jane Austen’s privileged and perilous
research the camaraderie of the inn parlour, qualities

209
that every man might hope to possess, and it did not
return till Henry James began to write. _

Certain men have sought to express the new emotion
through the Creative Mind, though fit instruments of
expression do not yet exist, and so to establish, in the
midst of our ever more abundant primary information,
antithetical wisdom; but such men, Blake, Coventry
Patmore at moments, Nietzsche, unlike those who, from
Richardson to Tolstoi, from Hobbes to Mill and Spencer,
have grown in number and serenity, are full of morbid
excitement and few in number. They were begotten in
the Sistine Chapel and still dream that all can be trans-
formed if they be but emphatic; yet Nietzsche, when the
doctrine of the Eternal Recurrence drifts before his eyes,
knows for an instant that nothing can be and is almost
of the next gyre.

The period from 1875 to 1927 (Phase 22)—in some
countries and in some forms of thought it is from 1815 to
1927—is like that from 1250 to 1800 (Phase 8) a period
of abstraction, and like it also in that it is preceded and
followed by abstraction. Phase 8 was preceded by the
Schoolmen and followed by legalists and inquisitors and
Phase 22 was preceded by the great popularisers of
physical science and economic science, and will be
followed by social movements and applied science.
Abstraction which began at Phase 19 will end at Phase
25 for these movements and this science will have for
their object or result the elimination of intellect. Our
generation has stood at the climax, at what I call
in ** The Trembling of the Veil ’’ Hodos Chamelionios,
or has witnessed a first weariness, and when the climax
passes will recognise that there common secular thought
began to break and disperse. Tolstoi in ‘‘ War and
Peace *? had still preference, could argue about this
thing or that other, had a belief in Providence
and a disbelief in Napoleon, but Flaubert in his

0

210

St. Anthony had neither belief, nor preference, and so it
is that, even before the general surrender of the will,
there came synthesis for its own sake, organisation where
there is no masterful director, books where the author
has disappeared, painting where some accomplished
brush paints with an equal pleasure, or with a bored
impartiality, the human form or an old bottle, dirty
weather and clean sunshine. I too think of famous works
where synthesis has been carried to the utmost limit
possible, where there are elements of inconsequence or
discovery of hitherto ignored ugliness, and I notice that
when the limit is approached or past, when the moment
of surrender is reached, when the new gyre begins to stir,
_ I am filled with excitement. I think of recent mathe-
matical research, and even my ignorance can compare it
with that of Newton—so plainly of the 19th Phase—with
its objective world intelligible to intellect; and I recog-
nise that the limit itself has become a new dimension,
and that this ever hidden thing which makes us fold our
hands has begun to press down upon multitudes. Having
bruised their hands upon that limit men, for the first
time since the seventeenth century, see the world as an
object of contemplation, not as something to be remade,
and some few, meeting the limit in their special study,
even doubt if there is any common experience, that is to
say doubt the possibility of science.

It is said that at Phase 8 there is always civil war, and
at Phase 22 always war, and as this war is always a
defeat for those who have conquered, we have repeated
the wars of Alexander.

I discover already the first phase—Phase 23—of the last
quarter in certain friends of mine, and in writers, poets
and sculptors admired by these friends, who have 4
form of strong love and hate hitherto unknown in the
arts. It is with them a matter of conscience to live in
their own exact instant of time, and they defend their

|
|

211
conscience like theologians. They are all absorbed in
some technical research to the entire exclusion of the
personal dream. It is as though the forms in the stone or
in their reverie began to move with an energy which is not
that of the human mind. Very often these forms are
mechanical, are as it were the mathematical forms that
sustain the physical primary—t think of the work of
Mr Wyndham Lewis, his powerful ** cacophony of sardine
tins,’ and of those marble eggs, or objects of burnished
steel too drawn up or tapered out to be called eggs, of
M. Brancussi, who has gone further than Mr Wyndham
Lewis from recognisable subject matter and so from
personality ; of sculptors who would certainly be rejected
as impure by a true sectary of this moment, the Scandin-
avian Milles, MeStrovié perhaps, masters of a geometrical
pattern or rhythm which seems to impose itself wholly
from beyond the mind, the artist ** standing outside him-
self.”? I compare them to sculpture or painting where now
the artist now the model imposes his personality. I think
especially of the art of the 21st Phase which was at times
so anarchic, Rodin creating his powerful art out of the
fragments of those Gates of Hell that he had found
himself unable to hold together—images out of a personal
dream, ** the hell of Baudelaire not of Dante,’’ he had
said to Symons. I find at this 23rd Phase which is it is
said the first where there is hatred of the abstract, where
the intellect turns upon itself, Mr Ezra Pound, Mr Eliot,
Mr Joyce, Signor Pirandello, who either eliminate from
metaphor the poet’s phantasy and substitute a strange-
ness discovered by historical or contemporary research
or who break up the logical processes of thought by

flooding them with associated ideas or words that seem

to drift into the mind by chance; or who set side by side
as in “* Henry IV,’ ** The Waste Land,’’ ‘* Ulysses,”’
the physical primary—a lunatic among his keepers, a
man fishing behind a gas works, the vulgarity of a single

212

Dublin day prolonged through 700 pages—and the
spiritual primary, delirium, the Fisher King, Ulysses’
wandering. It is as though myth and fact, united until
the exhaustion of the Renaissance, have now fallen so
far apart that man understands for the first time the
rigidity of fact, and calls up, by that very recognition,
myth—the Mask—which now but gropes its way out of
the mind’s dark but will shortly pursue and terrify,
In practical life one expects the same technical inspira-
tion, the doing of this or that not because one would,
or should, but because one can, consequent licence, and
with those ** out of phase ”’ anarchic violence with no
sanction in general principles. If there is violent revolu-
tion, and it is the last phase where political revolution
is possible, the dish will be made from what is found
in the pantry and the cook will not open her book.
There may be greater ability than hitherto for men will be
set free from old restraints, but the old intellectual
hierarchy gone they will thwart and jostle one another.
One tries to discover the nature of the 24th Phase which
will offer peace—perhaps by some generally accepted
political or religious action, perhaps by some more pro-
found generalisation—calling up before the mind those
who .speak its thoughts in the language of our earlier
time. Peguy in his Joan of Are trilogy displays
the national and religious tradition of the French poor,
as he, a man perhaps of the 24th phase, would have it,
and Claudel in his ** L’Otage ”’ the religious and secular
hierarchies perceived as history. I foresee a time when
the majority of men will so accept an historical tradition
that they will quarrel, not as to who can impose his
personality upon others but as to who can best embody
the common aim, when all personality will seem aD
impurity—** sentimentality,” ** sullenness,” ‘* egotism ”
—something that revolts not morals alone but good taste.
There will be no longer great intellect for a ceaseless

2138

activity will be required of all; and where rights are
swallowed up in duties, and solitude is difficult, creation
except among avowedly archaistic and unpopular groups
will grow impossible. Phase 25 may arise, as the code
wears out from repetition, to give new motives for
obedience, or out of some scientific discovery which seems
to contrast, a merely historical acquiescence, with an
enthusiastic acceptance of the general will conceived of
as a present energy—‘ Sibyll what would your” “I
would die.’? Then with the last gyre must come a desire
to be ruled or rather, seeing that desire is all but dead,
an adoration of force spiritual or physical, and society
as mechanical force be complete at last.

Constrained, arraigned, baffled, bent and unbent
By those wire-jointed jaws and limbs of wood
Themselves obedient,
Knowing not evil or good.

A decadence will descend, by perpetual moral improve-
ment, upon a community which may seem like some
woman of New York or Paris who has renounced her
rouge pot to lose her figure and grow coarse of skin and
dull of brain, feeding her calves and babies somewhere
upon the edge of the wilderness. The decadence of the
Greco-Roman world with its violent soldiers and its
mahogany dark young athletes was as great, but that
suggested the bubbles of life turned into marbles, whereas
what awaits us, being democratic and primary, may
suggest bubbles in a frozen pond—mathematical Baby-
lonian starlight.

When the new era comes bringing its stream of irra-
tional force it will, as did Christianity, find its philosophy
already impressed upon the minority who have, true to
phase, turned away at the last gyre from the Physical
Primary. And it must awake into life, not Diirer’s, nor
Blake’s, nor Milton’s human form divine—nor yet

214

Nietzsche’s superman, nor Patmore’s catholic, boasting
** a tongue that’s dead ’’—the brood of the Sistine Chapel
—but organic groups, covens of physical or intellectual
kin melted out of the frozen mass. I imagine new
races, as it were, seeking domination, a world resembling
but for its immensity that of the Greek tribes—each
with its own Daimon or ancestral hero—the brood of
Leda, War and Love; history grown symbolic, the
biography changed into a myth. Above all I imagine
everywhere the opposites, no mere alternation between
nothing and something like the Christian brute and
ascetic, but true opposites, each living the other’s death,
dying the other’s life.

It is said that the primary impulse ‘“* creates the
event *? but that the antithetical ** follows it’? and by
this I understand that the Second Fountain will arise
after a long preparation and as it were out of the very
heart of human knowledge, and seem when it comes no
interruption but a climax. It is possible that the ever
increasing separation from the community as a whole
of the cultivated classes, their increasing certainty, and
that falling in two of the human mind which I have
seen in certain works of art is preparation. During the
period said to commence in 1927, with the 11th gyre,
must arise a form of philosophy, which will become
religious and ethical in the 12th gyre and be in all things
opposite of that vast plaster Herculean image, final
primary thought. It will be concrete in expression,
establish itself by immediate experience, seek no general
agreement, make little of God or any exterior unity, and
it will call that good which a man can contemplate
himself as doing always and no other doing at all. It
will make a cardinal truth of man’s immortality that
its virtue may not lack sanction, and of the soul’s
re-embodiment that it may restore to virtue that long
preparation none can give and hold death an interruption.

215

The supreme experience, Plotinus’ ecstasy, ecstasy of the
Saint, will recede, for men—finding it difficult—sub-
stituted dogma and idol, abstractions of all sorts, things
beyond experience; and men may be long content with
those more trivial supernatural benedictions as when
Athena took Achilles by his yellow hair. Men will no
longer separate the idea of God from that of human
genius, human productivity in all its forms.

Unlike Christianity which had for its first Roman
teachers cobblers and weavers, this thought must find
expression among those that are most subtle, most rich
in memory; that Gainsborough face floats up; among
the learned—every sort of learning—among the rich—
every sort of riches—among men of rank—every sort of
rank—and the best of those that express it will be given
power, less because of that they promise than of that
they seem and are. This much can be thought because
it is the reversal of what we know, but those kindreds
once formed must obey irrational force and so create
hitherto unknown experience, or that which is incredible.

Though it cannot interrupt the intellectual stream—
being born from it and moving within it—it may grow
a fanaticism and a terror, and at its first outsetting
oppress the ignorant—even the innocent—as Christianity
oppressed the wise, seeing that the day is far off when
the two halves of man can define each its own unity
in the other as in a mirror, Sun in Moon, Moon in Sun,
and so escape out of the Wheel.

Finished at Capri, February, 1925.

BOOK IV

©
5
[xy
©
op
A
=
O
fx]
a0
cy

1. THE FOOL BY THE ROADSIDE

When my days that have

From cradle run to grave

From grave to cradle run instead;

When thoughts that a fool

Has wound upon a spool

Are but loose thread, are but loose thread;

When cradle and spool are past
And I mere shade at last
Coagulate of stuff

Transparent like the wind,

I think that I may find

A faithful love, a faithful love.

219

2. THH GREAT WHEEL AND FROM DEATH To
BIRTH

Stray THOUGHTS

CORNELIUS AGRIPPA in “ De Occulta Philosophia ”
quotes from ** Orpheus *’—** The Gates of Pluto cannot
be unlocked, within is a people of dreams,’’ and from
that sentence I take the name of this fourth book, in
which I must consider the condition from death to birth.

I must speak much of the Daimon, and yet we can
know nothing of the Daimon except by the Comple-
mentary Dream. She is not phasal and yet we must speak
as if she were because she affects human life, now through
one Faculty and now through another, and if we are to
strengthen her influence or to moderate it we must know
what these Faculties are. She is that being united to
man which knows neither good nor evil, and shapes the
body in the womb, and impresses upon the mind its form.
She is revealed to man in moments of prevision and
illumination and in much that we call good and evil
fortune, and yet, seeing that she remains always in the
Thirteenth Cycle, cannot accompany man in his
wanderings, nor can her tutelage of man be eternal,
secing that after many cycles man also inhabits the
Thirteenth Cycle and has in a certain way a greater

220

221

power than hers. When both are as it were side by side
in the same cycle, she like a spirit of the 15th Phase, —
can communicate with one living man, chosen still doubt-
less from a cycle beneath her own, whereas the man can
communicate with an indefinite number of other men.
We can but fall back on image and say that they are
united for twelve cycles, and are then set free from one
another, she being Full Moon and he Full Sun; though
when we consider all with the eyes of living man he is
Moon and she the Sun.

Presently 1 must speak of the Ghostly Self by which
the creators of this system mean the permanent self,
that which in the individual may correspond to the fixed
circle of the figure, neither Man nor Daimon, before the
whirling of the Solar and Lunar cones. It is the source
of that which is unique in every man, understanding by
unique that which is one and so cannot be analysed into
anything else.

I do not think of death as separation from body but
from the exclusive association with one body for in no
experience possible to the human spirit, as it is known to
me, does the human spirit cease to use directly or through
the Record the senses of living men. Upon the other
hand, eye and ear and touch have not always the same
range for the living and the dead, nor has the brain of the
living, when the dead and the living use it, the same
capacity, for the dead are the wisdom of the living.
Seeing that the body is a portion of the Daimon’s Body
of Fate it may be said that the Daimon, and therefore
all associated Daimons or Spirits, are nearer to the body
than to the intellect. Nor must the dead be thought
of as living an abstract life for it is the living who
create abstraction which ** consumes itself away.”’

222
II
THE VISION OF THE BLOOD KINDRED

AT death the man passes into what seems to him after-
wards a state of darkness and sleep; there is a sinking
in upon fate analogous to that of the individual cones
at Phase 22. During the darkness he is surrounded by
his kindred, present in their simulacrae, or in their Spirits
when they are between lives, the more recent dead the
more visible. Because of their presence it is called the
Vision of the Blood Kindred.

III
THE SEPARATION OF THE FouR PRINCIPLES

THE Spirit first floats horizontally within the man’s dead
body, but then rises until it stands at his head. The
Celestial Body is also horizontal at first but lies in the
opposite position, its feet where the Spirit’s head is, and
then rising, as does the Spirit, stands up at last at the feet
of the man’s body. The Passionate Body rises straight
up from the genitals and stands in the centre. The Husk
remains in the body until the time for it to be separated
and lost in Anima Mundi. The separation of the
Principles from the body is caused by the Daimon’s
gathering into the Passionate Body memory of the past
life—perhaps but a single image or thought—which is
always taken from the unconscious memories of the
living, from the Record of all those things which have
been seen but have not been noticed or accepted by the
intellect, and the Record is always truthful.

228
1V
THe AWAKENING OF THE SPIRITS

THE Spirit meanwhile has passed from the Vision of the
Blood Kindred into meditation, but of this meditation
we are told little except that it is upon the coming
‘‘ dissolution of the Passionate Body ” and that, though
in certain cycles it may be prolonged for a very great
period, with us it ends with burial. The Spirit may
appear to the living during this meditation, but if it
does so it will show in the likeness of the body as that
body was shortly before death. The meditation may be
moved and shaped by the Burial Ritual, for the body has
become a symbol, and as the Spirit has entered upon a
condition that is a dream, thoughts inspired among the
living by that Ritual can influence its life. Now in its turn
the Spirit gradually awakens, and it is said that the
awaking may begin with the sight of a flower upon the
gtave where it appears shining amidst the general dark-
ness. In the world where it is now the human soul is seen
to give forth light which is transmitted to objects and the
thought of some mourner will illuminate the flower.
The Spirit is somewhere said to appear as a colourless
outline until at this awakening it gradually takes upon
itself something of the hues of the living man. Its
coming to self-knowledge may be long and painful. If
death has been violent or tragic, Spirit and Passionate
Body may dream that death again and again with inter-
vals of awakening, and in some few cases so dream for a
century or more. A gambler killed in a gambling brawl
will demand his money, and a man, who has believed that
nothing will remain but the decaying body may haunt
the house where he has lived as an odour of decay; nor
is there any reason why a man may not see reflected

224

in @ mirror some beloved ghost who, thinking herself
unobserved, will powder her face as in Mr Davies’ verse.

The first night she was in her grave,
As I looked in the glass

I saw her sit upright in bed;

Without a sound it was;

I saw her hand feel in the cloth

To fetch a box of powder forth.

She sat and watched me all the while
For fear I looked her way,

I saw her powder cheek and chin

Her fast corrupting clay.

Then down my lady lay and smiled,
She thought her beauty saved, poor child.

V
THe RETURN

THE Spirit should separate itself from all such dreams
of the Passionate Body and seek the Celestial Body, and
only when so separate does it cease to dream and know
that itis dead. There are therefore, in what is known as
the Return, a *Waking State and a Sleeping State which
alternate, and these states resemble each other in that
in both are sensible images or some impression of sense,
but differ in that during the Waking State these images
and impressions of sense are imposed by other beings,
who are bound to the dead man by the events of some
past life, and in that during the Sleeping State they are
recovered from the Record, by the man’s Spirit or
Passionate Body, and in that during the Waking State

* These states seem analogous to Sage (or teacher) and Victim
respectively. During the Waking State the gyre moves but during
the Sleeping State it is stationary.—Sept. 28.

225

alone does he know that he is no longer living. During
this state which is commonly called the Teaching he is
brought into the presence, as far as possible, of all sources
of the action he must presently, till he has explored
every consequence, dream through. This passion for
the source is brought to him from his own Celestial
Body which perpetually, being of the nature of Fate,
dreams the events of his life backward through time. If
the thought of the past life permit, he will now perceive
all those persons as they now live or as they have lived,
who have influenced him, or whom he has influenced,
and so caused the action, but if he has belonged to some
faith that has not known rebirth he may explore sources
that require symbolical expression.

As he cannot escape the symbols of his life,
whatever his belief, he may now see himself sur-
rounded by flames and persecuted by devils. One
remembers the girl in the Japanese play whose
Ghost tells a Priest of a slight sin which seems -a
great sin because of its unforeseen and unforeseeable
consequences, and that she is persecuted by flames. If
she but touch a pillar, she says, it bursts into flames,
and the Priest who knows that these flames are but
her own conscience made visible, tells her that if she
cease to believe in them they must cease to exist. She
thanks him, but the flames return, for she cannot cease
to believe, and the play ends with a dance which is the
expression of her agony.

The Teaching Spirits, as the Waking State returns and
the first passion declines, may offer him a guidance which
seems like that of some familiar institution, hospital, or
school, for they are still the human mind and keep old
habits of thought, but it differs from that of an institution
because these spirits have been a part of his life for
perhaps many centuries. The object of the Return is to
exhaust pleasure and pain by the display of all the good

P

226

and evil of his past life, but it is always the old, never
new pleasure or pain. He may sometimes visit the
living, suggest thoughts or emotions that may amend the
consequence of his acts, but cannot, unless through the
eyes and ears of some spirit from a later condition, see
any that were not a part of his own life. When in the
Meditation he could but appear to the living in the form
he last wore alive, but now he may be seen as of that
age at which the event he is about to dream occurred.
Most of the spirits at séances are said to belong to this
condition.

When the Spirit has been for the moment exhausted
by the phantasmagoria as it is sometimes called, the
Passionate Body attracts it to itself, and the Sleeping
State begins. The Passionate Body like the Celestial
Body never ceases to dream, moving through events,
however, not in the order of their occurrence but in that
of their intensity, and when the Spirit returns to it the
Spirit is compelled to imitate this dream, having no life
except from one or other of the bodies. The man is now
in what is called the Dreaming Back, and it is now that,
according to ancient and modern tradition, the murderer
may be seen committing his murder night after night,
or perhaps upon the anniversary of its first committal;
or it may be that the dream is happy and that the seer
but meets the old huntsman hunting once more amid a
multitude of his friends and all his hounds, or half tragic
and half happy as when the mother, as the folklore of
all nations and spiritualistic annals recall, comes to her
orphan children. ‘* The Divine returns to the Divinity ”
through the Celestial Body, and to invert Plotinus “ the
Lonely returns to the Lonely ’”’ in the dream of the
Passionate Body, for mother, murderer and huntsman
are alone. If the dreamed event was once shared by
many, now dead, those many may indeed be present, and
yet as each but dreams again without change what

227

happened when they were alive, each dreamer is alone.
Should they exchange the thought of the moment, one
with another, there would be contrast, conflict, and
therefore creation, and the dream would not fade. The
dream may be dreamed through by the Spirit once, or
many times with short or long periods of awakening,
but the man must dream the event to its consequence as
far as his intensity permit; not that consequence only
which occurred while he lived, and was known to him, but
those that were unknown, or have occurred after his
death. The more complete the exploration, the more
fortunate will be his future life, but he is concerned with
events only, and with the emotions that accompanied
events. Every event so dreamed is the expression of
some knot, some concentration of feeling separating off
a period of time, or portion of the being, from the
being as a whole and the life as a whole, and the dream
is as it were a smoothing out or an unwinding. Yet
it is said that if his nature had great intensity, and the
consequences of the event affected multitudes, he may
dream with slowly lessening pain and joy for centuries.

As all the consequences of the event are discovered
from the Record made by the living—the Spirit finding
there names, dates, and language to complete the drama,
and the Passionate Body finding the concrete events—
we may say that the dead remain a portion of the living.
It is indeed said that where murderer and victim die
unknown, and the crime remains unknown, the Spirit
can find certain facts in its own Passionate Body, or
from the Passionate Body of its victim, but with
difficulty, and such a Dreaming Back is imperfect. A
Dreaming Back may be so imperfect or so prolonged that
it obsesses the next life and causes rebirth into almost
the same circumstances as those already lived through,
and generally into the same family. Teaching Spirits
may assist the dreamer, and many hauntings, many

228
inexplicable sights and sounds, are to cause, among the
living, inquiries that passing into the unconscious mind
of the enquirer enable the Passionate Body or Spirit of
the dreamer to perfect its knowledge.

The Spirit can even consult books, records, of all kinds,
once they be brought before the eyes or even perhaps
to the attention of the living, but it can see nothing
there that does not concern the dream. The Spirit so
dreaming, if it see the living thinks they are a portion
of its dream, and is without reflection or the knowledge
that it is dead. When the dream ends the Spirit with-
draws from the Passionate Body which continues its
purely animal dream. There is, however, the rare event,
which may affect either the dreaming back or the waking
state, of renewed contact of Spirit and Passionate Body
with the Husk. This constitutes the true ghost as
distinguished from the dream of the Spirit and Passionate
Body. In this state a spirit may experience for a moment
once more pleasure and pain that are not a fading
memory. It is said to be dangerous to the living and a
hindrance to the dead, and to include incubi and succubi,
and perhaps most of those beings the Cambridge Platonist
described, when he called the Devil ** A Body Politick,”’
and with whom witches made compacts to keep them,
by a periodical offering of their blood, from fading out..
Seeing that there is no punishment but the prolongation
of the Dreaming back, and the consequent exclusion of
other states, it is among Spirits so united to their Husk
that we discover tempting or evil spirits.

VI
THe RETURN IN RELATION TO THE COVENS

THERE are beings which have personality, though their
bodies consist of a number of minds held together by

229

a, stream of thought or an event, and these beings, called
Covens, have their own Dreaming Back, Record
Teachings, and so on, and hold those, who constitute
their bodies, even after death and perhaps for many lives.
During his individual Teaching or Dreaming Back, an
individual man is among the forms of his Coven, the
Heaven and Hell of Christianity, the Spheres of
Spiritualism, the Faery Hostings of Irish folk-lore, and
where there is little change in civilisation and belief these
forms may persist for centuries, and it is through these
forms that the beings of the 138th Cycle unite the
individual destiny to that of a race, or a religion, and
make the individual knot coincide with that of the nation
and make the untying of one the untying of both.

Vil
THE SHIFTINGS

AT the end of the Return which corresponds upon the
diagram to the gyre associated with phases 23, 24 and
25, the Spirit is freed from pleasure and pain and is
ready to enter the Shiftings where it is freed from Good
and Evil, and in this state which is a state of intellect,
it lives through a life which is said to be in all things
opposite to that lived through in the world, and dreamed
through in the Return. As the documents are here more
than usually obscure and strange and as I am afraid of
unconsciously perverting their meaning, I will quote
certain passages. If the surroundings of a past life were
** good ”? they are now ‘evil’? and where “ evil ”’
** good,”? and if a man has had good motives “‘ they are
now evil, and if evil good . . . . because it is not virtue
to be good knowing no evil, nor is it sin to be evil knowing

280

no good ... Good is not good if it is not a conquest
of evil, and evil is not evil unless a conquest of good.”
And this is amplified later on with the statement that
if one has been in any matter good, knowing evil, or
evil, knowing good, one suffers in that matter no trans-
formation. Yet seeing that one is generally good or evil
in ignorance, the state is for most men ** the best possible
life in the worst possible surroundings ’’ or the direct
contrary, and this is brought about by no external law
but by a craving in the Principles to know what life has
hidden, that the Daimon who knows intellect but not
good and evil, may be satisfied. Yet there is no suffering
** for in a state of equilibrium there is neither emotion
nor sensation *’; and seeing that for all, ** in the limits
of the good and evil of the previous life, . . . the soul is
brought to a comprehension of good and evil, neither the
utmost evil nor the utmost good can force sensation or
emotion.’’ Evil is that which opposes Unity of Being
and seeing that man seeks his primary in woman, and
woman her antithetical in man, a relationship of sex
displays good and evil in their most subtle and overpower-
ing form. Therefore it is said that in the Shiftings men
and women relive their loves, and not as in the Dreaming
Back to exhaust pleasure and pain, but that they may
separate that which belongs to their true primary or true -
antithetical from that which seems to, and therefore
exhaust good and evil themselves. The man would
know the woman utterly and so he must relive his love
in all things whereof he was ignorant, turning good
fortune into complete tragedy, or tragedy into good
fortune, that he may test his love in every fire; and if
the woman be dead and in like condition she will be
present in reality, but if not, in similitude alone. Yet
whether she be there or not there, the dream will be
but the same, for he can see nothing but his dream.
Light loves, loves without mutual recognition, may n0¢%

231

long delay him, for their circumstance and consequence
have been exhausted in the Dreaming Back, and their
effect upon himself has been but little, but strong love
given in ignorance may be relived again and again, though
not with suffering, for all now is intellect and he is all
Daimon, and tragic and happy circumstance alike
offer an intellectual ecstasy at the revelation of truth,
and the most horrible tragedy in the end can but seem a
figure in a dance. Yet his dream, like that of the
Dreaming Back, is not like dreams in sleep, for though
it seems to him reality, he sees beside it the love that
he actually did live, a reality that seems a dream, for
without that he could not bring his soul to quiescence.

In the Waking State of The Shiftings there is no
reliving of the past, and though the soul is taught, there
is no teaching, and there is no Teacher but the Celestial
Body, for it is a form of life; the soul is as it were folding
up into itself. We can say of it that it is no longer in
space, but, in the measure of its truth to phase, in
time alone, past and present being within equal
reach—for so it is the documents put it—and yet it is
more intelligible to say that it has now received from
the Celestial Body the Record of its past existence. It
has no memory of its own, apart from this Record, having
no acquired faculties, and thinks not as man thinks but
as Daimon thinks. Abstraction has gone, no thread of
the cloth can be separated from any other thread,
and the whole cloth is unwound. It is now, as the
Shiftings close, brought by the Celestial Body into the
presence, not of the source of its good and evil, for it
must transcend good and evil, but into that of all typical
qualities of its being, and all the associates of its past
lives in the order of their phase that it may see their loves
and its own as one single wheel; and where the Celestial
Body is in contact with the beings of the Thirteenth
Cycle it may carry to the living messages concerned with

282

purposes that transcend individual life, or upon the other
hand it may carry from its own Celestial Body messages
that concern individual life alone. But when it goes
upon these messages—remembering that it can hear but
cannot see, being in time only—it must act through the
intermediary of those in the Waking State of the Return,
and of Spirits at Phase 1; and should it desire to appear
it must by such intermediary mould into a living image
the most vivid memory of itself found in the unconscious
minds of the living, and this image is always that most
generally known, for it is still ‘* suggestible.’? Sometimes
these messengers make their presence known by some
scent or sound or sight associated with them, and it is
through this scent or sound or sight that they draw upon
the physical vitality of a man, or upon the knowledge of
the Daimon of this man to whom they are sent, or of that
other who may help the delivery of the message. When
through intermediaries they make use of our eyes, they can
unlike those in the Return understand records which have
no relation to their own past. They are most commonly
sent to those with whom they have lived in some near
or distant past, and they always “* take upon themselves
the exact mental condition of the person they communi-
cate with; if with some person they have injured, they
take on the sense of that injury .. . sorrow, suspicion,
self-doubt.”?

Vitl

EXPIATION FOR THOSE IN THE SHIFTINGS AND IN THE
RETURN

SEEING that persons are born again and again in associa-
tion, mother and son at first it may be, then wife and
husband, brother and sister, and that our loves and

288

- friendships are many, each person is a part of a com-
munity of spirits and our re-embodiments are governed
and caused by passions that we must exhaust in all their
forms. As all strong passions are said to contain
‘cruelty and deceit ’? and so to require expiation, one
deceived as to motive cannot pass out of the Shiftings if
unable to complete the transposition of life and
surroundings, and some other who has sinned in act
may be compelled to relive his phase again and again
till he has completed the expiation which frees both
souls. ‘* An Act’? or motive that created action is
* expiated in physical life *? but an intellectual defect
in ** spiritual life.’”? So that a man who has been deceived
but has not retaliated expiates in the Shiftings what,
must have found, had he retaliated, an expiation during
physical life. Expiation during physical life is caused
by the craving to experience that which we have
done to another, to reverse in action what the
disembodied soul reverses in thought, and we owe it
not to that other but to our own Daimon which, but
for “‘ cruelty or deceit,’? had.found the Daimon of
that other. The expiation is followed by a prolonged
or short mingling of the Daimons. Expiation is a
‘harmonisation of being, and we seek out the image,
reflected in some living man or woman, of that other
being, that we may achieve it in action. It affects that
other who must achieve it in thought by Complementary
Dream for the expiations are simultaneous.

Until an act has been expiated the same circumstance
occurs again and again, as though the Dreaming Back
flowed over into the life that followed. One woman has
endured a drunken husband because of a wrong done
to a husband in another life, while another expiates, by
a life of devotion to an un-loved man, a suicide whereby
under some misunderstanding she had deserted a man
she loved. During these acts of expiation the life may

284

be embittered ** by an inhibition of the active qualities ”
and a suffering which is a ‘* physical emotional and
spiritual, and not moral purgation.’? And there is always
.a sense of being fated. This inhibition, this sense of being
fated is not always an unhappiness. A life of voluntary
surrender to another may create an unconscious craving
for its opposite, and this craving may produce a pros-
perous self-appeasing life which is fated and so expiatory,
A Knot is first in the being, and is called a Knot of
Destiny, but in the life that follows, may be in the
events themselves, and uncontrollable by the being, and
is then a Knot of Fate. That the expiatory suffering, or
pleasure, may affect a particular disembodied soul, the
Celestial Body of that soul is through its Spirit imposed,
while in the Waking State of the Shiftings, as an image
upon some living man or woman, and that man or woman
is then loved, not for his or her own sake but for that of
the dead. Yet this image, not being imposed upon the
desires but upon the unconscious mind, does not create
new deception and expiation. There is indeed a condition
of the soul when an image, unexhausted in the Dreaming
Back, does impose a physical image upon the desire of
the living, but this is not expiation though it may—if the
same person be dominated by both images—be as it were
mixed into expiation. A purgation completed brings
good fortune and happiness, a consciousness of luck. _
A race may at times become dominated like an
individual by a subconscious desire for suffering or for
ease, as an expiation for acts done centuries before to
some race whose Coven has passed into Daimonic life.
There are other forms of expiation with which I shall
not concern myself in this book, but there is one on
which I must touch later, for it is that whereby super-
natural forms of the more powerful kind are created.

235
IX
BEATITUDE

AFTER the Shiftings the Spirit is for a short time ** out
of space and time,”’ and every other abstraction, and is
said not to move in a gyre but in a sphere, being as it
were present everywhere at once. Beatitude is the result
of the explations of living man and disembodied soul,
and the final harmony so established, and it is said that
while still living we receive joy from those we have served
—choosing tragedy they abandon to us this cast-off
joy °—whereas we receive from those we have wronged,
ecstasy, described as the only perfected love and as
emotion born when we love that which we hate knowing
that it is fated.

In life, seeing that the Four Faculties and the Husk
and Passionate Body constrain all, we are in accident and
passion; but now Spirit and Celestial Body constrain ali,
the one calling up all concrete universal quality and idea,
and the other closing it in the unique image. Nor can I
consider the Beatitude as any state beyond man’s com-
prehension, but as the presence before the soul in some
settled order, which has arisen out of the soul’s past, of
all those events or works of men which have expressed
some quality of wisdom or of beauty or of power within
the compass of that soul, and as more completely human
and actual than any life lived in a particular body.
It is the momentary union of the Spirit and the Celestial
Body with the Ghostly Self and fades into or is preceded
by what is called the Vision of the Clarified Body, which
is indeed a Vision of our own Celestial Body as that body
will be when all cycles end.

(Mr Yeats, indulgent to Christian or primary prejudice,
permits me to say that in the Robartes Papers I find

286
this passage—** The Celestial Body is the Divine Cloak
lent to all; at the Consummation the Cloak falls for the
Christ is revealed.’? A passage that reminds me of
Bardesan’s ** Hymn of the Soul’? where a king’s son
asleep in Egypt is sent a cloak which is also an image of
the body of him to whom it is sent—the Celestial Body
acting through the Mask—and the king’s son sets out
to his father’s kingdom clad in the cloak. I find also
that the Ghostly Self is so named, not as it might seem
because it is shadowy but because the Beatitude and
the two states that follow correspond to the 18th, 14th
and 15th Cycles which correspond in their turn to Holy
Ghost, Son and Father.—Owen Aherne.)

>. 4

* THE STATES BEFORE BIRTH, CALLED THE GOING FortTH
AND THE FOREKNOWING

WERE the Spirit strong enough, or were its human cycles
finished, it would remain, as in the Beatitude, perman-
ently united to its Ghostly Self, or would, after two more
states, be reborn into a spiritual cycle where the move-
ment of the gyre is opposite to that in our cycles, and
incomprehensible to us, but it will almost certainly pass
to human rebirth because of its terror of what seems to
be the loss of its own being. Whether it pass to a
spiritual or to a human rebirth it must receive in the
Beatitude—in Cancer—the Cup of Lethe. There all
thoughts or images drawn from the Faculties during the
Shiftings or the Dreaming Back, or that have remained

*The Documents where they describe existence between the
Beatitude and birth are exceedingly confused and what I have
written on the subject is less founded upon what they say than
upon my knowledge of the system as a whole.—Sept. 26.

237

in the Faculties, must be passed into the Ghostly
Self and so be forgotten by the Spirit. It has now no
fixed form, or rather one should say, cannot impose a
fixed form upon its intermediaries, or be represented
by a fixed correspondence, for it is not in space, nor is
it ** suggestible ’’ like an inhabitant of the Shiftings
though lke this inhabitant it lives in what is to us
darkness. It has, through its intermediaries and our
senses and its own darkness, an almost limitless vision of
concrete reality, and is in the presence of all those
activities whose Complementary Dream is in our art, or
music or literature, and of those men and women who
have finished all their cycles and are called ‘* Those who
wait.”?> We may even while we live hear their voices
when in a State of trance, but speaking detached and
broken sentences, and that which they say is always the
greatest wisdom attainable by our soul. It is now,
however, that there comes, seeing that it must recover
or find its new Husk, a craving for deception, for pleasure
and for pain, and it passes into the state called the
Foreknowing’ and into space among abstracted types
and forms; and there, in a reversal of the Dreaming Back,
it sees events and people that shall influence its
coming life upon earth, and as it can see that influence,
as can no living man, it is possessed with violent
love and hate, a wilful passion comparable to the
fated passion of the Dreaming Back. Such souls if drunk
with prevision may become what are called Frustrators
and through their power over human emotion, or if
helped by more powerful beings over the Body of Fate
of some living man, prevent, or try to prevent, the
beginnings of those things that they fear.

(Robartes told me that while in Arabia his work was
constantly interfered with by illness, his own or somebody
else’s, and that he came to know the presence of
Frustrators by animal odours like that of the excrement

of some beast, or by the smell of a guttering candle. He
said that these odours were objective, for anybody who
came into the tent smelt them. He blamed the Frustrators
for the inadequacy and confusion of all his own notes
which deal with the life between death and birth, and
insisted that the original revelation to Kusta Ben Luka
had been, so far as this subject is concerned, left
unfinished for the same reason. A curious point of his
was that souls immediately before birth frequently
thought of themselves as becoming small, and that this
called up an imagination of small beasts, birds and flies.
He had known, he said, two Arab women who found,
one a mouse in her shoe, the other in her bed, the night
before their first children were born. He thought that
mice, constrained by the imagination of the unborn,
were perhaps really there.—Owen Aherne.)

In certain cycles the soul is able within limits to choose
into what body it shall be born, but in most it must
accept the choice of others. Then comes the sleep in
the womb and it must be in this sleep I think that there
comes what is called the Vision of the Friends to
distinguish it from that of the Blood Kindred.

In the Beatitude and in the states that immediately
follow, the man is subject to his Daimon only, and there
is no alternation of sleep and waking. In the Beatitude
communication with the living is through that state of
soul, where an extreme activity is indistinguishable from
an equal passivity.

** Mind moved but seemed to stop
As *twere a spinning top,”

and in the Going Forth through those actions and
emotions, which are at once conscious and automatic
like sudden rage and bodily desire, and nobler emotions
cut from the same piece. And yet, through inter-

239
mediaries, souls in the Going Forth can use all forms of
communication not peculiar to the Beatitude.

The Going Forth lasts longer than any state except
the Return, which may last for generations.

XI
FUNERAL IMAGES, WORKS OF ART, AND THE DEAD

IN the other life, as we have described it, there is no
creation of separated form, that being the work of the
living, and until the Beatitude there is no deliberate
selection of form. All antiquity seems to have thought the
newly dead ‘°° suggestible,’? compelled even to go where
living men commanded. I have a story of a Sligo stable
boy who was dismissed by his employer because he had
sent her late husband’s ghost to haunt a weather-beaten
lighthouse, far out in the bay. A dying Mahom-
medan is sometimes guarded by relatives that he may
look upon no ugly woman and so compel the ghostly
women he will shortly meet to take her form. A Brahmin
once told Florence Farr that he disliked acting because
if a man died playing Hamlet he would be Hamlet in
the life to come. A Galway woman told a friend of
mine she had met this friend’s dead husband in an old
torn coat, but that if my friend gave a new coat, made
to his measure, to some poor man, he would have the
use of it. I heard a like story in Munster but there the
ghost returned to thank the giver dressed in the new
clothes. A king in Heroditus burned the best clothes
of the ladies in his neighbourhood that his dead wife
might make her choice. A man once told in my hearing
a long story of a ghost who appeared at his bedside
in a suit of clothes that had, as he proved, by some

240
argument I forget, been copied from a portrait. One
thinks of the burial customs of antiquity, all that they
hid away in tombs—boats, chairs, oars, and weapons, the
realistic statue of the dead man, or the golden mask
upon his face—and one may well conclude that all were
there to help the Dreaming Back of the Spirit or
its Waking State in the Return. At some moment
of the past it was discovered by some living man,
or more likely taught by some dead man, that
all being but ‘“‘ suggestion ’’ the clay or wooden
image would serve as well as the real boat or the real
Slave, or even that a painting upon the wall sufficed,
for that which made the image serviceable was not its
magnitude or its reality but the fervour and precision
of the ceremony of dedication, that is to say the might
of the ** suggestion.’’ The first portraits were statues
buried in tombs and buried there, as we believe, to assist
the Spirit in its Dreaming Back, and Strzygowski
thinks that the first landscape—a landscape painted or
worked in mosaic within the dome of some Mazdian
Temple—was ** connected with the cult of the dead, the
might and majesty of departed spirits.”? The Christmas
before last the spiritualistic paper *‘ Light ’’ described
how some woman had been directed by spirits to make
a Christmas tree for the pleasure of spirit children. After
the toys had served that turn they were to be given to
some children’s hospital. She and a medium sat beside
the tree on Christmas night and she heard the spirit
children asking for this or that toy, and oldér spirits—
Teaching Spirits doubtless—answering. They seemed
to unloose the toy which remained, however, in its place
upon the bough.* One recognises in those ‘“* synthetic
cigars *’ in ** Raymond,”’ a venerable tradition; but may

*The ceremony was repeated last Christmas, and this time
the name of the child for whom each toy wag intended was by
direction of the Spirits written near it. This made the dedication
precise with the precision of antiquity.—W. B. Y.

Vv — weer, wT ~ = —] ——— eee ee eee ———_———"———

241
be permitted to consider the scientific language and
explanation as borrowed from the subconsciousness of
the questioner, or from that of some associated person.

* Tue SPIRITS AT FIFTEEN AND AT ONE

IT is said of the Spirits at Phases 15 and 1 that the first
need help and the second give it. The second give it
because they are the instrument of communication
between men and all orders of Spirits, where the
communication shows an automatic element, and they
are also said to give the ** Kiss of Life *’ while the first
give what is called the ** Kiss of Death.’? The Spirits
at 15 need help that, before entering upon their embodied
state, they may rid themselves of all traces of the primary
Tincture, and this they gain by imposing upon a man or
woman’s mind an antithetical image which requires
primary expression. It is this expression, which may be
an action or a work of art, which sets them free, and the
image imposed is an ideal form, an image of themselves,
a type of emotion which expresses them, and this they
can do but upon one man or woman’s mind; their coming
life depending upon their choice of that mind. They
suffer from the terror of solitude, and can only free
themselves from terror by becoming entirely antithetical
and so self-sufficing, and till that moment comes each
must, if a woman, give some one man her love, and
though he cannot, unless out of phase and obsessed to

* Much in this chapter belongs to a part of the system that
requires a more detailed study than I can at present give. I may
be mistaken and only include it because the Documents insist
upon the importance of the form of expiation described. It is
connected with those critical and inttiatory moments touched on
in Book II Sec. XIV.

Q

242

the creation of a succuba know that his muse exists, he
returns this love through the intermediary of an
idol. This idol he creates out of an image imposed
upon his imagination by the Spirit. This Spirit
is said to give the ‘* Kiss of Death ”’ because though
she that gives it may persecute other idols, being
jealous, the idol has not come out of the man’s desire,
Its expression is a harmonisation which frees the Spirit
from terror and the man from desire, and that which
is born from the man, and from an all but completed
solitude, is called an antithetical Arcon. Such Arcons
deal with form not wisdom. It is of that Kiss I thought
when I made Emer say :

** They find our men asleep, weary with war,
Or weary with the chase, and kiss their lips
And drop their hair upon them; from that hour
Our men, who yet know nothing of it all,
Are lonely, and when at fall of night we press
Their hearts upon our hearts, their hearts are cold.”

If the Spirit at 15 be a man he must give the “* Kiss
of Death *” to some woman.

There is yet another expiation that follows denial of
experience, the wilful refusal of expression. Because
of this denial the Ghostly Self is famished and so in
the succeeding life there comes upon the man a craving
to inflict upon himself that which he has inflicted, to
make what is called the expiation for the Ghostly Self.
He will offer his love to some woman who will refuse
it, or to some cause that cannot prosper, or he will seek
money and find but penury, or knowledge and find but
ignorance, he is full of an insatiable desire and yet that
desire is unsatisfied because of the curse that is upon
him and his secret craving. The Ghostly Self is as it
were shut up in its own marmorean time-less infinity.
That this penury and this fullness may meet in Comple-

243
mentary Dream as in marriage, other spiritual beings
must intervene, using as their instruments still other
spirits, evil perhaps, instruments of the Ghostly Self; the
man must receive a violent shock from some crisis created
by supernatural dramatisation. Did Dante acquire in
the Thebaid the frenzy that he offered to Beatrice? In
antithetical man this form of Victimage is super-
imposed upon Victimage for the Dead that the
harmony of human emotions that creates may be
followed or accompanied by acceptance of a super-
natural aim. A man feels suddenly for a woman, or
a woman for a man, or—if there has been in both
expiation for the dead and for the Ghosily Self,—
each feels for the other an emotion which has become
a supernatural contemplation. I so picture my own
Deirdre and Naisi when at the spectacle of triumphant
evil and the approach of death they sit and play at chess,
and I wrote my ‘** Hour Glass ’’ to describe such contem-
plation, but there the man being primary makes no
expiation for the dead. In the one case natural love is
brought to the greatest height, and in the other intel-
lectual search, and both reduced to nothing that the soul
may love what it hates, accepting at the same moment
what must happen and its own being, for the Ghostly
Self is that which is unique in man and in his fate. This
is the moment of the greatest genius possible to that
man or woman, and in it a primary or antithetical Arcon
of wisdom is begotten by the Ghostly Self upon the soul.
The beings who at the bidding of the Ghostly Self produce
these dramatisations of evil are the corrective Spirits
of Strindberg’s Swedenborgian play, called in its English
translation ** There are crimes and crimes.” These
beings are themselves Arcons born through previous
dramatisations. The Ghostly Self comes to the man by
symbol and as when that symbol or vesture is not a
spirit at 15 it is a spirit from Phase 1, we may speak

244

of the primary Arcon as born from and receiving its
body from a spirit at Phase 1. Its soul may be that of
any selected spirit. Once born it creates a stream of
impersonal expression or search. In every supernatural
communication or influence which has a public object
there is such an Arcon that its supernatural body may
give stability and continuity. These beings begotten
in tragedy may be brought forth in joy; and all works
which are new creation, and so not from desire which
can but repeat that which is already known, are brought
forth under their influence or under that of beings, born
from men and from the spirits at Phase 15. Was it at
the Crucifixion or in the Agony in the Garden that the
being was begotten whose history imaged itself in that
of Christendom?

There are also Arcons born from the marriage of a
spirit at Phase 1 and a spirit at Phase 15, but these
Arcons have for their body neither expression nor search
but the work of art, the philosophy, or action itself.
They are the organic unity of thought.

XII
COMMUNICATIONS WITH SPIRITS AND THE NATURE OF SLEEP

NO concrete image that comes before the mind in sleep
is ever from the memory; for in sleep we enter upon
the same life as that we enter between death and birth.
Hence we may dream all night of a sweetheart or a
friend or a father or a mother and speak to them, and
be aware of affection or enmity, and yet if we examine
our dream immediately upon waking and before our
waking thought has had time to alter the dream, we
find that another image has been *substituted, perhaps

* I cannot account for the fact that these substituted images
often seem not only familiar but that their very form seems to
recall the person for whom they are substituted.

very like but more probably quite unlike, perhaps even
a table or a chair, and we may discover the nature of
our emotion if we study the substitution which is itself
a language. ‘The concrete images that have come before
us are from one or other of the states before our birth,
changed by the mind’s gutomatic phantasy, or from
those images of Anima Mundi which have some personal
link with ourselves, or images from our present life that
have evaded the memory and entered the Record alone.
All these concrete images are associated with the
Passionate Body; but the abstract intellectual memory
of the Spirit, that for names and qualities, continues to
serve in our sleep, though we cannot connect its contents
with recognisable facts. Spirit and Passionate Body are
separating, for it was the waking mind that held them
together; and when coherence is. attained, as it is at rare
moments, it is in some philosophical or symbolical drean
where a new centre of coherence is discovered in the
Celestial Body.

(Robartes told me that at Bagdad he came across an
old Judwali doctor who had taken a medical degree
in France, and made under his direction certain experi-
ments upon an Arab boy. This boy was a patient of
the doctor’s for some physical ailment which had no
connection with the fact that he talked in his sleep and
would answer questions. Sometimes Robartes carried
on conversations upon the most profound problems of the
soul with an automatic personality which seemed some-
times the boy’s own spirit and sometimes an extraneous
being. He discovered that the boy’s Passionate Body
continued to dream during these conversations, but he
only became aware of this dream when some physical
action arising out of it interfered with articulation.
Once the sleeper lapped like a cat under the influence
of some chance word spoken in his hearing before he
fell asleep;, upon another occasion he dreamt that his

246

mouth was full of feathers; and so on. If afterwards
Robartes asked the boy what he had dreamt it was the
dream of the Passionate Body and that alone he remem-
bered. Upon one occasion when the boy was lapping
Robartes imitated the barking of a dog as he might for
a child. The boy’s terror was great, the beating of his
heart violent and yet Robartes had scarcely made any
attempt at mimicry. Some part of the boy’s mind must
have accepted the suggestion deliberately; the dream
must have been a self-created terror. Robartes told me
that the dream of the Passionate Body after death was
so created and that the Spirit while it shared the dream
could be sufficiently apart from it to see men, scenes,
other spirits, though it could not act or speak outside
the dream.—O. Aherne.)

In our dreams we communicate with the dead in their
Waking State, and these dreams never come to an end
though they are only known to us while we sleep. They
are part of the Automatic Faculty, which with that
plastic substance sometimes visible at séances is an
element of personality which corresponds to, without
being identical with, the Spirits at Phase 1. This
Automatic Faculty prolongs, when we walk or breathe,
an act which was in the first instance voluntary, and it
may create, under an impulse from a spirit an automatic |
personality which resembles that spirit, more or less
accurately, according to the intensity of the impulse and
the freedom of the Automatic Faculty from contrary
impressions.

(During the sleep of the boy I described in a previous
note, Robartes once arranged a code with the automatic
personality. When the boy, who knew nothing of all
this was wide awake, perhaps eating or at some work,
the dream created being would comment upon Robartes’
conversation or action by tapping with the boy’s foot
or with his fork or in some similar way. Sometimes he

247

would speak through the boy’s lips and at such moments
the boy heard nothing, though the voice was loud and
clear, and though he heard everything that Robartes
said and every sound in the room and everything that
he himself said except those words. Gradually as the
automatic personality increased in power it made visible
or other signs outside the body of the boy, a sudden
light, a sudden heat or cold or some strong fragrance,
that of a flower frequently, and this fragrance was
generally perceptible to anybody who came into the
room. Once Robartes listened to the sleeping boy talking
to a number of spirits, and pausing for their answers.
The boy spoke to them as though he knew who they
were, their capacities, and when they lived. There was
something they wanted to tell him that he might know
what to do in a certain difficult matter, and that they
might be able to impress it on his mind they were
evidently insisting that he should go away by himself
at a certain hour the next day. He reluctantly
consented, being a very sociable person. Next morning
he knew nothing of his dream, but when the hour came
round said he wanted to be alone and strayed away into
the fields. On his return, he said that he had made up his
mind what to do in that difficult matter. Robartes’
comment was that he had obeyed an order received in
sleep without knowing that he did so and received a
thought without knowing that it was not his own, and
that this showed how strong is the control of the
Daimons over human life.—Owen Aherne.)

The automatic personality is never perhaps a puppet
in the hand of the spirit that created it, but has always
not only its own automatic life but that reflected from
the man himself. When, however, the creator’s control
is continuous, the thought and its expression may reveal
a mind with powers of co-ordination greater and swifter
than those of the embodied mind. One can most easily

study: these. powers: in their physical’ expression, and it
lias: long: been known that the hand of the medium can
under such influences: trace perfect: circles or make pat-.
terns of sweeping lines with a rapidity and precision no.
voluntary movement can achieve. A poltergeist has been
known to hurl small flat stones through narrow slits in
a. shutter from a considerable distance, though no living
man could have done it from but a few feet off. One
notices there and elsewhere that mathematical clarity
one would expect from Daimonic domination. It is
possible even that the first jugglers did not so much
imitate the effect of magic as display a sleight of hand, the
result of their obsession by an automatic personality.
Primary man in certain periods of thought, Shelley’s
Ahasuerus, let us say, is able ** By dreadful abstinence
and conquering penance of the mutinous flesh ’’ to keep
his Automatic Faculty; from desire and fear—hence. the
symbolic value given to chastity by primary philosophers
—and so be both vehicle and questioner. His mind has
but a single direct movement which may be wholly
dominated, whereas an antithetical inspiration may
demand a: separation of vehicle and questioner, a relation
like that between: Priest and Sybil, Socrates and Diotime,
wandering magician and his seryer. This relation, in its
highest form, implies a constant interchange of office.
and such relations may so cross and re-cross that a
community may grow clairvoyant. Lover and beloved,
friend and friend, son and daughter, or an entire family
and coven, are brought by the dramatisation of the Arcons
into such a crisis that the primary oppositions and
harmonies of the world are exposed in their minds and
fates. There must arise in the mind of one, where the
bond is between two, a need for some form of truth
so intense that the Automatic Faculty of the other grows
as it were hollow to receive that truth. Should the desire
but be to impose a particular form of belief upon others

249

or upon himself the automatic personalities may exercise
their control of thought or of mechanical movement for
deception; but if the man desires truth itself that which
comes will be the most profound truth possible to his
fate. I have, however, but spoken of the communication
of truth by intelligible word and there is a continual
influence of Waking Spirits upon man’s destiny by their
control of his automatic movements during ordinary life.
William Morris sometimes attributes to his heroes lucky
eyes and foretells of one that all that he does unwitting
shall be well done.

There is, however, communication of waking man and
Sleeping Spirit, the communication during expiation and
during the creation of a work of art, let us say. Seli-
exhaustion of a man’s creative power can make his
Automatic Faculty plastic to the Waking Spirits but it
can only be roused into that extremity of creation and
so of exhaustion, by conflict. Exhaustion and creation
should follow one another like day and night, his creation
bringing contact with one form of the spiritual primary,
his exhaustion with another, and this. can only come from
a choice forced by conflict with the physical primary.
When the conflict is sexual and the man and woman each
Victim for the Dead and for the Ghostly Selj—each
miracle working idol and an object of desire, they give
one another a treble love, that for the dead, that for the
living, that for the never living. And if those two for
whom the victimage had been undertaken be born of the
man and of the woman then there is created, both before
and after the birth, the position known as that of the
Four Daimons, and each of the four has been set free
irom fate.

250
XIV
THe RECORD AND THE MEMORY

I FIND a statement that for the supreme magical work
no word or symbol can be used that is still a part of
living tradition, whether that tradition is known to the
questioner or to the vehicle or not. Certainly when
sleep is interrupted by vision the seer goes back to remote
times, and the seer amidst brilliant light discovers myths
and symbols that can only be verified by prolonged
research. He has escaped from the individual Record
to that of the race. In even a comparatively superficial
communication, in so far as the actual mind of the spirit
is present, words and symbols are from the individual
Record and not from the individual memory. Those
things which have no intellectual element, sound of wind
and sea for instance, as distinguished, let us say, from
speech—constantly pass into the Record without passing
through the memory, and therefore come most easily
to the communicators, hence frequent symbolism
even where direct statement is possible. However all
images, languages, forms of every kind used in commun-
ications from spirits, have passed through living minds ~
whether in the past or in the present. All forms
are from the Record, and almost always from that
made by those who are still living, rarely from that
made by the spirit itself while living. Sometimes,
however, a spirit may come into contact with his
own Husk, and through that with his own personal
Record, or with the Husk of another if that other has
completely separated himself from it. It may mistake
that Husk for its own for it finds it difficult to distinguish
between Husk and Husk. The recovery, let us say, of
a language from such a Husk except in the form of whole

251

sentences imprinted upon the Record with their associated
meaning is difficult, and a spirit with knowledge so
acquired may write or speak accurately sentences in
Greek or Latin because the Husk when living read or
wrote or spoke such sentences, but will seldom be able
to form the simplest Greek or Latin sentence for itself.
It is easier to recover the concrete image than an
abstraction.

XV
THe Herrinc FISHERS

MUCH of this book is abstract, because it has not yet
been lived, for no man can dip into life more than a
moiety of any system. When a child, I went out with
herring fishers one dark night, and the dropping of their
nets into the luminous sea and the drawing of them up
has remained with me as a dominant image. Have I
found a good net for a herring fisher?

XVI
MyTHOLOGY

A BOOK of modern philosophy may prove to our logical
capacity that there is a transcendental portion of our
being that is timeless and spaceless, and therefore
immortal, and yet our imagination remain subjected to
nature as before. The great books—Berkeley’s ‘°* Prin-
ciples of Human Knowledge ”’ let us say—beget new
books, whole generations of books, but lie goes on
unchanged. It was not so with ancient philosophy

252
because the ancient philosopher had something to. rein-
force his thought,—the Gods, the Sacred Dead, Egyptian
Theurgy, the Priestess Diotime. He could assume,
perhaps even prove, that every condition of mind dis-
covered ‘by analysis, even that. which is timeless, space-
less, is present vivid experience to some being, and that
we could in some degree communicate with this being
while still alive, and after our death share in the
experience. We can believe that every school child
possesses in some degree all natural faculty displayed by
even the greatest man, for every such child can, if it will,
understand some few lines of Milton or Shakespeare.
That we may believe that all men possess the super-
natural faculties I would restore to the philosopher his
mythology.

Finished at Syracuse, January, 1925.

8. ALL SOULS’ NIGHT

Midnight has come and the great Christ Church bell,
And many a lesser bell, sound through the room;

And it is All Souls’ Night

And two long glasses brimmed with muscatel

Bubble upon the table. A ghost may come;

For it is a ghost’s right,

His element is so fine

Being sharpened by his death,

To drink from the wine-breath

While our gross palates drink from the whole wine.

I need some mind that, if the cannon sound
From every quarter of the world, can stay
Wound in mind’s pondering,

As mummies in the mummy-cloth are wound;
Because I have a marvellous thing to say,

A certain marvellous thing

None but the living mock;

Though not for sober ear;

It may be all that hear

Should laugh and weep an hour upon the clock.

X—’s the first I call. He loved strange thought
And knew that sweet extremity of pride
That’s called platonic love,
And that to such a pitch of passion wrought
Nothing could bring him, when his lady died,
Anodyne for his love.

253

254
Words were but wasted breath;

One dear hope had he:

The inclemency

Of that or the next winter would be death.

I'wo thoughts were so mixed up I could not tell
Whether of her or God he thought the most,
But think that his mind’s eye,

When upward turned, on one sole image fell;
And that a slight companionable ghost

Wild with divinity,

Had so lit up the whole

Immense miraculous house,

The Bible promised us,

It seemed a gold-fish swimming in a bowl.

On Florence Emery I call the next,

Who finding the first wrinkles on a face

Admired and beautiful,

And knowing that the future would be vexed
With ’minished beauty, multiplied commonplace,
Preferred to teach a school

Away from neighbour or friend

Among dark skins, and there

Permit foul years to wear,

Hidden from eyesight, to the unnoticed end.

Before that end much had she ravelled out

From a discourse in figurative speech

By some learned Indian r
On the soul’s journey. How it is whirled about
Wherever the orbit of the moon can reach,

Until it plunge into the sun,

And there—free and yet fast,

Being both Chance and Choice—

Forget its broken toys

And sink into its own delight at last.

955
And I call up MacGregor from the grave,
For in my first hard spring-time we were friends,
Although of iate estranged.
I thought him half a lunatic, half knave,
And told him so; but friendship never ends,
And what if mind seem changed,
And it seemed changed with the mind,
When thoughts rise up unbid
On generous things that he did
And I grow half contented to be blind.

He had much industry at setting out,

Much boisterous courage, before loneliness

Had driven him crazed;

For meditations upon unknown thought

Make human intercourse grow less and less;

They are neither paid nor praised.

But he’d object to the host,

The glass because my glass;

A ghost-lover he was

And may have grown more arrogant being a ghost.

But names are nothing. What matter who it be,
So that his elements have grown so fine

The fume of muscatel

Can give his sharpened palate ecstasy

No living man can drink from the whole wine.

I have mummy truths to tell

Whereat the living mock;

Though not for sober ear

For maybe all that hear

Should weep and laugh an hour upon the clock.

Such thought—such thought have I that hold it tight
Tull meditation master all its parts,
Nothing can stay my glance

256
Until that glance run in the world’s despite
To where the damned have howled away their hearts,
And where the blessed dance;
Such thought, that in it bound
I need no other thing,
Wound in mind’s wandering,
As mummies in the mummy-cloth are wound.

Oxford, Autumn, 1920.
