The Yoruba-Speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast of West Africa (A. B. Ellis, 1894)
==========================================================
Major A. B. Ellis's pioneering 1894 ethnography of the Yoruba — religion, manners, customs, laws and language, with the classic early account of the orisha system — the founding English study of Yoruba culture. Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/b21781370).

O.xT


THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES

OF  THE

SLAVE  COAST  OF  WEST  AFEICA


Digitized  by  tine  Internet  Arcliive

in  2015


Iittps://archive.org/details/b21781370


THE  YORUBA- SPEAKING  PEOPLES


OF  THE


SLAVE  COAST  OF  WEST  AFRICA


THEIE


RELIGION,  MANNERS,  CUSTOMS,  LAWS,  LANGUAGE,  Etc.


WITH  AN  APPENDIX    CONTAINING  A  COMPAEISON  OF  THE
TSHI,  GA,  E^E,  AND  YORUBA  LANGUAGES.


BY

A.   B.  ELLIS,

Lieut.- Colonel,  First  Battalion  West  India  Regiment.

AUTHOR  OF  "THE  TSHI-SPEAKING  PEOPLES  OF  THE  GOLD  COAST"  ;  "THE  EWE-SPEAKIXO  PEOPLES
OF  THE  SLAVE  COAST";  "A  HISTORY  OF  THE  GOLD  COAST  OF  WEST  AFRICA,"

ETC.,  ETC.


LONDON:   CHAPMAN  AND  HALL,  Lc

18'J4.
'iAll  rights  reserved.


WESTMINSTER  :
PBIKTED  BY  KICHOLS  AKD  «0>;s,
25,  PABLIAMEKT  STBEET.


CONTENTS.


CHAPTER  I.

PAGE

INTRODUCTORY  ..........  1

CHAPTEE  II.

CHIEF  GODS  34

CHAPTER  III.

MINOR  GODS  70

CHAPTER  IV.

REMARKS  ON  THE  FOREGOING  85

CHAPTER  V.

PRIESTS  AND  WORSHIP  93


vi


CONTENTS.


CHAPTER  VI.

EGUNGOT,  ORO,  ABIKU,  AND  TARIOUS  SUPERSTITIONS

CHAPTER  VII.

THE  INDWELLING  SPIRITS  AND  SOULS  OF  MEN

CHAPTER  VIII.

MEASUREMENTS  OF  TIME

CHAPTER  IX.

CEREMONIES  AT  BIRTH,  MARRIAGE,  AND  DEATH  .

CHAPTER  X.

SYSTEM  OF  GOYERNMENT  .         .         .         .  •

CHAPTER  XI.

LAWS  AND  CUSTOMS


CHAPTER  XII.

LANGUAGE


CONTENTS.
CHAPTER  XIII.

l-ROVERBS  ......


CHAPTER  XIV.

FOLK-LORE  TALES  .....


CHAPTER  XV.

CONCLUSIONS


APPENDIX


I


THE   YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES

OF  THE

SLAVE  COAST  OF  WEST  AFRICA.


CHAPTER  1.
Inteoductort.

The  portion  of  tlie  West  African  coast  occnpiecl  by
tlie  Yoruba-speaking  peoples  is  situated  in  the  eastern
lialf  of  tlie  Slave  Coast,  and  lies  between  Badagry,  on
the  west,  and  tlie  Benin  Eiver,  on  tlie  east.  Tlie
extent  of  sea-board  held  by  tliem  is  thns  smaller  than
that  occupied  either  by  the  Tshi  or  by  the  B\Ve
tribes ;  but  the  Yorubas  are  really  an  inland  people,
and  it  was  not  until  the  beginning  of  the  present
century  that  they  moved  to  the  south  and  colonised
Lagos  and  the  adjacent  littoral.

The  territory  now  inhabited  by  the  Yoruba  tribes
is  bounded  on  the  west  by  Dahomi,  on  the  south-west
by  Porto  Novo  and  Appa,  on  the  south  by  the  sea,  on
the  east  by  Benin,  and  on  the  north  by  the  Moham-
medan tribes  from  the  interior,  who  have  within
recent  times  conquered  and  annexed  the  Yoruba
province  of  Ilorin,  and  whose  territory  may  now  be
said  to  extend  southward  to  about  8°  30'  N.  latitude.

a-  -B


2


THE  YOnUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


The  aggressions  of  tliese  Moliammedan  tribes  com-
menced very  early  in  tlie  present  century,  and  it  was
no  doubt  tliis  pressure  from  the  north  that  caused  the
Yorubas  to  move  to  the  south  and  colonise  the  sea-
board.

Yoruba  country  at  present  comprises  the  following
states,  or  political  units  : —

(1)  The  British  colony  of  Lagos,  which  covers  the
whole  sea-front  between  the  meridian  of  the  Ajarra
Creek  and  the  Benin  Eiver,  and  has  absorbed  the
former  native  kingdoms  of  Appa,  Pokra,  Badagry,
Lagos,  Palma,  Lekki,  Mahin,  Ogbo,  and  Jakri.

(2)  Ketu.  This  is  the  western  state.  It  is  bounded
on  the  west  by  Dahomi,  on  the  south  by  Porto  Novo,
and  on  the  east  by  Egba.  Its  northern  limits  are
undefined.

(3)  Egba.  It  lies  east  of  Ketu  and  south-west  of
Yoruba  proper.  Its  capital  is  Abeokuta,  "Under  the
Rock."

(4)  Jebu.  This  is  the  south-eastern  kingdom,  and
is  divided  into  two  provinces,  called  Jebu  Remo  and
Jebu  Ode.  Jebu  Ode  has  for  its  capital  a  town  of
the  same  name,  that  of  Jebu  Remo  is  called  Ofiin.
The  river  Odo  Omi  is  considered  the  north-western
boundary  of  Jebu,  and,  roughly  speaking,  the  territory
of  the  Jebus  may  be  said  to  extend  inland  to  a  distance
of  some  fifty  miles  from  the  lagoon.

(5)  Ekiti  Tribes.  These  tribes,  which  form  a  con-
federation, lie  to  the  north-east  of  Jebu  Ode.

(6)  Ibadan.    It  lies  north  of  Jebu  Ode.

(7)  Yoruba  proper.  This  kingdom,  whose  capital
is  Oyo,  lies  to  the  north  of  Ibadan  and  Egba,  and


INTRODUCTORY.


3


towards  the  west  its  boundary  trends  southward  to
within  some  twenty-five  miles  of  Abeokuta.

(8)  Ijesa,  capital  Ilesa.    This  state  is  situated  to
the  south-east  of  Yoruba  proper.

(9)  Ife,  capital  of  the  same  name,  lies  south-west
of  Ijesa.

(10)  Ondo.  This  kingdom,  capital  Ondo,  is  situ-
ated south-east  of  Ife.

In  addition  there  are  several  small  states,  or  rather
mdependent  townships,  consisting  of  a  town  and  a
few  outlying  villages.  The  principal  are  Bgbado,
Okeodan,  Ado,  Awori,  and  Igbessa,  all  of  which  lie
south  of  Egba.  Their  inhabitants  are  Egbados,  or
Southern  Egbas  {IJgba-odo,  Egbas  of  the  coast).

The  inhabitants  of  all  these  states  speak  one  lan-
guage, the  Yoruba.  They  are  called  ISTagos  by  the
French,  and  by  the  English  are  named  after  their
political  divisions,  as  Egbas,  Ibadans,  Jebus,  &c.

The  lagoon  system,  which  in  the  last  volume  of  this
series  was  noted  as  commencing  a  short  distance  to
the  west  of  the  Yolta  River,  on  the  Gold  Coast,
extends  along  the  whole  sea-front  of  the  territory
occupied  by  the  Yoruba-speaking  tribes,  and  affords
a  contmuous  waterway  from  Porto  JN'ovo  to  Benin.
The  extension  of  the  continent  in  a  southerly  direction,
which  was  mentioned  in  the  last  volume  as  typical  of
the  western  half  of  the  Slave  Coast,  and  which  may
doubtless  be  attributed  to  the  action  of  the  Guinea
current  in  closing  with  sand  the  openings  to  former
indentations  which  existed  in  the  coast-line,  is  also
equally  noticeable  in  this  the  eastern  half  of  the
Slave  Coast;  and,  generally  speaking,  the  country  is

3  2


4


THE  70RUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


open,  flat,  and  devoid  of  stones.    Jebu  is  an  excep-
tion, being  tliickly  forested ;  but  it  appears  tliat  less
territory  lias  been  won  from  the  sea  south  of  Jebu,
and  east  of  Lagos  generally,  than  in  the  districts  to
the  west,  between  Lagos  and  Dahomi.    To  the  east
of  Lagos  the  old  coast-line  seems  to  have  been  almost
conterminous  with  the  northern  shores  of  the  Kradu
and  Lekki  lagoons,  and  the  water-way  which  connects
them  by  way  of  Epi,  while  to  the  west  it  appears  to
have  trended  back  northwards  beyond  the  lagoons
of  Oluge  and  Porto  Novo.    It  is  only  after  crossing
the  narrow  lagoon  or  creek  called  the  Ajarra  Creek,
which  runs  in  a  convex  curve  from  the  Porto  Novo
lagoon  to  the  Okpara,  that  stones  are  found  in  the
soil;  and  about  twenty  miles  to  the  west  of  this  there
appears  to  have  been  at  one  time  a  great  bay,  the
northern  limit  of  which  was  the  Ko,  or  Great  Marsh,
of  Dahomi,  thirty-five  miles  from  the  present  coast-
line.  The  dotted  line  in  the  accompanying  map  shows
the  probable  position  of  the  ancient  coast-line  between
the  Yolta  River  and  lickki.

Northward  of  the  old  coast-line  the  Yoruba  country
rises  very  gradually  in  a  succession  of  low-lying
plateaus,  traversed  by  a  few  lines  of  low  hills,  or
undulations  in  the  ground ;  but  a  chain  of  mountains,
whose  general  direction  is  east  and  west,  extends,  at
about  eight  degrees  north  latitude,  from  Dahomi  to
the  northern  border  of  Ijesa,  where  the  country  is
rugged  and  difiicult.  Isolated  and  densely-wooded
hills,  from  800  to  1,200  feet  high,  are  also  found  in

Ife  and  Ondo.

In  some  parts,  as  at  Sakiti,  north  of  Ajarra,  and  at


6


THE  YOnUBA-SPEAKlNG  PEOPLES.


Abeokuta,  isolated  masses  of  granite  afford  evidence
of  great  denudation.  In  fact  the  whole  western  coast
of  Africa,  between  the  Isles  de  Los,  seventy  miles  north
of  Sierra  Leone,  and  Lagos,  and  probably  beyond
those  limits,  shows  traces  of  an  enormous  denudation.
The  table-topped  Kofiu  Mountain,  which  rises  sheer
from  the  plain  north  of  the  Melikuri  Eiver  to  a  height
of  2,000  feet,  is  the  sole  remnant  of  a  vast  cap  of
sandstone  that  doubtless  at  one  time  covered  the
whole  of  that  part  of  the  country;  and  the  Krobo  Moun-
tain, an  isolated  and  precipitous  mass,  800  feet  high,
situated  in  the  Krobo  plain  on  the  Grold  Coast,  to-
gether with  the  table-topped  mountains  with  vertical
cliffs  in  the  Ataklu  district,  to  the  north  of  the  Quittah
(Keta)  lagoon,  will  probably,  when  geologically  exa-
mined, prove  to  be  other  vestiges  of  the  same  sand-
stone formation.

Of  the  early  history  of  the  Yoruba-speaking  peoples
nothing  is  known,  except  what  can  be  gleaned  from
Dalzel's  "  History  of  Dahomey,"  1793,  from  which  it
would  appear  that,  at  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth
century,  all  the  different  tribes  were  united,  and  were
ruled  by  a  king  who  resided  at  Old  Oyo,  sometimes
called  Katunga.  The  kingdom  of  Yoruba  also  seems
to  have  been  more  powerful  than  the  other  two  great
African  kingdoms,  Dahomi  and  Ashanti.  Between
1724  and  1725  the  King  of  Yoruba  espoused  the
quarrel  of  the  King  of  Ardra,  whose  kingdom  had
been  overthrown  by  Dahomi,  and  sent  a  large  army,
chiefly  consisting  of  cavalry,  to  invade  Dahomi.  By
a  stratagem  *'  the  Yorubas  were  routed,  and  the  king
*  "  Ewc-spoaking  Peoples,"  p.  285.


INTRODUCTORY.


1


of  Daliomi  tlien  diplomaticallj  sued  for  peace,  wliicli
was  granted;  but  about  September,  1728,  a  new
quarrel  having  arisen,  tliis  time  in  tlie  interests  of  tlie
King  of  Wliydali,  a  Yoruba  army  again  invaded
Daliomi,  and  a  desultory  war  lasted  until  1730,  when
peace  was  once  more  made.  In  1738  another  Yoruba
army  invaded  Daliomi,  defeated  the  king,  and  captured
and  burnt  Agbomi,  Kana,  and  Zassa  ;  *  and  from  that
time  forward  the  Yorubas  annually  raided  into  Dahomi,
ravaging  the  country,  and  retiring  again  at  the  com-
mencement of  the  rains.  This  state  of  affairs  was
brought  to  an  end  by  a  treaty  of  peace  made  in  1747,
by  which  the  King  of  Dahomi  undertook  to  pay  a
heavy  annual  tribute  to  the  King  of  Yoruba.  After
this  we  hear  no  more  of  the  Yorubas  in  Dalzel's
History,  which  is  only  carried  to  1791,  except  that,
in  1786,  they  interfered  to  prevent  the  Dahomis  from
attacking  Porto  JSTovo  ;  but  the  tribute  appears  to  have
been  paid  up  to  the  days  of  King  Gezo  of  Dahomi
(1818).

Governor  Dalzel  informs  us,  however,  that  when
the  "Byeos"t  (Yorubas)  were  dissatisfied  with  a
king,  they  sent  a  deputation  to  him  with  a  present  of
parrot's  eggs,  and  a  message  that  they  considered
he  must  be  fatigued  with  the  cares  of  government,
and  that  it  was  time  for  him  to  rest  and  take  a  little
sleep.  Upon  receiving  this  message,  the  king  forth-
with retired  to  his  apartments,  as  if  to  sleep,  and
then  gave  directions  to  his  women  to  strangle  him,

*  "Ewe-speaking  Peoples,"  p.  294.

t  The  Yorubas  were  called  Eycos  or  Oyos  by  old  writers,  after  the
name  of  tlicir  capital,  Oyo.


8


THE  YOBUBA-SFEAKING  PEOPLED.


vvliicli  they  accordingly  did.*  In  1774,  tlie  then  king
declined  to  take  tlie  hint,  and  returned  the  parrot's
eggs.  The  chiefs  tried  to  su^Dport  the  custom  by
force,  and  Ochemi,  the  prime  minister  headed  a  rebel-
lion, which  was,  however,  crushed,  and  Ochemi,  and
all  his  numerous  family  were  put  to  death.

The  reason  of  our  having  such  meagre  information
of  this  great  West  African  kingdom  is  that  the  Yorubas
did  not  inhabit  the  territories  on  the  sea-coast,  the  Ewe
tribes  occupying  the  coast  line  as  far  east  as  Badagry,
and  the  Benin  tribes  the  portion  from  Badagry  to
Benin.    The  Ewe  tribes  had  in  fact  spread  along
the  sea-shore  from  west  to   east,  and  the  Benin
tribes  from  east  to  west,  till  they  met,  and  covered
all  the  sea  frontage  of  the  inland  territory  occupied
by  the  Yorubas.    This  neglect  on  the  part  of  the
Yorubas  to  push  down  to  the  sea  may  have  been  partly
.due  to  superstition,  for  Dalzel  says  that  "  the  fetiche
of  the  Eyeos  was  the  sea,"  and  that  they  and  their
king  were  threatened  with  death  by  their  priests  if
they  ever  dared  to  look  upon  it.     Slave  traders  and
others,  who  frequented  the  Slave  Coast  during  the
last  century,  were  thus  not  brought  into  contact  with
the  Yorubas,  and  consequently  we  hear  but  little  of
them ;  while  the  literature  concerning  AsLanti  and
Dahomi,  which,  hke  Yoruba,  were  originally  inland
powers,  but  whose  invasions  of  the  coast  kingdoms
brought  them  into  contact  with  Europeans,  is  ample.

As  far  as  can  be  ascertained,  the  chief  strength  of
Yoruba  lay  in  its  cavalry,  which  was  said  to  number

*  This  custom  remaiued  in  force  until  quite  recent  times,  if,  indeed,
it  is  yet  altogether  extinct.


INTRODUGTOliY.


9


100,000,  a  manifest  exaggeration,  for  horses  have
never  been  numerous  in  the  few  districts  of  West
Africa  in  which  it  is  possible  for  them  to  live.  The
report  as  to  the  number  of  cavalry  reached  the  traders
through  the  coast  tribe,  who  owned  no  horses,  and
who  were  no  doubt  greatly  impressed  by  the  spec-
tacle of  a  few  score  of  mounted  men.  According  to
tradition,  the  following  was  the  method  of  determin-
ing the  number  of  men  required  for  a  military  expedi-
tion. An  ox-hide  was  pegged  down  in  front  of  the
general's  tent,  and  the  horsemen  made  to  ride  over  it
in  succession  between  two  spears.  When,  by  this
process,  a  hole  had  been  worn  in  the  hide,  the
number  of  men  was  thought  sufficient  for  an  ordinary
campaign.  For  serious  operations  two  ox-hides  were
used,  one  placed  over  the  other.

Although  as  we  know  from  Dalzel's  History,  Oyo,
or  Yoruba,  was  a  powerful  kingdom  at  least  as  early
as  1724,  Yoruba  traditional  history  carries  us  back
no  further  than  the  end  of  the  eighteenth  century,  a
fact  which  shows  what  little  reliance  can  be  placed
upon  the  traditions  of  nations  who  are  unacquainted
with  the  art  of  writing.  The  first  king  of  whom  the
aroJdn,  or  chroniclers,  have  any  knowledge  is  Ajagbo,
who  appears  to  have  reigned  soon  after  1780,  and
whose  name  is  preserved  in  the  metrical  sentence
which  fixes  the  rhythm  of  the  ogidigho  drum,  as
follows  :  Gbo,  Ajagho,  gbo  oha  gho,  Id  emi,  Id  osi  gbo.*

*  "  Grow  old,  AjagbOj  grow  old  king,  grow  old,  may  I  also  grow
old."  Each  drum  lias  its  own  measure  or  rhythm,  which  is  proper  to
it,  and,  in  order  to  preserve  this  rhythm,  sentences  arc  invented  to  call
it  to  mind.    In  this  case  the  rhythm  is —

Gbo  I  Ajagbo  \  —  |  r/bo  \  obu  rjbo  \  —  |  hi  emi  hi  osi  \  rjbo.


10


THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


In  tlie  days  of  Ajagbo  tlie  kingdom  of  Yoruba  con-
sisted of  tlie  four  following  states.

(1)  Yoruba  proper,  wliose  capital,  Old  Ojo,  or
Katunga,  was  situated  some  ninety  miles  to  the  nortli
of  tlie  present  town  of  Oyo.  The  king  of  this  state,
whose  title  was  Alafin,  or  Alaioofin,  literally  "One  who
owns  the  entering  of  the  palace,"  was  the  ruler  over
all  the  Yoruba-speaking  tribes.

(2)  Egba,  which  lay  to  the  south  and  west  of  the
above  kingdom.  Its  chief  town  was  Ake,  and  from  it
the  chief  took  his  title  of  Alahe,  "  One  who  owns
Ake."

(3)  Ketu.  This  was  then,  as  now,  the  western
province.  Its  capital  was  Ketu,  and  from  it  the  chief
took  his  title  of  Alakeiu,  "One  who  owns  Ketu."

(4)  Jebu,  which  lay  south  and  east  of  Yoruba
proper.  It  was  divided  into  Jebu  Eemu  and  Jebu
Ode,  each  having  its  own  chief,  but  the  ruler  of  the
latter,  called  the  Awujale,  was  considered  the  chief  of
the  whole.

The  rulers  of  Yoruba,  Egba,  and  Ketu  styled  each
other  "  brother."

Ajagbo  was  succeeded  by  Abiodun,  who  is  said  to
have  enjoyed  a  long  and  peaceful  reign,  so  that  the
reign  of  his  brother  and  successor,  Arogangan,  can
scarcely  have  commenced  before  1800.  It  was  during
the  reign  of  Arogangan  that  the  Yoruba  kingdom
commenced  to  break  up.  The  Fulas,  it  seems,  over-
ran the  territory  of  the  Hans  as,  and  the  latter,  driven
southward,  sought  refuge  in  the  northern  provinces  of
Yoruba.  Arogangan  had  appointed  his  nephew,
Afunja,  governor  of  Ilorin,  the  north-eastern  pro-


INTRODUCTOliY.


11


vince,  wliicli  contained  a  large  nnmber  of  Hausa
refugees,  and  Afunja,  being  ambitious,  conceived  the
project  of  utilising  tlie  Hausas  in  order  to  dethrone
his  uncle  and  make  himself  Alafin.  His  plans  being
matured,  he  raised  an  insurrection,  -which  met  with  a
measure  of  success,  for  Oyo  was  besieged,  and
Arogangan,  in  order  to  avoid  falling  into  the  hands
of  his  nephew,  poisoned  himself ;  but  Afunja  was
not  able  to  secure  the  throne,  as  the  elders  of  Ojo
elected  to  the  monarchy  Adebo,  the  brother  of
Arogangan,  and  Afunja  had  to  retire  to  Ilorin,
where  he  maintained  a  semi-independent  position.
These  events  are  supposed  to  have  taken  place  about
1807,  and  it  was  about  the  same  time  that  some  of
the  Yorubas  first  pushed  to  the  sonth  and  colonised
Lagos.  The  first  chief  of  Lagos  was  named  Ashipa,
and  is  said  to  have  belonged  to  the  family  of  the
Alafin.

Adebo  only  reigued  about  four  months,  and  died
suddenly,  from  which  it  was  supposed  that  he  was
poisoned.  He  was  succeeded  by  Maku,  who  en-
deavoured to  make  head  against  the  Mohammedan
tribes  who  were  now  pressing  in  from  the  north,  but
he  was  defeated  in  a  great  battle,  and  committed
suicide,  aftsr  a  reign  of  about  only  three  months.  An
interregnum  now  ensued,  during  which  the  reins  of
power  were  held  by  the  Oba-slwrun,  or  prime  minister,
and  it  was  not  until  five  years  had  elapsed  that  a  new
king,  named  Majotu,  was  elected.  He  reigned  about
seven  or  eight  years,  committed  suicide  on  account,
tradition  says,  of  the  misbehaviour  of  his  son,  and  was
succeeded  by  Amodo.


12


THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


Afunja  had,  since  1807,  remained  in  possession  of
llorin,  where  he  had  sought  to  strengthen  himself  by
encouraging  Mohammedans  to  settle,  and,  about  1825,
while  Amodo  was  engaged  with  the  invading  tribes
from  the  north,  he  again  made  war  upon  Yoruba.  He
captured  and  destroyed  a  number  of  towns,  and  was
apparently  about  to  carry  all  before  him,  when,  for
some  reason  that  has  never  transpired,  he  was  con-
veyed back  to  the  town  of  llorin  by  those  very  Hausa
mercenaries  through  whose  aid  he  had  hoped  to  be-
come Alafin,  and  pubhcly  burned  alive.  The  Moham-
medan party  had  for  some  years  been  dominant  in
llorin,  and  now,  declaring  that  it  would  no  longer
recognise  a  pagan  king,  it  elected  a  Mohammedan  to
the  supreme  power,  and  severed  the  connection  with
Yoruba.

llorin  now  took  the  lead  in  the  Mohammedan  in-
vasion of  Yoruba,  and  the  Yorubas  seem  to  have  been
invariably  worsted.  In  1830,  when  it  was  visited  by
Lander,  Old  Oyo  was  still  the  capital  of  Yoruba,  but
between  1833  and  1835  it  was  captured  and  destroyed
by  the  Mohammedans,  and  the  Yorubas,  flying  south-
wards, founded  their  present  capital  Oyo,  about
ninety  miles  south  of  the  old  one.  The  Egbas,  taking
advantage  of  the  overthrow  of  Yoruba,  declared  them-
selves independent,  but  the  Yorubas,  as  soon  as  they
were  settled  in  their  new  territory,  attacked  them
with  vigour,  and  drove  them  out  of  all  their  northern
towns.  A  desultory  war  then  lingered  till  about  1838,
when  the  Egbas  abandoned  their  territory,  and  moving
to  the  south,  founded  their  present  capital,  Abeokuta.
The  new  town  was  divided  into  several  distinct


INTRODUCTORY.


13


quarters,  or  townships,  which  were  named  after  an
equal  number  of  towns  that  had  been  destroyed  in  the
war,  and  one  of  them,  Ake,  still  preserves  the  name
of  the  old  Eg-ba  capital.  Although  these  events  oc-
curred so  recently,  they  have  already  become  clothed
with  myth ;  and  Lishabe,  the  chief  who  led  them  to
Abeokuta,  is  believed  by  the  Egbas  to  have  been  a
o-iant  and  a  demi-god.

About  the  same  time,  Ibadan,  a  town  of  the  old
province  of  Egba,  situated  some  thirty-five  miles
south  of  Oyo,  declared  itself  independent  of  Egba ;
the  original  Egba  inhabitants  having  been  driven  out
by  the  Jebus,  and  the  latter,  in  their  turn,  by  Yoruba
refugees.  Other  secessions  took  place,  and  by  1840
the  Yoruba  kingdom  had  split  up  into  the  following
independent  states.

(1)  Yoruba,  south  of  Old  Yoruba,  capital  Oyo.

(2)  Egba,  south  and  west  of  Old  Egba,  capital
Abeokuta.

(3)  Ketu.

(4)  Jebu.

(5)  Ibadan,  a  small  state  south  of  Oyo.  It  owned
a  nominal  allegiance  to  the  Alafin,  because  its
inhabitants  were  Yoruba  refugees,  but  was  really
independent.

(6)  Ijesa,  a  small  state  south  of  Ilorin.  The  ruler
was  styled  the  Owa.

(7)  Ife,  a  small  state  south-west  of  Ijesa.  The
ruler  was  styled  the  Oni.

The  former  Yoruba  province  of  Ilorin  was  now
inhabited  by  Fulas,  Bornus,  and  Hausas,  and  was  said
to  have  a  population  of  300,000,  80,000  of  whom


14


THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


were  in  the  town  of  Ilorin.  The  Fulas  were  the
dominant  race,  and  the  government  was  in  tlieir
liands.

Shortly  after  1840  the  Ekiti  tribes,  as  thej  were
afterwards  termed,  that  is,  the  inhabitants  of  the
various  towns  lying  between  Ibadan  and  Ijesa,  and
the  adjoining  territory  to  the  south,  formed  a  con-
federation, which  was  soon  joined  by  Ife  and  Ijesa,
the  ruler  of  the  latter  state  being  elected  head  of  the
confederation.  The  Mohammedans  of  Ilorin  were
the  first  to  take  alarm  at  this  coalition,  and  attacked
the  confederates,  destroying  or  annexing  several
towns  while  Ibadan  soon  followed  suit,  and  after  a
time  succeeded  in  conquering  and  annexing  Ijesa.
The  result  of  these  various  conflicts  was  that  the
confederation  was  entirely  subdued,  one  half  passing
under  the  rule  of  Ilorin  and  the  other  under  that  of
Ibadan.  Before  long,  however,  the  inhabitants  of
the  towns  which  had  been  annexed  to  Ilorin  applied
to  Ibadan  for  assistance,  and  another  war  ensued,
which  resulted  in  the  expulsion  of  the  Ilorins,  and
the  establishment  of  the  rule  of  Ibadan  over  the  whole
Ekiti  confederation.    This  was  about  1858.

While  these  events  were  taking  place  in  the  interior,
Lagos,  which,  as  we  have  seen,  was  colonised  from
Yoruba  at  the  beginning  of  the  century,  had  become
a  place  of  some  note  as  a  slave  emporium.  The  wars
in  the  north,  which  had  been  almost  incessant  since
the  rebellion  of  Afunja  about  1807,  had  resulted  in
the  capture  of  many  thousands  of  prisoners  of  war,
of  both  sexes  and  all  ages,  and  the  dregs  of  these,
the  men  who  Avere  of  no  local  importance,  and  the


INTBODUCTORY.


15


women  who  were  no  longer  attractive,  were,  in
accordance  with,  the  usaal  practice,  sold  to  tlie  slave-
traders.  Lagos  was  the  most  convenient  port,  and
•  fhey  were  therefore  marched  down  there  in  gangs  to
await  shipment.  This  traffic  in  slaves,  which  brought
Lagos  into  some  notoriety,  commenced  about  the
year  1815,  and  soon  attained  very  large  dimensions.

In  1836  a  struggle  for  the  succession  broke  out  in
Lagos,  and  resulted  in  Kosoko,  the  legitimate  pre-
tender, being  expelled  the  kingdom  by  his  rival
Oluwole,  who  secured  the  throne  for  himself.  Olu-
wole  died  in  1841,  and  was  succeeded  by  Akitoye,
who  was  foolish  enough  to  invite  Kosoko,  who  was
still  alive  and  in  banishment,  to  come  and  live  in
Lagos.  Kosoko  readily  accepted  the  invitation,  soon
began  conspiring,  and  before  long  found  himself  suf-
ficiently well  supported  to  rebel.  In  the  struggle
which  ensued  the  town  of  Lagos  was  burned,  and
Akitoye  driven  into  banishment.  He  found  a  refuge
at  Badagry,  and,  in  order  to  induce  the  English  to
espouse  his  cause,  promised  that,  if  he  were  re-instated
at  Lagos,  he  would  help  to  suppress  the  slave-trade.
This  negotiation  coming  to  the  knowledge  of  Kosoko,
he  despatched  a  force  to  Badagry  to  attack  Akitoye,
which  burned  the  town,  killed  an  English  trader
named  Glee,  and  destroyed  a  great  deal  of  property
belonging  to  British  subjects.  The  senior  naval
officer  upon  the  station  thereupon  determined  to  sup-
port Akitoye  against  Kosoko,  and  H.M.  sloops
Philomel,  Harlequin,  Niger,  and  Watertvitch,  with  the
gun  vessels  Bloodhound  and  Volcano,  assembled  off  the
Lagos  bar  in  November,  1851,  and  on  the  25th  all


16


TEE  YOnUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


the  sliips'  boats,  towed  by  the  Bloodhound,  entered
the  lagoon  and  proceeded  towards  Lagos  Island.  As
the  British  Consul,  who  was  with  the  flotilla,  had
hopes  that  Kosoko  would  submit  to  a  display  of
force,  flags  of  truce  were  kept  flying ;  and  although,
on  rounding  the  first  point,  a  heavy  musketry  fire
was  opened  by  the  natives,  the  fire  was  not  returned,
and  the  flags  were  not  lowered  till  the  boats  were
within  a  mile  of  the  town.    At  this  point  several
guns  opened  on  the  boats,  so  the  flags  of  truce  were
hauled  down  and  the  fire  returned.    The  fire  from
the  boats  had,  however,  but  little  effect  on  the  natives,
who  were  well  covered  by  stockades  and  mud  walls,
and  a  party  of  one  hundred  and  sixty  men  was
accordingly  landed.     They  found  themselves  in  a
maze  of  narrow  streets,  from  every  corner  of  which
they  were  fired  upon  by  concealed  enemies,  and  after
losing  two  officers  killed  and  several  men  wounded,
they  were  compelled  to  retreat  to  the  boats.

This  failure  led  to  a  more  determined  attack  in
December,  on  the  26th  of  which  month  a  consider-
able force,  under  the  command  of  Commodore  H.
"W.  Bruce,  entered  the  lagoon  in  boats.  The  natives
offered  a  stubborn  resistance,  and  had  in  position
several  guns,  which  were  exceedingly  well  served.
The  Teazer  got  aground  abreast  of  a  battery,
upon  which  her  own  gun  could  not  be  brought  to
bear,  and  to  save  her  from  destruction  it  became
necessary  to  land  a  party  and  carry  the  battery  by
assault.  This  was  done  in  gallant  style,  but  with
the  heavy  loss  of  one  officer  and  thirteen  men  killed,
and  four  officers  and  fifty-eight  men  wounded.  The


TNTRODUCTORY,


17


other  vessels  and  boats  had.  in  tlie  meantime  kept
up  a  vigorous  bombardment,  wliicli  was  maintained
all  that  day,  and  continued  next  morning  from  day-
break until  about  11  a.m.,  when  a  magazine  on  shore
blew  up  and  set  j&re  to  the  town.  The  flames,
fanned  by  the  sea-breeze,  spread  with  remarkable
rapidity,  and  the  heat  was  so  intense  that  the  fire
of  the  natives  gradually  slackened  and  then  finally
stopped.  Next  morning,  Kosoko  and  his  followers
having  abandoned  the  place,  the  British  landed.
They  found  the  beach  strongly  stockaded,  and  an
enfilading  piece  of  ordnance  at  every  promontory.
Pifty-two  guns  were  captured,  but  the  victory  was
dearly  purchased,  as  the  total  loss  during  the  two
days'  operations  amounted  to  two  officers  and  fifteen
men  killed,  four  officers  and  sixty-eight  men  wounded,
many  of  them  very  severely.

Akitoye  was  now  reinstated,  and  on  January  1st,
1852,  signed  a  treaty,  undertaking  to  suppress  the
export  slave  trade,  and  to  expel  all  Europeans  en-
gaged in  the  traffic.  About  September  of  the  same
year  some  Portuguese  slave  traders,  who  had  been
expelled  under  this  treaty,  returned  to  Lagos,  and,
with  the  assistance  of  some  of  the  chiefs,  secretly
renewed  the  traffic.  Akitoye,  being  informed  of  what
was  going  on,  strove  to  stop  it,  whereupon  the  Portu-
guese incited  the  chiefs  to  rebel,  and  in  August,  1853,
Kosoko  returned  from  Epi,  where  he  had  taken
refuge,  to  head  the  movement.  The  British  naval
authorities  again  interfered  in  favour  of  Akitoye;  a
party  of  seamen  and  marines  was  landed  to  support
him,  and   on   the   13th  of  August,  after  a  sharp

V.


18  THE  YOBVBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.

skirmisli,  defeated  Kosoko  and  Ms  adherents,  who
once  more  fled  to  tlie  east.

Akitoye  died  in  September,  poisoned,  it  was  said,
by  the  slave  trade  party,  and  liis  son  Docemo  was,
tkrongli  British  influence,  appointed  his  successor.
Kosoko,  who  had  again  found  an  asylum  with  the
chief  of  Epi,  refused  to  accept  this  arrangement,  and
continued  to  harass  Docemo  and  the  Lagos  people
until  by  an  agreement  made  in  January,  1854,  he
was  recognised  as  King  of  Palma  and  Lekki,  on
condition  of  renouncing  all  claim  to  the  sovereignty
of  Lagos.  In  August,  1861,  Docemo  ceded  Lagos
to  the  British  in  consideration  of  a  pension  of
£1,000  a  year,  and  Lagos  thus  became  a  British
possession;  but  it  is  doubtful  if  the  cession  was
altogether  voluntary  on  Docemo's  part,  for  during
the  first  few  years  succeeding  the  signature  of  the
treaty  he  made  several  protests  against  it.

In  1860  a  new  war  broke  out  in  the  interior.
Ijaye,  an  important  town  of  Yoruba,  declared  itself
independent  of  the  Alafin,  who  called  upon  the
Ibadans  to  assist  him  in  reducing  it  to  allegiance.
The  Ibadans  complied,  whereupon  the  Egbas  sided
with  Ijaye ;  but  these  allies  sustained  a  severe  defeat
at  the  hands  of  the  Yorubas  and  Ibadans,  losing,  it
is  said,  40,000  in  killed  and  prisoners,  and  Ijaye
was  destroyed  on  March  I7th,  1862.

Up  to  this  time  the  Egbas  had  been  considered
the  proteges  of  the  British,  and  great  interest  had
been  taken  in  the  welfare  of  Abeokuta,  which  was
regarded  as  the  bulwai'k  of  Christianity  in  West
Africa.    This  interest  dated  from  about  1838,  when


INTRODUCTOUY.


19


a  number  of  Egba  slaves,  wlio  liad  been  liberated
at  Sierra   Leone  from  captured  slave  vessels,  re-
turned  to  Abeokuta  and  asked   tkat  missionaries
miglit  be  sent  to  tliem.    A  Protestant  mission  was
establislied  there  in  1848,  and  when  an  attack  on
the  town  was  threatened  by  Gezo,  King  of  Dahomi,
in  1850,  Mr.  Beecroft,  the  British  Consul  for  the
Bights,  and  Commander  Forbes,  E.N.,  were  sent  to
Agbomi  to  endeavour  to  persuade  the  king  to  abandon
his  design.    The  mission  completely  failed,  and  Grezo
attacked  Abeokuta  on  March  3rd,  1851,  but  was  re-
pulsed with  some  loss.*    The  British  occupation  of
Lagos  in  1861  put  an  end  to  the  friendly  feelings  of
the  Bgbas,  who  resented  the  protection  granted  by
the  colonial  authorities  to  fugitive  slaves  from  Abeo-
kuta, and  objected  to  the  stoppage  of  the  export  slave
trade,  in  which  they  had  been  largely  engaged.  They
seem  also  to  have  had  some  suspicion  that  their  inde-
pendence was  threatened,  for  when  in  May,  1861,  it
was  proposed  to  send  some  trained  gunners  of  the
2nd  "West  India  Regiment  to  Abeokuta  to  instruct
the  people  in  the  use  of  some  guns  that  had  been
presented  by  the  British  Grovernment,  and  to  lend  aid
during  another  attack  that  was  now  threatened  by
Dahomi,  the  Egbas  made  excuse  after  excuse,  and
finally  declined  to  receive  them.    In  1862  they  fur-
ther displayed  their  ill-will  by  molesting  and  plunder-
ing several  native  traders  from  Lagos,  and,  as  they  ■
refused  reparation,  the  Grovernor  of  Lagos,  in  1863,
blockaded  all  the  roads  leading  to  Abeokuta.

In  1863,  Kosoko,  chief  of  Palma  and  Lekki,  desired

*  "  Ewe-speakirg  Peoples,"  pp.  31.5-G.


20


TIJE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


to  return  to  Lagos,  and,  in  order  to  obtain  per-
mission, ceded   Palnia  and  Lekki  to  tlie  British.
The   Possn,  or   chief  o£  Epi,  raised  objections  to
this   cession.    He   had,  it  appeared,  certain  terri-
torial rights  over  these  places,  and  their  cession,
moreover,  shut  him  off  from  the  sea.    As  he  refused
to  cede  his  rights,  an  expedition,  consisting  of  three
officers  and  124  men  of  the  2nd  and  3rd  West  India
Regiments,  proceeded  in  H.M.S.  Investigator  to  Epi,
where  the  troops  and  a  rocket  party  of  one  officer
and  fourteen  seamen  landed.    The  natives  offered  a
strenuous  resistance,  and  the  expeditionary  force  suf-
fered a  loss  of  three  men  killed  and  three  officers
and  twenty-eight  men  wounded,  but  the  town  was
destroyed.    After  this  the  chief  renounced  all  further
claim  to  territory  south  of  the  lagoon.    In  July,
1863,  the  chiefs  of  Badagry  likewise  ceded  all  their
territory  to  the  British.

The  war  between  the  Egbas  and  Ibadans  caused
by  the  affair  of  Ijaye  had  been  carried  on  in  a  desul-
tory manner  since  1862;  but  in  1864,  after  the  repulse
of  the  Dahomis  from  before  Abeokuta  on  March  15th,*
the  Jebus,  who  had  hitherto  adopted  the  policy  of
excluding  all  strangers  from  their  territory,  and  had
lived  in  complete  isolation,  shut  off  by  their  forests
from  the  rest  of  the  tribes,  joined  the  Egbas,  and  the
war  was  prosecuted  with  more  vigour.    The  Jebus
of  Ikoradu,  a  town  at  the  northern  exti'emity  of  the
Lagos  lagoon,  refused  to  join  their  fellow-tribesmen
in  the  alliance  with  the  Egbas,  their  reason  being  that
their  interests  were  identified  with  those  of  the  people
*  "  Ewe-spealdng  Peoples,"  pp.  322-324.


INTRODUCTORY.


21


of  Lagos,  and  tliat  tliey  liad  suffered  equally  with
tliem  from  tlie  cessation  of  trade  caused  by  the  mal-
treatment of  traders  by  the  Bgbas.  In  revenge^  the
Egbas,  early  in  1865,  despatched  to  Ikoradu  an
army  of  12,000  men,  which  besieged  the  town,  and,
after  the  native  fashion,  threw  up  two  entrenched
camps  against  it.  The  Colonial  Grovernment,  alarmed
at  the  near  approach  of  this  force,  and  appealed  to
by  the  Ikoradus  for  aid,  warned  the  Egbas  to  desist,
and  ordered  them  to  return  to  their  own  country.
The  Egbas  sent  insulting  messages  in  reply,  and  a
force  of  some  280  men,  consisting  of  the  5th  "West
India  B-egiment  and  the  Lagos  Police,  was  accord-
ingly sent  against  them,  which  stormed  the  camps
and  routed  the  Egbas  with  heavy  loss,  on  March  29th,
1865.  This  affair  of  course  only  served  to  widen  the
breach  between  the  British  and  the  Egbas,  the  latter,
besides,  conceived  that  the  Colonial  Grovernment
encouraged  the  annual  raids  of  Dahomi  upon  Egba
territory ;  and,  in  1867,  they  expelled  all  the  mission-
aries from  Abeokuta,  and  cut  off  all  relations  with
the  British.

It  seems  that  a  letter,  purporting  to  be  signed  by  a
hostile  chief,  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Egbas,  who
knew  that  the  chief  could  not  write,  and  fancied  they
recognised  the  handwriting  as  that  of  a  Protestant
missionary  who  had  formerly  lived  in  Abeokuta.  The
missionaries  in  Abeokuta  were  thereupon  accused  of
betraying  the  Egbas  to  their  enemies ;  there  was  a
popular  tumult,  and  the  mob  howled  for  their  blood.
It  was  only  with  great  difficulty  that  the  chiefs  and
elders  succeeded  in  saving  the  lives  of  the  accused,


22


THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


who  wore  immediately  expelled  from  tlie  town,  and
their  houses  and  churches  destroyed.  In  1880,  the
French  Roman  Catholic  missionaries  obtained  leave  to
establish  a  mission  in  Abeokuta,  which  thenceforward
fell  more  under  the  influence  of  the  French.

The  interior  continued  to  be  disturbed  by  inter-
tribal wars  until  about  1870,  when  affairs  calmed
down,  but  in  1877  the  Bgbas  plundered  some  Ibadan
traders,  and  the  Ibadans  sent  an  army  to  avenge  the
outrage.    Upon  this  the  Jebus  renewed  their  former
alhance  with  the  Bgbas,  and  Ijesa  and  the  Ekiti
tribes,  which  had  now  been  under  the  rule  of  Ibadan
since  1858,  seized  the  opportunity  for  rebellion,  a  step
which  was  soon  followed  by  a  declaration  of  war
against  Ibadan  by  Uorin.     The  Mohammedans  of
Ilorin  rapidly  invaded  the  country  and  laid  siege  to
Ofa,  a  town  situated  some  twenty  miles  to  the  north-
east of  the  city  of  Ibadan,  and  the  Ibadans  were
obliged  to  withdraw  their  army  of  invasion  from  Bgba
in  order  to  defend  their  own  territory,  which  was  now
threatened  from  three  sides.    The  Bgbas,  however,
did  not  follow  up  the  retreating  force,  and,  indeed,
took  no  further  part  in  the  war,  they  being  held  in
check  by  the  fear  of  leaving  Abeokuta  unprotected
against  Dahomi,  which  power  had  been  in  the  habit
of  making  annual  demonstrations  in  its  vicinity  for
some  years  past;  and  the  struggle  was  continued
between  Ibadan,  on  the  one  side,  and  Ilorin,  Ijesa,  the
Bkiti  tribes,  and  Jebu,  on  the  other.

Ibadan  secured  the  support  of  Modakeke  and  Ife,
two  populous  towns  situated  on  hills  on  the  opposite
sides  of  a  small  stream,  to  the  south-west  of  Ijesa,  and


INTRODUCTORY,


23


tlie  war  continued  for  some  years  without  any  great
advantage  being  gained  by  either  side.    The  Moda-
kekes  were  staunch  alHes  of  the  Ibadans,  but  the
sympathies  of  the  Ifes  were  rather  with  the  Ijesa  and
the  Ekiti  tribes,  with  whom  they  had  been  in  aUiance
durino-  the  war  which  terminated  in  1858.  Their
situation,  however,  made  them  afraid  of  coming  to  an
open  rupture  with  Ibadan,  so,  in  response  to  the
demand  of  the  Ibadans,  they  sent  a  contingent  to
the  Ibadan  camp,  but  at  the  same  time  also  secretly
sent  an  equal  force  to  the  camp  of  the  Ijesas  and
Ekitis.    This  double  game  could  not  long  escape
detection,  and  in  1882  the  Modakekes,  assisted  by  a
force  of  Ibadans,  attacked  Ife,  and  the  town,  which
was  regarded  as  holy,  and  the  cradle  of  the  Yoruba
race,  was  destroyed.    The  Ifes  now  openly  joined  the
enemies  of  Ibadan,  but  most  of  the  tribes  had  by  this
time  become  heartily  sick  of  the  prolonged  struggle,
and  in  1883  a  body  of  Jebus  who  were  encamped  on
the  Omi  River  made  peace  with  the  Ibadans  on  their
own  account,  and  returned  home.    The  Awujale  of
Jebu  Ode,  paramount  chief  of  the  two  Jebu  provinces,
was  so  alarmed  at  this  event  that  he  fled  from  the
town  of  Jebu  Ode,  which  he  was  by  law  forbidden  to
leave,  and  took  refuge  at  Epi.    Here  he  was  invited
by  the  Jebu  elders  to  commit  suicide ;  he  proved
docile,  and  a  new  Awujale  was  elected  by  the  peace
party.    His  election,  however,  was  not  approved  by
the  war  party,  and  a  strong  force  of  Jebus,  under  the
seriJci,  or  second  war  chief,  still  kept  the  field  against
Ibadan.

The  war,  which  was  really  only  a  succession  of


24


THE  YOliUBA-SFEAKlNG  PEOPLES.


skirmis]ies  at  long  intervals,  dragged  on  till  1884,
when  tlie  Grovernor  of  Lagos  was  asked  to  mediate
and  secure  a  peace.  In  1886  this  request  was  renewed
by  all  the  combatants  except  Ilorin,  and  the  G-overnor
accordingly  acted  as  mediator,  with  the  result  that
representatives  from  the  different  tribes  assembled  at
Lagos,  and  on  June  4th  an  agreement  was  signed,  of
which  the  following  were  the  chief  points  :

(1)  Ibadan,  Ijesa,  and  the  Ekiti  tribes  to  respec-
tively retain  their  independence.

(2)  The  four  Ekiti  towns  of  Otan,  Iresi,  Ada,  and
Igbajo  to  be  ceded  to  Ibadan,  on  the  understanding
that  the  present  inhabitants  were  at  liberty  to  leave
them.

(3)  The  town  of  Modakeke  to  be  reconstructed  on
territory  between  the  Oshun  and  Oba  rivers,  to  the
north  of  its  then  situation ;  such  of  the  inhabitants  as
elected  to  pass  under  the  rule  of  Ibadan  moving  to
the  new  site,  and  those  who  preferred  to  become
subject  to  Ife  living  in  Ife  territory,  but  not  in
Modakeke,  which  was  to  be  dealt  with  by  the  Ifes  as
they  thought  fit.

The  belligerents  were  at  this  time  established  in  six
large  camps,  the  chief  being  those  at  Kiji  and  Oke
Mesi,  situated  about  a  mile  apart  upon  opposite  sides
of  a  mountainous  valley  in  the  north  of  Ijesa,  the
former  occupied  by  the  Ibadans  and  the  latter  by  the
Ijesas  and  Ekiti  tribes.  The  Ibadans  had  another
camp  at  Ikirun,  about  fifteen  miles  west  of  Iviji,
between  the  two  arms  of  the  Erinle  River,  where  they
confronted  the  Ilorins,  who  were  encamped  at  Ofa,
eighteen  miles  to  the  north.    The  Modakekes,  with


INTRODUCTORY.


25


an  Ibadan  contingent,  were  at  Moclakeke  watching
the  Ifes,  who,  with  the  Jebu  force  under  the  Serild,
were  encamped  about  two  miles  to  the  south.  In
accordance  with  the  terms  of  the  agreement,  Com-
missioners were  sent  to  the  interior  by  the  Grovem-
ment  of  Lagos  to  take  steps  to  break  up  the  camps.
These  proved  to  be  towns  rather  than  camps,  since
they  consisted  of  the  ordinary  mud- walled  houses  of
the  natives,  were  defended  by  loop-holed  mud  walls,
and  contained  many  thousands  of  women  and  children.
The  Ibadan  camp  at  Kiji,  which  had  been  in  existence
for  seven  years,  was  estimated  to  contain  between
50,000  and  60,000  inhabitants,  at  least  two-thirds  of
whom  were  non-combatants,  and  the  Oke  Mesi  camp
40,000.  These  two  camps  were  evacuated  and  burned
on  September  28th,  1886,  their  occupants  returning  to
their  former  homes ;  but  an  unexpected  obstacle  was
now  offered  by  the  Modakekes,  who  first  asked  for  a
delay,  and  then  positively  refused  to  carry  out  the
agreement  and  quit  their  town,  alleging  that  they
could  not  leave  the  spot  where  their  forefathers  were
buried.  The  fact  was  they  feared  that  if  they
remained  on  the  soil  of  Ife,  the  Ifes  would  revenge
themselves  upon  them  for  the  destruction  of  the  holy
city,  and  that  if  they  moved  to  Ibadan  territory  the
Ibadans  would  enslave  them ;  and  after  some  further
delay,  the  Commissioners,  finding  there  was  no  pro-
spect of  the  Modakekes  keeping  their  promise,  returned
to  Lagos.  The  Ilorins  had  not  been  parties  to  the
agreement  of  June  4th,  but  the  Commissioners
endeavoured  to  arrange  a  peace  between  them  and
the   Ibadans,  and   induce  them   to    abandon  their


26


THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


camps  at  Ofa  and  Ikirim ;  this,  however,  did  not
succeed,  and  the  war  between  these  two  tribes  con-
tinued.

In  the  meantime,  while  the  interior  had  been  dis-
turbed bj  these  protracted  native  wars,  the  colony  of
Lagos  had  received  further  extensions,  Ketonu,  a
district  on  the  eastern  shores  of  Lake  Denham  Waters,
having  at  the  request  of  the  natives,  who  feared
Trench  aggression,  been  declared  British  in  January,
1880 ;  while  Appa,  which  lies  between  Ketonu  and
Badagry,  was  placed  within  the  British  jurisdiction  in
1883.  By  Letters  Patent,  dated  13th  January,  1886,
Lagos  was  made  a  sej)arate  colony,  independent  of  the
government  of  the  Grold  Coast.

In  1888,  in  consequence  of  the  reported  intrigues
of  the  French  in  Abeokuta,  who  were  said  to  have
offered  to  tolerate  slavery,  and  to  pay  an  annual  sub-
sidy, if  the  Egbas  would  place  themselves  under  French
protection,  efforts  were  made  to  have  the  limits  of
British  and  French  territory  and  spheres  of  influence
defined,  with  the  result  that  articles  of  arrangement
for  the  delimitation  of  the  English  and  French  posses-
sions on  the  West  Coast  of  Africa  were  signed  at
Paris,  on  August  10th,  1889.  The  fourth  article
defined  the  territories  and  spheres  of  influence  on
the  Slave  Coast,  the  line  of  demarcation  being  the
meridian  which  intersects  the  territory  of  Porto
Novo  at  the  Ajarra  Creek,  and  extending  from  the
sea  to  the  ninth  degree  of  north  latitude.  By
this  arrangement  the  eastern  half  of  Appa,  with
its  capital,  and  Pokra,  became  British,  while  the
western  half  of  Appa,  together  with  Ketonu,  became


n\TRO  DUG  TORY.


27


Frencli.  Egba  and  Okeodan  fell  -within  tlie  British
sphere  of  influence,  and  Ketn  within  that  of  the
French.

The  war  between  Ibadan  and  Ilorin  still  lingered
on,  and,  in  1889,  Mr.  Millson,  the  Assistant  Colonial
Secretary,  was  sent  to  the  interior  to  endeavour  to
arrange  a  meeting  between  the  Grovernor  of  Lagos  and
the  belligerents  in  order  to  bring  these  hostilities
to  an  end,  but,  as  the  chiefs  declined  to  enter  into
any  negotiations  with  the  Commissioner,  the  mission
failed.

Although  Abeokuta  had  now  been  definitely  placed
within  the  British  sphere  of  influence  there  was  no
improvement  in  the  relations  between  the  Egbas  and
the  Lagos  government.  In  January,  1891,  a  great
political  meeting  was  held  at  Abeokuta,  at  which  the
old  charge  that  the  government  connived  at  or  encou-
raged the  annual  inroads  of  Dahomi  was  revived,  and
some  European  missionaries  were  expelled.  A  Com-
missioner from  the  government  was  sent  to  Abeokuta
in  August,  but  achieved  no  results,  and  in  January,
1892,  the  Egbas  declared  all  their  trade  routes,  both
to  the  coast  and  to  the  interior,  closed,  and  ceased  all
commercial  relations  with  the  colony.  A  further
attempt  on  the  part  of  the  government  to  open  nego-
tiations was  made  in  the  following  month,  but  com-
pletely failed,  and  at  a  meeting  of  Egba  chiefs,  held
on  the  13th  of  April,  the  proposal  to  reopen  the  trade
routes  to  Lagos  was  unanimously  negatived.

While  affairs  had  been  in  this  unsatisfactory  state
in  the  western  portion  of  the  sphere  of  British  influ-
ence, a  dispute  with  the  Jebus  had  sprung  up  in  the


28


THE  YOliUBA-SPEAKlNG  PEOPLES.


east.  Tlie  Bjinrin  market,  situated  about  ten  miles
east  of  Bpi,  was  closed  by  the  Awujale  of  Jebu  Ode
on  account  of  some  disagreement  with  the  people  of
Lagos ;  and  though,  in  October,  1890,  in  consequence
of  representations  made  by  the  government  of  Lagos,
it  was  formally  opened  by  the  Grovernor  and  represen-
tatives sent  by  the  Awujale,  the  Jebus  made  this  con-
cession unwillingly,  and  had  no  intention  whatever  of
departing  from  their  policy  of  excluding  foreigners
from  the  interior  of  their  country.  Consequently,
when,  in  May,  1891,  the  Acting  Governor,  Captain
Denton,  O.M.Gr.,  left  Lagos  with  an  escort  of  Hausas
to  proceed  on  a  mission  to  Jebu  Ode,  with  the  object
of  coming  to  some  agreement  for  the  opening  of  the
country- to  commerce,  the  Jebus  refused  to  allow  the
party  to  enter  their  territory,  on  the  plea  that  they
feared  hostile  action.  The  Awujale  not  only  refused
to  treat,  but  rejected  the  presents  offered  on  behalf
of  the  British  Grovernment,  fearing,  no  doubt,  that
to  accept  them  would  entail  some  concession  on  his
part.

Upon  this  affair  being  referred  to  the  Home  Grovern-
ment, the  Grovernor  was  instructed  to  demand  an
apology  from  the  Jebus  for  the  so-called  insult  offered
to  the  Acting  Grovernor,  and  to  insist  upon  a  free  right
of  way  through  Jebu  country.  The  Awujale  was  to
be  informed  that,  if  these  terms  were  not  complied
with,  force  would  be  used.  Li  December,  1891,  this
ultimatum  was  conveyed  to  the  Awujale  by  an  officer
of  the  Lagos  Constabulary,  and  the  Awujale  then
consented  to  send  to  Lagos  representatives  fully
empowered  to  make  the  apology  and  sign  a  treaty.


INTRODUCTOJtY,


29


In  January,  1892,  tlie  representatives  arrived,  and
on  the  21st  made  a  formal  apology,  and  signed  an
agreement  to  maintain  a  free  and  unrestricted  right-
of-way  for  persons  and  goods  tlirougli  Jebu  territory;
tlie  Government  of  tlie  Colony  undertaking  to  pay
tlie  Jebns  an  annual  sum  of  £500  in  compensation
for  the  duties  they  had  been  accustomed  to  levy  on
goods.

For  a  short  time  the  Jebus  observed  their  treaty
engagements,    and    one    member   of    the  Church
Missionary  Society  was   allowed  to   pass  through
Jebu  Ode  on  his  way  to  the  interior;  but  when,
soon  afterwards,  in  the  month  of  February,  another
missionary  attempted  to  pass  through  the  capital  he
was  ill-used  and  sent  back.     A  party  of  Ibadan
carriers,  who  sought  to  pass  through  from  the  north,
was  also  turned  back.    The  Awujale  asserted  that
the  Ibadans  had  been  insolent,  but  it  was  evident
that  the  young  men  of  the  tribe  were  determined  to
maintain  the  old   Jebu  policy  of   isolation.  The
Jebus  were  a  turbulent  and  proud  nation,  and  they
considered   it  disgraceful   to  observe  engagements
which  had  been  extorted  from  them  by  threats.  In
consequence  of   these  breaches  of  the  treaty,  the
Inspector-aeneral  of   the  Lagos  Constabulary  was
sent  to  the  Awujale  to  ask  for  explanations.  He
landed  at  Itoike,  but  was  not  allowed  to  proceed
any  further,  the  Awujale  sending  to  say  that  he  did
not  wish  "  to  palaver  "  with  the  Lagos  aovernment.

The  Home  Grovernment  now  authorised  the  em-
ployment of  force.  Special-service  officers  were  sent
out  from  England,  two  officers  and  155  men  of  the


so  THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.

Gold  Coast  Constabulary  were  ordered  from  Accra,
and  tliree  officers  and  ninety-nine  men  of  tlie  1st
Battalion  West  India  Eegiment  were  despatched  from
Sierra  Leone.  These,  with  165  of  the  Lagos  Con-
stabulary, and  an  Ibadan  Contingent  of  100  men,
making  a  total  combatant  force  of  about  500,  left
Lagos,  under  the  command  of  Colonel  T.  C.  Scott,
C.B.,  on  the  12th  of  May,  and  disembarked  at  Bpi
without  opposition  on  the  day  following.  On  the
16th  the  column  advanced  from  Epi ;  there  was  a
slight  skirmish  at  Pobo  on  the  same  day,  another  at
Kpashida  next  day,  and  on  the  18th  the  force
encamped  at  Majoda.

Next  morning  the  Jebus  were  found  in  position,
ready  to  defend  the  passage  of  the  Oshun  Eiver,  and
an  action  commenced  at  7  a.m.  The  fire  of  the
Jebus  not  only  swept  the  ford,  which  they  had
deepened  by  digging  out  the  bed  of  the  stream,  but
also  the  narrow  bush-track  which  led  to  it,  and
was  exceedingly  heavy  and  well  sustained.  It  was
reported  that  they  had  offered  a  human  sacrifice  to  the
goddess  of  the  river,  to  enlist  her  aid  against  the
invaders,  and  this  had  so  powerful  an  effect  upon  the
superstitious  minds  of  the  constabulary,  that  for  a  full
hour  they  could  not  be  induced  to  enter  the  stream ;
and  it  was  not  until  the  West  Indians,  who  had  been
held  in  reserve,  were  ordered  up  to  lead  the  way
across  the  Oshun,  that  the  enemy's  position  was
carried.  Between  the  river  and  the  village  of  Mas'-
bon,  which  the  victors  entered  shortly  after  10  a.m.,
was  found  the  camp  which  the  Jebus  had  occupied
the  previous  night,    It  was  estimated  to  have  accom-


INTRODUCTORY.  31

modated  from  5,000  to  6,000  persons,  and  as  about
lialf  the  occupants  of  a  native  camp  are  women  and
non-combatants,  the  passage  of  the  river  was  pro-
bably disputed  by  about  3,000  men.  The  Jebu  losses
were  supposed  to  be  severe,  but  the  British  force  lost
only  three  killed  and  twenty-four  wounded,  exclusive
of  carriers.

On  the  20th  of  May  the  advance  was  resumed  soon
after  daybreak,  and,  being  met  by  a  flag  of  truce,  the
force  occupied  the  town  of  Jebu  Ode  the  same  day
without  resistance.  It  was  about  four  miles  in  cir-
cumference, defended  by  a  mud  wall,  and  contained
in  time  of  peace  about  15,000  inhabitants,  all  of
whom,  with  the  exception  of  the  Awujale  and  his
immediate  following,  had  now  fled.  On  the  25th,
the  Grovernor  arrived  from  Lagos  to  conduct  the
negotiations  with  the  Awujale,  who  made  complete
submission,  alleging  that  the  young  men  had  fought
contrary  to  his  wishes  and  orders ;  and,  on  the  30th
and  31st,  the  expeditionary  force,  with  the  exception
of  three  officers  and  140  men  of  the  Constabulary,  who
remained  in  occupation  of  Jebu  Ode,  left  for  Lagos,
one  column  marching  through  Sagamu  and  Ikoradu,
and  another  through  Itoike.

The  trade  routes  on  the  east  were  now  opened,
but  those  through  Egba  country  still  remained  closed,
and  for  some  time  it  was  thought  that  a  military
expedition  against  Abeokuta  would  be  necessary.
The  ease  with  which  the  Jebus,  who  were  considered
a  very  powerful  tribe,  had  been  punished,  had,  how-
ever, made  a  profound  impression  upon  the  native
mind,  and  many  British  subjects  of  Egba  descent  at


32


THE  YOnUBA-SPEAiaNG  PEOPLE!^.


Lagos,  fearing  that,  if  tlie  oliiefs  of  Abeokuta  main-
tained tlieir  unfriendlj  attitude,  tlie  independence  of
Egba  would  be  lost,  strongly  impressed  upon  tlieir
compatriots  tlie  necessity  of  coming  to  terms.  In
consequence,  the  Egbas  declared  their  willingness  to
receive  the  Grovernor,  Mr.  Carter,  and  come  to  some
arrangement,  with  the  result  that  on  the  18th  of
January,  1893,  a  treaty  was  signed  at  Abeokuta.
The  Egbas  undertook  to  refer  all  disputes  between
themselves  and  British  subjects  to  the  GrOvernor  for
settlement,  to  establish  complete  freedom  of  trade
between  Egba  country  and  Lagos,  and  to  close  no
trade  route  without  the  consent  of  the  GrOvernor.
They  also  promised  to  abolish  human  sacrifice,  and
not  to  cede  any  portion  of  Egba  territory  to  a  foreign
power  without  the  consent  of  the  British.  On  the
other  hand.  Great  Britain  guaranteed  that  the  inde-
pendence of  Egba  should  be  fully  recognised,  and  no
annexation  of  any  portion  of  it  be  made  without  the
consent  of  the  Egba  authorities.

There  is  a  considerable  difference  between  the
Yoruba-speaking  Peoples  and  the  Ewe-speaking
Peoples.  We  still  find  the  characteristics  which  were
dominant  among  the  latter,  namely,  indolence,  impro-
vidence, and  duplicity,  but  they  are  no  longer  so
pronounced,  probably,  almost  certainly,  because  life
and  property  are  more  secure.  The  Yoruba  has  more
independence  of  character  than  the  Tshis,  G-as,  or
Ewes,  and  servility  is  rare.  He  even  has  the  senti-
ments of  nationality  and  patriotism,  and  though  these
are  regarded  with  disfavour  by  the  Colonial  Grovern-
ment,  they  are  none  the  less  tokens  of  superiority.


INTliODUGTOliY.


33


He  is  a  keener  trader,  is  more  sociable,  and  is  in  all
respects  socially  liiglier  than  the  tribes  of  the  other
three  cognate  groups.  This  is  in  a  great  measure
due  to  the  physical  characteristics  of  the  country.
There  being  but  little  forest,  except  in  the  eastern
districts,  commimication  is  easy,  and  the  territory
is  moreover  opened  up  by  several  rivers.  Instead,
then,  of  being  dispersed  in  a  number  of  inconsiderable
hamlets,  which  are  mere  specks  in  a  vast  and  impene-
trable forest,  the  Yorubas  have  been  able  to  live  in
towns,  each  of  which  is  within  easy  communication
of  others.  No  doubt  their  superior  social  instincts
first  caused  them  to  congregate  in  towns,  and  now
many  generations  of  town  life  has  further  developed
them.  There  is  even  a  certain  amount  of  loyalty  in
the  Yoruba,  a  quality  for  which  one  might  look  in
vain  among  the  Ewe  tribes.  Without  saying  that
the  Yorubas  are  more  intelligent,  we  can  safely  say
that  their  intellect  is  more  cultivated ;  the  asperities
of  savage  life  are  softened,  the  sharper  angles  are
worn  down  by  frequent  intercourse  with  their  fellow-
men,  and  at  the  present  day  they  are  certainly  the
leading  people  in  West  Africa.


D


CHAPTER  II.


Chief  Gods.


The  tendency  wliicli  we  noted  in  the  case  of  the  Ewe-
speaking  peoples  to  replace  gods  which  were  purely
local,  and  only  worshipped  by  those  dwelling  in  the
vicinity,  by  tribal  gods,  and  by  gods  worshipped  by  an
entire  people,  has  in  the  case  of  the  Yoruba  tribes
been  very  fully  developed,  and  all  the  gods  possessing
any  importance  are  known  to  and  worshipped  by  the
Yoruba-speaking  peoples  as  a  whole.    The  effect  of
increasing  the  number  of  general  objects  of  worship
has  been  to  diminish  the  importance  of  the  local
objects  of  worship,  the  genii  loci,  who,  except  in  Jebu
and  in  some  of  the  remoter  districts,  have  been  so
shorn  of  their  power  as  now  to  be  scarcely  above
the  level  of  the  fairies  and  water- sprites  of  medieval
England,  or,  which  is  perhaps  a  closer  parallel,  of  the
Naiads  and  Hama-dryads  of  ancient  Grreece.  This
of  course  is  what  was  to  be  expected,  for  the  general
objects  of  worship  govern,  between  them,  all  the
phenomena  which  most  nearly  affect  mankind;  and
the  special  function  of  each  genius  loci  is  thus  now
vested  in  some  other  god,  who  is  believed  to  be  more
powerful,  because  he  is  worshipped  over  a  larger
area  and  has  a  more  numerous  following.  Grods,


CHIEF  GODS.


35


however,  which  are  purely  tutelar  have  not  been  so
much  affected,  and  tutelary  dieties  of  towns  and  of
individuals  are  still  common;  because  the  native,
while  enrolling  himself  as  a  follower  of  a  general  god,
likes  also  to  have  a  protector  whose  sole  business  is  to
guard  his  interests ;  and  who,  though  his  power  may
be  limited,  is  not  likely  to  be  distracted  by  the  claims
of  others  to  his  attention.

The  term  used  by  the  Yoruba  tribes  to  express  a
superhuman  being,  or  god,  is  orisha,  and  as  it  is
used  equally  to  express  the  images  and  sacred  objects,
and  also  as  an  adjective  with  the  meaning  of  sacred
or  holy,  it  answers  exactly  to  the  Tshi  term  holisum,  the
Ga  loong,  and  the  Ewe  vodu.  The  word  orisha  seems
to  be  compounded  of  ori  (summit,  top,  head)  and  sha
(to  select,  choose)  ;  though  some  natives  prefer  to
derive  it  from  ri  (to  see)  and  islia  (selection,  choice),
and  thus  to  make  it  mean  "  One  who  sees  the  cult."

(1)  Oloeun.

Olorun  is  the  sky-god  of  the  Yorubas,  that  is,  he  is
the  deified  firmament,  or  personal  sky,  just  as  Nyan-
kupon  is  to  the  Tshis,  Nyonmo  to  the  Gas,  and  MaAvu
to  the  Ewes.  As  was  mentioned  in  the  last  volume,
the  general  bias  of  the  negro  mind  has  been  in  favour
of  selecting  the  firmament  for  the  chief  Nature-
god,  instead  of  the  Sun,  Moon,  or  Earth ;  and  in  this
respect  the  natives  resemble  the  Aryan  Hindus,
Greeks,  and  Romans,  with  whom  Dyaus  pitar,  Zeus,
and   Jupiter   equally  represented  the  firmament.*

*  Tlio  Tsliis  and  Gas  use  the  words  Nyankupon  and  JSTyonmo  to
express  sky,  rain,  or  tlinnder  and  lightning,  and  tlie  ICVves  and

D  2


36


THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


Nyaiikupoii  and  Nyonmo  tlauncler  and  ligliten  as
well  as  pour  out  rain,  but  Olorun,  like  the  Ewe
Mawu,  does  not  wield  tlie  thunderbolt,  wlncli  lias
become  the  function  of  a  special  thunder-god,  and
he  consequently  has  suffered  some  reduction  m
importance.  The  name  Olorun  means  "Owner  of
the  Sky  "  {pni,  one  who  possesses,  orun,  sky,  firmament,
cloud*),  and  the  sky  is  believed  to  be  a  solid  body,
curving  over  the  earth  so  as  to  cover  it  with  a
vaulted  roof.

Like  Nyankupon,  Nyonmo,  and  Mawu,  Olorun  is
considered  too  distant,  or  too  indifferent,  to  interfere
in  the  affairs  of  the  world.  The  natives  say  that  he
enjoys  a  life  of  complete  idleness  and  repose,  a
blissful  condition  according  to  their  ideas,  and  passes
his  time  dozing  or  sleeping.  Since  he  is  too  lazy  or
too  indifferent  to  exercise  any  control  over  earthly
affairs,  man  on  his  side  does  not  waste  time  m
endeavouring  to  propitiate  him,  but  reserves  his
worship  and  sacrifice  for  more  active  agents.  Hence
Olorun  has  no  priests,  symbols,  images,  or  temples,

Yorubas,  the  words  Mawu  and  Olorun  to  express  the  two  former.
The  Tshi  peoples  say  Nyanlupon  bom  (Nyankupou  knocks)  ;  "  It  is
thundering";  Nyanlcnpon  aha  (Nyankupou  has  come),  "  It  is  ram-
ino-  "  •  and  the  Ga  peoples,  Nyonmo  kn.;cks  (thunders),  Nyonmo
po'lirs,  Nyonmo  drizzles,  &c,  while  in  just  the  same  way  the  Ancient
Greeks  ascribed  these  phenomena  to  Zens,  who  snowed,  rained,  hailed,
gathered  clouds,  and  thundered.  Nyankupon  has  for  epithets  the
following:  Amosu  (Giver  of  Rain);  Amovua  (Giver  of  Sunshine);
Teterehoensu  (Widc-speading  Creator  of  Water),  and  Tyoduampon,
.yhich  seems  to  mean  "  Stretched-out  Roof"  {Tyo,  to  draw  or  drag,
dua,  wood,  and  pon,  flat  surface).

*  The  n  in  oni,  or  ni,  always  changes  to  Z  before  the  vowels  a,  e,  o,
and  u.    See  Chapter  on  Language,  Verbs  (6).


CHIEF  GODS.


37


and  tliougli,  in  times  of  calamity  or  affliction,  wlien
the  other  gods  have  turned  a  deaf  ear  to  his  supplica-
tions, a  native  will,  perhaps,  as  a  last  resource,  invoke
Olorun,  such  occasions  are  rare,  and  as  a  general
rule  the  god  is  not  worshipped  or  appealed  to.  The
name  Olorun,  however,  occurs  in  one  or  two  set
phrases  or  sentences,  which  appear  to  show  that  at
one  time  greater  regard  was  paid  to  him.  Tor
instance,  the  proper  reply  to  the  morning  salutation,
"  Have  you  risen  well  ?  "  is  0  yin  Olorim,  "  Thanks
to  Olorun ;  "  and  the  phrase  "  May  Olorun  protect
you "  is  sometimes  heard  as  an  evening  salutation.
The  former  seems  to  mean  that  thanks  are  due  to  the
sky  for  letting  the  sun  enter  it ;  and  the  latter  to  be
an  invocation  of  the  firmament,  the  roof  of  the  world,
to  remain  above  and  protect  the  earth  during  the
night.  Sometimes  natives  will  raise  their  hands  and
cry,  "  Olorun,  Olorun !  "  just  as  we  say,  "  Heaven
forbid! "  and  with  an  equal  absence  of  literal  meaning.
Olorun  has  the  following  epithets  : —

(1)  Oga-ogo  {Oga,  distinguished  or  brave  person;
ogo,  wonder,  praise).

(2)  Oloivo  (ni-oivo)  "  Venerable  one."

(3)  Electa  {da,  to  cease  from  raining),  "He  who
controls  the  rain."

(4)  Elemi,  "  a  living  man,"  literally  "  he  who
possesses  breath."  It  is  a  title  apj^lied  to  a  servant
or  slave,  because  his  master's  breath  is  at  his  mercy;
and  it  is  in  this  sense  also  that  it  is  used  to  Olorun,
because,  if  he  were  evilly  disposed,  he  could  let  fall
the  solid  firmament  and  crush  the  world.

(5)  Olodumaye  or  Olodumare.  ■  The  derivation  of


38


THE  YOllUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


this  epithet  is  obscure,  but  it  probably  means
"  Replenisher  of  brooks"  {Olodo,  possessing  brooks).
We  find  the  same  termination  in  Oshumaye  or
Oshumare,  Eainbow,  and  in  Osamaye  or  Osamare,
Water  Lily,  and  it  is  perhaps  compomided  of  omi,
water,  and  aye,  a  state  of  being  alive.

It  may  be  mentioned  that,  just  as  the  missionaries
haye  caused  Nyankupon,  Nyonmo,  and  Mawu  to  be
confused  with  the  Jehovah  of  the  Christians,  by
translating  these  names  as  "  God,"  so  have  they  done
with  Olorun,  whom  they  consider  to  be  a  survival
from  a  primitive  revelation,  made  to  all  mankind,  in
the  childhood  of  the  world.  But  Olorun  is  merely  a
nature-god,  the  personally  divine  sky,  and  he  only
controls  phenomena  connected  in  the  native  mind  with
the  roof  of  the  world.  He  is  not  in  any  sense  an
omnipotent  being.  This  is  well  exemplified  by  the
proverb  which  says,  "  A  man  cannot  cause  ram  to
fall,  and  Olorun  cannot  give  you  a  child,"  which
means  that,  just  as  a  man  cannot  perform  the  functions
of  Olorun  and  cause  rain  to  fall,  so  Olorun  cannot
form  a  child  in  the  womb,  that  being  the  function  of
the  god  Obatala,  whom  we  shall  next  describe.  In
fact,  each  god,  Olorun  included,  has,  as  it  were,  his
own  duties ;  and  while  he  is  perfectly  independent  in
his  own  domain,  he  cannot  trespass  upon  the  rights  of
others.

(2)  Obatala.

Obatala  is  the  chief  god  of  the  Yorubas.  The  name
means  "  Lord  of  the  White  Cloth  "  {Oha-ti-ala) ,  and
is  explained  by  the  fact  that  white  is  the  colour  sacred


CHIEF  GODS.


39


to  Obatala,  whose  temples,  images,  and  parapliernalia
are  always  painted  wliite,  and  whose  followers  wear
white  cloths.  Another  derivation  is  Oha-ti-ala,  "Lord
of  Visions, "  and  this  gains  some  probability  from
the  fact  that  Obatala  has  the  epithets  of  Orisha
ofenia,  "  The  Orisha  who  enters  man,"  and  Alahalese
{Al-ha-ni-ase) "  He  who  predicts  the  fntnre,"
beca.use  he  inspires  the  oracles  and  priests,  and  unveils
futurity  by  means  of  visions.  "  Lord  of  the  White
Cloth,"  however,  is  the  translation  most  commonly
adopted,  and  appears  to  be  the  correct  one.  The  god
is  always  represented  as  wearing  a  white  cloth.

Obatala,  say  the  priests,  was  made  by  Olorun,  who
then  handed  over  to  him  the  management  of  the
firmament  and  the  world,  and  himself  retired  to  rest.
Obatala  is  thus  also  a  sky-god,  but  is  a  more  anthro-
pomorphic conception  than  Olorun,  and  performs
functions  which  are  not  in  the  least  connected  with
the  firmament.  According  to  a  myth,  which  is,  how-
ever, contradicted  by  another,  Obatala  made  the  first
man  and  woman  out  of  clay,  on  which  account  he  has
the  title  of  Alamorere,  "  Owner  of  the  best  clay;  "  and
because  he  kneaded  the  clay  himself  he  is  called
Orisha  JqjoJcpo,  "  The  Orisha  who  kneads  clay  "  {hpo,
to  tnead  or  temper  clay).  Though  this  point  is
disputed  by  some  natives,  all  are  agreed  that  Obatala
forms  the  child  in  the  mother's  womb,  and  women
who  desire  to  become  mothers  address  their  prayers
to  him ;  while  albinoism  and  congenital  deformities
are  regarded  as  his  handiwork,  done  either  to  punish

*  Al-oni  (one  who  has)  ;  ha  (to  overtiike)  ;  ni  (to  have)  ;  ase
(a  coming  to  pass),  "  One  who  oyertakes  the  coming  to  pass,"


40  THE  YOPJJBA-SrEAKTKG  PEOPLES.

some  neglect  towards  liim  on  tlie  part  of  tlie  parents,
or  to  remind  his  worshippers  of  his  power.

Obatala  is  also  styled  "Protector  of  the  Town
G-ates,"  and  in  this  capacity  is  represented  as  mounted
on  a  horse,  and  armed  with  a  spear.  On  the  panels
of  the  temple  doors  rude  carvings  are  frequently  seen
of  a  horseman  with  a  spear,  surrounded  by  a  leopard,
tortoise,  fish,  and  serpent.  Another  epithet  of  Obatala
is  Ohatala  gbinghinihi,  "  The  enormous  Obatala."  His
special  offerings  are  edible  snails.

Amongst  the  Ewe-speaking  Peoples  at  Porto  Novo,
Obatala  determines  the  guilt  or  innocence  of  accused
persons  by  means  of  an  oracle  termed  Onshe  or
Onislie  (messenger,  ambassador).     It  consists  of  a
hollow  cylinder  of  wood,  about  3^  feet  in  length  and
2  feet  in  diameter,  one  end  of  which  is  covered  with
draperies  and  the  other  closed  with  shells  of  the
edible  snail.    This  cylinder  is  placed  on  the  head  of
the  accused,  who  kneels  on  the  ground,  holding  it
firmly  on  his  head  with  a  hand  at  each  side.  The
god,  being  then  invoked  by  the  priests,  causes  the
cylinder  to  rock  backwards  and  forwards,  and  finally
to  fall  to  the  ground.    If  it  should  fall  forward  the
accused  is  innocent,  if  backward  guilty.    The  priests
say  that  Obatala,  or  a  subordinate  spirit  to  whom
he  deputes  the  duty,  strikes  the  accused,  so  as  to
make  the  cylinder  fall  in  the  required  direction ;  but
sceptics  and  native  Christians  say  that  a  child  is
concealed  in  the  cylinder  and  overbalances  it  in  front
or  behind,  according  to  instructions  given  before-
hand by  the  priests.    They  add  that  when  a  child
has  served  for  a  year  or  two  and  grown  too  big  for


CHIEF  GODS.


41


tlie  cylinder  lie  is  put  to  death,  in  order  tliat  the
secret  may  bo  preserved;  and  is  succeeded  by  another,
who,  in  his  turn,  undergoes  the  same  fate — but  all
this  is  mere  conjecture.

(3)  Odudua.

Odudua,  or  Odua,  who  has  the  title  of  Tya  agbe,
"  The  mother  who  receives,"  is  the  chief  goddess  of
the  Yorubas.  The  name  means  "Black  One"  (clu,
to  be  black ;  dudu,  black),  and  the  negroes  consider
a  smooth,  glossy,  black  skin  a  great  beauty,  and  far
superior  to  one  of  the  ordinary  cigar-colour.  She  is
always  represented  as  a  woman  sitting  down,  and
nursing  a  child.

Odudua  is  the  wife  of  Obatala,  but  she  was  coeval
with  Olorun,  and  not  made  by  him,  as  was  her  hus-
band. Other  natives,  however,  say  that  she  came
from  Ife,  the  holy  city,  in  common  with  most  of  the
other  gods,  as  described  in  a  myth  which  we  shall
come  to  shortly.  Odudua  represents  the  earth,  mar-
ried to  the  anthropomorphic  sky-god.  Obatala  and
Odudua,  or  Heaven  and  Earth,  resemble,  say  the
priests,  two  large  cut-calabashes,  which,  when  once
shut,  can  never  be  opened.  This  is  symbolised  in
the  temples  by  two  whitened  saucer-shaped  calabashes,
placed  one  covering  the  other ;  the  upper  one  of  which
represents  the  concave  firmament  stretching  over  and
meeting  the  earth,  the  lower  one,  at  the  horizon.

According  to  some  priests,  Obatala  and  Odudua
represent  one  androgynous  divinity;  and  they  say  that
an  image  which  is  sufficiently  common,  of  a  human


42  THE  YOEUBA-SrEAKTNG  PEOPLES.

being  witli  one  arm  and  leg,  and  a  tail  terminating  in
a  spliere,  symbolises  tliis.  This  notion,  however,  is
not  one  commonly  lield,  Obutala  and  Odudua  being
generally,  and  almost  universally,  regarded  as  two
distinct  persons.  The  phallus  and  yoni  in  juxta-
position are  often  seen  carved  on  the  doors  of  the
temples  both  of  Obatala  and  Odudua ;  but  this  does
not  seem  to  have  any  reference  to  androgyny,  since
they  are  also  found  similarly  depicted  in  other  places
which  are  in  no  way  connected  with  either  of  these
deities.

According  to  a  myth  Odudua  is  blind.  In  the
beginning  of  the  world  she  and  her  husband  Obatala
were  shut  up  in  darkness  in  a  large,  closed  calabash,
Obatala  being  in  the  upper  part  and  Odudua  in  the
lower.  The  myth  does  not  state  how  they  came  to  be
in  this  situation,  but  they  remained  there  for  many
days,  cramped,  hungry,  and  uncomfortable.  Then
Odudua  began  complaining,  blaming  her  husband  for
the  confinement ;  and  a  violent  quarrel  ensued,  in  the
course  of  which,  in  a  frenzy  of  rage,  Obatala  tore  out
her  eyes,  because  she  would  not  bridle  her  tongue.
In  return  she  cursed  him,  saying  "  Naught  shalt  thou
eat  but  snails,"  which  is  the  reason  why  snails  are
now  offered  to  Obatala.  As  the  myth  does  not  make
Odudua  recover  her  sight,  she  must  be  supposed  to
have  remained  sightless,  but  no  native  regards  her  as
being  blind.

Odudua  is  patroness  of  love,  and  many  stories  are
told  of  her  adventures  and  amours.  Her  chief  temple
is  in  Ado,  the  principal  town  of  the  state  of  the  same
name,  situated  about  fifteen  miles  to  the  north  of


CHIEF  cons.


43


BadagTj.  The  word  Ado  means  a  lewd  person  of
eitlier  sex,  and  its  selection  for  the  name  of  this  town
is  accounted  for  by  the  following  legend.  Odiidua
was  once  walking  alone  in  the  forest  when  she  met  a
hunter,  who  was  so  handsome  that  the  ardent  tempera-
ment of  the  goddess  at  once  took  fire.  The  advances
which  she  made  to  him  were  favourably  received,  and
they  forthwith  mutually  gratified  their  passion  on  the
spot.  After  this,  the  goddess  became  still  more
enamoured,  and,  unable  to  tear  herself  away  from  her
lover,  she  lived  with  him  for  some  weeks  in  a  hut,
which  they  constructed  of  branches  at  the  foot  of  a
large  silk-cotton  tree.  At  the  end  of  this  time  her
passion  had  burnt  out,  and  having  become  weary  of
the  hunter,  she  left  him ;  but  before  doing  so  she
promised  to  protect  him  and  all  others  who
might  come  and  dwell  in  the  favoured  spot  where  she
had  passed  so  many  pleasant  hours.  In  consequence
many  people  came  and  settled  there,  and  a  town
gradually  grew  up,  which  was  named  Ado,  to  com-
memorate the  circumstances  of  its  origin.  A  temple
was  built  for  the  protecting  goddess )  and  there,  on
her  feast  days,  sacrifices  of  cattle  and  sheep  are  made,
and  women  abandon  themselves  indiscriminately  to
the  male  worshippers  in  her  honour.


(4)  Aganju  and  Yemaja.

Before  her  amour  with  the  hunter,  Odudua  bore  to
her  husband,  Obatala,  a  boy  and  a  girl,  named  respect-
ively Aganju  and  Yemaja.  The  name  Aganju  means
uninhabited  tract  of  country,  wilderness,  plain,  or


44


THE  YOnUBA-SPEAKTKG  rEOPLE^.


forest,  and  Yemaja,  "Mother  of  fish"  {ijeye,  mother;
eja,  fish).  The  offspring  of  the  union  of  Heaven  and
Earth,  that  is,  of  Obatala  and  Odudua,  may  thus  be
said  to  represent  Land  and  Water.  Yemaja  is  the
goddess  of  brooks  and  streams,  and  presides  over
ordeals  by  water.  She  is  represented  by  a  female
figure,  yellow  in  colour,  wearing  blue  beads  and  a
white  cloth.  The  worship  of  Aganju  seems  to  have
fallen  into  disuse,  or  to  have  become  merged  in  that
of  his  mother ;  but  there  is  said  to  be  an  open  space
in  front  of  the  king's  residence  in  Oyo  where  the  god
was  formerly  worshipped,  which  is  still  called  0]u-
Aganju — "  Front  of  Aganju."

Yemaja  married  her  brother  Aganju,  and  bore  a  son
named  Orungan.  This  name  is  compounded  of  orun,
sky,  and  gan,  from  ga,  to  be  high;  and  appears  to
mean  "  In  the  height  of  the  sky."  It  seems  to  answer
to  the  Ichelcheme,  or  "Free-air  Region"  of  the  Ewe
peoples ;  and,  like  it,  to  mean  the  apparent  space  be-
tween the  sky  and  the  earth.  The  offspring  of  Land
and  Water  would  thus  be  what  we  call  Air.

Orungan  fell  in  love  with  his  mother,  and  as  she
refused  to  listen  to  his  guilty  passion,  he  one  day  took
advantage  of  his  father's  absence,  and  ravished  her.
Immediately  after  the  act,  Yemaja  sprang  to  her  feet
and  fled  from  the  place  wringing  her  hands  and
lamenting;  and  was  pursued  by  Orungan,  who  strove
to  console  her  by  saying  that  no  one  should  know  of
what  had  occurred,  and  declared  that  he  could  not
live  without  her.  He  held  out  to  her  the  alluring
prospect  of  living  with  two  husbands,  one  acknow-
ledged, and  the  other  in  secret ;  but  she  rejected  all


CHIEF  GODS.


45


liis  proposals  with  loathing,  and  continued  to  run
awa3^  Orungan,  however,  rapidly  gained  upon  her,
and  was  just  stretching  out  his  hand  to  seize  her,
when  she  fell  backward  to  the  ground.  Then  her
body  immediately  began  to  swell  in  a  fearful  manner,
two  streams  of  water  gushed  from  her  breasts,  and
her  abdomen  burst  open.  The  streams  from  Yemaja's
breasts  joined  and  formed  a  lagoon,  and  from  her
gaping  body  came  the  following: — (1)  Dada  (god  of
vegetables),  (2)  Shango  (god  of  lightning),  (3)  Ogun
(god  of  iron  and  war),  (4)  Olokun  (god  of  the  sea),
(5)  Olosa  (goddess  of  the  lagoon),  (6)  Oya  (god-
dess of  the  river  Niger),  (7)  Oshun  (goddess  of  the
river  Oshun),  (8)  Oba  (goddess  of  the  river  Oba),
(9)  Orisha  Oko  (god  of  agriculture),  (10)  Oshosi
(god  of  hunters),  (11)  Oke  (god  of  mountains),  (12)
Aje  Shaluga  (god  of  wealth),  (13)  Shankpanna  (god  of
small-pox),  (14.)  Orun  (the  sun),  and  (15)  Oshu  (the
moon).*  To  commemorate  this  event,  a  town  which
was  given  the  name  of  Ife  (distention,  enlargement,  or
swelling  up),  was  built  on  the  spot  where  Yemaja's
body  burst  open,  and  became  the  holy  city  of  the
Yoruba-speaking  tribes.  The  place  where  her  body
fell  used  to  be  shown,  and  probably  still  is ;  but  the
town  was  destroyed  in  1882,  in  the  war  between  the
Ifes  on  the  one  hand  and  the  Ibadans  and  Modakekes
on  the  other.

The  myth  of  Yemaja  thus  accounts  for  the  origin  of
several  of  the  gods,  by  making  them  the  grandchildren
of  Obatala  and  Odudua ;  but  there  are  other  gods,  who

*  The  order,  according  to  some,  was  Olokun,  Olosa,  Shango,
Oya,  Oshun,  Oba,  Ogun,  Dada,  and  the  remainder  as  above.


46  THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.

do  not  belong  to  this  family  group,  and  whose  genesis
is  not  accounted  for  in  any  way.  Two,  at  least,  of
the  principal  gods  are  in  this  category,  and  we  there-
fore leave  for  the  moment  the  minor  deities  who
sprung  from  Yemaja,  and  proceed  with  the  chief  gods,
irrespective  of  their  origin.

(5)  Shango.

Shango,  the  god  of  thunder  and  lightning,  is,  next
to  Obatala,  the  most  powerful  god  of  the  Yorubas ;  he
was  the  second  to  spring  from  the  body  of  Yemaja.
His  name  appears  to  be  derived  from  shan,  "  to
strike  violently,"  and  go,  "  to  bewilder ;  "  and  to  have
reference  to  peals  of  thunder,  which  are  supposed  to
be  produced  by  violent  blows.*  He  has  the  epithet
of  Jakuta,  "Hurler  of  stones,"  or  "Fighter  with
stones  "  (J a,  to  hurl  from  aloft,  or  jci,  to  fight,  and
olcuta,  stone) ;  and  stone  implements,  which  have  long
ceased  to  be  used  in  "West  Africa,  are  believed  to  be
his  thunderbolts.

To  wield  the  thunderbolt  is  certainly  one  of  the
proper  functions  of  the  sky-god,  and  the  process  by
which  he  becomes  deprived  of  it  is  not  by  any  means
clear.  It  does  not  appear  to  be  the  result  of  advanc-
ing culture,  for  the  Zeus  of  the  Greeks  and  the  Jupiter
of  the  Romans,  who  had  respectively  the  epithets
Kerauneios  and  Tonans,  retained  it ;  as  do  the  Nyan-
kupon  of  the  Tshis  and  the  Nyomno  of  the  Gas ;
while,  like  the  Ewes  and  Yorubas,  the  Aryan  Hindus

*  For  the  same  notion  among  the  Tshis  and  Gas,  see  Note  at
p.  36.


CHIEF  GODS.


47


made  anotlier  god,  namely,  Indva,  offspring  of  Dyaus,
wield  the  lightning.

The  notion  we  found  amongst  the  Ewes  that  a  bird-
like creature  was  the  animating  entity  of  the  thunder-
storm has  no  parallel  here,  and  Shango  is  purely
anthropomorphic.  He  dwells  in  the  clouds  in  an
immense  brazen  palace,  where  he  maintains  a  large
retinue  and  keeps  a  great  number  of  horses ;  for,
besides  being  the  thunder-god,  he  is  also  the  god  of
the  chase  and  of  pillage.*  From  his  palace,  Shango
hurls  upon  those  who  have  offended  him  red-hot
chains  of  iron,  which  are  forged  for  him  by  his
brother  Ogun,  god  of  the  river  Ogun,  of  iron  and  of
war ;  but  this,  it  should  be  observed,  is  seemingly  a
modern  notion,  and  the  red-hot  chains  furnished  by
Ogun  have  a  suspicious  resemblance  to  the  thunder-
bolts of  Jupiter,  forged  by  Yulcan.  The  Yoruba
word  for  lightning  is  mana-mana  (ma-ina,  a  making
of  fire),  and  has  no  connection  either  with  iron  (irin)
or  a  chain  (eivon) ;  while  the  name  Jakuta  shows  that
Shango  is  believed  to  hurl  stones  and  not  iron.  The
iron-chain  notion,  therefore,  appears  to  have  been
borrowed  from  some  foreign  source,  and,  moreover,
not  to  yet  have  made  much  progress.  The  Oni-
Shango,  or  Priests  of  Shango, f  in  their  chants  always
speak  of  Shango  as  hurling  stones  ;  and  whenever  a
house  is  struck  by  lightning  they  rush  in  a  body  to
pillage  it  and  to  find  the  stone,  which,  as  they  take

*  Hunting  and  tlumdci-  were  likewise  tlie  functions  of  the  Aztec
god,  or  goddess,  Mixcoatl.  (Nadaillac,  "  Prehistoric  America,"
p.  298.)

I  Oni,  one  who  possesses  or  gets.


48  THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.

it  with  tliem  secretly,  tliey  always  succeed  in  doing.
A  cliant  of  the  Oni-Shango  very  commonly  heard  is,
"  Oh,  Shango,  thou  art  the  master.    Thou  takest  m
thy  hand  thy  fiery  stones,  to  punish  the  guilty  and
satisfy  thine  anger.    Everything  that  they  strike  is
destroyed.    Their  fire  eats  up  the  forest,  the  trees
are  broken  down,  and  all  living  creatures  are  slam;
and  the  lay-worshippers  of  Shango  flock  into  the
streets   during   a  thunderstorm  crying,    "  Shango,
Shango,  areat  King  !    Shango  is  the  lord  and  master.
In  the  storm  he  hurls  his  fiery  stones  against  his
enemies,  and  their  track  gleams  in  the  midst  of  the
darkness."    "May  Shango's  stone  strike  you,"  is  a
very  common  imprecation.

According  to  some  natives,  Oshumare,  the  Eainbow,
is  the  servant  of  Shango,  his  office  being  to  take  up
water  from  the  earth  to  the  palace  in  the  clouds.  He
has  a  messenger  named  Ara,  "  Thunder-clap,"  whom
he  sends  out  with  a  loud  noise.  A  small  bird  called
;papagori  is  sacred  to  Shango,  and  his  worshippers
profess  to  be  able  to  understand  its  cry.

Shango  married  three  of  his  sisters  :  Oya,  the  Niger ;
Oshun,  the  river  of  the  same  name,  which  rises  in
Ijesa  Ind  flows  into  the  water-way  between  Lagos
and  the  Lekki  lagoon,  near  Emina;  and  Oba,  also  a
river,  which  rises  in  Ibadan  and  flows  into  the  Kradu
Water.  All  three  accompany  their  husband  when  he
goes  out,  Oya  taking  with  her  her  messenger  Afefe
(the  Wind,  or  Gale  of  Wind),  and  Oshun  and  Oba
carrying  his  bow  and  sword.  Shango's  slave  Bin
(Darkness)  goes  in  attendance.

The  imag^e  of  Shango  generally  represents  him  as  a


CHIEF  GODS.


49


man  standing,  and  is  surrounded  by  images,  smaller
in  size,  of  liis  three  wives ;  who  are  also  represented  as
standing  up,  with  the  palms  of  their  hands  joined
together  in  front  of  the  bosom.  Oxen,  sheep,  and
fowls  are  the  offerings  ordinarily  made  to  Shango,
and,  on  important  occasions,  human  beings.  His
colours  are  red  and  white.  He  is  consulted  with
sixteen  cowries,  which  are  thrown  on  the  ground,
those  which  lie  with  the  back  uppermost  being  favour-
able, and  those  with  the  back  downward  the  reverse.
He  usually  goes  armed  with  a  club  called  oshe,  made
of  the  wood  of  the  ayan  tree,  which  is  so  hard  that  a
proverb  says,  "  The  ayan  tree  resists  the  axe."  In
consequence  of  his  club  being  made  of  this  wood,  the
tree  is  sacred  to  him.

The  priests  and  followers  of  Shango  wear  a  wallet,
emblematic  of  the  plundering  propensities  of  their
lord,  and  the  chief  priest  is  called  Magba,  "  The
Receiver."  As  amongst  the  Ewe  tribes,  a  house
struck  by  lightning  is  at  once  invaded  and  plundered
by  the  disciples  of  the  god,  and  a  fine  imposed  on  the
occupants,  who,  it  is  held,  must  have  offended  him.
Persons  who  are  killed  by  lightning  may  not,  pro-
perly speaking,  be  buried ;  but  if  the  relations  of  the
deceased  offer  a  sufficient  payment,  the  priests  usually
allow  the  corpse  to  be  redeemed  and  buried.  Indi-
viduals rendered  insensible  by  lightning  are  at  once
despatched  by  the  priests,  the  accident  being  regarded
as  proof  positive  that  Shango  requires  them.  A
common  idea  is  that  Shango  is  subject  to  frequent
outbursts  of  ungovernable  temper,  during  which
he  thumps  and   bangs   overhead,  and  hurls  down

E


50  THE  YOnUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.

Stones  at   tliose  wlio   liave   given   liim   cause  for
offence.

The  foregoing  are,  with  the  exception  of  the  myth
of  the  fiery  chains,  the  old  ideas  respecting  Shango ;
but  on  to  them  are  now  rapidly  becoming  grafted
some  later  myths,  which  make  Shango  an  earthly
king  who  afterwards  became  a  god.    This  Shango  .
was  King  of  Oyo,  capital  of  Yoruba,  and  became  so
unbearable  through  rapacity,  cruelty,  and  tyranny,
that  the  chiefs  and  people  at  last  sent  him  a  calabash
of  parrots'  eggs,  in  accordance  with  the  custom  that
has  already  been  mentioned ;  with  a  message  that  he
must  be  fatigued  with  the  cares  of  government,  and
that  it  was  time  for  him  to  go  to  sleep.    On  receiving
this  intimation,  Shango,  instead  of  allowing  himself  to
be  quietly  strangled  by  his  wives,  defied  public  opinion
and  endeavoured  to  assemble  his  adherents  ;  and,  when
this  failed,  sought  safety  in   flight.    He  left  the
palace  by  night,  intending  to  endeavour  to  reach
Tapa,  beyond  the  Niger,  which  was  his  mother's
native  place  ;  and  was  accompanied  only  by  one  wife
and  one  slave,  the  rest  of  his   household  having
deserted  him.    During  the  night  the  wife  repented  of
her  hasty  action,  and  also  left  him;  so,  when  in  the
morning  Shango  found  himself  lost  in  the  midst  of  a
pathless  forest,  he  had  no  one  with  him  but  his  slave.
They  wandered  about  without  food  for  some  days,
seeking  in  vain  for  a  path  which  would  lead  them  out
of  the  forest,  and  at  last  Shango  left  his  slave,  saying,
"  Wait  here  till  I  return,  and  we  will  then  try  further."
After  waiting  a  long  time,  the  slave,  as  his  master  did
not  appear,  went  in  search  of  him,  and  before  long


I  CHIEF  GODS.  51

found  Lis  corpse  hanging  bj  the  neck  from  an  ayan-
tree.  Eventually  the  slave  succeeded  in  extricating
hunself  from  the  forest,  and  finding  himself  in  a  part
of  the  country  he  knew,  made  his  way  towards  Oyo,
where  he  told  the  news.

When  the  chiefs  and  elders  heard  that  Shango  had
hanged  himself  they  were  much  alarmed,  fearing  that
they  would  be  held  responsible  for  his  death.  They
went,  in  company  with  the  priests,  to  the  place  where
the  slave  had  left  the  body,  but  were  unable  to  find
it,  for  it  was  no  longer  on  the  tree.    They  searched
in  every  direction,  and  at  last  found  a  deep  pit  in  the
earth,  from  which  the  end  of  an  iron  chain  protruded.
They  stooped  over  the  pit  and  listened,  and  could
hear  Shango  talking  down  in  the  earth.    They  at
once  erected  a  small  temple  over  the  pit,  and  leaving
some  priests  there  to  propitiate  the  new  god,  and
establish  a  worship,  returned  to  Oyo,  where  they  pro-
claimed :  "  Shango  is  not  dead.    He  has  become  an
orislia.    He  has  descended  into  the  earth,  and  lives
among  the  dead  people,  with  whom  we  have  heard  him
conversing."     Some  of  the  townspeople,  however,
being  ignorant  and  foolish,  did  not  believe  the  story,
and  when  the  criers  cried,  "Shango  is  not  dead,''
they  laughed  and  shouted  in  return,  "Shango  is
dead.    Shango   hanged  himself."    In  consequence
of  this  wicked  conduct,  Shango  came   in  person,
•with   a   terrific   thunderstorm,  to  punish  them  for
their  behaviour ;  and,  in  order  to  show  his  power,
te   killed   many  of    the    scoffers   with    his  fiery
stones,   and    set    the    town    on    fire.    Then  the
priests   and   elders  ran  about  among  the  burnino-

E  2


THE  YORUBA'SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


houses,  Shouting,  "  Shango  did  not  hang  himself.
Shango  has  become  an  orislm.  See  what  these  baa
men  have  brought  upon  you  by  their  unbelief.  He  is
angry  because  they  laughed  at  him,  and  he  has  burned
your  houses  with  his  fiery  stones  because  you  did  not
vindicate  his  honour."  Then  the  populace  fell  upon
the  scoffers  and  beat  them  to  death,  so  that  Shango
was  appeased,  and  his  anger  turned  away,  i  he  p  ace
where  Shango  descended  into  the  earth  was  called
Kuso,  and  soon  became  a  town,  for  many  people  went

to  dwell  there.

Perhaps  this  myth  really  does  refer  to  some  former
King  of  Oyo,  though  why  such  a  king  should  usurp
the  functions  of  the  thunder-god,  is  not  at  all  clear.
It  is  inconsistent  in  part,  for  it  makes  the  chiefs  and
elders  alarmed  at  the  suicide  of  Shango,  because  they
feared  to  be  held  responsible  for  his  death ;  yet  they
would  have  been  equally  responsible  had  he  complied
with  estabhshed  custom,  and  committed  suicide  when
he  received  the  parrots'  eggs  they  sent  him.    The  ta€t
of  the  ayan  being  sacred  to  the  god  Shango,  no  doubt
caused  that  tree  to  be  selected  for  the  legendary  suicide
of  the  king  Shango;  and  the  iron  chain  which  pro-
truded from  the  hole  in  the  ground  was  probably
suggested  by  the  notion  of  red-hot  chains  of  lightning.
As  we  have  said,  this  myth  is  rapidly  becoming  blended
with  the  older  ones,  and,  in  consequence  of  these  events
having  taken  place  at  Kuso,  Shango  has  the  title  of
Oha-Kuso,  "King  of  Kuso."

Another  myth  makes  Shango  the  son  of  Obatala,
and  married  to  the  three  river  goddesses  Oya,  Oshun,
and  Oba,  but  reigning  as  an  earthly  king  at  Oyo.  The
story  relates  that  one  day  Shango  obtained  from  his


CHIEF  GODS.


53


father  Obatala  a  powerful  cliarm,  wliicli,  wlien  eaten,
would  enable  liim  to  vanquisli  all  wtio  opposed  him.
Shango  ate  most  of  the  medicament,  and  then  ga^e
the  rest  to  Oya  to  keep  for  him ;  but  she,  as  soon  as
his  back  was  turned,  ate  the  rest  herself.  Next  morn-
ing the  chiefs  and  elders  assembled  at  the  palace  as
usual,  to  judge  the  affairs  of  the  people,  and  each
spoke  in  his  turn ;  but  when  it  came  to  Shango's  turn
to  speak,  flames  burst  forth  from  his  mouth,  and  all
fled  in  terror.  Oya,  too,  when  she  began  to  scold  her
women  in  the  palace,  similarly  belched  forth  flames,  so
that  everybody  ran  away,  and  the  palace  was  deserted.
Shango  now  saw  that  he  was,  as  a  god,  inferior  to
none ;  so  calling  his  three  wives  to  him,  and  taking  in
his  hand  a  long  iron-chain,  he  stamped  on  the  earth
till  it  opened  under  him,  and  descended  into  it  with
his  wives.  The  earth  closed  again  over  them,  after
they  had  gone  down,  but  the  end  of  the  chain  was  left
protruding  from  the  ground.

This  myth  well  exemplifies  the  confusion  that  has
now  been  created  in  men's  minds  between  the  thunder-
god  proper  and  the  demi-god,  the  result  being  a  kind
of  compound  Shango,  possessing  attributes  of  each.
The  Shango  of  this  story  resembles  in  his  marital
relations  the  thunder-god,  but  the  descent  into  the
earth  with  the  iron  chain,  the  end  of  which  is  left
above  ground,  is  like  the  legendary  descent  of  the
deified  king,  and  is  probably  only  another  version  of
the  same  event.  It  is  probable  that  contact  with
Mohammedans  has  had  something  to  do  with  the
invention  of  this  myth.  The  genii,  as  we  read  of
them  in  the  "  Arabian  Nights,"  are  frequently  de-
scribed as  breathing  forth  flames  to  destroy  their


54


"tJI^  YOnVBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


opponents;  and  a  descent  into  tlie  eartli,  whicli  opens
wlien  stamped  upon,  is  a  mode  of  exit  often  found  m
tlie  same  collection.  These  ideas  do  not  appear  to
be  ones  at  all  likely  to  liave  arisen  spontaneously  in
the  negro  mind,  and  we  find  nothing  of  the  sort  in  the
groups  cognate  to  the  Yoruba.  Moreover,  a  thunder-
god  must,  from  the  very  nature  of  his  being,  hve
above  the  earth  amongst  the  clouds ;  and  to  make  him
descend  into  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  is  to  place
him  in  a  situation  where  he  could  not  exercise  the
functions  of  his  office.  These  remarks  equally  apply
to  the  following  myth.

Since  his  descent  into  the  earth  with  his  three
wives  at  Oyo,  Shango  has  often  come  back  to  the
world.    One  day,  when  down  in  the  earth,  he  quar-
relled with  Oya,  who  had  stolen  some  of  his  "  medi-
cines ;  "  and  she,  terrified  at  his  violence,  ran  away,
and  took   refuge   with   her   brother   the  Sea-God
(Olokun).    As  soon  as  Shango  discovered  where  she
had  gone,  he  swore  a  great  oath  to  beat  her  so  that
she  would  never  forget  it.    Next  morning  he  came
up  from  below  with  the  Sun,  and,  following  him  in
his  course  all  the  day,  arrived  with  him  in  the  evening
at  the  place  where  the  sea  and  sky  join,  and  so
descended  with  him  into  the  territories  of  his  brother
Olokun.    The  Sun  had  not  knowingly  shown  Shango
the  road  across  the  sky  to  Olokun's  palace,  for  Shango
had  been  careful  to  keep  behind  him  all  the  time,
nearly  out  of  sight,  and  to  hide  when  the  Sun  looked
round.

When  Shango  reached  Olokun's  palace  and  saw  his
wife  Oya  there,  he  made  a  great  noise  and  commotion.


CHIEF  GODS.  55

He  rushed  towards  lier  to  seize  her,  but  Olokun  held
him ;  and  "while  the  two  were  struggling  together  0  ja
escaped,  and  ran  to  hide  with  her  sister  Olosa  (the
Lagoon).    "When  Olokun  saw  that  Oya  had  gone  he
released  Shango,  who,  now  more  furious  than  ever,
ran  after  his  wife  cursing  and  threatening  her.  In
his  rage  he  tore  up  the  trees  bj  their  roots,  as  he
ran  along,  tossing  them  here  and  there.    Oja,  look-
ing out  from  her  sister's  house,  saw  him  coming  along
the  banks  of  the  lagoon,  and,  knowing  that  Olosa
could  not  protect  her,  ran  out  again,  and  fled  along
the  shores  towards  the  place  where  the  Sun  goes
down.     As  she  was  running,  and  Shango  coming
behind,  roaring  and  yelling,  she  saw  a  house  near  at
hand,  and,  rushing  into  it,  claimed  protection  of  a
man  whom  she  found  there,  whose  name  was  Huisi.
She  begged  Huisi  to  defend  her.    Huisi  asked  what
he,  a  man,  could  do  against  Shango ;  but  Oya  gave
him  to  eat  of  the  "  medicines  "  she  had  stolen  from
her  husband,  and  he,  being  thus  made  an  orisha,
promised  to  protect  her.    As  Shango  approached,
Huisi  ran  from  his  house  down  to  the  banks  of  the
lagoon,  and  tearing  up  a  large  tree  by  the  roots,
brandished  it  in  the  air,  and  defied  Shango.  There
being  no  other  tree  there,  Shango  seized  Huisi's
canoe,  shook  it  like  a  club,  and  the  two  weapons,
striking  together,  were  shattered  to  pieces.  Then
the  two  orishas   wrestled   together.     Flames  burst
from  their  mouths,  and  their  feet  tore  great  fissures
m  the  earth  as  they  dragged  each  other  to  and  fro.
This  struggle  lasted  a  long  time  without  either  being-
able  to  gain  the  mastery,  and  at  last  Shango,  filled


56


THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  P  EOF  EES.


with  fury  at  being  baffled,  and  feeling  bis  strength
f  aibng,  stamped  on  the  earth,  which  opened  under  him,
and  he  descended  into  it,  dragging  Huisi  down  with
him.  At  the  commencement  of  the  combat,  Oya  had
fled  to  Lokoro  ;  *  she  remained  there,  and  the  people
built  a  temple  in  her  honour.  Huisi,  who  had  become
a  god  by  yirtue  of  the  "medicine"  he  had  eaten,
also  had  a  temple  erected  in  his  honour,  on  the  spot
where  he  had  fought  with  Shango.

In  this  myth  Oya  steals  the  "  medicine  "  and  gives
it  to  Huisi ;  in  the  former  one  she  also  stole  it,  but
ate  it  herself.  In  each  case  it  caused  flames  to  burst
from  the  mouth.

(6)  Ifa.

■  Ifa,  god  of  divination,  who  is  usually  termed  the
G-od  of  Palm  Nuts,  because  sixteen  palm-nuts  are  used
in  the  process  of  divination,  comes  after  Shango  in
order  of  eminence.    The  name  Ifa  apparently  means
something  scraped  or  wiped  off :  he  has  the  title  of
Grbangba  (explanation,  demonstration,  proof).  Ifa's
secondary  attribute  is  to  cause  fecundity  :  he  presides
at  births,  and  women  pray  to  him  to  be  made  fruitful ;
while  on  this  account  offerings  are  always  made  to
him  before  marriage,  it  being  considered  a  disgrace
not  to  bear  children.    To  the  native  mind  there  is  no
conflict  of  function  between  Ifa  and  Obatala,  for  the
former  causes  the  woman  to  become  pregnant,  while
the  latter  forms  the  child  in  the  womb,  which  is  sup-
posed to  be  a  different  thing  altogether.

*  Near  Porto  Novo.


CHIEF  GODS.


57


If  a  first  appeared  on  tlie  earth  at  Ife,  but  lie  did  not
come  from  tlie  body  of  Yemaja,  and  Hs  parentage  and
origin  are  unexplained.  He  tried  to  teacli  the
inhabitants  of  Ife  how  to  foretell  future  events,  but
they  would  not  listen  to  him,  so  he  left  the  town  and
wandered  about  the  world  teaching  mankind.  After
roaming  about  for  a  long  time,  and  indulging  in  a
variety  of  amours,  Ifa  fixed  his  residence  at  Ado,
where  he  planted  on  a  rock  a  palm-nut,  from  which
sixteen  palm-trees  grew  up  at  once.
■  Ifa  has  an  attendant  or  companion  named  Odu
(?  One  who  emulates),  and  a  messenger  called  Opele
(ojje,  puzzle,  or  ope,  palm-tree).  The  bandicoot
(oTcete)  is  sacred  to  him,  because  it  lives  chiefly  upon
palm-nuts.  The  first  day  of  the  Yoruba  week  is  Ifa's
holy  day,  and  is  called  ajo  awo,  "  day  of  the  secret."
On  this  day  sacrifices  of  pigeons,  fowls,  and  goats  are
made  to  him,  and  nobody  can  perform  any  business
before  accomplishing  this  duty.  On  very  important
occasions  a  human  victim  is  immolated.

A  priest  of  Ifa  is  termed  a  habalawo  (baha-ni-aioo) ,
"  Father  who  has  the  secret,"  and  the  profession  is
very  lucrative,  as  the  natives  never  undertake  any-
thing of  importance  without  consulting  the  god,  and
always  act  in  accordance  with  the  answer  returned.
Hence  a  proverb  says,  "  The  priest  who  is  more
shrewd  than  another  adopts  the  worship  of  Ifa."  As
Ifa  knows  all  futurity,  and  reveals  coming  events  to
his  faithful  followers,  he  is  considered  the  god  of
wisdom,  and  the  benefactor  of  mankind.  He  also
instructs  man  how  to  secure  the  goodwill  of  the  other
gods,  and  conveys  to  him  their  wishes.    His  priests


58


THE  Y0RUJ3A-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


pluck  all  tlie  liair  from  their  bodies  and  sliave  their
lieads,  and  always  appear  attired  in  white  cloths.

The  general  belief  is  that  Ifa  possessed  the  faculty
of  divination  from  the  beginning,  but  there  is  a  myth
which  makes  him  acquire  the  art  from  the  phallic  god
Elegba.  In  the  early  days  of  the  world,  says  the  myth,
there  were  but  few  people  on  the  earth,  and  the  gods
found  themselves  stinted  in  the  matter  of  sacrifices  to
such  an  extent  that,  not  obtaining  enough  to  eat  from
the  offerings  made  by  their  followers,*  they  were
obliged  to  have  recourse  to  various  pursuits  in  order
to  obtain  food.  Ifa,  who  was  in  the  same  straits  as
the  other  gods,  took  to  fishing,  with,  however,  but
small  success  ;  and  one  day,  when  he  had  failed  to
catch  any  fish  at  all,  and  was  very  hungry,  he
consulted  the  crafty  Elegba,  who  was  also  in  want,
as  to  what  they  could  do  to  improve  their  condition.
Elegba  replied  that  if  he  could  only  obtain
the  sixteen  palm-nuts  from  the  two  pahns
that  Orungan,t  the  chief  man,  had  in  his  planta-
tion, he  would  show  Ifa  how  to  forecast  the
future;  and  that  he  could  then  use  his  knowledge
in  the  service  of  mankind,  and  so  receive  an  abund-
ance of  offerings.  He  stipulated  that  in  return  for
instructing  Ifa  in  the  art  of  divination,  he  should
always  be  allowed  the  first  choice  of  all  offerings
made..  Ifa  agreed  to  the  bargain,  and  going  to
Orungan,  asked  for  the  sixteen  palm-nuts,  explaining

*  Compare  this  with  Luciaii,  "  Zeus  in  Tragedy,"  where  Zei;s
complains  that  the  sea  captain  Mncsitheus  had  only  sacrificed  one
cock  to  entertain  sixteen  gods.

\  Tiie  son  and  ravisher  of  Yemaja  is  also  so  named.


CHIEF  GODS.


59


to  him  wliat  lie  proposed  to  do  with  them.  Ornngan,
very  eager  to  know  what  the  future  had  in  store  for
him,  at  once  promised  the  nuts,  and  ran  with  his  wife
Orisha-bi,  "  Orisha-born,"  to  get  them.  The  trees,
however,  were  too  lofty  for  them  to  be  able  to  reach
the  palm-nuts,  and  the  stems  too  smooth  to  be
climbed;  so  they  retired  to  a  little  distance  and
drove  some  monkeys  that  were  in  the  vicinity  into
the  palms.  No  sooner  were  the  monkeys  in  the
trees  than  they  seized  the  nuts,  and,  after  eating  the
red  pulp  that  covered  them,  threw  the  hard  kernels
down  on  the  ground,  where  Orungan  and  his  wife
picked  them  up.  Having  collected  the  whole  sixteen,
Orisha-bi  tied  them  up  in  a  piece  of  cloth,  and  put
the  bundle  under  her  waist-cloth,  on  her  back,  as  if
she  were  carrying  a  child.  Then  they  carried  the
palm-nuts  to  Ifa.  Elegba  kept  his  promise  and
taught  Ifa  the  art  of  divination,  and  Ifa  in  his  turn
taught  Orungan,  who  thns  became  the  first  habalaiuo,
It  is  in  memory  of  these  events  that  when  a  man
wishes  to  consult  Ifa,  he  takes  his  wife  with  him,
if  he  be  married,  and  his  mother  if  he  be  single,  who
carries  the  sixteen  palm-nuts,  tied  up  in  a  bundle,
on  her  back,  like  a  child;  and  that  the  habalaivo,
before  consulting  the  god,  always  says,  "  Orungan,
ajuba  oh.  Orisha-bi  ajuha  oh."  ("Orungan,  I  hold
you  in  grateful  remembrance.  Orisha-bi,  I  hold  you
in  grateful  remembrance."

For  the  consultation  of  Ifa  a  whitened  board  is
employed,  exactly  similar  to  those  used  by  children
in  Moslem  schools  in  lieu  of  slates,  about  two  feet
long  and  eight  or  nine  inches  broad,  on  which  are


60  THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.

marked  sixteen  figures.  These  figures  are  called
motliers."  Tlie  sixteen  palm-nuts  are  held  loosely
in  the  right  hand,  and  thrown  through  the  half-
closed  fingers  into  the  left  hand.  If  one  nut  remain
in  the  right  hand,  two  marks  are  made,  thus  |  1;
and  if  two  remain,  one  mark,  i  .*  In  this  way  are
formed  the  sixteen  "mothers,"  one  of  which  is
declared  by  the  hahalawo  to  represent  the  inquirer;
and  from  the  order  in  which  the  others  are  pro-
duced he  deduces  certain  results.  The  interpretation
appears  to  be  in  accordance  with  estabhshed  rule,
but  what  that  rule  is  is  only  known  to  the  initiated.
The  following  are  the  "  mothers  "  :


(1)  Burn  Meji.


(4)  Di  Meji.


I


(2)  Yehuro  Mep


I  I

(5)  Loslio  Meji.


(3)  Ode  Meji


(6)  Or  on  Meji.


1  I

*  This  process  is  repeated  eight  times,  and  the  marks  arc  made  in
succession  in  t'^vo  cohimns  of  four  each.


CHIEF  GODS.  01
(7)  Ahila  Meji.  (12)  Ture  MejL


II  II

(8)  Akala  Meji.


(9)  8a  Meji.


(10)  Kuda  Meji.

I  I
I


(11)  Durapin  Meji.


1  I


I  I


(13)  Leti  Meji


(14)  Ka  Meji


(15)  Shi  Meji.
I  I


(16)  FuMeji
I  I


I  I


(52


THE  YORVBA'SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


No.  6  is  No.  5  inverted;  8  is  7  inverted;  10,  9
inverted;  13,  12  inverted;  and  14,  11  inverted.
Meji  means  "  two,"  or  "  a  pair,"  and  the  following
appears  to  be  tlie  meaning  of  the  names : — (1)  The
close  pair  (hum,  closely).  (2)  The  removed  pair
(Yelmro,  to  remove).  (3)  The  street  pair  {Ode,  a
street).  (4)  The  closed-up  pair  {Bi,  to  close  up,
make  dense).  (5)  The  sqnatting-dog  pair  (losho,  to
sqnat  like  a  dog).  (6)  The  cross-bow  pair  {oron,
cross-bow).  (7)  The  striped  pair  {aUla,  striped).
(8)  ?  Vulture-pair  (a/caZa,  vulture).  (9)  The  pointing
pair  {sha,  to  point).  (10)  The  pair  ending  downward
(Ku,  to  end,  da,  to  upset  on  the  ground).  (11)  ?  The
top-heavy  pair  {Dura,  to  make  an  effort  to  recover
from  a  stumble  ;  opin,  end,  point).  (12)  The  tattoo-
mark  pair  {ture,  name  of  certain  tattoo-marks).
(13)  The  edge  pair  (Zeii,  on  the  edge  of ).  (14)  The
folded-up  pair  {Ka,  to  fold  or  coil).  (15)  The  opened
pair  {slii,  to  open).  (16)  The  alternate  pair  {fo,  to
pass  over,  pass  by,  jump  over,  skip).

From  these  sixteen  "  mothers  "  a  great  many  com-
binations can  be  made  by  taking  a  column  from  two
different  "mothers,"  and  figures  thus  formed  are
called  "  children."  Thus  (13)  and  (2)  and  (11)  and
(10)  make  respectively —


As  the  figures  are  read  from  right  to  left,  the
system  is  probably  derived  from  the  Mohammedans.


I


CHIEF  GODS.


63


James  Hamilton,  indeed,  describes  *  a  very  similar
mode  of  divination  wliicli  lie  saw  in  the  oasis  of
Siwab,  where  it  was  called  Derh  el  ful,  or  Derh  el
rami,  according  to  wliether  beans  or  sand  were  used.
He  says  :  "  Seven  beans  are  lield  in  the  palm  of  the
left  hand,  which  is  struck  with  a  smart  blow  with
the  right  half-closed  fist,  so  that  some  of  the  beans
jump  into  the  right  hand  — if  an  odd  number,  one  is
marked ;  if  even,  two.  The  beans  are  replaced  in
the  left  hand,  which  is  again  struck  with  the  right,
and  the  result  marked  below  the  first.  This  being-
repeated  four  times  gives  the  first  figure,  and  the
operation  is  performed  until  there  are  obtained  four
figures,  which  are  placed  side  by  side  in  a  square  ;
these  are  then  read  vertically  and  perpendicularly
{sic),  and  also  from  corner  to  corner,  thus  giving  in
all  ten  figures.  As  each  may  contain  four  odd  or  four
even  numbers,  they  are  capable  of  sixteen  permuta-
tions, each  of  which  has  a  separate  signification,  and
a  proper  Jiouse,  or  part  of  the  square  in  which  it
should  appear."

The  initiation  fee  paid  to  a  priest  for  teaching  the
art  of  divination  is,  it  is  said,  very  heavy,  and  more-
over does  not  cover  the  whole  of  the  expense;  for
the  Oracle  is,  like  Oracles  generally,  ambiguous  and
obscure,  and  the  neoj)hyte  finds  that  he  constantly
has  to  refer  to  the  priests  for  explanations  of  its
meaning,  and  on  each  such  occasion  he  is  required
to  pay  a  consultation  fee.  When  a  man  is  initiated
the  priest  usually  informs  him  that  he  must  hence-


*  "  Wanderings  in  North  Africa,"  pp.  2G4-65.


64


THE  YORUBA-SP BAKING  PEOPLES.


forward  abstain  from  some  particular  article  of  food,
wHcli  varies  witTi  tte  individual.

Ifa  fio-ures  in  connection  witli  a  legendary  deluge,
tlie  story  of   which,  now  adapted   to  the  Yoruba
theology,  was  probably  derived  from  the  Moham-
medans.   Some  time  after  settling  at  Ado,  Ifa  be-
came  tired  of  living  in  the  world,  and  accordmgly
went   to  dwell  in  the   firmament,   with  Obatala.
After   his    departure,   mankind,    deprived    of  his
assistance,  was   unable   to   properly  interpret  the
desires  of  the  gods,  most  of  whom  became  m  con-
sequence  annoyed.    Olokun  was   the  most  angry,
and  in  a  fit  of  rage  he  destroyed  nearly  all  the
inhabitants  of  the  world  in  a  great  flood,  only  a
few  being  saved  by  Obatala,  who  drew  them  up  into
the  sky  by  means  of  a  long  iron  chain.    After  this
ebullition  of  anger,  Olokun  retired  once  more  to  his
own  domains,  but  the  world  was  nothing  but  mud,
and  quite  unfit  to  live  in,  till  Ifa  came  down  from
the   sky,  and,  in  conjunction  with  Odudua,  once
more  made  it  habitable.


(7)  Blegba.

Blegba,  or  Blegbara  (Blegba-Bara),  often  called
Eshu,  is  the  same  phallic  divinity  who  was  described
in  the  volume  on  the  Ewe-speaking  Peoples.  The
name  Blegba  seems  to  mean,  "He  who  seizes"
(Eni-gha),  and  Bara  is  perhaps  Oha-ra,  "Lord  of  the
rubbing"  {Bci,  to  rub  one  thing  against  another).
Bshu  appears  to  be  from  sliu,  to  emit,  throw  out,
evacuate,    The  propensity  to  make  mischief,  which


CHIEF  GODS.


65


we   noted   as  a  minor  characteristic  of   the  Ewe
Blegba,  is  much  more  prominent  in  the  Yoruba  god,
who  thus  more  nearly  approaches  a  personification
of  evil.    He  is  supposed  always  to  carry  a  short
knobbed  club,  which,  originally  intended  to  be  a  rude
representation  of  the  ^phallus,  has,  partly  through  want
of  skill  on  the  part  of  the  modellers  of  the  images,  and
partly  through  the  growing  belief  in  Elegba's  malevo-
lence, come  to  be  regarded  as  a  weapon  of  offence.*
Because   he   bears  this   club    he  has  the  title  of
Agongo  ogo.     Ogo  is  the  name  of  the  knobbed  club,
and  is  most  probably  a  euphemism  for  the  'phallus ;
it  is  derived  from  go,  to  hide  in  a  bending  or  stooping
posture.    The  derivation  of  agongo  is  less  easy  to
determine,  but  it  seems   to   be   from  gongo,  tip,
extremity.

The  image  of  Elegba,  who  is  always  represented
naked,  seated  with  his  hands  on  his  knees,  and  with
an  immensely  disproportionate  phallus,  is  found  in
front  of  almost  every  house,  protected  by  a  small
hut  roofed  with  palm-leaves.    It  is  with  reference
to  this  that  the  proverb  says  :  "  As  Eshw  has  a  mali-
cious disposition,  his  house  is  made  for  him  in  the
street  "  (instead  of  indoors).    The  rude  wooden  repre-
sentation of  the  phallus  is  planted  in  the  earth  by  the
side  of  the  hut,  and  is  seen  in  almost  every  public
place ;  while  at  certain  festivals  it  is  paraded  in  great
pomp,  and  pointed  towards  the  young  girls,  who  dance
round  it.

Elegba,  in  consequence  of  the  bargain  he  made  with

*  In  tlie  case  of  Priapiis  we  find  a  simiLai-  connection  between  the
plialhis  and  a  cudgel.    See  Catullus,  xx.,  "  The  Garden  God."


66  THE  YOnUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.

Ifa,  receives  a  sliare  of  every  sacrifice  offered  to  the
other  gods.    His  own  proper  sacrifices  are,  as  among
the  Ewe  tribes,  cocks,  dogs  and  he-goats,  chosen  on
account  of  their  amorous  propensities ;  but  on  very
important  occasions  a  human  victim  is  offered.  In
such  a  case,  after  the  head  has  been  struck  off,  the
corpse  is  disembowelled,  and  the  entrails  placed  in  front
of  the  image  in  a  large  calabash  or  wooden  dish ;  after
which  the  body  is  suspended  from  a  tree,  or,  if  no  tree
be  at  hand,  from  a  scaffolding  of  poles.  Turkey-
buzzards  are  sacred  to  Blegba  and  are  considered  his
messengers,  no  doubt  because  they  devour  the  entrails
and  bodies  of  the  sacrifices.

There  is  a  noted  temple  to  Elegba  in  a  grove  of
palms  near  Wuru,  a  village  situated  about  ten  mHes
to  the  east  of  Badagry .    The  market  of  Wuru  is  under
his  protection,  and  each  vendor  throws  a  few  cowries
on  the  ground  as  a  thank-offering.    Once  a  year  these
cowries  are  swept  up  by  the  priests,  and  with  the  sum
thus  collected  a  slave  is  purchased  to  be  sacrificed  to
the  god.    A  slave  is  also  sacrificed  annually,  towards
the  end  of  July,  to  Blegba  in  the  town  of  Ondo,  the
capital  of   the  state  of  the  same  name.  Elegba's
principal  residence  is  said  to  be  on  a  mountain  named
Igbeti,  supposed  to  be  situated  near  the  Niger.  Here
he  has  a  vast  palace  of  brass,  and  a  large  number  of
attendants.

Circumcision  among  the  Yorubas,  as  among  the
Ewes,  is  connected  with  the  worship  of  Blegba,  and
appears  to  be  a  sacrifice  of  a  portion  of  the  organ
which  the  god  inspires,  to  ensure  the  well-being  of  the
remainder.    To  circumcise  is  dalco  (da-olco)  da,  to  be


CHIEF  GODS.


67


acceptable  as  a  sacrifice,  and  oho,  the  foresldii.  Cir-
curDcision  is  iheyiha,  or  ilwla,  the  former  of  wliicli
means  "  tlie  circular  cutting  "  {ike,  the  act  of  cutting,
and  iyeka,  a  circuit),  and  the  latter,  "  the  cutting  that
saves  "  {ihe,  the  act  of  cutting,  and  ola,  that  which
saves).  Except  among  the  Mohammedans  there  is  no
special  time  for  performing  the  rite  of  circumcision,
it  being  fixed  for  each  individual  bj  Ifa,  after  consul-
tation, but  usually  it  is  done  early  in  life.  No  woman
would  have  connection  with  an  uncircumcised  man.
A  similar  operation  is  performed  on  girls,  who  are
excised,  by  women  operators,  shortly  before  puberty,
that  is,  between  the  ages  of  ten  and  twelve  years.

As  is  the  case  in  the  western  half  of  the  Slave
Coast,  erotic  dreams  are  attributed  to  Elegba,  who,
either  as  a  female  or  male,  consorts  sexually  with  men
and  women  during  their  sleep,  and  so  fulfils  in  his  own
person  the  functions  of  the  incuU  and  succuU  of
medi£Bval  Europe.

(S)  Ogun.

Ogun  is  the  god  of  iron  and  of  war,  and,  like  Shango,
is  also  a  patron  of  hunters.  Iron  is  sacred  to  him,
and  when  swearing  by  Ogun  it  is  usual  to  touch  an
iron  implement  with  the  tongue.  The  name  Ogun
seems  to  mean  "  One  who  pierces  "  {gun,  to  pierce,  or
thrust  with  something  pointed).  He  is  specially
worshipped  by  blacksmiths,  and  by  those  who  make
use  of  iron  weapons  or  tools.  Any  piece  of  iron  can
be  used  as  a  symbol  of  Ogun,  and  the  ground  is  sacred
to  him  because  iron  ore  is  found  in  it.  He  is  one  of
those  who  sprang  from  the  body  of  Yemaja.

F  2


G8  THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.

Tlie  usual  sacrifice  offered  to  Ogunis  a  dog,  together
witli  fowls,  palm  oil,  and  minor  articles  of  food.  A
proverb  says,  "An  old  dog  must  be  sacrificed  to
Ogun,"  meaning  that  Ogun  claims  the  best;  and  a
dog's  head,  emblematic  of  this  sacrifice,  is  always  to
be'seen  fastened  up  in  some  conspicuous  part  of  the
workshops  of  blacksmiths.    On  very  important  occa-
sions, however,  a  human  victim  is  offered,  and,  as  m
the  case  of  a  sacrifice  to  Elegba,  the  entrails  are
exposed  before  the  image  and  the  body  suspended
from  a  tree.    The  victim  is  slain  by  having  his  head
struck  off  upon  the  stool  of  Ogun,  over  which  the  blood
is  made  to  gush.    The  reason  of  this  is  that  the  blood
is  beheved  to  contain  the  vital  principle,  and  therefore
to  be  an  offering  particularly  acceptable  to  the  gods.

This  belief  appears  to  be  common  to  most  bar-
barous peoples ;  the  Israelites  held  it,*  and  blood
was  considered  to  be  so  peculiarly  the  portion  of
their  national  god,  that  the  blood  of  all  animals  slam,
whether  for  sacrifice  or  food,  had  to  be  presented  as
an  offering,  no  one  being  allowed  to  eat  it  under

pain  of  death. t

When  war  has  been  decided  upon,  a  slave  is  pur-
chased at  the  expense  of  the  town,  or  tribe,  and
offered  as  a  sacrifice  to  Ogun,  to  ensure  success.  The
day  before  that  on  which  he  is  to  be  immolated,  the
victim  is  led  with  great  ceremony  through  the  prin-
cipal thoroughfares,  and  paraded  in  the  market,
where  he  is  allowed  to  say  or  do  anything  he  pleases
(short  of  escaping  his  impending  fate),  may  gratify  his

*■  Genesis  ix.  4  ;  Leviticus  xvii.  11,  14.

f  Leviticus  xvii.  3,  4  ;  iii.  16,  17  ;  vii.  2^-27.


CHIEF  GODS.


69


desire  witli  any  woman  wlio  takes  liis  fancy,  and  give
his  tongue  every  licence.  Tlie  reason  of  liis  being
thus  honoured  for  the  twenty-four  hours  before  being
sacrificed,  is  that  it  is  believed  he  will  be  born  again
and  become  a  king ;  and,  after  the  head  has  been
struck  off,  the  corpse  is  treated  with  the  greatest
respect  by  all.  In  order  for  this  sacrifice  to  be
effective,  it  is  necessary  that  the  war  leaders  should
take  the  field  before  the  body  begins  to  become
offensive.  The  Ibadans,  who  appear  to  be  rather
averse  to  human  sacrifice,  always  used  to  perform
this  duty  by  deputy,  paying  the  priests  of  Ife  to  sacri-
fice for  them  a  slave  in  that  town.  When  the  war
of  1877  began  they  omitted  to  do  this,  thinking  that
the  affair  would  not  be  serious ;  and,  attributing  their
subsequent  want  of  success  to  the  omission,  they  after-
wards sacrificed  a  slave  to  Ogun  in  their  camp  at
Kiji  in  1885,  they  having  been  prevented  from  doing
it  earlier  by  their  leader,  a  Mohammedan,  who  died
in  that  year.

The  priests  of  Ogun  usually  take  out  the  hearts  of
human  victims,  which  are  dried,  reduced  to  powder,
then  mixed  with  rum,  and  sold  to  persons  who  wish
to  be  endowed  with  great  courage,  and  who  drink
the  mixture.  The  reason  of  this  is  that  the  heart  is
believed  to  be  the  seat  of  courage  and  to  inherently
possess  that  quality ;  and  that  when  the  heart  is
devoured  or  swallowed  the  quality  with  which  it  is
inspired  is  also  taken  into  the  system.


CHAPTER  III.


minoe  gods.
(1)  Olokun.

Olokun  {oni-ohun,  lie  wlio  owns  the  sea),  "  Lord  of  tlie
Sea,"  is  tlie  sea-god  of  tlie  Yorubas.  He  is  one  of
tliose  wlio  came  from  tlie  body  of  Yemaja.

As  man  worships  tliat  from  wliicli  lie  has  most  to
fear,  or  from  which  he  hopes  to  receive  the  greatest
benefits,  the  inland  tribes  pay  little  or  no  attention
to  Olokun,  who  is,  however,  the  chief  god  of  fisher-
men and  of  all  others  whose  avocations  take  them
upon  the  sea.  When  Oloknn  is  angry  he  causes  the
sea  to  be  rough  and  stirs  up  a  raging  surf  upon  the
shore ;  and  it  is  he  who  drowns  men,  upsets  boats  or
canoes,  and  causes  shipwrecks.

Olokun  is  not  the  personally  divine  sea  but  an
anthropomorphic  conception.  He  is  of  human  shape
and  black  in  colour,  but  with  long  flowing  hair,  and
resides  in  a  vast  palace  under  the  sea,  where  he  is
served  by  a  number  of  sea-spirits,  some  of  whom  are
human  in  shape,  while  others  partake  more  or  less  of
the  nature  of  fish.  On  ordinary  occasions  animals
are  sacrificed  to  Olokun,  but  when  the  condition  of
the  surf  prevents  canoes  from  putting  to  sea  for


MINOR  GODS.


71


many  days  at  a  time,  a  human  victim  is  offered  to
appease  liim.  It  is  said  that  sucIl  sacrifices  have
been  made  in  recent  times,  even  at  Lagos,  by  tlie
people  of  tlie  Isaleko  quarter,  wlio  are  cliiefly  wor-
shippers of  Olokun.  The  sacrifice  was  of  course
secret,  and  according  to  native  report  the  canoemen
used  to  watch  by  night  till  they  caught  some  solitary
wayfarer,  whom  they  gagged  and  conveyed  across
the  lagoon  to  the  sea-shore,  where  they  struck  off
his  head  and  threw  the  body  into  the  surf.

A  myth  says  that  Olokun,  becoming  enraged
with  mankind  on  account  of  their  neglect  of  him,
endeavoured  to  destroy  them  by  overflowing  the
land ;  and  had  drowned  large  numbers  when  Obatala
interfered  to  save  the  remainder,  and  forced  Olokun
back  to  his  palace,  where  he  bound  him  with  seven
iron  chains  till  he  promised  to  abandon  his  design.
This,  perhaps,  has  reference  to  some  former  en-
croachment of  the  sea  upon  the  low-lying  sandy
shores,  which  are  even  now  liable  to  be  submerged
at  spring-tides.*

Olokun  has  a  wife  named  Olokun-su,  or  Blusu,  who
lives  in  the  harbour  bar  at  Lagos.  She  is  white  in
colour  and  human  in  shape,  but  is  covered  with
fish-scales  from  below  the  breasts  to  the  hips.  The
fish  in  the  waters  of  the  bar  are  sacred  to  her,  and
should  anyone  catch  them,  she  takes  vengeance  by
upsetting  canoes  and  drowning  the  occupants.  A
man  who  should  be  so  ill-advised  as  to  attempt  to
fish  on  the  bar  would  run  a  great  risk  of  being

*  Another  mytli  of  tliis  nature  lias  been  mentioned  in  Cliapter  II.,
under  I  fa.


72


THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


tlirowii  overboard  by  tlie  other  canoemen.  Olokun-
su  is  an  example  of  a  local  sea-gocldess,  originally,
as  on  the  Qold  Coast  at  the  present  day,  considered
qnite  independent,  being  attached  to  the  general  god
of  the  sea,  and  accounted  for  as  belonging  to  him.

(2)  Olosa.

Olosa  {oni-osa,  owner  of  the  lagoon)  is  the  goddess
of  the  Lagos  Lagoon,  and  the  principal  wife  of  her
brother  Olokun,  the  sea-god.  Like  her  husband
she  is  long-haired.  She  sprang  from  the  body  of
Yemaja.

Olosa  supplies  her  votaries  with  fish,  and  there  are
several  temples  dedicated  to  her  along  the  shores  of
the  lagoon,  where  offerings  of  fowls  and  sheep  are
made  to  her  to  render  her  propitious.  When  the
lagoon  is  swollen  by  rain  and  overflows  its  banks  she
is  angry,  and  if  the  inundation  be  serious  a  human
victim  is  offered  to  her,  to  induce  her  to  return  within
her  proper  limits.

Crocodiles  are  Olosa' s  messengers,  and  may  not
be  molested.  They  are  supposed  to  bear  to  the
goddess  the  offerings  which  the  faithful  deposit  on
the  shores  of  the  lagoon  or  throw  into  the  sedge.
Some  crocodiles,  selected  by  the  priests  on  account
of  certain  marks  borne  by  them,  are  treated  with
great  veneration ;  and  have  rude  sheds,  thatched
with  palm  leaves,  erected  for  their  accommodation
near  the  water's  edge.  Food  is  regularly  supplied
to  these  reptiles  every  fifth  day,  or  festival,  and
many  of  them  become  sufficiently  tame  to  come  for


I


MINOR  GODS.


73


tlie  oifering  as  soon  as  they  see  or  hear  the  wor-
shippers gathering  on  the  bank.

(3)  Shankpanna.

Shankpanna,  or  Shakpana,  who  also  came  from  the
boclj  of  Yemaja,  is  the  Small-pox  god.  The  name
appears  to  be  derived  from  shan,  to  daub,  smear,  or
plaster,  which  probably  has  reference  to  the  pustules
with  which  a  small-pox  patient  is  covered,  and  alc-
pania*  a  man-killer,  homicide.  He  is  accompanied
by  an  assistant  named  Buku,t  who  kills  those  attacked
by  small-pox  by  wringing  their  necks.

Shan-kpanna  is  old  and  lame,  and  is  depicted  as
limping  along  with  the  aid  of  a  stick.  According  to
a  myth  he  has  a  withered  leg.  One  day,  when  the
gods  were  all  assembled  at  the  palace  of  Obatala,  and
were  dancing  and  making  merry,  Shankpanna  endea-
voured to  join  in  the  dance,  but,  owing  to  his  defor-
mity, stumbled  and  fell.  All  the  gods  and  goddesses
thereupon  burst  out  laughing,  and  Shankpanna,  in
revenge,  strove  to  infect  them  with  small-pox,  but
Obatala  came  to  the  rescue,  and,  seizing  his  spear,
drove  Shankpanna  away.  From  that  day  Shank-
panna was  forbidden  to  associate  with  the  other  g-ods,
and  he  became  an  outcast  who  has  since  lived  in  deso-
late and  uninhabited  tracts  of  country.

Temples  dedicated  to  Shankpanna  are  always  built
in  the  bush,  at  some  little  distance  from  a  town  or
village,  with  a  view  to  keeping  him  away  from  habi-

*  Ahpania,  kpa,  to  kill,  and  enia,  a  person.

t  Perhaps  hu,  to  rot,  emit  a  stench,  and  ilcu,  death.


74


THE  YOEUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


tatioiis.    He  is  mucli  dreaded,  and  when  there  is  an
epidemic  of  small-pox  the  priests  who  serve  him  are
able  to  impose  almost  any  terms  they  please  upon  the
terrified  people,  as  the  price  of  their  mediation.  To
whistle  by  night  near  one  of  -  Shankpanna's  haunts^  is
believed  to  be  a  certain  way  of  attracting  his  notice
and  contracting  the  disease.    As  is  the  case  with
Sapatan,  the  small-pox  god  of  the  Ewe  tribes,  who
have  perhaps  adopted  the  notion  from  the  Yorubas,
flies  and  mosquitos  are  the  messengers  of  Shankpanna,
and  his  emblem  is  a  stick  covered  with  red  and  white
blotches,  symbolic,  it  seems,  of  the  marks  he  makes
on  the  bodies  of  his  victims.


(4)  Shigidi.

Shigidi,  or  Shngudn,  is  deified  nightmare.  The
name  appears  to  mean  "  something  short  and  bulky,"
and  the  god,  or  demon,  is  represented  by  a  broad  and
short  head,  made  of  clay,  or,  more  commonly,  by
a  thick,  blunted  cone  of  clay,  which  is  ornamented
with  cowries,  and  is  no  doubt  emblematic  of  the

head.  . .  „

Shigidi  is  an  evil  god,  and  enables  man  to  gratity
his  hate  in  secret  and  without  risk  to  himself.  When
a  man  wishes  to  revenge  himself  upon  another  he
offers  a  sacrifice  to  Shigidi,  who  thereupon  proceeds
at  night  to  the  house  of  the  person  indicated  and
kills  him.  His  mode  of  procedure  is  to  squat  upon
the  breast  of  his  victim  and  "  press  out  his  breath;  "
but  it  often  happens  that  the  tutelary  deity  of  the
sufferer  conies  to  the  rescue  and  wakes  liim,  upon


MINOR  GODS.


75


which.  Shigidi  leaps  off,  falls  upon  the  earthen  floor,
and  disappears,  for  he  only  has  power  over  man  dur-
ing sleep.  This  superstition  still  lingers  among  the
negroes  of  the  Bahamas  of  Yoruba  descent,  who  talk
of  being  "  hagged,"  and  believe  that  nightmare  is
caused  by  a  demon  that  crouches  upon  the  breast  of
the  sleeper.  The  word  nightmare  is  itself  a  survival
from  a  similar  belief  once  held  by  ourselves,  mare
being  the  Anglo-Saxon  msere,  elf  or  goblin.

The  person  who  employs  Shigidi,  and  sends  him
out  to  kill,  must  remain  awake  till  the  god  returns,
for  if  he  were  to  fall  asleep  Shigidi  would  at  that
moment  turn  back,  and  the  mission  would  fail.
Shigidi  either  travels  on  the  wind,  or  raises  a  wind
to  waft  him  along ;  on  this  point  opinions  differ.  The
first  symptom  of  being  attacked  by  Shigidi,  is  a  feeling
of  heat  and  oppression  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  "like
hot,  boiled  rice,"  said  a  native.  If  a  man  experiences
this  when  he  is  falling  asleep,  it  behoves  him  to  get  up
at  once  and  seek  the  protection  of  the  god  he  usually
serves.

Houses  and  enclosed  yards  can  be  placed  under  the
guardianship  of  Shigidi.  In  order  to  do  this  a  hole  is
dug  in  the  earth,  and  a  fowl,  sheep,  or,  in  exceptional
cases,  a  human  victim  is  slaughtered,  so  that  the
blood  drains  into  the  hole,  and  is  then  buried.  A  short,
conical  mound  of  red  earth  is  next  built  over  the  spot,
and  an  earthen  saucer  jolaced  on  the  summit  to
receive  occasional  sacrifices.  When  a  site  has  thus
been  placed  under  the  protection  of  Shigidi,  he  kills,
m  his  typical  manner,  those  who  injure  the  buildings,
or  who  trespass  there  with  bad  intentions.


76


THE  YOnUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


(5)  Olarosa.

Olarosa  (?  Alarense,  helper)  is  tlie  tutelary  deity  of
Houses.  He  is  represented  as  armed  with  a  stick  or
sword,  and  his  image  is  found  in  almost  every  house-
hold guarding  the  entrance.  His  office  is  to  drive
away  sorcerers  and  evil  spirits,  and  to  keep  Elegba
from  entering  the  house.

(6)  Dada.

Dada,  more  properly  Eda,  or  Ida,  is  the  god  of
New-born  Babes  and  Yegetables.  The  name  appears
to  mean  natural  production,  anything  produced  or
brought  forth  by  natural  process.  Dada  is  repre-
sented by  a  calabash  ornamented  with  cowries,  on
which  is  placed  a  ball  of  indigo.  He  is  one  of  those
who  came  from  the  body  of  Yemaja.

(7)  Ota.

Oya  is  the  goddess  of  the  Niger,  which  is  called
Odo  Oya,  the  river  of  Oya.  She  is  the  chief  wife  of
the  thunder-god,  Shango,  and,  as  has  already  been
said,  her  messenger  is  Afefe,  the  Wind.  At  Lokoro,
near  Porto  Novo,  there  is  said  to  be  a  temple  of  Oya
containing  an  image  of  the  goddess  with  eight  heads
surrounding  a  central  head.  This  is  supposed  to  be
symboHcal  of  the  numerous  outfalls  of  the  Niger
through  its  delta.  Oya  and  the  two  following  sprang
from  Yemaja.

(8)  OSHUN.

Oshun,  goddess  of  the  river  of  the  same  name,


MlArOK  GODS.


77


■wliich  is  the  sacred  river  of  Jebu  Ode,  is  tlie  second
wife  of  Sliango.  Crocodiles  wliicli  bear  certain  marks
are  sacred  to  her,  and  are  considered  her  messengers.
Human  sacrifices  are  made  to  Oshun  in  time  of  need.

(9)  Oba.

Oba,  the  third  wife  of  Shango,  is  the  goddess  of  the
Eiver  Ibu,  or  Oba.

(10)  Aje  Shaltjga.

Aje  Shaluga  is  the  god  of  "Wealth,  and  confers
riches  on  his  worshippers.  The  name  appears  to
mean  either  "the  gainer  who  makes  to  recur,"  or
"  the  sorcerer  who  makes  to  recur."  (Aje,  sorcerer  ;
aje,  earner,  or  gainer,  and  shahi,  to  recur.)  His
emblem  is  a  large  cowry.  One  proverb  says,  "Aje
Shaluga  often  passes  by  the  first  caravan  as  it  comes
to  the  market,  and  loads  the  last  with  benefits  ;  "  and
another,  "  He  who  while  walking  finds  a  cowry  is
favoured  by  Aje  Shaluga."  The  large  cowry,  emble-
matic of  Aje  Shaluga,  has  no  value  as  a  medium  of
exchange,  the  small  white  cowries  being  alone  used
for  that  purpose.  He  is  the  patron  of  dyes  and  of
colours  generally.  He  came  from  the  body  of
Yemaja.

(11)  Oeisha  Oko.

Orisha  Oko  {oJco,  farm,  garden,  plantation)  is  the
god  of  Agriculture,  and  is  one  of  those  Avho  sprang
from  the  body  of  Yemaja.  As  the  natives  chiefiy
depend  upon  the  fruits  of  the  earth  for  their  food,


78


THE  YOnUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


Orislia  Oko  is  mucli  lionourecl.  There  is  scarcely  a
town  or  village  that  has  not  a  temple  dedicated  to
him,  and  he  has  a  large  number  of  priests  and  priest-
esses in  his  service.

Although  his  first  care  is  to  promote  the  fertility
of  the  earth,  he  is  also  the  god  of  natural  fertility
in  general,  for  he  is  a  phallic  divinity,  and  his  image
is  always  provided  with  an  enormous  ])haTlus.  He
thus  resembles  Priapus,  who,  although  a  phallic  deity,
was,  apparently,  primarily  a  garden-god,  who  fostered
and  protected  crops.  (Catullus,  xix.  xx.;  Tibullus,  i.  i.)

An  emblem  of  Orisha  Oko  is  an  iron  rod,  and  honey
bees  are  his  messengers.  It  is  probably  with  refer-
ence to  his  phallic  attributes  that  he  has  the  title  of
Eni-chLru — "  the  erect  personage."  One  of  his  func-
tions is  to  cure  malarial  fevers,  to  which  those  who
disturb  the  soil  in  the  process  of  cultivation  are  par-
ticularly liable.

There  is  an  annual  festival  to  Orisha  Oko,  held
when  the  yam  crop  is  ripe,  and  all  then  partake  of
new  yams.  At  this  festival  general  licence  prevails,
the  priestesses  give  themselves  indiscriminately  to  all
the  male  worshippers  of  the  god,  and,  theoretically,
every  man  has  a  right  to  sexual  intercourse  with
every  woman  he  may  meet  abroad.  Social  prejudices
have,  however,  restricted  the  application  of  this  pri-
vilege, and  it  is  now  only  slave-girls,  or  women  of  the
lowest  order,  who  are  really  at  the  disposal  of  the
public,  and  then  only  if  they  are  consenting  parties.
At  this  festival  all  kinds  of  vegetable  productions  are
cooked  and  placed  in  vessels  in  the  streets,  for  general
use.


MINOR  GODS.


79


(12)  OSANHIN.

Osanllin  {san,  to  benefit)  is  the  god  of  Medicine,
and,  as  lie  is  always  applied  to  in  cases  of  sickness,
liis  worsliip  is  verj  general.  His  emblem  is  the  figure
of  a  bird  perched  upon  an  iron  bar.

(13)  Aeoni.

Aroni  is  the  Forest-god,  and,  like  the  last,  has  a
knowledge  of  medicine,  though  the  cure  of  disease  is
not  his  special  function.  The  name  means  "  One
having  a  withered  limb,"  and  Aroni  is  always  repre-
sented as  of  human  shape  but  with  only  one  leg,  the
head  of  a  dog,  and  a  dog's  tail.

Aroni  seizes  and  devours  those  who  meet  him  in
the  forest  and  attempt  to  run  away  when  they  see
him ;  but  if  a  man  faces  him  boldly  and  shows  no  sign
of  fear,  he  leads  him  to  his  dwelling  in  the  fastnesses
of  the  forest,  and  keeps  him  there  for  two  or  three
months,  during  which  time  he  teaches  him  the  secrets
of  the  plants  and  their  medicinal  properties.  When
the  pupil  has  no  more  to  learn  Aroni  dismisses  him,
giving  him  a  hair  from  his  tail  to  prove  to  the  incre-
dulous that  he  has  really  been  initiated.

An  eddy  of  wind,  rushing  through  the  forest  and
swirling  up  the  dead  leaves,  is  considered  a  mani-
festation of  Aroni.

(14)  Aja.

Aja,  whose  name  appears  to  mean  a  wild  vine,  is  a
deity  somewhat  similar  to  Aroni.    Like  Aroni,  she


80


THE  YOEUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


carries  off:  persons  wlio  meet  lier  into  tlie  depths  of
tlie  forest,  and  teaclies  tliem  the  medicinal  properties
of  plants;  bnt  slie  never  liarms  anyone.  Aja  is  of
human  shape,  bnt  very  diminutive,  she  being  only
from  one  to  two  feet  high.  The  aja  vine  is  used  by
women  to  cure  enflamed  breasts.

(15)  Ote.

Oye,  the  god  of  the  Harmattan  wind,  is  a  giant
who,  according  to  some,  lives  in  a  cavern  to  the  north
of  Ilorin,  while  others  say  that  he  resides  on  the
mountain  named  Tgbeti,  where  Blegba  is  supposed  to
have  his  palace.

(16)  Ibeji.

Ibeji,  Twins  {U,  to  beget,  eji,  two)  is  the  tutelary
deity  of  twins,  and  answers  to  the  god  Hoho  of  the
Ewe-tribes.  A  small  black  monkey,  generally  found
amongst  mangrove  trees,  is  sacred  to  Ibeji.  Offermgs
of  fruit  are  made  to  it,  and  its  flesh  may  not  be  eaten
by  twins  or  the  parents  of  twins.  This  monkey  is
called  Edon  dudu,  or  Edun  oriohm,  and  one  of  twin
children  is  generally  named  after  it  Edon,  or  Edun.

When  one  of  twins  dies,  the  mother  carries  with  the
surviving  child,  to  keep  it  from  pining  for  its  lost
comrade,  and  also  to  give  the  spirit  of  the  deceased
child  something  to  enter  without  disturbing  the  living
child,  a  small  wooden  figure,  seven  or  eight  inches
long,  roughly  fashioned  in  human  shape,  and  of  the
sex  of  the  dead  child.  Such  figures  are  nude,  as  an
infant  would  be,  with  beads  round  the  waist.


MINOR  GODS.


81


At  Erapo,  a  village  on  tlie  Lagoon  between  Lagos
and  Badagrj,  there  is  a  celebrated  temple  to  Ibeji,  to
wliicli  all  twins,  and  tlie  parents  of  twins,  from  a  long
distance  round  make  pilgrimages.

It  is  said  to  be  usual  in  Ondo  to  destroy  one  of
twins.  Tliis  is  contrary  to  the  practice  of  the  Yoru-
bas,  and,  if  true,  the  custom  has  probably  been  bor-
rowed from  the  Benin  tribes  to  the  east.

(17)  OSHUMAEE.

Oshumare  is  the  Rainbow-god,  the  Great  Snake  of
the  Underneath,  who  comes  up  at  times  above  the
edge  of  the  earth  to  drink  water  from  the  sky.  The
name  is  compounded  of  shu,  to  gather  in  dark  clouds,
to  become  gloomy,  and  the  word  mare,  or  maye,  which
occurs  in  one  of  the  epithets  of  Olorun,  and  the  mean-
ing of  which  is  uncertain.  This  god  is  also  common
to  the  Ewe-tribes,  under  the  name  of  Anyiewo,  and
has  been  described  in  "  The  Ewe-Speaking  People  of
the  Slave  Coast  of  "West  Africa."  A  variety  of  the
python,  called  by  the  Yorubas  ere,  is  the  messenger
of  the  rainbow-god,  and  is  sacred  to  him.

(18)  Oke.

Oke,  mountain,  or  hill,  is  the  god  of  Mountains,  and
is  worshipped  by  those  who  live  in  mountainous  or
rocky  country.  If  neglected,  he  is  apt  to  roll  down
huge  masses  of  rock  upon  the  habitations  of  those  who
have  been  forgetful  of  his  wants,  or  to  sweep  them
away  by  a  landslip.  When  any  great  mishap  of  this
nature  occurs,  a  human  victim  is  offered  up  to  turn
away  his  anger.    The  falling  of  boulders  or  detached

c;


S2  I'TTE  YORUBA-SPEAIUNG  PEOPLES.

pieces  of  rock  is  always  considered  the  handiwork  of
Oke  and  a  sign  that  something  is  required.  The
emblem  of  Oke  is  a  stone  or  fragment  of  rock.  He
is  one  of  those  who  sprang  from  Yemaja.

At  Abeokuta  there  is  a  rocky  cavern  in  which  Oke
is  worshipped.  It  is  popularly  believed  by  the  other
tribes  that  the  Egbas,  when  defeated  in  war,  can  retire
into  this  cavern,  which  then  hermetically  seals  itself
till  the  danger  is  past.

(19)  OSHOSI.

Oshosi,  who  is  also  one  of  those  who  came  from
Yemaja,  is  the  patron  of  Hunters.  He  resides  in  the
forest,  and  drives  the  game  into  the  snares  and  pit-
falls of  his  faithful  followers,  whom  he  also  protects
from  beasts  of  prey.  He  is  represented  as  a  man
armed  with  a  bow,  or  frequently  by  a  bow  alone.
Offerings  are  made  to  him  of  the  fruits  of  the  chase,
chiefly  of  antelopes,

(20)  iND  (21)  The  Sun  and  the  Moon.

According  to  the  myth,  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars
came  from  the  body  of  Yemaja.  Orun,  the  Sun,  and
Oshu,  the  Moon,  are  gods,  but  the  stars  do  not  seem
to  have  been  deified.  The  worship  of  the  sun  and
moon  is,  moreover,  now  very  nearly  obsolete,  and
sacrifices  are  no  longer  offered  to  them,  though  the
appearance  of  the  new  moon  is  commonly  celebrated
by  a  festival.

The  stars  are  the  daughters  of  the  sun  and  moon.
The  boys,  or  young  suns,  on  growing  up  tried  to


MINOR  GODS.


83


follow  their  father  in  his  course  across  the  sky  to
where  the  sea  and  the  sky  meet,  and  which,  say  the
Yorubas,  is  the  place  where  the  white  men  go  and  find
all  the  things  with  which  they  fill  their  ships  ;  but  he,
jealous  of  his  power,  turned  upon  them  and  tried  to
kill  them.  Some  of  them  sought  refuge  with  Olosa,
some  with  Olokun,  and  the  remainder  with  their
grandmother,  Yemaja,  who  turned  them  into  fish.
Thus  all  the  sons  were  driven  out  of  the  sky,  but  the
daughters  remained  with  their  mother  and  still  accom-
pany her  by  night.  This  myth  is  virtually  the  same
as  that  current  among  the  eastern  Ewe-tribes,  who
have  almost  certainly  learnt  it  from  their  Yoruba
neighbours.

To  see  the  new  moon  is  lucky,  and,  just  as  in  Eng-
land, people  wish  when  they  first  see  it.  As  amongst
the  Ewe-tribes,  an  eclipse  of  the  Moon  is  supposed  to
indicate  that  the  Sun  is  beating  her,  and  steps  are
taken  to  drive  him  away,  similar  to  those  described  in
"  The  Ewe-Speaking  People."

The  Yorubas  pay  some  attention  to  the  heavenly
bodies.  The  planet  Venus,  when  near  the  Moon,  is
called  Aja-Oshu,  the  Moon's  Dog,  because  she  travels
with  it.  When  a  morning  star  she  is  called  Ofere,  or
Ofe,  which  seems  to  mean  a  pale  blue  colour.  When
an  evening  star  she  is  called  Irawo-ale,  Star  of  the
Evening.  Sirius  is  called  Irawo-oko,  Canoe  Star,
because  it  is  beheved  to  be  a  guide  to  canoemen.  A
proverbial  saying  likens  the  stars  to  chickens  fol-
lowing a  hen,  the  Moon ;  and  the  Milky  Way  is  called
"  the  group  of  chickens."


84


THE  YOEUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


(23)  Olori-meein.

Olori-meriu,  possessor  of  four  lieacls,  is  auotlier  god
whose  worship  is  nearly,  i£  not  quite,  obsolete.  He
was  the  tutelary  deity  of  towns,  and  was  represented
by  a  hillock,  or,  if  no  hillock  existed  within  the  pre-
cincts of  the  town,  by  an  artificial  mound.

Sacrifice  was   made  to  Olori-merin   every  three
months,  or  four  times  a  year,  and  always  consisted  of
a  new-born  child  not  more  than  three  or  four  days'
old.    The  child's  throat  was  cut  by  a  priest,  and  the
blood,  caught  in  a  calabash  or  earthen  vessel,  was
placed  on  the  summit  of  the  mound,  after  which  the
flesh  was  sliced  up  into  small  pieces  and  buried  in
the  mound.    During  this  dreadful  scene  the  mother
had  to  be  present.    This  sacrifice  was  called  Bjodun
(Eje-odun),  "  The  season  of  blood."

Olori-merin  had,  as  his  name  betokens,  four  heads,
with  which  he  watched  the  four  points  of  the  compass
from  the  top  of  his  mound,  and  it  was  believed  that
no  war  or  pestilence  could  attack  a  town  under  his
protection.  He  had  the  legs  and  feet  of  a  goat.
Sometimes,  at  night,  he  appeared  in  the  shape  of  a
venomous  serpent.


CHAPTER  IV.


EEMAEKS  ON  THE  TOREGOING.


In  tlie  mjtlis  of  tlie  origin  of  tlie  various  gods
described  in  tlie  last  two  chapters  we  probably  see
the  result  of  the  indwelling- spirit  theory  having  been
lost  sight  of.  As  long  as  a  god  was  accepted  to  be
the  animating  principle  or  spiritual  entity  of  some
natural  object  or  feature,  his  origin  required  no  ex-
planation, for  his  existence  was  bound  up  with  the
feature  or  object,  and,  if  the  question  was  thought  of
at  all,  he  must  have  been,  in  the  native  mind,  coeval
with  the  origin  of  the  world.  When,  however,  as  has
been  the  case  with  most  of  the  deities  worshipped  by
the  Yoruba  tribes  as  a  whole,  the  gods  ceased  to  be
identified  'with  local  objects  or  natural  phenomena,
some  other  explanation  of  their  origin  became  neces-
sary ;  for  man,  however  low  he  may  be  in  the  scale  of
civilisation,  is  always  desirous  of  knowing  the  reasons
for  everything,  and  the  "West  African  negro  in  par-
ticular is  of  a  very  inquisitive  turn  of  mind.  Then,
in  order  to  satisfy  the  natural  desire  to  know  who  the
gods  were  and  whence  they  came,  the  myths  we  have
already  recounted  grew  up,  and  the  numerous  discre-
pancies in  them  appear  to  show  that  the  process  was
comparatively  recent.    It  looks  as  if  the  stories  had


86


THE  YOnUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


not  yet  liad  sufficient  time  to  become  generally  known
in  a  commonly  accepted  version.

Tlie  deities  Obatala  and  Odudna  represent,  say
the  priests,  Heaven  and  Earth.    Olorun  is  tlie  real
Heaven-god,  or  Sky-god,    answering   to   tlie  EVve
Mawn,  bnt  lie  is  now  almost  pushed  out  o£  sight,  and
Obatala,  a  more  active  agent,  acts  for  him.    The  dif-
ference between  Olorun  and  Obatala  appears  to  be
that  the  former  is  the  personal  divine  firmament,  and
the  latter  an  anthropomorphic  sky-god,  a  later  con-
ception; and  we  perhaps  here  see  a  repetition  of  the
process  by  which  in  the  religion  of  ancient  Greece
Kroiios  supplanted  Uranus.     Obatala,    or  Heaven,
marries  Odudna,  or  Earth,*  and  has  two  children,
named  Aganju  and  Yemaja,  who,  according  to  the
priests,  represent  Land  and  Water.    These  two  inter-
marry and  have  a  son,  Orungan,  "Air,"  the  region
between  the  solid  firmament  and  the  earth.  Orungan
ravishes  his  mother  Yemaja,  who,  while  endeavouring
to  escape  from  further  outrage,  falls  and  bursts  open,
whereupon  a  number  of  gods  emerge  from  her  gaping
body.

The  gods  whose  origin  is  thus  accounted  for  as  the
offspring  of  Yemaja,  are  of  various  types.  The  Sea-
god  (Olokun),  the  Thunder-god  (Shango),  the  Sun,
the  Moon,  the  Lagoon  (Olosa),  the  three  river-god-
desses Oya,  Oshun,  and  Oba,  the  god  of  Mountains
(Oke),  and  Ogun,  god  of  iron  and  war  and  of  the  Eiver
Ogun,  are  all  the  product  of  Nature-worship,  but  are
not  of  one  type,  for  the  Sun  and  Moon  belong  to  the

*  Rhea,  bride  of  Kronos,  to  some  extent  represented  the  earth  in
Grecian  mythology.


REMARKS  OX  THE  FOUEGOING.


87


old  order  of  things,  to  tlie  same  religious  system  as
Olorun,  and  are  personally  divine,  wliile  the  others
belong  to  the  new  order,  and  are  anthropomorphic.
Shankpanna,  god  of  small-pox,  is  personified  pesti-
lence, and  belongs  to  another  type ;  while  Dada,
Oshosi,  Aje  Shaluga,  and  Orisha  Oko,  as  the  respec-
tive patrons  of  vegetable  productions,  hunters,  wealth,
and  agriculture,  may  be  regarded  as  the  tutelary
deities  of  industries,  and  as  belonging  to  a  third  class
of  religious  conceptions.  The  myth  thus  assigns  a
common  origin  alike  to  the  ancient  gods  and  to  those
which  are  more  modern.

There  are,  however,  other  gods  who  do  not  belong
to  this  family  circle ;  that  is,  they  are  not  descendants
of  Obatala  and  Odudua,  so  the  mythological  scheme
is  incomplete,  no  attempt  being  made  to  account  for
their  origin.  These  gods  are  the  Grod  of  Divination
(Ifa),  the  Forest-god  (Aroni),  the  Phallic-god  (Elegba),
the  Harmattan  Wind  (Oye),  the  Rainbow  (Oshumare),
the  tutelary  deity  of  households  (Olarosa),  the  god  of
Medicine  (Osanhin),  and  Shigidi.  These  also  are  of
various  types.  The  Harmattan  Wind  and  the  Rain-
bow are  ISTature-gods  of  the  old  order,  and  Aroni,  god
of  forests,  of  the  new.  Olarosa  and  Osanhin  are
tutelary  deities,  and  Shigidi  is  personified  nightmare.
Ifa  was  probably  originally  the  God  of  fecundation,
though  now  his  chief  function  is  to  foretell  the  future.
Elegba,  primarily  a  phallic  divinity,  seems  to  be
gradually  becoming  a  personification  of  evil,  and  here
we  perhaps  see  a  tendency  towards  Dualism,  which
in  the  future  might,  if  undisturbed,  result  in  Elegba
becoming  the  Evil  Deity,  and  Obatala  or  Ifa  the  Grood,


88


THE  YOBUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


The  incompleteness  of  tte  scheme  seems,  as  has  been
said,  to  show'that  the  myth  of  Yemaja  is  comparatively
recent,  and  this  is  supported  by  the  fact  that  the
myth  itself  is  not  universally  accepted  in  its  entirety.
Shango,  for  example,  is  said  by  some  to  be  of  mde-
pendent  origin,  like  Ifa  ;  and  Odudua,  the  mother  of
Yemaja,  according  to  the  myth,  is  by  others  included
in  the  number  of  those  who  sprang  from  Yemaja's
body.    No  general  consensus  of  opinion  has  yet  been
arrived  at,  but  the  myth  of  Yemaja  is  the  only  one
that  holds  the  field,  and  no  doubt  in  course  of  time
the  gods  whose  origin  is  as  yet  unexplained  would
also  be  held  to  have  come  from  the  daughter  of
Obatala  and  Odudua.

We  find  the  same  want  of  accord  in  the  myths  of  the
origin  of  man.     According  to  some,  Obatala  made  the
first  man  and  woman  out  of  clay  or  mud,  whence  he
has  obtained   his   titles  of  Alamorere  and  Orisha
Kpokpo;  while,  according  to  others,  the  first  pair
came,  with  the  gods,  from  the  body  of  Yemaja.  Al-
though the  first  story  somewhat  resembles  the  account
of  the  origin  of  man  given  in  the  Book  of  Genesis,
there  is  no  reason  for  supposing  it  to  be  borrowed.
When  uncivilised  man,  after  speculating  about  the
origin  of  mankind,  has  come  to  the  conclusion  that
there  must  have  been  a  first  pair,  and  has  accounted
for  that  first  pair  by  the  theory  that  they  were  made
by  a  superior  being  out  of  something ;  the  material
which  he  would  be  most  likely  to  select  for  their
manufacture  is  clay  or  mud,  because  it  is  with  these
that  he  makes  his  own  first  rude  attempts  to  model
the  human  form.    To  make  a  rude  imitation  of  the


REMARKS  OX  THE  FOREGOfXG.  SO

figure  of  a  man  in  clay  requires  far  less  skill  and  far
less  labour  than  to  carve  one  out  of  a  block  of  wood,
whence  it  is  that  most  of  the  images  of  the  gods  are
made  of  clay.  Olav  figures  being  primordial,  and
images  being  ordinarily  made  of  clay  even  when  the
arts  have  somewhat  advanced,  this  would  be  the  sub-
stance which  the  myth-makers  would  introduce  into
their  myths  describing  the  origin  of  the  first  pair,  a
connection  of  ideas  between  clay  and  the  human  form
already  existing.*

The  second  story,  which  cannot  be  any  older  than
the  myth  of  Yemaja,  of  which  it  is  a  part,  is  sufficiently
precise  to  give  the  name  of  the  first  couple,  that
of  the  man  being  Obalofun  (Lord  of  Speech),  and
that  of  the  woman  lya  (Mother).  After  coming  out
of  the  goddess  at  Ife,  they  settled  there,  and  had  a
numerous  progeny,  which  increased  and  multiplied
till  the  whole  earth  was  populated,  hence  it  is  that
Ife  is  considered  the  cradle  of  the  human  race.  Of
course  Obalofun  and  lya  were  Yorubas,  for  it  is  a
peculiarity  of  every  uncivilised  people  to  believe  that
the  first  man  and  woman  were  of  their  race.

Another  tradition,  though  it  makes  Ife  the  place
of  origin  of  the  Yoruba  tribes,  represents  it  as  being
colonised  by  persons  migrating  from  the  interior.
This  tradition  is  perhaps  a  dim  recollection  of  a  his-
torical fact,  historical,  that  is,  in  so  far  that  the
Yoruba  tribes  probably  did  in  the  remote  past  come

*  According  to  one  Greek  myth,  Pandora,  tlie  first  woman,  was
made  by  Hephasstus  out  of  eartli,  and,  according  to  anotlier,  Pro-
metheus made  man  out  of  earth  and  water.  See  also  Lueian,
"  Dialogues  of  the  Gods,"  i.


90


THE  YOBUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


down  from  tlie  interior,  and  occnpy  tlie  territory  in
wliicli  they  were  found  at  the  commencement  of  the
present  century;  for  the  cognate  Tshi  tribes  of  the
Gold  Coast  also  have  a  tradition  of  a  migration  from
the  interior.    Most  probably  the  two  traditions  refer
to  a  great  southward  movement  of  the  original  stock
from  which  the  Tshi,  Ga,  Ewe,  and  Yomba  tribes  are
descended,  and  which,  starting  from  some  central
point  in  the  interior,  spread  out  in  fan-shape  till  it
reached  the  sea-coast.    The  tradition  of  the  Yoruba
migration  is  as  follows.

Long  ago  a  certain  person  living  in  the  far  interior
sent  fifteen  people  from  his  country  to  go  to  the
south,  and  with  them  came,  of  his  own  free  will,  one
named  Okambi,*  who  afterwards  became  the  first
King  of  Yoruba.    When  they  were  leaving,  the  per-
son who  sent  them  gave  Okambi  a  slave,  a  trumpeter
named  Okinkin,t  a  fowl,  and  something  tied  up  in  a
piece  of  black  cloth.    They  journeyed  for  some  time,
and  when  they  opened  the  gate  of  the  south  and
passed  into  the  unknown  country,  they  found  nothing
but  water  spread  out  before  them.    At  first  they
thought  of  returning,  but  fearing  tlie  anger  of  the
person  who  had  sent  them,  they  entered  the  water ;
and,  finding  it  quite  shallow,  waded  on  through  it.
This  they  did  for  some  time  until  Okinkin  the  trum-
peter sounded  his  trumpet,  in  accordance  with  the
instructions  the  person  had  given,  and  thereby  re-
minded Okambi  of  the  something  tied  up  in  black
cloth,  which  was  to  be  opened  when  the  trumpet

*  This  name  means  "  an  only  cliild."  Okan,  one,  and  hi,  to  bear.
■]-  Okinkin  appears  to  mean  "  owner  of  a  very  small  portion."


REMARKS  OX  THE  EO  RE  GOING.


91


sounded.  The  cloth  was  accordingly  nntied,  and  a
palm-nut,  with  some  earth  fell  into  the  water  from
it.  The  nut  immediately  began  to  grow,  and  shot
up  so  rapidly  that  in  a  few  minutes  it  had  become  a
tall  palm  with  sixteen  branches.*  All  the  party,  being
very  tired  from  their  long  wading,  climbed  up  into
the  tree  and  rested  on  the  branches  till  next  mornino-,
in  which  position  a  certain  person  named  Okiki  f  saw
them  from  the  country  from  which  they  had  been
sent  out.  When  he  saw  them,  Okiki  reminded
Okinkin  the  trumpeter  that  it  was  his  duty  to  sound
the  trumpet  again,  whereupon  he  sounded  it,  and
Okambi  untied  the  piece  of  black  cloth  a  second  time.
When  it  was  opened,  earth  fell  from  it,  and,  drying
up  the  water,  made  a  small  mound.  The  fowl  that
the  personage  had  given  Okambi  then  flew  on  to  the
mound  and  scratched  the  earth  here  and  there,  and
wherever  the  earth  fell  it  dried  up  the  water.  When
there  was  a  good  space  covered  with  earth,  Okambi
came  down  from  the  tree,  bringing  with  him  his
trumpeter  Okinkin  and  his  slave  Tetu.J  The  other  per-
sons wished  to  come  down  also,  but  Okambi  would  not

*  This  number  often  recurs  in  Yoruba  myths.  Thei-e  wereslxteen
palm-nuts  on  the  two  palms  in  the  garden  of  Orungan,  the  chief  man,
which  If  a  obtained  for  the  purpose  of  divination,  and  sixteen  palm
trees  grew  up  from  the  palm-nut  that  Ifa  planted  on  the  rock  at  Ado.
Sixteen  persons,  viz.  fifteen  and  Okambi,  commence  the  journey  to
the  south.

t  This  name   is  sometimes  given  as  Okiki-shi.     Okiki  means
rumour,  or  report,  and  Okiki-shi,  "borrowed  from  report."    Th  ere  is
an  unintelligible  Ga  proverb,  "Nobody  knows  who  has  born  Okaikoi,"
which  perhaps  refers  to  the  same  personage.
Tetu  means  "executioner."


92


THE  YQRUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLED.


allow  tliem  to  do  so  until  tliey  liad  promised  to  pay
him,  at  stipulated  periods  of  time,  a  tribute  of  200
cowries  apiece.  Tlie  place  where  the  palm  sprung  up
from  the  water  afterwards  became  Ife,  and,  some
time  after,  three  brothers  set  out  from  there  in
different  directions,  to  make  fresh  discoveries.  When
they  went  away  they  left  a  slave,  named  Adimu,*  to
rule  Ife  during  their  absence.

This  tradition  is  vague  and  meagre  of  detail,  the
only  points  brought  out  being  that  a  certain  number
of  persons  migrated  southward  from  the  interior,  and
found  a  region  covered  with  water.  This  latter  de-
tail, however,  strongly  supports  the  theory  that  a  real
migration  took  place;  for  the  large  stretches  of  shallow
water  of  the  lagoon  system,  which  during  the  rainy
season  are  enormously  extended  by  the  inundation  of
the  low-lying  portions  of  the  surrounding  country,
could  scarcely  have  failed  to  excite  the  wonder  of  a
people  accustomed  to  the  plateaus  and  mountain
ranges  of  the  interior,  and  to  leave  a  lasting  impres-
sion upon  their  memories.


*  Adimu,  a  tight  grasp,  hold-fast.


CHAPTER  V.


PEIESTS  AND  WOESHIP.

The  Yomba  priesthood  is  divided  into  recognised
orders,  but  before  describing  tliem  it  will  be  neces-
sary to  give  some  account  of  a  secret  society  which  is
inseparably  connected  with  the  priesthood,  and  which,
except  in  Jebu,  where  it  is  called  Oshogbo,  is  known
as  the  Ogboni  Society.

The  Ogboni  Society  really  holds  the  reins  of  govern-
ment, and  kings  themselves  are  obliged  to  submit  to
its  decrees.  The  members  are  popularly  believed  to
possess  a  secret  from  which  they  derive  their  power,
but  their  only  secret  appears  to  be  that  of  a  powerful
and  unscrupulous  organisation,  each  member  of  which
is  bound  to  assist  every  other,  while  all  are  bound  to
carry  out,  and  if  necessary  enforce,  the  decrees  of  the
body.  Each  town  and  village  has  its  Ogboni  "  lodge,"
and  the  members  recognise  each  other  by  conventional
signs  and  passwords.  At  their  meetings,  which  are
held  with  a  great  affectation  of  mystery,  they  delibe-
rate upon  all  matters  which  interest  the  tribe  or  com-
munity. The  decisions  of  the  Ogboni  are  final,  and
nothing  of  importance  can  be  done  without  their
consent  When  the  missionaries  wished  to  establish
themselves  at  Abeokuta,  the  king  could  not  grant  the


94  THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


necessary  permission  till  tlie  Ogbonis  had  considered
tlie  matter  and  signified  their  consent.  The  power  of
the  Ogbonis,  however,  varies  in  different  states,  and
in  Ibadan  they  seem  to  be  little  more  than  public
executioners.

Of  course,  since  the  organisation  is  secret,  little  can
really  be  known  about  it.  Death  is  said  to  be  the
penalty  for  betraying  the  secrets  of  the  order.  Ac-
cording to  native  report,  a  member  who  has  been
convicted  of  such  an  offence  is  placed  in  a  narrow  cell,
with  his  legs  protruding  through  two  holes  in  the
wall  into  an  adjoining  cell,  where  they  are  fastened  to
two  stakes  driven  into  the  earthen  floor.  The  execu-
tioner sits  in  this  adjoining  cell,  and  the  offender  is
tortured  to  death  by  having  the  flesh  scraped  from  his
legs  with  sharp-edged  shells.  Whether  this  is  true
or  not  it  is  impossible  to  say.

According  to  some  natives  the  Ogboni  Society  has
for  its  chief  object  the  preservation  of  established
religious  customs,  while  according  to  others  it  is
principally  occupied  with  the  civil  power.  It  really
appears  to  concern  itself  with  every  matter  of  public
interest,  and  seems  to  resemble  in  all  important  par-
ticulars a  very  similar  society,  called  Porro,  which  is
found  among  the  Timnis  of  Sierra  Leone.  What  is
quite  certain  is  that  the  protecting  deity  of  the
Ogboni  is  the  goddess  Odudua,  who  is  generally
spoken  of  by  members  by  her  title  He  (Earth).
It  seems  probable  that  the  society  was  originally
intended  for  the  initiation  to  manhood  of  youths
who  had  arrived  at  puberty,  like  the  Boguera  of
the  Bechuanas,  the  Niamwali  of  the  Manganja,  and


PHIESTS  AND  won  SHI  P.  <J5

the  ceremony  of  the  Mpongwe,  described  by  Mr.
Winwood  Reade,*  and  that  its  civil  and  judicial
functions  are  later  usuriDations.  If  this  were  so,  it
would  to  some  extent  be  connected  with  phallic
worship,  and  phallic  emblems  are  very  commonly
seen  carved  on  the  doors  of  Ogboni  lodges.  The
name  Ogboni  is  probably  derived  from  Ogba,  "  Com-
panion."

The  Alafin  of  Yoruba  is  the  chief  of  all  the  Ogboni,
and  he  thus  is  able  to  exert  influence  beyond  the
limits  of  his  own  kingdom.  In  most  states  the  chief
of  the  Ogboni  is  the  head  of  the  priesthood,  and  is
styled  Ekeji  OrisJm,  "  JsText  to  the  Gods."  He  con-
vokes councils  of  priests  on  extraordinary  occasions,
and  decides  disputed  points.  In  Jebu  every  man  of
rank  is  an  Oshogbo,  but  in  Ibadan,  as  has  been  said,
the  Ogboni  seem  chiefly  to  exercise  the  functions  of
executioners.  Criminals  are  delivered  to  them  for
execution  and  are  put  to  death  secretly  in  the
Ogboni  lodge.  The  heads  are  afterwards  fixed  to  a
tree  in  the  market-place,  but  the  bodies  are  never
seen  again,  and  the  relatives  are  thus  unable  to  give
them  the  rites  of  sepulture,  which  is  considered  a
great  disgrace.

The  Yoruba  priesthood  (Olorisha,  priest)  is  divided
into  three  orders,  each  of  which  is  further  subdivided
into  ranks  or  classes.

The  first  order  comprises  three  ranks,  viz.  (1)  the
Babalawo,  or  priests  of  Ifa ;  (2)  priests  who  practise
medicine,  and  who  serve  Osanhin  and  Aroni,  gods  of
medicine  ;  (3)  priests  of  Obatala  and  Odudua.  White
*  "  Savage  Africa,"  p.  2-16.


96  THE  rORUBA-SPEAKlXa  PJiOPLES.

is  the  distitigmsMng  colour  of  this  order  and  all
priests  belonging  to  it  invariably  wear  "1°*^^
The  Babalawo  wear  armlets  made  of  Vf^^""^^'  ^"'l
carry  a  cow-tail  (ir»/.e),  while  priests  of  Obatala  are
distinguished  by  necklaces  of  white  beads^  There
are  two  high  priests  of  this  order,  one  o  whom
resides  at  If  e  and  the  other  at  Ika,  some  distance  to

the  nortli.  ,     ^  •  cn

The  second  order  comprises  (1)  the  Oni-Shango,
or  priests  of.Shango;  and  (2)  priests  of  all  other
gods  not  before  mentioned,  except  Orisha  Oko.  Bed
^nd  white  are  the  distinguishing  colours  o  this  ordei,
and  all  members  of  it  shave  the  crown  o  the  lieacL
Priests  of  Shango  wear  necklaces  of  black  red,  ana
white  beads;  those  of  Ogun  an  iron  bracelet  on  the
left  arm  ;  and  those  of  Oshnn,  one  of  bhango  s  wives,
brass  armlets  and  anklets.  ,  r^  ■  i  „

The  third  order  consists  of  (1)  priests  of  Orisha
Oko,  god  of  Agriculture,  and  (2)  priests  of  demi-gods,
or  deified  men,  such  as  Huisi,  who  defended  Oya
against  Shango.  Priests  of  this  o'^der  are  dis-
tinguished by  a  small  white  mai-k  painted  on  the

'^^Thr  reason  of  the  Babalawo  taking  the  highest
place  in  the  priesthood  is  that  it  is  through  his  agency,
as  the  priestof  Ifa,the  god  of  divination,  that  nianleai-ns
what  is  necessary  to  be  done  to  please  the  other  god  •
The  priests  of  Ifa  thus,  to  a  certain  extent,  oontiol
and  direct  the  worship  of  the  other  gods,  and  in
Tme  of  calamity,  war,  or  pestilence  it  is  ^eir  bu-nes
to  declare  what  ought  to  be  done  to  make  the  gods
propitious.


PRIESTS  AND  wousirir.


97


The  Magba,  or  chief  priest  of  Sliango,  has  twelve
assistants,  who  are  termed,  in  order  of  authority,
right-hand  {Oton),  left-hand  {Osin),  third,  fourth,
fifth,  and  so  on.  They  reside  near  Kuso,  the  spot
at  which  Shango  is  said  to  have  descended  into  the
earth.

The  priests,  besides  acting  as  intermediaries  between
the  gods  and  men,  preside  at  all  trials  bj  ordeal,  and
prepare  and  sell  charms,  amulets,  &c.  The  priests
of  Ifa  are  diviners  proper,  but  other  priests  also
practise  divination,  though  not  with  palm-nuts  and
the  board  peculiar  to  Ifa.  The  methods  are  various ;
one,  called  hehe,  is  a  casting  of  lots  by  means  of  small
sticks  or  stalks  of  grass,  each  of  which  represents
a  particular  individual;  another,  called  gogo,  is  a
drawing  of  lots.  A  certain  number  of  grass  stalks,
one  of  which  is  bent,  are  held  in  the  hand  or  wrapped
in  a  piece  of  cloth,  so  that  the  ends  only  show;  and
each  person  in  turn  draws  one,  the  bent  stalk  in-
dicating the  one  who  is  in  fault.  The  person  of
a  priest  is  sacred,  and  violence  offered  to  one  is
severely  punished.

The  office  of  priest  is  hereditary  in  the  families  of
priests,  but  members  are  recruited  in  other  modes.
Seminaries  for  youths  and  girls,  like  those  of  the
losio  of  the  EVve  tribes,  are  a  regular  institution,  and
m  them  applicants  for  the  priestly  office  undergo  a
novitiate  of  two  or  three  years,  at  the  end  of  which
they  are  consecrated  and  take  a  new  name.  The
ceremony  of  consecration  is  very  similar  to  that
described  in  the  last  volume.*

*  "  E^e-Speaking  Peoples,"  p.  143.
H


98


THE  YOBUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


The  ordinary  service  of  the  temples  is  performed
by  the  dependents  of  the  priesthood,  the  affihated
youths,  and  the  "  wives  "  of  the  gods,  who  keep  the
vessels  filled  with  water,  and  every  fifth  day  sweep
out  the  temples.  In  the  vicinity  the  affiliated  young
people  practise  the  religious  dances  and  songs,  and
for  hours  together  may  be  heard  repeatmg  chants
of  only  two  or  three  notes,  till  they  work  themselves
up  into  a  state  of  frenzy,  and  break  out  into  loud
shrieks  and  cries.  ,

Temples  are  ordinarily  circular  huts  built  of  clay,
with  conical  roofs  thatched  with  grass ;  the  interior
is  usually  painted  with  the  colour  sacred  to  the  god,  and
the  doors  and  shutters,  and  the  posts  which  support  the
overhanging  eaves,  are  carved.    The  temples  of  the
chief  gods  are  usually  situated  in  groves  of  fine  trees,
amongst  which  one  or  two  large  silk-cotton  trees
(Bomhaces),  which  seem  to  be  regarded  with  veneration
throughout  all  West  Africa,  tower  above  the  rest.
From  the  summits  of  the  trees,  or  from  tall  bamboos,
lono'  streamers  flutter  in  the  wind  and  testify  to  the
sanctity  of  the  locality.    Sometimes  there  is  a  grove
only,  without  any  temple,  but  more  frequently  the
grove  or  avenue  adjoins  a  shrine.    These  groves  are
recrarded   with    superstitious   reverence,   and  have
proper  names;  a  grove  sacred  to  Ifa  and  his  com-
panion Odu  is,  for  instance,  called  an  Igbodu.  Near
the  western  entrance  of  the  town  of  Ode  Ondo  is  a  ,
celebrated  grove  or  sacred  avenue,  to  one  side  ot
which,  in  the  adjoining  bush,  the  sacrifice  of  human
victims  and  the  execution  of  criminals  takes  place.|
Persons  approaching  each  other  in  opposite  directions


PRIESTS  AND  W  OR  SIT  IF.


99


are  not  allowed  to  pass  eacli  otlier  in  tliis  avenue,  one
of  them  being  required  to  turn  back  and  wait  till  tlie
path  is  clear.

The  temples  of  tutelary  deities  of  towns  are  usually
to  be  found  in  the  central  square  of  the  town,  or  near
the  principal  gate,  and  those  of  the  tutelary  deities
of  families  or  households  near  the  house-door  or  in
the  yard.  In  shape  and  construction  they  resemble
the  temples  of  the  chief  gods,  but  those  of  the  pro-
tecting deities  of  households  are  mere  miniatures,  and
are  sometimes  only  small  sheds,  open  at  the  ends  and
sides.  Besides  these  structures,  which  are  seen  in
every  street,  one  often  finds  larger  huts,  circular  in
shape,  thatched  with  grass,  and  large  enough  to  con-
tain a  seated  man.  These,  which  might  be  mistaken
for  temples  but  for  the  fact  that  they  contain  no
images,  are  built  for  the  accommodation  of  pious  per-
sons who  wish  to  meditate  and  pray.  A  temple  is
called  He  Orisha,  "  House  of  the  Orisha."

The  Yoruba  gods  are  almost  invariably  represented
by  images  in  human  form,  which  appear  grotesque,
but  are  not  meant  to  be  so,  the  grotesqueness  being
merely  the  result  of  want  of  skill.  These  images  are
regarded  as  emblems  of  absent  gods.  They"  them-
selves are  not  worshipped,  and  there  is  no  idolatry  in
the  proper  sense  of  the  word,  though  no  doubfc  there
is  a  tendency  to  confuse  the  symbol  with  the  god.
Likewise,  through  a  confusion  of  objective  and
subjective  connection,  there  is  an  idea  that  the
god  enters  into  the  imago  to  receive  the  sacrifices
offered  by  his  faithful  followers,  a,nd  to  listen  to  their
adoration  and  prayers.    Earthen  vessels  receive  the

H  2


100


THE  YOBTIBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


libations  of  blood  and  palm-pil,  while  ihe  j^olks  of
eggs,  wliicli  liere,  as  elsewhere  in  West  Africa,  are
regarded  as  offerings  pecuharly  proper  to  the  gods,
are  smeared  upon  the  posts,  door-sills,  and  threshold.*
In  important  temples,  and  also  in  the  houses  of  kings
and  chiefs  of  high  rank,  a  tall  drum,  called  a  gbeclu,  is
kept.    It  is  usually  covered  with  carvings  represent-
ing animals  and  birds,  and  the  phallus.    This  drum
is  only  beaten  at  religious  fetes  and  public  ceremonies,
and  a  portion  of  the  blood  of  the  victims  immolated  is
always  sprinkled  upon  the  symbolic  carvings,  upon
which  palm-wine,  the  yolks  of  eggs,  and  the  feathers  of
sacrificed  chickens  are  also  smeared.    In  this  case  the
offering  is  to  the  protecting  spirit  of  the  drum,  which
is  that  of  a  slave  who  has  been  sacrificed  on  it.  This
plan  of   supplying  an  artificial  guardian-spirit  for
objects,  other  than  natural  objects,  which  are  con-
sidered of  importance,  is  a  development  of  ghost-
worship,  and  on  the  Grold  Coast  such  guardians  are
provided  for  the  "  stools  "  of  kings  and  chiefs,  as  well
as  for  temple  and  state  drums.

Sacrifice  is  the  most  important  part  of  ceremonial
worship,  and  no  god  can  be  consulted  without  it,  the
value  of  the  offering  varying  with  the  importance  of
the  occasion.  Besides  the  offerings  thus  made  for
special  purposes,  or  on  special  occasions,  persons  who
are  the  followers  of  a  god— that  is,  those  who  wear
his  distinguishing  badge  and  are  believed  to  be  under
his  protection— make,  as  a  rule,  daily  offerings  of  small

*  A  purificatory  egg  was   used  to  pro)3itiate  the  goddess  Isis
(Juvenal,  Sat.  vi.  518).


PRIESTS  AND  WORSHIP.


101


value,  sucli  as  a  few  cowries,  or  a  little  maize-flour,
palm-oil,  or  palm- wine.

As  lias  already  been  mentioned,  eacli  god  lias  cer-
tain animals  which  it  is  proper  to  sacrifice  to  him ;
to  use  the  phraseology  of  the  Old  Testament,  every
god  has  his  "clean"  and  his  "  unclean  "  animals.
Some  sacrifices  are  "  unclean  "  to  all  the  gods,  as  the
turkey-buzzard  (gunu-gitnu),  the  vulture  (aJcala),  and
the  grey  parrot  (ofe).  As  the  two  former  devour
offal  and  carrion,  and  are,  in  fact,  scavengers,  we  can
see  a  reason  for  considering  them  unclean ;  but  why
the  grey  parrot  should  also  be  so  considered  is  not
evident.  The  natives  endeavour  to  account  for  the
"  uncleanliness  "  of  these  birds  by  two  popular  say-
ings, which  run  as  follows  : —

"  The  turkey-buzzard  was  required  to  offer  sacrifice,
but  he  refused  to  do  so ;  the  vulture  was  required  to
offer  sacrifice,  but  he  also  refused.  When  the  pigeon
was  required  to  offer  sacrifice,  he  did  so."

"  The  grey  parrot  being  required  to  offer  sacrifice,
refused  to  offer  it;  but  the  green  parrot  took  the
sacrifice  and  offered  it.  After  all,  the  grey  parrot  is
a  citizen  of  Oyo  (the  capital  of  Yoruba)  and  the  green
parrot  an  inhabitant  of  the  country,  and  yet  people
thought  that  the  grey  parrot  was  not  wise."

As  the  turkey-buzzard,  vulture,  and  grey  parrot
refused  to  offer  sacrifice,  they  became  "unclean,"
while  the  pigeon  and  the  green  j)arrot,  which  offered
it,  remained  "clean."  The  latter  part  of  the  second
saying  appears  to  be  ironical,  for  the  grey  parrot,  in
consequence  of  its  uncleanliness,  is  never  offered  up,
while  the  green  parrot  is  sacrificed.


102


THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES,


On  important  occasions  the  priest  designates  to  tlie
suppliants  tlie  sacrifice  which  he  thinks  necessary
to  induce  the  god  to  lend  a  favourable  ear.  They
prostrate  themselves  before  the  shrine  with  cries  of
"  Toto,  toto-hun,''  an  exclamation  which  denotes  humi-
liation and  submission,  while  the  priest,  in  a  long
harangue,  presents  their  petition,  or  case,  to  the  god.
He  usually  begins  his  address  by  flattering  the  god,
dwelling  upon  his  fame  and  power,  and  showing  how
his  humble  servitors  are  entirely  dependent  upon  his
good- will.    Then  he  calls  attention  to  the  self-abase-
ment of  the  god's  faithful  followers  "  So-and-so,"  to
the  value  of  the  victim  which  they  have  brought  him,
and  begs  him  to  be  propitious  and  listen  to  their
humble  prayer.  He  then  sacrifices  the  victim,  sprinkles
some  of  the  blood  on  the  image,  pours  the  remainder
on  the  ground,*  and  places  the  head  and  entrails  in  a
shallow  earthen  vessel  in  front  of  the  temple.

Sacrifices  are  thus  offered  in  the  presence  of  the
god,  that  is,  before  his  image,  which  he  is  supposed
to  animate  for  the  time  being,  but  there  is  one  ex-
ception to  this  general  rule.  This  is,  on  occasions
when  sacrifice  is  made  at  cross-roads,  or  at  a  point
where  several  roads  meet,  in  order  to  avert  an  im-
pending calamity.  In  this  case  the  sacrifice  is  pro-
bably made  to  the  legion  of  spirits,  mostly  evil,  who
are  supposed  to  haunt  the  forests  and  uninhabited
tracts  of  country ;  and  the  general  belief  is  that  the
approaching  danger  is  diverted  from  the  proper
road,  and  turned  away  from  the  community  which  it

♦  Whence  it  is  that  the  verb  da,  "  to  be  poured  out,"  has  also  the
meaning  "  to  be  acceptable  as  a  sacrifice."


PRIESTS  AND  WORSHIP.


103


threatened.  In  reference  to  this  practice  a  proverb
says,  "The  cross-roads  do  not  dread  sacrifices."*

Sometimes,  in  response  to  the  ajDpeal  of  the  priest,
the  god  answers  in  a  bird-like,  twittering  voice,  first
heard  whispering  at  a  little  distance  and  then  coming
nearer.  When  this  occurs,  the  worshippers  lie  ]3rone
with  their  faces  to  the  ground,  awe-stricken,  while
the  priest  carries  on  a  conversation  with  the  spirit-
voice,  and  subsequently  interprets  it  to  the  auditors.
This  conception  that  a  spirit-voice  should  be  a  twitter-
ing, chirping,  or  whistling  sound  is  very  wide -spread ;
as  Dr.  Tylor  has  shown,  it  used  to  exist  among  the
Greeks  and  Romans,  and  it  may  at  the  present  day
be  found  among  the  Indian  tribes  of  North  America,
the  Zulus,  and  the  Polynesians.!  The  spirit-voice  is
no  doubt  produced  by  a  confederate  priest,  by  means
of  a  blade  of  grass,  or  a  leaf,  placed  between  the
teeth.

The  image  of  a  god  which  is  merely  tutelar  to  one
individual  is  only  treated  with  respect  during  the  life
of  that  individual,  after  which  it  is  thrown  away.
Since  the  god  is  personal  to  the  individual,  and  has  no
other  purpose  than  to  protect  him,  the  image  is  only
of  use  as  a  vehicle  of  communication  between  them  so
long  as  the  man  lives.  After  his  death  the  god  no
longer  enters  or  animates  the  image,  which,  in  conse-
quence loses  its  sacred  character,  and  becomes  an
ordinary  object  of  no  value.  Thus,  whenever  a  man
dies,  his  tutelary  god,  if  he  had  one,  is  thrown  away

*  The  ancients  offered  sacrifices  at  the  cross-roads  to  Helcatc,
Goddess  of  Niglit.    (Lucian,  "  Dialogues  of  the  Dead,"  I.),
t  "Primitive  Culture,"  vol.  i.  p.  452,


104  THE  XORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


Toy  tlie  suryiving  members  of  tlie  houseliold,  and  the
extraordinary  belief,  held  by  some  Europeans,  that
the  negro  makes  and  breaks  his  gods  at  will,  may
probably  be  accounted  for  as  a  misconception  of  this
practice.

Although   human   sacrifices   occur   amongst  the
Yoruba  tribes,  we  find  among  them  no  parallel  to  the
wholesale  slaughters  which  take  place,  or  rather  used
to  take  place,  in  Ashanti  and  Dahomi.    The  reason
no  doubt  is,  that  the  Yoruba  kings  and  chiefs  are  not
sufficiently  powerful  to  be  able  to  sacrifice  life  on  a
large  scale;  for  the  more  powerful  the  monarch,  the
more  he  can  afford  to  disregard  public  opinion,  and
since  the  masses  supply  the  victims,  human  sacrifices
are  never  regarded  by  them  with  favour.  Whether,
when  Yoruba  was  a  homogeneous  and  powerful  state^
human  sacrifices  were  a  state  institution,  as  they  were
in  Dahomi,  we  have  no  means  of  ascertaining,  but  all
the  probabilities  point  in  that  direction.

During  the  period  that  the  Yorubas  have  been
known  to  Europeans  no  large  number  of  victims  has
been  put  to  death  even  on  the  occasion  of  the  death
of  a  king.    A  king  of  Oyo  died  on  April  27th,  1859,
and  only  four  men  were  sacrificed,  but  forty-two  of
his  wives  poisoned  themselves  in  order  to  accompany
him  to  the  Land  of  the  Dead.    In  Ondo  about  twenty
persons  were  sacrificed  when  a  king  died,  and  there
was  an  established  procedure,  one  victim  having  to  be
immolated  when  the  corpse  was  washed,  four  at  dif-
ferent entrances  to  the  palace,  and  a  sixth  in  the
market-place.    On  the  day  of  the  burial  from  eight  to
ten  victims,  with  a  cat,  were  either  killed  and  interred


PRIESTS  AND  WORSHIP.


105


with  the  corpse  or  buried  alive,  and  during  the  three
months  which  are  required  to  elapse  before  a  new
king  can  be  installed  there  were  occasional  sacrifices.
In  1882  the  king  of  Ondo  entered  into  an  engage-
ment with  the  government  of  Lagos  to  put  an  end  to
human  sacrifices,  but  he  does  not  appear  to  have  kept
it.  At  the  present  day,  amongst  all  the  tribes,  when
a  king  or  chief  dies  it  is  usual  for  two  of  his  wives  to
commit  suicide,  and  should  no  volunteers  be  forth-
coming, two  are  selected  and  put  to  death.  Horses
are  often  killed  and  buried  with  their  owners.

There  was  until  very  recently,  and  perhaps  still  is,
an  annual  human  sacrifice  at  Abeokuta,  called  the
"basket-sacrifice,"  a  euphemism  designed  to  conceal
the  real  nature  of  the  ceremony.  The  victim  was
enclosed  in  a  long  basket,  as  in  Dahomi,  from  whence
perhaps  the  custom  was  adopted,  thrown  down  from
a  height,  and  despatched  by  a  mob  armed  with  clubs.
It  was  a  national  offering,  but  when  times  were  pros-
perous the  victim  was  often  spared  and  dedicated  to  a
god,  whose  temple-slave  he  then  became.  There  used
also  to  be  an  annual  sacrifice  of  one  human  victim  at
Ikoradu,  and  a  similar  offering  every  sixth  year  to  the
god  Ogun  at  Ikriku.

In  times  of  great  urgency  human  sacrifices  are
offered  to  some  of  the  gods,  for  example,  to  Shango,
If  a,  Elegba,  Ogun,  Olokun,  and  Olosa ;  but  they  are
nearly  always  made  at  night,  and  the  people  are
required  to  remain  in  their  houses.  There  is  none  of
the  publicity  and  display  which  we  found  in  Ashanti
and  Dahomi,  and  so  the  people  escape  the  brutal-
ising  effect  which  the  frequent  spectacle  of  scenes  of


106  THE  YOIWBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


bloodslied  must  produce.     Even  tlie  priests,  always
tlie  last  to  be  influenced  by  a  change   of  public
opinion,  seem  to  regard  buman  sacrifice  as  sometbmg
to  be  deplored,  but  occasionally  necessary.    The  vic-
tim is  slaughtered  almost  in  secret,  and  tlie  sound  of
the  temple-drums  and  the  mournful  chants  of  the
assistants  alone  inform  the  people  of  what  is  taking
place.    The  natives  avoid  any  direct  reference  to  the
subject.    "  The  night  is  bad,"  they  say.    As  on  the
Gold  Coast,  the  victim  is  always  decapitated  in  front
of  the  image,  so  that  the  blood  from  the  severed
arteries  may  spurt  over  it.    For  Blegba  the  body  is
opened  and  the  entrails  placed  before  him  in  a  shallow
dish.    The  body  of  a  man  sacrificed  to  the  sea-god
Olokun  is  thrown  into  the  sea,  and  that  of  a  man
offered  to  Olosa  into  the  lagoon.

The  Commissioners  who  were  sent  to  the  interior
in  1886  to  break  up  the  camps  of  the  belligerent
tribes,  succeeded  in  inducing  the  rulers  of  Ijesa
and  Ekiti  to  sign  an  enactment  abolishing  human
sacrifices,  both  to  the  gods  and  at  the  funeral  obse-
quies of  men  of  rank.  They  endeavoured  to  obtain
a  similar  undertaking  from  the  Ifes,  but  here  they
met  with  some  difficulty.  If  e  being  the  home  of  human
sacrifice,  and  though  the  chief  men  promised  to  put
an  end  to  the  practice,  only  four  of  the  eighteen  per-
sons who  composed  the  Ife  Council  signed  the  agree-
ment. The  Oni  of  Ife  said  that  sacrifice  was  made  at
Ife  for  the  whole  human  race,  the  white  man  not  ex-
cepted ;  and  that  if  the  sacrifice  made  on  his  behalf
were  to  be  discontinued,  his  superior  knowledge,  and
the  arts  derived  therefrom,  would  depart  from  him.


CHAPTEE  yi.


egungun,  oro,  abiku,  and  vaeious  superstitions.

Egungtjn.

Egungun  reallj  means  "  bone,"  hence  "  skeleton,"
and  Egungun  himself  is  supposed  to  be  a  man  risen
from  the  dead.  The  part  is  acted  by  a  man  disguised
in  a  long  robe,  usually  made  of  grass,  and  a  mask  of
wood,  which  generally  represents  a  hideous  human
face,  with  a  long  pointed  nose  and  thin  lips,  but
sometimes  the  head  of  an  animal.

Egungun  appears  in  the  streets  by  day  or  night
indifferently,  leaping,  dancing,  or  walking  gro-
tesquely, and  uttering  loud  cries.  He  is  supposed
to  have  returned  from  the  land  of  the  dead  in
order  to  ascertain  what  is  going  on  in  the  land  of
the  living,  and  his  function  is  to  carry  away  those
persons  who  are  troublesome  to  their  neighbours.
He  may  thus  be  considered  a  kind  of  supernatural
inquisitor  who  appears  from  time  to  time  to  inquire
into  the  general  domestic  conduct  of  people,  par-
ticularly of  women,  and  to  punish  misdeeds.
Although  it  is  very  well  known  that  Egungun  is
only  a  disguised  man,  yet  it  is  popularly  believed
that  to  touch  him,  even  by  accident,  causes  death.


108


THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


A  crowd  always  stands  round  watcbing,  at  a
respectful  distance,  the  gambols  of  an  Bgungun,^  and
one  of  tte  chief  amusements  of  tlie  performer  is  to
rush  suddenly  towards  the  spectators,  who  fly  before
him  in  every  direction  in  great  disorder,  to  avoid
the  fatal  touch.  To  raise  the  hand  against  Egungun
is  punished  with  death,  and  women  are  forbidden,  on
pain  of  death,  to  laugh  at  him,  speak  disparagingly
of  him,  or  say  he  is  not  one  who  has  risen  from  the
dead.  "May  Egungun  cut  you  in  pieces,"  is  an
imprecation  often  heard,

Egungun  is  thus  at  the  present  day  a  sort  of
"bogey,"    or    make-believe    demon,    whose  chief
business    is    to    frighten    termagants,  busybodies,
scandalmongers,  and  others,  but  it  seems  probable
that  originally  he  was  regarded  as  the  incarnation  of
the  dead,  and  that  the  whole  custom  is  connected
with  manes-worship.     In  June  there  is  an  annual
feast  for  Egungun  lasting  seven  days,  during  which
lamentations   are   made   for  those  who  have  died
within  the  last  few  years.    It  is  a  kind  of  All-Souls
festival,  and  resembles  the  Affirah-U  festival  of  the
Tshi  tribes,  described  in  the  first  volume  of  this
series.*     Moreover,  Egungun  also  appears  in  con-
nection with  funeral  ceremonies.    A  few  days  after
the  funeral  an  Egungun,  accompanied  by  masked  and
disguised  men,  parades  the  streets  of  the  town  at
night,  and,  as  in  the  Eoman  conclamatio,  calls  upon
the  deceased  loudly  by  name.    A  superstitious  and
half -frightened   crowd   follows,   listening   for  any
response  that  may  be  given  to  the  weird  cries  of

•  *  See  "  The  Tslii-Speaking  Peoples  uf  the  Gold  Coast,;'  p.  227.


EGUNGUN,  ORO,  AA'D  ABIKU.


109


the  Egungun.  A  feAV  days  later  tlie  Egungun,  again
accompanied  bj  several  followers,  proceeds  to  the
house  in  which  the  death  took  place,  and  brings  to
the  relatives  news  of  the  deceased,  usually  that  he
has  arrived  in  Deadland  safely,  and  is  quite  well.
In  return  for  the  good  news  the  family  set  food,
rum,  and  palm-wine  in  a  room  of  the  house,  and
inviting  the  Egungun  to  partake  of  it,  themselves
retire,  for  to  see  Egungun  eating  is  death.  When
Egungun  and  his  followers  have  consumed  every-
thing loud  groans  are  heard  to  issue  from  the  room,
and,  this  being  a  sign  that  he  is  about  to  depart,  the
family  re-enter  and  entrust  him  with  messages  for
the  deceased.

A  large  proportion  of  the  slaves  landed  at  Sierra
Leone,  at  the  beginning  of  the  present  century,  from
slave-ships  that  had  been  captured  by  British  cruisers,
were  Yorubas,  and  their  Christian  descendants  have
preserved  the  practice  of  Egungun,  who  may  often
be  seen  performing  his  antics  in  the  streets  of  Free-
town. There,  however,  his  disguise  is  less  elaborate
than  in  Yoruba  country,  and  he  appears  in  a  long-
robe  of  cotton-print,  with  a  piece  of  cloth,  having
apertures  for  the  eyes,  covering  the  face  and  head.
Spectators  soon  gather  round  him,  and  though,  if
asked,  they  will  tell  you  that  it  is  only  "play,"  many
of  them  are  half -doubtful,  and  whenever  the  E2:un2"un
makes  a  rush  forward  the  crowd  flees  before  him  to
escape  his  touch.

Oro.

The  word  Oro  means  fierceness,  tempest,  or  pro-


110


THE  Y  GRUB  ASP  BAKING  PEOPLES.


vocation,  and  Oro  liimself  appears  to  be  personified
executive  power.

Oro  is  supposed  to  liaunt  tlie  forest  in  the  neigli-
bourliood  of  towns,  and  lie  makes  liis  approacli  known
by  a  strange,  wliirring,  roaring  noise.  As  soon  as
this  is  keard,  all  women  must  skut  tkemselves  up  in
tkeir  kouses,  and  refrain  from  looking  out  on  pain  of
deatk.  Tke  voice  of  Oro  is  produced  by  wkirling
round  and  round  a  tkin  strip  of  wood,  some  2\  inckes
broad,  12  inckes  long,  and  tapering  at  botk  ends,
wkick  is  fastened  to  a  stick  by  a  long  string.  It  is,
in  fact,  tke  instrument  known  to  Engksk  boys  as  tke
"bull-roarer,"  and  wkick  Mr.  Andrew  Lang  kas
skown  to  kave  been  used  in  tke  mysteries  of  Ancient
areece,  Austraka,  New  Mexico,  New  Zealand,  and
Soutk  Africa.*  No  women  may  see  tke  "  bull-
roarer "  and  live,  and  all  women  are  obliged,  under
pain  of  deatk,  to  say  tkat  tkey  bekeve  Oro  to  be  a
powerful  Orisha,  and  to  act  up  to  tkat  belief.

In  Yoruba  country  Oro  is  manipulated  by  tke
Ogboni  Society.  Criminals  condemned  to  deatk  are
sometimes  given  to  Oro,  in  wkick  case  tkey  are  ordi-
narily never  seen  again,  but  tkeir  clotkes  are  skown
entangled  in  tke  branckes  of  a  lofty  tree,  wkere  Oro
is  said  to  kave  left  tkeni  wken  flying  tkrougk  tke
air.  In  suck  a  case  Oro  is  said  to  kave  devoured  tke
bodies.  Sometimes,  kowever,  tke  keadless  corpse  of
tke  criminal  is  discovered  in  tke  forest  on  tke  out-
skirts of  tke  town,  but  nobody  is  allowed  to  bury  it.
Unlike  Egungun,  Oro  only  appears  on  kis  feast-days,
or,  to  use  tke  native  expression,  wken  a  town  kas  an

*  "  Custom  and  Mytli,"  Art.  "  The  Eull-Eoarcr."


EGUXGUN,  OnO,  A.YD  ABIKU.


Ill


0^o-da3^  The  voice  of  Oro  is  liearcl  from  morning  to
night,  and  all  women  are  closely  confined  to  their
houses,  while  Oro  himself,  in  a  long  robe  hung  with
shells,  and  a  wooden  mask  painted  white,  with  the
lips  smeared  with  blood,  parades  the  town  with  a
numerous  following-.

In  Ondo  there  is  an  annual  festival  to  Oro,  called
Oro  Doko.  It  lasts  for  three  lunar  months,  and  every
ninth  day  women  are  obliged  to  remain  within  their
houses  from  daybreak  till  noon,  while  the  men  parade
the  streets,  whirling  the  bull-roarer,  dancing,  singing,
and  beating  drums,  and  killing  all  stray  dogs  and
fowls,  on  which  they  afterwards  feast.  A  large
boulder  of  granite,  called  Olumo,  on  the  summit  of  a
hill  in  Abeokuta,  is  sacred  to  Oro,  and  no  one  may
ascend  it.

Just  as  Egungun  is  now  used  for  social  purposes,
and  to  preserve  order  in  private  life,  so  is  Oro  used
for  political  purposes,  to  preserve  order  in  the  com-
munity at  large ;  yet,  from  the  analogy  of  other
peoples,  and  from  the  fact  that  it  is  death  for  a  woman
to  see  the  instrument  which  produces  the  voice  of
Oro,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  originally  Oro  was
the  spirit  that  presided  at  the  celebration  of  male
mysteries,  such  as  are  found  among  the  Kurnai  of
Australia,  and  he  has  perhaps  been  diverted  from  his
proper  purpose  by  the  influence  of  the  Ogboni.

Abikij.

Abiku,  obi,  that  which  possesses"  ;  ihi,  "  death";
hence,  "  predestined  to  death  "  is  a  word  used  to


112  THE  YORUBA.SPEAKING  PEOPLES.

mean  the  spirits  of  cliildren  wlio  die  before  reaching
puberty,  and  also  a  class  of  evil  spirits  who  cause
children  to  die ;  a  child  who  dies  before  twelve  years
of  age  being  called  an  Abiku,  and  the  spirit,  or  spirits,
who  caused  the  death  being  also  called  Abiku.

The  general  idea  seems  to  be  that  the  uninhabited
tracts  of  country  abound  with  numbers  of  evil  spirits
or  demons,  who  suffer  from  hunger,  thirst,  and  cold,
since  nobody  offers  sacrifice  to  them  and  they  have
no  temples,  and  who  are  constantly  endeavourmg  to
improve  their  condition  by  entering  the  bodies  of
new-born  babes.  Only  one  Abiku  can  enter  and
dwell  in  the  body  of  the  same  child,  and,  as  there  is
great  competition  amongst  the  Abikus  for  such  a
position,  an  Abiku  is  only  suffered  by  his  companions
to  enter  peaceably,  and,  in  fact,  to  be  recogmsed  as
having  vested  rights  in  a  child,  on  condition  of  his
promising  them  a  share  of  the  comforts  he  is  about  to
obtain.

When  an  Abiku  has  entered  a  child  he  takes  for  his
own  use,  and  for  the  use  of  his  companions,  the
greater  part  of  the  food  that  the  child  eats,  who  in
consequence  begins  to  pine  away  and  become  ema-
ciated. If  an  Abiku  who  had  entered  a  child  were
not  bound  to  supply  the  wants  of  other  Abikus  who
had  not  succeeded  in  obtaining  human  tenements,  no
great  harm  would  ensue,  since  the  sustenance  taken
could  be  made  sufficient  both  for  the  child  and  his
tenant.  It  is  the  incessant  demands  that  are  made
by  the  hungry  Abikus  outside,  and  which  the  in-
dwelling Abiku  has  to  satisfy,  that  destroy  the  child,
for  the  whole  of  Ms  food  is  insufficient  for  their  require-


EGUNGUX,  ORG,  AND  ABIKU.

ments.  When  a  cliild  is  peevish  and  fretful  it  is
believed  that  tlie  outside  Abikus  are  hurting  him  in
order  to  make  the  indwelling  Abiku  give  them  more
to  eat ;  for  everything  done  to  the  child  is  felt  by  his
Abiku.  The  indwelling  Abiku  is  thus,  to  a  great
extent,  identified  with  the  child  himself,  and  it  is  pos-
sible that  the  whole  superstition  may  be  a  corruption
of  the  Grold  Coast  belief  in  the  sisa*

A  mother  who  sees  her  child  gradually  wasting
away  without  apparent  cause,  concludes  that  an  Abiku
has  entered  it,  or,  as  the  natives  frequently  express
it,  that  she  has  given  birth  to  an  Abiku,  and  that
it  is  being  starved  because  the  Abiku  is  stealing
all  its  nourishment.     To  get  rid  of  the  indwelling
Abiku,  and  its  companions  outside,  the  anxious  mother
offers  a  sacrifice  of  food ;  and  while  the  Abikus  are
supposed  to  be  devouring  the  spiritual  part  of  the
food,  and  to  have  their  attention  diverted,  she  attaches
iron  rings  and  small  bells  to  the  ankles  of  the  child,
and  hangs  iron  chains  round  his  neck.    The  jingling
of  the  iron  and  the  tinkling  of  the  bells  is  supposed
to  keep  the  Abikus  at  a  distance,  hence  the  number  of
children  that  are  to  be  seen  with  their  feet  weighed
down  with  iron  ornaments.

Sometimes  the  child  recovers  its  health,  and  it  is
then  believed  that  this  procedure  has  been  effective,
and  that  the  Abikus  have  been  driven  away.  If,
however,  no  improvement  takes  place,  or  the  child
grows  worse,  the  mother  endeavours  to  drive  out  the
Abiku  by  making  small  incisions  in  the  body  of  the
child,  and  putting  therein  green  peppers  or  spices,
*  "  Tsbi-Speaking  Peoples  of  tlie  Gold  Coast,"  chap,  xi.


114


THE  YOnUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


believing  that  she  will  thereby  cause  pain  to  the
Abikn  and  make  him  depart.  The  poor  child  screams
with  pain,  bnt  the  mother  hardens  her  heart  in  the
belief  that  the  Abiku  is  suffering  equally.

Should  the  child  die  it  is,  if  buried  at  all,  buried
without  any  funeral  ceremony,  beyond  the  precincts
of  the  town  or  village,  in   the  bush;  most  other
interments  being  made  in  the  floors  of  the  dwelling-
houses.     Often  the  corpse  is  simply  thrown  into  the
bush,  to  punish  the  Abiku,  say  the  natives.  Sometimes  a
mother,  to  deter  the  Abiku  which  has  destroyed  her
child  from  entering  the  body  of  any  other  infant  she
may  bear  in  the  future,  will  beat,  pound,  and  mutilate
the  little  corpse,  while   threatening  and  invoking
every  evil  upon  the  Abiku  which  has  caused  the
calamity.    The  indwelling  Abiku  is  believed  to  feel
the  blows  and  wounds  inflicted  on  the  body,  and  to
hear  and  be  terrified  by  the  threats  and  curses.


Teee-Spirits.

Several  varieties  of  trees  are  believed  to  be
inhabited  by  indwelling  spirits,  which  are  not  exactly
gods,  but  answer  more  to  the  hama-dryads  of  Ancient
Greece,  or  to  the  elves  of  medieval  Europe.  From
the  analogy  of  the  Tshi  tribes  there  is  little  doubt
but  that  these  tree-spirits  were  once  gods  of  the
Srahmantin  type,  i.e.,  of  the  type  of  those  which  on
the  Gold  Coast  are  believed  to  animate  the  gigantic
silk-cotton  trees;  but  now,  owing  to  the  great
increase  in  the  number  of  general  objects  of  worship,
^hich  makes  the  propitiation  of  the  local  object  a


EGUNGUN,  Ono,  AND  ABIKU.  115

matter  of  less  importance,  tliej  liave  been  shorn  of
a  great  deal  of  their  power,  and  pushed  more  into  the
background.

The  Ashorin  tree  is  one  which  is  inhabited  by  a
spirit  who,  it  is  belieyed,  would,  if  its  attention  were
not  diverted,  drive  away  anyone  who  attempted  to
fell  the  tree.  The  woodman  therefore  places  a  little
palm-oil  on  the  ground  as  a  lure,  and  when  the  spirit
leaves  the  tree  to  lick  up  the  delicacy,  proceeds  to  cut
down  its  late  abode.

The  Apa,  frequently  called  the  African  mahogany,
IS  mhabited  by  an  evil  spirit,  and  is  commonly  seen
encircled  with  palm-leaves,  and  with  an  earthen  pot
at  Its  foot  to  receive  the  offerings  of  woodcutters.
It  IS  beheved  to  emit  a  phosphorescent  light  by  night.
The  wood  of  this  tree  is  in  some  demand  for  the  con-
struction of  drums,  which  are  hollow  wooden  cylinders
covered  with  hide  at  one  end ;  but  before  it  can  be  cut
down  the  spirit  must  be  propitiated  by  an  offering,
usually  consisting  of  a  fowl  and  some  palm-oil.  The
Apa  is  the  emblem  of  vengeance.

The  IroJco  (silk-cotton  tree)  is  also  inhabited  by  a
spirit,  but  it  is  not  very  powerful  or  malicious,  and
when  a  man  desires  to  fell  such  a  tree  it  is  sufficient
protection  for  him  to  invoke  the  indwelling  spirit  of
his  own  head  by  rubbing  a  little  palm-oil  on  his
forehead.  The  IroJco  is  used  chiefly  for  building,
whence  probably  it  comes  to  be  the  emblem  of  refuge.'

A  proverb,  referring  to  the  risks  a  man  runs  in
cutting  down  trees  inhabited  by  spirits,  says  "  The
axe  that  cuts  the  tree  is  not  afraid,  but  the  woodman
covers  his  head  with  etu  "  (a  magic  powder).

i2


116  THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.

These  customs  may  be  compared  with  those  of  the
modem  Greeks  of  Siphinos,  one  of  the  Cyclades.
Mr.  Bent  says  *  that  when  the  woodcutters  have  to
cut  down  a  tree  they  suppose  to  be  inhabited  by  a
spirit  (hamadryad),  they  are  exceedingly  careful  when
it  falls  to  prostrate  themselves  humbly  and  m  silence,
lest  the  spirit  should  chastise  them  as  it  escapes.
Cato  also  t  instructs  a  woodcutter  that,  in  order  to
escape  the  consequences  of  thinning  a  sacred  grove,
he  must  sacrifice  a  hog,  and  beg  permission  to  thm
the  grove  in  order  to  restrain  its  overgrowth.

As  is  the  case  among  the  Ewe  tribes  of  the  Slave
Coast,  wizards  and  witches  are  by  the  Yorubas
believed  to  hold  nocturnal  meetings  at  the  foot  of
trees  tenanted  by  spirits,  more  especially  the  ^pa,
whose  indwelling  spirit  is  believed  to  assist  them  m
their  malpractices.  Here,  too,  the  owl  again  appears,
but  now,  instead  of  the  bird  being  the  messenger  or
agent  of  the  tree  spirit,  it  is  the  wizard  {Aje)  himself,
who  metamorphoses  himself  into  an  owl  and  proceeds
on  the  mission  of  death.

Witchcraft  is,  in  the  minds  of  the  natives,  the
chief  cause  of  sickness  and  death.  They  cannot,
they  think,  attribute  these  evils  to  the  gods,  unless
they  occur  in  some  way  special  to  a  god;  as,  for
instance,  when  a  man  is  struck  by  lightning,  in  which
case  the  event  would  be  attributed  to  Shango— or
contracts  small-pox,  when  the  disease  would  be  attri-
buted to  Shanpanna ;  for  they  are  very  careful  to
keep  on  good  terms  with  the  gods,  by  scrupulously


*  "The  Cyclades,"  p.  27.


t  "  De  Re  Rustica,"  139.


EGUNGUN,  ORO,  AND  ABIKU.  117

observing  tlieii-  religious  duties.  They  consequently
attribute  sickness  and  death,  other  than  death  result-
ing from  injury  or  violence,  to  jDersons  who  have  for
bad  purposes  enhsted  the  services  of  evil  spirits,  that
is  to  say,  to  wizards  and  witches.  Witches  are  more
common  than  wizards,  and  here,  as  elsewhere  in  the
world,  it  is  the  oldest  and  most  hideous  of  their  sex
who  are  accused  of  the  crime.

Properly  speaking,  a  person  charged  with  witch-
craft should  be  subjected  to  trial  by  ordeal,  and  then,
if  found  guilty,  immediately  executed  ;  but  the  excited
populace,  filled  with  superstitious  terror,  frequently
acts  without  waiting  for  proof,  and  puts  the  accused
to  death  without  trial.  Curiously  enough,  the  phe-
nomenon that  so  frequently  occurred  in  England,  when
a  belief  in  witchcraft  was  an  article  of  faith,  appears
here  also ;  and  old  women,  accused  of  being  witches,
very  often  acknowledge  that  they  are,  and  charge
themselves  with  deaths  which  may  have  recently
occurred  in  the  community.

Amulets  and  charms  {pnde)  are  numerous  and  of
various  kinds.  Some,  like  tlie  vo-sesao  of  the  Ewe
tribes,  are  really  the  badges  of  different  gods,  such  as
the  a^ude,  or  iron  armlet  worn  by  hunters,  who  are  the
servitors  of  Ogun,  god  of  iron,  and  possess  no  virtue
of  themselves,  being  merely  useful  as  serving  to
remind  the  gods  that  the  wearers  are  under  their
protection.  Others  are  amulets  proper,  and  are
believed  to  derive  a  protecting  power  from  the  gods,
from  whom  they  have,  through  the  agency  of  the
priests,  been  obtained.  Amulets  are  generally  sewn
up  in  leather  cases ;   those  obtained  from  Mob  am-


118  THE  YORliBA-SPEAKlNG  PEOPLES.


medans,  and  whicli  usually  consist  of  a  verse  trom
the  Koran,  always  are.

The  name  onde  means  "  one  in  bondage,"  and  is
compounded  of  em,  "a  person,"  or  "one  who,"
and  ide,  "  the  act  of  being  confined."  This  name
seems  to  point  to  the  former  existence  of  a  belief
similar  to  that  now  held  by  the  Tshi-tribes  in  regard
to  the  Suhman ;  namely,  that  the  amulet  is  animated
by  an  indwelling  spirit,  who  has  been  confined  therein
by  a  superior  power.  At  the  present  time,  however,
the  onde  cannot  be  regarded  in  any  way  as  being
animated,  or  an  orisha.  Prayers  are  never  addressed
to  it,  nor  are  offerings  presented  to  it ;  it  is  merely
the  instrument  or  vehicle  through  which  the  god  from
whom  it  was  obtained  acts,  and  by  means  of  which
events  which  affect  the  wearer  of  the  onde  are  brought
to  the  knowledge  of  the  god.

An  onde  for  the  protection  of  the  person  is  worn  on
the  body,  being  tied  round  the  wrist,  neck,  or  ankle,
or  placed  in  the  hair.  Others,  for  the  protection  of
property,  are  fastened  to  houses,  or  tied  to  sticks  and
stumps  of  trees  in  cultivated  plots  of  ground.  In
consequence  of  their  being  tied  on  to  the  person  or
object  they  protect,  the  word  edi,  which  really  means
the  act  of  tying  or  binding,  has  now  the  meaning  of
amulet  or  charm,  just  as  in  Eavo  the  word  vd-sesa
(amulet)  is  derived  from  vo  and  sa,  to  tie  or  bind.
Another  word  sometimes  used  to  express  amulet  is
ogun,  which,  however,  more  properly  means  medicinal
preparation,  poison,  or  magical  drug.

The  following  are  some  examples  of  current  super-
stitions.


J^GUNGVN,  org,  and  AJJlKtf.  ll'J

(1)  Tlie  fur  of  the  ehoro,  a  kind  of  liare,  is  a  cliarm
"whicli  protects  the  house  from  fire.

(2)  A  house  fumigated  with  the  bark  of  the  erun
tree  is  purged  of  evil  spirits  and,  consequently,  of
sickness.  Charcoal  made  from  the  wood  of  this  tree
is  largely  used  as  a  medicine.

(3)  Powder  made  of  the  leaves  of  the  sensitive
plant,  is  a  charm  to  make  the  inmates  of  a  house  fall
into  a  deep  sleep,  and  is  used  by  thieves.

(4)  To  kill  an  ajaho,  a  kind  of  jackal,  brings
misfortune  upon  the  slayer.  A  proverb  says,  "He
who  kills  an  ajako  will  suffer  for  it."

(5)  The  flocking  of  vultures  denotes  impending-
war.  These  birds  prey  on  the  slain,  and  so,  by  an
inversion  of  ideas,  are  supposed  to  cause  war.

(6)  To  break  the  bones  of  the  crane  called  agufon
causes  calamity.

(7)  Whoever  touches  the  nest  of  the  bird  called
ognroclo  will  die.

The  Yorubas  have  the  same  superstitions  in  regard
to  the  hooded  crow,  porcupine,  tortoise,  and  wild  cat
(oghoya)  as  have  the  Ewe  tribes.*

By  country-custom  no  Yoruba  may  milk  a  cow,  and
in  consequence  cows  are  always  tended  by  foreign-
born  slaves,  usually  Fulani.

We  find  a  curious  example  of  the  manner  in  which
objective  and  subjective  connection  are  confused  in
the  expression,  Abede  ni  ti  oJdra—-"  Eight  through  is
the  cutting  of  the  sword-fish."  This  saying  is  used
as  a  charm  by  warriors,  and  is  believed  to  ensure  suc-


•  "  E\Ve-Speaking  Peoples,"  pp.  95,  97,  and  98,


120  THE  rORUBA-SFEAKING  PEOPLES.

cess,  because  it  is  supposed  tliat  tlie  sword-fish  {oUra)
cuts  in  two  all  its  foes  in  the  sea.

The  Yorubas  have  a  superstition  which  has  close
points  of  resemblance  to  the  "  changeling "  super-
stition of  Northern  Europe.  It  is  referred  to  in
many  folk-lore  tales,  and  the  following  is  an  example.

"  There  lived  at  Otta  "  (a  village  on  the  River  Ilo,
which  is  a  tributary  of  the  Ogun)  "  a  woman  named
Bola,  who  had  a  male  child.  When  the  child  was
small  the  mother  carried  him  on  her  back  when  she
went  to  market,  but  when  he  became  about  nine
months  old  she  used  to  lay  him  down  on  a  mat  in
her  house,  fasten  the  door,  and  go  to  market  by
herself.  After  this  it  always  happened  that  when
she  returned  from  the  market  she  found  that  all  the
food  she  had  left  in  the  house  had  disappeared.  This
seemed  to  her  very  strange,  and  she  at  first  suspected
her  neighbours,  but  she  always  found  the  door-
fastening  untouched,  and  was  unable  to  fathom  the
mystery.

"  One  day  a  neighbour  came  to  her  and  said,  '  I  am
going  to  the  market  at  Orichi  to-morrow  morning
early,  and  therefore  must  ask  you  to  repay  me  the
string  of  cowries  that  you  sent  your  little  boy  to  borrow
from  me.'  Bola,  much  astonished,  declared  that  she
had  borrowed  no  cowries  from  the  woman,  and  had
sent  no  one  to  her  ;  but  the  neighbour  persisted  that
Bola's  child  had  come  to  her,  and  had  borrowed  a  string
of  cowries  in  the  name  of  his  mother.  '  Come,  then,'
said  Bola,  '  and  see  my  child.'

"  The  two  women  went  into  the  house  where  the
child  was  sleeping  on  his  mat.    '  You  see  him,'  said


EGUNGUN,  ORO,  AND  ABIKU.


121


Bola,  '  there  lie  is,  sleeping.  Do  you  not  see  that  he
is  yet  too  young  to  walk  ?  How  then  could  he  come
to  you  ?  And  how  could  he  ask  you  for  cowries,
seeing  that  he  cannot  yet  talk  ?  '

"  The  neighbour  looked  closely  at  the  child,  and
then  solemnly  declared  that  it  was  really  he  who  had
come  to  her,  but  that  when  he  came  he  was  much
bigger  than  he  was  now,  and  had  the  appearance  of
a  child  of  about  ten  years  of  age.

"  When  Bola  heard  this  she  was  much  distressed.
She  could  not  doubt  her  neighbour's  word,  and  she
feared  that  her  child  must  be  possessed  by  an  evil
spirit.  She  paid  the  neighbour  the  string  of  cowries,
and  begged  her  to  say  nothing;  then,  when  the  child's
father  came  to  the  house,  she  told  him  the  whole
story.

"  The  father  and  mother  decided  to  search  into  the
mystery.  The  father,  therefore,  carefully  hid  himself
in  the  house,  one  day  while  the  mother  and  child  were
out.  Then  Bola  returned  to  the  house  with  the  child,
put  him  down  on  the  mat,  said  to  him,  '  Sleep  good
while  I  go  to  the  market,'  and  then  went  out,  and
fastened  the  door  as  usual.

"  Scarcely  had  Bola  gone,  than  the  father,  from  his
hiding-place,  saw  the  baby  stand  up,  and  begin  to
grow  till  he  became  a  big  boy.  Then  he  went  to  the
calabashes  where  the  food  was  kept,  and  was  beginning
to  eat  it,  when  the  father  came  out  from  his  hiding-
place.

"  Immediately  the  child  saw  his  father  he  became
a  little  baby  again,  and  lay  on  the  floor  crying.  He
was  possessed  by  a  spirit.    His  mother  came  back.


122  THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.

and  tliey  beat  liim  to  drive  the  spirit  out,  so  that  the
spirit  fled."

The  parallel  between  this  tale  and  the  changeling
stories  of  ISForthern  Europe  is  close.  In  the  latter,
as  in  the  Yoruba  version,  the  changeling,  while  in  the
presence  of  its  foster-mother  and  others,  affects  to  be
an  infant,  but  throws  off  his  disguise  as  soon  as  he
imagines  himself  to  be  alone.  See,  for  instance,  the
tale  called  "The  Father  of  Eighteen  Elves,"  in
Arnason's  collection  of  Icelandic  legends.*  The  only
difference — an  important  one,  it  is  true — is  in  the
genesis  of  the  changehng.  In  Europe  it  is  an  elfin
child,  who  is  substituted  for  a  stolen  human  child,  but
here  it  is  the  child  himself  who  is  possessed  by  an
evil  spirit,  just  as  an  Abika  possesses  a  child,  though
with  different  results.

We  also  find  a  superstition  which  recalls  that  of  the
were-wolf,  for  the  hyena  (Kpelekpe)  is  often  supposed
to  be  a  man  who  assumes  that  disguise  at  night,  to
prey  upon  sheep  and  cattle,  and,  if  the  opportunity
offers,  upon  human  beings.  Such  man-hyenas  are
believed  to  be  able,  by  means  of  certain  howls  and
cries,  to  compel  people  to  go  out  to  them  in  the  dark
forest  to  be  devoured.  A  similar  belief  is  found  in
Abyssinia.t  The  weird  "laugh"  of  the  hyena,  and
its  nocturnal  habits,  no  doubt  account  for  this  super-
stition, just  as  similar  causes  have  led  to  the  owl  being
universally  regarded  as  a  bird  of  ill  omen.

A  belief  in  metamorphosis  is  universal,  and  is  not

*  London,  E.  Bentley,  1804.

t  Mansfield  Parkyns,  "  Life  in  Abyssinia,"  vol.  ii.  p.  U6.


EGUNGUN,  OIW,  AND  ABIKU.


123


limited  to  a  change  to  an  animal  form,  since  men  and
women  are  sometimes  transformed  into  trees,  slirubs,
rocks,  or  natural  features.  The  slirub  huje,  whose
fruit  is  used  to  stain  the  skin  in  imitation  of  tattoo
marks,  was  a  Yoruba  belle  of  that  name,  who  was
metamorphosed.  Her  storj  will  be  found  among  the
Tortoise  Stories  in  the  chapter  on  Folklore.

The  Ijewa  lagoon  is  also  said  to  have  been  a  woman.
The  story  runs  that  a  poor  woman,  named  lyewa,  had
two  children,  whom  she  had  a  hard  struggle  to  sup-
port; but  she  used  every  day  to  go  with  them  into
the  forest  to  gather  firewood,  which  she  carried  to  the
town  and  sold  for  food.  One  day,  when  following
her  customary  avocation,  she  and  the  children,  finding
wood  scarce,  wandered  further  into  the  forest  than
usual,  and,  when  it  was  time  to  return,  they  could  not
find  their  way  out.  They  walked  hither  and  thither
looking  for  the  path,  but  in  vain,  and  at  last,  tired
out  and  tormented  with  thirst,  they  lay  down  to  rest
under  a  large  tree.  This  rested  their  limbs,  but
their  thirst  increased,  and  the  two  children  filled
the  forest  with  their  lamentations,  crying  to  their
mother  for  water.  The  poor  woman,  half  dis-
tracted, sprang  to  her  feet,  and  again  searched  in
every  direction  for  the  path  and  for  water,  but  fruit-
lessly, and  when  at  last  she  returned  to  her  children
she  found  them  almost  at  the  last  gasp.  Then,  pros-
trating herself  upon  the  earth,  she  called  upon  the
gods  to  come  to  her  assistance  and  save  her  children.
The  gods  listened  to  her  prayer,  and  lyewa  was  at
once  changed  into  a  lagoon,  at  which  the  children
drank  and  so  recovered;  while  next  day  they  were


124  THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.

found  by  neighbours  who  bad  come  in  search  of  tbem,
and  taken  back  to  the  town.  When  the  children
grew  up  they  built  a  house  by  the  side  of  the  lagoon,
which,  in  memory  of  their  mother,  they  called  Odo
lyewa,  "  The  Lagoon  of  lyewa."


CHAPTER  VII.


THE  INDWELLING-  SPIRITS  AND  SOULS  OF  MEN.


In  the  first  volume  of  this  series  we  found  that  the
Tshi-speaking  peoples  believe  that  every  man  has
dwelling  in  him  a  spirit  termed  a  kra,  which  enters
him  at  birth  and  quits  him  at  death,  and  is  entirely
distinct  from  the  soul,  which,  at  the  death  of  the
body,  proceeds  to  the  Land  of  the  Dead,  and  there
continues  the  life  formerly  led  by  the  man  in  the
world.  In  the  second  volume,  we  found  that  the  Ewe-
speaking  peoples  have  a  similar  belief,  the  indwelling
spirit  being  by  them  termed  a  luwo.  The  Gra-speaking
tribes,  situated  geographically  between  the  Tshi  and
Ewe  tribes,  have  modified  this  belief,  and  they  assign
to  each  individual  two  indwelling  spirits,  called  Ida,
one  male  and  one  female,  the  former  being  of  a  bad
and  the  latter  of  a  good  disposition.  Each  Ida,  like
the  kra  and  the  luwo,  is  a  guardian-spirit,  but — and  this
is  a  new  departure — they  give  good  or  bad  advice,  and
prompt  good  or  bad  actions,  according  to  their  re-
spective dispositions.  The  Yorubas  also  have  modified
what  appears  to  be  the  original  theory  of  one  in-
dwelling and  guardian-spirit,  and  they  hold  that  each
man  has  three  spiritual  inmates,  the  first  of  whom,


126


rilE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


Olori,  dwells  in  the  head,  the  second,  Jpm  ijeun,  in  the
stomach,  and  the  third,  Ijpori,  in  the  great  toe.

Olori  {Oni-ori,  owner,  or  lord,  of  the  head)  some-
times called  Ori  (head,  faculty,  talent),  seems  to  be
the  spirit  which  answers  to  the  hra  or  luwo.  He  is
the  protector,  guardian,  and  guide.  Offerings  are
made  to  him,  chiefly  fowls,  as  with  the  kra  and  luwo,
and  some  of  the  blood,  mixed  with  palm-oil,  is  rubbed
upon  the  forehead.  Olori  brings  good-fortuue,  whence
the  proverb,  "  Olori  causes  the  owner  of  the  head
to  prosper,  and  not  the  crab  on  the  bank  of  the  river."
The  symbol  of  Olori  is  half  a  calabash  studded  over
with  cowries.

I]jin  ijeun,  or  ipin  ojelmn  (ipin,  share,  portion;  ijeun,
act  of  eating,  from  je  ohun,  to  eat ;  hence  "  he  who
shares  in  the  food"),  is  perhaps  considered  the  most
important  of  the  three  indwelling  spirits,  but  as  he
shares  in  all  that  the  man  eats,  he  has  no  special
sacrifice  offered  to  him.  A  proverb  says,  "There
is  no  orisha  like  the  stomach;  it  receives  food
every  day."  In  some  respects  hunger  (ebi)  seems
to  be  personified,  and  to  be  considered  the  agent
of  Ipin  ijeun;  for  he  is  said  to  communicate  to
the  man,  by  pinching  his  stomach,  the  desire  of  his
principal  for  food.  Curiously  enough,  Ipin  ijeun  is
connected  with  fire-worship.  There  is  among  the
Yorubas  no  god  of  fire,  answering  to  the  Ewe  god
Dso,  but  fire  {ina)  was  probably  once  personified,  for
it  is  still  spoken  of  as  Abanigbele,  "  the  Inmate."  It
is  not  clear  by  what  process  fire-worship  came  to  be
blended  with  that  of  the  indwelling  spirit  of  the
stomach;  but  the  natives   explain   the  connection


THE  INDWELLING  SPIRITS  AND  SOULS  OF  MEN.  127


between  tlie  two  by  saying  tliat  fire  is  necessary  for
the  preparation  of  food,  and  food  is  necessary  to  Ipin
ijeun,  therefore  he  takes  fire  under  his  protection,  and
takes  care  that  it  is  not  extinguished.  A  proverbial
saying  runs,  "  I]yin  ijeun  does  not  allow  fire  to  depart
from  the  earth."  When  fire  could  only  be  produced
by  the  tedious  process  of  rubbing  together  two  sticks,
it  was  no  doubt  important  to  keep  one  or  two  embers
of  a  fire  always  smouldering.

Ipoi'i,  the  great  toe,  is  the  least  important  of  the
three  guardian  spirits,  and  sacrifice  is  rarely  offered
to  him,  except  when  a  man  is  about  to  set  out  on  a
journey ;  in  which  case  he  anoints  the  great  toe  with  a
mixture  of  fowl's  blood  and  palm-oil.  Waterfowl  are
apparently  "  unclean  "  for  this  purpose,  for  a  proverb
says,  "A  waterfowl  is  not  fit  for  the  worship  of  I]Jori''

The  ghost-man,  or  soul,  the  "  vehicle  of  individual
personal  existence,"  is  called  iwin,  or  olmn,  but  the
latter  also  means  "  heart."  Another  word  is  ojiji,  or
oji,  which  has  the  meanings  of  ghost,  shade,  or
shadow.  After  the  death  of  the  body,  the  ghost-man
goes  to  Ipo-ohu,  "  the  Land  of  the  Dead  "  {fyo,
place;  oJm,  dead),  which  is  beneath  the  earth,  and
where  each  man  does  that  which  he  has  been  accus-
tomed to  do,  and  holds  the  same  social  position  as  he
did  in  the  world.  To  enable  the  ghost  to  reach  this
land  it  is  essential  that  he  should  have  the  prescribed
funeral  rites  performed  over  him.  Should  they  be
omitted,  the  ghost  wanders  about  the  world,  cold,
hungry,  and  homeless,  and  he  runs  the  risk  of  being
seized  by  some  of  the  evil  spirits  which  roam  about
the  earth  in  great  numbers,  and  cast  by  them  into


128


THE  YORUBA-SPEAKfNG  PEOPLES.


Orun-aiMcli,  "  tlie  unseen  world  of  potsherds,"  an
uncomfortable  place  like  a  pottery  furnace,  heaped
up  with  charcoal  and  the  debris  of  broken  earthen
pots.  Funeral  rites  cannot,  of  course,  be  performed
at  the  moment  that  breath  leaves  the  body,  but  as
an  earnest  of  their  intention  to  perform  them,  and  to
prevent  the  evil  spirits  from  seizing  the  ghost,  the
relations  at  once  offer  a  sacrifice  to  propitiate  them  ;
and  when  the  corpse  is  buried,  a  fowl,  called  Aclire-
iranna*  "  the  fowl  that  buys  the  road,"  that  is,  "  that
opens  a  right  of  way,"  is  sacrificed.

A  comparison  of  the  beliefs  held  by  uncivilised
peoples  concerning  the  dead,  seems  to  show  that  when
in  a  very  low  state  of  culture,  the  ghost,  no  doubt
from  the  association  of  ideas,  is  held  to  remain  in  the
vicinity  of  the  grave  in  which  the  body  was  interred ;
and  that  the  notion  of  a  distinct  and  separate  place
of  abode  for  the  dead,  or  Deadland,  is  only  formed
when  a  higher  degree  of  culture  is  attained.  The
first  belief  often  lingers  on  alongside  the  second,
as  in  England,  where  the  churchyard  is  considered
to  be  the  most  likely  place  in  which  to  see  a  ghost ;
and  a  similar  survival  among  the  Yorubas,  or  a  trace
of  the  former  belief,  is  found  in  the  word  iboji,  "  a
grave,"  which  means,  literally,  "place  of  the  ghost"
(ihi,  place  ;  oji,  ghost).

The  dead  often  return  to  earth,  and  are  born  agam
in  the  families  to  which  they  belonged  in  their  former
life.  In  fact,  one  might  say  that  they  always  retiirn,
since  every  mother  sends  for  a  hahalawo  to  tell  her

*  Adire,  a  fowl;  iranna,  tlie  act  of  purchasing  a  right  of  way,  from
ra,  to  buy,  and  ona,  road.


THE  IND  WELLING  SPIltTTS  AXD  SO ULS  OF  MEN.     ]  20


what  ancestral  ghost  lias  animated  lier  new-born
child,  and  the  hahalaioo  always  tells  her  which  it  is.
As  the  births  at  least  equal  in  number  the  deaths,
and  the  process  of  being  re-born  is  supposed  to  have
gone  on  "  from  the  beginning,"  logically  there  ought
to  be  few,  if  any,  departed  souls  in  Deadland ;  but
the  natives  do  not  critically  examine  such  questions
as  this,  and  they  imagine  Deadland  to  be  thickly
populated,  and  at  the  same  time  every  new-born
child,  or  almost  every  one,  to  be  a  re-born  ghost.
As  was  mentioned  in  the  volume  on  the  Ewe-speaking
peoples,*  this  belief  in  metempsychosis  is  probably
a  result  of  a  confusion  between  the  noli,  or  disem-
bodied luwo  (in  Tshi,  the  sisa),  and  the  soul  or  ghost-
man,  and  we  may  here  endeavour  to  sketch  in  the
origin  and  probable  development  of  these  various
beliefs.

There  can  be  little  reasonable  doubt  but  that  the
notion  that  man  possesses  a  soul,  an  entity  that
continues  his  personality  after  death,  arose  from
dreams,  after  the  manner  shown  by  Mr.  Herbert
Spencer  in  his  "  Principles  of  Sociology."  f  A  man
dreams  that  he  is  going  through  various  adventures,
but,  as  the  evidence  of  his  companions  shows  him
that  he  has  not  really  left  their  company,  he  comes
to  the  conclusion  that  he  has  a  second  individuality,
something  that  is  himself  and  yet  is  detachable,  some-
thing that  can  go  out  of  him,  and  does  so  go  out  when
he  is  asleep.  Among  the  lower  races  all  over  the
world,  dreams  are  believed  to  be  the  adventures  of

*  Pp.  114  and  115.  ,t  Pp.  148  et  seq.

TC


130


THE  YORUBA.SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


the  spiritual  man  wliile  detaclied  from  tlie  bodily
man  during  sleep.     Then,  as  lie  dreams  of  men
whom    he    knows    to   be   dead   and  buried,  and
naturally  dreams  of  them  as  he  was  accustomed  to
see  them,  he  concludes  that  this  second  individuality
can  and  does  exist,  entirely  independently  of  the
body,  after  death,  and  preserves  the  appearance  and
characteristics  of  the  bodily-man.    At  this  stage  of
belief  the  spiritual-man,   or  life-phantom,  and  the
soul,  or  ghost-man,  are  one  and  the  same.  Then,
seemingly,  in  some  cases,  this  second  individuality
becomes  divided  into  two  separate  entities— one,  a
life-phantom,  which  enters  the  body  at  birth,  goes
out  and  indulges  in  adventures  during  the  sleep  of
the  body,  and  quits  it  at  death;  the  other,  a  soul,
or  death-phantom,  which,  after  death,  continues  the
life  and  personality  of  the  former  bodily-man.

It  is  possible  that  this  conception  of  two  different
entities  was  brought  about,  partly  at  least,  by  the
desire  to  explain  the  reproduction  by  heredity  of
physical  characteristics.    Children  generally  resemble
their  parents,  and  frequently  reproduce  their  manner-
isms most  remarkably.    As  soon  as  the  savage  begins
to  speculate  at  all,  he  begins  to  think  of  this  phe-
nomenon, which  cannot  fail  to  arrest  his  attention.
He  can,  and  no  doubt  often  does,  come  to  the  con-
clusion  that   the   dead  are  reborn  again  in  their
descendants;  he  invents   the   doctrine   of  metem-
psychosis ;  but  in  some  cases,  and  the  negro  tribes
of  the  Gold  and  Slave  Coasts  seem  to  be  examples,
he  appears  to  feel  that  this  explanation  is  unsatis-
factory.   And  for  this  reason.    He  still  dreams  of


THE  INDWELLING  SPIRITS  AND  SOULS  OF  MEN.  131


persons  who  are  dead,  whence  he  believes  that  they
exist  after  death;  and  he  must  often  dream  of  dead
friends  or  relations  whose  characteristics  have  been
reproduced  in  their  children,  or,  since  they  had  a
common  ancestor,  in  some  collateral  member  of  the
same  family.     He   cannot,   then,  in   these  cases,
conclude  that  the  dead  have  returned  to  earth  in
the  persons  of  their  descendants;  for  the  evidence
of  his  dreams  proves  to  him  that  they  still  exist  as
ghost-men,  and  are  in  every  respect  as  they  were
when  alive  in  the  world.     On  the  other  hand,  the
evidence  of  his  eyes  shows  him  that  their  physical
peculiarities  are  reborn  in  children  now  living.  He
therefore  divides  the  second  individuality  into  two
— from,  so  to  say,  the  Ira-soul,  which  was  one  entity,
he  makes  two,  the  Ira  and  the  soul,  the  former  of
which  inhabits  the  body  during  life,  and  after  death
enters  a  new  human  body  in  the  same  family ;  while
the  latter  remains  dormant,  as  it  were,  during  life,
but  after  death  continues  the  existence  of  the  man
as  an  individual.     The   reproduction   of  features,
mannerisms,  &c.,  is  thus  accounted  for  by  the  hra,
while  the  theory  of  the  soul  satisfactorily  accounts
for  what  the  uncivilised  man  believes  to  be  the
incontestable  evidence  of  his  dreams.*

If  this  view  be  correct  it  will  probably  be  found
that  several  other  races  have  divided  the  originally
conceived  entity  into  two.    The  genius  natalis  of  the

*  The  Awunas,  an  Eastern  E\Ve  tribe,  say  that  the  lower  jaw  is  the
only  part  of  the  body  which  a  child  derives  from  its  mother,  all  the
rest  being  derived  from  the  ancestral  luwoo  (the  Tshi  hra).  The  father
furnishes  nothing.

K  2


132


THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


Eomans  resembled  tlie  Icra  in  tliat  it  was  a  guardian-
spirit  which  entered  man  at  birth,  but,  unlike  the
hra,  it  perished  at  liis  death.    It  was  certainly  quite
separate  and  distinct  from  the  soul,  or  ghost-man,
which  went  to  Hades.    We  say  advisedly  that  the
genius  natalis  dwelt  in  the  man  from  birth,  because  to
practise  abstinence  was  "to  defraud  one's  genius,"
and  to  eat,  drink,  and  be  merry  was  "to  indulge  one's
genius,'"  *  thus  showing  that  the  ge^iius  was  bound  up
with  the  man  just  as  is  the  hra.    As  with  the  leva,  the
birthday  was  particularly  set  apart  for  the  worship  of
the  genius.     Subsequently,  the  Romans,  under  the
influence  of  duahsm,  just  as  the  G-a-tribes  have  done,
divided  the  genius  into  two — one  of  a  good  disposition
and  one  of  a  bad.

Similar  conceptions  of  two  entities,  the  hra,  or  life-
phantom,  and  the  soul,  or  death-phantom,  among  the
Navajo  and  Algonquin  Indians  of  North  America,  the
Karens  of  Burma,  and  the  Tijians,  were  mentioned  in
the  last  volume,t  but  whether  these  people  believe
in  metempsychosis  is  uncertain ;   and  to  them  we
may  now  add  the  Greenlanders,  J   and  the  ancient
Egyptians,  whose  ha  appears  to  closely  resemble  the
hra.l     A  correspondent  informs  me  that  the  Irish
peasants  of  County  Mayo  also  believe  in  an  entity
like  the  hra.    They  call  it  the  "  spirit,"  consider  it  to
be  perfectly  distinct  from  the  soul,  and  liable  to  be
stolen  by  the  fairies  during  the  sleep  of  its  possessor,
who,  on  awakening,  is  ignorant  of  his  loss,  but  gradu-


*  See  Tihullus,  Bohn's  Edition,  note  l,p.  126.

•j-  Pp.  16  and  17.  $  Cranz,  Gronland,  p.  251.

§  S.  Laing,  Human  Origins,  p.  119.


THE  IND  WELLING  SPIRITS  AND  SO  ULS  0 F  MEN.  133


ally  fades  awaj  and  dies.  It  is  also  liable  to  be  seized
by  tlie  fairies,  at  tlie  moment  of  deatli  of  the  person
wliose  body  it  lias  tenanted.

The  Yorubas,  it  seems  probable,  have  arrived  at
the  doctrine  of  metempsychosis  after  having  passed
through  a  phase  of  belief  similar  to  that  now  held  by
the  Tshi  and  Ewe  tribes.  The  belief  in  one  in-
dwelling spirit  has  been  changed  into  a  belief  in  three
indwelling  spirits,  and  this  multiplication  has  caused
confusion.  These  indwelling  spirits  do  not,  at  the
death  of  the  body,  enter  a  new-born  human  child  in
the  same  family,  so  that  the  phenomena  of  heredity
cannot  be  explained  as  being  due  to  their  agency;
and  the  Yorubas  have  reverted  to  the  theory  of  me-
tempsychosis to  account  for  them.  The  belief  in  the
spirits  called  abilm  is  very  probably  a  corruption  of
the  former  hra  belief,  for  if  a  sisa,  or  disembodied
hra,  enters  a  human  body  it  causes  sickness  and  death,
just  as  the  aUlcu  does.

The  souls  of  the  dead  are  sometimes  reborn  in
animals,  and  occasionally,  though  but  rarely,  in  plants.
In  the  ideas  of  the  natives,  animals,  though  they  differ
m  shape  from  a  man,  possess  passions  and  moral
qualities  identical  with  those  of  the  human  being.
Animals  also  possess  souls  which,  like  the  souls  of
men,  go  to  Deadland.  Hence,  as  men  and  animals
have  so  many  characteristics  in  common,  it  does  not
require  any  great  stretch  of  imagination  for  the  native
to  fancy  that  the  soul  may  be  re-born  in  an  animal.
When  a  plant  is  concerned  the  difference  is  greater;
but  if,  as  we  hold,  the  Yoruba  tribes  passed  through  a
phase  of  belief  similar  to  that  held  by  the  Tshi  tribes


134  THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.

at  tlie  present  day,  they  at  one  time  believed  that
trees,  shrubs,  &c.,  and,  in  fact,  all  things  not  made
by  human  hands,  were  animated  by  kras,  which  may
accoimt  for  the  extension  of  the  doctrine  of  metem-
psychosis to  objects  so  unlike  man.

The  animal  in  which  human  souls  are  most  com-
monly re-born  is  the  hyena,  whose  half -human  laugh
may  perhaps  account  for  the  belief.  Human  souls
are  also  reborn  in  different  kinds  of  monkeys,  but
chiefly  in  the  solitary  yellow  monkey,  called  oloyo;
and  in  these  cases  the  human  appearance  and  charac-
teristics of  monkeys  no  doubt  furnishes  the  key  to  the
belief.

As  has  been  said,  the  re-birth  of  a  human  soul  m  a
plant  is  rarely  spoken  of,  and  usually  we  can  discover
the  reason  for  the  supposed  transmigration,  as  in  the

following  tale : —

«  There  were  two  boys,  brothers,  who  knew  and
sang  the  popular  songs  of  the  country  so  well,  that
they  were  in  great  demand  for  festive  occasions.

"  One  day  they  were  asked  to  go  to  a  festival  at  a
neighbouring  village,  and  their  mother  gave  them
permission.

"  They  went  to  the  village,  where  the  people  were
assembled  to  play,  and  they  sang  their  songs  and
beat  their  drums  so  well  that  the  people  rewarded
them  highly.  They  gave  to  each  boy  a  thousand
cowries,  and  plenty  to  eat  and  drink.  Then  they
dismissed  them  next  morning  to  return  home.

"  On  the  way  back  the  elder  boy,  covetous  of  the
thousand  cowries  that  had  been  given  to  the  younger,
led  him  off  the  path  into  the  forest,  and  murdered


THE  INDWELLING  SPIRITS  AND  SOULS  OF  MEN.  135

liim.  Then  lie  took  the  thousand  cowries,  added
them  to  those  which  he  already  had,  and  returned
home.

"  When  he  came  back  alone,  his  mother  asked  him
where  was  his  brother.  '  I  left  him  behind  on  the
road,'  said  the  boj.

"  The  day  passed,  and  night  began  to  fall,  and  still
the  younger  brother  had  not  returned  home.  Then
his  mother  and  her  neighbours  went  to  look  for  the
child,  but  they  could  not  find  him.  They  searched
for  him  for  many  days,  but  found  him  not.  They
concluded  that  someone  had  carried  him  off  to  sell
him.

"  Some  months  afterwards  the  mother  went  into
the  forest  to  look  for  leaves  for  medicine,  and  she
came  to  the  place  where  the  child  had  been  murdered.
The  body  of  the  boy  had  already  decayed,  and  from
his  bones  had  sprung  up  an  olu*  The  olu  was  very
fine  and  large,  and  when  the  mother  saw  it  she  cried,
'  Oh  !  what  a  fine  olu.'  She  was  stooping  down  to
pick  it,  when  the  olu  began  singing —

'  Do  not  pluck  me,  mother,
Do  not  pluck  mC;  mother,
Do  not  pluck  me,  mother,

I'm  a  lowly  plant  on  the  ground.

*  I  went  to  the  village  frolic,
I  went  to  the  village  frolic,

I'm  a  lowly  plant  on  the  ground.
I  was  given  a  thousand  coAvries,

I'm  a  lowly  plant  on  the  ground.


*  Olu,  an  edible  fungus.


1H6  Tlll^  YORUBA-SFEAIUiSG  FEOPLES.


'  Do  not  pluck  me,  mother.
Do  not  pluck  me,  mother.
Do  not  pluck  me,  mother,

I'm  a  lowly  plant  on  the  ground.

My  brother  received  a  thousand  cowries.
My  brother  received  a  thousand  cowries,

I'm  a  lowly  plant  on  the  ground.
But  he  slew  me  here  for  my  cowries,

I'm  a  loAvly  plant  on  the  ground.'

"When  the  mother  heard  the  olu  sing  this  she
ran  home,  called  her  husband,  and  the  two  returned
to  the  forest.  When  the  man  saw  the  fine  olu,  he
stretched  out  his  hand  to  gather  it,  and  the  olu  sang
again —  ^  ,  ,

'  Do  not  pluck  me,  father,
(etc.,  etc.,  as  before.)

«  The  father  went  to  the  king  of  the  country,  and
told  him  all  that  had  happened.  The  king  himseK
came  to  see  the  olu.  He  stooped  to  pick  the  olu,  and
the  olu  sang —  ,^

'  Do  not  pluck  me,  oha.
(etc.,  etc.,  as  before.)

"  Then  the  king  sent  and  ordered  the  elder  brother
to  be  brought  before  him.  And  when  the  boy  heard
what  the  olu  had  sung  he  confessed.  The  kmg  said,
'As  you  took  your  brother  and  slew  him  so  will  we
now  lake  you  and  slay  you.     Then  shall  the  child

come  back  to  life.'

"  So  the  elder  brother  was  killed  and  the  younger
came  back  to  life,  as  the  king  had  said."

Here  the  connection  between  the  olu  and  the  dead

*  Oha,  king.


THE  INDWELLING  SPIRITS  AND  SOULS  OF  iVEN.  137


child  is  obvious.  It  sprang  from  his  bones,  and  was
nourished  by  his  decaying  body,  so  that  it  might  well
be  imagined  that  the  soul  of  the  child,  which  stayed
with  the  remains  instead  of  proceeding  to  Deadland,
because  no  funeral  rites  had  been  performed,  passed
into  the  fungus.

As  we  have  said,  the  soul,  or  ghost-man,  after  the
death  of  the  body,  proceeds  to  Deadland,  and  food,
drink,  cowries,  and  property  of  various  kinds  are
placed  in  the  grave  with  the  corpse,  to  equip  the
ghost  for  his  new  sphere ;  while,  before  the  grave  is
filled  up,  a  goat  is  sacrificed  to  the  deceased,  and
wishes  offered  for  his  safe  journey,  such  as  "  May  you
arrive  in  peace,"  "  May  you  not  stray  from  the  right
path,"  &c.

It  would  certainly  appear  as  if  the  dead  were  cog-
nizant of  and  able  to  influence  the  affairs  of  the  living,
for  it  is  usual  for  offerings  and  prayers  to  be  made  to
them  from  time  to  time ;  and  sometimes  the  skull  of
the  deceased  is  exhumed  and  placed  in  a  small  temple,
where  offerings  are  made  to  it.  Before  taking  the
field  for  war,  too,  offerings  are  made  at  the  graves  of
warriors  of  renown,  and  their  assistance  in  the  com-
ing campaign  is  supplicated.  Yet  a  proverb  says,
"As  grass  cannot  grow  in  the  sky,  so  the  dead  cannot
look  out  of  the  grave  into  the  street,"  from  which  it
might  be  inferred  that  the  dead  are  not  cognizant  of
what  is  taking  place  in  the  world,  or  at  all  events  do
not  know  what  is  occurring  till  it  is  made  known  to
th  em  through  the  medium  of  sacrifice,  and  several
folk-lore  tales  point  to  this  conclusion  as  well.  The
following  is  an  example  :


138  TEE  YOEUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.

A  woman,  an  inliabitant  of  an  inland  town,  wlio
was  going  to  tlie  sea-sbore  to  make  salt  by  boiling
sea-water,  a  common  industry,  and  wlio  expected  to
be  away  from  home  for  some  time,  gave,  on  the  eve
of  her  departure,  and  in  the  presence  of  witnesses,  a
necklace  of  valuable  beads  to  a  neighbour,  to  be  kept
for  her  during  her  absence.    The  neighbour,  a  woman
with  two  boys,  accepted  the   trust,  and,  for  safe
custody,  made  a  hole  in  the  mud  wall  of  her  house,
into  which  she  put  the  necklace,  and  then  closed  the
aperture  with  fresh  mud,  which  she  smoothed  down
to  conform  with  the  wall.    Unfortunately  the  woman
died  before  the  owner  of  the  necklace  returned,  and
the  secret  of  its  hiding-place  died  with  her,  so  that
when  the  owner  at  last  came  back  and  claimed  her
property,  it  could  not  be  found.

The  woman  made  a  great  commotion  about  the
loss.  She  would  not  beheve  the  two  children  when
they  declared  that  they  had  not  seen  or  even  heard
of  the  necklace,  and  she  took  them  before  the  chief,
and  charged  them  with  theft.  The  chief  heard  the
case.  The  fact  of  the  necklace  having  been  entrusted
to  the  deceased  woman  was  proved  ;  the  boys  declared
that  they  knew  nothing  of  it,  but  the  chief  held  that
they  were  responsible.  If  they  had  not  stolen  it
they  knew  where  it  was.  They  must  restore  it  or
pay  the  value.  Such  was  the  chief's  decision,  and  in
order  to  compel  the  elder  boy  to  make  restitution,  he
caused  the  younger  to  be  "  put  in  log,"  and  threatened
to  sell  him  if  the  missing  property  were  not  recovered
within  a  certain  time.

In  this  dilemma  the  elder  boy,  knowing  that  human


THE  IND  WELLING  SPIR ITS  A  ND  SO  ULS  OF  ME N.  139


agencj  could  avail  liini  nought,  sought  assistance
from  the  gods.  He  went  to  the  head  priest  of  the
habalawos  at  the  town  of  Ife,  unfolded  his  tale,  and
begged  for  aid.  The  priest  consulted  the  god  Ifa,
and  Ifa  replied  that  in  order  to  know  what  his  mother
had  done  with  the  necklace,  the  boj  must  go  to  Dead-
land  and  ask  her.  The  child  said  he  was  readj  to
go,  but  how  was  he  to  get  there  ?  Then  the  oracle
instructed  him  as  follows  : —

"  Let  the  child  in  search  of  his  mother
OlFer  an  ebon  sheep  to  the  dead,
When  night  falls  in  the  grove  of  Ifa.

"  Let  the  child  in  search  of  his  mother
Sprinkle  his  eyes  with  lustral  water,
Then  shall  the  dead  be  visible  to  him.

"  Let  the  child  in  search  of  his  mother
Follow  the  shadows'  noiseless  footsteps,
So  shall  he  reach  the  land  of  the  dead."

The  habalaivo  instructed  the  boj  that,  upon  making
the  necessary  payment,  the  door-keeper  of  Deadland
would  allow  him  to  enter,  and  he  warned  him  not
to  touch  any  of  the  dead,  or  else  he  would  not  be
able  to  return  to  earth.  Supposing  all  went  well,  and
he  returned  again  to  the  grove  of  Ifa,  from  which  he
would  set  forth,  he  must  again  sprinkle  his  eyes  with
the  water  of  purification,  to  restore  their  natural
properties  to  them,  and  then  offer  a  Hving  sacrifice
to  Ifa  in  gratitude  for  his  assistance.

The  boy  followed  out  his  instructions  to  the  letter,
and  arrived  safely  in  Deadland,  where  he  saw  his
mother  seated  near  a  spring,  around  which  many
other  dead  people  were  walking  slowly  or  sitting


140  THE  YORUBA-SFEAKING  PEOPLES.

down.    He  approaclied  Ms  mother  and  called  to  her,
whereupon  she  rose  and  came  to  him,  saying,  "What
brings  thee  here  my  son  ?  Why  hast  thou  come  to  the
land  of  the  dead  ? "    The  boy  replied,  "  The  chief
has  pnt  my  brother  in  log,  and  will  sell  him  as  a
slave  if  the  necklace  which  was  given  thee  to  keep
is  not  restored  to  onr  neighbour.    Ifa  the  Great,  the
Unveiler   of   Futurity,  the  aovernor  of  Lots,^  has
permitted  me  to  come  here  to  ask  thee  where  it  is.
Say,  where  is  it  ?  "    His  mother  told  him  that  it  was
hidden  in  the  wall,  explaining  to  him  how  to  find  the
exact   spot,   and  the  boy  was  so  overjoyed  that,
forgetting  the  warning  of  the  priest,  he  tried  to
embrace  her;   but  she   stepped  back  hastily  and
avoided  him,  saying,  "  Touch  me  not  my  son,  or  the
road  to  the  world  will  be  closed  to  thee  for  ever.  Go
home  and  effect  thy  brother's  deliverance,  and  make
frequent  offerings  to  me,  for  I  need  them  much."
Then  she  turned  away  and  went  and  sat  down  agam
by  the  spring.

The  boy  came  back  to  the  world,  and  found  himself
in  the  grove  of  Ifa,  where  he  sprinkled  his  eyes  as
directed,  and  offered  sacrifices.  Then  he  went  to  the
chief  and  told  him  what  had  occurred;  so  the
necklace  was  found  and  his  brother  released.  The
two  boys  were  not  neglectful  of  their  mother's  last
request.  Every  fifth  day  they  placed  fresh  offerings
on  her  grave,  and  kept  it  always  plentifully  supphed

with  fresh  water.

In  this  story  the  dead  mother  evidently  did  not
know  what  was  going  on  in  the  world  above,  for
she  had  to  ask  her  son  why  he  came,  yet  she  was


THE  IND  WELLING  SPIBITS  AND  SO  ULS  OF  MEN.  141


able  to  reap  the  advantage  of  the  offerings  made  on
her  grave.

Ordinarily,  people  do  not  have  to  undertake  the
dangerous  journej  to  Deadland  in  order  to  consult
the  dead.  When  the  members  of  a  family  wish  to
know  how  a  departed  relative  is  faring  below,  they
apply  to  a  priest,  who  takes  a  young  child,  bathes  his
face  in  water  of  purification,  which,  it  may  be
remarked,  is  prepared  with  edible  snails  and  shea-
butter,  offers  a  sacrifice  in  a  new  earthen  vessel,  digs
a  hole  in  the  earth  in  a  sacred  grove  in  the  middle
of  the  night,  and  bids  the  child  look  into  it.  Through
the  magical  properties  of  the  lustral  water,  the  child,
on  looking  down  into  the  hole,  is  able  to  see  into
Deadland,  and  so  can  tell  the  priest  all  that  is  going
on  there.  When  the  priest  has  obtained  the  in"^
formation  he  requires,  he  again  bathes  the  child's
eyes  with  the  water  of  purification,  which  causes  him
instantly  to  lose  all  recollection  of  what  he  has  seen
and  heard.  The  priest  thus  remains  the  sole
possessor  of  the  information,  and  he  is  able  to  tell
the  family  that  employed  him  what  he  pleases.


CHAPTER  YIII.


MEASIJEEMENTS  OE  TIME.


The  Yorubas  reckon  time  by  moons  and  weeks.  A
moon,  or  montb,  is  tlie  period  of  time  between  one
new  moon  and  tlie  next,  and,  as  is  tlie  case  witli  all
peoples  wlio  count  by  lunar  months,  tlie  day  com-
mences at  sunset,  tliat  is  at  tlie  liour  at  wMcli  a  new
moon  would  ordinarily  be  first  perceived.

The  custom  of  measuring  time  by  lunar  months
appears  to  be  common  to  all  uncivilised  peoples,  the
regular  recurrence  of  tlie  moon  at  fixed  mtervals^  of
time  affording  a  natural  and  easy  mode  of  computmg
its  lapse.  Tlie  measurement  of  time  by  weeks,  that
is  by  sub-divisions  of  the  lunar  month,  seems,  m  the
present  state  of  our  knowledge  of  the  modes  of
measuring  time  amongst  the  lower  races,  to  be  rather
exceptional ;  but  the  subject  is  one  that  Jias  been
much  neglected  by  travellers,  and  there  is  but
little  information  from  which  a  conclusion  may  be

drawn.  ^        ^  .

The  Tshi-tribes  of  the  Gold  Coast  have  (as  was
stated  in  the  first  volume  of  this  series)  ^  ^even-day
week,  or,  to  be  more  correct,  they  have  divided  the
lunar  month,  which  is  approximately  twenty-nme  and
a-half  days  long,  into  four  parts,  each  of  seven  days


MEASUREMENTS  OF  TIME.  143

and  about  nine  hours.  Hence,  as  before  said,*  each
week  commences  at  a  different  hour  of  the  day,  the
reason  of  this  arrangement  being  that  twenty-nine
and  a-half  will  not  divide  exactly  into  halves  and
quarters.  The  first  day  of  the  first  week  of  the  lunar
month  commences  when  the  new  moon  is  first  seen ;
the  first  day  of  the  second  week  commences  some  nine
hours  later,  and  so  on.

The  Ga-tribes  have  an  exactly  similar  mode  of
measuring  time,  but  their  names  for  the  days  of  the
week  are  not  the  same  as  those  used  by  the  Tshi-
tribes.    They  are —

1st.  Dsu.  5th.  80-ha.

2nd.  Dsu-fo.  6th.  Eo.

3rd.  Fso.  7th.  Eo-gha.

4th.  ;S'o.

which,  it  will  be  seen,  seem  to  consist  of  three  pairs
and  an  odd  one,  the  third  day.

The  Yoruba  week  consists  of  five  days,  and  six  of
them  are  supposed  to  make  a  lunar  month;  but,  as  a
matter  of  fact,  since  the  first  day  of  the  first  week
always  commences  with  the  appearance  of  the  new
moon,  the  month  really  contains  five  weeks  of  five
days'  duration,  and  one  of  four  days  and  a-half
approximately.  The  Benin-tribes  to  the  east  are  said
to  have  a  similar  method,  and  the  Yoruba-tribes  have
perhaps  borrowed  the  five-day  week  from  them.

The  Tshi  and  G-a-tribes  thus  add  a  few  hours  to
each  seven-day  week  in  order  to  make  four  of  these
periods  coincident  with  a  lunar  month,  and  the  Yoruba-
tribes  deduct  about  twelve  hours  from  the  last  five-
'Tshi-spcaking  Peoples  of  the  Gold  Coast'"  pp.  215,  216.


*  w


144  THE  YOnUB  ASP  EARING  PEOPLES.

day  week  in  order  to  make  six  of  tliese  periods  agree
witli  a  lunar  montli.  The  reason  is  obvious.  Twenty-
nine  and  a-lialf  will  not  divide,  and  the  nearest
numbers  that  will  are  twenty-eight  and  thn^ty.  i  he
Tshi  and  Ga-tribes  have  adopted  the  former  as  the
inteo-er  to  be  divided,  and  consequently  have  had  to
add  some  hours,  while  the  Yorubas  have  adopted  the
latter  and  have  had  to  deduct.  _

We  have  said  that  to  divide  the  lunar  month  into
weeks  appears  to  be  exceptional  among  the  lower
races,  but  we  have  some  examples.  The  Ahantas
who  inhabit  the  western  portion  of  the  Gold  U)ast,
divide  the  lunar  month  into  three  periods,  two  ot  ten
days'  duration,  and  the  third  lasting  till  the  next  new
moon  appears,  that  is,  for  about  nine  days  and  a-half .
The  Sofalese  of  East  Africa  must  have  had  the  same
system,  forDe  Faria  says  that  they  divided  the  month
into  three  weeks  of  ten  days  each,  and  that  the  first
day  of  the  first  week  was  the  festival  of  the  new

moon.*  ^  •    ii  £

When  a  people  has  progressed  sufficiently  tar  m

astronomical  knowledge  to  have  adopted  the  solar

year  as  a  measurement  of  time,  the  month,  for  the

reason  that  an  exact  number  of  lunar  months  will  not

make  up  a  solar  year,  becomes  a  civil  period  or

calendar  month,  and  is  arbitrarily  fixed  at  a  certam

number  of  days,  or  some  months  are  made  of  one

len-th  and  some  of  another.    When  this  occurs,  and

the°  month  is  disconnected  from  the  moon  and  its

phases,  it  seems  that  the  week-which  was  properly  a

sub-division  of  the  lunar  month,  and  was  no  doubt

*  Astley's  Collection,  vol.  iii.,  p.  397.


MEASUREMENTS  OF  TIME.


145


designed  to  mark  tlie  cliief  phases  of  tlie  moon— also
becomes  a  civil  period,  and  is  a  sub- division  of  tlie  civil
month.     The  ancient  Greeks  had  a  civil  month  of
thu'tj  days,  divided  into  three  weeks,  each  of  ten
days;  and  the  Javanese,  before  the  seven-day  week
was  adopted  from  the  Mohammedans,  had  a  civil
week  of  five  days.*    The  former  thus  resembled  the
Ahantas,  and  the  latter  the  Yorabas,  and  no  doubt
when  the  Gfreeks  and  Javanese  reckoned  time  by
lunar  months  instead   of  by  civil,  they,  like  the
Ahantas  and  Yorubas,  struck  off  the  superfluous  hours
from  the  last  sub-division  of  the  month.

The  names  of  the  days  of  the  Yoruba  week  are  as
follows : —

1.  Aho-ojo      .  First  day.

2.  Ojo-awo      .  Day  of  the  Secret  (sacred  to  If  a).

3.  Oj 0-0 gun    .  Ogun's  Day.

4.  Ojo-Shango.  Shango's  Day.

5.  Ojo-Ohatala.  Obatala's  Day.

Aho-ojo  is  a  Sabbath,  or  day  of  general  rest.    It  is
considered  unlucky,  and  no  business  of  importance  is
ever  undertaken  on  it.    On  this  day  all  the  temples
are  swept  out,  and  water,  for  the  use  of  the  gods,  is
brought  in  procession.    Each  of  the  other  days  is  a
day  of  rest  for  the  followers  of  the  god  to  which  it  is
dedicated,  and  for  them  only,  Ojo-Shango  being  the
Sabbath  of  the  worshippers  of  the  thunder-god,  and
Ojo-Ogun  for  those  of  the  god  of  iron,  but  AJco-Ojo  is  a
day  of  rest  for  all.    A  holy  day  is  called  Ose  (se,  to
disallow),  and  because  each  holy  day  recurs  weekly,

*  Raffles'  "  History  of  Java,"  vol.  i.  p.  475,


146  THE  YORUB  AS  PEAKING  PEOPLES.

Ose  lias  come  also  to  mean  the  week  of  five  days,  or
the  period  intervening  between  two  holy  days.

There  appears  to  be  good  reason  for  supposing  that
the  institution  of  a  general  day  of  rest,  not  only
among-  the  Yorubas,  but  in  most,  if  not  all,  other
cases,  may  be  referred  to  moon-worship.    The  first
day  of  the  first  week  of  the  lunar  month  is  reckoned
from  the  appearance  of  the  new  moon,  and  was,  we
think,  a  moon-festival,  or  holy  day  sacred  to  the
moon.    This  holy  day,  before  the  invention  of  weeks,
recurred  monthly,  but  after  the  lunar  month  was  sub-
divided, it  recurred  weekly,  and  was  held  on  the  first
day  of  the  week.    The  Mendis  of  the  liinterland  of
Sierra  Leone,  who  reckon  time  by  lunar  months,  but
have  not  divided  the  month  into  weeks,  hold,  a  new-
moon  festival,  and  abstain  from  all  work  on  the  day  of
the  new  moon,  alleging  that  if  they  infringed  this
rule  corn  and  rice  would  grow  red,  the  new  moon
being  a  "  day  of  blood."    From  this  we  may  perhaps
infer  that  it  was  at  one  time  customary  to  offer  human
sacrifices  to  the  new  moon.    The  Bechuanas  of  South
Africa  keep  the  twenty-four  hours,  from  the  evening
on  which  the  new  moon  appears  till  the  next  evening,
as  a  day  of  rest,  and  refrain  from  going  to  their
gardens.*     These  are  examples  of  monthly  moon-
Sabbaths  observed  by  peoples  who  do  not  reckon  by
weeks.

The  first  day  of  the  Tshi  week,  which  in  the  first
week  of  the  lunar  month  is  the  day  of  the  new  moon,
is  called  Byo-da  {Adjwo-da)  "  Day  of  Rest,"  and  is  a

*  Livingstonp,  "Travels  in  Soutli  Africa,"  p  235.


MEASUltEMENTS  OF  TIME.


U7


general  daj  of  rest.    The  other  days  of  the  week  are,
as  with  the  Yorubas,  dajs  of  rest  also,  but  only  for
particular  persons,  and  not  for  the  whole  community.
The  second  day,  Bna-cla,  is  sacred  to  the  sea-gods,
and  is  the  fisherman's  Sabbath ;  while  the  fifth  day,'
Fi-da,  is  the  Sabbath  of  agriculturists.    The  first  day
of  the  G-a  week,  which  is  also  a  general  day  of  rest,
is  called  Dsu,  "  Purification."   Dsii  seems  also  to  have
been  used  as  a  title  of  the  moon,  for  we  find  silver
called  dsu-etei,  "  moon  substance,"  or  "moonstone,"
and  in  the  cognate  Ewe  and  Yoruba  languages,  the
moon  is  called  Dsu-nu  and  Oshu  respectively.  Owing
to  later  and  more  anthropomorphic  conceptions  of
gods  moon-worship  appears  to  have  died  out,  though
all  these  peoples  salute  the  new  moon  respectfully
when  it  is  first  seen,  and  a  Tshi  epithet  of  the  moon
is  holmim,  "  Sacred,"  or  "  God."     When,  however,
moon-worship  flourished,  the  moon  would  undoubt-
edly have  been  a  general  god,  worshipped  by  the  com-
munity as  a  whole;  and  hence  the  day  dedicated  to  the
moon  is  a  general  day  of  rest,  and  not,  like  the  other
days  of  the  week,  a  day  of  rest  for  certain  persons
only.    In  the  case  of  the  Tshi  and  Ga  tribes,  we  thus
have  examples  of  a  weekly  moon- Sabbath,  observed
by  peoples  who  reckon  by  weeks.

It  seems  probable  that  the  Jewish  Sabbath  was  also
connected  primarily  with  moon-worship,  and  at  first
was  a  monthly  festival  like  that  of  the  Mendis  and
Bechuanas,  but  became  a  weekly  festival  after  the
Jews  adopted  the  seven-day  week  from  the  Baby-
lonians. In  the  historical  books  of  the  Old  Testa-
ment, viz.,  Joshua,  Judges,  the  books  of  Samuel,  and

L  2


148  THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.

the  first  book  of  Kings,  tliere  is  not  only  no  mention
of  a  weekly  Sabbatk,  whicli  is  first  spoken  of  m
II.  Kings  iv.  23,  but  there  is  evidence  tliat  sucli  an
institution  was  unknown;  for  tlie  encompassing  of
Jericho,*  the  events  described  in  I.  Samuel  xxix.  and
XXX.,  and  Solomon's  fourteen-day  feast,t  would  all
have  violated  the  injunction,  "  Let  no  man  go  out  of
his  place  on  the  seventh  day,"t  had  there  been  a
weekly  Sabbath.    But  while  the  weekly  Sabbath  is
not  mentioned  we  find  a  new  moon  festival  spoken
of.§     In  all  the  later  works,  written  after  contact
with  the  Babylonians,  we  find  frequent  mention  of
Sabbaths,  but  nearly  always  in  connection  with  new
moons,  and  the  day  of  the  new  moon  was  itself
observed  as  a  day  of  rest,  or  Sabbath.  ||    That  the
Jewish  Sabbath  should  come  to  be  called  the  seventh
day,  though  originally  the  day  of  the  new  moon,  and
consequently  the  first  day  of  the  lunar  month,  can  be
readily  understood.    When  a  holy  day  recurs  every
seventh  day,  the  day  on  which  it  is  held  is  naturally
called  the  seventh  day.    Thus  the  day  of  the  Yoruba
Sabbath,  which  recurs  every  fifth  day,  is  called  the
fifth  day  of  the  week,  though  the  meaning  of  the
name  alco-ojo  is  first  day.

That,  on  a  day  dedicated  to  a  god,  no  manner  of
work  should  be  done  by  the  followers  of  that  god,
seems  to  be  a  custom  of  universal  appHcation.  Ab-
stention from  work  was  doubtless  considered  a  mode

*  Joshua  vi.  13—16.  t  I-  Ki»gs  viii.  65.

t  Exodus  xvi.  29.  §  I-  Samuel  xx.  5,  18,  24,  26.

\\  Ezekiel  xlvi.  1  ;    Amos  viii.  5.     See  also  Nchemiah  x.  23  ;
Isaiah  i.  13  ;  Ixvi.  23  ;  Ezekiel  xlv.  17  ;  Hosea  ii.  11.


MEASUREMENTS  OF  TIME.


149


of  sliowing  respect  for  tlie  god,  and  since  a  want  of
respect  for  a  god  would  be  commonly  belie'/ed  to  be
followed  bj  some  punishment  inflicted  by  him,  the
proposition  that  it  is  unlucky  to  do  work  on  a  holy
day  naturally  becomes  accepted.    Thus  the  Yorubas
consider  it  unlucky  for  anyone  to  work  on  the  aJco-ojo,
or  general  Sabbath,  and  for  the  followers  of  the  gods
to  whom  the  other  days  are  dedicated  to  work  on
those  days.    For  a  follower  of  a  god  to  violate  the
day  sacred  to  that  god  is  as  serious  offence  among  the
Tshi,  Ga,  Ewe,  and  Yoruba  tribes,  as  to  break  the
Sabbath  was  among  the  Jews ;  and,  as  with  the  Jews,
IS  punished  with  death,  the  notion  being  that  if  the
honour  of  the  god  is  not  vindicated  by  his  followers,
they  will  suffer  for  the  neglect.    The  Sabbath-breaker
IS,  m  fact,  killed  by  the  other  worshippers  of  the  god
from  motives  of  self -protection.    On  the  Gold  Coast
any  fisherman  who  dared  to  put  to  sea  on  Bna-da,  the
fisherman's  Sabbath,  would  inevitably,  in  the  old  days,
have  been  put  to  death.    Persons  who  were  not  fish-
ermen, and  who  consequently  were  not  followers  of
the  gods  of  the  sea,  might  do  as  they  pleased ;  for  in
that  spirit  of  toleration  which  always  accompanies
polytheism,  they  were  held  to  be  only  accountable  to
their  own  gods.

Among  the  Yoruba  tribes  markets  are  held  weekly,
that  is,  every  fifth  day.  The  day  of  the  market  varies
m  different  townships,  but  it  is  never  held  on  the  aJco-
ojo.  From  this  custom  of  holding  markets  every  fifth
day  has  arisen  another  mode  of  computing  time,
namely,  by  periods  of  seventeen  days,  called  eta-di-
ocjun  (three  less  than  twenty).    This  is  the  outcome  of


150


THE  YOIWBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


tlie  Em  societies,  or  subscription  clubs,  wMcli  are
general  amongst  the  Yoruba  tribes,  and  still  exist,
under  the  same  name,  among  the  negroes  of  Yoruba
descent  in  the  Bahamas.  The  members  of  an  Esu,
society  meet  every  fifth  market-day  and  pay  their
subscri|)tions,  each  member  in  turn  taking  the  whole
sum  contributed  at  a  meeting.  The  first  and  fifth
market-days  are  counted  in,  and  thus  the  number
seventeen  is  obtained.  For  instance,  supposing  the
second  day  of  a  month  to  be  a  market-day,  the  second
market  would  fall  on  the  6th,  the  third  on  the  10th,
the  fourth  on  the  14tli,  and  the  fifth  on  the  18th.
The  fifth  market-day,  on  which  the  members  meet
and  pay  their  subscriptions,  is  counted  again  as  the
first  of  the  next  series.  These  clubs  or  societies  are
so  common  that  the  seventeen-day  period  has  become
a  kind  of  auxiliary  measure  of  time.

Osan  is  day,  in  contradistinction  to  oru,  night.  The
division  of  the  day  and  night  into  hours  is  not  known,
but  the  day  is  divided  into  the  following  periods,  viz.,
Icutu-lmtu,  early  morning  ;  owuro,  morning,  forenoon  ;
gangan,  or  osan  gangan  {gangan,  upright,  perpendi-
cular), noon;  ijY-s/ie /t;pa/e  (shadow-lengthening), after-
noon ;  and  ashale,  or  asJieivale,  evening,  twilight.  The
night  is  divided  into  periods  of  cock-crowing,  as  alculco-
shiwaju  (the  cock  opening  the  way),  first  cock-crow-
ing ;  ada-ji,  or  ada-jiwa,  time  of  second  cock-cro™g ;
and  ofere,  or  ofe,  the  time  of  cock-crowing  just  before
sunrise.

Odun  means  "  year,"  and,  like  the  word  ose,
"  week,"  also  an  annual  festival  which  is  celebrated
in  October,  and  the  period  of  time  intervening  between


MEASUREMENTS  OF  TIME.


151


two  sucli  festivals.  The  year  is  divided  into  seasons —
Eivo-erun,  dry  season ;  Ewo-oye,  season  of  tlie  Har-
mattan  wind  ;  and  Eivo-ojo,  rainy  season.  Tlie  last  is
again  divided  into  aJco-ro,  first  rains,  and  nro-huro,  last
rains,  or  little  rainy  season.


CHAPTER  IX.


CEREMONIES  AT  BIRTH,  MARRIAGE,  AND  DEATH.

I.  At  Birth.

The  ceremonies  at  birtli  resemble  in  tlie  main  tliose
observed  by  tlie  Ewe-speaking  peoples,  and  described
in  the  last  volume,  but  tbere  are  a  few  changes  whicli
may  be  attributed  to  increased  priestly  influence.

As  soon  as  the  pangs  of  labour  seize  a  woman  a
priestess  takes  charge  of  her,  and  has  the  care  of
her  and  the  child;  while,  soon  after  the  child  is
born,  a  habalawo  appears  on  the  scene  to  ascertain
what  ancestral  soul  has  been  re-born  in  the  infant.
As  soon  as  this  important  point  is  decided,  the
parents  are  informed  that  the  child  must  conform
in  all  respects  to  the  manner  of  life  of  the  ancestor
who  now  animates  it ;  and  if,  as  often  happens,  they
profess  ignorance,  the  habalawo  supplies  the  necessary
knowledge.

Seven  days  after  birth,  if  the  child  be  a  girl,  nine
days,  if  it  be  a  boy,  the  habalatvo  comes  again  and
offers  a  sacrifice  of  a  cock  and  a  hen  to  Ifa  and
the  Olori,  or  indwelling  spirit  of  the  child's  head;
after  which,  in  order  to  prevent  Elegba  from  inter-
fering with  the  mother  and  child,  the  entrails  of  the


CEREMONIES  AT  BIRTH,  MA RRIA GE,  AND  DEA  TIL  153


two  sacrifices  are  sprinkled  with  palm-wine,  taken
outside  the  house,  and  placed  before  his  image.

Then  follows  a  ceremony  which  appears  to  be  one
of  purification,  for  here,  as  among  the  Tshi  and  Ewe
tribes,  the  mother  and  child  are  considered  unclean,
as  are  women  during  the  menses.    The  water  which
is  always  in  the  earthen  vessels  placed  before  the
images  of  the  gods,  is  brought  to  the  house  and
thrown  up  on  the  thatched  roof,  and  as  it  drips
down   from  the  eaves  the  mother  and  child  pass
three  times  through  the  falling  drops.    The  habalawo
next  makes  a  water  of  purification  with  which  he
bathes  the  child's  head,  he  repeats  three  times  the
name  by  which  the  infant  is  to  be  known,  and  then
holds  him  in  his  arms  so  that  his  feet  touch  the
ground.     After   these  ceremonies  have  been  duly
performed  the  fire  is  extinguished  and  the  embers
carried  away ;  the  house  is  then  carefully  swept  out,
live  coals  are  brought,  and  a  fresh  fire  lighted.  We
thus  appear  to  have  a  combination  of  a  purification
by  water  and  a  purification  by  fire.    After  the  new
fire  has  been  kindled,  another  sacrifice  of  fowls  is
made  to  Ifa,  and  the  proceedings  are  at  an  end.


II.  At  Maeriage.

When  a  man  desires  to  marry  a  girl,  his  parents
visit  her  parents  and  make  proposals  of  marriage.
If  they  are  accepted,  the  suitor  sends  a  present  of
native  cloths  and  kola-nuts,  and,  after  consulting  a
habalawo,  a  day  is  appointed  for  the  weddino-.


3  54  THE  YOIUJBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


The  marriage-feast  is  held  at  the  house  of  the
parents  of  the  bridegroom,  and  the  bride  is  con-
ducted there  by  a  procession  of  women,  who  sing
an  epithalamium.     The  bride  is  put  to  bed  by  a
female   of   the   bridegroom's   family,  who  remains
concealed  in  the  apartment  till  the  bridegroom  has
joined  the  bride ;  after  which  she  secures  the  "  tokens
of  virginity,"  and,  coming  out  of  the  room,  displays
them  to  the  assembled  company.    She  then  carries
them  to  the  house  of  the  parents  of  the  bride,  who
never  attend  a  daughter's  wedding-feast,  and  next
morning  they  are  hung  on  the  fence  for  the  edifica-
tion of  the  public.    In  this  abstention  of  the  bride's
parents   from   the   feasting  and  merrymaking,  we
perhaps  find  a  lingering  survival  from  marriage  by
capture.    The  producer  of  the  "  tokens  "  is  selected
from  the  family  of  the  bridegroom  to  ensure  that
there  is  no  deception,  because  the  husband's  family
has  no  interest  in  falsifying  the  facts,  while  the
wife's  family  has  ;  but  virginity  in  a  bride  is  only
of  paramount  importance  when  the  girl  has  been
betrothed  in  childhood.    The  marriage-feast  is  con-
tinued on  the  next  day.

It  is  not  uncommon  for  newly-married  couples
to  visit  some  celebrated  shrine  and  offer  sacrifice
together,  a  practice  which,  together  with  the  fixing
of  the  wedding-day  by  a  habalaioo,  shows  an  in-
creasing disposition  on  the  part  of  the  priests  to
control  or  interfere  with  matters  which  are  purely
social  and  quite  beyond  the  domain  of  religion.


CEREMONIES  AT  BIRTH,  MARlilAGE,  AND  DEATH.  155


III.  At  Death.

THe  ceremonies  observed  by  the  Yoruba  tribes  at
death  chiefly  differ  from  those  of  the  Ewe  tribes  in
the  addition  of  various  religious  observances.

When  the  breath  has  departed  from  the  body  there
is  the  usual  outburst  of  exaggerated  grief,  with  loud
cries,  lamentations,  and  frenzied  gestures,  and  the
eldest  son  of  the  deceased,  or  the  brother,  if  there  be
no  son,  at  once  sends  for  a  bahalawo,  to  ascertain  if
the  deceased  died  from  natural  causes,  or  through  the
machinations  of  witches.    The  hahalaivo,  after  sacri-
ficing a  fowl,  inquires  at  the  oracle  of  Ifa,  by  means
of  the  board  and  sixteen  palm-nuts ;  and  if  it  aflSrms
that  the  death  was  caused  by  witchcraft,  further
mquiry  is  made  to  know  if  any  other  member  of  the
family  is  threatened  with  a  like  fate,  and  also  if  the
soul  of  the  deceased  is  in  danger  of  further  molesta-
tion from  the  evil  spirits  who  have  been  influenced
by  the  malpractices  of  the  sorcerers.    Should  the
oracle  declare  that  the  soul  of  the  deceased  is  in
danger,  a  sheep  or  goat  is  sacrificed,  and  the  carcass,
sprinkled  with  palm-oil,  is  carried  outside  the  town,
and  deposited  at  a  spot  where  two  or  more  paths
meet,  which  has  the  effect  of  causing  the  evil  spirits
to  disperse  in  as  many  directions  as  there  are  paths.
The  hahalaiDO  then  prepares  the  usual  water  of  puri-
fication with  shea-butter  and  edible  snails,  and  dip-
ping into  the  vessel  a  palm-branch,  sacred  to  Ifa,
sprinkles  the  corpse,  the  room,  and  the  spectators
with  the  fluid.    At  the  same  time  he  invokes  the  soul


156  THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


of  tlie  deceased  to  leave  the  liouse  as  soon  as  tlie
funeral  rites  liave  been  performed,  and  proceed  peace-
fully to  its  destination,  wishing  it  a  safe  journey.  He
says,  "  May  tlie  road  be  open  to  you.  May  nothing
evil  meet  you  on  the  way.  May  you  find  the  road
good  when  you  go  in  peace."

After  these  preliminaries,  the  corpse  is  washed  with
rum,  or  a  decoction  of  aromatic  herbs,  and  attired  in
its  best  clothes.  The  thumbs  and  the  great  toes  are
then  tied  together.  If  the  deceased  be  a  man  the
head  is  shaved,  and  the  hair,  carefully  wrapped  up  in
a  piece  of  white  cotton,  is  buried  in  the  earth  behind
the  house.  If  a  woman,  the  exposed  parts  of  the
body  are  stained  with  a  decoction  of  the  bark  of  a
tree,  which  gives  a  reddish  hue  to  the  skin.  Tinally,
the  corpse  is  wrapped  up  in  many  native  cloths,  and
placed  on  a  mat  at  the  door  of  the  room.

In  the  meantime  a  death-feast  has  been  prepared,
and  now  commences,  while  outside  the  house  a  con-
tinual beating  of  drums  is  kept  up,  together  with
frequent  discharges  of  musketry,  fired  in  honour  of
the  deceased.  The  feast,  at  which  intoxicants  are
used  lavishly,  soon  becomes  a  veritable  orgie,  in  which,
however,  the  chief  mourners,  that  is,  the  widows  and
daughters  of  the  deceased,  take  no  part ;  for  as  soon
as  they  have  performed  the  last  offices  for  the  dead,
and  have  placed  the  corpse  at  the  door,  they  are  shut
up  in  an  adjacent  apartment,  where  they  are  com-
pelled by  custom  to  remain  during  the  three  days
that  a  corpse  invariably  lies  in  state.  While  thus
immured  they  are  forbidden  to  wash,  and  usage
requires  them  to  refuse  all  food,  at  least  for  the  first


CEREMONIES  AT  BIRTH,  MARRIAGE,  AND  DEATH.  157

twenty-four  lioiirs,  after  wliicli  tliey  usually  allow
tliemselves  to  be  persuaded  to  take  some  nourisliment.

The  conventional  mo,urning  is  tlie  business  of  the
women  of  the  household,  who,  while  the  men  are
feasting,  utter  loud  lamentations  in  the  room  in  which
they  are  confined ;  and,  in  consequence  of  this,  the
epithet  isohun,  "  a  mourner,"  is  often  applied  to  a
female  child ;  a  male,  on  the  other  hand,  being  some-
times called  kvale,  "  a  digger,"  i.e.,  of  a  grave.  A
father  might  thus  say  that  he  had  begotten  two
mourners  and  a  digger,  meaning  two  daughters  and  a
son.  Female  friends  usually  come  to  join  in  the
lamentations,  the  conventional  character  of  which  is
referred  to  in  the  proverb  "  A  mourner  mourns  and
goes  on  her  way  (without  afterthought),  but  one  who
ponders  over  sad  memories  mourns  without  ceasing."
There  are  also  professional  mourners,  chosen  for  their
poetical  turn  of  expression,  whose  services  are  en-
gaged in  well-to-do  households,  and  who  often  con-
trive to  work  up  the  real  mourners  to  a  condition  of
frenzied  grief.  A  professional  mourner  sings  in  a  sad
tone,  which  rises,  and  falls  in  a  modulated  wail ;  "  He
is  gone,  the  lion  of  a  man.  He  was  not  a  sapling,  or
a  bush,  to  be  torn  out  of  the  earth,  but  a  tree — a  tree
to  brave  the  hurricane ;  a  spreading  tree,  under  which
the  hearts  of  his  family  could  rest  in  peace,"  &c.  &c.  ;
while  the  widows  and  daughters  lament  their  lonely
and  improtected  state,  somewhat  as  follows  :  —

"  I  go  to  the  market ;  it  is  crowded.  There  are
many  people  there,  but  he  is  not  among  them.  I
wait,  but  he  comes  not.    Ah  me  !  I  am  alone.

"  Never  more  shall  I  see  him.    It  is  over ;  he  is


158    .        THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.

gone.  I  shall  see  liim  no  more.  All  me  !  I  am
alone.

"  I  go  into  tlie  street.  The  people  pass,  but  he  is
not  there.  ISTight  falls,  but  he  comes  not.  Ah  me  !
I  am  alone.

"  Alas  !  I  am  alone.  Alone  in  the  day — alone  in
the  darkness  of  the  night.  Alas  !  my  father  (or  hus-
band) is  dead.    Who  will  take  care  of  me  ?  "

On  the  afternoon  of  the  third  day  of  the  wake  the
body  is  placed  on  some  boards,  or  on  a  door  taken  off
its  hinges,  covered  with  a  rich  native  cloth,  and
borne  at  a  trot  through  the  streets  by  the  men.  Male
friends  and  relations  accompany  the  bier,  singing  the
praises  of  the  deceased,  and  throwing  handfuls  of
cowries  among  the  spectators.  This  procession  re-
turns to  the  house  towards  evening,  and  the  corpse  is
then  interred  in  a  grave  that  has  been  dug  in  the
earthen  floor,  and  which  is  so  contrived  that  the  head
of  the  deceased  may  project  beyond  the  line  of  the
outer  wall  of  the  house.  Most  of  the  cloths  in  which
the  corpse  is  wrapped  are  taken  off,  and  the  body,
covered  with  grass  mats  so  that  no  earth  may  soil  it,
is  carefully  lowered  into  the  grave.  A  coffin  is  some-
times used,  but  not  often.  Food,  rum,  and  cowries
are  placed  in  the  grave,  the  body  is  sprinkled  with
the  blood  of  a  he-goat,  sacrificed  to  propitiate  Blegba,
a  few  more  cowries  are  thrown  in,  and  then  the  grave
is  filled  up  amid  the  wishes  for  a  safe  and  pleasant
journey  to  which  we  have  already  referred.*

When  the  grave  is  full  the  earth  is  smoothed  down,


*  Chapter  vii.


CEREMONIES  A  T  BIR  Til,  MA  RRIA  GE,  AND  BE  A  TIL    1 5  9


and  sometimes,  wlien  many  articles  of  value  liave  been
entombed,  the  surface  is  moistened  with,  water  to
make  the  earth  settle  down,  and  slaves  and  depen-
dents are  made  to  sleep  on  it  night  after  night,  for
the  double  purpose  of  jDrotecting  it  and  of  obliter-
atiDg  all  trace  of  its  exact  position.  After  the  inter-
ment, the  feast,  which  had  been  suspended  since  the
afternoon,  recommences ;  and  drinking  and  shouting,
amid  the  firing  of  muskets,  the  jangle  of  native
gongs,  and  the  dull  thud  of  the  drums,  continues  all
night.

Next  day,  about  noon,  the  male  relations  walk  out
in  a  body,  and  wander  about  the  town,  as  if  looking
for  the  deceased,  and  chanting  "  We  look  for  our
father,  and  cannot  find  him";  to  which  the  bystanders
reply,  "  He  has  gone  to  his  house."  Returning  from
this,  the  mourners  carry  on  the  feast  till  the  evening
of  the  next  day,  when  the  bones  of  the  victims  that
have  been  sacrificed,  and  those  of  the  fowls  and  sheep
that  have  been  eaten  by  the  guests,  are  collected  and
placed  over  the  grave.  All  the  articles  which  the
deceased  had  in  daily  use,  such  as  his  pipe,  the  mat
on  which  he  slept,  the  plate  or  vessel  from  which  he
ate,  his  calabashes,  and  other  things  of  small  value,
are  carried  out  into  the  bush  and  burned.

Up  to  this  point  the  soul  of  the  deceased  is  sup-
posed to  have  been  lingering  near  his  old  home,  and
this  destruction  of  his  property  is  intended  to  signify
to  the  soul  that  he  must  now  depart,  since  there  is  no
longer  anything  belonging  to  him.  In  former  times
the  destruction  of  property  was  carried  much  further
than  at  present.    Usually  the  apartment  in  which


160


THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


tlie  deceased  is  buried  is  closed,  and  never  used  again,
and  sometimes  tlie  roof  is  removed.  Eicli  families
even  abandon  tlie  liouse  altogether,  and  it  is  said  to
have  been  usual  in  days  bygone  to  burn  it.  Tlie
deceased  is  called  tliree  times  by  name,  and  adjured
to  depart,  and  no  longer  haunt  the  dwellings  of  the
living.  After  this  invitation  to  be  gone,  the  fowl,
called  adire-iranna*  is  sacrificed,  which,  besides  se-
curing a  right-of-way  for  the  soul,  is  supposed  also
to  guide  it.  The  feathers  of  the  fowl  are  scattered
around  the  house,  and  the  bird  itself  carried  out  to  a
bush-road,  where  it  is  cooked  and  eaten.  The  road
on  which  the  aclire-iranna  is  eaten  must  be  outside  the
town  and  lead  away  from  it,  for  though  the  natives
believe  that  Deadland  is  under  the  earth,  they  think
that  it  is  necessary  to  eat  the  fowl  on  a  road  leading
into  the  bush,  in  order  to  place  it  in  a  proper  position
for  commencing  its  ofiice  of  guide  to  the  soul.

The  relations  may  not  wash  themselves  or  comb
their  hair  during  the  funeral  ceremonies,  in  conse-
quence of  which  the  rites  themselves  are  sometimes
styled  Ofo,  "Unwashed."  On  the  last  day  they  shave
their  heads,  and  then  pay  visits  of  thanks  to  those
who  assisted  at  the  funeral.  The  time  of  mourning
after  the  conclusion  of  these  ceremonies  varies  with
the  rank  and  influence  of  the  deceased,  and  with  the
locality.  Three  months  is  usually  considered  long
enough,  but  a  commemoration-feast  is  often  held  a
year  after  the  death.  During  the  period  of  mourning
the  hair  must  be  left  unkempt  as  it  grows,  and  women


*  See  p.  128.


CEREM ONIES  A  T  BJR  Til,  MA  11 R  TA  GE,  AND  DEA  TII.   1 6 1

must  cover  the  liead  witli  a  cloth  of  a  dark  blue
colour.  A  widow  remains  shut  up  for  forty  days,  and
may  not  wash  her  cloths  during  that  time.

It  is  considered  the  greatest  disgrace  to  a  family
not  to  be  able  to  hold  the  proper  ceremonies  at  the
death  of  one  of  their  number,  a  notion  which  is  com-
prehensible when  we  remember  how  much  the  welfare
of  the  soul  of  the  deceased  is  supposed  to  depend
upon  their  performance.     Hence  families  not  un-
frequently  reduce  themselves  almost  to  beggary  in
order  to  carry  them  out,  or  pawn  or  sell  their  children
to  raise  the  money  necessary.    Sometimes,  too,  they
conceal  the  death  and  hide  the  body  until  they  have
secured  the  requisite  means,  and  such  concealments
have  been  known  to  last  for  three  or  four  months.
The  body  is  treated  with  resinous  herbs  so  that  it
becomes  desiccated,  and,  while  it  remains  in  the  house,
the  soul  is  believed  to  abide  in  its  old  home,  where
food  and  drink  are  provided  for  it,  till  such  time  as
the  proper  ceremonies  can  be  held,  and  it  be  leg-iti-
mately  ushered  on  its  new  career.

A  common  imprecation  is  01m  igbe,  "  Bush
death,"  meaning  "May  you  die  in  the  bush,  alone
and  uncared  for,  and  so  receive  no  funeral-rites."
A  proverb  contrasts  a  man's  duties  to  his  relations
with  those  towards  the  members  of  any  secret  society
to  which  he  may  belong,  such  as  the  Ogboni,  and
msists  upon  the  importance  of  the  former,  because
of  the  obligation  upon  his  relations  to  bury  him.
It  runs,  "  A  man  must  honestly  perform  all  the  duties
mcumbent  on  relationship,  even  though  he  may  belong
to  a  secret  society.     When  he  has  attended  to  the

M


162  THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


society  lie  must  attend  to  his  relations,  because  it  is
the  J  who  must  bnry  him  when  he  dies."

This  desire  for  a  very  ceremonial  funeral,  which
•owes  its  origin  to  the  native  beliefs  concerning  the
soul,  lasts  long  after  the  negro  has  been  transplanted
across  the  Atlantic,  and  has  lost  all  notion  of  its
motive.     In  most  of  the  West  India  Islands,  but
particularly  in  the  Bahamas,  where  the  bulk  of  the
negro   population   is   of  Yoruba  descent,  a  grand
funeral  is  considered  the  greatest  desideratum.  To
attain   this   end,    burial-societies   are   formed,  the
members  of  which  pay  subscriptions  all  their  lives
in  order  to  be  buried  with  pomp.    Every  member
of  such  a  society  is  bound  to  attend  the  funeral  of
another  member,  and  the  result  is  a  procession  of
men   in   uniforms,   more   or   less   grotesque,  with
banners  and  various  insignia.     Often  a  band  heads
the   cortege,  and   many  a   man   occupies   his  last
moments  in  giving  directions  as  to  the  manner  in
which  the  funeral  is  to  take  place.*

*  See  the  following,  which  appeared  in  the  Nassau  Chiardian,  New
Providence,  Bahamas,  10th  January,  1891  :  —

NOTICE.
All  to  whom  it  may  concern.

Dear  Friends,

Mr.  A  B  had  been  a  member  of  the  Grant's  Town  Friendly

Society  for  many  years,  and  was  financial  up  to  July,  1891.  During
his  illness  he  requested  that  the  Band  of  the  said  Society  play  the
Dead  March  in  Saul  when  he  died.    The  message  came  to  the

President  from  Mr.  J         C.  S  ,  ex-President  of  the  Society.

The  Band,  in  conjunction  with  the  members,  was  summoned  to  meet
at  the  Society's  Hall,  in  uniform,  at  3  o'clock  sharp.  The  members
were  present  waiting  on  the  Band,  but  only  tho  Bandmaster  and  three


CEREMONIES  AT  BIRTH,  MARltfAGE,  AND  DEATH.  1G3


When  a  man  dies  abroad  Hs  family  make  the
greatest  exertions  to  obtain  something  belonging  to
him,  over  which  the  usual  rites  may  be  held.  Hair
or  nailparings  are  most  sought  for  this  purpose,
but,  if  these  cannot  be  obtained,  a  portion  of  the
clothing  worn  by  the  deceased  suffices.  Such  remains
are  called  eta,  a  word  which  seems  to  mean  some-
thing brought  from  one  place  to  another.  Through
a  confusion  between  objective  and  subjective  con-
nection, these  relics,  which  bring  the  deceased  to
mind,  are  suppposed  to  bring  the  soul  to  the  place
where  the  funeral  ceremonies  are  held.

other  members  came,  and  they  had  to  leave  the  Hall,  proceeding  to
the  house  of  the  deceased  without  the  Band.

I  am  sorry  to  say  that  if  the  Band  cannot  attend  on  members
(deceased)  of  the  Society  to  which  they  belong,  it  will  be  best  for  the
Society  to  do  away  with  tlie  Band.  If  members  are  paying  their
monies  towards  Band  Funds,  they  should  have  the  use  of  the  Band
when  required.

(Signed)       Z.  C  .

Pre?.  G.  T.  F.  Society.


CHAPTER  X.


SYSTEM  OE  GOVEENMENT.

The  monarcliical  system  of  government  prevails  m
most  of  the  Yoruba  tribes,  bnt  tlie  king  is  merely
tlie  nominal  liead  of  tlie  state,  and  lias  little  real
power,  wliicli  remains  in  the  hands  of  the  chiefs
and  elders,  without  whom  the  king  can  do  nothing.
In  each  state  there  is  a  council  of  elders,  without
whose   concurrence  the   king  can  issue  no  edict,
and  a  two-thirds'    majority  of  which  is  required
for  any  new  law.     The  sovereignty  of  a  state  is
hereditary  in  one  family,  but  the  individual  who  is
to  succeed  to  the  office  is  selected  by  the  council.
The  monarchy  is  thus  elective,  though  only  men
of  a  certain  blood-descent  are  qualified  for  election.
The   council   of    elders,   besides   electing   a  king,
controls  his  actions,  and,  should  he  show  any  dis-
position to  make  himself  independent  of  it,  invites
him  to  "go  to  sleep,"  by  sending  him  a  present  of
parrots'  eggs.     The  king  is  never  allowed  to  see
foreigners  without  some   members   of   the  council
being    present,   and    all    his    actions   are  closely
watched.     The   king   and  the  council  make  laws
and   decide   all   ordinary  affairs,  but,  should  any
question   of  vital  importance  to  the  nation  arise,


SYSTEM  OF  GOVERNMENT.  1G5

the  whole  people  is  assembled  for  its  discussion
and  settlement ;  and  every  individual,  regardless  of
position,  is  allowed  to  express  his  opinion.  The
emblem  of  royalty  is  a  conical  head-dress  of  beads,
from  which  hang  long  strings  of  beads,  so  arranged
as  to  conceal  the  face  of  the  wearer.  An  epithet
applied  to  kings  is  alaiye,  "  Owner  of  the  World."

The  election  of  a  king  is  preceded  by  a  curious
ceremony.      When    the    council   has   selected  the
mdividual  who  is  to  succeed   to   the   throne,  the
chiefs  and  elders  proceed  to  his  house  on  the  day
fixed  for  the  coronation,  seize  him  suddenly,  and
forcibly  convey  him  to  the  palace,  where  they  floo-
him  vigorously  with  light  whips.    If  he  should  cry
out  during  the  punishment,  or  show  any  signs  of
pam,  he  is  at  once  rejected  as  unworthy,  and  the
council  makes  a  new  choice ;  but  if  he  bear  himself
bravely,  without  flinching,  he  is  forthwith  crowned.
This^  ordeal   appears   to   be  designed  to  test  the
candidate's  capacity  for  endurance,  and  his  powers
of  self-restraint  and  concealment  of  thought.  An
exactly  similar  practice  is  found  among  the  Timnis
of  Sierra  Leone,  who,  on  the  day  of  election,  scoff
at  and  beat  the  new  king  while  dragging  him  from
his  own  house  to  the  residence  of  his  predecessor  •
where,  if  he  has  withstood  the  ordeal,  the  royal
ornaments  are  put  on  him.

The  chief  officers  of  state  are  the  Bashorun,  or
prime  minister,  the  chief  adviser  of  the  kino-  who
has  the  title  of  Emeiva  (Eni-mo-ewa),  "  He  who
knows  the  mind;"  and  the  Balog^m  (Oha-ni-ogun),
or   "Chief   of   the  Army."     The    military  officer


16G  THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


second  in  command,  is  styled  the  Berild.  Next  to
these  high  officials  come  the  civil  governors  of
towns  {Bale  *),  each  of  whom  exercises  rule  in  his
own  domain.  The  Bales  of  towns  correspond  to
the  chiefs  of  districts  among  the  Tshi  tribes,  and,
as  in  their  case,  the  king  of  the  nation  is  the
Bale  of  his  own  capital.  Under  the  Bales  of
towns  are  the  Bales  of  town -quarters  and  villages,
and  under  these  again  are  the  Bales  of  households.

The  Bale  of  a  household  is  responsible  for  the
preservation  of   order  in  the  group   of  dwellings
occupied  bj  his  family  and  dependents.    He  settles
all  minor  disputes  between  those  under  his  control,
but  if  the  matter  involves  the  subordinates  of  another
household-5aZe,  it  is  taken   before  the  Bale  of  the
town-quarter,  who  is  responsible  for  peace  and  order
within  that  area.    If  it  be  an  ordinary  "palaver,"
this  functionary  settles  it,  but  if  it  be  serious  he  must
refer  it  to  the  Bale  of  the  town.    Unless  the  affair
concerns  another  district  also,  or  is  of  national  im-
portance, it  need  go  no  further,   for  in  his  own
domain  the  town-5aZe  is  almost  independent.  Persons
subject  to  a  Bale  address  him  as  Baba,  "  Father,"  or
"  Master,"  and  he  in  turn  calls  them  "  my  children."

In  every  town  there  is,  besides  the  Bale,  an  lyalode
(lya-ni-ode),  "Mistress  of  the  street,"  to  whom  all
disputes  between  women  are  brought  in  the  first
instance,  only  those  which  she  is  unable  to  deal  with
being  referred  to  the  Bale.  The  lyalode  has  as
coadjutors  an  Oton-iyalode  (right-hand  lyalode)  and
an  Osin-iyalode  (left-hand  lyalode).

»  Bale  =  Obii  ilc,  literally,  "  chief  of  the  house,  or  town."


SYSTEM  OF  GOVERNMENT.


167


Members  of  council  and  town-Bales  are  Oloris,
"  chiefs,"  and  form  the  aristocracy.  Every  Olori  has
in  his  service  certain  men  termed  Onses,  who  act  as
messengers,  heralds,  bailiffs,  and  police,  and,  at  a
pinch,  as  executioners.  A  king's  Onse  is  called  an
Ilari,  whence  the  proverb,  "As  no  subject,  however
rich,  may  have  an  Ilari,  so  it  is  not  every  man  who
may  own  a  palace."

Respect  to  kings  and  chiefs  is  shown  by  prostration,
followed  by  rising  and  clapping  the  hands.  Before
entering  the  presence  of  a  king  or  chief,  the  cloth
is  removed  from  the  shoulder,  over  which  it  is  usually
worn,  and  wrapped  round  the  waist.  When  a  new
title  is  conferred  on  a  man  a  leaf  of  the  aJcolco-tree  is
given  to  the  recipient  as  a  sign  of  honour.  All
officers  of  state,  members  of  council,  and  town-Bales
h&ye  EJcejis,  "seconds,"  who  assist  in  the  management
of  affairs  and  rule  in  the  absence  of  their  principals.
The  king  also  has  an  EJceji,  and  it  is  he  who  is  usually
selected  to  succeed  him.

The  foregoing  applies  generally  to  all  the  Yoruba
tribes,  but  there  are  a  few  customs  special  to  certain
kingdoms,  which  it  may  be  as  well  to  note.

In  Yoruba  proper  the  king  is  styled  the  Alafin,
and  his  eldest  son,  called  the  Aremo  (Are-ommo,  eldest
child),  governs  conjointly  with  him.  Under  an  old
custom,  the  Aremo  was  obliged  to  commit  suicide
when  the  Alafin  died ;  and  the  new  king,  who  must  be
the  descendant  of  one  who  had  worn  the  crown,  was
chosen  from  another  branch  of  the  royal  family.
This  custom  was  set  at  defiance  by  Adelu,  who  was
the  Aremo  when  his  father  died  in  1860,  and  it  was


168


THE  YOliUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


in  consequence  of  this  that  the  people  of  Ijaye
rebelled.  The  custom  has  not  since  been  observed.
The  tail  of  a  white-bellied  rat,  called  Afe-imojo  (Rat
of  knowledge),  is  used. by  the  Alafin  as  the  symbol  of
royalty,  and  when  he  walks  abroad  he  holds  it  to  his
lips.

In  Yoruba  the  office  of  Basliorun  is  hereditary  in
one  family,  but  the  Alafin,  in  council,  selects  the
member  to  fill  it.  He  is  obliged  by  law  to  reside  in
Oyo,  the  capital.  Next  in  rank  to  the  Basliorun  is
the  Are-Onalcalanfo,  "First  of  the  War- Captains,"
who  can  be  selected  from  any  family  and  live  where
he  pleases.  The  council  consists  of  twenty-two
members,  and  is  called  Isolcan  (agreement,  concord,
or  unanimity) ;  the  leader  of  the  council  is  styled  the
Onasohan,  "  Channel  to  the  Concord."

The  Baris  are  the  confidential  advisers  of  the
Alafin,  and  are  of  either  sex,  the  females  being  chosen
from  among  his  wives.  Ilaris,  whether  male  or
female,  shave  the  head,  leaving  a  small  tuft,  or  tail,  on
the  crown.  In  addition  to  these,  the  Alafin  has  a
number  of  court-officials  termed  Bafin,  or  Ibafin,  a
word  which  seems  to  mean  "  Inmates  of  the  Palace."
Six  of  them,  called  the  Bvefa  {Iwe-eja)  "the  six
papers,"  are  chamberlains,  the  remainder  are  spies,  or
intelligence-officers,  who  keep  the  Alafin  informed  of
everything  that  takes  place.  The  chief  chamberlain
is  styled  the  Ona-iwefa,  and  the  two  next  in  rank,  the
right-hand,  and  the  left-hand.  The  Tetu  is  a  kind  of
sheriff's  officer,  who  arrests  for  debt.  When  making
an  arrest  it  is  essential  that  he  should  pronounce  the
word  ogusa,  "a  shield."    The  Ologho  is  the  keeper


SYSTEM  OF  GOVERNMENT.


169


of  the  ancient  traditions,  which  he  teaches  to
his  pnpils,  and  on  certain  occasions  recites  in
public.

According  to  court  etiquette,  no  word  having  more
than  one  distinct  meaning — and  such  words  are  very
numerous  in  the  Yoruba  language — maj  be  used  when
addressing  the  Alafin,  if  one  of  its  meanings,  no  matter
how  inapplicable  to  the  subject  in  hand,  be  unbecom-
ing. At  audiences  the  speaker  addresses  a  eunuch,
who  repeats  the  words  to  the  chief  female  Ilari,  and
she  conveys  what  is  said  to  the  Alafin.  Ko  native
may  appear  before  the  Alafin  in  any  costume  other
than  an  ordinary  native  cloth,  and  the  Alafin  always
speaks  of  his  subjects  as  his  "  slaves."

Among  the  Egbas  the  Alalce  of  Abeokuta  is  nomi-
nally the  ruler  of  the  whole  collection  of  villages
within  the  walls  ;  but  each  village  or  township  has  its
own  Bale,  who  is  virtually  independent,  and  except  in
times  of  national  danger  or  emergency  the  Alahe  is
really  only  the  Bale  of  his  own  townshij).  The  Bales
of  all  the  townships,  except  Ake,  are  elected  by  their
own  subjects,  but  the  Bale  of  Ake,  who  becomes  the
Alahe,  is  elected  by  the  council,  and  the  election  must
be  confirmed  by  all  the  other  Bales  of  townships.
The  Bashorun  is  here  the  chief  of  the  council,  and
there  is  an  official  called  the  Ahpena,  whose  duty  it  is
to  summon  the  council  together.  In  Abeokuta  the
Ogbonis  are  the  real  rulers.

Ibadan,  The  Bale  of  the  town  of  Ibadan  exercises
the  kingly  ofiice,  but  next  to  him,  and  almost  equal  in
rank  and  power,  is  the  Balogun,  who  sits  with  the
Bale  to  judge  important  cases.     Two  members  of


170  THE  YOBUBA-SFUAKING  PEOPLES.


council,  called  tlie  riglit-liand  and  tlie  left-hand  Bale,
are  the  Bale's  chief  advisers.

Jebu.  The  Council  of  the  Awujale  is  called  the
eketa-odi  (?  third  rampart),  and  his  confidential  ad-
viser the  Agunri  ("  One  who  brings  to  light  ").  The
Awujale  is  surrounded  by  a  great  deal  of  niysterj.
Until  recently  his  face  might  not  be  seen,  even  by  his
own  subjects,  and  if  circumstances  obliged  him  to
communicate  with  them,  he  did  so  through  a  screen
which  concealed  him  from  view.  Now,  though  his
face  may  be  seen,  it  is  usual  to  conceal  his  body ;  and
at  audiences  a  cloth  is  held  before  him  so  as  to  hide
him  from  the  neck  downwards,  and  is  raised  so  as  to
cover  him  altogether  whenever  he  coughs,  sneezes,
expectorates,  or  takes  snuff.  The  face  is  partially
concealed  by  the  conical  cap  with  hanging  strings  of
beads.  It  is  death  for  anyone,  except  members  of
the  court,  to  sit  or  stand  behind  the  Awujale.  The
umbrella  is  the  symbol  of  sovereignty  in  Jebu,  and  it
is  a  capital  offence  for  a  subject  to  use  one.

Among  all  the  tribes  the  revenues  of  the  kings,  chiefs,
and  hales  of  towns  are  derived  from  tribute  paid  by  the
dependent  villages,  and  from  duties  levied  upon  goods
and  native  productions  brought  into  the  towns.  These
duties  are  collected  by  officers  called  Oni-bodes,  and
are  levied  at  custom-houses  [bode)  at  the  gates  of
towns,  and  also  on  the  roads  at  the  frontiers.  The
names  of  two  frontier  towns  of  the  ancient  kingdom
of  Yoruba,  where  duties  used  to  be  paid,  but  Avhich
have  long  since  been  destroyed,  are  still  preserved  in
the  proverbial  saying,  "  Let  the  marvel  stop  at  Ibese
and  not  proceed  to  Ijanna."    There  is  no  fixed  tariff.


SYSTEM  OF  GOVERNMENT.


171


and  traders  are  largely  at  tlie  mercy  of  the  Oni-hodes,
wliose  cupidity  is  only  kept  witliin  reasonable  limits
tlirougli  fear  of  complaint  being  made  to  the  Bale  of
the  town.  A  considerable  proportion  of  the  duties
levied,  nearly  always  in  kind,  sticks  to  their  fingers.

Every  Bale  who  adjudicates  upon  a  case  receives  a
hearing-fee,  and  both  plaintiff  and  defendant  usually
see  him  in  private  before  the  case  comes  on,  and  seek
to  influence  his  decision  by  presents.  These  bribes,
however,  do  not  really  produce  much  effect,  for  every
case  is  tried  in  public,  and  no  manifest  injustice,  or
verdict  given  against  the  weight  of  evidence,  would
be  allowed  to  pass  unobjected  to  by  the  people,  who
would  resent  it  in  their  own  future  interests.  In
cases  in  which  the  evidence  for  and  against  is  nicely
balanced,  the  decision  is  no  doubt  affected  by  the
longest  purse.

Sticks  of  office  are  used  by  all  men  in  authority,
and  are  received  with  the  same  ceremony  and  respect
as  among  the  Ewe  tribes.*  A  royal  stick-bearer  is
called  an  Olohjpaja-oha,  "  Bearer  of  the  king's  stick."
The  Ogbonis  have  their  own  staff,  or  stick,  of  a  special
pattern,  called  edan.

Public  notices  are  proclaimed  by  a  public  crier,  or
herald,  styled  an  Alcede  {Ice  ode,  to  exclaim  in  the
street),  who  prefaces  his  announcement  by  cries  of
"  Atoto-o  !  Atoto-o  !  "  "  Noise  !  noise  !  "

In  time  of  war,  all  the  men  capable  of  bearing
arms  take  the  field  under  the  military  chiefs.  They
are  accompanied  by  a  number  of  women,  who  cook
the  food  and  carry  the  baggage,  so  that  the  size  of  a
*  "  E\Vc-Spcaking  Peoples,"  pp.  178  to  181.


172  THE  Y0BUBA-8FEAKING  PEOPLES.


war- camp  affords  no  fair  indication  of  tlie  number  of
combatants  it  contains.  As  the  Yoruba  tribes  did  not
come  into  communication  with  Europeans  till  about
1815,  wlien  tlie  export  slave-trade  from  Lagos  and
Badagrj  commenced,  thej  have  not  been  supplied
with  muskets  for  so  long  a  period  as  the  Tshi,  Ga,
and  B\Ve  tribes,  who  have  been  accustomed  to  use
firearms  for  such  a  length  of  time  that  all  other  kinds
of  weapons,  except  knives  and  swords,  have  long
disappeared.  Maskets  do  not  seem  to  have  come
into  common  use  among  the  Yoruba  tribes  until  after
1850,  and  their  old  weapons  are  not  quite  displaced
even  yet.  Thej  used  bows,  with  strings  of  raw  hide,
and  cross-bows  {akatanpo) ;  and  besides  the  arrows
carried  bj  each  man  in  a  quiver,  there  was  a  reserve
of  these  missiles  contained  in  a  large  receptacle  called
an  ada-gun-ile-apo,  and  which  was  placed  on  the
ground  to  supply  the  archers  during  a  battle.  Bow-
men used  an  iron  guard  for  the  fingers,  styled  ifarun
(fa-orun :  "  pull  bow  "),  and  a  leather  guard  {ijasan)
was  worn  on  the  left  arm  to  protect  it  from  the
bowstring.  Poisoned  arrows  seem  to  have  been
commonly  used.  One  of  the  ingredients  of  the  poison
was  the  leaf  of  a  shrub  called  eive-ina  (ewe,  leaf,  ina,
fire),  "fire-plant,"  and  so  named  because  the  hairs
with  which  the  leaf  is  covered  raise  blisters  on  the
skin.  Another  poison  is  said  to  have  been  obtained
by  pounding  up  the  large  red  ants.

Before  the  introduction  of  firearms  an  army  was
ordinarily  divided  into  cavalry  (elesiii),  archers  (olofa,
or  tafatafa),  and  foot-soldiers  (elese).  Notwith-
standing the  enormous  numbers  of  cavalry  mentioned


SYSTEM  OF  GOVEimMENT.


173


by  Dalzel,  tlie  Yorubas  do  not  seem  ever  to  liave  liad
any  considerable  force  of  liorsemen,  and  liorses,  wliicli
are  not  very  common,  are  usually  monopolised  by
men  of  rank.  The  bulk  of  tke  army  was  composed
of  foot-soldiers,  wlio  carried  spears,  swords,  or  axes,
and  shields.  Another  infantry  weapon  was  called
gamu-gamu,  and  was  something  like  an  old-fashioned
halberd.  Shirts  of  mail  and  breast-plates  were  some-
times seen,  and  appear  to  have  been  obtained  from
the  natives  of  the  "Western  Soudan.  Each  contingent
fought  under  its  own  Kalcanfo  (captain),  and  the
Balogun  was  the  Are-JcaJcanfo,  or  generalissimo.  Under
each  Kalcanfo,  or  leader  of  a  local  contingent,  were
three  inferior  officers,  styled  Are  alasa,  Otin  alasa,  and
Osin  alasa,  the  chief,  right-hand,  and  left-hand  alasa.

In  battle  the  main  bodies  oppose  each  other  at  a
distance  of  half-a-mile  or  a  mile,  and  are  covered  by
detachments  from  the  various  contingents.  These
detachments  skirmish,  keeping  at  the  extreme  range
of  their  muskets,  and  hold  their  ground  without  ad-
vancing, till  their  ammunition  is  exhausted,  when
they  retire  for  more.  The  skirmishers  are  never  re-
inforced from  the  main  body,  and  ordinarily  the  day
passes  without  any  decisive  result.  Sometimes,  how-
ever, when  the  skirmishers  of  one  army  retire  to
replenish  their  ammunition,  the  opposing  army  ad-
vances, in  which  case  the  other  endeavours  to  draw
it  into  an  ambuscade,  which  manoeuvre,  if  successful,
is  supposed  to  be  decisive.  There  is  no  general  plan
of  action ;  each  contingent  acts  more  or  less  indepen-
dently, and  the  nominal  commander  of  the  army  rarely
knows  how  many  men  he  has  under  his  command.


CHAPTEE  XI.


laws  and  customs.

(1)  Laws  relating  to  Kinship  and  Inheritance.

We  find  a  great  change  from  the  customs  of  tlie
other  tribal  groups  of  this  family  of  nations,  in  the
Yoruba  manner  of  tracing  descent  and  blood-rela-
tionship ;  descent  and  consanguinity  being  no  longer
reckoned  exclusively  in  the  female  line,  with  succes-
sion to  chiefdom,  office,  and  property  from  brother  to
brother,  and  then  to  sister's  son ;  but  in  the  male  line,
as  far  as  succession  to  dignities  is  concerned,  and  on
both  sides  of  the  house  for  blood-descent.  The
Yoruba  family — using  the  word  family  as  meaning  a
group  of  persons  who  are  united  by  ties  of  blood — is
thus  quite  a  different  organisation  to  that  which  we
found  existing  among  the  Tshi  and  Ewe  tribes,  where
a  family  consists  solely  of  persons  who  are  connected
by  uterine  ties,  and  in  which,  as  two  persons  of  the
same  blood  may  not  marry,  the  father  is  never  related
by  blood  to  his  children,  and  is  not  considered  as  be-
longing to  the  family.  In  the  Tshi  and  Ewe  tribes
the  clan-name  is  the  test  of  blood-relationship,  and  as
property  follows  the  laws  of  blood-descent,  it  ensues
that  property  never  goes  out  of  the  clan  ;  for,  with


LAWS  AND  CUSTOMS.


176


descent  in  tlie  female  line,  a  family  is  only  a  small
circle  of  persons,  all  of  wliom  bear  tlie  same  clan-
name,  within  the  larger  circle  of  the  clan  itself.

Among  the  Yoruba  tribes  the  blood-tie  between
father  and  child  has  been  recognised,  and  the  result
of  this  recognition  has  been  the  inevitable  downfall
of  the  clan-system,  which  is  only  possible  so  long  as
descent  is  traced  solely  on  one  side  of  the  house,  as
may  be  readily  shown.    Since  two  persons  of  the
same  clan-name  may,  under  the  clan-system,  never
marry,  it  follows  that  husband  and  wife  must  be  of
different  clans.    Let  us  say  that  one  is  a  Dog  and  the
other  a  Leopard.     The  clan-name  is  extended  to  all
who  are  of  the  same  blood ;   therefore,  directly  the
blood-relationship  between  father  and  child  comes  to
be  acknowledged,  the  children  of  such  a  pair  as  we
have  supposed,  instead  of  being,  as  heretofore,  simply
Leopards,  would  be  Dog-Leopards,  and  would  belong  to
two  clans.     They  in  their  turn  might  marry  with
persons  similarly  belonging  to  two  clans,  say  Cat-
Snakes,  and  the  offsprings  of  these  unions  would
belong  to  four  clans.    The  clan-system  thus  becomes
altogether  unworkable,  because,  as  the  number  of
clans  is  limited  and  cannot  be  added  to,  if  the  clan
name  still  remained  the  test  of  blood-relationship  and
a  bar  to  marriage,  the  result  in  a  few  generations
would  be  that  no  marriages  would  be  possible.  Con-
sequently the  clan-name  ceases  to  be  the  test  of  con-
sanguinity, kinship  is  traced  in  some  other  way,  and
the  clan-system  disappears ;  or,  as  appears  to  have
been  occasionally  the  case,  descent  is  boldly  trans-
ferred into  the  male  line,  and  marriage  in  the  father's


176


TEE  YOBTJBA-SFEAKING  PEOPLES.


clan  is  prohibited,  tliafc  of  tlie  mother  being  ignored.
The  Yornbas  have  adopted  what  appears  to  have  been
the  usual  course,  and  blood-relationship  is  now  traced
both  on  the  father's  and  on  the  mother's  side,  as  far
as  it  can  be  remembered,  and  marriage  within  the
known  circle  of  consanguinity  is  forbidden.

Wlien  we  consider  the  extraordinary  vitality  the
system  of  descents  through  mothers  possesses,  so  long
as  it  is  undisturbed  by  foreign  influence,  it  seems
probable  that  the  acknowledgment  of  a  father's  blood-
relationship  to  his  children  was  brought  about  by  the
intercourse  of  the  northern  Yorubas  with  the  Moham-
medan tribes  of  the  interior.  That  the  Yorubas
formerly  had  the  system  of  female  descents  is  shown
by  an  ancient  proverb,  which  says,  "The  esuo  (gazelle),
claiming  relationship  with  the  elculu  (a  large  ante-
lope), says  his  mother  was  the  daughter  of  an  ehulu."
If  the  male  system  of  descents  had  been  in  vogue
when  this  proverb  was  invented,  the  esuo  would  have
been  made  to  say  that  his  father  was  the  son  of  an
elculu.  Moreover,  in  spite  of  the  legal  succession  from
father  to  sons,  children  by  different  mothers,  but  the
same  father,  are  by  many  natives  still  scarcely  con-
sidered true  blood-relations.

It  is  no  doubt  in  consequence  of  the  change  from
kinship  in  the  female  line  to  kinship  on  both  sides  of
the  house  that  the  family  has  become,  to  a  certain
extent,  disintegrated.  On  the  Gold  Coast,  where  the
uterine  family  is  the  only  one  known,  the  family  is
collectively  responsible  for  the  crimes  or  injuries  to
person  or  property  committed  by  any  of  its  mem-
bers, and  each  member  is  liable  for  a  proportion  of


LAWS  AND  CUSTOMS.


177


tlie  compensation  to  be  paid.  Similarly,  each  member
of  the  family  is  entitled  to  a  share  of  the  compensation
received  for  injury  to  the  person  or  property  of  one  of
the  members.  The  head  of  the  family  can,  if  the
necessity  should  arise,  pawn,  and  in  some  cases  sell,
a  junior  member ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  the  junior
members  have  a  right  to  be  fed  and  clothed  by  the
head  of  the  family.  Among  the  Yoruba  tribes  there
is  no  collective  responsibility  in  a  family,  except  that
parents  are  responsible  for  crimes  committed  by  their
children  ;  the  head  of  the  family  cannot  pawn  the
younger  members,  and  the  latter  cannot  claim,  as  a
matter  of  right,  to  be  supported  by  him.

When  a  man  dies  his  sons  divide  all  his  property
between  them.  The  daughters  have  no  inheritance
in  their  father's  house,  but  they  divide  between  them
the  property  of  their  mother,  for  here,  as  with  the
Tshi,  Ga,  and  Ewe  tribes,  the  property  of  a  wife  is
always  separate  and  distinct  from  that  of  her  hus-
band. If  a  man  have  no  sons  his  property  falls  to
his  brothers,  or,  if  he  have  no  brothers,  to  his  sisters.
From  these  laws  of  inheritance  there  is  no  departure,
and  a  man  cannot  disinherit  a  legal  heir.  A  man  can,
within  certain  limits,  give  away  projoerty  during  his
lifetime,  provided  it  is  purely  personal,  and  not  family
property ;  but  he  cannot  make  a  will,  or  any  arrange-
ment for  its  disposal  after  his  death.  Succession  to
property  entails  the  obligation  of  defraying  the  debts
of  the  deceased.

The  terms  used  to  express  relationship  are  very
indefinite,  and  can  be,  and  are,  used  not  only  to  rela-
tions, but  even  to  strangers,  as  terms  of  address.

N


178


TEE  YOBUBA-SPEAKim  FHOPLES.


Baba,  father,  is  used  not  only  to  tlie  actual  fatlier,
but  to  uncles  on  both  sides  of  the  house,  and  to  men
to  whom  it  is  desired  to  show  respect,  provided  that
they  are  of  an  age  which  would  admit  of  their  being
fathers  to  the  speaker.    lya,  mother,  is  also  used  to
women  of  the  generation  next  above  the  speaker,
when  it  is  desired  to  show  respect.    Ara  is  a  term
used  to  relations  of  the  same  age  as  the  speaker,  and
is  applied  to  brothers,  sisters,  and  male  and  female
cousins.    It  is  of  no  gender,  and  to  express  brother
and  male  cousin,  or  sister  and  female  cousin,  it  is
necessary  to  Q^dAolwuri,  man  or  male,  or,  ohiri,  woman,
or  female.     Usually  the  relative  age  of  the  speaker
to  the  person  addressed  is  expressed  by  the  word
eghon,  elder,  senior,  or  aburo,  younger.    Thus,  eghon
ara  olconri  would  mean   an  elder  brother  or  male
cousin,  properly,  an  elder  male  relative  of  the  same
generation  as  the  speaker.    Omo,  child,  which  also
has  no  gender,  and  requires  the  qualifying  words
olconri  or  ohiri  to  be  placed  after  it  when  exactitude  is
necessary,  is  used  to  relations  of  the  generation  next
below  the  speaker,  that  is  to  say,  to  sons,  daughters,
nephews,  nieces,  and  children  of  cousins.    It  is  also
used  as  a  term  of  address  to  domestic  slaves.  Grand-
father, laba-la  {haha-nla,  great-father)  is  used  to  grand-
fathers and  great-uncles,  and  iya-la  {iya-nla,  great-
mother)  to  mothers  and  great-aunts.    Grandchild  is
omO'Omo  (child-child),  or  omo-loju  (front-child).

The  foregoing  are  the  terms  commonly  used.  Of
course  it  is  quite  possible  to  construct  compound
terms  to  express  exactly  the  degree  of  relationship,
just  as  we  can,  if  required,  say,  "father's  sister,"  in-


LAWS  AND  GU8T0MS.  I79

Stead  of  "aunt,"  or  "father's  brotlier's  son,"  instead
of  "  cousin " ;  but  tlie  Yorubas  do  not  make  use  of
sucli  terms  any  more  than  we  do.  Tlius  "  aunt"  could
be  expressed  bj  ara-hiri  ti  haha,  or  ara-biri  ti  iya,
"relative  of  same  age,  female,  of  the  father,"  or

relative  of  same  age,  female,  of  the  mother,"  but
■iya  is  always  used  instead.

It  will  thus  be  seen  that  the  terms  used  to  express
relationships  are  applied  to  five  groups  or  classes

(1)  The  grade  of  the  speaker's  grand-parents.

(2)  The  grade  of  the  speaker's  parents.

(3)  The  grade  of  the  speaker.

(4)  The  grade  of  the  speaker's  children.

(5)  ^  The  grade  of  the  speaker's  grand-children.
This  system  is  what  the  late  Mr.  Morgan  termed

the  classificatory  system  of  relationships,  and,  on  the
assumption  that  the  terms  used  were  from  their  very
inception  devised  to  express  actual  degrees  of  blood-
relationship,  he  endeavoured  to  show  that  the  human
family  had  passed  through  regular  stages  of  peculiar
types  of  marriage.*     But  it  appears  certain  that
these  terms  were  originally  terms  of  address  to  persons
of  different  grades,  being  probably  designed  to  show
the  relative  positions  of  the  individuals  composing
the  group  or  community,  and  had  nothing  whatever
to  do  with   consanguinity.    As  the  Yorubas  trace
descent  on  both  sides  of   the   house,  they  might,
assuming  that  the  terms  did  imply  blood-relationship,
very  properly  use  the  term  for  a  male  of  the  genera-
tion next  above  the  speaker,  either  to  the  father's

*  "  The    Systems  of  Consangninity  aiul  Affinity  of  the  Human
Family  "  (Wasliington,  U.S.  of  America,  1871).

N  2


180  THE  YOBUBA-SPUAKING  PEOPLES.

brother   or   to  tlie   mother's   brother,  just  as  we
ourselves  say  "  uncle  "  ;  but  the  Tshi  and  Ga  tribes,
who  trace  descent  solely  through  the  mother,  equally
have  this  classificatory  system,  and  also  use  one  and
the  same  term  to  relations  on  the  father's  side  or  on
the  mother's.    That  is  to  say,  these  tribes  use  these
terms  indifferently  to  blood-relations  and  to  persons
who,  according  to  their  system  of  consangumity,
are  not  relations  at  all ;   and  the  conclusion  is  that
the  terms  of  the  classificatory  system  do  not  primarily
imply  consanguinity,  whatever  they  may  come  to
mean  afterwards.

The  lack  of  precision  in  the  terms  used  by  the
Yorubas  to  express  relationships  would  at  first  sight
seem  to  show  that  they,  and  other  races  who  follow
the  classificatory  system,  do  not  lay  much  stress  upon
blood-relationship,  the  more  especially  as  they  use
the  same  terms  both  to  consanguinei  and  to  persons
who  are  not  akin  ;  but  the  fact  appears  to  be  that  the
classificatory  system  is  at  first  always  combined  with
the  clan-system,  and  as  the  clan-name  is  the  test
of  consanguinity,  precision  in  terms  of  address  is  not
really  of  much  moment.  After  the  clan-system  breaks
down,  and  the  clan-name  ceases  to  be  the  test,  some
other  mode  of  denoting  blood-relationship  becomes
necessary ;  and  it  seems  probable  that  it  is  under  the
stress  of  these  new  circumstances  that  the  terms
formerly  applied  to  whole  grades  are  narrowed  in
their  application  to  the  household  circle,  and  new
descriptive  terms,  such  as  uncle,  nephew,  and  cousin,
are  invented  to  define  the  remoter  degrees  of  con-
sanguinity.   In  this  connection  we  may  note  that


LAWS  AND  CUSTOMS.


181


among  tlie  younger  generations  of  tlie  Yorubas  tlie
word  eghon,  which,  reallj  only  means  "  elder,"  is
rapidly  coming  into  use  as  a  term  of  address  to  the
father's  brother  and  the  mother's  brother,  and  so  is
acquiring  the  meaning  of  "  uncle " ;  but  the  old
people  still  cling  to  the  classificatory  term  haha.

Investigation  shows  that  the  Yoruba  terms  used
to  express  "  father  "  and  "  mother  "  have  no  reference
to  fatherhood  or  motherhood.  Bdba  now  means  lord,
master,  great  personage,  or  father.  It  appears  to
be  derived  from  a  root  having  the  meanings  of
violence,  strength,  and  power,  and  so,  in  the  classifi-
catory system,  might  well  be  applied  to  the  grade  of
men  who  would  be  the  hunters  and  warriors  of  the
community.  Oba,  king,  lord,  or  master,  is  from
the  same  root.  In  Ewe  we  found  that  the  word  fofo
(father)  meant  "  maintainer,"  a  designation  which
also  might  well  be  applied  to  the  men  who  defended
the  group  from  foes  and  provided  the  food.

lya  means  mistress,  lady,  or  mother,  or  any  vessel
used  to  contain  food,  such  as  as  an  earthen  pot,  basin,
or  calabash.  It  is  derived  from  a  root  meaning
primarily  to  feed,  whence  to  nourish,  cherish,  and
be  glad.  Ljci  would  thus  mean  "  the  feeder,"  and,
in  a  community,  would  equally  apply  to  young
women,  who  were  mothers  suckling  their  children,
and  to  those  who  were  not,  since  it  is  the  business
of  the  young  women  to  prepare  the  food.  Similarly
we  found  in  Ewe  that  da,  or  dada,  mother,  was
derived  from  da,  to  cook.  Ara  appears  to  mean
"one  of  the  same  kind,"  hence  "companion,  co-
habitant," &c.    Omo,  child,  is  literally  "  suckling,"


182  TSE  YOmBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.

and  comes  from  mo,  or  m?/.,  to  drink,  suck,  as  does
omo,  or  omu,  breast,  udder.

(2)  Maeeiage  Laws  and  Customs.

Wives  are  married  by  purcliase,  the  amount  paid
for  a  bride  varying  with  the  rank  of  the  father  and
also  with  that  of  the  husband,  for  a  man  of  wealth
and  position  is  expected  to  give  more  for  a  wife
than  one  lower  in  the  social  scale.  The  poorest
always  pay  a  small  sum  for  their  wives,  so  as  to
give  the  union  the  title  of  a  marriage,  and  distinguish
it  from  concubinage.  The  amount  paid  for  a  wife
is  regarded  as  a  compensation  to  her  parents  for
the  loss  of  her  services  in  the  household,  and  the
transaction  is  not  in  any  sense  the  purchase  of  a
chattel.

By  marriage  a  man  acquires  the  services  of  his
wife  in  domestic  affairs  and  an  exclusive  right  to
her  embraces.  That  is,  she  may  not  have  intercourse
with  other  men  without  his  knowledge  and  consent,
but  there  is  no  objection  to  his  waiving  his  right
in  favour  of  some  other  person,  and  men  sometimes
lend  their  wives  to  their  guests  or  friends,  though
more  frequently  their  concubines,  for  in  a  household
there  are  both  wives  and  concubines,  the  latter
usually  being  slaves.  Each  wife  has  her  own  house,
situated  in  the  "  compound "  of  the  husband,  and
her  own  slaves  and  dependants.  The  wife  first
married  is  the  head  wife,  and  is  charged  with  the
preservation  of  order  among  the  women.     She  is


LAWS  AND  CUSTOMS.


183


stjled  lyale  (lya  He),  "Mistress  of  tlie  house."
The  junior  wives  are  called  lyawo  (lya  owo),  "  Trade-
wives,"  or  "  Wives  of  commerce,"  probably  because
the  J  sell  in  the  markets.

Grirls   of  the   better   classes   are  almost  always
betrothed    when    mere    children,   frequently  when
infants,  the  husband  m  futuro  being  sometimes  a
grown  man  and  sometimes  a  boy.     Betrothal  con-
fers  upon  the   male   all  the   rights   of  marriage
except   consummation,   which   takes   place  shortly
after  the  girl  arrives  at  puberty.     Since  the  early
age  of  betrothal  makes  ante-betrothal  unchastity  a
physical  impossibility,  the  absence  of  the  primitise
when  the  marriage  is  consummated  proves  that  the
girl  has  been  unchaste  after  betrothal,  that  is,  after
the  husband  in  futuro  had  acquired  an  exclusive  right
to  her  person,  and  consequently  he  has  a  right  to
repudiate  her.    In  such  a  case  he  may  dismiss  her,
sending  a  few  broken  cowries  to  her  mother,  and  the
girl's  family  must  return  the  amount  paid  for  her,
and  the  value  of  all  presents  made ;  but  it  is  more
usual  to  effect  some  compromise.

In  this  custom  of  infant  or  child-betrothals  we
probably  find  the  key  to  that  curious  regard  for
ante-nuptial  chastity  found  not  only  among  the
tribes  of  the  G-old  and  Slave  Coasts,  but  also
among  many  other  uncivilised  peoples  in  different
parts  of  the  world ;  and  which  certainly  cannot  be
attributed  to  any  feeling  of  delicacy,  since  husbands
lend  their  wives  without  the  least  compunction,  and
often  merely  as  a  sign  of  friendliness.  In  "West
Africa  virginity  in  a  bride  is  not  valued  j?er  se,  but


184  THE  YOBUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.

because  it  is  a  proof  that  the  betrothed  has  not  in-
fringed the  exclusive  marital  i^rivileges  of  the  husband
in  futuro ;  and  non- virginity  in  a  bride  is  only  a
valid  ground  for  repudiation  when  the  girl  has  been
betrothed  at  a  tender  age,  for  unbetrothed  girls  can
bestow  their  favours  upon  whom  they  please.  Thus,
no  man  who  marries  a  girl  without  early  betrothal
feels  aggrieved  if  she  should  prove  not  to  be  a  virgin,
for  until  she  is  married  or  betrothed  she  is  perfectly
free,  and  mistress  of  her  own  actions.

G-irls  of  the  lower  classes,  who  are  seldom  betrothed,
can  lead  any  life  they  choose  without  incurring  re-
proach, and  without  affecting  their  future  prospects
of  marriage  ;  but  girls  of  the  upper  classes,  who  are
almost  always  betrothed,  must  be  chaste.    If,  then,
the  great  majority  of  girls  were  betrothed  in  child-
hood, it  may  readily  be  conceived  that  a  notion  might
be  formed  that  a  bride  ought  to  be  a  virgin,  and  be
made   of  general  application  quite  independent  of
betrothals.    At  present,  the  feeling  of  annoyance,
which  a  Yoruba  bridegroom  experiences  when  he  finds
that  his  bride  has  been  unchaste,  is  not  due  to  jealousy
or  sentiment,  but  to  a  sense  of  injury,  because  his
rights  acquired  by  betrothal  have  been  trespassed
upon;  but  no  doubt,  in  course  of  time,  the  sentimental
grievance  would  be  produced.    Whether  this  feeling
ever  extends  to  the  lowest  classes  is  uncertain,  but  at
all  events  it  has  scarcely  yet  done  so  in  Europe.

A  great  deal  of  evidence  might  be  adduced  to  show
that  the  custom  of  child-betrothal  leads  to  virginity
being  expected  in  a  bride,  and  its  absence  being
reo-arded  as  a  just  ground  for  repudiation.    In  New


LAWS  AND  CUSTOMS.


185


Zealand,  girls  were  occasionally  betrothed  in  infancy,
and  in  that  case  had  to  be  chaste  ;  but  girls  not
betrothed  in  childhood  were  allowed,  on  growing  up,
to  bestow  their  favours  on  whom  they  pleased.*  In
Fiji  and  Samoa  it  appears  that  only  the  daughters  of
chiefs  were  expected  to  be  virgins  when  married,  and
it  was  only  the  daughters  of  chiefs  who  were  be-
trothed early  in  life.f  The  Mosquito  Indians  betroth
children,  and  if,  when  the  marriage  takes  place,  the
girl  is  not  a  virgin,  the  match  is  broken  off.  Similar
evidence  is  forthcoming  in  regard  to  the  Bagas,  Fulas,
Timnis,  and  Fans,  in  Africa,  the  Kirghese  and  Ouz-
beks,  in  Asia,  and  many  others.

Parents  cannot  force  a  daughter  to  marry  a  suitor
who  is  distasteful  to  her,  but  they  can  prevent  a  girl
from  marrying  a  man  of  whom  they  do  not  approve,
and  if  she  should  misbehave  with  him  they  can  shut
her  up  and  chastise  her.  If,  however,  she  runs  off
with  him,  they  usually  take  no  further  trouble.  Most
girls  have  lovers  in  secret.

Children  are  usually  suckled  for  three  years,  and
during  the  period  of  lactation  the  wife  must  not
cohabit  with  her  husband.

When  a  man  dies  his  wives  and  concubines  are
divided  among  his  sons,  whose  wives  and  concubines
they  then  become ;  but  no  son  is  allowed  to  take  his
own  mother.  Formerly  the  Levirate  was  in  force,
and  when  an  elder  brother  died  the  brother  next  in

*  Surgeon-Major  Thompson,  "  Story  of  Now  Zealand,"  pp.  17C,
177.

t  Wilkes,  "  U.S.  Exploring  Expedition,"  pp.  92  and  210.


186


THE  YOBUBA-SrEAKING  PEOPLES.


order  of  age  married  the  iyale,  or  head  wife,  and  so
in  succession  from  brother  to  brother.  There  was  no
obligation  to  marrj  the  subordinate  wives  of  a  de-
ceased elder  brother,  and  they  usually  devolved  upon
the  legal  heirs.  If  the  deceased  were  childless,  the
son  first  born  of  the  new  union  of  the  younger  brother
with  the  widow  was  named  after  the  deceased,  and
was  considered  to  fill  the  place  of  the  son ;  he  did
not,  however,  as  among  the  Jews,  succeed  to  the  pro-
perty to  the  exclusion  of  the  Levir — his  inheritance
Jay  solely  in  the  house  of  his  actual  father.  At  the
present  time  a  widow -iyale  is  not  obliged  to  marry
her  deceased  husband's  brother,  but  she  does  not,  on
the  other  hand,  become  the  wife  of  one  of  the  hus-
band's sons,  as  do  the  subordinate  wives.  She  usually
goes  to  live  with  the  relatives  of  her  late  husband ;
and,  should  she  contract  a  second  marriage  with  some
man  other  than  her  brother-in-law,  the  second  hus-
band has  to  repay  to  the  relatives  of  the  first  the
amount  that  the  latter  paid  for  his  wife.

Adultery  can  only  be  committed  with  a  married
woman.  Adultery  in  a  wife  is  punishable  by  death
or  divorce,  but  as  a  rule  the  injured  husband  beats
his  erring  wife,  and  recovers  damages  (oji)  from  the
adulterer.  In  extreme  cases,  where  the  husband  is
a  man  of  rank,  and  discovers  the  couple  in  the  fact,
they  are  sometimes  both  put  to  death.

If  a  husband  should  divorce  his  wife  for  adultery
he  can  claim  the  restitution  of  the  money  he  paid  for
her,  but  not  if  he  sends  her  away  for  any  other  cause.
"When  a  wife  is  divorced  or  put  away,  no  mailer  for
what  cause,  the  husband  retains  any  children  she


LAWS  AND  CUSTOMS.  187


may  liave  borne  him  ;  but  if  a  cliild  be  too  young  to
leave  the  mother,  it  does  not  come  to  the  father  till
ten  or  twelve  years  of  age.  We  see  here  a  great
change  from  the  customs  of  the  Tshi  tribes,  among
whom,  under  every  circumstance  of  divorce  or  sepa-
ration, the  mother  retains  her  children,  though  she
is  liable  to  her  husband  for  a  certain  sum  to  compen-
sate him  for  what  he  has  paid  for  their  maintenance.
There,  children  belonged  exclusively  to  the  mother,
but  here  they  belong  to  the  father,  and  the  innova-
tion is  undoubtedly  due  to  the  alteration  in  the
system  of  descents.

When  a  husband  systematically  neglects  his  wife
and  refuses  to  perform  his  marital  duties,  she  can  call
upon  her  family  to  assemble  and  hold  a  palaver;
when,  if  the  husband  promises  to  amend  his  ways,  he
IS  given  an  opportunity  of  retrieving  his  character.
If,  after  all,  there  is  no  improvement,  or  if  he  refuses
to  treat  his  wife  properly,  she  is  then  at  liberty  to
leave  him,  and  sometimes,  if  he  be  of  inferior  rank,
the  indignant  family  tie  him  up  and  flog  him.

The  daughters  of  kings  or  chiefs  can  live  with  or
marry  whom  they  please,  and  change  their  partners
as  often  as  they  please.  Women  of  the  royal  blood
of  Ashanti  and  Dahomi  have  or  had  the  same  liberty,
which  is  perhaps  a  survival  from  a  former  sexual
freedom  once  enjoyed  by  all  women,  dating,  if
McLennan' s  theory  be  correct,  from  the  time  when
the  position  and  influence  of  women  was  enhanced  by
the  scarcity  of  the  individual,  but  now  only  lingering
in  the  case  of  women  in  the  highest  rank,  who  would
be  just  those  most  likely  to  retain  the  privilege  longest.


188  TEI]  YOBUBA-SFEAKING  PEOPLES.


Marriage  is  forbidden  in  tlie  same  blood ;  and,  as
descent  is  traced  on  botli  sides  of  tlie  liouse,  it  is  con-
sequently forbidden  both  in  the  father's  and  mother's
families,  as  far  as  relationship  can  be  traced.  This,
however,  is  not  far,  as  there  is  no  longer  the  clan-
name,  which,  as  long  as  descent  was  traced  on  only
one  side  of  the  house,  remained  the  test  of  kinship  to
perpetuity,  and  a  people  who  do  not  write  have  no
means  of  recordmg  genealogies.  As  a  rule  relation-
ship does  not  seem  to  be  traced  further  than  second-
-  cousins,  and  the  prohibitive  degrees  of  marriage  are
for  a  man,  mother,  aunt,  sister,  daughter,  niece,
cousin,  and  second-cousin.  In  consequence  of  descent
being  traced  on  both  sides,  half-brother  cannot  marry
half-sister ;  but  on  the  Grold  Coast  such  marriages  are
permitted,  provided  the  pair  have  not  the  same  mother.
Eelationship  by  affinity  has  not  yet  been  invented,
and  a  man  may  marry  two  or  more  sisters,  aunt,  and
niece,  and  even  mother  and  daughter,  but  the  last
unions  do  not  often  occur.


(3)  Land  Laws.

Land  belongs  to  the  community  collectively,  and  is
vested  in  the  chief,  who  distributes  it  amongst
households  and  families  as  required.  No  man  can
be  dispossessed  of  land  once  allotted  to  him,  and  the
usufruct  descends  to  his  children,  but  the  land  cannot
be  sold.  The  land  being  more  than  sufficient  for  all
requirements,  this  communal  system  presents  no
difficulties,  as  practically  everybody  can  have  as  much


LAWS  AND  CUSTOMS.


189


as  lie  wishes  to  cultivate.  Wlien  laud  goes  out  of
cultivation,  and  is  allowed  to  be  overgrown  with  bush
or  forest,  it  reverts  to  the  community.

On  the  Gold  Coast  private  property  in  land  is  not
recognised,  and  the  sale  or  purchase  of  land  is  un-
known, except  when  Europeans  or  Anglicised  natives
desire  to  acquire  landed  property,  in  which  case
the  consent  of  the  community  as  a  whole  to  the
transaction  has  to  be  obtained.  Among  the  Yoruba
tribes,  however,  the  notion  that  land,  and  not  merely
its  usufruct,  may  be  the  property  of  the  individual,
instead  of  the  community,  is  beginning  to  appear,
for  a  chief  can  sell  or  give  away  land.  No  one  but  a
chief  can  sell  land ;  it  is  one  of  the  prerogatives  of
chieftainship  ;  but  the  land  sold  or  given  away  must
be  unoccupied  waste-land,  the  usufruct  of  which  has
not  been  yielded  to  any  member  of  the  community.

When,  under  this  custom,  land  is  given,  the  owner-
ship is  not  complete,  for  though  the  individual  or
family  which  receives  it  can  retain  it  and  use  it  for
ever,  it  cannot  be  disposed  of  to  any  third  party.
Land  acquired  by  purchase  becomes  the  absolute
property  of  the  purchaser.  The  purchase  of  land
does  not,  however,  carry  with  it  the  ownership  of
anything  on  the  land,  such  as  trees,  crops,  or  houses,
which  still  remain  the  property  of  the  vendor,  unless
sold  separately.  Houses  can  ouly  be  sold  by  per-
mission of  the  king  or  chief,  and,  as  they  are  family
property,  the  consent  of  the  whole  family  has  to  be
obtained  to  the  transaction.


190  TEE  YOBUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


(4)  Laws  of  Debt.

A  man  can  be  imprisoned  for  debt,  and  in  every
town  of  importance  there  is  a  debtor's  prison  {Ile-
emu,  bouse  of  seizure),  in  wbicb  tbe  Bale  confines
a  debtor  till  tbe  debt  is  discharged .  There  is  also  a
custom  similar  to  our  putting  a  man  in  possession,
a  bailiff's  ofiicer,  called  ogo,  being  placed  in  the
debtor's  house  to  enforce  payment.

A  man  who  causes  the  ordinary  funeral-rites  to  be
performed  over  another,  thereby  becomes  responsible
for  all  the  debts  of  the  deceased,  unless  he  first
obtains  permission  from  the  creditors.  The  creditors
nearly  always  consent  upon  the  relations  becoming
collectively  responsible  for  the  discharge  of  the  debt;
but  if  they  refuse  permission,  and  no  one  is  willing
to  accept  the  responsibility,  the  corpse  is  placed  on  a
raised  platform  of  wattles  outside  the  town,  and
remains  there  till  the  debt  is  paid.  This  seldom
occurs,  except  in  the  case  of  a  stranger,  as  the
omission  to  bury  reflects  the  greatest  disgrace  upon
the  family  concerned.

A  man  is  responsible  for  any  debts  his  wives  may
contract,  but  not  for  those  contracted  by  his  children.

(5)  Criminal  Laws.

When  there  is  not  sufficient  evidence  to  establish
the  guilt  of  an  accused,  he  has  to  prove  his  innocence  by
"  drinking  orisha,"  that  is,  he  is  subjected  to  an  ordeal,


LAWS  AND  CUSTOMS.


191


or,  in  other  words,  liuman  means  Having  failed,  the  bur-
den of  a  decision  is  thrown  upon  the  gods.  The  draught,
which  is  nearly  always  a  decoction  of  odtim-hark,  is
prepared  by  a  priest,  who  thus  has  it  in  his  power  to
make  it  harmless  or  effective.  It  is  a  powerful  poison,
and  if  not  at  once  rejected  by  the  stomach,  as  often
happens,  causes  death,  in  which  case  the  orisha  is
considered  to  have  declared  his  guilt  by  slaying  him.
A  guilty  man  does  not  dare  to  "  drink  orisha;'  but
the  innocent  will  submit  to  the  ordeal  without  fear,
and,  indeed,  frequently  demand  it  in  order  to  prove
their  innocence,  whence  it  follows  that  it  is  the
guiltless  who  ordinarily  perish.

As  a  rule,  murder,  arson,  and  treason  are  punished
with  death.  A  first  offence  of  theft  is  punished  by
flogging  and  a  fine,  a  second  by  mutilation,  and  a
third  by  death.  When,  however,  cattle  or  sheep -
steahng,  becomes  prevalent,  a  detected  thief  is  put  to
death,  as  a  warning  to  others.  In  such  a  case,  the
criminal,  instead  of  being  executed  by  the  Ogboni  in
secret,  is  decapitated  on  Ogun's  stool,  by  the  sword-
bearers  of  the  chiefs,  in  some  public  place.  Criminals
who  cannot  pay  their  fines  are  flogged  with  the
Jc^ashan,  a  formidable  whip  made  of  hippopotamus-
hide,  which  draws  blood  at  each  stroke.

The  relatives  of  a  person  who  has  been  executed
for  crime  are  not  entitled  to  bury  him  without  paying
ransom  for  the  body,  which,  as  in  the  case  of  a  man
dying  in  debt,  is  placed  on  a  platform  of  sticks
outside  the  town,  until  the  ransom  is  paid.


CHAPTER  XII.


LANGUAGE.


(1)  Verhs.

(1)  In  Yoruba,  as  in  Tshi,  Ga,  and  Ewe,  all  simple
roots  are  monosyllabic  verbs,  consisting  of  a  consonant
followed  by  a  vowel.  These,  wliicli  are  tlie  primitive
verbs,  we  will  call  verbs  of  Class  I.    Examples  :—

Ba,  to  meet.  Je,  to  eat.  Wa,  to  come.

Bi,  to  beget.  Mo,  to  drink.         Mi,  to  breathe.

Da,  to  make.         Lo,  to  go.  Wo,  to  see.

(2)  Verbs  of  Class  II.  are  formed  from  Class  I.,
by  adding  a  liquid  n.

Yan,  to  gape,  yawn  ;  from  ya,  to  open,  part.

(3)  Verbs  of  Class  III.  are  formed  by  using  to-
getlier  two  verbs  of  Class  I.,  wliicli  are,  however,
separated  by  the  objective  noun.  They  are  what  we
styled,  in  Ewe,  "Separable  Compound  Verbs."
Examples : —

Ba-ja,  to  fight  with  ;  from  ha,  to  meet,  and  ja,  to  fight.
Ba-ro,  to  advise  ;  »   ba,  to  meet,  and  ro,  to  consider.

Di-mo,  to  enclose  ;  „   di,  to  shut,  and  mo,  to  stop.

Gba-la,  to  rescue  ;  „   gba,  to  take,  and  la,  to  save.

Du-ro,  to  desist,  cease  ;       „   du,  to  strive,  and  ro,  to  ease.


LANGUAGE.  593

(4)  Verbs  of  Class  IV.  are  formed  by  joining  a
verb  of  Class  I.  and  a  noun,  as  : —

Bila,  to  give  wny,  give  place  ;  from  ii,  to  sliove,  and  ila,  opening
Laja,  to  reconcile  ;  „    /a,  to  save,  and  ija,  strife

Kpeja,  to  fish ;  „    kpe,  to  kill,  and  eja,  fish.

Da-meji,  to  divide ;  „    da,  to  make,  and  meji,  two.

(5)  Further  compound  verbs  are  made  by  using
verbs  of  Classes  II.  and  III.  witli  verbs  of  Class  I.,
as : —  '

(a)  Da  cluro,  to  prevent ;    from  da,  to  make,  and  duro,  to  cease.
Da  hoja,  to  neglect;       „    da,  to  make,  and  koja,  to  omit.
Kpe  kpada,  to  recall ;      „    kpe,  to  call,  and  kpada,  to  come

back.

(b)  Te  balle,  to  bend  down  ;  „    te,  to  bend,  and  balk,  to  touch  the

ground.

Ba  wijo,  to  judge  „    ba,  to  meet,  and  wijo,  to  complain.

(6)  Verbs  of  another  class,  and  wliicli  may  be
called  "verbs  of  possession,"  are  formed  by  placing
the  verb  ni,  to  have,  before  a  noun.  Before  the
vowels  a,  e,  0,  and  u,  ni  is  changed  euphonically  to  li,
ovV.    Thus: —

Ni-dagiri,  to  be  alarmed  ;  from  ni,  and  idagiri,  alarm.
Ni-beru,  to  fear  ■  and  z5mi,  fear.

Ni-kpekun,  to  terminate  ;•  •  „        and  ikpekwi,  end.

Laba  {ni-aba),  to  be  hopeful  ;  „    ni,  and  aba,  hope.

Laga  {ni-aga),  to  be  weary  ;  „  ni,  and  aga,  weariness.

LeU  (ni-ebi),  to  be  hungry  ;  „  ni,  and  ebi,  hunger.

Lete  (ni-ete),  to  intend ;  „  ni,  and  ete,  intention.

Lotvo  (ni-oivo),  to  be  rich  ;  „  ni,  and  0100,  wealth,

iov/^n  (K/.o?/Mra),  to  be  pregnant  ;  „  ni,  and  oyun,  pregnancy.

Conjugation  of  Verhs.

The  Infinitive  is  expressed  by  the  verb  in  its  simple
form,  as : —

Fe,  to  love.
0


194


THE  TORUBA-SP BAKING  PEOPLES.


Indicative  Mood.
The  ordinary  rules   for   forming  tenses  in  tlie
Indicative  appear  to  be  : —

(1)  Present  Indefinite,  or  Past  Indefinite  ;  the  verb

in  its  simple  form.

(2)  Future;  by  the  prefix  ijio,  which  is  commonly

abbreviated  to  o.

(3)  Perfect,  Pluperfect,  and  Second  Future;  by
placing  ti  before  the  verb.  Ti  is  probably  a  contrac-
tion of  tan,  to  be  at  an  end,  be  done.

Present  Indefinite,  or  Past  Indefinite.

Emi  fe,  I  love,  or  loved.  Awa  fe,  We  love,  or  loved.

Iwo  fe,  Thou  lovest,  or  lovedst.     Enyinfe,  You  love,  or  loved.
On  fe,  He  loves,  or  loved.  Awon  fe.  They  love,  or  loved.

Future.

Emi  ofe,  I  shall  love.  Awa  ofe,  We  shall  love.

Iivo  ofe,  Thou  shalt  love.  Emjin  ofe,  You  shall  love.

On  ofe.  He  shall  love.  Awon  ofe,  They  shall  love.

Perfect,  or  Pluperfect.
Emi  ti  fe,  I  have,  or  had,  loved.    Awa  tife.  We  have,  or  had,  loved.
Iioo  ti  fe,  Thou  hast,  or  hadst,    Enyin  ti  fe.  You  have,  or  had,
loved.

On  tife,  He  has,  or  had,  loved.     Awon  ti  fe,  They  have,  or  had

loved.


Second  Future.

Emi  otife,  I  shall  have  loved.       Azva  oti  fe,  We  shall  have  loved,
Iwo  otife,  Thou  shalt  have  loved.     Enyin  otife,  You  shall  have  loved.
On  otife,  He  shall  have  loved.      Aivoii  oti  fe.  They  shall  have  loved.

Each  of  these  tenses  can  be  made  more  definite  by
prefixing  n  to  the  verb.    This  prefix  is  no  doubt  the


LANGUAGE.  I95
verb  ni,  to  be.  It  conveys  an  allusion  to  tiie  present
Thus  ^~  ''''  ^""^  completed.

Present.

I  am  loring.  1  •

&c.  &c  ^


&c.  &c.

Future.


n  ofe,  I  shall  be  loving.  Awa  n  ofe,  We  stall  be  loving

Perfect,  or  Pluperfect.
Emi  ti  nfe,  I  have,  or  had,  been    Awa  ti  nfe,  We  have,  or  had,  been

loving.

iTivpemtive  Mood.
_  The  Imperative  Mood  is  formed  by  using  the  verb
jeJa  with  the  verb.    JeJd  appears  to  be  a  compound
verb,  havmg  the  meaning  "to  permit,  let,"  and  to  be
compounded  of  je,  to  be  willing,  and  Jd,  to  fulfil,
ihe  Imperative  Mood  is  thus  really  expressed  by  a
compound  verb  of  Class  Y.,  and  the  objective  noun
or  pronoun,  is,  according  to  the  rule  which  governs
compound  verbs,  placed  between  the  two  verbs
i  hus  : —

Jeki  emife,  Let  me  love.       JeM  awa  fe,  Let  us  love.
Jekt  0  fe,  Let  him  love.         Jeki  awon  fe,  Let  them  love.

In  the  second  person  the  verb  je  is  not  used,  as  :—

Ki  iwofe,  Love  thou.  Ki  enyin  fe,  Love  ye.

This  is  sufficiently  comprehensible  when  we  con-
sider the  meaning  of  jeld.    Je,  conveying  the  meaning

0  2


196


THE  Y011UBA-8PEAKING  PEOPLES.


of  permission,  is  not  liere  required,  and  ki,  conveying
the  sense  of  fulfilling,  remains.  In  the  same  way  the
"  let "  of  the  English  Imperative  disappears  in  the

second  person.

It  should  be  mentioned  that  the  letter  o  is  frequently
prefixed  to  the  verb  in  the  Imperative,  and  is  no  doubt
the  sign  of  the  Future.

Subjunctive  Mood.

The  Subjunctive  Mood  is  expressed  by  means  of  a
verb  meaning  to  be  able,  can,  may,  which,  with  the
verb  proper,  forms  a  compound  verb  of  Class  III.

Present.

Emi  lefe,  I  may  love.  A:wa  lefe,  We  may  love.

Iwo  lefe,  Thou  mayest  love.  Enyin  lefe.  You  may  love.

On  lefe.  He  may  love.  Awon  lefe,  They  may  love.

Past.

Emi  le  life,  I  may  have  loved.      Aiva  le  ti  fe,  We  may  have  loved.
&c.  &c.  &c.  &c.

In  the  Ewe  language  we  found  this  plan  much
further  elaborated.  Consecutive,  Iterative,  Intentative,
and  Continuative  Moods  being  formed  by  using  with
the  verb  verbs  conveying  the  notion  of  action  in  the
immediate  future,  repeated  action,  intended  action,
and  continued  action  respectively.*

Passive  Voice.

There  are  no  passive  verbs  in  Yoruba,  but  there  is
a  mode  of  expressing  the  idea  conveyed  by  a  passive

*  "  The  E^Ve-Speaking  Peoples  of  the  Slave  Coast,"  p.  235.


LANGUAGE.


197


verb,  viz.  :  bj  prefixing  a  to  the  active  verb  and
placing  the  pronoun  after  the  verb.  A  appears  to
be  a  contraction  of  the  personal  pronoun  awon,  they,
here  used  in  the  sense  of  "one,"  "some  one"
Thus:-

Afe,  to  be  loved.

Indicative  Mood.
Present  Tense.
Afe  'mi,  I  am  loved  (lit.  one  loves  me).    Afe  'wa,  We  are  loved.
Afe  'wo,  Thou  art  loved.  Afe  'nyin,  You  are  loved.

Afe  0,  He  is  loved.  Afe  ^won,  They  are  loved.

Fdture.

A  ofe  mi,  I  shall  be  loved  (one    A  ofe  'wa.  We  shall  be  loved,
will  love  me).

Perfect,  or  Pluperfect.
AH  fe  'mi,  I  have,  or  had,  been    Ati  fe  'wa.  We  have,  or  had,  been
^^^^'J-  loved.

Se  coND  Future.

^otife  'mi,  I  shall  have  been    A  oti  fe  'wa.  We  shall  have  been

loved.

Imperative  Mood.

Jeki  afe  'mi,  Let  me  be  loved.


Subjunctive  Mood.
Present.

Ahfe  'mi,  I  may  be  loved.  Alefe  'tea,  We  may  be  loved.


198


IHE  YOnUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


Past.


Ale  ti  fe  'mi,  I  may  have  been
loved.


Ale  ti  fe  'wa,  Wc  may  have  been
loved.


Negative  Voice.

As  in  Tslii,  Ga,  and  Ewe,  verbs  are  also  conjugated
negatively.  In  Yoruba  tliis  is  effected  by  placing
the  negative  particle  ai  before  the  verb.    Thus  : —

Fe,  to  love.  Aife,  not  to  love.

Ai  is  compounded  of  a,  not,  and  the  substantive
formative  prefix  i,  signifying  a  state  of  being.

The  negative  particle  of  a  verb  of  possession  is  lai,
which  is  simply  ai,  with  the  verb  m,  to  be,  euphoni-
cally  changed  to  I,  placed  before  it.    Example  : —

Lowo  (ni-owo),  to  be  rich,  have  wealth.

Lai-lowo,  not  to  be  rich  (literally,  "  not  to  be  to  have  wealth  ").

Many  verbs  denote  a  quality,  as  : —

Le,  to  be  hard,  or  strong.
Du,  to  be  black.
Mo,  to  be  clean.

Articles.

The  indefinite  article  is  expressed  by  ohan  (one)
being  placed  after  the  noun.  It  is  almost  invariably
abbreviated  to  Jean.

The  definite  article  is  expressed  by  the  demonstra-
tive pronoun  na  (that),  which  is  placed  after  the
noun.    Thus : —

Olconri  kan,  a  man  ;  literally,  "  one  man."
Olconri  na,  the  man  ;  literally,  "  that  man."


LANGUAGE.


199


Tronouns.
(1)  Personal  pronouns.

When  used  in  conjunction  witli  a  verb,  tlie  personal
pronouns  are : —

Emi,  mo,  or  ncj,  I.  Aioa,  We.

Iioo,  or  0,  Thou.  Enyin,  You.

On,  or  no.  He,  she,  or  it.    Aioon,  or  nwon,  They.

-Mo,  I,  cannot  be  used  with  the  future  tenses.  Kg
is  more  commonly  used  in  the  future  than  emi,  and  is
often  used  whenever  the  n,  signifying  action  not  jet
completed,  is  prefixed  to  the  verb.  The  independent
forms  of  the  personal  pronouns  are  the  same  as  those
given  first  above.  The  personal  pronouns  are  made
possessive  bj  placing  ii  before  them.  Ti  is  an
obsolete  verb,  now  only  used  in  the  sense  of  "  of  "  or
"  belonging  to."    Thus  :—

Ti  emi,  or  t'emi,  Mine.       Ti  awa,  or  t'awa,  Ours.
Ti  iwo,  or  tHwo,  Thine.      Ti  enyin,  or  t'enyin,  Yours.
Ti  on,  or  t'on,  His.  Ti  awon,  or  ti'ivon,  Theirs.

The  objective  personal  pronouns  are  : —
Mi,  Me.  T^a,  Us.

Wo,  or  0,  Thee.  Nyiji,  You.

A,  e,  i,  0,  or  u,  Him,  her,  it.    Wo7i,  Them.

As  will  be  seen,  they  are,  with  the  exception  of  the
third  person  singular,  the  nominative  personal  pro-
nouns with  the  initial  vowel  omitted.  The  particular
form  to  be  used  to  express  him,  her,  or  it,  is  deter-
mmed  by  the  vowel-sound  of  the  verb,  a  being  used
with  a  verb  in  which  the  sound  of  a  occurs,  and
so  on.    Thus: —

a  would  be  used  with  the  verb  ba,  or  with  kan.


^        "         J)         »  gc-

^         "  ))  SI,  or  with  rin.


200


THE  YORUBA-SFEAKING  PEOPLES.


The  personal  pronouns  are  made  reflexive  by
adding  ti-kara  {ti,  of,  or  belonging  to;  ara,  body,
form)  : —

Tikara  'vii,  Myself.  Tikara  'wa,  Ourselves.

By  placing  na  (the  same  that)  after  a  personal
pronoun  the  particularising  power  is  increased.  It
denotes  the  exclusion  of  any  other  person,  and  answers
to  "myself,"  "himself,"  &c. : —

Emi  na,  I  myself.  Aioa  na,  We  ourselves.

(2)  Relative  pronouns.

There  is  only  one,  viz.:  ti,  which  means  who,
whom,  which,  that.

In  the  nominative  case  the  personal  pronoun  to
which  it  relates  is  always  placed  after  it,  as
lya  ti  ofe  'mi,  "  the  mother  who  loves  me,"  literally,
"the  mother  who  she  loves  me."  In  the  objective
case  the  relative  pronoun  is  governed  by  the  verb,  and
the  personal  pronoun  is  not  required.  Thus  Iija  ti
emife,  "the  mother  whom  I  love."

(3)  Demonstrative  pronouns.
These  are : —

Eyiyi,  eyi,  or  yi,  This.  Wonyi,  These.

Eyini,  eni,  ni,  or  na.  That.  Wonni,  Those.

Eyiyi,  eyi,  or  yi,  seems  to  mean  literally  "  the  thing
taken,"  and  Eyini  to  be  composed  of  eyi,  and  eni,
one.    Won,  is  an  abbreviation  of  awon,  they.

The  adverbial  demonstrative  pronouns  of  time,
place,  and  manner  are  expressed  by  :  —

Nighana,  then,  at  that  time  {ni,  to  be  ;  igha,  time;  na,  that).
Niliin-yl,  here,  in  this  place  (niha,  locality,  place  ;  eyi,  this).


LANGUAGE.


2(11


Nibe-na,  there,  in  that  place  {nibe,  in  or  at  a  place;  na,  that).
Bat,  thus,  in  this  manner  (is  perhaps  a  contraction  of  ba-eyi,  to  meet
this).

(4)  Interrogative  pronouns.

Tani,  Who.
Eivo,  Which.

The  possessive  cases  are  made  by  prefixing  ti,
"  belonging  to  "  : —

Ti-tani,  Ti-ewo.


Nouns.

Nouns  are  formed  in  the  following  ways  :

(1)  From  the  verb,  with  the  prefix  i.  This  prefix
seems  to  convey  the  notion  of  things  regarded  collec-
tively, or  in  the  abstract.

Ife,  love,  willingness,  from  fe,  to  love.

I(ja,  height,  loftiness,  „   ga,  to  he  high,  or  tall.

Iha,  computation,  reckoning,  „   ka,  to  count.

Iri,  a  seeing,  sight,  „   ri,  to  see.

Ilo,  the  act  of  going,  „    lo,  to  go.

Ita,  pain,  smart,  „    ta,  to  sting.

Idu,  blackness,  „   du,  to  be  black.

/se,  cookery,  „   se,  to  prepare  food.

Ikpamo,  the  act  of  hiding,  „   kpamo,  to  hide.

Ikimre,  erasure,  „  .kpare,  to  rub  out.

(2)  From  the  verb,  with  the  prefix  a.  This  prefix
seems  to  limit  the  abstract  notion  of  the  verb  and
make  it  more  concrete.  Properly  speaking,  it  seems
to  carry  with  it  a  suggestion  of  passiveness,  or  of
individuality  of  things  rather  than  of  beings,  but
nouns  expressing  personality  are  nevertheless  some-


202


THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


times  formed  with  tliis  prefix.  A  is  occasionally
changed  to  e.

Afe,  pleasure,  a  state  of  loving,  from  fe,  to  love.


Aga,  a  chair,  elevated  seat.

Aha,  a  storeliouse,

Alo,  departure,

Ata,  pepper,  capsicum,

Elo,  utensil,

Edu,  cinder,

Ela,  splinter,  chip,

Akpeja,  fisherman,

Afonnu,  boaster,


J)


ga,  to  be  high.
ka,  to  count.
lo,  to  go.
ta,  to  sting.
lo,  to  use.
du,  to  be  black.
la,  to  split,  cleave.
hi^eja,  to  fish.
fonnu,  to  boast.


(3)  From  the  verb,  with  the  prefix  o.  This  prefix
is  the  personal  pronoun  o,  he,  she,  or  it,  and  conveys
the  idea  of  distinct  or  active  personality.  It  gives
the  meaning  of  "  one  who,"  or  "  that  which."


Obi,  parent  (one  who  has  borne),
Obo,  nurse,
Oku,  corpse,

Olu,  borer,  gimlet  (that  which  bores),
Omi,  water  (that  which  is  swallowed),
Oka,  ring  (that  which  is  coiled)
Oyun,  pregnancy,


from  hi,  to  bear,  beget.
ho,  to  feed,  maintain.
ku,  to  die.
lu,  to  jjerforate.
mi,  to  swallow.


5>


ka,  to  coil.


yun,  to  be  pregnant.


Ohiri,  woman;  ohonri,  man;  ofe,  parrot;  oforo,
squirrel ;  ogho,  wild  cat ;  olcete,  bandicoot ;  oloyo,
monkey  ;  owiwi,  owl ;  omo,  child  ;  oha,  king.

(4)  By  joining  a  verb  and  a  noun.


Arin-ko,  chance,
Ajin-ta,  kidnapper,

Atiko,  teaching,
Aii-lo,  departure,


from  arin,  middle,  midst,  and  ko,  to  meet.
,,   ajin,  darkness,  depth  of  night,  and  ta,  to

pass  from  one  place  to  another.
,,   ati,  purpose,  intention,  and  ko,  to  teach.
„  ati,  and  lo,  to  go.


(5)  From  the  verb,  by  reduplication.    This  mode  is


LANGUAGE.


203


common  to  the  other  cognate  languages,  and  is  pro-
bably primitive.

(a)  Eegular  reduplication  : —

Fofo,  foam,  from/o,  to  float.

Nini,  owner,  „  ni,  to.  possess.

Riri,  sight,  ri,  to  see.

Konrinkonrin,  singer  „  konrin,  to  sing.

Gbenagbena,  carpenter,  „  ghena,  to  carve,  work  in  wood.

(b)  Irregular  reduplication  : —

Mimu,  something  to  be  drunk,  from  mu,  to  drink.
TiYo,  sufficiency,  to  be  enough.

Giga,  height,  to  be  tall.

Jija,  fight,  battle,  ja,  to  fight.

Jijin,  depth,  y,-  to  be  deep.

(6)  Bj  prefixing  the  personal  pronoun  o  (lie,  she,
or  it)  to  a  verb  of  possession,  as : —

Onija,  antagonist,  fighter,        from  nija  {ni  ija),  to  have  strife,
Onijo,  dancer,  to  have  a  dance.

Om%o,  judge  „  ,v%o),    to  have

judgment.

Where  the  ni  of  the  verb  of  possession  has  been
euphonically  changed  to  li,  or  I,  the  initial  vowel  of
the  original  noun  becomes  the  prefix  of  the  nonn  of
possession.    Thus  : —

Alafose  diviner,  from  lafose  (ni-afose),  to  have  divination.

Aladngbo,  neighbour,  „  ladvgbo  (ni-adugbo),  to  have  vicinity.

Elekun,  mourner,  „   Mcwn  (ni-ekun),  to  have  grief.

Elegan,  slanderer,  „   legan  (nt-egan),  to  have  slander.

Olowo,  rich  man,  „  lowo  (ni-owo),  to  have  riches.

Olofo,  loser,  „   hfo,  (ni-o/o),  to  have  loss.

We  may  here  show  the  successive  changes  by  which


204


THE   YORUBA'SFEAKING  PEOPLES.


tlie  noun  of  possession  is  formed  from  tlie  primitive
monosyllabic  verb : —

Monosyllabic  Verb.  Noun.

Ru^  to  cany.  Eru,  burden.

Fo,  to  be  empty.  Ofo,  emptiness,  loss.

Da,  to  make.  Ida,  act  of  making.

Verb  of  Possession.  Noun  of  Possession.

Leru  {ni-eru),  to  have  a  burden.  Eleru,  carrier.

Lofo  (ni-ofo),  to  have  loss.  Olofo,  loser.

Nida,  to  have  the  making.  Onida,  maker.

(7)  By  joining  two  noans,  as  : —

Ebado,  river-side,    from  eha,  brink,  edge,  and  odo,  river,  brook.
Eyinju,  oye-ball,        „    e^Jin,  egg,  and  oju,  eye.
Iboji,  grave,  „    ibi,  place,  and  oji,  shade,  ghost.

Irinajo,  travel,  „    irin,  a  walk,  and  ajo,  journey.

(8)  By  prefixing  a,  "not,"  to  nouns  commencing
with  i.  This  gives  the  notion  of  a  negative  quality
in  the  abstract.    Thus  :  —

Aife,  unwillingness.  Ailo,  inutility.

From  the  foregoing  it  will  be  seen  that  all  nouns
begin  with  a  vowel,  except  those  formed  by  re-
duplication from  a  verb.  A  few  nouns  may  be  found
which  appear  to  be  exceptions  to  this  rule,  but  on
investigation  they  are  found  to  be  either :  —

(a)  Nouns  of  foreign  importation,  such  as  galas,
east,  a  Hausa  word,  or

(b)  Nouns  whose  vowel-prefix  has  been  dropped.

Of  the  latter,  we  find  hoji,  a  grave ;  halogun,  war-
chief  ;  haluwe,  bath-room ;  bode,  custom-house ;  and,
as  we  as  often  hear  iboji  as  boji,  and  ibalogun  as  balo-


LANGUAGE.


205


gun,  \TQ  conclude  that  hode,  and  a  few  ofher  similar
words,  originally  had  the  vowel-prefix.

Conversely,  all  words  beginning  with  a  vowel  are
nouns.  A  few  words  used  as  adjectives,  adverbs,
or  conjunctions,  appear  at  first  sight  to  be  exceptions,
but  they  are  all  really  nouns.    Thus  : —

Abiye,  used  as  an  adjective,  "  -wiugod,"  really  means  "  something
possessing  wings."    (^Ahi,  something  possessing).

Ahila,  used  to  express  "  striped,"  similarly  means  "  something
possessing  stripes."

Ighana,  iised  to  express  "  then,"  is  really  igba  (time)  and  na
(that).

Okpo  lohpo,  used  as  an  adverb,  "  plentifully,*'  is  a  reduplication  of
the  noun  okpo,  plenty,  and  means  literally  "  plenty-plenty."

Nouns  are  not  declined.  The  noun  in  the  nomina-
tive, or  subjective,  case  is  placed  before  the  verb,  and,
in  the  objective,  after  it.  The  genitive  is  either
expressed,  as  in  Ewe,  by  position,  as  He  ohonri,  house
(of  the)  man,  or  by  means  of  ti,  belonging  to,  as
He  ti  okonri,  house  of  the  man.

The  plural  is  formed  by  placing  the  demonstrative
pronoun  ivonyi  (these),  or  wonni  (those),  after  the
noun,  except  when  a  number  is  used,  in  which  case
the  number  itself,  placed  after  the  noun,  sufiiciently
indicates  the  plural.

There  is,  properly  speaking,  no  gender  in  Yoruba,
as  is  shown  by  the  same  word  serving  for  he,  she,  or
it.  In  the  case  of  human  beings,  infants  excepted,
sex  is  indicated  by  the  nouns  ohonri  (man)  and  oMri
(woman).    Thus: —

Omo-konri,  son.  Omo-biri,  daughter.

In  the  case  of   all  other  living  creatures,  human


20G


THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


infants  included,  it  is  indicated  by  tlie  words  alco  (a
male)  and  abo  (a  female),  as  : —

Ako-malu,  bull.  Aho-elede,  boar.

Aho-malu,  cow.  Aho-elede,  sow.

Ako  and  abo,  when  applied  to  infants,  stand  alone,
without  being  joined  to  a  noun  meaning  child  or
infant.

Adjectives.

Adjectives  are  expressed  in  various  ways.
(1.)  By  verbs,  as  : —

Ga,  to  be  tall.  Wo,  to  be  bent.

Mo,  to  be  clean.  Eo,  to  be  soft.

Yi,  to  be  tough.  Te,  to  be  flat.

These  adjectival  verbs  admit  of  comparison,  and
are  the  only  words  qualifying  nouns  that  can  be
compared.  The  comparative  is  formed  by  adding  the
verb  ju  (to  surpass,  be  more  than) ;  and  the  super-
lative by  adding  the  verb  lo  (to  leave,  depart),  to  the
comparative.  The  comparative  is  thus  expressed  by
a  'compound  verb  of  Class  III.,  and  the  superlative
by  one  of  Class  V.    Example  : —

Ga,  to  be  tall.

Ga-ju,  to  be  taller  (to  be  tall,  to  surpass).

Ga-jii,  lo,  to  be  tallest  (to  be  tall,  to  surpass,  to  leave).

(2)  By  verbs  of  possession,  as  : —

Nikpara  (ni-ikjpara),  to  have  harm,  expresses  harmful.
Ntbo  {ni-iho),  to  have  breadth,  „  wide.

Nikpa  {ni-ikpa),  to  have  strength,         „  powerful.
Laiya  (iii-aiya),  to  have  courage,  „  brave.


LANGUAGE.


207


Tliese  can  also  be  used  in  tlie  negative.    Tlius  : —

Lai-nikpara,  not  to  have  harm,        expresses  harmless.
Lai-nibo,  not  to  have  breadth,  „  narrow.

Lai-nikpa,  not  to  have  strength,  „  powerless.

(3)  By  nouns  with  the  negative  particle  ai  (no,  not),
or  lai  (not  being),  prefixed.    Thus  : —

Aidaba  (ai  idaba,  no  hope)    can  be  used  to  express  hopeless.
Aigbona  (ai  I'gbona,  no  warmth)        „  „  cold.

Lai  daju  (lai  idaju,  not  being

certainty)  „  „  uncertain.

Laidon  (lai  idon,   not  being

sweetness)  „  „  unpleasant.

The  only  adjectives  proper  are  those  formed  by
reduplication  from  a  verb,  ordinarily  an  adjectival
verb.    Examples  : —

Wiiuo,  bent,  crooked,  from  ivo,  to  be  bent.

Tito,  straight,  „    to,  to  be  straight.

Lile,  hard,  „    le,  to  be  hard.

Lele,  pliant,  „    le,  to  be  pliant.

Giga,  high,  tall,  „  ga,  to  be  high  or  tall,

Dudu,  black,  ,,  du,  to  be  black.

Kukuru,  short,  ,,  Iciiru,  to  be  short.

Bum,  disordered,  ,,  ru,  to  stir  up,  mingle.

Jiiju,  confused,  ,,  jic,  to  surpass,  differ.


Adverbs.

Adverbs  are  usually  expressed  by  verbs,  nouns,
adjectives,  or  compounds  of  these,  used  adverbially.
The  word  used  as  an  adverb  is  always  placed  after
the  verb  or  objective  noun.    Examples  : —

Awhile,  for  a  time,  by  osa,  time,  interval  of  time.

Before  (sooner),  „  sin,  to  load  the  way.


208  THE   YOBRUA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.

Afterwards,  by  dehin  (de,  to  reach,  ehin,  tlie  back).
Late,  „  pe,  to  be  long.

There,  ibe,  place.

Far,  „  ji,  to  be  far.

Aside,  apart,  „  soto  (so,  to  turn,  and  to,  to  go  to)

Down,  beneath,  „  isale,  base,  bottom.

Quite,  „  pe,  to  be  complete.

Foremost,  in  front,  „  tmaju  {ti,  to  push,  and  iioaju,

face,  front).

jTreely,  v  fo-^h  to  draw  aside.

Coolly,  calmly,  „  slwn,  to  take  a  little  at  a  time.

Closely,  5>  nio-ara,  to  adhere  to  the  body.

Verbs  of  possession  are  very  commonly  used
adverbially.    Thus : —

Across,  may  be  expressed  by  nibu  (iii  ibu),  to  have  breadth.^
-^Qy^         ^  „       niglayi  {ni-igha-yi),  to  have  this  time.

Afterwards"  „       nighehin  (ni-igba-ehm) ,  to  have  the

time  back.

Proudly    „       „       j,       nirera  (ni-irera),  to  have  pride.

There  are,  however,  a  number  of  words  which
appear  to  be  true  adverbs,  but  may  only  be  adjectives
used  adverbially,  since  they  are  all  formed  by  redupli-
cation from  verbs.    Examples  :  —

Yara.yara,  quickly,  from          to  be  quick.

Tutu,  entirely,  „        to  loosen,  untile.

Jale-jale,  thoroughly,  „  jale,  to  go  through.

Fule-fule,  softly,  „          to  be  soft.

Rege-rege  evenly,  equally,  „   re,  to  agree,  and     to  be  equal.

Scge-sege,  unevenly,  unequally,  „   se,  to  miss  the  mark,  and  ge,

to  be  equal.

Jeje,  gently,  softly,  „       to  comply.

A  peculiarity  is  that  many  adverbs  can  only  be
used  with  a  special  verb  or  adjective.    There  is,  of


LANGUAGE.


200


course,  some  connection  between  tlie  adverb  and  the
word  it  qualifies,  wliicli  connection  we  can  in  a  few
cases  discover  bj  referring  to  Tshi,  Ga,  or  Ewe,  but
in  others  it  remains  obscure.

For  example,  take  the  following  adverbs,  each  of
which  can  only  be  rendered  in  English  by  "  very,"
or  "  exceedingly."

1.  Bin-hiri,  very,  can  only  be  used  with  the  verb  slm,  to  be  dark,  or
gloomy,  as  oju-orun  sliu  hiri-biri,  "  the  sky  is  very  gloomy."  Here
the  connection  is  discoverable,  as  there  is  in  Tshi  a  verb,  biri,  to  be
dark,  gloomy,  or  black,  so  that  biri-biri  itself  would  properly  mean
"  gloomy."

2.  Fio-fio,  very,  can  only  be  used  with  the  verb  cja,  to  be  tall,  or
with  the  adjective  gicja,  tall.  This  is  explained  by  the  verbs  fro,  to
ascend,  climb  (Tshi)  ;  fa,  to  shoot  up  (Ga) ;  fo,  to  rise,  raise  (E^e)  ;
and/o,  to  jump,  leap  (Yomba^,  which  show  that  fio-fio,  properly  means
raised.

3.  Rin-rin,  very,  can  only  be  used  with  the  verb  wuwo,  to  be  heavy.
As  it  is  a  reduplication  of  rin,  to  be  saturated,  to  press  down  to  the
ground,  the  connection  can  be  seen.

4.  Janjan,  very,  can  only  be  used  of  the  heat  of  the  sun.    Je.  is
the  sun  in  Ewe.

5.  Gara,  very,  can  only  be  used  with  reference  to  transparency,
clearness  ;  as  ami  mimo  rjara,  "  very  clear  water."  The  hard  "  g  "  is
only  a  softened  "  k,"  and  we  find  ko,  to  be  clear,  pure  (E^Ve),  and
iron,  pure,  clear  (Ga).

6.  Ram-ram,  veiy,  can  only  be  used  with  the  verb  ke,  to  roar,  utter
a  cry  or  sound.    Ra-ra,  loudly,  can  only  be  used  with  the  same  verb.

7.  Nini,  very,  can  only  be  used  with  tutu,  to  be  cold.

8.  Dodo,  very,  can  only  be  used  with  ro,  to  slacken,  to  cool  ardour.
This  is  perhaps  explained  by  the  verbs  de,  to  slacken  (Yoruba) ;  do,
to  let  go,  do,  to  be  grieved,  troubled  (EiVe) ;  and  do,  to  grant  (Ga).

9.  Jojo,  very,  can  only  be  used  with  a  verb  of  abundance,  as.  for
instance,  with  po,  to  be  many.  Enia  po  jojo,  "the  people  arc  very
many."

10.  Koro,  very,  can  only  l)c  used  with         to  go  through.    It  is
perhaps  from  ko,  to  meet,  and  ro,  to  give  way.

P


210  THE  TOnUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.

11.  Kpere-lcpere,  very,  can  only  be  used  with  du,  to  be  black.    It  is
probably  from  Icpe,  to  endure,  last,  and  re,  to  dye.

Similarly  eacli  colour  seems  to  have  an  adverb
proper  to  it,  to  convey  the  meaning  "  beantifully."
Thus,  Meje  can  only  be  used  of  yellow,  and /o  of  a
bright  yellow.  The  latter  is  explained  by  the  fact
that  fu  means  yellow  in  Ga.  Bold-void  and  roro  can
only  be  used  with  the  verb  po7^,  to  be  red,  and  lolojo
only  of  a  jet-black.

In  the  same  way,  jigUni  (abundantly)  can  only
be  used  of  fruits ;  ya'pa  (violently)  only  with  iva,  to
tremble ;  lulu  (entirely)  only  with  son,  to  burn ;  and
so  on.

Conjunctions.

There  are  no  conjunctions  properly  speaking,  their
place  being  supplied  by  verbs,  nouus,  or  compounds
of  the  two.    Examples  : —
And,  also,  by  sm,  to  accompany.

If,  or  whether,  „  H,  to  ask.

Since,  „  ti,  to  support.

Notwithstanding,  „  acli,  the   act   of  shutting,   closing,  or

blocking.

Or,  nor,  either,  neither,    „  tahi  (ta,  to  pass  from  one  place  to  another,

and  ibi,  -place).

Because,  „  nitori  (ni,  to  have  ;  itori,  share,  lot).

Although,  tile  (ti,  to  have  ;  le,  to  replenish).

Unless,  „  iike  {hi,  to  bear,  beget ;  ihose,  hindrance).

Prepositions,

Prepositions  are  also  expressed  by  verbs,  nouus,
or  compounds  of  the  two.    Examples  : —
Under,  beneath,  below,   by  nisale,  to  have  the  lower  part.


LANGUAGE.


211


Over,  upon,  above,         by  lohe  (iii-olce),  to  have  the  top,  or  by  lori

(ni-ori),  to  have  the  head.
In,  within,  „  ni7io  (ni-ino),  to  have  the  interior.

To,  against,  „  si,  to  go  to.

-^*»  „  ni,  to  occupy,  get.

Between,  „  /arm  {ni-arin),  to  have  the  centre.

Numerals.

Tlie  primary  numerals  are  : —
One,  Eni.  Eight,  Ejo.

T^^o,  Eji.  jfine,  Esan.

Three,  Eta.  Ten,  Ewa.

Fonr,  Erin,  or  Merin.  Twenty,  O^^n.

Five,  Arun.  Tj^irtj,  O^/Jojz.

f Two  Hundred,  /^5a.
Seven,  Eje.

As  the  Yowel-prefix  shows,  these  are  all  nouns.

The  numbers  from  eleven  to  fourteen  are  formed
bj  suffixing  la,  a  euphonic  change  from  hoa,  ten,  to
the  units.    Thus  : —

Eleven,  Okan-la.  Thirteen,  Eta-la.

Twelve,  Eji-la.  Fourteen,  Erin-la.

It  will  be  observed  that  the  word  ohan,  which  stands
for  "one"  in  the  compound  " one-ten,"  is  different
from  "  one  "  as  above.  The  word  ohan  is  evidently
the  same  as  the  Tshi  numeral  eko,  or  akon,  "  one  "  ;
and  the  existence  in  the  Yoruba  language  of  such
words  as  ako-bi  (first-born),  ako-ro  (the  first  rains),
a/co-so  (first  fruits),  shows  that  ako,  or  a/con,  formerly
stood  for  "  one,"  instead  of  the  present  word  eni.

The  numbers  from  fifteen  to  nineteen  are  formed  bv
deducting  from  twenty.    Thus  :

Fifteen,  Edogun  {arun-di-ogun,  five  less  than  twenty).

P  2


212


THE  YOEUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


Sixteen,  Erin-di-locjun  (four  less  than  twenty).

Seventeen,  Eta-di-logun  (three  less  than  twenty).

Eighteen,  Eji-di-logun  (two  less  than  twenty).

Nineteen,  Olcan-di-logun  (one  less  than  twenty),

Di  is  a  verb,  to  be  short  of,  or  less  than.  The

letter  I  is  inserted  between  di  and  ogun,  for  the  sake

of  euphony.

The  tens  from  forty  to  two  hundred  which  contain
a  complete  number  of  scores,  are  formed  by  placing
ogun,  twenty,  before  the  imits.    Thus  : —

Forty,  Oji  {ogun-eji,  twenties-two).

Sixty,  Ogota  {ogun-eta,  twenties-three).    It  is  commonly  abbre-
viated to  Ota.

Eighty,  Ogorin  (ogun-erui,  twenties-four).    Abbreviated  to  Orin.
One  hundred,  Ogorun  {ogm-arun,  twenties-five).  Abbreviated
to  Orun.

One  hundred  and  twenty,  Ogofa  (ogun-efa,  twenties-six).
One  hundred  and  forty,  Ogoje  {ogun-eje,  twenties- seven.)
One  hundred  and  sixty,  Ogojo  {ogun-ejo,  twenties-eight).
One  hundred  and  eighty,  Ogosan  (ogun-esan,  twenties- nine).

The  tens  from  forty  to  two  hundred  which  will  not
divide  by  twenty  are  formed  by  deducting  ten  from
the  ten  next  above.    Thus  : —

Fifty,  Adota  {ewa-di-ota,  ten  less  than  sixty).

Seventy,  Adorin  {ewa-di-oriv,  ten  less  than  eighty).

Ninety,  Adomn  {ewa-di-orun,  ten  less  than  one  hundred).

One  hundred  and  ten,  Adofa  {ewa-di-ogofa,  ten  less  than  one

hundred  and  twenty).
One  hundred  aad  thirty,  Adoje  (eioa-di-ogoje,  ton  less  than  one

hundred  and  forty).
One  hundred  and  fifty,  Adojo  {ewa-di-ogojo,  ten  less  than  one

hundred  and  sixty).
One  hundred  and  seventy,  Adosan  {ava-di-ogosan,  ten  less  than

one  hundred  and  eighty).
One  hundred   and   ninety,  Ewa-di-nigba  (ten  less  tlian  two

hundred).


LANGUAGE.  213

Tlie  numbers  between  tlie  tens  are  exjDressed  on
the  same  principle  as  those  from  eleven  to  nineteen,
viz.  :  from  one  to  four  by  joining  the  lower  to  the
higher  (in  this  case  by  means  of  the  verb  le,  to  add),
and  from  five  to  nine  by  deducting  from  the  ten  next
above  by  means  of  the  verb  di.    Thus  :—

Twenty-one,  Ohan-le-ogun  (one  added  to  twenty).
Twenty-two,  Eji-le-ogun  (two  added  to  twenty).
Twenty-three,  Eta-le-ogun  (three  added  to  twenty).
Twenty-four,  Erin-le-ogun  (four  added  to  twenty).
Twenty-fiye,  Edogbon  {arun-di-oghon,  five  less  than  thu-ty).
Twenty-six,  Erin-di-loghon  (four  less  than  thirty).
Twenty- seven,  Eta-di-loghon  (three  less  than  thirty).
Twenty-eight,  Eji-di-loghon  (two  less  than  thirty).
Twenty-nine,  Okan-di-loghon  (one  less  than  thirty).

From  two  hundred  upwards  the  Yoruba  peoples
reckon  by  two  hundreds.  When  the  number  is  odd
they  say  "  So  many  two  hundreds,  less  one  hundred,"
and  to  facilitate  this  process  they  have  a  word  ede,
which  means  "minus  one  hundred,"  or  "minus  one
thousand,"  according  to  whether  it  is  used  in  connec-
tion with  hundreds  or  thousands.  Two  hundred  is
ten  score,  and  computation  by  two-hundi^eds  is  as
natural  to  people  who  reckon  by  scores  as  that  by
hundreds,  i.e.,  ten  tens,  is  to  people  who  reckon  bv
tens.

The  numbers  from  two  hundred  upwards  are,
however,  ordinarily  expressed  in  cowry  nomenclature.
Ihese  shells  are  pierced  and  strung  on  strings  to  the
number  of  forty  or  fifty,  and  five  of  the  former  or
tour  of  the  latter  make  up  two  hundred  cowries,  or  a
small  bundle,  called  ighawo  (owo,  cowries),  which  word


214  THE  YOnUBA-SPEAKlNG  PEOPLES.

is    frequently    abbreviated    to    ighio.      Ten  small^
bundles,  or  two  tlionsand  cowries,  make  a  large  bundle,
eghaiua,  or  egha,  and  ten  large  bundles,  or  twenty
thousand  cowries,  make  a  bag,  ohe  Jean  {oke,  bag,  okan,
one).    Thus : —

Six  hundred  is  egheta  (igbio-eta),  three  small  bundles.
Five  hundred  is  edegbeta  (ede-egbeta),  three  small  bundles  mmus
one  hundred.

Twelve  hundred  is  egbefa  {igbio  efa),  six  small  bundles.
Six  thousand  is  egbata  (egba-eta),  three  large  bundles.
Five  thousand  is  edegbata  {ede-egbata),  three  large  bundles  mmus
one  thousand.

When  twenty  thousand— one  bag— is  arrived  at,  the
computation  is  continued  by  bags  : —

Eighty  thousand,  oke-merin  (bags-four).

One  hundred  thousand,  Oke-marun  (bags-five).

This  system  of  numeration  is  clumsy,  and  compares
unfavorably  with  those  evolved  by  the  Tshi,  Ga,  and
Ewe-speaking  peoples,  which  are  very  regular.  It
exhibits  rather  stronger  traces  of  the  primitive  practice
of  counting  by  fives,  tens,  and  twenties— that  is,  by  one
hand,  two  hands,  and  hands  and  feet— than  do  the
other  systems.    Olcan,  one,  means  "something  alone,"
and  no  doubt  refers  to  the  thumb.*    Eji,  two,  is  pro-
bably from  ji,  to  pick,  and  means  "  the  picker,''  that
is,  the  index-finger.    This  verb  appears  again  in  eje,
seven,  which  would  be  counted  on  the  index-finger  of
the  other  hand.    Eta,  three,  is  from  the  verb  ta,  to
shoot  out  lengthwise,  and  the  third,  or  middle  finger,
is  the  longest.    Erin,  four,  is  seemingly  from  the  verb
rm,  to  go,  progress,  and  would  mean  "  the  progress-

*  Thumb  is  atampako.


LANGUAGE.  215

ing."  Arun,  five,  is  from  run,  to  bring  to  an  end,  finisli.
It  means  "  the  ending,"  and  five  brings  to  an  end  the
counting  of  the  fingers  of  one  hand.  Bfa,  six,  which
would  be  counted  on  the  thumb  of  the  other  hand,
seems  to  mean  "  that  which  leads  or  attracts,"  and  to  be
from  fa,  to  lead,  attract,  draw ;  and  ewa,  ten,  is  pro-
bably from  the  verb  lua,  to  come  together,  and  refers
to  the  closing  of  the  two  hands  when  the  counting  is
finished.  The  derivation  of  ejo,  eight,  and  eran,  nine,
is  not  clear.  Then  eleven,  twelve,  thirteen,  and  four-
teen are  respectively  ten-one,  ten-two,  ten-three,  and
ten-four  ;  but  fifteen,  which  completes  the  counting  on
one  hand,  is  five  less  than  twenty.  The  computation
is  then  carried  to  the  other  hand,  and  we  get  four  less
than  twenty,  three  less  than  twenty,  and  so  on,  till
twenty  is  reached.  From  twenty  to  two  hundred  the
computation  is  by  scores,  that  is,  by  hands  and  feet.

The  ordinal  numbers  are  formed  by  prefixing  ekon

completion,  fulness,  generally  contracted  to  e/c'— before
the  cardinal  numbers,  but  complete  tens  above  ten,
that  is,  twenty,  thirty,  &c.,  do  not  take  this  prefix!
Thus :—  ^

First.  Ek-eni.  Eleventh.  Ek-okanla.

Second.  Ek-eji.  Twentieth.  Ocjun.

Third.  Ek-eta.  Twenty-first.  Ek-okan-le-ocjim.

Tenth.  Ek-ewa.  Twenty-fiftli.  Ek-edoghon.

When  answering  the  question  "  How  many  ?  "  it  is
necessary  to  prefix  m  to  the  cardinal  number,  except
m  the  case  of  one,  ten,  twenty,  thirty,  &c.  Thus,
mefa,  six,  instead  of  efa  ;  meji,  two,  instead  of  eji,  and
so  on.

The  numeral  adverbs  of  time  are  formed  by  prefixing


216


THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


ara,  usually  contracted  to  e,  before  the  cardinal  num-
bers, as  used  in  answer  to  a  question.    Thus  :—

Once,  ekan  {ara-lcan).
Twice,  emeji  {aixi-meji).
Thrice,  emeta  {ara-meta).
Four  times,  emerin  {ara-merin).

Ara  is  a  noun  wliicli  has  the  primary  meaning  of
custom,  fashion,  but  also  means  a  repetition.

The  numeral  adverbs  of  order  are  formed  by  pre-
fixing the  verb  lelce,  to  be  prominent,  or  uppermost,
abbreviated  to  lelc    before   the   cardinal  numbers.


Thus  :—


Firstly,  leh-eni.
Secondly,  lek-cji.
Thirdly,  lek-eta.


From  the  preceding  it  will  have  been  seen  that,  as
in  Tshi,  Ga,  and  Ewe,  all  the  words  in  the  language
are  derived  from  the  simple  monosyllabic  verbs.  The
list  of  Yoruba  simple  monosyllabic  verbs  will  be  found
in  the  Appendix,  where  the  four  languages  are  com-
pared.

There  is  the  usual  want  of  definiteness  in  expressmg
colours.  Fufu  means  white,  or  any  light  colour;
dudu,  black,  dark  blue,  dark  green,  pui^ple,  or  any
dark  colour;  and  pu:pa,  red,  scarlet,  or  yellow.
Colours  are  thus  grouped  into  three  classes,  hght,
dark,  and  reddish.  To  express  different  shades  of
colour  with  exactness  recourse  is  had  to  natural  objects.
Thus,  grey  is  expressed  by  eru,  "  ashes  "  ;  blue,  by
awo-aro,  "  colour  of  the  aro,"  a  small  bird  of  blue
plumage;  light  blue  by  ait;o-o>-onm,  "  sky-colour  "  ;
green  by  ohedo,  "  duck-weed  "  ;  purple  by  awo-aluho,


LANGUAGE.


217


"  colour  of  the  aluko,"  a  bird  of  a  purplisli  liue ;  and
yellow  bj  iyeye,  the  name  of  a  yellow  plum,  or  by
sJiafa-pupa,  literally  "  faded,  scraped,  red."

That,  in  speaking,  the  words  should  follow  one
another  in  the  natural  order  in  which  they  would
occur  to  the  mind,  is  what  is  to  be  expected  from  a
people  who  have  not  invented  an  elaborate  syntax.
Thus  the  adjective  always  follows  the  noun,  and  a
native  would  say  "Handkerchief  red,"  instead  of
putting  the  attribute  before  the  subject,  as  we  do,
and  saying  "  Eed  handkerchief."  Similarly  they  say
"Water  bring,"  instead  of  "  Bring  water,"  and  "  Cold
blows  the  wind,"  or,  literally,  "  Coldness  owns  the
wind,"  instead  of  "  The  wind  blows  cold."  In  short,
the  notion  which  comes  first  to  the  mind  is  that  which
is  first  expressed.


CHAPTER  XIII.


PEOVEEBS.

The  Yorubas  have  an  extraordinary  number  of  pro-
verbial sayings,  and  regard  a  knowledge  of  tliem  as  a
proof  of  great  wisdom,  wlience  the  saying,  "A  counsellor
who  understands  proverbs  soon  sets  matters  right."
They  are  in  constant  use,  and  another  saying  runs,
"A  proverb  is  the  horse  of  conversation.  "When  the
conversation  droops  a  proverb  revives  it.  Proverbs
and  conversation  follow  each  other."  Several  of  the
proverbs  given  in  the  volume  on  the  Ewe-speaking
peoples  are  known  to  and  used  by  the  Yoruba-speak-
ing  peoples ;  but  they  have  hundreds  of  others  which
appear  to  be  peculiar  to  themselves,  and  from  these
the  following  are  taken  as  examples : —

1.  Secrets  should  never  be  told  to  a  tattler.

2.  What  is  not  wished  to  be  known  is  done  in
secret.

3.  He  who  has  done  something  in  secret,  and  sees
people  talking  together,  thinks  they  are  talking  of  his
action.

4.  A  whisperer  looks  suspiciously  at  the  forest
when  he  hears  a  noise,  but  the  forest  does  not  tell
tales.


PROVERBS.


219


5.  Rags  make  up  a  pad.

6.  Continuai  sweepings  make  a  dust-lieap.

7.  One  here  :  two  tkere  :  a  great  crowd.

8.  One  here  :  two  there  :  the  market  is  filled  up.
(Nos.  5  to  8  are  equivalent  to  our  "  Many  a  mickle  makes  a  muckle.")

9.  Boasting  is  not  courage.

10.  He  who  boasts  much  cannot  do  much.

11.  Much  gesticulation  does  not  prove  courage.

12.  It  is  easy  to  cut  to  pieces  a  dead  elephant.

(Nos.  9  to  12  resemble  our  "  Deeds,  not  words.")

13.  "I  nearly  killed  the  bird."  ISTo  one  can  eat
nearly  in  a  stew.

(Answers  to  "  Catch  your  hare  before  you  cook  liim.")

14.  A  hog  that  has  wallowed  in  the  mud  seeks  a
clean  person  to  rub  against.

15.  A  man  in  a  white  cloth  is  never  looked  for  in
the  palm-oil  market.

(Is  something  akin  to  "  You  cannot  touch  pitch  without  being

defiled.")

16.  The  cross-roads  do  not  fear  sacrifices.

17.  The  sieve  never  sifts  meal  by  itself.

^  18.  Disobedience  will  drink  water  with  his  hands
tied  up.

19.  Disobedience  is  the  father  of  insolence.

20.  Calamity  has  no  voice ;  suffering  cannot  speak
to  tell  who  is  really  in  distress.

21.  He  who  owns  the  inner  square  of  the  house  is
the  master  of  the  outer.

22.  Peace  is  the  father  of  friendship.

23.  Strife  never  begets  a  gentle  child.

24.  He  who  forgives  ends  the  quarrel.


220


THE  Y0RUBA-8PEAKING  PEOPLES.


25.  A  sharp  word  is  as  tougli  as  a  bow-string.  A
sliarp  word  cannot  be  cured,  but  a  wound  may.

26.  A  peacemaker  often  receives  blows.

27.  There  is  no  medicine  against  old  age.

28.  The  afomo  (a  parasitical  plant)  has  no  roots;
it  claims  relationship  with  eyery  tree.

29.  A  man  with  a  cough  can  never  conceal  him-
self.

30.  Full-belly  child  says  to  hungry-belly  child,
"  Keep  good  heart."

31.  A  jealous  woman  has  no  flesh  upon  her  breast,
for  however  much  she  may  feed  upon  jealousy,  she
will  never  be  satisfied.

32.  Houses  that  are  not  adjacent  do  not  readily

catch  fire.

33.  Do  not  attempt  what  you  cannot  bring  to  a

good  end.

34.  Each  coloured  cloth  has  its  name.

35.  He  who  marries  a  beauty  marries  trouble.

36.  A  man  of  the  town  knows  nothing  about  farm-
ing, or  the  seasons  for  planting,  yet  the  yam  he  buys
must  always  be  large.

37.  A  witch  kills  but  never  inherits.

33.  Unless  the  tree  falls  you  will  never  be  able  to
reach  the  branches.

39.  Another's  eye  is  not  like  one's  own.

40.  The  bite  of  the  sand-fly  is  not  so  bad  as
poverty.

41.  Poverty  destroys  a  man's  reputation.

42.  A  poor  man  has  no  relations.

43.  Poverty  never  visits  a  poor  man  without  visiting
his  children  also.


PROVERBS.


221


44.  The  wliite  man  is  the  father  of  merchants,  and
want  of  money  is  the  father  of  disgrace.

45.  A  man  may  be  born  to  a  fortune,  but  wisdom
only  comes  with  length  of  days.

46.  People  think  that  the  poor  are  not  so  wise  as
the  rich,  for  if  a  man  be  wise,  why  is  he  poor  ?

47.  The  appearance  of  the  wise  differs  from  that  of
the  fool.

48.  The  labourer  is  always  in  the  sun,  the  planta-
tion-owner always  in  the  shade.

(Answers  to  "  One  sows,  another  reaps.")

49.  A  lazy  man  looks  for  light  employment.

50.  Laziness  lends  assistance  to  fatigue.

51.  The  potsherd  goes  in  front  of  the  man  who  has
taken  embers  on  it  from  the  fire.

(Means  that  every  enterprise  requires  a  leader.)

52.  The  partridge  says  :  "What  business  has  the
farmer  to  bring  his  cloth  here  ?  "  (fearing  it  may  be
a  bird-trap).  The  farmer  says:  "How  could  I  go
to  my  farm  without  my  cloth  P  "

(This  means  that  there  are  two  sides  to  every  question.)

53.  Ear,  hear  the  other  before  you  decide.

54.  He  who  annoys  another  only  teaches  him  to
strengthen  himself.

55.  He  who  waits  for  a  chance  will  have  to  wait
for  a  year.

56.  When  the  jackal  dies  the  fowls  do  not  mourn,
for  the  jackal  never  brings  up  a  chicken.

57.  When  fire  burns  in  the  bush,  smuts  fly  into  the
town.

(Answers  to  "  Evil  communication  corrupts  good  manners.")


222


THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


58.  Tale-bearing  is  tlie  elder  brother,  vexation  tlie
younger.

59.  He  wlio  knows  a  matter  beforehand  confuses
tlie  liar.

60.  Time  may  be  very  long,  but  a  lie  will  not  go
to  forgetfulness.

61.  A  lie  costs  nothing  to  a  liar.

62.  A  man  walks  calmly  in  the  presence  of  his
defamer ;  a  man  walks  proudly  in  the  presence  of  his
slanderer,  when  he  knows  that  the  slanderer  has  only
twenty  cowries  in  his  house.

63.  To  be  trodden  upon  here,  to  be  trodden  upon
there,  is  the  fate  of  the  palm-kernel  lying  in  the
road.

64.  The  sole  of  the  foot  is  exposed  to  all  the  dirt
of  the  road.

65.  He  who  eats  alcaslm  does  not  know  that  a
famine  prevails.

{Alcaslm  is  a  large  ball  of  agidi,  and  hence  emblematic  of  plenty.)

66.  Consideration  is  the  senior,  calculation  the
junior,  and  wisdom  the  third-born.

67.  Want  of  consideration  and  forethought  made
six  brothers  pawn  themselves  for  six  dollars.

(Instead  of  one  brother  pawning  himself  for  the  whole  amount,  in
which  case  the  others  would  be  free  to  work  and  earn  money  with
which  to  redeem  him.)

68.  An  obstinate  man  soon  falls  into  disgrace.

69.  Inquiry  saves  a  man  from  making  mistakes.
He  who  makes  no  inquiry  gets  himself  into  trouble.

70.  Though  a  man  may  miss  other  things,  he  never
misses  his  mouth.


PROVERBS.


223


71.  Not  to  aid  one  in  distress  is  to  kill  him  in  your
heart.

72.  Charity  is  the  father  of  sacrifice.

73.  Covetousness  is  the  father  of  disease.

74.  Never  did  our  fathers  honour  an  orisha  of  this
kind.

(Is  used  to  discountenance  innovations.)

75.  A  white  cloth  and  a  stain  never  agree.

76.  Thorns  do  not  agree  with  the  foot.

77.  The  stream  may  dry  up,  but  the  watercourse
still  keeps  its  name.

78.  When  water  is  poured  on  the  head  it  finds  its
way  down  to  the  feet.

79.  A  gift  is  a  gift,  and  a  purchase  is  a  purchase ;
so  no  one  will  thank  you  for  saying  "  I  sold  it  you
very  cheap."

80.  Hawks  go  away  for  the  nesting-season,  and
fools  think  they  have  gone  away  for  ever.

81.  Ashes  fly  back  in  the  face  of  him  who  throws
them.

(Is  equivalent  to  our  "  Curses  come  home  to  roost.")

82.  It  is  the  path  of  the  needle  that  the  thread  is
accustomed  to  follow.

83.  If  a  matter  be  dark,  dive  to  the  bottom.

84.  He  who  is  pierced  with  a  thorn  must  limp  off
to  him  who  has  a  knife.

85.  Every  man's  character  is  good  in  his  own  eyes.
(This  resembles  "  Self-praise  is  no  recommendation.")

86.  Wherever  a  man  goes  to  dwell,  his  character
goes  with  him.


224  THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.

87.  Frogs'  spawn  does  not  attract  the  attention  of
tlie  robber.

(Frogs'  spawn  is  supposed  to  resemble  a  mass  of  beads.)

88.  The  white  ant  may  well  admire  the  bird,  for  it
loses  its  wings  after  flying  for  only  one  day.

89.  G-ently!  gently!  still  hurts  the  snail.

90.  A  bribe  blinds  the  judge's  eyes,  for  bribes  never
speak  the  truth.

91.  A  witness  speaks  the  truth;  a  witness  is  not  a
partisan.

92.  Iwo  is  the  home  of  the  grey  parrot,  Ibara  the
home  of  the  hawk,  but  where  is  the  home  of  the  green
parrot  ?

(Is  used  to  persons  making  false  pretences.)

93.  Bank  rises  after  bank,  and  ditch  follows  after
ditch.  When  the  rain  falls  into  the  ditch  the  banks
are  envious.

(Is  said  of  those  who  are  dissatisfied  with  their  station  in  life.)

94.  The  strength  of  a  mortar  (made  of  wood)  is  not
like  the  strength  of  a  pot  (made  of  clay).  Place  a
mortar  on  the  fire  and  it  will  burn ;  pound  a  yam  in  a
pot  and  it  will  break.

(Means  that  there  is  a  proper  use  for  everything.)

95.  When  the  monkey  jumps  from  the  tree  he
jumps  into  the  house.

(Inculcates  the  danger  of  leaving  one's  proper  station.)

96.  A  tick  having  fixed  itself  on  the  mouth  of  a
jackal,  a  fowl  was  asked  to  take  it  off ;  but  the  fowl
knew  that  she  was  food  for  the  jackal  just  as  the  tick
was  for  her.

97.  Gossip  is  unbecoming  in  an  elder.


PROVERBS.  225

98.  Tliree  elders  cannot  all  fail  to  pronounce  the
word  elculu;  one  may  say  elulu,  another  ekulu,  but  the
third  will  say  ekulu.

{Ekulu  is  tlie  name  of  an  antelope.    The  saying  means  that  there  is
safety  in  a  number  of  counsellors.)

99.  The  younger  should  not  thrust  himself  into  the
seat  of  the  elders.

100.  The  young  cannot  teach  the  elders  traditions.

101.  As  a  calabash  receives  the  sediment  of  the
water,  so  must  an  elder  exercise  forbearance.

102.  A  man  does  not  run  among  thorns  for  nothing.
Either  he  is  pursuing  a  snake  or  a  snake  is  pursuing

103.  As  no  subject  may  keep  a  herald,  so  it  is  not
every  man  who  may  own  a  palace.

104.  Everyone  in  the  assembly  has  a  name,  but
when  you  are  summoned  "  in  the  name  of  the  assem-
bly" (instead  of  in  the  name  of  some  individual  in
it)  evil  awaits  you.

105.  A  near  neighbour  need  not  say  good-bye  till
to-morrow.

106.  A  thing  thrown  forward  will  surely  be  over-
taken, and  a  thing  put  in  the  ground  will  be  there  to
be  dug  up  ;  but  if  nothing  has  been  thrown  forward
what  shall  be  overtaken  ?  and  if  nothing  has  been
buried,  what  shall  be  dug  up  ?

(Is  used  to  inculcate  provident  habits.)

107.  The  name  given  to  a  child  becomes  natural
to  it.

108.  Gold  should  be  sold  to  him  who  knows  its
value.


Q


226  THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.

109.  Time  is  longer  tlian  a  rope.

110.  Tlie  dawn  does  not  come  twice  to  wake  a
man.

111.  If  clotlies  remain  long  in  tte  bag  they  rot.

112.  The  agli  (a  bird  with  blue  plumage)  is  the
dyer  in  blue  ;  the  aluko  (a  bird  with  purple  plumage)
is  the  painter  of  purple ;  but  the  lekileki  (the  white
crane)  is  the  owner  of  the  white  cloth.

(Means  each  to  his  own  pursuits.)

113.  When  the  rain  fell  upon  the  parrot  the  aluko
rejoiced,  thinking  that  the  red  tail  of  the  parrot
would  be  spoiled,  but  the  rain  only  increased  its
brilliancy.

114.  The  akala  (vulture)  smells  the  carrion,  no
matter  how  high  in  the  air  he  may  be.

115.  The  bat  hangs  with  his  head  down,  watching
the  actions  of  the  birds.

(Is  used  to  inculcate  silent  observation.)

116.  He  that  has  copper  ornaments  looks  after  the
lime;  he  that  has  brass  ornaments  looks  after  the
aiuedi.

(The  lime  is  used  for  cleaning  copper  an    the  awedi  for  cleaning

brass.)

117.  Though  the  dengi  is  cold  on  the  top,  yet  the
inside  is  very  hot.

(Dengi  is  a  kind  of  gruel  made  of  pounded  maize.    The  proverb  means
"  Do  not  judge  by  appearances.")

118.  A  small  bed  will  not  hold  two  persons.

119.  The  elephant  makes  a  dust  and  the  buffalo
makes  a  dust,  but  the  dust  of  the  buffalo  is  lost  in
that  of  the  elephant.


PROVERBS.  227

120.  Thougli  yon  appear  very  sharp  you  cannot
tell  nine  times  nine.

121.  A  large  morsel  chokes  a  child.

_  122.  He  who  cannot  lift  an  ant,  and  yet  tries  to
lift  an  elephant,  will  find  out  his  folly.

123.  He  who  tries  to  shake  the  trunk  of  a  tree
only  shakes  himself.

124.  The  world  is  the  ocean  and  mankind  is  the
lagoon.  However  well  a  man  can  swim  he  cannot
cross  the  world.

(Nos.  119  to  124  are  used  to  check  presumption  and  over- confidence.)

125.  When  the  eya  (a  wild  cat)  has  reached  to  the
ferocity  of  the  leopard  he  will  kill  animals  to  feed  on.

126.  Though  the  fire  is  burning  the  walls  do  not
shrmk  from  it,  and  yet  the  fire  is  trying  to  burn  the
water.

(Is  said  of  persons  who  aim  at  the  greater  when  they  cannot

accomplish  the  less.)

127.  The  cry  of  the  bird  Jcegio  does  not  reach  the
sky.

(Is  used  of  one  whose  opinion  or  advice  is  not  valued.)

128.  Cocoa-nut  is  not  good  for  a  bird  to  eat.

(This  IS  used  in  the  same  way  as  our  "sour  grapes.")

129.  The  bill-hook  cuts  the  bush,  but  receives  no
profit  from  the  bush.  It  clears  the  road,  but
receives  no  profit  from  the  road.  The  bill-hook  is
badly  bent,  the  bill-hook  is  badly  bent.  The  bill-
hook is  bent ;  it  pays  five  cowries  to  bind  its  neck
(handle)  with  a  ring.    When  the  bill-hook  reaches

ti  2


228  THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.

its  owner's  farm  witli  the  ring  on  its  neck,  it  is
girded  tiglitly  for  new  works.

(This  saying  refers  to  the  labour  of  slaves,  wliicli  brings  them  no
remuneration.    In  the  original  it  forms  a  kind  of  verse.    Thus: —

Ada  shan  iglo,

Ko  ri  ere  igho.

0  ro  ona,

Ko  ri  ere  ona.

Ada  da  ida  kicda,

Ada  da  ida  Icuda.
Ada  da  ;  o  fi  arun  ghadi  o  di  oho  olowo.
Ada  li  eha  oron  gbadsa  giri-giri.)

130.  The  pot-lid  is  always  badly  off,  for  the  pot
gets  all  the  sweet  and  the  lid  nothing  but  the  steam.

("  Pot-lid  "  is  here  used  to  mean  "  slave.")

131.  Job-work  is  not  the  slave's  first  care;  the
master's  work  has  the  first  claim  on  his  time.

132.  A  slave  is  not  the  child  of  a  tree  {i.e.,  made  of
wood).  When  a  slave  dies  his  mother  hears  nothing
of  it,  but  when  a  free  man  dies  there  is  mourning ;
yet  the  slave,  too,  was  once  a  child  in  his  mother's
house.

133.  As  the  yam-flour  was  once  a  soft  unripe  yam,
so  was  the  slave  once  a  child  in  his  father's  house.

134.  Birth  does  not  differ  from  birth ;  as  the  free
man  was  born  so  was  the  slave.

135.  You  find  a  hen  in  the  market  and  hasten  to
buy  her.  Had  she  been  worth  keeping  the  owner
would  not  have  sold  her.

(This  is  said  in  warning  to  any  man  who  is  about  to  buy  a  female

slave.)


PROVERBS.


229


136.  He  who  gathers  locust-fruit  spends  the  money
of  death.

(Is  used  to  check  rashness.  The  wood  of  the  locust-tree  breaks  easily,
and  this  proyerb  contemplates  a  man  perched  on  a  lofty  limb  to
pick  the  fruit,)

137.  A  hunchback  is  never  asked  to  stand  up
straight.

(That  is,  no  one  expects  the  impossible.)

138.  He  who  has  only  an  eyebrow  for  a  bow  can
never  kill  an  animal.

139.  You  cannot  kill  game  by  looking  at  it.

140.  When  the  hawk  hovers  the  fowl-owner  feels
uneasy.

141.  No  one  carrying  elephant-beef  on  his  head
should  look  for  crickets  underground.

(Elephant-beef  here  means  the  food  of  the  rich,  and  crickets  that  of
the  poor.  The  saying  means  that  the  rich  should  not  stoop  to
petty  gains.)

142.  No  one  should  draw  water  from  the  spring  in
order  to  supply  the  river.

(this  means  that  no  poor  man  should  stint  himself  in  order  to  make

presents  to  the  rich.)

143.  The  glutton,  having  eaten  his  fill,  then  calls
his  companions  to  come  also.

144.  If  you  are  not  able  to  build  a  house  at  once,
you  first  build  a  shed.

145.  If  one  has  not  an  adan  (a  large  kind  of  bat),
one  sacrifices  an  ode  (small  bat).

(Nos.  144  and  145  mean  "  Do  your  best,")

146.  If  one  is  carrying  water,  and  it  gets  spilt,  so


230


THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


long  as  the  calabash  is  not  broken  one  can  still  get
more.

(Is  used  to  encourage  those  who  think  a  disaster  irreparable.)

147.  No  snuff-seller  likes  to  own  that  she  sells  bad
tobacco,  but  all  profess  to  sell  tobacco  as  sweet  as
honey.

("No  one  cries  stinking  fish.")

148.  The  esuo  (gazelle),  claiming  relationship  with
the  ehulu  (a  large  antelope),  says  his  mother  was  the
daughter  of  an  ehulu.

149.  If  you  abuse  the  eiu,  you  make  the  head  of
the  awo  ache.

(The  etu  and  the  awo  are  two  varieties  of  guinea-fowl.  The  provei'b
means  that  people  do  not  like  to  hear  their  relations  badlv  spoken
of.)

150.  He  runs  away  from  the  sword  and  hides  him-
self in  the  scabbard.

( This  answers  to  our  "  Out  of  the  frying-pan  into  the  fire,"  as  the
sword  will  return  to  the  scabbard.)

151.  The  sword  shows  no  respect  for  its  maker.

152.  The  spoon,  seeing  death,  ventures  his  head
into  it.

(That  is,  into  the  boiling  fluid.    The  proverb  is  used  to  check

rashne-ss.)

153.  After  the  aghe^i  has  saved  men  from  star-\ang,
it  is  thought  only  fit  to  be  cut  into  a  common  cala-
bash.

(The  agheji  is  a  kind  of  calabash-gourd,  which  ripens  early  in  the
season,  when  vegetables  are  scarce.  When  over-ripe  it  is  bitter  to
the  taste.    The  saying  is  used  to  reprove  ingratitude.)


PPiOVEliBS,


231


154.  The  agbeji  is  never  bitter  in  a  large  family.

(This  resembles  "  Hmiger  is  the  best  sauce.")

155.  Leprosy,  desiring  to  disfigure  a  man,  attacks
the  tip  of  his  nose.

(Said  of  one  who  tells  the  faults  of  another  in  public.)

156.  The  first-born  is  due  to  the  sheep-owner.

(This  answers  to  "  Give  to  each  one  his  due."  It  refers  to  a  custom
by  which,  when  ewes  are  put  in  charge  of  a  shepherd,  he  receives
in  payment  a  certain  proportion  of  the  young,  after  the  first-born.)

157.  Contraction  of  words  conceals  the  sense.

(The  Yorubas  talk  habitually  with  great  rapidity,  contracting  words,
and  often  not  giving  themselves  time  to  think  of  the  proper  word  to
use.  Hence,  the  meaning  of  what  they  say  is  very  often  obscure,  and
their  conversation  is  in  consequence  continually  interrupted  by  the
question"  Ogbol"  "Do  you  understand?"  literally,  "Do  you  hear?")

158.  When  the  face  is  washed  yon  finish  at  the
chin.

(This  is  a  saying  used  when  a  dispute  is  ended.    It  means,  "  Well,

that's  settled,")

159.  No  one  should  ask  the  fish  what  takes  place
on  the  land,  nor  should  the  rat  be  asked  what  takes
place  in  the  water.

160.  A  large  cock  does  not  allow  a  small  one  to
crow.

161.  A  rock  is  the  father  of  stones.

162.  Two  rams  cannot  drink  out  of  the  same
calabash.

163.  No  one  will  throw  away  antelope-venison  to
pick  up  squirrel-meat.

164.  When  the  spider  intends  to  attack  you  it
encircles  you  with  its  web.


232


THE  YOnUB  AS  PEAKING  PEOPLES.


165.  The  deaf  look  witli  surprise  at  a  speaker's
moutli.

166.  Although  you  are  about  to  die,  need  you  split
up  the  mortar  for  firewood  ?

(Means,  have  some  consideration  for  others.)

167.  "  To-day  I  am  going ;  to-morrow  I  am
going,"  gives  the  stranger  no  encouragement  to
plant  the  ahusa  (a  plant  which  bears  fruit  very
rapidly).

168.  What  good  have  the  gods  done  to  the  hunch-
back that  he  should  name  his  child  Orishagbemi  (the
gods  have  blessed  me)  ?

(This  means,  why  should  one  return  thanks  when  unkiudness  only  has

been  experienced?)

169.  He  who  does  not  understand  the  cry  of  the
palm-bird  (ego)  complains  of  the  noise  it  makes.

(Means  that  people  are  prone  to  contemn  what  they  do  not  under-
stand.)

170.  A  large  cock,  crowing  in  the  middle  of  the
night,  settles  the  dispute  (as  to  what  the  time  is).

17 1.  A  lame  man  said  the  load  on  his  head  was
not  properly  balanced,  and  was  told  "  Its  unevenness
began  from  the  ground"  {i.e.,  from  his  lame  leg).

(This  is  used  to  reprove  those  who  find  fault  when  the  fault  really  lies

with  them.)

172.  When  the  bush  is  on  fire  the  pigeon  leaves
the  grass ;  when  the  fire  is  extinguished  everyone
returns  home.


PROVERBS.


233


173.  The  aJcpena  says  to  the  cotton,  "  Do  not  hang
your  trouble  round  my  neck."

(The  ahpena  is  a  kind  of  spindle,  on  wLich  spun  cotton  is  wound  for
sale.  The  proverb  is  used  to  one  who  is  involving  another  in  a
difficulty.)

174.  The  aro  does  not  bear  its  load  for  ever;
sooner  or  later  it  will  put  it  down.

(The  aro  is  the  hearth,  or  fire-place,  consisting  of  three  rounded
cones  of  clay,  between  which  the  fire  is  lighted,  and  on  which  the
cooking-pot  rests.  The  proverb  means,  "  Sooner  or  later  matters
must  mend.")

175.  Self-conceit  deprives  the  wasp  of  honey.

176.  He  who  begs  with  importunity  will  obtain
what  he  wants.

177.  The  pond  stands  aside,  as  if  it  were  not
related  to  the  river.

(Is  used  to  reprove  pride.)

178.  The  ago  (a  striped  rat  noted  for  its  cunning)
is  caught  in  a  trap,  how  much  more  then  the  malaju
(a  water-rat  remarkable  for  its  stupidity).

179.  The  ajao  (flying-fox)  is  neither  rat  nor  bird.
(Is  used  of  a  person  who  remains  neutral  during  a  quarrel.)

180.  When  a  Mohammedan  is  not  pinched  with
hunger  he  says,  "  1  never  eat  monkey."

181.  The  rat  has  no  voice  to  call  the  cat  to
account.

182.  When  the  man  on  the  stilts  falls,  another
hand  gets  possession  of  the  sticks.

183.  One  man  makes  bill-hooks  and  others  use  them.

184.  If  you  send  no  one  to  the  market  the  market
will  send  no  one  to  you.


284


THE  YOnUB  AS  PEAKING  PEOPLES.


185.  There  is  no  tallness  among  pigeons ;  tliey  are
all  dwarfs.

186.  No  one  would  expose  fowls  on  the  top  of  a
rock  in  sight  of  a  hawk.

187.  The  rat  does  not  show  his  companion  the  hole

in  the  roof.

(Each  one  for  himself.)

■  188.  You  cannot  shave  a  man's  head  in  his
absence.

(This  means  that  a  matter  cannot  be  settled  in  the  absence  of  the

people  concerned.)

189.  A  bald-headed  man  does  not  care  for  a  razor.

190.  A  mouth  not  keeping  shut,  and  lips  not
keeping  close,  bring  trouble  to  the  jaws.

(Answers  to  our  "  Speech  is  silver,  but  silence  is  gold.")

191.  With  the  forefinger  one  takes  up  the  sauce.

192.  A  chicken  'having  been  delivered  from  death
{i.e.,  from  the  hawk)  by  being  shut  up,  comi3lained
because  it  was  not  allowed  to  feed  openly  on  the
dust-heap.

193.  The  dog  that  is  known  to  be  very  swift  is  the
one  chosen  to  catch  the  hare.

194.  If  the  dog  has  his  master  behind  him  he  will
not  be  afraid  of  the  baboon.

195.  An  old  dog  cannot  be  taught.

196.  The  butcher  pays  no  regard  to  any  particular
breed  of  animals.

(That  is,  "  All  is  fish  that  comes  to  his  net.")

197.  A  rogue  never  closes  the  mouth  of  his  wallet.

198.  The  birdlime  is  the  death  of  the  bird.


PROVERBS.


235


199.  When  the  shin-bone  is  not  hurt,  it  says  it
has  no  flesh  to  protect  it.

(This  means,  "  You  do  not  know  what  you  can  do  till  you  tiy.")

200.  Working  in  competition  quickens  the  hands.

201.  The  coloured  calico  deceives  the  country-
cloth,  but  it  is  not  really  what  the  country-cloth  takes
it  to  be,  for  the  thread  is  fine.

(Country-cloth,  that  is,  native-made  cotton-cloth,  is  only  dyed  to
disguise  its  coarseness,  and  it  is  here  represented  as  imagining
that  coloured  calico  is  coloured  for  the  same  reason.  The  proverb
means  that  first  impressions  are  often  erroneous.)

202.  He  who  goes  into  a  river  may  fear,  but  the
river  does  not  fear,

203.  No  one  confesses  that  he  has  eaten  yam  with
a  knife  that  is  missing,

204.  A  fool  of  Ika  and  an  idiot  of  Iluka  meet
together  to  make  friends.

("  Birds  of  a  feather  flock  together.")

205.  The  palm  of  the  hand  deceives  no  one.

(This  answers  to  our  "A  bird  in  the  hand  is  worth  two  in  the  bush.")

206.  No  matter  how  well  an  idol  is  made,  it  must
have  something  to  stand  on.

(Is  used  like  our  "  There  is  no  smoke  without  fii-e.")

207.  Though  the  host  may  be  obliged  to  eat
gbingbindo,  the  guest  expects  at  least  to  be  given  a
handful  of  corn,

(The  fruit  of  the  gbingbindo  is  only  eaten  in  time  of  famine.  The
proverb  is  used  to  check  unreasonable  demands.)


236


THE  YORUBA-SPEAKTNG  PEOPLES.


20S.  Wlien  a  fisli  is  killed  its  tail  is  put  in  its
mouth. .

(Is  said  of  those  who  reap  the  fruit  of  their  own  misdeeds.)

209.  Thanks  are  due  to  the  shoulders  which  keep
the  shirt  from  slipping  off.

210.  As  one  is  walking,  so  is  he  met.

211.  The  monkey  is  sure  to  tear  the  cloth  of  any-
one who  resembles  himself.

212.  An  accident  is  not  like  a  result  that  is  fore-
seen.

213.  One  lock  does  not  know  the  wards  of  another.

214.  If  the  stomach  is  not  strong,  do  not  eat
cockroaches.

215.  The  pangolin  dwelt  in  a  forest,  not  in  a
plain.

(This  is  a  mode  of  saying  that  a  person  is  bashful.)

216.  If  a  man  powerful  in  authority  should  ill-treat

you,  smile  at  him.

217.  He  who  claps  hands  for  a  fool  to  dance  is  no

better  than  the  fool.

218.  When  the  aghali  is  overpowered,  there  remains
only  the  strength  of  the  arahi  to  be  overcome.

(The  agiali  and  arabi  are  two  insects  which,  it  is  popularly  believed,
are  always  found  in  company.)

219.  The  thumb  cannot  point  straight  forward.

(Is  used  when  a  person  has  been  detected  in  some  deceit.)

220.  To  prostrate  oneself  and  keep  the  elbows  close
(to  the  side)  does  something  for  you.

(This  resembles  our  saying  about  holding  a  candle  to  the  devil.)

221.  The  trader  never  acknowledges  that  he  has


PROVERBS.


237


sold  all  his  goods.  Wlien  asked,  lie  will  only  saj,
"Trade  is  a  little  better."

222.  Everything  has  a  price,  but  who  can  put  a
price  on  blood  ?

223.  Famine  compels  one  to  eat  the  fruit  of  all
kinds  of  trees.

("  Necessity  knows  no  law.")

224.  A  fugitive  does  not  stop  to  pick  the  thorns
from  his  foot,  neither  does  he  make  choice  of  his
sauce.

225.  The  ground-pig  (bandicoot)  said :  "  I  do  not
feel  so  angry  with  the  man  who  killed  me,  as  with
the  one  who  dashed  me  on  the  ground  afterwards."

("  Insult  adds  to  injury.")

226.  Never  take  hold  of  a  man  who  has  a  drawn
knife  in  his  hand.

227.  By  labour  comes  wealth.

228.  A  thief  is  more  merciful  than  a  fire.

229.  Odofin  tells  a  bigger  lie  than  Aro.

Aro  says  he  dropped  his  needle  in  the  water ;
Odofin  says  he  heard  the  splash  of  it.

230.  A  knife  cannot  be  so  sharp  as  to  sharpen  its
own  handle.

231.  Joy  has  a  small  body.

232.  Number  one  always  precedes  number  two.

233.  The  horse  never  refuses  a  homeward  gallop.

234.  The  wife  saying,  "I  am  going  to  see  my
mother,"  deceives  the  husband.

235.  He  who  waits  to  see  a  crab  wink  will  tarry
long  upon  the  shore.

236.  The  butterfly  that  brushes  against  thorns  will
tear  its  wings.


238  THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


237.  If  an  orisha  would  kill  a  man  for  cooking  an
unpalatable  soup,  wliat  would  become  of  those  who
cook  nothing  at  all  ?

238.  A  rat  that  has  a  navel  is  a  witch.

239.  That  which  a  child  likes  never  injures  its
stomach.

240.  Quick  loving  a  woman  means  quick  not  loving
a  woman.

("  Marry  in  haste  and  repent  at  leisure.")

241.  One  cannot  show  darkness  by  pointing  it
out.

242.  The  greater  covers  the  less.

243.  Ropes  are  entangled  when  goats  are  tied  to
the  same  post.

244.  Hilts  are  unconscious  of  the  strain  to  which
the  blades  are  subjected.

245.  We  say,  "  Know  it  who  can."    The  knower

will  know.

("  The  cap  fits.")

246.  Without  bad  news  there  is  no  sadness  of
heart.

247.  The  dove  would  not  eat  the  ground-nuts,  or
the  crow  the  white  beans.

("  One  man's  food  is  another  man's  poison.")

248.  Health  is  the  stepping-stone  to  wealth.

249.  Dada  cannot  fight,  but  he  has  a  brave  brother.

250.  As  a  girl  is,  so  is  her  "head-money."

Many  of  the  proverbial  sayings  run  in  couplets,  and
resemble  in  construction  some  of  those  found  in  the
Hebrew  Book  of  Proverbs,  the  object  being  to  estab-


PROVERBS.


239


lisli  an  antithesis  between  two  consecutive  lines,  in
wliicli  noun  is  made  to  answer  to  noun,  and  verb  to
verb.    For  instance,  compare  : —

The  simple  inherit  foUj,

But  the  prudent  are  crowned  with  knowledge.  '

(Proverbs  xiv.  18).

A  gracious  woman  retain  eth  honour,
And  strong  men  retain  riches.

(Proverbs  xi,  16.)

With  the  following  Yoruba  aphorisms  : —

1.  Ordinary  people  are  as  common  as  grass,
But  good  people  are  dearer  than  the  eje.

2.  A  matter  dealt  with  gentlj  is  sure  to  prosper.
But  a  matter  dealt  with  violently  causes  vexation.

3.  Familiarity  induces  contempt.
But  distance  secures  respect.

4.  The  public  assembly  belongs  to  the  town.
But  a  select  council  belongs  to  the  king.

5.  Anger  does  nobody  good,

But  patience  is  the  father  of  kindness.

Anger  draws  arrows  from  the  quiver.

But  good  words  draw  kola-nuts  from  the  bag.

6.  A  fruitful  woman  is  the  enemy  of  the  barren.
And  an  industrious  man  is  the  foe  of  the  lazy.

7.  Beg  for  help,  and  you  will  meet  with  refusers ;
Ask  for  alms,  and  you  will  meet  with  misers.

8.  A  wild  boar  in  the  place  of  a  hog  would  ravage

the  town.

And  a  slave,  made  king,  would  spare  nobody.

9.  When  there  are  no  elders  the  town  is  ruined,
And  when  the  master  dies  the  house  is  desolate.


240


THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


10.  Tlie  absence  of  powder  converts  a  gun  into  a

stick,

And  tlie  death  of  a  father  causes  tlie  dispersion
of  Ms  cliildren.

11.  The  sharpness  of  an  arrow  is  not  like  that  of  a

razor,

And  the  wickedness  of  a  horse  is  not  like  that
of  a  man.

12.  A  pistol  has  not  a  bore  like  a  cannon.
And  a  poor  man  has  not  monej  like  a  rich.

13.  Sorrow  is  after  weeping,

And  mortification  is  after  trouble.

14.  To-day  is  the  elder  brother  of  to-morrow,
And  a  heavy  dew  is  the  elder  brother  of  rain.

15.  A  ram's  mane  gives  him  a  noble  appearance,
And  a  father's  honour  makes  a  son  proud.

16.  No  one  can  separate  the  aghali  from  the  arabi  *
And  no  one  can  deprive  a  man  of  his  inheritance-

The  Yoruba-speaking  peoples  are  fond  of  composing
punning  sentences,  made  up  of  words  having  similar
sounds  but  different  meanings.    Thus  : —
(1)  Abehi  ni  ibe  iku.

Abebi  ni  ibe  orun.
Bi  oru  ba  mu  abebi  ni  ibe  e.

Abebi  means  a  fan,  an  advocate,  or  an  intercessor,
and  the  above  is

An  intercessor  (with  the  gods)  wards  off  death.
An  advocate  (with  the  judge)  wards  off  punish-
ment.

A  fan  wards  off  the  heat  when  it  is  hot.
*  See  Proverb  218.


PROVERBS.


241


(2)  Tgun  ti  ogun  mi  ko  jo  ti  egun.  "  Stabbing  is
not  like  pricking  me  with  a  thorn."  The  play  here
IS  in  the  resemblance  between  the  words  igun,  ogun,
and  egun.

(3)  Bi  alapata  ha  pa  eran,  aivon  alaghata  abu  u  li
ajan.  "  When  the  butcher  kills  the  animal  the
retailers  cut  it  into  pieces."  Here  the  play  is  upon
the  words  alapata  (butcher)  and  alaghata  (pedlar,
retailer,  petty  trader).

(4)  The  following  is  on  the  words  lata  (shoes),
bata-bata  (an  onomatopoeic  word  like  our  "patter
patter"),  apata  (rock),  ajulabata  (chief  drummer),
and  bata  (a  long  drum)  : —

Ojo  pa  bata,  bata-bata-bata,  li  ori  apata;  li  ode
ajulabata,  bata  ni  igi,  bata  li  awo.

"  The  rain  on  the  bata  (shoes),  goes  patter,  patter,
patter,  as  on  the  apata  (rock) ;  in  the  street  of  ajula-
bata, the  bata  (drum)  is  wood,  the  bata  (shoes)  are  of
hide."

(5)  Igba  dodo  li  agbado,  igba  ni  ?  "  What  supports
the  people  if  it  is  not  maize  ?  "  Here  the  play  is  on
igba  dodo  and  agbado.

_  It  is  a  favourite  game  to  repeat  as  fast  as  pos-
sible sentences  difficult  to  pronounce,  like  the  fol-
lowing : —

lyan  mu  ire  yo ;  iyan  ro  ire  ru.  "When  there  is
famine  the  cricket  is  fat  "  (that  is,  is  considered  good
enough  to  eat)  ;  "  when  the  famine  is  over  the  cricket
is  lean  "  {i.e.,  is  rejected).

Kanakana  ha  kanaJcana  ja,  kanaJcana  da  kanaJcana.
"  The  crow  met  the  crow  and  fought,  the  crow  beat
the  crow."


242


THE  rO  RUB  A- SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


The  two  following  are  examples  of  a  play  of  a
different  sort : —

(1)  The  cry  of  the  squirrel  sounds  like  the  word
koTolcoro,  whence  "  It  was  the  squirrel's  own  mouth
that  betrayed  her,  for  when  she  had  brought  forth
two  young  ones  she  carried  them  to  the  roadside  and
said,  "  My  children  are  very  sound,  very  sound,  very
sound"  (Omo  mi  ije  korolcoro,  korohoro,  koroJcoro.)

(2)  The  cry  of  the  bush-fowl  (partridge)  resembles
the  words  kiki  or  a,  "  nothing  but  f  at  "  ;  hence  the
saying,  "With  its  mouth  the  bush-fowl  declares  its
fatness,  crying,  'Nothing  but  fat!  Nothing  but
fat.'  "    {Kild-ora  !  Kiki-ora.)

Riddles  are  sufficiently  common,  but  few  of  them
are  good.    The  following  are  examples  : —

Q.  A  small  confined  room,  with  hardly  anything
in  it  but  pegs.

A.  The  mouth,  with  the  teeth.

Q.  An  associate  who  cannot  be  tamed.

A.  Tire.

Q.  There  is  no  market  in  which  the  dove  with  the
prominent  breast  has  not  traded.
A.  The  cowry.

Q.  A  hen  that  has  many  chickens.
A.  The  Milky  Way.

Q.  I  am  long  and  slim,  I  am  engaged  in  commerce,
and  yet  I  never  reach  the  market.

A.  The  canoe  (which  carries  the  goods  but  stops
at  the  landing-place) .


CHAPTER  XIV.


POLK-LOEB  TALES.


The  Yoruba  folk-lore  tales  are  very  numerous.  The
word  now  commonly  used   to  mean  one  of  these
popular  fables  is  alo,  which  more  properly  means  a
riddle,  or  something  invented,  literally  something
twisted,  or  inverted.    A  reciter  of  tales,  called  an
akpalo  {k^a-alo)  -  maker  of   «Zo,"  is  a  personage
highly  esteemed,  and  in  great  demand  for  social
gatherings.    Some  men,  indeed,  make  a  profession  of
story-telling,  and  wander  from  place  to  place  reciting
tales.    Such  a  man  is  termed  an  akpalo  kpatita,  "  one
who  makes  a  trade  of  telling  fables."    As  among  the
Ewe  tribes,  the  professional  story-teller  very  often
uses  a  drum,  with  the  rhythm  of  which  the  pauses  in
the  narrative  are  filled  up.    When  he  has  gathered  an
audience  around  him,  he  cries  out,  «  My  alo  is  about
so-and-so,"  mentioning  the   name  of  the  hero  or
herome  of  the  tale ;  or  "  My  alo  is  about  a  man  (or
woman)  who  did  so-and-so,"  and,  after  this  preface,
proceeds  with  the  recital.    The  professional  story-
teller must  not  be  confounded  with  the  aroMn,  or
narrator  of  the  national  traditions,  several  of  whom
are  attached  to  each  king  or  paramount  chief,  and
Avho  may  be  regarded  as  the  depositaries  of  the

II  2


244  THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.

ancient  clironicles.  Tlie  cliief  of  tlie  aroldn  is  a
councillor,  bearing  tlie  title  of  Ologlo  "one  wlio
possesses  tlie  old  times,"  and  a  proverb  says  "  Ologho
haba  arokin''  "  Ologbo  is  tlie  father  of  clironiclers."

I.

My  alo  is  about  a  woman  whose  little  girl  made
palm-oil.

One  day  when  she  had  made  palm-oil  she  took  it  to
the  market  to  sell.

She  stayed  in  the  market  selling  her  palm-oil  until
it  was  quite  dark.  And  when  it  was  dark,  a  goblin*
came  to  her  to  buy  palm-oil,  and  paid  her  with  some
cowries.

When  the  little  girl  counted  the  cowries  she  found
that  there  was  one  short,  and  she  asked  the  goblin
for  the  cowry  that  was  wanting.

The  goblin  said  that  he  had  no  more  cowries,  and
the  little  girl  began  crying,  "  My  mother  will  beat
me  if  I  go  home  with  a  cowry  short."

The  goblin  walked  away,  and  the  little  girl  walked
after  him.

"Go  away,"  said  the  goblin;  "turn  back,  for  no
one  can  enter  the  country  where  I  live."

"No,"  said  the  little  girl  ;^"  wherever  you  go  I
will  follow,  until  you  pay  me  my  cowry."

So  the  little  girl  followed,  followed  a  long,  long
way,  till  they  came  to  the  country  where  the  people
stand  on  their  heads  in  their  mortars  and  pound  yams
with  their  heads.

*  Iwin,  goblin,  spirit,  ghost.


FOLK-LOBE  TALES.


245


Then  tliev  went  on  again  a  long  way,  and  they  came
to  a  river  of  filth.    And  the  goblin  sang  : —

Oh  !  young  palm-oil  seller,
yoii  must  now  turn  back."

And  the  girl  sang  : —

"  Save  I  get  my  cowry,
I'll  not  leave  your  track."

Then  the  goblin  sang  again  : —

"  Oh  !  young  palm-oil  seller.
Soon  will  lead  this  track,
To  the  bloody  river,

Then  you  must  turn  back."

And  she  : —

"  I  will  not  turn  back."

And  he  : —

"  See  yon  gloomy  forest  ?  "

And  she  : —

"  I  will  not  turn  back."

And  he  : —

"  See  yon  craggy  mountain  ?  "

And  she  : —

"  I  will  not  turn  back.
Save  I  get  my  cowry
I'll  not  leave  your  track."

Then  they  walked  on  again,  a  long,  long  way;  and  at
last  they  arrived  at  the  land  of  dead  people.

The  goblin  gave  the  little  girl  some  palm-nuts,
with  which  to  make  palm-oil,  and  said  to  her :  "  Eat
the  palm-oil  and  give  me  the  ha-ha*

*  Ha-ha,  the  stiingy  remains  of  the  pulp  of  the  nut  after  the  oil
has  been  expressed.


THE  YOnUBA-SPEAKTXG  PEOPLES.


But  wlien  tlie  palm-oil  was  made  the  little  girl  gave
it  to  the  goblin,  and  eat  the  ha-ha  herself,  and  the
goblin  said,  "  Yery  well."

By-and-by  the  goblin  gave  a  banana  to  the  little
girl,  and  said  :  "Eat  this  banana,  and  give  me  the
skin."  But  the  little  girl  peeled  the  banana  and  gave
it  -to  the  goblin,  and  eat  the  skin  herself.

Then  the  goblin  said  to  the  little  girl :  "  Gro  and
pick  three  ados*  Do  not  pick  the  ados  which  cry
'  Pick  me,  pick  me,  pick  me,'  but  pick  those  which
say  nothing,  and  then  return  to  your  home.  When
you  are  half-way  back  break  one  ado,  break  another
when  you  are  at  the  house-door,  and  the  third  when
you  are  inside  the  house."  And  the  little  girl  said,
"  Yery  well."

She  picked  the  ados  as  she  was  told,  and  returned
home.

When  she  was  half-way  she  broke  one  ado,  and
behold,  many  slaves  and  horses  appeared,  and  followed
her.

When  she  was  at  the  house-door,  the  little  girl
broke  the  second  ado,  and  behold,  many  creatures
appeared,  sheep,  and  goats,  and  fowls,  more  than  two
hundred,  and  followed  her.

Then,  when  she  had  entered  the  house,  the  little
girl  broke  the  last  ado,  and  at  once  the  house  was
filled  to  overflowing  with  cowries,  which  poured  out
of  the  doors  and  windows.

The  mother  of  the  little  girl  took  twenty  country-
cloths,  twenty  strings  of  valuable  beads,  twenty  sheep

*  The  ado  is  a  very  small  calabash,  commonly  used  for  keeping
mcdicinnl  powdcvs  in.


FOLK-LORE  TALES.  247

and  goats,  and  twenty  fowls,  and  went  to  make  a
present  to  tlie  liead  wife.*

The  liead  wife  asked  whence  all  these  things  came,
and  when  she  had  been  told,  she  refused  to  accept
them.  She  said  she  would  send  her  own  child  to  do
the  same,  and  that  she  could  easily  get  as  much.f

Then  the  head  wife  made  palm-oil,  and  gave  it  to
her  own  little  girl,  and  told  her  to  go  and  sell  it  in
the  market.

The  little  girl  went  to  the  market.  The  goblin
came,  bought  palm-oil  of  her,  and  paid  her  with
cowries.  He  gave  the  proper  number  of  cowries,  but
the  little  girl  hid  one  and  pretended  that  he  had  not
given  her  enough.

"  What  am  I  to  do  ?  "  said  the  goblin.  "  I  have  no
more  cowries."

"  Oh,"  said  the  little  girl,  "  I  will  follow  you  to
your  house,  and  then  you  can  pay  me."

And  the  goblin  said  :  "  Yery  well."

Then  the  two  walked  together,  and  presently  the
goblin  began  singing,  as  he  had  done  the  first  time.
He  sang : —

Oh  !  young  palm-oil  seller,
You  must  now  turn  back."

*  Head  -wife,  lyale  (lya-ile,  Mistress  of  the  House).  As  already
explained,  the  subordinate  wives,  of  which  the  mother  of  the  girl  in
the  story  was  one,  are  called  lya-ioo.

t  From  the  European  point  of  view  this  would  appear  to  be  a  good
trait  on  the  part  of  the  iyale,  for  the  inference  would  be  that  she  did
not  wish  to  deprive  the  sub-wife  of  so  much  property,  but  that  is  not
the  native  view.  To  the  native  mind  a  person  only  refuses  a  present
when  he  is  nurturing  rancour  against  the  donor,  and  to  refuse  a  gift
is  regarded  as  a  sign  of  enmity.


248


THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


And  tlie  little  girl  sang  : —

"  I  will  not  turn  back."

And  the  goblin  : —

"  You  must  leave  the  track."
And  tlie  girl : —

"  I  will  not  turn  back."

Then  the  goblin  said  :  "  Yery  well.  Come  along."
And  they  walked  on  till  they  reached  the  land  of  dead
people.

The  goblin  gave  the  little  girl  some  palm-nuts,  and
told  her  to  make  palm-oil.  He  said :  "  When  the
palm-oil  is  made,  eat  it  yourself,  and  bring  me  the
ha-ha."  And  the  little  girl  eat  the  palm-oil  and
brought  the  ha-ha  to  the  goblin.  And  the  goblin
said  :  "  Yery  well."

Then  the  goblin  gave  a  banana  to  the  little  girl,
and  told  her  to  peel  it.  He  said :  "Eat  the  banana
yourself  and  bring  me  the  skin."  And  the  little  girl
eat  the  banana  and  carried  the  skin  to  the  goblin.
.  Then  the  goblin  said  :  "  Gro  and  pick  three  ados.
Do  not  pick  those  which  cry  '  Pick  me,  pick  me,  pick
me,'  but  pick  those  which  say  nothing."

The  little  girl  went.  She  found  ados  which  said
nothing  and  she  left  them  alone.  She  found  others
which  cried,  "Pick  me,  pick  me,  pick  me,"  and  she
picked  three  of  them.

Then  the  goblin  said  to  her,  "  When  you  are  half-
way home  break  one  ado ;  when  you  are  at  the  door
break  another ;  and  break  the  third  when  you  are
inside  the  house."

Half-way  home  the  little  girl  broke  one  ado,  and


FOLK-LORE  TALES.


249


behold,  numbers  of  lions,  and  leopards,  and  hyenas,
and  snakes,  appeared.  They  ran  after  her,  and
harassed  her,  and  bit  her  till  she  reached  the  door
of  the  house.

Then  she  broke  the  second  ado,  and  behold,  more
ferocious  animals  came  upon  her  and  bit  her  and  tore
her  at  the  door.  The  door  was  shut,  and  there  was
only  a  deaf  person  in  the  house.  The  little  girl
called  to  the  deaf  person  to  open  the  door,  but  he
heard  her  not.  And  there,  upon  the  threshold,  the
wild  beasts  killed  the  little  girl.

[I.

My  alo  is  about  a  poor  young  woman.*

There  was  a  poor  young  woman  who  had  a  child.
She  was  so  poor  that  she  could  not  even  buy  a  cloth
to  wear,  and  her  child  was  held  on  her  back  with  a
plantain-leaf.

The  poor  young  woman  used  to  go  into  the  forest
to  cut  fire-wood  to  sell.  One  day  she  went  there  as
usual.  There  was  a  tall  tree,  and  under  it  she  put
down  her  child  to  sleep  in  the  shade.

Now  in  this  tree  there  was  an  aTanran,'\  and  while
the  young  woman  was  cutting  fire-wood,  the  aranran
seized  the  child,  and  carried  it  up  into  the  tree.

When  the  young  woman  had  made  up  her  bundle
of  wood,  she  came  back  to  the  place  where  she  had
left  her  child,  and  could  not  find  it.

*  This  story  is  also  about  the  discomfiture  of  an  iyale,  which  is  a
favourite  theme.    The  plot  resembles  the  foregoing,
f  Aranran,  a  bird  of  prey  ;  probably  from  ra,  to  hover.


250


THE  YORUBA-SPEAKTNG  PEOPLES.


Slie  looked  everywhere,  but  still  could  not  find  it,
and  slie  ran  to-and-fro,  crying  bitterly.

At  last  slie  looked  up,  and  tlien  ske  saw  ker  ckild
in  tke  claws  of  tke  aranran,  kigk  up  in  tke  tree-top.
And  ske  began  to  sing  : —

"  Aranran,  eiye  igbo,  igho,'''
Give  me  back  my  child,  oh,  igbo.
Here  is  a  rope  of  tie-tie,t  igbo  ;
Quickly  let  my  child  down,  igbo."

"Wken  tke  young  woman  kad  sung  tkis,  tke
aranran  tkrew  down  to  ker  a  bag  of  coral  beads.

Tke  young  woman  ran  to  tke  bag  and  opened  it,
but  ker  ckild  was  not  in  it,  so  ske  tkrew  tke  bag
down  and  sang  again  : —

"  Aranran,  eiye  igbo,  igbo.
Give  me  back  my  child,  oh,  igbo.
Here  is  a  rope  of  tie-tie,  igbo  ;
Quickly  let  my  child  down,  igbo."

Tken  tke  aranran  took  all  kinds  of  valuable  pro-
perty, and  tkrew  tkem  down  to  ker.  And  tke  motker
looked  kere  and  looked  tkere  as  tke  tkings  fell,  but
ker  ckild  was  still  not  tkere,  so  ske  sang  again,  tke
same  song,  a  tkird  time.

Tken  tke  aranran  took  tke  ckild  and  flew  down
witk  it  and  placed  it  gently  on  tke  ground.

Tke  young  woman  ran  to  ker  ckild,  took  kim  up,

*  Eiye,h\x&;  igbo,  forest,  bush.  Hence  eiye  igbo  answers  to  our
"  wild  bird."  The  native  words  are  here  retained  in  order  to  preserve
the  rhythm.

j  Tie-tie  is  an  Anglo-African  term  for  the  various  kinds  of
parasitical  vines  which  are  used  as  substitutes  for  cord.  They  are
sometimes  called  "  bush-rope."


FOLK-LOU K  TA LES.


251


and  put  liim  on  her  hack.  She  picked,  up  also  all
the  things  that  the  aranran  had  thrown  down  to  her.
And  from  being  poor,  she  now  became  rich.

After  returning  home  the  young  woman  took
twenty  strings  of  coral  beads,  and  went  to  offer  them
to  the  iyale ;  but  the  iyale,  when  she  learned  how  the
young  woman  had  come  by  the  beads,  refused  them.

The  iyale  took  a  child  belonging  to  one  of  the  other
wives  and  carried  it  into  the  bush.  She  put  it  under
the  tree  of  the  aranran,  and  went  away  to  cut  wood.

But  while  she  was  away  cutting  wood  the  aranran
carried  off  the  child,  and  killed  and  ate  it.

"When  the  iyale  returned  to  the  foot  of  the  tree,  and
could  not  find  the  child,  she  began  to  sing,  as  the
young  woman  had  done  : —

"  Aranran,  eiye  igbo,  igho,
Give  me  back  my  child,  oh,  igho.
Here  is  a  rope  of  tie-tie,  igho  ;
Quickly  let  my  child  down,  igho.''

Then  the  aranran  voided  copiously  into  a  bag,  tied  up
the  neck  of  the  bag,  and  threw  it  down.

The  iyale  ran  to  the  bag,  picked  it  up,  and  untied
it.  She  found  it  full  of  filth,  and  she  threw  it  away.
Then  she  sang  again,  as  before.

This  time  the  aranran  made  water  in  a  large  cala-
bash, and  let  it  fall,  so  that  it  broke  upon  the  woman's
head.    And  the  iyale  sang  a  third  time  : —

"  Aranran,  eiye,  igho,  igho,
Give  me  back  my  child,  oh,  igho.
Here  is  a  rope  of  tie-tie,  igbo  ;
Qiiiclvly  let  my  child  down,  igho.'"


252


THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


Then  tlie  aranran  took  up  the  bones  of  the  child  and
threw  them  down  at  her.

The  iyale  ran  and  looked  at  the  bones  of  the  child,
and  she  cried  out,  "  This  is  not  my  child.  It  is  the
child  of  another  woman  that  this  bird  has  killed,
believing  it  to  be  mine."    And  she  went  away.

When  she  reached  home,  the  mother  of  the  child
came  to  the  iyale  for  her  little  one.  And  the  iyale
said  that  the  child  was  quite  well,  but  was  not  with
her.

Many  times  the  mother  came  to  ask  for  her  child,
and  when  three  months  had  passed  and  the  child  had
not  been  restored  to  her,  she  carried  the  case  before
the  king.

She  told  the  king  all  that  had  taken  place,  that  the
hjale  had  taken  the  child  from  her  hands,  and,  though
three  months  had  passed,  had  not  yet  brought  it  back.

The  king  summoned  the  iyale  to  his  court,  and
asked  her,  "  What  have  you  done  with  the  child  ?
Where  is  it?"  And  the  iyale  answered,  "What  do
you  suppose  I  should  do  with  it  ?  "

Then  the  king  said  to  the  people  who  were
assembled,  "  If  this  woman  belonged  to  you,  what
would  you  do  with  her  ?  "  And  all  the  people  replied,
"  If  she  belonged  to  us  we  would  put  her  to  death."

And  the  king  said,  "  Let  her  then  be  put  to  death."
And  so  the  iyale  was  killed.

III.

Why  the  ajao  remained  unhuried.
My  alo  is  of  the  a.jao.*

*  Ajao,  a  kind  of  flying-fox,  or  large  bat.


FOLK-LORE  TALES.


253


Tlie  ajao  lay  in  liis  house  very  sick,  and  tliere  was
no  one  to  tend  liim.    The  ajao  died.

The  neighbours  said,  "  The  ajao  is  dead ;  we  mnst
call  his  relatives  to  come  and  perform  the  funeral
ceremonies,  and  bury  him."  And  they  went  and
called  the  birds,  saying  "  Your  relation  is  dead."

The  birds  came,  and  when  they  saw  that  the
deceased  was  an  ajao,  they  said,  "  This  is  not  one  of
our  family.  All  our  family  wear  feathers,  and
you  see  the  ajao  has  none.  He  does  not  belong  to
us."    And  they  went  away.

The  neighbours  consulted  together.  Thej  said,
"  The  birds  are  right.  The  ajao  has  no  feathers,  and
is  not  of  the  family  of  birds.  He  must  be  of  the
family  of  rats."  And  they  went  and  called  the  rats,
saying,  "  Your  relation  is  dead."

The  rats  came,  but  when  they  saw  that  the  deceased
was  an  ajao  they  also  denied  him.  They  said,  "  This
is  not  one  of  our  family.  Everyone  who  is  of  our
family '  has  a  tail,  and  you  see  the  ajao  has  none."
And  they  went  away.

Thus  the  ajao,  having  no  relations,  remained
unburied.*

IV.

My  alo  is  something  about  a  certain  king.

One  day  the  king  called  all  the  birds  to  come  and
clear  a  piece  of  ground.  But  he  forgot  to  call  Ic'im-
Icini.f

*  See  Proverb  179.

■f  A  small  black  and  wliitc  bird,  sometimes  called  the  doctor-bird.
It  is  named  i'rom  its  cry,  wliicli  resembles  the  words  kini-ldin.


2bi


THE  YORUBA-SPEAJCING  PEOPLES.


All  tlie  birds  came.  They  set  to  work,  and  they
cleared  a  large  piece  of  ground.

In  the  middle  of  the  piece  of  ground  was  an  odan-
tree.*  At  mid-day,  when  the  smi  was  hot,  and  all
the  birds  had  left  their  work  for  the  day,  kini-kini
came  and  perched  on  the  odan-tvQQ,  and  began  to
sing  : —

"  The  king  sent  to  invite  my  companions,

Kini-kini.

He  assembled  all  the  children  of  the  folk  with  wings,

Kini-hini.

Grow  grass,  sprout  bnsh,

Kini-hini,
Come,  let  us  go  to  the  house,

Kini-kini.
And  there  we  can  dance  the  bata,

Kini-kini.

If  the  bata  will  not  sound  we  will  dance  the  clundun,

Kini-kini.

If  the  dundun  will  not  sound  we  will  dance  the  gangan,]

Kini-kini."

Next  morning,  when  the  birds  came  to  work,  they
found  the  ground  they  had  cleared  all  grown  over
with  gra.ss  and  bush.  They  went  and  told  the  king.
The  king  said,  "  That  is  nothing ;  clear  it  again."

*  Odan,  a  variety  of  ficus,  which  is  planted  in  streets  and  open
spaces  as  a  shade-tree.

j"  Bata,  dundun,  and  gangan,  arc  the  names  of  different  kinds  of
drums.  The  bata  is  a  tall  drum,  the  dundun  is  hung  with  little  bells,
and  the  gangan  is  properly  a  war-drum.  These  names  are  onomato-
pceic.  Each  drum  has  its  own  measnre  and  rhythm,  and  people  say
"to  dance  tlie  bata,  to  dance  the  dundun,  or  to  dance  the  gangan,"
just  as  we  say,  "  to  dance  a  waltz,  to  dance  a  polka,  or  to  dance  a
quadrille."


FOLK-LORE  TALES.


255


The  birds  went  to  work  and  cleared  it  again,  and  at
mid-day  went  away.  Tlie  kini-Jcini  came  back  and
sang  his  song  again,  and  again  the  grass  and  bush
sprang  up.

Next  day  the  birds,  when  they  saw  what  had
happened,  went  and  informed  the  king.  "  No
matter,"  said  the  king,  "  clear  the  ground  again."

A  third  time  the  birds  cleared  the  ground  and  went
away,  and  a  third  time  the  kini-hini  came  and  sang
so  that  the  grass  and  bush  sprang  up.

The  next  day,  when  the  birds  found  the  ground
covered  with  bush,  they  went  to  the  king.  They
asked  the  king  to  give  them  authority  to  seize  the
person  who  had  played  this  trick.  The  king  said,
"  Yery  well."

Then  all  the  birds  went  back  to  the  piece  of  ground;
they  put  a  great  quantity  of  birdlime  on  the  oclo.n-
tree ;  then  they  went  home.

Next  morning  they  came  and  cleared  the  ground
again,  and  at  mid-day  went  and  hid  in  the  bush
close  by.

The  Jdni-ldni  came  and  perched  on  the  odan.  He
sang  his  song,  and  the  grass  and  bush  grew  up.  Then
he  wanted  to  fly  away,  but  he  found  himself  held  by
the  birdlime.

Then  all  the  birds  flocked  to  the  tree  and  saw  the
kini-Jchii.  They  seized  him  and  brought  him  to  the
king.  They  said  to  the  king,  "  Behold  the  one  who
has  caused  iis  so  much  trouble."

The  king  made  the  Jdni-ldni  come  near.  "  What
have  I  done  to  you,"  he  asked,  "  that  you  should  act
thus  ?  "     The  Jdni-ldni  said,   "  When  you  called  all


256


THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


my  companions  to  clear  the  ground  you  left  me  out,
therefore  I  have  revenged  myself."

When  the  king  heard  this,  he  raised  his  hand  to
give  the  Jdni-ldni  a  slap.

"  Pardon,  pardon,"  said  the  Idni-lmii.  "  If  I  find
any  cowries  I  will  give  them  to  you.  When  I  get
any  kola-nuts  I  will  bring  them  to  you."

The  king  gave  the  bird  a  slap,  and  the  kini-ldni
voided  out  cowries  till  the  room  was  filled.

"  What  is  this  ?  "  said  the  king,  much  astonished,
and  he  raised  his  hand  again  to  give  the  kini-Tdni  a
slap.

"  I  beg  pardon,"  said  the  bird.  "  If  I  find  any
cowries  I  will  give  them  to  you.  When  I  get  any
kola-nuts  I  will  bring  them  to  you."

The  king  gave  him  a  slap,  and  the  Jdni-ldni  voided
from  his  body  still  more  cowries  than  the  first  time.

The  king  sent  messengers  through  all  the  country,
and  summoned  all  his  people  to  assemble  on  the  fifth
day,  to  see  a  marvel.  All  the  people  promised  to
come.

Then  the  king  put  the  kini-kini  in  a  basket.  He
covered  the  top  of  the  basket  and  went  out.  His
little  son,  who  wanted  to  give  the  kini-kini  a  slap
himself,  uncovered  the  basket,  and  the  bird  flew
away.

When  the  king  came  home  he  went  to  the  basket.
He  found  no  bird  in  it,  and  he  called  his  son.
"  Where  is  the  kini-kini  ?  "  he  asked.
.  The  little  boy  answered  that  he  had  gone  to  play
with  it,  and  that  the  bird  had  flown  away.  The  king
took  the  little  boy  and  beat  him.  He  beat  him — he  beat


FOLK-LORE  TALES.


257


Him,  and,  in  liis  anger,  lie  cut  off  one  of  his  ears.
"  Gro  quick,"  lie  said.  "  Gro  quick,  and  find  tlie  bird."
He  pushed  liim  out  of  tlie  house.

The  boy  made  a  little  drum,  and  went  on  the  road
to  the  bush.  He  sat  down  in  a  place  in  the  bush
where  the  birds  were  accustomed  to  come.  He  began
to  beat  on  his  drum,  and  the  drum  said : —

"  Tinliki,  fcinliki,  tinli — ^puru.

Tinli — puru."

All  the  birds  flocked  round,  and  each  danced  in
turn.  When  it  came  to  the  turn  of  the  kini-kini
to  dance,  the  kini-kini  did  not  want  to  dance.
All  the  birds  begged  him  to  dance,  but  he
refused.

Then  the  boy  played  quicker  on  the  drum.  He
beat,  and  beat,  and  beat,  while  all  the  birds  begged
the  kini-kini.

At  last  the  kini-kini  began  to  yield.  He  twisted
here  and  he  twisted  there.  He  flew  three  times
round  the  head  of  the  little  boy.  The  boy  continued
beating  as  if  he  had  not  noticed  anything,  and  the
Jdni-Jdni  began  to  dance.

He  turned  here  and  twisted  there.  He  turned,
and  twisted,  and  turned,  till  he  came  quite  close  up
to  the  drum.  Then  the  little  boy  thrust  out  his
hand  and  seized  the  kini-kini  by  the  leg.  All  the
other  birds  flew  away.

The  boy  brought  the  kini-kini  to  his  father.  "I
have  caught  him,"  he  said.  "Here  he  is.  Won't
you  do  something  now  to  restore  my  ear  ?  "

Then  the  king  got  up.    He  took  a  dead  leaf  and

s


258


THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


put  it  in  tlie  place  of  the  ear.  And  tlie  dead  leaf
softened  and  changed  into  an  ear.

"We  now  come  to  those  tales  which  may  be  called
"Tortoise  Stories,"  since  the  tortoise  {aivon)  always
plays  a  leading  part  in  them.  The  tortoise  has,  in
these  tales,  various  superhuman  powers  attributed
to  him,  and,  in  most,  is  described  as  acting  craftily
or  mischievously.  He,  in  fact,  fills  in  the  folk-lore
tales  of  the  Slave  Coast  the  place  of  the  spider
{anansi)  in  the  tales  of  the  Grold  Coast,  and  which
are  in  consequence  known  as  Anansi  'sem  {Anansi
asem),  "  Spider  Stories."  In  these  the  spider  is
always  depicted  as  showing  great  skill  and  craft,
and,  like  the  minor  gods,  is  represented  as  speaking-
through  the  nose.

The  names  Tortoise  and  Spider  are  in  these  stories
used  as  the  proper  names  of  anthropomorphic  per-
sonages, and  among  the  Tshi  tribes  the  latter  is  called
Aj'ija  Anansi,  "  Father  Spider,"  or  "  Father  Anansi."
Thus,  the  Yoruba  proverbial  saying,  Eji  Awon  ho  Icon
ni  li  owo,  used  to  convey  the  meaning  that  a  matter
which  at  first  sight  appears  insignificant  may  really
be  one  of  great  importance,  should  not  be  translated
"  The  blood  of  the  tortoise  is  not  a  handful  "  (literally,
"  does  not  fill  a  hand  "),  but  "  the  blood  of  Aivon  "
(the  mythical  personage,  or  anthropomorphic  tortoise)
"is  not  a  handful."  An  epithet  of  the  tortoise  is
ajajja,  "bald-headed  elf,"  or  "hairless  elf  "  {aja,  elf;
pa,  to  be  bald  or  bare).  The  flickering  appearance
seen  near  the  ground  on  sultry  days  is  called  "  tortoise-
fire,"  and  is  believed  to  be  caused  by  a  subterranean


FOLK-LORE  TALES.


259


fire  made  bj  the  tortoise  to  destroy  tlie  roots  of  trees.
The  tortoise  appears  in  several  proverbial  sayings,
as  "  The  tortoise  (or  Awon)  is  always  the  subject  of
an  alo  "  (tale),  and  "  The  house  of  the  tortoise  is  not
large  enough  for  itself.  The  verandah  "  (that  is,  that
part  of  the  shell  which  projects  over  the  tail)  "  of
a  tortoise  will  not  accommodate  a  guest.  The
tortoise,  having  built  its  house,  makes  the  verandah
behind  it ;  "  while  "As  the  tortoise  meets  with  due
regard,  so  also  should  the  snail,"  seems  to  indicate
that  the  tortoise  is  regarded  with  reverence  or  respect.

It  is  possible  that  totemism  lies  at  the  root  of  these
phenomena.    On  the  Gold  Coast  there  is  a  tradition
that  all  mankind  are  descended  from  Anansi,  and  on
the  Slave  Coast  the  figure  of  the  tortoise  is  frequently
seen  carved  on  the  doors  of  temples,  together  with  the
leopard,  serpent,  and  a  fish.    On  the  whole,  however,
it  seems  more  probable  that  the  peculiarities  which
make  the  spider  and  the  tortoise  each  in  its  own  way
remarkable,  have  led  to  their  selection  for  the  chief
role  in  the  popular  fables.    The  tales  being  largely
about  animals,  those  creatures  which  most  excited
wonder  and  speculation  in  the  minds  of  the  natives
would  be  the  ones  to  which  the  most  wonderful
attributes  would  be  ascribed ;  and,  in  the  case  of  the
spider,  the  ingenuity  and  patience  displayed  by  it  in
the  construction  of  its  web  would  be  attributed  to  the
anthropomorphic  spider  of  the  stories.    There  is  at
the  present  time  no  spider-clan  among  the  totem-
clans  of  the  Gold  Coast,  and,  as  the  communities
of  the  G-old  Coast  are   heterogeneous,  Ave  cannot
suppose  that  an  entire  clan  has  become  extinct,  unless

s  2


260  THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.

the  extinction  took  place  in  the  remote  past  when
communities  were  homogeneous ;  in  which  case
there  seems  no  sufficient  reason  for  the  memory  of
the  totem-ancestor  being  preserved,  after  the  dis-
appearance of  all  those  who  were  supposed  to  be
descended  from  him.

Tortoise  Stories.
I.

My  alo  is  something  about  a  woman  named  Olu.

Olu  had  a  son  named  Sigo,  and  Sigo  determined
to  be  a  hunter.

His  father  gave  him  a  horse,  his  mother  gave  him
a  sheep,  and  they  told  him  to  go  and  hunt.  So  Sigo
took  his  bow  and  arrows,  mounted  the  horse,  and  rode
away  into  the  bush.

He  travelled  a  long  way,  and  at  last  arrived  at  the
haunt  of  animals.

Then  the  sky  became  overcast,  and  it  grew  so  dark
that  Sigo  could  scarcely  see.  Soon  the  rain  poured  in
torrents.  It  fell  so  heavily  that  Sigo  was  washed  by
the  water  into  a  deep  gully.  He  tried  to  get  out,  but
could  not,  and  remained  there  weeping  and  lamenting.

The  rain  ceased,  and  Tortoise,  always  on  the  look-
out for  opportunities,  came  to  the  gully.

Sigo  saw  him,  and  stretched  his  neck  up  to  the
blink  of  the  gully.  "Hi!  Tortoise!  Oh!  bald-
headed  elf  I    Hi !  "  he  cried.

Tortoise  came  and  leant  over  the  edge  of  the  gully
to  see  who  was  calling  him.  "  What  are  you  doing
there  ?  "  he  said.  "  The  flood  of  the  rain  washed  me
in  here,"  said  Sigo.


FOLK-LORE  TALES.


261


"What  will  you  give  me  if  I  piiU  you  out?"
asked  Tortoise.  "  I  will  be  your  slave,"  replied
Sigo.  "  Very  well,"  said  Tortoise,  the  bald-headed
elf.

Tortoise  climbed  down  into  the  gully  and  took  Sigo
out.  He  said  to  him,  "  I  am  going  to  make  a  large
drum,  and  shall  put  you  inside  it.  "When  we  come
to  any  house,  and  I  begin  playing  on  the  drum,  take
care  that  you  sing  well."  "I  understand,"  said
Sigo.

When  he  reached  the  town  in  which  he  lived,
Tortoise,  the  bald-headed  elf,  went  to  the  king  and
boasted  of  the  fine  sound  of  his  drum.  The  king
ordered  Tortoise  to  bring  the  drum  and  beat  it  in  his
presence,  so  that  he  could  hear  the  sound.

"Very  well,"  said  Tortoise;  "send  and  call  all
the  town  to  the  dance."  "  Very  good,"  said  the  king,
and  he  sent  all  through  the  town  to  invite  the  people
to  come  and  dance.

When  all  the  people  had  assembled  the  king  sent
to  call  the  bald-headed  elf.  The  bald-headed  elf  took
his  drum,  and  came  into  the  midst  of  the  assembly.
He  beat  the  drum  with  the  stick,  and  the  drum
sounded,  saying : —

"  Sigo  is  the  son  of  Ola  ;*

Ah  !  let  me  be  rescued.
His  mother  gave  him  a  sheep,  and  told  him  to  go  and  hunt ;

Ah  !  let  me  be  rescued.
His  father  gave  him  a  horse,  and  told  him  to  go  and  hunt  ;

Ah  !  let  me  be  rescued.


*  There  is  perhaps  pome  pun  in  this.  Olu  means  a  clapper,  or
anything  to  strike  with,  and  ilu  meana  a  drum.


THE  YOliUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


Listen  to  what  I  say.    lie  went  to  the  Repliant's  haunt ;

Ah  !  let  me  be  rescued.
Listen  to  what  I  sny.    He  went  to  tlie  buffalo's  lair:

Ah  !  let  me  be  rescued.
The  flood  of  the  rain  washed  him  into  the  cleft;

Ah  !  let  me  be  rescued.

And  so  he  became  the  Tortoise's  slave  ;

Ah  !  let  me  be  rescued."

The  people  were  much  astonished,  and  clapped
their  hands  to  their  mouths  in  wonder.  The  king
told  Tortoise  to  beat  the  drum  again,  and  let  him
hear  once  more.

Tortoise  beat  his  dram  a  second  time,  and  the
people  cried  out  aloud  at  the  marvel.  Then  Tortoise
returned  home.

Before  long  the  mistresses  of  the  house  to  which
Sigo  belonged  came  to  Tortoise,  and  asked  him  to
come  and  beat  his  drum  at  a  dance  they  were  about  to
have.  The  bald-headed  elf  said  "Yery  good."  He
took  his  drum  and  he  went  there.

When  he  arrived  the  wives  made  ready  some  gruel
of  Indian  corn,*  and  bought  some  rum.  They  asked
Tortoise  to  beat  his  drum.  Tortoise  beat  h^s  drum,
and  the  drum  sang  : —

Sigo  is  the  son  of  Olu ;

Ah !  let  me  be  rescued.
His  mother  gave  him  a  sheep,  and  told  him  to  go  and  hunt;

Ah  !  let  rac  be  rescued.
His  father  gave  him  a  horse,  and  told  him  to  go  and  hunt ;

Ah  I  let  me  be  rescued.
Listen  to  what  I  say.    He  went  to  the  elephant's  haunt ;

Ah  !  let  me  be  rescued.


*  Oka,


FOLK-LORE  TALES.


2G3


Listen  to  what  I  say.    He  went  to  the  buffalo's  lair;

Ah  !  let  me  be  rescued.
The  flood  of  the  rain  washed  him  into  the  cleft;

Ah  !  let  me  be  rescued.
And  so  he  became  the  Tortoise's  slave ;

Ah  !  let  me  be  rescued."

Tliej  gave  Tortoise  to  eat.  Tortoise  ate.  They
gave  him  rum  to  drink.  He  drank,  and,  becoming
drunk,  fell  asleep.

When  Tortoise  was  asleep  they  took  his  drum.
They  took  off  the  drum-head,  and  took  Sigo  out.
Then  they  put  the  head  back  as  it  was  before.

When  he  awoke.  Tortoise  took  his  drum  and  began
beating  on  it.  A  crow  croaked  in  the  drum.  Tortoise
beat  harder  and  quicker,  and  the  crow  croaked  louder
and  louder.  He  cried,  as  loud  as  he  could,  "  Why,
when  you  were  eating,  did  you  not  give  something  to
eat  to  the  drum?  Why,  when  you  were  drinking,  did
not  you  give  some  of  the  rum  to  the  drum  P  "

Tortoise  went  home.  He  took  off  the  drum-head,
and  found  a  crow  in  the  drum.


II.

My  alo  is  something  about  a  certain  king.

The  king  had  a  daughter  who  was  dumb.  The
girl's  name  was  Bola.

The  king  did  all  he  could  to  make  his  daughter
speak.  All  that  he  did  was  of  no  avail,  so  he  did  not
keep  the  girl  in  the  town ;  he  sent  her  into  the
country.

Tortoise,  of  the  thousand  cunning  tricks,  came  to


264  THE  YORUBA-SPEAKI^G  PEOPLES.

the  king  and  said  to  liim,  "  Wliat  will  you  give  me  if
I  make  your  cliild  speak  ?  "  "I  will  divide  my  house
into  two  halves,"  said  the  king,  "and  I  will  give  you
one  half."

The  bald-headed  elf  went  and  bought  a  bottle  of
honey,  and  came  to  the  bush,  where  the  girl  was
living.  He  put  the  honey  on  the  groand  and  went
and  hid  himself.

The  girl  came  and  saw  the  bottle  of  honey  and  put
out  her  hand  to  it.

Tortoise  came  out  of  his  hiding-place,  came  behind
the  girl,  and  gave  her  a  slap,  crying,  "  Thief  !  So  it
is  you  who  steal  my  honey  and  eat  it."

"  I  ?  "  said  the  yoimg  girl.  "  I  have  stolen  your
honey  to  eat  ?    I  ?  "

Then  Tortoise,  the  crafty,  tied  her  with  a  rope,  and
sang  : —

"  Bola  stole  honey  to  eat  ;

Kayin,  Kayin.*
Bola  is  a  cunning  cheat  ;

Kayin,  Kayin.
Bola  is  a  shameless  thief  ;

Kayin,  Kayin."

When  Tortoise  sung  this,  the  young  girl  sang : —

"  Into  the  wood  of  the  elephant  I  went  with  the  elephant  ;

Kayin,  Kayin.
Into  the  wood  of  the  buffalo  I  went  with  the  buffalo ;

Kayin,  Kayin.

And  Tortoise  has  come  to  accuse  me  of  stealing  honey  to  eat  ;

Kayin,  Kayin."

Tortoise,  the  mischievous,  led  the  young  girl  back  to
*  Kayin  (ka-iyin),  to  celebrate,  or  sing  the  praises  of.


FOLK-LORE  TALES.


265


tlie  town.  He  was  singing  his  song,  and  she  was
answering  with  her  song.  In  this  manner  they
arrived  before  the  king,  who  cried  out  with  astonish-
ment, "  Mj  daughter,  who  has  never  been  heard  to
speak,  speaks  to-day  !  "

The  king  divided  his  palace  in  half,  and  gave  one
half  to  Tortoise,  the  bald-headed  elf.

That  is  how  Tortoise  succeeds  in  everything.

III.

My  alo  is  about  Tortoise  and  the  elephant.

The  bald-headed  elf  one  day  told  the  other  animals
that  he  would  ride  the  elephant,  but  all  the  animals
said  :  "  No,  you  can't  ride  the  elephant."

The  bald-headed  elf  said  :  "  Well,  I  will  make  a
wager  that  I  will  ride  the  elephant  into  town."  And
the  other  animals  agreed  to  the  wager.

Tortoise  went  into  the  forest  and  met  the  elephant.
He  said  to  him  :  "  My  father,  all  the  animals  say  you
are  too  stout  and  big  to  come  to  town."

The  elephant  was  vexed.  He  said  :  "  The  animals
are  fools.  If  I  do  not  come  to  town  it  is  because  I
prefer  the  forest.  Besides,  I  do  not  know  the  way  to
town."

"  Oh  !  "  said  the  bald-headed  elf,  "  then  come  with
me.  I  will  show  you  the  way  to  the  town,  and  you
can  put  all  the  animals  to  shame."

So  the  elephant  followed  him.

When  they  were  near  the  town  the  bald-headed
elf  said  :  "  My  father,  I  am  tired.  Will  you  kindly
allow  me  to  get  on  your  back."


THE   YORUBA-SrEAKING  PEOPLES.


"All  right,"  said  the  elephant.  He  knelt  down,
and  Tortoise  climbed  up  on  his  back.  Then  they
went  on  along  the  road.

The  bald-headed  elf  said :  "  My  father,  when  I
scratch  your  back  you  must  run,  and  when  I  knock
my  head  against  your  back  you  must  run  faster ;  then
you  will  make  a  fine  display  in  the  town."  The
elephant  said  :  "  Yery  well."

When  they  came  near  the  town,  the  bald-headed  elf
scratched  the  elephant's  back,  and  he  began  to  run.
He  knocked  his  back  with  his  head,  and  the  elephant
ran  faster.

The  animals,  when  they  saw  this,  were  frightened.
They  went  into  their  houses,  but  they  looked  out  of
their  windows.  And  Tortoise  called  out  to  them  :
"  Did  I  not  say  I  would  ride  my  father's  slave  to
town  ?  "

"  What  do  you  mean  by  '  your  father's  slave  '  ?  "
said  the  elephant,  growing  angry.

"  I  am  only  praising  you,"  said  Tortoise.

But  the  elephant  saw  the  other  animals  laughing,
and  grew  more  angry.  "  I  will  throw  you  down  on
the  hard  stones  here,  and  break  you  to  pieces,"  he
cried.

"  Yes,  yes,  that  is  right,"  said  the  bald-headed  elf.
"  Throw  me  down  here.  That  will  be  all  right.  Then
I  shall  not  die;  then  I  shall  not  be  hurt.  If  you
really  want  to  kill  me,  you  ought  to  carry  me  to  a
swamp.  There  I  shall  die  at  once,  for  the  mud  and
water  will  drown  me."

The  elephant  believed  the  bald-headed  elf.  He
ran  to  the  swamp,  and .  threw  Tortoise  into  the  mud


FOLK-LORE  TALES.


2C7


Then  lie  stretched  out  his  foot  to  kick  him,  but  the
bald-headed  elf  dived  in  the  mire,  and  came  up  in
another  place.

The  other  animals  were  there,  looking  on,  and
Tortoise  called  out  to  them,  "  Did  I  not  say  I
would  ride  my  father's  slave  to  town  ?  "

When  the  elephant  found  that  he  could  not  catch
the  bald-headed  elf,  he  ran  away  at  full  speed  back
to  the  forest.

When  he  reached  there  he  said  to  the  other  ele-
phants, "  Do  you  know  what  that  broken-back  *  has
done  to  me  ?  "    And  he  told  them  the  story.

The  other  elephants  said,  "  You  were  a  fool  to  carry
that  broken-back  to  town."

Since  then  the  elephant  has  not  come  to  town  any
more.

IV.

My  alo  is  about  a  woman  named  Adun.

Adun  was  very  beautiful,  and  all  the  men  wanted
her.  They  were  always  entreating  her,  but  she  always
refused.

One  market-day  a  person  borrowed  legs  from  one,
arms  from  another,  and  a  body  from  a  third.  He
joined  all  together,  and  went  to  the  market.  He
wanted  Adun,  and  he  would  have  her.

His  appearance  pleased  Adun,  and  they  talked
together.  Although  he  belonged  to  a  distant  country,
she  consented  to  go  with  him.    She  took  him  to  the

*  An  epithet  of  tlie  tortoise.  It  probiibly  refers  to  the  notched
appearance  of  the  back.


268


THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


house  and  showed  Mm  to  her  mothers.*  Her  mothers
said,  "  Yery  well,  go  with  him."

They  went.  On  the  road,  the  master  of  the  legs
took  away  the  legs,  the  master  of  the  arms  took  away
the  arms,  and  the  master  of  the  body  took  away  the
body.  Nothing  was  left  bnt  the  head.  And  the  head
went  on,  on,  while  Adnn,  nearly  dead  with  fear,  could
not  run  away.

They  arrived  at  the  house  of  the  head.

Next  morning,  before  he  went  to  work  in  his
plantation,  the  head  said  to  Tortoise,  "  If  Adun  tries
to  run  away,  sound  the  horn  to  warn  me."

The  head  had  scarcely  gone  out  of  sight  when  Adun
took  her  bundle,  and  began  to  run  away.

Then  Tortoise  sounded  the  horn.  "  Head,  head,"
he  cried,  "  Adun  is  going.  She  has  tied  up  her
calabashes,  she  has  gathered  her  dishes."

The  head  ran  up  and  made  big  round  eyes.  "  Where
are  you  going  ?  "  he  asked.  "I  am  going  to  relieve
nature,"  t  said  Adun.  "  You  are  running  away,"
said  the  head.

Every  day  Adun  tried  to  run  away,  but  without
success.  Then  she  went  to  ask  the  habalaico  what
she  should  do.

The  bahalaivo  said,  "  Go  and  buy  some  elcurus.t
Buy  plenty  of  them.    Soak  them  in  palm-oil,  and

*  The  wives  in  the  household.

t  The  ordinary  excuse  of  a  native  who  has  no  pretext  ready.

J  Ekvnc  is  a  cake  made  of  tlie  flour  of  a  white  bean  called  ere.  It
is  very  dry,  and  a  proverbial  saying,  said  of  a  tedious  visitor,  runs,
"  He  chokes  me  like  ekuru."


FOLK-LORE  TALES.


269


stuff  tliem  into  Tortoise's  horn."  "Very  good,"  said
Adun.

Slie  did  as  she  was  told.  Then  she  took  up  her
bundle  and  started  off.  Tortoise  took  the  horn  to
blow  it.  The  elairiis  came  into  his  mouth.  He  ate,
ate,  ate,  and  Adun  ran  away.

V.

My  alo  is  about  a  maiden  named  Buje,  the  slender.

There  was  a  young  maiden  named  Buje,  the  slender,
whom  all  the  men  wanted.  The  rich  wanted  her,  but
she  refused.  Chiefs  wanted,  and  she  refused.  The
king  wanted  her,  and  she  still  refused.

Tortoise  came  to  the  king,  and  said  to  him,  "  She
whom  you  all  want,  and  cannot  get,  I  will  get.  I  will
have  her,  I."  And  the  king  said,  "If  you  succeed
in  having  her,  I  will  divide  my  palace  into  two  halves
and  will  give  you  one  half."

One  day,  Buje,  the  slender,  took  an  earthen  pot
and  went  to  fetch  water.  Tortoise,  seeing  this,  took
his  hoe,  and  cleared  the  path  that  led  to  the  spring.
He  found  a  snake  in  the  grass,  and  killed  it.  Then
he  put  the  snake  in  the  middle  of  the  path.

When  Buje,  the  slender,  had  filled  her  pot,  she
came  back.  She  saw  the  snake  in  the  path,  and
called  out  "  Hi !  hi !    Come  and  kill  this  snake."

Tortoise  ran  up,  with  his  cutlass  in  his  hand.  He
struck  at  the  snake,  and  wounded  himself  in  the
leg.

Then  he  cried  out  "  Buje,  the  slender,  has  killed
me.    I  was  cutting  the  bush,  I  was  clearing  the  path


270  THE  YOItUBA-SPEAKINQ  PEOPLES.


for  her.  She  called  to  me  to  kill  the  snake,  and  I
came  quickly.  Buje,  the  slender,  Buje,  the  slender,  I
have  killed  the  snake,  but  I  have  wounded  myself  in
the  leg.  Oh,  Buje,  the  slender,  Buje,  the  slender,
take  me  up  on  your  back  like  a  child.  Take  me  up
on  your  back  and  hold  me  close."

He  cried  this  many  times,  and  at  last  Buje,  the
slender,  took  Tortoise  and  put  him  up  on  her  back.
And  then  Tortoise  slipped  his  legs  down  over  her
hips,  and  violated  Buje,  the  slender,  from  behind.

Next  day,  as  soon  as  it  was  light,  Tortoise  went  to
the  king.  He  said,  "  Did  I  not  tell  you  that  I  would
have  Buje,  the  slender  ?  Call  all  the  people  of  the
town  to  assemble  on  the  fifth  day,  and  you  will  hear
what  I  have  to  say."

When  it  was  the  fifth  day,  the  king  sent  out  his
crier  to  call  all  the  people  together.  The  people  came.
Tortoise  cried  out,  "Everybody  wanted  Buje,  the
slender,  and  Buje  refused  everybody,  but  I  have  had
her."

The  king  sent  a  messenger,  with  his  stick,  to  summon
Buje,  the  slender.  When  she  came  the  king  said,
"  We  have  heard  that  Tortoise  is  your  husband ;  is  it
so?"

Buje,  the  slender,  was  ashamed,  and  could  not
answer.  She  covered  her  head  with  her  cloth,  and
ran  away  into  the  bush.

And  there  she  was  changed  into  the  plant  called
Buje.*

*  There  is  a  version  of  tliis  story,  current  among  the  English  and
Ameiicans,  which  makes  Buje  be  ravished  by  a  deformed  man,  instead
of  by  the  Tortoise.    It  is  to  be  found,  I  believe,  in  "  Central  Africa,"


FOl.K-LOEE  TALES.  271
VI.

My  alo  is  about  Tortoise.

There  was  a  famine,  and  there  was  a  great  scarcity
of  food  all  through  the  country.

One  day  the  lizard  was  in  a  plantation  searching
for  something  to  eat,  when  he  found  a  large  rock  full
of  yams.

The  owner  of  the  plantation  was  near  the  rock.  He
cried  "Rock,  open,"  and  the  rock  opened.  He  went
in  and  took  yams,  and  came  out  again.  Then  he  said,
"Rock,  shut,"  and  the  rock  closed  up.

The  lizard  saw  all  this.  He  heard  also  what  the
man  said,  and  he  went  home.

Next  morning,  at  cock-crow,  he  went  to  the  rock.
He  said,  "  Rock,  open,"  and  the  rock  opened.  He
went  in  and  carried  out  yams  to  take  home  and  eat.
Then  he  said,  "  Rock,  shut,"  and  the  rock  shut.
Every  day  the  lizard  did  this.

a  work  I  have  not  seen,  but  wliich  was  written  by  Mr.  Bowen,  an
American  Missionary,  and  published  at  Charleston,  United  States  of
America,  in  1857.  All  natives  are  agreed  that  this  version  is  incor-
rect, and  that  Tortoise  was  the  ravisher,  and  the  only  probable
explanation  oi:  the  mistake  seems  to  be  that  Mr.  Bowen  learnt  the
story  from  a  native  who  spoke  French,  and  either  confused  la  tortue
with  le  tortu,  or  concluded  that  the  narrator  meant  the  latter  when  he
said  the  former.  If  the  hearer  had  never  heard  of  the  mythical
personage,  the  anthropomorphic  Tortoise,  he,  thinking  it  impossible
that  Bujc  could  be  violated  by  a  tortoise,  would  very  naturally
suppose  that  the  naiTator  meant  to  say  le  tortu,  and  erred  through  an
insufficient  knowledge  of  French.

The  pulp  of  the  fruit  of  the  Buje- shrub  turns  black  when  exposed
to  the  air,  and  is  used  by  the  natives  to  stain  the  skin  in  imitation
of  tattooing.    It  leaves  marks  like  lamp-black.


272


THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


One  day  Tortoise,  the  bald-lieaded  elf,  met  the
lizard  on  the  road  carrying  yams.  He  said  to  him,
"  Where  did  you  get  your  food  from,  comrade  ?  "

The  lizard  said,  "If  I  were  to  tell  you  that,  and  take
you  to  the  place,  I  should  be  killed."  The  bald-
headed  elf  answered,  "  No,  I  will  not  say  a  word  to
anyone.  Please  take  me."  And  the  lizard  said,
"Yery  well,  then;  come  and  call  me  to-morrow
morning  at  cock-crow,  and  we  will  go  together."

Next  morning,  long  before  cock-crow.  Tortoise  came
to  the  house  of  the  lizard.  He  stood  outside  the
house  and  cried  "  Cock-a-doodle-do."  *  Again  he
cried  "  Cock-a-doodle-do."  Then  he  went  in  and
woke  the  lizard.    "  The  cock  has  crowed,"  he  said.

"Let  me  sleep,"  said  the  lizard;  "it  is  not  yet
cock-crow."  "  Yery  well,"  said  Tortoise.  And  they
both  went  to  sleep  till  cock-crow.

Then  the  lizard  got  up,  and  the  two  went  together.
As  soon  as  they  arrived  at  the  place  the  lizard  said,
"Rock,  open,"  and  the  rock  opened.  The  lizard
went  in,  took  yams,  and  came  out  again.

He  said  to  Tortoise,  "  It  is  time  to  go.  Take  your
yams  and  come."  "Wait  a  minute,"  said  Tortoise.
"Yery  well,"  said  the  lizard.  "  Eock,  shut."  And
he  went  away  without  waiting.

Tortoise,  the  bald-headed  elf,  helped  himself  to
yams.  He  put  yams  on  his  back  and  yams  on  his
head;  he  put  yams  on  his  arms  and  yams  on  his
legs.

*  In  Yoruba,  Jcelcere-Jce,  an  onomatopoeic  word  supposed  to  resemble
the  crow  of  a  cock.  It  is  from  Jceke,  wliicb,  like  cair  onomatopoeic
word  "  cackle,"  means  the  cry  of  the  hen.


FOLK-LORE  TALES.


273


The  lizard  had  already  gone  home.  He  lighted  a
fire.  Then  he  lay  on  his  back,  Avith  his  feet  in  the  air,
as  if  he  were  dead ;  and  he  remained  like  that
all  day.

When  Tortoise,  the  bald-headed  elf,  was  ready  to
go,  he  wanted  to  make  the  rock  open.  But  he  could
not  remember  what  he  ought  to  say.  He  said  many,
many  words,  but  not  the  right  words  ;  and  the  rock
remained  shut.

By-and-bye  came  the  plantation- owner.  He  opened
the  rock,  and  found  Tortoise  inside.  He  took  him
and  beat  him.    He  beat  him  badly.

"Who  brought  you  here?"  asked  the  man.  "It
was  the  lizard  who  brought  me,"  replied  Tortoise.
Then  the  man  tied  a  string  to  Tortoise,  and  took  him
to  the  lizard.

When  the  man  reached  the  house  of  the  lizard,  he
found  the  lizard  lying  on  his  back,  with  his  feet  in  the
air,  as  if  he  were  dead.  He  shook  him.  He  said  to
him,  "  This  bald-headed  elf  says  it  was  you  who  took
him  to  my  plantation,  and  showed  him  my  store  of
yams.'"'

"  I  ?  "  said  the  lizard.  "  You  can  see  for  yourself
that  it  is  impossible.  I  am  not  in  a  state  to  go  out.
I  have  been  sick  here  for  three  months,  lying  on  my
back.  I  do  not  even  know  where  your  plantation
is."

Then  the  man  took  Tortoise  and  smashed  him.
And  Tortoise,  groaning  and  moaning,  said  in  a  pitiful
voice,  "  Cockroach,  come  and  mend  me.  Ant,  come
and  mend  me."

And  the  cockroach  and  the  ant  mended  him.  And

T


274


THE  YOnUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


the  places  wliere  they  mended  him  are  those  parts  of
Tortoise  which  are  rough.*

*  In  this  tale,  Tortoise's  iisual  cunning  fails  him.  It  is  lo  be
noted  that,  whenever  he  is  shown  as  being  over-reached  or  unsuccessful,
the  want  of  success  is  due  to  greediness — as  in  the  first  tale,  where  he
eats  and  drinks  till  he  falls  asleep,  so  that  Sigo  is  rescued  from  the
drum  ;  and  in  the  fourth  tale,  where  he  is  so  busily  engaged  in  eating
the  ekurus  placed  in  the  horn,  that  he  forgets  to  sound  it.  Here  his
greediness  makes  him  stay  behind,  to  get  more  yams.


CHAPTER  XV.


CONCLUSIONS.

In  the  preface  to  the  second  volume  of  tliis  series  it
was  said  tliat,  in  collecting  information  concerning
the  rehgions  of  the  cognate  tribes  dealt  with,  mj
chief  purpose  was  to  endeavour  to  ascertain  to  what
extent  different  conditions  of  culture  led  to  the
modifications  of  religious  conceptions.  Three  groups
of  tribes  have  now  been  considered,  the  Tshi,  the
Ewe,  and  the  Toruba,  who  represent  three  stages  of
progress,  the  Tshi  being  in  the  lowest  stage  and  the
Yoruba  in  the  highest.  As  these  tribal  groups  un-
doubtedly had  a  common  origin,  it  is  reasonable  to
suppose  that  the  Yoruba  tribes  were  once  in  the  social
and  mental  condition  in  which  the  Tshi  tribes  are
now,  and  that,  in  fact,  in  these  groups  we  find  the
same  race  in  different  states  of  culture.  Assuming
then,  as  we  legitimately  may,  that  the  religious  beliefs
of  the  Ewes  are  modifications  of  earlier  belief  re-
sembling those  now.  held  by  the  Tshis,  and  that  those
of  the  Yorubas  are  similarly  modifications  of  beliefs
like  those  now  held  by  the  Ewes,  we  here  have  an
opportunity  of  observing  how  the  evolution  of  religion
may  proceed.

Among  the  Tshi-speaking  tribes  we  found  that

T  2


276


TEE  YOBUBA-SrEAKING  rEOPLES.


everytliing  in  nature  is  believed  to  be  animated — that
is  to  say,  everything  not  made  by  hmnan  hands  has
an  animating  principle,  spiritual  second-self,  or
indwelling  spirit,  possessing  powers  which  may  be
beneficial  or  prejudicial  to  man,  according  to  whether
it  is  propitiated  or  neglected.  It  seems  probable  that
the  belief  in  all  nature  being  thus  animated  was  an
extension  of  the  belief  that  man  possesses  a  spiritual
second-self,  or  indwelling  spirit,  which  belief  is
beyond  dispute  the  result  of  savage  speculation
concerning  dreams.  Man,  having  decided  that  he
possessed  an  indwelling  spirit,  would  extend  the  same
possession  to  animals,  then  to  vegetable  life,  and
finally  to  inanimate  nature,  partly  because  he  does
not  perceive  any  strict  line  of  demarcation  between
these,  and  partly  because  he  as  frequently  sees  the
phantoms  of  such  things  in  his  dreams  as  he  does  the
phantoms  of  living  meu.  He  would  be  led  to  extend
the  indwelling-spirit  theory  to  all  nature,  because  it
would  account  for  many  things  that  would  otherwise
be  incomprehensible,  since  uncivilised  man  believes
that  every  occurrence  is  the  result  of  design,  and  that
nothing  ever  happens  by  accident.  The  theory  that
a  man  who  is  drowned  has  been  drawn  down  and
strangled  by  the  water-spirit,  seems  to  him  much
more  satisfactory  than  to  suppose  that  the  death  was
the  result  of  chance  circumstances.

All  indwelling  spirits  are,  however,  not  equally
revered.  Those  of  bushes,  grasses,  stones,  &c.,  are
not  much  regarded,  and  the  most  important  are  those
of  rivers,  lagoons,  the  sea,  mountains,  rocks,  and
shoals.    The  reason  of  this,  no  doubt,  is  that  no  loss


CONCLUSIONS.


277


of  life  or  injury  to  person  or  projoerty  can  be  directly
connected  with  a  busli,  or  grass,  or  a  stone,  witliont,
at  least,  the  intervention  of  human  agency ;  while,
in  the  nature  of  things,  men  must  occasionally  be
drowned  in  rivers,  canoes  capsized  in  the  sea,  and
property  and  life  destroyed  or  injured  by  flood  or
landslip,  or  other  natural  causes.    Timor  fecit  deos,
and    those    natural    features    and    objects  which
experience   has   shown  to  be  more  frequently  the
apparent  cause  of  mishaps,  have  more  regard  paid
to  them,  or  rather  to  their  animating  principles,  than
those  which  have  proved  to  be  innocuous.  Every
man  worships  that  from  which  he  has  most  to  fear  or
most  to  expect,  and  it  is  commonly  something  with
which  he  is  daily  brought  into  contact.    Thus,  fisher-
men pay  most  attention  to  the  indwelling  spirits  of
the  sea  and  of  the  shoals  and  reefs  on  which  their
canoes  might  be  m^ecked ;    while  the  agriculturist
worships  the  spirit  of  the  stream  that  flows  near  his
dwelling,  or  that  of  the  cliff  or  mass  of  rock  which
overhangs  his  plantation,  and  those  of  the  gigantic
silk-cotton  trees,  whose  downfall  so  frequently  crushes
to  death  the  inhabitant  of  the  forest.    Objects  of
worship  are  thus  local,  and  are  worshipped  only  by
those  in  the  neighbourhood.    In  most  cases  worship
and  sacrifice  are  made  in  the  habitat  of  the  spirit,  or
god,  under  the  boulder  of  rock,  or  on  the  bank  of
the  stream  or  lagoon ;  and,  as  the  nature  of  the  god
is  well   imderstood,  as   he   is   believed  to  be  the
indwelling  spirit  of  the  rock  or  the  stream,  there  is  no
need  for  any  myth  explanatory  of  his  origin,  or  for  an
image  or  tangible  representation  of  him.    This  is  the


278  THE  Y0BUBA-8PEAKING  PEOPLES.


condition  in  wliicli  fclie  great  majority  of  tlie  Tshi
tribes  are  at  tlie  present  day.

Tlie  first  change  appears  to  be  caused  by  tlie
making  of  an  image,  or  simulacrum,  of  a  god,  whicb.
bas  tbe  effect  of  weakening  the  tie  between  the
indwelling  spirit  and  tbe  object  it  animates.  If  tbe
image  were  kept  in  tbe  babitat  of  tbe  local  god,  tbe
connection  of  tbe  god  witb  tbe  particular  rock,  cliff,
or  stream  would  not  be  lost  sigbt  of ;  but  it  would
serve  no  useful  purpose  to  keep  an  image  tbere,  since
tbe  god  bimself  is  present,  and  tbe  only  object  in
making  one  is  to  bring  tbe  god  to  some  place  nearer
at  band,  wbicb  will  be  more  convenient  for  tbe  wor-
shippers, and  at  tbe  same  time  bring  the  protecting
power  more  directly  into  contact  witb  them.  To
effect  this  removal  of  a  god  it  is  a  sine  qua  non  that
the  simulacrum  must  be  made  from  material  obtained
from  the  habitat  of  the  god,  or  be  a  portion  of  that
which  be  animates.  A  fragment  of  rock  from  a
boulder  inhabited  by  an  indwelling  spirit,  or  a  figure
carved  from  wood  taken  from  a  tree  in  a  grove
inhabited  by  a  spirit,  preserves  in  tbe  minds  of  the
worshippers  the  subjective  connection  between  the
fragment  and  tbe  boulder,  or  tbe  figure  and  tbe
grove  ;  and,  by  a  confusion  of  ideas  which  is  well
known,  be  thinks  that  the  objective  connection  is
likewise  unbroken,  and  that  the  god,  or  spirit,  is  by
means  of  the  simulacrum  brought  before  him.

This  removal,  as  it  were,  of  a  god  from  his  proper
dwelling-place,  necessarily  leads,  first,  to  a  Aveakening
of  the  tie  between  the  god  and  that  whicb  be  animates,
and,  finally,  to  tbe  nature  of  tbe  god,  as  an  indwelling


CONCLUSIONS.


279


spirit  of  a  natural  object,  being  completely  lost  sight
of.  Let  us  imagine,  for  example,  that  the  inhabitants
of  a  village  who  have  been  in  the  habit  of  worshipping
the  indwelling  spirit  of  a  precipitous  cliff  in  the  neigh-
bourhood, come  to  the  conclusion  that  it  would  be
more  convenient,  and  at  the  same  time  place  them
more  effectually  under  the  protection  of  the  spirit,  if
they  were  to  bring  him  into  the  village.  They
accordingly  make  a  figure  of  clay  taken  from  the  cliff,
and  set  it  up  in  the  village  in  a  miniature  hut  erected
for  its  protection.  This  hut  then  becomes  the  sacred
place,  and  the  sacrifices  and  sacred  dances  are  per-
formed before  it,  instead  of,  as  heretofore,  at  the  cliff.
The  god,  however,  is  not  supposed  to  have  absolutely
abandoned  the  cliff,  and  persons  whose  avocations
took  them  to  it  would  still  think  it  necessary  to  pro-
pitiate him  with  small  offerings  of  food.  Practically
he  is  believed  to  be  in  the  cliff  and  yet  also  in  the
image  in  the  village,  for  although  a  man,  if  asked  to
explain  the  seeming  impossibility  of  one  and  the  same
person  being  in  two  places  at  once,  might  say  that
the  god  only  entered  the  image  in  order  to  receive  the
offerings  and  listen  to  the  prayers  of  the  faithful,  or
that  the  image  merely  served  as  an  instrument
through  which  the  god  could  take  cognizance  of  the
wants  of  his  followers,  yet,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  they
never  seem  to  think  about  the  matter  at  all,  and  it  is
taken  for  granted  by  the  villagers  that  the  god  is  in
their  midst.  Generations  are  born  and  die,  and  are
succeeded  by  others,  all  of  which  have  been  accus-
tomed to  perform  religious  ceremonies  before  the
miniature  hut,  and  the  inevitable  result  is  that,  sooner


280  THE  YOBIIBjU SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


or  later,  the  connection  of  tlie  god  with  the  cliff,  of
which  he  was  the  animating  principle,  is  completely
lost  sight  of,  and  he  is  regarded  as  the  tutelary  deity
of  the  village,  pure  and  simple.  In  this  way  un-
doubtedly originated  many  of  the  tutelary  deities  of
towns  and  villages  on  the  Grold  Coast,  for  the  process
can  be  seen  going  on  at  the  present  day.  By  carry-
ing it  a  little  further,  tribal  or  national  gods  might  be
similarly  produced,  but,  with  two  or  three  exceptions,
the  Tshi  tribes  have  not  progressed  so  far  as  that,  and
most  of  the  gods  worshipped  by  complete  tribes  are
simply  the  indwelling  spirits  of  very  remarkable
natural  objects  situated  in  the  territories  occupied  by
the  tribes.

Besides  the  gods  which  are  the  animating  principles
or  indwelling  spirits  of  natural  features  and  objects,
and  which  we  may  call  nature-gods,  we  have  objects
of  worship  of  another  class,  which  are  the  product  of
manes-worship,  and  which  we  may  therefore  term
ghost-gods.  The  ghosts,  or  souls  of  deceased  men
of  rank  and  power,  are  supplicated  and  propitiated
in  the  same  way  and  to  the  same  extent  as  are  the
nature-gods,  and  it  is  often  difl&cult  to  decide  where
the  one  worship  begins  and  the  other  ends.

Manes-worship  reaches  its  fullest  development  in
the  royal  houses  of  Ashanti  and  Dahomi,  that  is  to
say,  in  those  situations  where  the  conditions  are  most
favourable  for  preserving  the  memory  of  the  wisdom
and  power  of  deceased  men.  In  both  these  houses
periodical  human  sacrifices  are  made  on  the  tombs
of  the  former  kings,  in  addition  to  the  daily  minor
offerings  of  food  and  drink.      We  find  the  same


CONCLUSIONS.


281


confusion  between  objective  and  subjective  connection
in  tlie  case  of  these  gliost-gods  as  we  do  in  that  of
the  nature-gods  ;  and  the  skulls  of  chiefs  and  others
are  often  exhumed  and  placed  in  small  temples
adjoining  the  dwelling-houses,  in  the  idea  that  the
guardian-ghost  is  thereby  brought  to  the  spot.  At
the  battle  of  Dodowah,  near  Accra,  where  the  Ashantis
were  defeated  in  1826,  a  head,  wrapped  in  a  silk
handkerchief,  and  covered  with  a  leopard-skin,  the
emblem  of  royalty,  was  captured.  This  was  the  head
of  the  late  king,  Tutu  Kwamina,  and  his  successor
had  brought  it  with  him,  in  the  idea  that  he  would
thereby  be  able  to  obtain  the  support  of  the  ghostly
king  against  his  enemies.  Before  the  battle  offerings
were  made  to  it,  and  the  ghost  was  invoked  to  cause
the  heads  of  all  the  white  men  in  the  field  to  lie
beside  his  before  night.

Many  tutelary  deities  of  towns,  clans,  and  families
doubtless  owe  their  origin  to  manes-worship.  The
dead  are  ordinarily,  one  might  almost  say  invariably,
buried  in  or  near  to  the  habitations  of  the  living,  and
it  is  certain  that  in  many  cases  the  habit  of  offering
sacrifices  at  the  place  of  sepulture  has  been  continued,
simply  through  habit,  long  after  the  fact  that  a  man
was  buried  there  has  been  forgotten.  In  such  a
case,  the  guardian-ghost  being  lost  sight  of,  the  god
is  simply  a  tutelary  god,  whose  origin  is  either  unex-
plained, or  which  the  priests  explain  in  any  way  that
may  suit  them  best.  "We  thus  have  two  explanations
of  the  origin  of  tutelary  deities.  They  are  either
nature-gods  who  have  been  severed  from  their  proper
surroundings,  or  ghost-gods  whose  origin  has  been


282  TEE  YOBUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


forgotten.  Of  course  tlie  manes  tliemselves  are
tutelar.

Nature-gods  tliemselves  are  no  doubt  in  several
cases  blended  with  ghost-gods.  The  reverence  paid
to  certain  rivers,  rocks,  cliffs,  &c.,  must  have  often
dated  from  some  fatal  accident  that  occurred  in  con-
nection with  them.  It  was  this  which  first  attracted
attention,  and  primitive  man  would  not  be  likely  to  dis-
criminate between  the  ghost  of  the  victim,  which  would
haunt  the  spot  where  the  latter  lost  his  life,  and  the
indwelling  spirit  of  the  natural  feature.  Neverthe-
less, that  the  nature-gods  are,  as  a  whole,  the  product
of  manes-worship,  is,  we  think,  a  theory  not  war-
ranted by  the  evidence,  though  apparently  supported
by  the  high  authority  of  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer.  It
often  occurs  that  a  family  settles  near  to  some  river,
lake,  or  hill,  and  forthwith  commences  a  cult  of  the
indwelling  spirit,  without  any  catastrophe  having
taken  place  to  initiate  it.  In  fact,  it  may  be  said  to
be  the  rule  that  whenever  a  Tshi  group  takes  up  its
abode  near  any  remarkable  natural  feature  or  object,
it  worships  and  seeks  to  propitiate  its  indwelling
spirit,  fearing  that  otherwise  it  may  do  some  harm.
Many  of  the  nature-gods  are  non-terrestrial,  and  it
is  difficult  to  see  by  what  process  they  could  ever
become  confused  with  dead  men.  Nobody  could  be
buried  in  the  sky,  sun,  moon,  rainbow,  or  wind ;  and
if  these  could  be  conceived  to  be  animated  without
the  intervention  of  the  souls  of  the  dead,  why  could
not  terrestrial  objects  also?  Manes-worship  is  the  result
of  the  belief  that  man  has  an  indwelling  spirit  which  sur-
vives after  the  death  of  the  body,  and  nature-worship


G0NGLU8I0NS.


283


is  the  result  of  the  belief  that  all  nature  is  animated.
Which  was  first  in  order  it  would  be  difficult  to  deter-
mine with  absolute  certainty,  but,  from  the  analogy  of
the  lower  animals,  it  seems  probable  that  the  second
was.  Animals  regard  objects  which  move  as  alive,
without  having  come  to  the  conclusion  that  they
themselves  have  spiritual  second  selves,  and  primitive
man,  who  would  know  little  more  of  natural  causation
than  an  animal  does,  probably  did  also.  When  a  rock
slipped,  or  a  tree  fell,  the  unusual  behaviour  suggested
animation.  Afterwards,  when  he  had  come  to  believe
that  he  himself  possessed  an  indwelling  spirit,  he
probably  conceived  the  animating  entities  of  natural
objects  to' be  somewhat  analogous,  and  made  the  gods
the  reflex  of  his  own  kra.

Objects  made  by  human  hands  are  not  animate,  and
do  not  possess  indwelling  spirits,  though  they  have
ghosts,  which  the  souls  of  the  dead  are  able  to  make
use  of  in  deadland.  There  are,  however,  many  such
objects  upon  which  the  native  sets  great  value,  and  as
they  do  not  possess  guardian-spirits  of  themselves,  he
provides  them  with  artificial  ones.  Thus,  just  as  he
kills  the  wives  of  his  chief,  and  buries  them  with
him,  releasing  their  ghosts,  or  souls,  from  their  bodies
to  enable  them  to  continue  their  ministrations  to  their
lord,  so,  perfectly  logically,  he  slays  a  slave  on  the
family  stool,  the  emblem  of  office,  or  upon  the  great
drum  of  the  tribe,  releasing  the  ghost  from  the  body
in  order  to  enable  it  to  become  the  guardian-spirit  of
the  stool  or  drum.  This  is  a  luxury  that  can  only  be
afforded  by  men  of  rank,  or  to  ensure  the  safe-
keeping of  national  trophies  or  emblems,  and  hence


284


THE  YOmnA-SPEAKTNa  FEOPLBS.


it  is  only  tlie  royal  stools  of  kings  and  chiefs,  or  para-
pliernalia  belonging  to  tlie  tribe  as  a  wliole,  tliat  are,
as  a  rule,  thus  protected.  The  victim  is  decapitated
upon  the  object  so  that  the  blood  gushes  over  it,  and
on  the  Gold  Coast  many  tribal  stools  and  drums  are
clotted  thick  with  the  blood  of  those  who  have  been
slain  upon  them,  for  it  seems  to  be  thought  necessary
to  renew  the  guardian  from  time  to  time.  As,  when
a  human  sacrifice  is  offered  to  a  god,  the  victim  is
similarly  slain  upon  the  sacred  stool  or  chair,  it  seems
probable  that  the  ghost  is  in  this  case  also  believed  to
become  a  guardian-spirit.  No  doubt  the  belief  that
all  objects  not  made  by  human  hands  possessed  in-
dwelling, or  guardian- spirits,  suggested  the  idea  of
supplying  artificial  guardian-spirits  to  objects  which
did  not  come  under  this  category.  The  practice  is
very  widespread,  and  the  custom  of  immolating
human  victims  at  the  launching  of  war-cauoes  in
the  islands  of  the  Pacific,  so  that  the  bows  were
sprinkled  with  their  blood,  and  the  Dyak  practice  of
crushing  a  slave-girl  to  death  under  the  first  post
erected  at  the  building  of  a  communal  house,  are  cases
in  point,  the  sacrifice  being  in  each  case  designed  to
provide  a  guardian-spirit.

With  some  two  or  three  exceptions,  all  the  gods
worshipped  by  the  Tshi  tribes  are  purely  local  and
have  a  hmited  area  of  worship.  If  they  are  nature-
gods  they  are  bound  up  with  the  natural  objects  they
animate,  if  they  are  ghost-gods  they  are  localised  by
the  place  of  sepulture,  and  if  they  are  tutelary  deities,
whose  origin  has  been  forgotten,  their  position  is
necessarily  fixed  by  that  of  the  town,  village,  or  family


CONCLUSIONS.


285


they  protect.  In  any  case  tliey  are  worsliipped  only
by  tliose  who  live  in  the  neighbourhood.  The  excep-
tions are  the  sky-god,  the  earthquake-god,  and  the
goddess  of  the  silk-cotton  trees.  The  vault  of  the
heaven  overhangs  every  town  and  hamlet,  so  that
Nyankupon,*  the  god  of  the  sky,  which  is  believed  to
be  solid,  and  the  roof  of  the  world,  is  universally
known.  Similarly,  earthquakes  are  felt  over  the
whole  country,  so  that  Sasabonsum,  the  earth-god,
who  is  held  to  produce  these  phenomena,  is  also
widely  known.  Silk-cotton  trees  are  found  every-
where, so  that  Srahmantin,  the  goddess  of  these
trees,  is  feared  and  worshipped  everywhere.  With
these  three  exceptions  there  are  no  general  gods,  that
is,  no  gods  known  to  the  Tshi  tribes  as  a  whole;
and  two  of  them,  it  may  be  observed,  in  accord-
ance with  the  principle  that  every  man  worships
that  which  is  most  likely  to  affect  his  lot,  and  which
is  ordinarily  near  at  hand,  though  known  to  all,  are
not  paid  much  regard  to,  except  when  they  force
themselves  upon  the  attention.  Nyankupon  is  gene-
rally considered  too  distant  to  have  much  weight  in
the  affairs  of  mankind,  or  to  take  much  interest
therein,  but  when  he  thunders  and  lightens — for  to
thunder,  lighten,  and  pour  out  rain  are  his  functions —
and  thereby  reminds  men  that  he  has  power  to  injure,
they  become  polite  to  him,  and  seek  to  propitiate  him

*  JTyanliupon.  Ni/an  means  "  to  awake,"  but  seems  primarily  to
have  meant  "to  stretch,"  or  "  to  extend."  Po7i  is  anything  flat,  as
"  door,  table-top  "  ;  po,  "  ocean,"  is  from  the  same  root.  Ku  seems
to  be  a  euphonic  change  from  lent,  "  rounded,  curved."  The  word
Nyankupon  woukl  thus  mean  "  the  stretched-out,  curved,  flat  surface,"
or  shortly  "  the  outspread  vault."


286


TEE  Y0RUBA-SP2<JAinNG  PEOPLES.


hj  flattery  and  praise.  Sasabonsmn  likewise  is  not
paid  much  attention  to,  except  wlien  an  earthquake
happens,  and  then  everybody  hastens  to  offer  sacri-
fices. As  silk-cotton  trees  are  everywhere  close  at
hand,  and  a  great  many  persons  are  crushed  to  death
by  them — for  they  seem  particularly  liable  to  the
ravages  of  white  ants,  and  are  then  blown  down  by  a
very  moderate  gale  of  wind — it  is  considered  of  some
importance  to  propitiate  Srahmantin,  who  is  the  only
spirit — or  class  of  spirits,  for  it  is  not  quite  clear  which
it  is — that  can  be  said  to  be  generally  worshipped  by
the  tribes  as  a  whole.

The  indwelling  spirits  of  natural  objects  are  held  to
be  of  human  shajDe,  but  to  possess  the  more  striking-
characteristics  of  the  objects  they  animate.  Thus,
because  the  silk-cotton  tree  has  a  gaunt,  greyish- white
trunk,  which  towers  high  above  the  other  trees  of  the
forest,  and  often  reaches  to  a  height  of  100  feet  before
it  throws  out  a  branch,  Srahmantin  is  said  to  be  of
gigantic  stature  and  greyish-white  in  colour.  To
these  characteristics  native  imagination  has  added
long  flowing  hair,  and  long  pendent  breasts.
Similarly,  Tahbi,  the  indwelling  spirit  of  the  huge
mass  of  black  rock  on  which  Cape  Coast  Castle  is
built,  is  of  immense  size,  and  black ;  and  Abroh-ku,
the  surf-god  of  the  landing-place,  is  of  the  colour  of
wood-ashes,  and  small  and  round,  like  a  breaking  wave.

Among  the  Ewe  tribes  we  find  the  same  funda-
mental belief  that  all  nature  is  animate,  and  the  local
nature-gods  are,  as  among  the  Tshi  tribes,  the
indwelling  spirits  of  natural  objects  and  features ;  but
simulacra  are  much  more  common  on  the  Slave  Coast


CONCLUSIONS.


287


tlian  on  tlie  Grold  Coast,  and,  as  a  consequence,  tlie  tie
between  natiire-gods  and  tlieir  habitats,  and  between
gliost-g'ods  and  tlieir  linman  origin,  lias  been  more
frequently  weakened  and  lost  siglit  of.  Hence  we
find  a  large  increase  in  tlie  number  of  tribal  and
general  gods,  many  of  wbicli  liave  now  no  connection
witli  any  natural  object  or  with  manes- worship.  Con-
currently with  the  increase  in  the  number  of  tribal
and  general  gods  runs  the  relegation  of  the  purely
local  gods  to  an  inferior  position.  A  god  who  is  wor-
shipped over  a  large  area  is  naturally  believed  to  be
more  powerful  than  one  whose  area  of  worship  is
circumscribed,  and  the  tribal  and  general  gods,  having
each  their  special  functions  and  attributes,  monopolise
between  them  nearly  all  the  phenomena  and  qualities
which  excite  fear  and  respect  in  man.  The  local  gods
are  thus  pushed  back  from  the  prominent  position
they  held  among  the  Tshi  tribes,  with  whom  to  pro-
pitiate the  local  god  was  considered  all  important,
and  though  they  are  worshipped  by  small  communities
and  solitary  families,  the  inhabitants  of  towns  do  not
pay  much  attention  to  them.  Almost  every  person  is
enrolled  as  a  follower  of  one,  at  least,  of  the  general
and  tribal  gods,  and  when  a  man  is  secure  of  the
favour  and  protection  of  the  king,  the  goodwill  of
the  court-underling  is  no  longer  of  much  moment  to
him.

Among  the  general  deities  of  the  Ewe  tribes,  Mawu,
the  sky-god,  whose  name  also  means  to  stretch  over
or  overshadow,  answers  to  the  ISTyankupon  of  the  Tshi
tribes,  and  the  silk-cotton  tree  spirits  appear  under
the  names  of  Huntin  and  Loko.    The  Ewes  have  no


288


TEE  YORUB A- SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


eartliquake-god,  probably  because  the  sliocks  of  eartli-
quake  are  rarely  felt  on  tlie  Slave  Coast,  two  only
being  known  to  kave  occurred  since  1778,  whereas
slight  shocks  are  experienced  on  the  Gold  Coast  every
two  or  three  years.    Mawu,  like  Nyankupon,  is  con-
sidered too  distant  to  interfere  in  human  affairs,  and
as  he  no  longer  thunders  and  lightens,  which  pheno-
mena are  attributed  to  a  new  conception,  Khebioso,  a
bird-like  god,  who  appears  to  be  the  personified
thunder-cloud,   he    does   nothing   but    control  the
rain,  and  his  importance  has  been  thereby  lessened.
Other  general  deities  are  Aizan,  protector  of  markets
and  public  places,  who  seems  to  be  a  type  generalised
from  the  multitudinous  tutelary  gods  of   the  Gold
Coast ;  Dso,  the  god  of  fire,  Legba,  a  phallic  divinity,
and  Sapatan,  the  small-pox  god.    In  this  deification,
or  personification,  of  fire,  love,  and  pestilence,  we
see  a  new  departure.    Tire  is  not  worshipped  on  the
Gold  Coast,  and  there  it  is  the  local  gods  who  inflict
pestilence  on  their  worshippers  as  a  punishment  for
neglect ;  while  love,  or  desire,  is  usually  stimulated
by  the  ghost-gods,  who,  as  the  forefathers  of  the
living,  are  believed  to  take  an  interest  in  the  propa-
gation of  their  descendants,  though  occasionally  the
exciting  of  this  passion  may  be  found  to  be  one  out
of  the  many  attributes  of  a  nature-god.

"When  we  come  to  the  Yoruba-speaking  tribes  we
find  simulacra  in  universal  use,  and  the  belief  that
nature-gods  are  the  animating  principles  of  natural
objects  only  lingering  in  places  remote  from  populous
centres,  and  among  the  Jebus,  who  live  isolated  in
their  forests  and  shun  intercourse  with  the  other


CONCLUSIONS.


289


tribes.  Tliere  are,  in  consequence,  few  local  gods
proper,  but  many  tutelary  deities  of  tribes,  towns,
villages,  and  families,  and  tliere  is  a  very  large  increase
in  the  number  of  general  deities.  Olorun,  the  sky-
god,  answers  to  the  Ewe  Mawu  and  the  Tshi  Nyan-
kupon,  but  he  is  rapidly  being  displaced  by  Obatala,
a  more  anthropomorphic  conception,  and  who  very
probably  was  a  ghost-god  whose  origin  has  been  lost
sight  of.  The  god  of  thunder  and  lightning  appears
under  the  name  of  Shango,  and  that  of  small-pox
under  the  name  of  Shan-kpanna.  Legba  has  become
a  combination  of  desire  and  evil,  and  Odudua,  a
goddess,  said  by  the  priests  to  be  the  earth,  presides
over  the  passion  of  love.  Orisha  Oko,  who  repre-
sents natural  fertility,  Aje  Shaluga,  god  of  wealth,
Shigidi,  personified  nightmare,  and  Dada,  patron  of
vegetables,  are  new  conceptions.  A  native  of  the
Grold  Coast  who  found  his  yam-crop  thrive  would
attribute  it  to  the  fostering  care  of  the  local  nature-
god,  and  if  he  acquired  wealth  it  would  probably  be
considered  duo  to  the  efforts  of  his  tutelary  deity,  but
here  gods  appear  to  have  been  made  out  of  abstractions.

The  evolution  of  types  has  been  carried  further
than  among  the  Ewes,  and  instead  of  each  hill  and
mountain  having  its  own  indwelling  god  we  have  Oke,
god  of  heights  in  general ;  while  in  place  of  the
multitude  of  local  sea-gods  found  on  the  Gold  Coast
and  the  western  half  of  the  Slave  Coast,  we  have  one
general  god  of  the  sea,  Olokun.  Aroni,  god  of
forests,  is  another  example.  Olosa,  the  lagoon,
Oya,  the  river  Niger,  and  the  two  rivers  Oshun  and
Oba,    are  nature-gods,  which,   from  being  strictly

TJ


290


THE  YOBU BASF  BAKING  PBOPLES.


local,  liave  now  become  general.  Ifa,  god  of  divina-
tion, wlio  is  tlie  benefactor  of  man  and  tlie  unveiler  of
tte  future,  was  probably  originally  a  ghost-god,  as  no
doubt  was  Osanbin,  god  of  medicine.  Ogun,  god  of
iron,  and  bence  of  war,  may  be  a  personification  of
iron,  but  it  is  just  as  probable  that  he  was  the  tradi-
tional discoverer  of  the  use  of  iron,  and  hence  a  ghost-
god,  who  has  now  been  raised  to  the  first  rank.  In
the  general  tendency  to  regard  Legba  as  the  evil
principle,  we  perhaps  see  a  first  step  towards  dualism,
in  which  Ifa,  for  choice,  would  represent  the  good
principle.  All  the  gods  are  more  anthropomorphic
than  was  the  case  with  the  Ewe  and  Tshi  tribes.

Looking,  then,  at  these  three  groups  of  tribes,  we
find  what  seems  to  be  a  regular  progression  from  the
gods  of  hamlets  and  small  communities,  as  among  the
Tshis,  to  the  gods  of  a  whole  people,  as  among  the
Yorubas;  and  from  the  worship  of  the  indwelling-
spirits  of  tangible  objects,  or  objects  believed  to  be
tangible,  as  the  sky,  and  of  dead  men,  to  the  worship
of  personified  principles.  With  the  aggregation  of
peoples  comes  the  concretion  of  gods.  On  the  Grold
Coast  the  natives  dwell  in  small  groups,  isolated  from
one  another  by  large  tracts  of  forest.  There  are  no
towns,  properly  speaking,  except  on  the  sea-coast,  and
only  a  few  large  villages.  Ideas  percolate  but  slowly,
and  people  live  in  the  narrow  circle  of  their  own  lives,
knowing  little  or  nothing  of  anything  that  transpires
outside  their  own  hamlet.  To  them  their  own
surroundings  are  of  the  first  importance,  and  the  local
god  is  the  first  in  their  estimation.  There  is  no
room  here  for  the  growth  of  national  and  general


CONCLUSIONS.


291


gods,  for  everything  is  narrowed  down  to  the  village
circle.

Among  those  Ewe  tribes  who  inhabit  the  western
and  forested  portion  of  the  Slave  Coast  we  find  much
the  same  condition  of  affairs ;  but  in  the  eastern
Ewe  districts  the  country  is  comparatively  open,
communities  are  larger,  and  communication  is  in  every
way  freer.  Here  ideas  circulate  readily,  man  is
constantly  meeting  with  man,  and  as  his  mental
circle  widens,  so  do  his  conceptions  concerning  the
nature  of  gods.  Thus,  among  the  eastern  Ewe  tribes
we  find  many  national  and  tribal  gods,  and  several
general  gods,  while  the  local  gods  have  sunk  in  the
general  estimation.

Among  the  Yoruba  tribes  this  evolution  has  been
carried  still  further,  the  country,  except  that  inhabited
by  the  Jebus,  being  fairly  open,  large  towns  numerous,
and  circulation  constant.  Here  the  local  god  has
almost  disappeared,  and  the  great  majority  of  the
gods  are  known  to,  and  worshipped  by,  the  whole  of
the  tribes.  The  origin  and  inception  of  the  nature-
gods,  as  the  indwelling  spirits  of  natural  objects  or
phenomena,  being  generally  lost  sight  of,  some
explanation  of  their  existence  becomes  necessary,
and,  in  consequence,  we  find  a  variety  of  myths
dealing  with  the  parentage  and  adventures  of  the
gods.

As  far  as  manes-worship  alone  is  concerned — that
is,  the  worship  of  spirits  or  gods  which  are  known  to
have  once  been  men — there  is  no  great  difference
between  the  three  lingual  groups.  Among  the
Yorubas  it  is,  if  anything,  rather  less  developed  than

u  2


292  THE  YOItUB A- SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


among  tlie  Tsliis  and  Ewes,  or  ratlier  relegated  to  an
inferior  position,  in  consequence  of  tlie  greater  power
and  sway  of  tiie  gods  generally  worshipped.  When-
ever, however,  the  human  origin  of  the  ghost-god
has  been  lost  sight  of,  he  seems  to  have  conformed
to  the  general  rule  ;  that  is,  where  the  circumstances
have  been  unfavourable,  he  has,  like  the  minor  local
nature-gods,  disappeared,  or  been  absorbed  in  the
personality  of  another  god,  and  where  they  have  been
favourable,  he  has  acquired  increased  renoAvn  and
area  of  worship,  and  become  a  national  or  general  god.

That  with  the  nationalisation  of  gods  the  priest-
hood should  also  become  organised  and  developed  is
a  natural  result.    Both  on  the  G-old  and  Slave  Coasts,
and,  indeed,  everywhere  else,  the   priesthood  is  a
guild,  or  fraternity,  the  members  of  which  require  a
special  knowledge  ;  and  no  man  or  woman  can  become
a  member  of  it  without  a  preliminary  training,  or
apprenticeship.    On  the  Grold  Coast,  however,  there
are  no  distinct  orders,  or  bodies,  of  priests.    The  gods
being  infinite  in  number,  and  local,  the  groups  of
priests  are  infinite  in  number,  and  local,  and  have
no  cohesion.    In  every  village  there  will  be  found
three  or  four  priests  who  know  the  sacred  dances  and
special  ceremonies  required  for  the  worship  of  the
gods  peculiar  to  that  village,  but  they  know  nothing
of  the  rites  and  ceremonies  of  the  gods  of  other
towns.    On  the  Slave  Coast,  on  the  other  hand,  each
general  god  of  the  Ewe  tribes,  except  Mawu,  has  in
every  town  and  village  a  considerable  number  of
priests,  whose  duty  it  is  to  minister  to  him  and  to
him  alone.    Colleges  and  seminaries  for  the  instruc-


CONCLUSIONS.


293


tion  of  novices  are  numerous,  and  to  each  god  are
attached  a  number  of  temple-women,  or  wives.
Among  the  Yoruba  tribes  priestlj  organisation  is
carried  still  further,  and  there  are  three  recognised
orders  of  priests,  each  of  which  is  subdivided  into
grades.  On  the  Grold  Coast  a  priest  might  officiate
indifferently  before  any  god  of  the  locality  for  which
he  was,  so  to  speak,  ordained ;  but  if  a  Yoruba  priest
of  Shango  were  to  attempt  to  consult  Ifa  there  would
be  as  great  a  commotion  as  there  would  be  if  a  Roman
Catholic  priest  were  to  attempt  to  preach  in  a  Baptist
Chapel.  There  is,  in  fact,  a  healthy  competition
between  the  priests  of  the  principal  gods,  and  each
guard  their  own  privileges  very  jealously.

Religion,  at  the  stage  of  growth  in  which  we  find
it  among  these  three  groups  of  tribes,  has  no  connec-
tion with  morals,  or  the  relations  of  men  to  one
another.  It  consists  solely  of  ceremonial  worship,  and
the  gods  are  only  offended  when  some  rite  or  ceremony
has  been  neglected  or  omitted.  If  the  omission  be
quite  unintentional  the  result  is  just  the  same,  as  the
gods,  like  uncivilised  man,  judge  by  acts  and  not  by
motives.  In  all  ages  man  makes  God  the  moral
counterpart  of  himself,  and  in  savage  life  he  only
revenges  that  which  affects  himself.  With  the  wrongs
of  others  he  has  nothing  to  do.  If  a  man  murdered
his  neighbour  and  robbed  the  widow  and  orphans,
that  would  be  a  matter  that  would  not  concern
the  gods  in  the  least,  and,  provided  he  paid  the
usual  homage  expected  by  gods  from  their  followers,
he  would  be  as  secure  of  their  favour  and  pro-
tection  as  if  he  were    perfectly    innocent  of  all


294         THl!]  YOnUBA-SFEAKINfl  PEOPLES.


crime.  On  the  otlier  hand,  years  of  blameless  life
would  not  save  a  man  from  punishment  if  he  omitted
some  customary  rite,  or  inadvertently  gave  offence.
Similarlv,  in  the  Hebrew  books,  we  find  that  the
detestable  fraud  perpetrated  by  Jacob  upon  his
brother  Esau  did  not  in  any  way  lessen  the  favour
with  which  he  was  regarded  by  the  national  god ;  but
when  the  unfortunate  TJzzah,  with  the  best  intentions
in  the  world,  put  forth  his  hand  and  held  the  ark  to
keep  it  from  falling,  he  was  struck  dead,  because  the
action  implied  that  the  god  was  not  able  to  protect
himself.  So,  too,  among  the  ancient  Greeks,  the
gods  took  no  cognisance  of  social  offences,  and  only
revenged  slights  offered  to  themselves ;  as,  when  they
caused  Protesilaus,  the  husband  of  Laodamia,  to  be
the  first  hero  slain  before  Troy,  because  she,  in  her
eagerness  to  consummate  her  marriage,  forgot  to
propitiate  them  with  the  usual  sacrifices.

The  belief  that  religion  has  no  connection  with
morals  thus  seems  to  be  inherent  in  man  when  in  a
certain  intellectual  and  social  condition,  and  it  is  not
by  any  means  at  once  got  rid  of  by  the  adoption  of
the  religion  of  a  higher  race  in  which  the  two  are
associated.  The  uneducated  negroes  of  our  colonies,
for  instance,  who  have  been  nominally  Christian  for
some  three  generations,  practically  believe  that  the
commission  of  grave  moral  offences,  and  even  crimes,
will  not  in  the  least  affect  their  prospects  of  future
"salvation,"  provided  that  they  go  to  church  or
chapel  regularly,  and,  in  fact,  pay  their  god  all  that
ceremonial  homage  and  lip-service  which  is,  in  their
yiew,  the  essence  of  religion.


aONGLUSTONS.


295


On  tlie  Gold  and  Slave  Coasts  tliere  is  perfect
liberty  of  thouglit  in  matters  of  religion,  but  a  man
must  show  outward  respect  for  the  gods,  because  to
do  otherwise  is  to  provoke  calamities.  A  man  may
worship  many  gods,  or  none,  just  as  he  pleases,  but
he  must  not  insult  any.  In  fact,  at  this  stage,  man
tolerates  any  form  of  religion  that  tolerates  others ;
and  as  he  thinks  it  perfectly  natural  that  different
people  should  worship  different  gods,  he  does  not
attempt  to  force  his  own  personal  opinions  upon  any-
one, or  to  establish  conformity  of  ideas.

The  striking  resemblance  which  the  Yoruba  religious
system  bears  to  that  of  the  ancient  Greeks  can
scarcely  have  escaped  notice.  Olorun,  the  sky-god
proper,  now  being  gradually  displaced  by  the  more
anthropomorphic  Obatala,  resembles  Uranus,  who  was
displaced  by  Kronos.  In  Greek  mythology  Kronos
married  his  sister  Ehea,  the  earth,  and  the  Yoruba
myth,  makes  Obatala  marry  Odudua,  who  also  repre-
sents the  earth,  though  the  qualities  of  Aphrodite
appear  to  predominate.  Olokun  answers  to  Poseidon,
Ogim,  worker  in  iron,  to  Hephoestus,  Orisha  Oko  to
Priapus,  Osanhin  to  ^sklepius,  Orun,  the  sun,  to
Helios,  and  Oshu,  the  moon,  to  Selene.  Zeus'  mes-
senger, Hermes,  the  lightning,  was  the  protector  of
plunderers,  and  Shango  is  the  god  of  lightning  and
plunder.  Ifa,  as  the  god  of  prophecy,  and  the  being
who  wards  off  evil  and  affords  help,  resembles  Apollo,
who,  in  Homer,  is  perfectly  distinct  from  the  sun-god,
though  identified  with  him  in  later  times.*

*  In  the  Soman  mythology  Air  married  Earth,  and  the  marriage
was  renewed  every  year  in  spring.  (Virgil,  Gcorg.  ii.,  32.5.)  Here,
Air  (Orungan)  marries  Water  (Yemaja).


296


TEE  YOBUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


The  spirits  of  tlie  trees  answer  to  the  Hama- dryads,
and  we  have  river-gods  and  sea-spirits.  Metamor-
phosis to  a  brook,  spring,  or  lagoon  is  common,  and
we  have  one  example  of  a  girl  being  transformed,  like
Daphne,  into  a  shrub.  The  gods,  when  consulted,
gave  oracular  responses  that  differ  in  no  essential
particular  from  the  answers  given  by  the  Oracle  of
Delphi.  The  Yorubas,  like  the  G-reeks,  offer  human
sacrifices  in  time  of  national  need.  Dancing  was,
with  the  Greeks,  intimately  connected  with  wor-
ship, as  Lucian  says :  *  "  You  cannot  find  a
single  ancient  mystery  in  which  there  is  not
dancing;"  and  on  the  Grold  and  Slave  Coasts
every  god  of  note  has  his  own  dance,  which
is  sacred  to  him,  and  known  only  to  the
initiated.  The  religion  of  ancient  Grreece  has  been
obscured  by  a  great  deal  of  later  poetic  imagery ;
but,  when  we  look  into  it  closely,  it  is  found  to  be
similar  to  that  of  the  Yorubas,  and  was  no  doubt
produced  when  the  G-reeks  were  in  a  like  intellectual
condition.  It  is  a  pantheon  which  seems  peculiar  to
a  certain  stage  of  culture,  and  is  composed  of  nat'ire-
gods  and  ghost-gods.  The  Khonds  of  India  have
almost  exactly  the  same  objects  of  worship  as  the
Yorubas,  their  gods  being  the  sun-god,  moon-god,
earth-god,  god  of  iron  and  arms,  small-jDox-god,  god
of  hills,  god  of  streams,  forest-god,  god  of  limits,
god  of  fountains,  god  of  rain,  god  of  hunting,  god
of  births,  village-god,  and  tank-god. f  Similar  resem-
blances are  forthcoming  from  almost  every  part  of

*  On  "  Dancing,"  c.  15.

f  Latliam,  "  Ethnology  of  the  British  Colonies,"  p.  140.


CONCLUSIONS.


297


the  world.  In  fact,  tlie  gods  are  everywhere  much
the  same,  because  much  the  same  phenomena  and
natural  objects  are  found  everywhere,  and  because
mankind  on  the  same  plane  of  civilisation  has  much
the  same  wants  and  necessities.

From  a  comparison  of  the  systems  of  consanguinity
of  these  lingual  groups  we  are  able  to  trace  the  order
of  evolution  of  the  family,  and  the  results  go  to  show
that  Dr.  Starcke's*  theories  of  the  priority  of  a  sys-
tem of  kinship  through  fathers  are  incorrect,  and
that  Mr.  McLennan  was  right  in  his  general  conclu-
sions that  descent  through  mothers  was  first  in
order.

Among  the  Tshi  tribes  of  the  Gold  Coast  descent
is  solely  and  exclusively  in  the  female  line.  A  family
is  a  number  of  persons  connected  by  uterine  ties,
all  of  whom  bear  the  same  clan-name.  The  clan-
name  is  the  test  of  kinship,  and  a  family  is  a  small
circle  of  persons  whose  exact  degrees  of  consanguinity
to  each  other  are  known,  within  the  wider  circle  of
more  distant  relations,  that  is,  the  clan  at  large.
Marriage  within  the  clan  is  forbidden,  and  hence  a
father  cannot  be  related  by  blood  to  his  children,  or
be  of  the  same  family.  Succession  to  property,  office,
or  dignity  follows  the  line  of  blood-descent,  and  a
man's  heir  is  his  brother,  or,  failing  a  brother,  his
sister's  son.

Among  the  Ga  tribes  of  the  Gold  Coast  descent  is
also  solely  and  exclusively  in  the  female  line,  and
marriage  in  the  mother's  family  is  forbidden;  but
here  the  influence  of  the  father  in  the  household
*  "  The  Primitive  Family."


298


TJTi?  YOBUBA-FIPEAKINa  PEOPLES.


lias  begun  to  assert  itself,  and  in  some  cases,  cMeflj
where  the  father  is  a  man  of  some  rank  and  power,
office  or  dignity  descends  from  father  to  son.  Pro-
perty is  still  considered  to  be  vested  in  families,
rather  than  in  individuals,  and  succession  to  property
remains  in  the  female  line,  in  the  same  order  as
among  the  Tshi  tribes.

Among  the  western  Ewe  tribes  the  law  of  blood-
descent,  and  of  succession  to  office  or  property,  is  the
same  as  with  the  Ga  tribes  ;  but  among  the  eastern
Ewe  tribes,  in  Dahomi,  blood-descent  is  on  both  sides
of  the  house,  and  succession  in  the  male  line.  This
change  has,  however,  only  taken  place  in  the  royal
family  of  Dahomi,  and  among  what  may  be  termed
the  aristocracy,  who  appear  to  have  followed  the
lead  of  their  sovereign.  The  lower  orders  still  trace
descent  in  the  female  line,  and  that  the  higher  orders
used  also  to  do  so  is  shown  by  the  terms  in  use  for
expressing  relationships.  Brother  and  sister,  for
instance,  can  only  be  rendered  by  "mother's  son"
and  "  mother's  daughter  "  respectively.

Among  the  Yoruba  tribes  descent  is  through  both
parents  with  succession  in  the  male  line,  and  marriage
is  forbidden  both  in  the  father's  and  mother's  family
so  long  as  relationship  can  be  traced.  A  man's  heirs
are  his  sons,  among  whom  the  property  is  equally
divided.  If  a  man  have  no  sons,  his  brothers  inherit.
The  old  ideas  concerning  blood-descent  still,  however,
exercise  some  influence,  and  children  by  the  same
father,  but  different  mothers,  are  not  generally  con-
sidered proper  blood-relations.  Thus,  going  from
the  Tshi  tribes  to  the  Yoruba,  from  the  least  cultured


CONGLUSTONS.


299


to  tlie  most  cnltnred,  we  find  a  gradual  but  regular
change  from  kinship  and  descent  through  mothers
onlj,  to  kinship  and  descent  through  both  parents.

We  are  also  able  to  trace  the  evolution  of  society
from  the  stage  in  which  the  group,  or  community,  as
a  whole,  protected  its  own  rights  and  exacted  redress
for  injuries,  to  that  in  which  the  state  protects  the
individual  and  punishes  crime.

It  would  appear  that,  at  first,  the  community  or
group  was  the  social  unit,  and  had  collective  rights
and  responsibilities,  every  member  of  the  group
having  a  right  to  the  protection  of  the  group  as  a
whole,  and  being  in  turn  responsible  individually  for
the  acts  or  omissions  of  the  group  as  a  whole,  or
of  any  member  of  it.  If  we  might  speculate  on  this
subject  we  might  say  that  this  condition  dated  from
the  time  when  the  group  was  homogeneous,  and  had
not  yet  been  broken  up  into  different  clans  by  the
system  of  blood-descent  through  mothers.  Either  no
notion  of  blood-descent  at  all  had  been  formed,  or,  if
formed,  the  group-tie,  the  tie  of  association  and
comradeship,  was  considered  of  more  moment  than
the  blood-tie.  The  sole  remaining  trace  of  this  con-
dition to  be  found  among  the  three  lingual  groups
under  consideration  lies  in  the  right  which  a  creditor,
whose  debtor  belongs  to  another  community,  has  to
seize  the  property  of  a  third  party,  belonging  to  the
same  community  as  the  person  indebted,  instead  of
recovering  what  is  due  from  the  latter.  The  groujD  is
individually  and  collectively  responsible  for  debts
contracted  by  any  member.

Among  the  Tshi,  Gra,  and  Ewe  tribes  the  family,


300  THE  YOBUBA-BFEAKING  PEOPLES.


connected  by  uterine  ties,  is  tlie  social  unit,  and  eacli
member  of  a  family  is  individually  responsible  for  all
the  others.  The  state,  represented  by  the  tribal  or
village-chief,  takes  no  cognisance  of  offences  unless
they  are  such  as  directly  concern,  or  are  believed  to
concern,  the  interests  of  the  community  as  a  whole.
Treason  and  witchcraft  are  almost  the  only  offences
that  the  state  takes  cognisance  of.  In  cases  of
homicide,  theft,  rape,  assault,  and  injury  to  the
person  or  property,  it  is  the  family  of  the  person
who  has  suffered  that  alone  can  demand  and  exact
satisfaction.  No  one  else  has  a  right  to  interfere,
and,  if  the  family  should  choose  to  forego  all
demands,  no  one  has  a  right  to  say  anything.
Reparation  is  not  sought  directly  from  the  offender,
but  from  the  family  to  which  he  belongs.  It  is,  in
fact,  a  case  of  one  family  arrayed  against  another.

Where  the  contending  parties  cannot  come  to
mutual  agreement  as  to  the  reparation,  the  injured
party  brings  the  case  before  the  state,  that  is,  the
chief,  who,  until  thus  called  upon  to  arbitrate,  has
no  power  to  act.  There  is  no  fixed  scale  of  punish-
ments or  awards ;  the  injured  family  assesses  its
damages,  and,  if  the  injuring  family  does  not  accept
the  terms  or  effect  a  compromise,  the  dispute  is
referred  to  the  chief  for  settlement.  Murder  is  not
necessarily  punished  with  death,  for  the  family  of
the  deceased  may,  if  they  think  fit,  accept  a  money-
compensation  in  lieu  for  the  loss  of  the  services  of  the
deceased.  If  the  family  be  poor,  and  that  of  the
murderer  rich,  they  usually  deem  it  better  to  exact
payment  than  to  enjoy  the  luxury  of  revenge,  which


CONCLUSIONS.


301


would  only  have  the  effect  of  clejD riving  the  injurers
of  one  of  their  number,  without  improving  the
position  of  the  injured.  In  the  contrary  case  the
feeling  of  revenge  is  alloAved  to  have  its  way ;  and
when  this  occurs,  the  homicide  is  handed  over  to
the  injured  family  and  put  to  death  by  them.  In
cases  of  theft,  or  injury  to  property,  the  stolen  goods
are  returned,  or  the  amount  of  the  damage  made
good,  by  the  family  to  which  the  offender  belongs  ;
which  is  also  liable  to  a  fine  for  not  having  controlled
the  actions  of  the  guilty  member.  The  family  itself
then  deals  with  its  erring  member,  and  punishes  or
pardons  him,  just  as  it  thinks  fit,  that  being  a  matter
with  which  the  outside  public  has  nothing  to  do.
'No  distinction  is  made  between  crimes  and  accidents.
Motive  is  never  taken  into  account,  and  the  harm
done  is  always  deliberated  upon  from  the  point  of
view  of  loss  to  the  family.  If  a  man  be  deliberately
murdered,  or  killed  by  accident,  there  is  equally  a
loss  of  an  individual  to  the  family,  and  they  can  in
either  case  take  a  life  in  exchange,  or  accept  com-
pensation. "We  saw  the  reflex  of  this  condition  in
their  religious  views,  the  gods  being  likewise  believed
not  to  take  motive  into  consideration.

Among  the  Yorubas,  in  consequence  of  the  change
in  the  system  of  blood-descents,  the  family  has  lost
cohesion.  It  is  no  longer  the  powerful  organisation  it
was  when  it  rested  upon  the  basis  of  the  clan ;  for,
instead  of  being  a  large  group  of  kindred,  it  has  be-
come a  congeries  of  households,  each  with  two  lines
of  descent,  and  as  the  family  has  weakened,  the  state
has  gradually  usurped  its  privileges.    The  state  here


302


THE  YOBUBA-SPEAEING  PEOPLES.


takes  cognisance  of  serious  crimes,  and  only  minor
injuries  to  tlie  person  or  property  are  left  to  tlie
initiative  of  the  family.  The  restoration  of  the  stolen
property,  and  the  imposition  of  a  fine  on  the  family,  is
no  longer  considered  a  sufficient  reparation  for  theft.
Theft  has  come  to  be  regarded  as  an  offence  against
social  order,  in  which  the  whole  community  is
interested,  and  hence  a  first  offence  is  punished  by
flogging  or  fine,  a  second  by  mutilation,  and  a  third  by
death.  The  family,  being  no  longer  collectively
responsible  for  the  actions  of  its  several  members,  is
not  allowed  to  deal  with  the  guilty  member  as  it  thinks
fit.  The  state  metes  out  justice ;  every  man  is  respon-
sible for  his  own  conduct,  and  punishment  falls  upon
the  guilty  individual  instead  of  upon  the  group  of
kindred.

We  are  also  able  to  trace  to  some  extent  the  evolu-
tion of  ideas  concerning  property.  In  those  groups  of
tribes  which  trace  descent  through  mothers  only,
property  is  vested  in  families  rather  tha,n  in  indi-
viduals. There  is,  of  course,  individual  property,  but
it  usually  is  limited  to  minor  articles,  such  as  utensils,
weapons,  &c.  Houses,  the  family  gold  ornaments,
insignia,  stools,  and  properties  that  have  been  handed
down  from  bygone  generations,  are  vested  in  the  head
of  the  family,  and  cannot  be  alienated  without  the  con-
sent of  the  family  as  a  whole.  At  the  demise  of  the
head  of  the  family  the  next  of  kin  who  succeeds  has
the  usufruct  of  the  family  property  in  his  turn,  and  is
responsible  for  its  safe  custody.  Among  the  Yorubas,
in  consequence  of  the  change  in  the  system  of  descents,
property  is  vested  in  households,  that  is,  in  a  smaller


CONCLUSIONS.


303


group  of  kindred,  and  is  divided  among  the  heirs,  who
are  the  sons,  or,  in  default  of  sons,  brothers.  As  here,
equally  with  the  tribes  who  trace  descent  solely  in  the
female  line,  the  order  of  succession  is  unalterable ;
property  in  all  cases  remains  in  the  family,  the  only
difference  being  that  among  the  Yorubas  it  is  dis-
tributed with  each  succeeding  generation,  instead  of
being  kept  together ;  but  the  tendency  of  the  Yoruba
custom  undoubtedly  is  to  destroy  the  notion  that
property  belongs  to  the  group  of  kindred,  and  to  make
it  individual.

In  the  case  of  all  the  tribes  land  is  held  in  common,
and  there  is  no  individual  property  in  land,  though
the  notion  that  land  can  be  the  property  of  the  indi-
vidual, instead  of  the  community,  has,  as  has  been  said,
begun  to  appear  among  the  Yorubas.  Probably,  in
early  times,  moveable  as  well  as  immoveable  property
was  once  common.  It  still  is,  to  a  large  extent,  com-
mon to  the  family,  and,  at  an  earlier  stage,  when  the
group  was  homogeneous,  it  was  no  doubt  common  to
the  group  or  community  ;  for  the  custom  which  allows
a  creditor  to  seize  the  property  of  a  third  party
belonging  to  the  same  community  as  the  debtor,  seems
to  point  to  a  notion  that  the  community  as  a  whole
must  have  benefited  by  what  the  debtor  received.  If
all  property  were  once  common  to  the  group,  as  land
is  noAY,  then  the  following  changes  probably  occurred.
When  the  homogeneous  group  became  heterogeneous,
and  broke  up  into  clans  in  consequence  of  the  system
of  female  descents,  property  became  common  to  the
clan.  Then,  when  the  clan  became  divided  into
uterine  families,  property  became  common  to  the


304


THE  YOliUBA-SPEAKING  I'EOPLES.


uterine  family,  as  it  still  is  on  the  Gold  Coast ;  and,
wlien  tlie  uterine  families  came  to  an  end,  owing  to
the  recognition  of  the  blood-tie  between  father  and
child,  property  became  vested  in  households,  as  it  is
with  the  Yorubas.  In  other  words,  as  the  units  of
which  society  was  originally  composed  became  sub-
divided into  smaller  and  smaller  groups,  so  did
property  become  vested  in  a  gradually  decreasing
number  of  persons,  until  it  finally  became  individual.


APPENDIX.


305


X

I— I
Ah


O

O
Q


o


H

w

O
O

CO
I— (

o
o


oq  c§  h


CD

3


03


o
c


72


.S  o

P.  s

S


c

C3


o


o


o


o  2

^  a


CO

a

c3

e
o

03

O
CS  "

^  -t->


1:)

11  a;


o    ^  S


0

CO

rO"

CO

C3

<D

rO

03

CO

lU

r-H

Pj

E

0

0

CD

^  r-]

a

■  rH

03

IB

cn

CD

-a

S

-i->

a

0

0

03

>

306


THE  Y0RUBA-8PEAKING  PEOPLES.


APPENDIX.


307


C3     0)  CS


s  3


Cti


CL,

c3


o


r-C>  ^


c

o


CO
■i-H


ID

a


o  ^-g
So  So

C3  r;


O

o
o

o


^  o


C3


J3


O


O
+3


a


c3


c3


0)
N

tn
O

o


a

o

-(J
d"

a

o


^  o


T3

o


CO


O
-(J


•73


>
O


'o


a

o


o

«

-Hi

-tT

■  ^

O

c3

o

a

o

o

as  "»


o


r-O


o


c


2  c


Oh  P


an

o


§^  a
.s"  f^I  s


5t3

o


o


a  J,


o


Ph  cc


5  ^

^  O
O    o  ^


a,

03


a

o


a  ^


O  1)


' — <


bo


c3


CO

03

o

bp

s

pun

0)

cS

C3

CO

w

bp


O


Ph

a

C3  W


to

CO

rt

o

03

-C3


fe  03
-+J  CO
03


03  O)


bO.S


O  03

bo  f5


03


03

5


03  03

^  -P

°  a

CO  w

03  C


03

o
H


CO


03


T3

o


03


o
H


03

rt

c3
Ph

03
CO

03

»H

03

o

&:


P
O


o


03

^  a

HJ  rt


x2


308


THE


YOBUBA-SPEAKING  PEOFLES.


a

O

d

'E,


O  ^


►5"  era


5

ave,

p-  a

^  g

-2  ^

wo)

o

to

fea

!  s

S

-heru,

g

s

••>»

and

p

«i5

and

be  02


o    o  _

+i

-  S


CO

r^  Q


-O

-P


s  a


t3
PI


CO
CO

1=1


Sh

OSS,

da,

real

con-

"i

as

0  ans

S-l

u

n-S

<x>

to

to

an

es

o

+^

o

-1^

a

o


5

o

a


a


CI
ci


o    c  „


03

ci

D

03

rP

a

o

eJcu

O

p

c3

a

o

p

c3
r!

c3

(D

d  .d


-2  o
O


.a

l-l


d

c3

bo
a

a

o


to

>
bo

o
bo


CO
ID
to
c4
O

03

a

o


rd


»0  03

e3


O  1^


ci

OJ

Oh  c3

a'^

S  .d


CO  05

pi.  -^^

OJ


;h  CO

^.2  ^


03

_bp  ^

 ,

CO  ^
03  ._


03  CO
t>  03

8  %


'p

CS


d
d
o
p


05

>

rd


o


o

^  p
~  rd

a  'sf

P  e
d

-d


O      i  i
2        ^  ^

o  53  bo

B  .a

p  g  g  ^

CS  a


ter,

tlie

/ — s

1

c3

d

ohaTe

rrel.

now

en

a

a}
c3

,d

C3

CO

p

S

o

o

■-a

03

d

+i

OJ

1

an

CO

d

itio

rao.i

utu

erb

CO

p»

o

pene

bo
o

terio

p

5

The

p.

03
O

O)
03


03

a


03

!*

03

d


CO      03  S

S  03

,5  -^^  .S

O   bo  o

^  ""^

"  'd  -

•  r-"

rQ  ^-


to


rQ


CO

S  en


o;


8  =^

O   ^  cS

CO   .  rd

es  >


03
to
o


a

03


5

*^  o
:  p


S      CO  '3

ho

CO


03


S  to

03  03


P

03  04

bo  W


APPENDIX.


309


o


u
o


a

c3


bo

a
•  — t
>-
o


^4

o


o


I— I  S


a.


OS
a>

CO


o

Qi
'Ji


c3


60


1— I

o

cT

M

/vb,  to  go

i¥2  Ao,  I

went

ikft  relio,

going

o
c


>

-5

o
o


8


>

!?5


t-.  r-l


Q
O

o

^  .2


c


"p..

a


D
O
O

■<
O

s


'3  o


<v  in


CO

only,

as

ithoi

-♦J

&:

CO

a

S

as

a)

us

verb

Pres

a

CD

e3

bu

he

"a

%-)

fi

-u

CO

D
fi

>->

CD

za

O)

y,

CO

"S

resse

inflect

a

ndefi

(D

C3

1— 1

C  ID

c

»  n
a


(D

a

13


OJ


O  J3

-i-i  >-i

"S  ^

(U  rP
05

rC  p


310


TEE  TOBUBA-SPEAKING  PEOFLES.


c


I


9  .

O  (U  ~
c3  o


o

d  CO
o


03


l-l


PL,


o


o
bo


H  03

H  o


cn
(3
0)

H

03


03

H


03

bo  >
o

"5  03


rtf  03

03

bo

ci  ^

C3  C

03  t— I


^  to


I  03

03  -tJ


o


o  ^


tc
cS

:-i

03

03  t:  03
03  O


03
&:
o

>  ^

03  5


03

d


c

03

a.
.a


C3
es
>-i

S

o


d

03


d


03
P-

a,
c


d

03
03
J3


c  S

03

S  o

03
»-

03

d  „

O  o

(3  ^


2

P      d  CO

•-is

M  C
OS

>  »  c

03    5=  .

•5  *^

+J  -t-^


APPENDIX.


311


r4


■2

o


•^3

°  C3


o


o

<»
o


a


^  ^  <^  •


=9


eg


a


^1


bo

c
"-+3
cS


s


g


o
=9


c3


O
&,

GO


ci


E3
O


nS

Ph

m


a,


o


€

rt

oi

<u

o

s

Oi

tn

a

a

hi

<5


®
o

o

bo


I  -2  -

^  •§

^  o

o  -

O  P-l

^  a  5^


a  o  S


(U  60

<u  a

JO  ci


(D
fe-
es


60

5  -p

X)

ra


2


o


. — I  M


03


3


03  cn


ici  ^

^  a


03


"  CO

60  '%

a

i  !


r/3
03


0)

a

,3


ce

a

c  ?

a  23
o  ^
o

a


ai
o

o


N  o  ^

60


a

03


60


o
=3


o
=9


o

60


o
o

M


O
■4J


03


1

o

a;

•  rH

a'~

o

CO

C3

s

3

'ft

a

o

a

o

c«

03

CO

fH

he

(53

H

60

a

•  ^

a  03


03


a  ^


03

CP
r/3
CO
03


03

-a
H


O  03

bo  a

a  c3

03


CO

a
o

CO

f-.

03
ft


03
bo

a


u

03

c3


03
ft

o


TEE  YOBUB A. SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


APPENDIX.


313


3  -a


0
l-i

o


a


3


0


o

C3
^-1


d  O


s


s  ^

o  o


1-1  l-l


c3


CO


bo  -g
•  -^  o

O

bo  c3


a

o

£>
O


o
PL,

05


w  60


o
o


6

O

J  1

CO

m

^  M

CO  ^--^

US

O   ^  S

.5   <s  PL,

-4^    ;h  CO

o


03


05


g  o

05
CO


.S  0

•  rH


05


05


CO  05

CO  CO

■p  a

S-i  05


o  o


I

o

i5


o
o


CO


o
bo


05  53

3  ^


^    O    o  o
l-H      ^  bo

o   bo  g
^  'o  ^

ci    c3  bo


05

rG

Is

o

05

to

a

c3

ej

05

'i'

a,

05

be

r-t

O

"g

>-i

.2

O

O


05


CO


Q
O

o

>

H

H
!?!
O
O


05


05


c3


.-  bp

CO   9

^  5


a
o

o

bo

oT

3


o
o

o


C3

.2

'■+3


05

.§

05


CO
05


Oh  a


c3

ic3

C5

05

pj

a

1— 1

05

05

o

a,

JMo

a

05

o

CO

c3

3

3

cj

.S

'•+3

c

CO

o

O

I

05


05


05


'A

05


CO


ci
o


a

5  -5  W


O

o


>

H

P

w

to

o
O


05


=3  .t^


05


CO

H


r3


1:3

05
Cj

be
3

■  r—>

3

o

05

3

05


^1
^  05

CO  O
O

-  CO

05  r0


o

05

05
>^

■+3
O

3


3
_o

05

c3
Q)


THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


'43

o

u
o


a
o


S


rt


CO


o


"  -

<1>

aT

bene

cS

CO

o

ilac

c3

"o

to

•  f-H

t>

a

J*

1— 1

o

o


CO  i-r

o

o  ^

a  2

o


CS  >


o  ^
o


to

to

c3


f o  ^
OO  o

o


o


lie

o

t>

cS

s

o

fn

QJ

ad

1— 1

cS

>^

(0

Ire

aced

conv

bo

o

<3>


c3


0)

'a

<D

O

o;

&

XI

CO

CO

.—

on

a

c3

pa

a


-a
-1^


(D
O


CD
ti-
cs


I— I
^  o

fii  to


!1>
>


rid


o
bo


(D  O

bo  '3

O  X:
o


Is  r-l


c
o


o

CS


•-3

o
d


a  a


a


a  -o-

o

-  s  °

bo  a  p

o    «  -


H  g


-d  ^


CO


2  6  O

bb


Oh


:5  w


Q
O
O

H

O
H


c3
o


CS  rd


c5


CO

H


I  a)
O  S

ai  cj


o

a>  cS


bo  ^
o  o


t

c


^  d

g  '3


o  <»

to

"  d


C3


aj


cu

3


■73

•4-3

c3

bo  -  -iJ

.a,  bo'"'

■  d


o


d  '  .

CS  -

a  cS


cS

rd
o


o

O    5  !^  ^
&  d

ri  r-,

■►^  ^  to

rd    o  a)
&-  aj

a>


<D  -d


tu  d
to  d

8  w


APPENDIX.


815


S3
O


03


ID
CD


a

03
'a

a

CO
CO


J  .-Is


03
>;

fee

03
Id
03


03


■73

03


t;

03


^  03


CO

a


"  d

c3  03

rd

CO

f  ^

5b


CO
03

03


03
CO

C!

03
■+2


I

id


535

S  CS

03

i  o

N  g
-1-2


E30
03
!d

03


cT   O    O  C


CO


03


03


CS  (T)


o


.fe    s  «


,o


03  'S

^  ^  .3

S  ^  OS
03     (33  O

-S  P^


S2  Id


a-i    J  -u


CO


2


o
Id

<A


1

o

o

bD

03

for

~l-2
S3

he

Id

oT
bD

CO

ice

H

O

R

cS

CO

c3

C

CO

-(-2

CO

.s

o

03

!Z3

03

a

biD

1— 1

CO
(-!

a

tei

no

lOS

he

o

=+-(

I

bo

03  ,


03


o


ci


d,  03
cS  O


S  =Jd

03


c3


CO  .CO


0

bo


03


03
'-I3

bo

03


I

bo

03


O     03  _w


bo


03  ;h


Id

03


CO

13


a!

tive

-u
1— 1

fixe

r-

CS

03
-1-2

1

CO

o

C3

cS

CO
•  p-t

-S

erb

h- 1

xed

03

o

03

t>

prefi

'o

•  r-l

he

be,

+2

l=L,

abl

O

o

CD
>-»

03
>

CS

c

o

'-(3

'-5

Id

cS

o


c=  ^


-  ==  53


o

-1-2


c3


03


03

rd


a

c3

id

03
CO
03


o3
ho

03
P
03
rP

-*2

cc

H


o


-1-2
P

c3
P
O

CO

P

o
o


03


cS


P

o

P4

Ci  P

03

.52  to


i-i

03
03

rP


03

bo
P
c3

rP


O  c3


rS*  03

cz  ^


O
to


03
03


o

CO
03

bo
P

C3


C

o
o


p

o

03

03

P

cS
o


03

>     -?  03


I— I   "    03  .3


O     03  03

rP  P

^  -t^  CS  '-C

«     CO  ^"  -2

03  .2  03

t;  >  ^  -t2

P      C  03  C

c:    o  OS  I— I

^  "  P

«s  IS  P

03  03

CS  03


O  03


CS

bo


2  s


^


CO  03
03  t>

bo

P  be
bo  03
p  P
a

^  n3

03

P  "S

-.2

_  s

P

o
u


03  03  O

3  ^

1  P  J

P-4  P


o


cS


bo  ^
a,  P
p  "J


c3  CO

^   °  H

"  s  °

p

03


CO

Id


CO
•  I— I

03

s

,p

o


CD

Ci


CO
CS


03  03

^  rd


T3

03

p

B

ci

o

CO

03

Ci

1

03

CO

03

p

bo

03

ci

rP

03

ble

CD
_Q3

dera

and

'-I3

.s

consi

Tshi

pecul

316


THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


p

O


>
o


o
a


o

o  <o
.  .  o


o


•c»  O

o


-I


OS


s

T  cs  bo
^   o  -g


-1-3

<S3

o


4  a


o


X
CQ

CO  ^


p.  -efl    (B  ITS

rJ3  S


c3


03

o


M

d

o
f-^  ■

no

c:3

)od

CO

O

do

spe

-u

-w

o

cT

O

<^

CD

a

spe{

>

€

pera

Eka

o

-♦J
o

o


O
Pt


o
c

o


o
bo


.1-1


I— I    f-i  «^

S


o  -


bo  o


c:3


cao  P<
O    ^    O  p


1

C

o

o

o

o

o

H

>>

H

H

i-i

-<!

•/i

o

•<

t-c

o

n

^<

52i

1—1

(— 1

u
o

-•■J"

c

O)
CO
<Vl

;h


o
u

-i->


A[^PENDIX.


317


>


6^


o


o
1

t

ID

<a

ID

1

1

•a

s

no

a

1?

60

.3

'-+3
c3

<D

O

a

03


O
1=1

>
o


5U  'csi


>
O


o
c


03


I


-1-3

CD
O

C

a


o

o
a


5  03


o


(-i


O


.  a

0)  05

b»  1/3

o


a

I/)

o


Ph  id
<D  ^


5    g    c4  g


T3

<D
>
O


O  ^


c3


a

CO

c


<D


•  CO

03  - — V

CD     O)  '73

S  a<


<1  ^


03


<D

a


a  ^


03  fe


<D


(D

S-i  05

1^


3


<D


<D  'li


<1  ^


C3


CD
c3


f4i  O


was

not

>^

03

O)

03

bo

'1

<D

Pi

02

too

Ph

CO

O

<»

pea

Mi

CO

a

not

4

'is  M
p<


c3


ID

ID  tn


CD
CD
S


ID


(D
N

1)
ID

to


ID


eq       ^  Pm


<D

pi

o

en

T3

ID

s

a

ee

CO

a

ueezi

73

am

00

ID


ISl
<D

5  <D

■  ^  52

CO  r-
44-1

6  t>

•  r-'


c
o


c3


o

o
bo

o


P4


Ph


O
bo

o
PI


O
O


IS
Ed
Ph


O

1^  O


o

o
o


D


o


CO  <D

•r-l  CO

ID

s

bo

C  <D

■J^  -^^

(D  t>
Pk  ^
CO

5r!

9J  CO
Ph  03

2  Ph


P^


o
pl


Ph  O
••-1  (3


00

boO


-a  IE'

2  CO

PI  :a
pi

O  CO

P  03

60

p  o

'o  3

03

I — I  O)
Ph


-^2  ^  .a


r-i  ID

p  -

O  "


o


Pl


-a


o


o


(D


CO

03


to

'Ph

a

X


318


THE


YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


cii

I—

o


c5

(—1
i-i— J

to

o

a

■-a

OJ

O

o

(— (

03

CO

o
;^

S

03

<a

03

o

be

to

o

•r-l

o

-(J

tracti

they.

to

t— I  •>

o

03  °Q

a  ^

03  03


a  a

p  p

o

Pi

-pi

p

03

he

be

deat
die)
chil
sue

o

•(-•  03

03

N

03

03

Ci

cri

to


^3

03
N
03
03

CT
to

03
X3


I

c

o


03


to  03

S   w  *^

p  to

-So

Ph  en!
S  03

n


rO


1=1  Q«  to  O

°o

rO         f  "  03

to     O  J3

I— I     =^  43


P

03


03


03

V  to


03


o


o

.in


03    03    P  cr'
i  o


03

O
-(J


a

o


P.

.X  O


a

o

o

P
cs

Ph


■"O  03

03

tn  T3
03

bo  03

p  >-.

5P'p
p

-  a


03  a

CO  O

03  S  "

_ I  c4  to

o:  <x)  ^

r-.  >  03

^  ^


»  V

I—'

O


to


03

es

cs  >

P  «
P  "I

O  to

03


CO

!>

CO
03

to


>>

p

C3

-u

P

o

to

03

to

'El

p
p

S

o

cs

p

CO

nr

03

to

CO

P

to
p

03

c5

5

APPENDIX.


210


!2i


a

53

p

_o

'-J3

C3

-u

p

cldic

'S

a;

,£3

o

bo


Pi
o


QO

C3


CO


c
B

a
o


I

a>


a


0)


^    g  O


-4^
C3


o


03


II
o

Pi
.a


PI
o


o


AT.I

o
a>

Ol

«

Ch

O

cc

<»"

o

-u

bo

<S5

pt  p<

f

is  o
.,


O

m  o

ho  n
o


*  CO

CO  tpl

O
to


hb  CO
60  ^

si


^  .J.

'-'  a
?  a

bo  "


c3


a

^  s


o


^ — ^  ■  —I

O  o


c3


a
o


o

CO

>


03  03  S  -"^
!-,  r-H  O  c3
O


CO


C  O


00  o;


03

a

03


!^  -s"  ^  e'  ^  a


c3


•2  g  ^

-IJ  o

03      tn    ,  1

12  60  O
Pi  o
cS     O  -2

H     +:>  CO

^  ce
=^  «

o  ^


P>->    03  a;  o

f>    'TIS  to  rt

t>-      rH  CO  ^

G     ci  C3  H^

o  60  g  S

?H  i-j  03


320


THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


rH

o


o
o


o
4=


o

«  a

°  8

c3  ^.


o


1i
_o

M

O
O

o


o
o


c3

Oh  ,


v:  G
!3  O


ID

-(J  ^ — ^

O

a  i

"  Is
bo  "

CO

"to


-a
-1-2


o  o
bo  -

B  «


oc  t«


en  c3  -
c3

O  to


la


o

O

00

o

o

C!

03

.2

fH

c3

'■+3

!D

o

P^

a

S  2

O  f4J


O


c  P
O)  e

J3    bO  ce  -


g  -^^      -5  g^O^


CO

aT

rd


o


a


o


a  ':3


bo

a

o


03


>i  bO
-a  -5


03


bol
.3

"3  -J3
rp  a


P-i  a
o  >


'r^  O


a


>  •:;3  .o  a


03

a
o


^H
O


03

a
o


to
cS

C3


1

43

03

refi:

on

0
t*

0

a

CO

s

c3

13

Ph

rH

o

0

OISS

C3

nnoii

03

en

03

0

e"
.■^

8

bo

p

1

0

a

o


a

o


M  P-I

CO      o  ^


P-i  03

a  ra


a

CO
CO

a!


03  !:<
^  ca

03  Pj

bo  -T-

C3  (V)


o

o


bo

a


.2  45  a  o


'a  fs;


to  o
to  t>


03

a


bo

o
-t-=

CO


O  T3

-t;  a


p

5

3

arcl

-(J

nffi

S

p.

•  rH

to

g

0

0)

oT

m

rJq

0

+3

cT

oT

0"

e

ra

0

0"

In

to

5

c5


a

o


-a

C3


rC

o


a

o


f<3


CO

to  •rH

03  „

CO  (U

o

03


m

a


03

Eh


I

o


03  ^

•  •~  3

.2  o


U

03

03

ci

S

03

0

0

a

o


03

03


a   S  'S


O     Sh  03
bo  O

a

irH

to  r^
03

><!

ta

03


a

bo


o


a
o

CO


03

ra
H


a
o
to

03
pH


03
>

a
o


c3

a
o

CO
03

Ph

o
a


10


=t-H

o


a

o


a  X
o  t:
§  «

Ph  ei


!3  •t2

c

03  r-


-  to

rX3  03

P.

r.  a

ra  0)


a

o
to

03

Ph


03

03  ^


O
Ph


10  ""


•  S  o
ra  ra

CO


03

m  O  03
a  c;

i-,  C>  "*-*
O  "


<i1  :S  ^  -5


03

bo  -a

a  ~


be  .2
a  1=


03

to

a
c


CO

03  t5
:-H  03

Ph  eS

y.  X

03  03


.a  o
3

CO  -3
o  §


APPEKDTX,


321


>


O  ^    K    3  2

Q  g

^ — "   C3  ■  •  _d


o  2
t«5


o


g


^  o

-4-3


a


1=1

to


be


P  O


&0  !^


bo  bb


Ph

g

o
o


-  r  S  S


03  o


.0


s


<S  <0  p  '-^
O    ci  tin  CS


-5     S  =


0}

s


o


X3


0

s

fix

0

■/3

ja

CO

0
c

p

g

?

cr

c/T

u

eS

0

0

0   ir  I


bo


o  S  g

o

^»  tin

2  5  to

^  §
o  c


o

g
g

o
o

(O
CO

«

bo
a


T3


c3  g

p     '2  £  g


g


3


rP

g

1

0

p

■  t-\

CO

^  ■'

sir

.s

_o

'co

'55

cT

S

0

g

rt
0

ft

g

ns

CP

bo


5fi


o
eS

CO  CO

-p


o  E5  CO

CD  ^
P  &

CS  ?  g

S  o  ss

g  «

o  "

fq  o


g

o


10
■73


i  P.


CD  aj

to  k>


5!5  'T3


.1  ID


5*-  O

O  -73


O  O


O


bo  g


>

a;
o


1=1
o


0/


03


a  ^

C  ID


o


CO


03


03  03  „
^    -a      03  §


03


bo


P-


g


322


THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


3

/ — \

o

ng

=^

sir

CS

D

<o

<»

o

o

a?

-u

a"

.e

1

03


«j  s


03

■  «-<

03


03


CO


c5


CO


P2

X

i=l

03

froi

03

urn

a

a

CO

CO

Ire

to

e

03
'a

g

C5

s

a

o

1— 1

o


bo


■T3  TS

9


5

03

'be  ^

CS  ^


5


CO


tc

03

lur

bo

P3

a

03

"o

til

CO

c3

Ul

^    bo  Ph


8
I

g


03


si  CO


2  O


03

a


03


o

CO


c5
03

03

C

s

o


"73

03

s

PL,

1

>%

bO

(S

.S

o

CO

"5

CO

03

bO

a

03

-♦J
O

1=1


O

C

03

eS

/— s

o

03

>-

o

£

CS

c3

to

w

APPENDIX.


323


c3


O

S


p


_     M     110  _


I


s

^  bo


c3


a


B
O


o


o


id

O    eS  O)

a  ^  a


O

1

I

o

-Q

o

•  t-T

GO
•  rH

CO

O

a>

H

OJ
t-
■  i-H

cas

o

le  ti

_=!

eni

ome

"d

aj

tuo

<D
tc

CQ

CO

c
o

>

UT

03

oj

a


o

CO

3

O


CO


H

•  I— I


a

e
o


o


=a  3~

a  s


to


S


a    S  a3

p    ITS  -+3


■+3


53

o
a
o

bo

a
_'S
'o

•"—a

w


5  a  t»2

d)     1^  w


'f-*  CO
O  ••-I

.2  S


2  bo  .-+2

M  CO

ai  o
CO  J  p.

-  H  J:


CO  d


a.


p2  i  5  i
y2


13

CO


O


'bb


a

o

0
03
-d

H


O


O


c3
■73

Eh  (d


0
0

o

rd


rd


(1)


03

o

03
43


-9  -G

d  O  c3

>-  03

1^  03

Pi  'S


824


THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


a
P

O


C3


c3
o


CO  cl
cn  .S

O

o


O  ^


c3


to

(3


a

o


o


CO


to  .1-1


2


o


3  §  a

CO  to


J3    o  o


o
o
bo


CO  >•


o

03


0)

o

C3

03

.  w

CO
Pi

o

.a

.  r-t

pass

'^-|
03

s

B
O

O
•  t-l

03

a

o3

o

&

u

a

_C

>->

O  c
53

1  the

r     c3  to

.a  ^  .2

^       O  O  03

.„  Pi  qH  Ci

00  O  (3  C


03

o
o

pi

o

03

'5


bo


S     03  to

g    bO  cS

W       f=l     rd  ^


03

5


to


O


t/J  ••

^  s  s
.a  ^-s.
^  a


o

CO


03


rd

bO
c3


0?  ^     03  2

C    a,   o  .2P  X

s  5:  a  a


£
O


a  s

C5     ~  o


s

o  „


03  <U

e:  _

a  «

o  tri


s
o
to


12


rd  C

bo  «

5  a

^  a

SS


1^  ^  !^


1

(-3

PI

O)

c

n  the  tow

S

o

o
cT

join

o
o

to

o

bO

pi

O

yonn

no

Thus—

o

•  1— 1

«"

1

-S

side,

c3
O

tract

Ma

nil

son

Oh

p

c3


O
p!

o


bo

CO

C

U.I

o

>v

S

-♦J

•  r-

o

o

a

?^

CO

ci

03

s

O

o

p;
o


bO


c3


IS

o


i  2

^

e  £  «
^i:^    C3  <b

o  .-s  o


o


ci


O


03
■  w

c

03

bO

o
p


tt>  p

to  o
03  o
rP  CO

03
.a


PI  .a


bo

P  03

'm

03

P-(  03

K  bo
C3


03


CO
OQ
C)

P.

X

03
O


bO
P

"E

03


CD

03

CO

c

03

'5

bO
P

"-+3

CO

O

c

>^

oT

-P

c£

CO

CO

03

03

oT

03

p;

APPENDIX.


326


o


<I)


e3


.CO  bo  p
-ij  "3  '-^


Id  ^  g


CO

a

o
PI


p<  o


D


a


03


o
5.


C  -


CO
CD


2  PI

*^  o
:  Pi


^  a

«  I

-r  ?

o  o


^3

a

O


CO


Pi
pi

o  ^  CS


03
J3


03


PI

_g

03

dm

ress

PI

03

03

xtend

ouns

03

CO


C3


a

p


03


3  a


03


03

q=l  b


03


03
t/3

03

03  --J


CO


pl
o

Pi


=3  ^


CO

to


03


a  ?


s


03  S

S5  -S  ^  ^


S

03

a  M


03


o

•  rH


CO

p;


03  CO


3  -  ...


be


a  ^  2


O
O

o
ci


03  ^

a  °

03  rfl


03


03
03


03

a


a

.2


CO

bo  2

PI  p


03  H
Ph  h3


O


e  PI


03


03


O


ich

r-l

(  1

bo

Ph

03

c3

tsel

'p-

0

ri>

03

CO
•  rH

0

o
0


i


o


55   -H     03  ^

^  5  "3


•73
03


"  ia


rH


Cf.  "
bp  33

a


r^  i  a  S


a    60  ^  rS


03
■Pn


a  ^  S

03

a  .=  t3


03
03
&

H^
03
-P


a

o


03

a


03
O

bp
-a


^  a


03

-a


«4-H

O


a

03


03

bo


03

ra


a


PI  .-S
c3


1:3

03

c3
O

a


03  CO

br
a

C3  '73


ra

o


ft

r-

i  Eh
ra

Uj

bo  1/3
PI  bo


ra

&:

CO
03

X

^  ta

03

cj
g  P


■t;    03    o  ra


03

-a  CO
^,  0^


<a

c3

C3

ra

bo

a

-*->

a

a

"Ph

0

a

rP

'a

03

03

ra

rP

T3

-t-5

03

<+H

0

)a

-f->

HJ
CO

CO

Ts

'  tJ

03

lode

In

efix

03
rP


03

bb
a


03


O  .

03  03

-a  X


326


THE  TORITBA  SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


SJZl     ••  03

in   cQ  a)  t-

H  cS  O

a>  o    fH  „  o

+^  ^   O  Si  s>

-►^  ^  C>


g  .-s  ^  ^  ^  o  o


I


o
o


a


I

m

1

m

a

a

o

m

o

T3

w—t

•r-4

Cla

o

ers(

ban

1 — 1
o

-11  CI

o

•  f-l

t-]

plu

bai

lUS

o

m

a

C3

c3

us

efi

a

&D

-a

me

Nam

pleme;

The

nouns

the  pr

5),  is

itself

cT
(-»

Thus :

Owu

Owu

o  o

cS


c3


o

s  a

^  5


CO

O
•  f-t


03      CQ  =«  _

O              CO      <D  O  r-rj

CO          -fc   .5    11  ^

S^Sd^^o.o  a

g  §  2  ^  '-"'^
g  s  a  a


to


60
P


^  --I  :a  p


'5   P  H


m    S    S  02

o  rp
5  ^  !^  H


P
P

o

p


CO


•  -p

CO  ,^2

p  p

O     CO  •

CO  O

?L,  rO  tS


O


QJ  rP


CO


o  2  b  -S

^      ^  O


to

p
o


o  -


K

P
O


P  S


rp


2  H


O  o
00

o  P

P  P


APPENDIX.


32,7


1

03

1

03

ed

1

1

1

03

o

C3

a

o

tn

03

1

OU

\

33

o

00

o

ami

coil

CO

C

Iso

03
>

«3

o

03

com

utlTi

GQ

ci

03

ion

3

c:

mil

O

o

o

g

,ba

ten

not

be

Is

Co

CO

03

•  -H

P

o

o

•Si

o

be

lur

I— 1

cs

O*

03

•ng

O

(/J

-♦-3

=2

H

03

o

S

C3

CO

O

60

'S

odes

cal

bo
CD

a

00

O

03

•r-l

s

Eh

=2

03

bp

S  o
o

03  bo

'S  -S

O  'p

"5  o

5  O

03  e;


c3

a

o

CO

O

CJ


03


d

03


.15  O


9  H  S


03

bo
c

C3

o


8  .2


'a
o


53


o

CO


03


03


o
o

03


JO
03


03

-a


2  i  =^


03

rd  CS
-     -S  rd

c  S  fe


03


CO


03

3

03


328


THJjJ  YOliUBA-SFMlAL'lNG  FEOPLES.


O


"73  tn


in     ^  r-^


O

a


CO


c3


o

-5  a

P-l  o


c3


O  f-,


m

s

ID

■5


a


3


IS


05
03


s  a

a  .2

.a  2


D
03


a

o


o

53


u

a

o

P3


329


s

o


bo

PI

o


a>
-a

o  'd


e3
O
Pi


isses-

used

stive.

O
— -

used

PI

53

03

ft

OI

cS

o

s

CO

O

CO
•  rH

r*

c/T

verb

rH

C3

o

siol

CO

C3

Thi

J3

to  bp


b  S3
CD  r1

03


2

o3


s

O


be

.s


■5:1


*5  O


o
o


CD

o


c3


rPl


03
03

(S  o

03


to


Pi
c3

CO
03


03  "S^


Pi

pi  03
O  „
P3

bJD


o


^  2^  a
^^1


22  'TIS

^  O


03


iTrx  to

0/j


I

?-i  o


03

o


-P
PI

c3

00
C3
<13


03    c3  03

03  a


"    §  S"
bD


.o.  03  g
^    be  g

c3


O
ft

03

o  -a

CS  -M


^  oT  J  J

g  O  ^  o

^.SP  03

03  O


03

3


_  C3
43  03

03        .  ^3

be  PI  c3


I

03

-+=
PI


■73  n3

03  03


03  ^

PI
O
CJ


^  03

-jj  "73

ic3  'm

O  .2

a  . -


o

C3


o


^  pi

e3


-  03


03


e3  03

bp  fajo

^  PI

Pt  03

C3  ^

03


CO

;>
I— I

H
O
g

P
<1


03
>■

•«-(

o

c3


03   ^  .r

<n   a  03

-5  W

S  ^

-  .2  o

5   -3  03

CO  O

03  Cl,

bD  a  a

C3    03  •>

bo  '-^  "3,

^  c3

a  03


03


03


ft  03
03  fl

^  03


P

o


03  C


Pi
O


03
O


03


03


03

O

03


03

Ti

03

CO
CO
03


0)  -3  P  03
C/3    u3  _  '—'


03
03
03


5=


O

c

CO

n3
o

t-i

03


03


c3


o

03

a

o

03


CO

03

o

03
c3


■TJ  03


-ri

03


ft


o

125


330


THE  YOliUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


p

o


o
a


PL,  ■
O

e  J-


CJZ!


o
<1>


OS
(D

H


fies,

'El

CO

&:
O

no

tn

a?

CO

■  w

n

O

c3

o
c3


eS

CQ


1

o

CC

o

no

CO

ne([

is
o

he

_o

*o

«3

c3

CD

m

•  rH

+3

*^

H

o
is

C3

OS

o  o  2  t»
e>   .

o    o  '-3


O  5^

^  O


I

<i>


02


5     ^     !^  -O


o


T3
CO

53  =


CQ

^  OS

C3  CP


a


CO

to  ^


"CJ   ,

-       CD  (1^


a


Pi

CO


CQ


03


J3


03

H


o


CO


CO

o


I  I

,5  "'^

CL,


-^^  -a


0)

o

O  CO


g.i

•o  g


-a


CO
rH

a

o
o

c3
c3


03  ^


s  CO  tin


o

PI


03


92  CO


O  . — r


05


EH

o

Q
<1


p:

CO

CO  '-^

o

o


O  OS


APPENDIX.


331


c3
0


o

1

O

s

o

s

^— N

the!

o

ca
O

<D

t>

O

g3

o

iresse

r-(

a

a,

60

C

tn

c3

CS  r1

g

o
o


13
03


OT
03


>

•  I— (


son.

her.

be

o

3

to  be  h

a

o
o

be:

o

s

OT

o

CO

a>

03

«

mit

H

bo

o

"Si
CO

Co  ^


OT

o


1

a

o
o

-(J
<»


o  S

OT  Si
OT  «^


I


cS  (U
3


•fc  e  i

cS  C  "

CI

C3  a  ^


o

o

-l-l

ec-

a

and

r-j

•'— »

verbS;

03
03

'bs,  a

c"

o

OT

livci

on

03
t>

re
P4
E

V»

03

03

1 — I

CO

CJ

•' — 3

>

03
*' — 3

•  r-l

o

03


03


03


03  03
03

rO  O


r£3

H


a

03


03
■73

^  c3


03  O


a

o
u

a>

rC


I  S3
03  -f^


OT  O)

M  Oh


03

OT  P-a  o
•pH    ^  ^


C3
3

OT

03

9  ra


03

OT  _  _.
to  ^  C
03  t-i  C5
03


55JD

a


03


r--        w  (-^

Ph   PL,   >   '53  C3


ci

a

o

03
03


03


o


o


03

Ph


03
0)

cS

C3


OT

03  03


^  S  CO
13  -^3    9<  CS


03  t-,

a

o


O  'O

O  03


J82


TEE  YOBUBA-ti'F BAKING  PEOFLES.


a


o


M

g

o

-(J
X


o


f<3


33  a


f3  ?


O  M


1^


tt)  .1-.


o


o  2

^  O  ^
M  ^  <1  d


aj  O


5


c3


a  a
p.p

a


0)


"  o


bo

«  o

g

a;  g2
CO  S

00  ^


o
bo

o

o


1-^


53    G  o  2

gt>   S  Q       ^  g

^


o


o  a         o  o

11  ^


^  g


be

p

o

3

w

c3

S  O  CD  !S

g  ^  o  ^  ^  '


1^


a;  pi.


O


o


o


CD

o  ^ — ^

CQ  O

So"

"  5  ^

03  til


O

H


W  ?►


O  J3


CO

o
o
p-1


PL,


Vi


o  ^


CS


bo


?3  ^


o

p


o

CO


0


Al

bo

cc

to

g

o
o

c

p

em

t-

o

Oi

oT

s

CO

ID

verb

p-

oT
'p

o

g

o

o

u

labi

p<

a>

to
O

o

_>

ion

3

n3


03


1

03

g

o

CO

<D
c3

O

>  C
o

-  5  --S


ci


C3

bo


SP
5


CS

o


APPENDIX.


333


e3  g


o


o-


O


o


PI
o


p

o

CS

o

a

-»->

K

c3

rb

ei

m

O

>

he

1  FN

s

a

nd

p

o

a>

03
(U

a,


p


o


o

•73


o


8

F-

03

&0  03

C  r=3


^  cS


-    53  E


03     S  C

-a  p  p


I  a

o


-1-3

o
o


05

a

03
03
XD


c


c

o

03


.p

^1

C3

03

S

03

!>

o

>

PI

03

a

03

th

09

o

from

o

he;

a
p

pi

O

o

03

•X3

e

c3


a

o


05

03

p


o
o


03


■  O  O
O  .g

o  cT

g  a

o


CO


03


o

■73


d  te  03  o

d  S  ai

O  -4J  -P  C  -t^

Pi  03  j<

e3  fSII  „  03  03

S  03  O  (U

C3  O  ;h  05


03

5

u

pi

GO

03

oT

03

03

O

J3

o
-*-»

05

O
-M

ve

m

o

S
>

a.
a

the

Ollll

so

bo  03

.9  S


03


m

d

o

PI
o


c3
p

O

P!


O
03

«3
03

03


03

C3  -fJ


60  £


CS
03


0/

o

—  03
0^  C3


O
'T2


03


03


-P

03


a.


p:

03

o
&.

03

e

c

03
Ci
03

Pi

03


PI
c4


•—       t«      C  O


0/     "  „

c
'd


O  «3


u  a


03
O  QJ

P-<  o

QJ      03    ■  —

^  ^  d

•s  a  3

03  tiS


rJ3


03
"11


O

o


P


o

§  03
M  rP
03

r— '

I  i


'43
cS

eg

bo


tlj


^  a  ^  fS

c  o

^  <U  bo  P

p  S  -2


cS
P

O

CO
03

Ph


5    bo  p


^  p

rAi  5!^


03
,P


Cfi

03  —

03  03

P,  fP  -p


334


TEE  Y0BUBA-8PEAKING  PEOPLES.


e3

O


C3  o


i


03
■73


CD


c3


S  o


O


s

o

>


S


o


a

o

o

cT
S

c3

C3

5

p

o

c3

oT

o

•rH

an

o

B

a

r-t

o

s

CO

•

wo

s

O


03

aT
■+=

03

s

Id

03


2  c


03


S     S     a  d

-  §  §


o


03

■5
B

o


*3


a

c3


CD

03  5^l
^  S


03


P  ^
53  03


oT

a

o


„     03  W

:g


03


a  03"

la-i

o3  ?a


03
O

o

Pi


O

■+3
TO

a

03
03


0

o


o


03

■+3


c3
03

a


e3


i  03


o
;^

a  .s

s  «

S-.  rP


a

03

>.

o

a
a
I— <

Ph


03


0

o


03

P-l
CS


03  E
P<


H


o
o


03
(=1

o
t-l

03

,£3


03

c

03

s
o


o

I

o
a


C3  -^^

o  2
S  ^

03

P-i  03

03

03

tp

•  i-t

03

^  a

03

03


.a:s
-I

O  03


S  bo
bo  S


if  I

c3  c3


§  -s

rj  03
S  03


03


Id
O
M

03  Cm


5  ^


03


«

03

-a

03

Ph

a

o


o

«I-t

a

o


-a
H


03

a

03

o  «

5b  «j
5  o

03


03


APPENDIX.


335


So  -  ^
g       «  ft,


'§  ^


o


p


5  ^  •  c


he

eral

a

p

+3

a

as

pi

id

ed

lie

a

)0.I

CO

•  r-l

saul

CO

H

s
o

one.

ID
O


s


a  *  o


to

o


'So


&0  r


I


CO


a  ^


o  ■=


CO    C    CO  CO  So


^45


03


Ci


CO


-us


• — s  ^

o  i


-  rid


o


o


C  S-  .-
c4    .S    ^  -Ai

^  ^


a  o

■> — y


a


I


<»     O  I


IS  jt;  C|


CO

be


o  s


o


•  rH


s


c


CO


5  i


6C


a

o


a


a;    o  -4J


S  <i  ^  ;5  <5


o


CO
CO  t-,

a  o  S3


e

Sh  e-i

^   -3  •J.


a

O


bo
a


1=1

ci

a  .2


o
o

-Ci


o

+3


this

away,

that

take

select

4"

a-

n
o


ic3  CO


bo


o
S


a>
o


p  ci


a

o


,£3

CO  T3
'  CD

a


H


c2


f>  ci

^  60

CO  C

2  ^


1  "


CO  ^

sS  rvi


I  O


g  60  «
o  a

^  CO  43
60

g  CO

•S  -a  ^


C3


"1^  s


o

G


OS  C3
V  CO


"Pi'/->
i  lO-

o

m
t-<

<D

&,

53

'•+3

03

-4-3

O

8U01

B

«  ..

0)

o  ^

fi

0)

§  a

CO  f*

!3  .S^

Eh

o  H


CO  -t.3

(3  ^

!0


03
Ci


03

a


c3

&

i?3

a-


60


'TIS

.S

a;


CO


CO
05

&■

M
c3


CO

a  §

^  13
^  2

S  P4

(3


TEE  YOBUBA-SFFjAKTNG  PEOPLES.


o


I

a

o

'/J


o
c

c3


I

a

o


a

^  o
bo  to


a

o
03


"S

H


o


'd  *-5  ^


CO  ;h

<u  CO

S  a


.22  P   §  "S


ICS


H


CO

a

P5


c3
Pi


03

a

o

03


•-0

o


03

a

o


o


r£3

•s  ^


03

o


O
03

a

o
tn


03


bo

.s

03

a

bo  "t.  s

g  -Ai  -3  rii  O
^     i   -5  ^


03  03

s  °^

O  g


o

03


03
f-i


03

a

O


bo


03

a

o

03


03

s

rd

a=^.


!3
O


03


»  ::s"  ^


bo  .

C  03  .
C4

03

a


03


.s;  03

„  O
03

c3


CO
03


O


c3  &,


be  s  a

S  s

^5  S


03
03


e3


bo  t„

.5  o

a  s

03  O
03

O


CO


o

03


03  3
i-"  03

03  ^


03  ^

X  >%  =

C  s

„  o  ^


03


03


.2  §


o  .S  c


03  -.T

«:  c

C      03  ^

(13

&:    5"  '"3


03


03     03     >^  ■


CO  fl

2  O

03  03


■  03

.  'S

03


K  d

o

CO


03
C
O


03  .S


P  03

d  ^  d

£  «^  5

2  fi  CM  :g  d


03

H


0)

1i


03  03
-3


03


."ii


td

03
T3

d


d

03

03

H


03    d  S


c
d

22  Q  5


03


03  03

I  i

^  CO


O
I— I
H


1

X

■13

d

(->

03

CS

03

CO

03

CO

CO

d"

03

0

cle

P

0
d

03

d

ne.

0

p

d

0

03

c3

&

,d

CO

03

c3

ral

era

03

me

03

fin

'5

CC

C13

0/

0)

d

03

6

03

ve

CO

.5

03

H

CO
03

03

th

c

&

rd

03
Pi

o

03

'■5

CS
03

"5

CX3
03


APPEND  fx.


337


ci

CO


CO

p


be-

se

CO
•  r-1

as,

oT

o

to

o2

es

pr

<i>
o

O

'  ^

o


-a


03

c


CO
CD


s
s


OS


H

CO

S

o
en

+3


o
o


<D


I

i>


o

J2


^  §


•~-  o  o
^

^  ^


ID


?J  (13
>^  S


-•J

<L1

a,


o


Oh


e  n3


bo  ^  S


to

CO

<D

;-.

O

to

a

to

"53


O


bo

OS


03


W  CO
CO

p

Tj  03
03
03

bo  9  I


03
03


g  bo


CO


Oh

tH

03  03
P-  ^


03

a

o
o


P  03


03


03


03
CD  O

C3  ^


CO  V


f>3


Ph
03  -
P

o  r^a


cq
<!


03
>■


Si

o

co"  CO
P  P


CO

<1


CO
-O


03
O
OS

'Ph


P
Ph  03


03


o

03


03

E--


03


CO  03
03  CO
>  P


O  03
P^  03  CO
Ph  •'—i  03

co  <s  "is


z


338


TEH  YORUBA-SPl^AKING  PEOPLES.


Yovuba.

Jeje,  gently,  from
je,  to  comply.

Yara-yara,  quick-
ly, from  yara,  to  be
quick.

Si  (to  go  to)  is
used    to  express
"  to,  against."

Bi   (to    ask)  is
used    to  express
if,  whether."

03

Tso     (to  come
from)   is  used  to
express      "  from,"
and  me  (interior),
to  express  "  in  "

Ghli  (to  take)  is
used    to  express
"  and  "

o

Ne    (surface)  is
used    to  express
"  on,  up,  over  "

Ke  (to  take,  hold)
is  used  to  express
"and"

Tsbi.

Mu  (interior)  is
used    to  express
"in,"   and  ji  (to
come  from)  to  ex-
press "  from  "

Nso  (a  taking  hold
of)  is  used  to  ex-
press "  also  "

Explanatory  Eemarks.

s

HO

o
o

1

n
«

>
p

<

PREFOSITIONS.

The  place  of  prepositions  is
supplied  by  verbs  or  nouns.
As

CONJUNCTIONS.

The  place  of  conjunctions
is  supplied  by  verbs,  nouns,
or  pronouns,  or  compoimds
of  these.  As

I


APPENDIX.  339


Cd"  Ed"  ^  fa  =8  ^  ^  §


(3


Si

a


5       g  ^  a


^     fe^      ^  ^  q  ^  ^  ^  ^


■T3

S3


^     ^  ■■s  -2


03  O^nf^Si.jfclhnCi  c!  So  t>,??S


O      HHELHp^cGcnH^       H      Wh  ea-


rn

C3


o


O


e    S    S    S  S


o


«  S


£  3


H


S3

.0  33


OC  OQ  F£l


03
f-i

!3
13


03

S3

m
O

rJ3

H


^  03

i3  o

03  eis

bo


I


■73
(3
03


O


s  -a

s  a

*5  03  60


03  O

O  H


03
03


e

u

O


o  a

^-  ~  ^       S  s  s

S    00    t5    o  i<i

^  wq  o


P  03

o  .S

pR


03
03

02  CJQ


bo  a


■73

03

S3
13

M


S3
c3


O
-S3
H


bo  "Ph

.a  2

03  o
Pk  ^
CQ  ^


13

03
03
-♦J
L-i
C!
O


S3
!3

03


s


O

H
«2

CQ


o


(3  eg

03     Ph  ^


C3

03


a

03


03

H


u  c3


o


P  -P  '3
C3  03


03  ^

a


03
,£3


a

03

r  ,03


03


CO
C!


,2  w  ^  a  bi,


03  ^

03  i

a  g

P  aP
,(-1


to  o

03

a  «

H  03
03

a


03


cn
&:
O
1=1

o  o


55  2


340


TEE  YOBUBA-SPEAKINa  PEOPLES.


o


p  ^3


bo


<D
O

o
14-1


a

o


03  O
CO    -J-  o

.-s  r";


to


2"    "  =  ^.


,0  ^


T3


o


OJ


+3


a

c


555  s


C  o

I  o
S  cS


Pi

ID


■-a

c3


o


I


d


o


o

&C  S
0


lO


^  -  S  S  S  .


pa  c


du,

nits ;

1

00
c

O)

c

•a

bo

0

'm

CO

s

re

0

1

0

p<
P5

2
■43

(ten),

a

(Lit

four"

03
M

cr

a

03

>>
I-.
o

CS

p

'a.


o


a
o

H
H

CO

>
73


e
o
o


CO

o


0

03


a

o


03


03

H


03
03


APPENDIX.


Hi


a)

'>

W

o

S

a

O

H

03  S


aT
>
o
-a


•-^  O)

bo  p:;


a

&0  -|J


onot

reds.

03
>  1— 1

c

used

bers

t3

m

t/J

•rH

a

ba

CO

3

nu

o

o

03

o

03

-a

H

In

s

o

or

p

n2
03


'TIS


O
OJ

o


h2  o

e

03  ~


bo

03


03

3

c

o

(H>

CO

rH

C3

cS

1

CO

no

cn

Sh

th

.  rH

a

bo  ^

.3  ^

0.  o
Ph  1—1


W  rS


03

rO


03


•-a

03


^  03

e  e  o
&o

o  ^

03  1— '  cS

j;    oS  tZ!

rH  5

~


3


Si.  «3

s

^  rl


-        ■  CO  tH

e  _S  1:3  CO

p  e  1^

.q    rS;  03  ~

£      O  O       g       I  r^

Ph  r-H  ^    03     J,  U

Ph  't3    O  r=H


ro       Q  CO

•~    O  cS

bfl  pH

C  03  05
to  ,i


03


pH  CO  O


s;

.fe  CS

^r§


03

a

.o


03


p
CO

03

B

-a

03


CO

(3
ci

m

o

r^
H-»

03
.a

H


342


THE  TOBTIBA-SPEAKING  PU0PLE8.


c3
-a

O


be-i

arel

to

O

ill

p

1

es

+3

..— .

o

ers  j

;ensi

a

o

leve;

o

a

o
_g

'p

nm

the

sed

ft

a

p

(D

o

rt

CD

d

03

<V
-tJ

o

d)

<B

CD

p  .

a

o

.s

03

bo

&

!=l

ID

O

<D  _


g
o


CO
CO

<I>
<»


I

o


a  ^

O  (D


CO  ^


I


03  o  X
t-     D  QJ


03


1^


03


03


03  O

P  5i

CO

•  iH  fj

03

S  03

03  r4

H  o


0

03


03


03


03
rd


CD


PI

CS


C3


O
c3

CO
=!
O


03


03

o

03

rd


^  PI


c3


I

.o


PI

C3


03


(-1   "  Jh


'=2


c3

03

■-a


_S  03


tea


PI
pl


03
CPl


03

rd

ho


03


o


n:3

03
PI


■73

Pi


03
O


03


CO

PI

03  — .
-t-=  _


03

^  I — I

O     c3  'T^

_     03  S


s


Pi

03


«3

S  03

■  tpl

ltd


03  03
p!


CO

a

03

O
c4
PI

'El


I

03


^  5

.2  r2

S  03


2  ^


03

a


a

o

03

a


rd

•  l-H


CO  03

O  1-

o  ej

o  o

03  -


03

o  ^

^  03
^  CO
<1  CO
4  03

t-.

ft


03

bo


-a

EH


03


to


o


H

0.

03

03


1

03

the

S30

■als

03

03

i-H

O

a

bo

ic3
O

pi

c3
-t-a

PI
PI

^°

O

03

o

PI

CO

03

'S

Ts

pf

03

rra,

o

P!

,d

-l->

M

00
03

13

(-<

ci

'a

'ft

c3  ^
Pl  PI

"ft -2
2  3


— "  bo

(— t    •  1— I

'ft'^


CS


Pi    S  p:


CO

cS

rP


03


03
cS

5  .£


03


CO


o


•ts  p:


Appundix.


.o


9i


to


2  H


75

O

bo

«

CP

1=1

(>

p-<

QJ

p  1

o

bo

a

Cj

CO

O)

to

.9

rf!

M

Pi

CP

CD

_a

This

r-

•  l-l

1^

TO

bo
cS

o


!D  to


^      ^      ^  rH


S3

a


CD

^  2  <^


a

o


o
o

c3
O


bo


bo

bo'o  g
bO  S

2  C3  a


CO


O  &  g
^  O


oj  s
o    o  t-i


I


X2

s


C3


3


.^^5  ^  a  3

-    -  o


p

O  S
P  p


bo  n3

0  2i

1  1


O


S


=  a  :  =s


o
o

a
>^

o


rO

o


i-Cs

C
O

o

•rH

O

C3


03

;<!

H

inde

liter

0)

o

sT

to

-1^

to

55

S

o

•  rH

o3

-t-»

CD

,  I

OJ

.3

a

rH

"o

f— 1

r-

o


o


ICS


-a


.5


3

O  ^


o

1— I  _ ,

;>  ^
1—1


CO
IZ

o

a

d

rd

O

to


C3

d
-d


^  d


d

to
d


bo
bo

d


d  .£

bO  §

PS  O


a  ^

o  ^


03


d
o


r£3


to


03

o


03

bO

d

ad  03


03


•_  03


^     a  M

d   ;2   p  d
bo  --^


a

o


03

a

d


o


bO
c;
CO

03

d

•  r-t

_d


mi?  YOB  UBA-8PEAKmG:_]?B  OPLES.


****  r-

i  §

o

03


o

+3


c3


s

«  rH

a

p

a>

H

-(J

CO

03

o

ta

roo

n3


o
C
O


00  ^

o

o  o


CO


o
o


o  c

M  r-l

o   -t^  o

CO  o,


S  .2


.a  ^

ci

e  >


a

o


bp  o


o


OS


CO     03  ~
•r-     r-     <»  'q


(3


o


<-  c<3


up

bp

"a

'5

a

o

c

o

•+->

PI

is

o

5^


bo
b


s

CO


5


:6

^  bo
^  o


s

o


bo


£  c

o  o

aj  „

03  -


C3
O


o


03


03
U


03


03

bo

c

CO


E3


«3  .

03  03

bD  el
o


.   ^  ^  3


o
bo

§

tn
08


c

c3


APPENDIX.


845


§  a
i  8

•  m

•  1— t  j-i


03


s


53


o  3  a

•2  S  2  «)
_g   o   bo  O


c3


c
o
a"

03
t>

03


S   2   S  o


p-l  J-"

o


a  "  ^


s


CO


O


r-  03

o  -r


a  -  3


"a


03


3  ^


o

03


60


.£P  -2  3  -S  §


60  '
c


o
cj

03


03

H


60

c

•  I— I

a

o
o


o
bp
•  ~  o


.a  o

•o  "

•'— >  03

O

-5  2


03

03

'03
rH

I  1

03


CO
03

60
ci

be

CS


P

O


03


c3

03


03
03

03


•  rH

60

o
60

03
03

a

o


60

.a
'a


.2


03


03
Pi
O
CO

o
u

's

o


^13

03


03


CO
03


03
C


a  03
o  5


CO


3

O

a

^  co~

§


c  S  &


03
>


-a

03  CO


03


03


03

a

o


■73
03


03


03

^  o

c3


1

03

>^

03

•  1-4

03
f-*

t  J

73

a

+3

o
3

ine

03

CO

cS

qj
bO

03

•bs

CO
03

ded

&

03

03

60

o

no

"+3

03
3

-l-i

03

60

03

o

c3

03

cJ

s

m

03

•■A
03

O
•+3


.2

*co

o

i3

o


03

■+0     03  C
"


g

CO
•  I— »

■+=

03
U
O
p3

o
tj


ci.


03


1  i

-  3

03  d

00  w

§  =^

60


03
P-i
03


CO  ^

03  5
03  CO


60
03

03
CO
03


03

60
03  *S

'-I  ^

c3

_  CO

O  o


00


"-5
o
c


60  o

t/J


&i  o
3  ■+=>


0

_o

o
3

o
o


CO

C

o

O
Ph

03


St!  <s


o
3


03
Ph


60  S

.2


2


3   3  -t:

Q


^  03


a  ^  =^

^  /-\


03

O
V-

c4


03  ~

o
>


r/j


c
o

3
C3


■73


O
Ph

03


03


CO


03


03  ^

•J3  03


03

.i:  CO


o  o

Oh  rp

60  o


O

a

M

n3

'S

03

r3


^  03

o3


CO  ^

o  _o

Ph  l3
03


-  -5
o


'"'    a>    1.  ^

i-S  ' — !     o  .    (>->  r3


a  ^

o

03


03  O

03

CO  5

rjH  >

o  o


0

a

o

CO

3
3

O
l=i

CO

O


C3

03
03

3

O


Ph

l-^  CO

§


Ph  or
03  .5


03
03


-M  ffO


Ti  Ti

03     03  CO
-  60

J3     03  03

•

HJ       U  ->J

3  -

03  r-

^  03

60  03

^    3  "


03
03
-P

CO

f-H

rH

03

03

o


o
.2

rP

s

>

c3
03

c2

03
JP

TS
03
O
03

r— <

Ph

CO


03

to


C3

03


Oj

o

03


3


03

rP


03
>


3
3
O
3
p

Ph  3


3
3
O


O

CO

03
03


CO

c3

03

>

03

CO

O  tH

03

I — I
13

^  o
?  .2

03
60

3  c3

c  a  .2

C3  03

n3  Ph  ^
c3  CO


60
3


03  _Q
CO

03  O

^  "1


03


03
CO
03

ri:1


CO


CO

03

60  o

■g

03  ^

CO

03  O  03
S  p  03
P  ^


CO

rO


C3  S


o

3
O

a

03


_3

Ph

03
.3


Ph  CO

^  t
^  "60

Ih

^  60

03  B

s  'i

rT!  ^

1^  EH


n3  03
03  03

60  a

r3

03

3


03  O

r3  <^


03  Oh

"§

rn  3

11  Ph


346


THE  YORUBA-SPEAKim  PEOPLES.


a


o


o


o


03


o


o


ID


O

o
o


o


ftq  Pq


o

sk:

CO

O

.5

O

o

o

■<->

oT

,  beget

beseec

bear

UIOA

beg,

o

o

o

'72


>-

ci

ID


CO
O


o
es


•-3  ii>


a-
o


.  <i3  _r

^  o  It;  o  ^


cs"

5o,

fling

CD
f— ;

CO
C3

rawl

long,

o

o

>"

P

creep,

to

o

C

-4-1

c


o
o


bo
o

pq


<D
O

(D  03
-►J  O

03

O


Cli  o


o

o
o
o


o
si

O
O


T3

CD
,^

O
■+=


03

O


03


03
O


o

•  r-l

03

•  (—<

o

C3

o

p.

o

O

03

o

oq  ft:.


bo


03

a

o


03


o

03
03

CO
03

03
O


03


P3  pq


o


o


o

03


Bq


o


CO

c3


o
-1-^


o

13


o
en


o

03


c3


ci


C


h  03
c^  &


03  _
^      O  <D

&  -^^^  ^

Rq


a
o


^  O


cq


c3


C3


o
bo


03


CO

H


03

&  03

^  3  p


cS


o
o

03

o

CO


03    _Q  ^


03


03  -tJ  -t-i
O  «3

cq  cq


rM  CO


03

do

0

03

-(J

e3

bO

jH

be

a

0

s-T

03

03

-.J
-i^

ci

0

CO

0"

CO

Bq

C

•  cH

'TIS
CS
03

cS  ,

03


a

03
03

CO
03


03


CO
03


i  is

ftq  ftq


03
O


o


ci
c3


5

O


53  ^  ^


03

o


10


ci

03

^  o
ci


C5


03
C


03
03

o


o


AFPENBIX.


347


p


a


S


o

O

a


Ci

o


<1>


o  C


(U

a

.2

'o

o

o


03


03

5

a

03
03

o


C5


03

m
P-(
P

o


■1^
c3


-Tj  ^  .r;

<U  f3  Sh

i  I  !

03  03  cS


03


0


o
o


.2

.s

o


o

03
13


o
o


oi


-ti  03
S     Oh  O

o  "§  o


q     q  q


03

03

col

03

CS

M

o

rH

o

03

q


o

o

cj

cS

E:

d

•f-H

cT

03

XI

o

O

-(J

q

q

C3


o


o

rd


to
03
■T3


O
I — I
ci

o


q


CO


t/3


q


bo

(3

•l-H


O
•T3


O


03
03


d
o


ci

O/

o


q


03


03
>
03

03


03


03


place

,  sink.

down,

under

go

'oS

Ph

go

let

03

o

o

cT

bo

to

Do.

Do,

Do,

d
o


03

d  J
£  o

bo


q


bb
o

q


o


&H  d

03  03
03


03


0)


03  "

03  o


bo


q


o


03

'bo

o


bo  «

s  >

d

S  5


•43  «
d

_ci  o


03


03

o


d
o


03

a

o

03


Ci

03


03

Ci

a


fi;    cs;  ^


-4-3

o

oT

Ph

oi


^  to

O  CO

03    ^  Ph


rd


03


03

OJ
P^


03

rP


03


03


C3

O
-4J


03
03


03

bo


Ci

03  fc:

03  p

03

PL,
03

03  O


•4-3

ci


03


03


O
CS


ci
ci

33
ci


CO


o
bo


-4J

03

Ph

qT

'a

o

be  ]

o

o

-t-»

Fe

Fe

id

p.

ci


ci

03
03

bo
ci


03

a

o
o


d

03
03

to
Ci

O

-4-3


ci
OJ
P-i


o  a


o
o


p
bb
o


03


d

S-i


o
a,

to


O   ^  ^

^ — '  to  ^
bo  d


o  ^


O  -4-3


03

a

d
d


"73

oi

03


p


O  Si

bo

ci


:3


C5


C!3


O  r-l


O

o


03


CO


THB  YORUBA-S'FEAKING  PEOPLES.


c3


(D


6:
o


o


o

CO


c3


Ol
•  r-i

o


c3
cj


o


CO

p


P3  O

3


o


i5  ^     •  ,=3,


s

03  O

a  ^  a


O

o


03


CO

O


03


o


si

C3
03


s

C3


o


r?


03


to
o


03


■13

03

3
s

o


03  -r?

>  5

03  P

.5"

o;-    S  c

CO

O     !^  O

o


03


o

b.

3  ^


03


03

a

o

03

CJ


03

be
C
c3

03

03


O


a,

03
03

15
o

cT


03
-l->

c3
Oh
CO
03
13


03

CO


m
C3


o


o
>  '

bo

jo

r-t

(-^

5d

o

o

03

Do,

Do.

oj


bD

CI

03


f


.r-  O


o
o


bo


•-a

ain,

nst,

p
O

o

03

agai

tr:

S
t>

low

con

11,1

)ver

s

bp

CO

I— 1
ci

ck

we

.S

be

03

ive

no

03
>

03

03

>

cover

give,

C3
O

03

catcli,

ack

"5

03
1

pass

03
03
OJ

C
1o
O

03

sell,

to

to

+2

acc

o

att

to

bel

to

El

-tJ

CO

to

1

1

Hi,

iJo,

if

!51

03
03

o
u

PL,


o
o

03

03


03
03


^5

CM


03
_>

'S
O

03


03

.Si  =s
c  o


o


o


o


ICS


OD


ci

03


CO

(M


CS
03

C3

O
bTj

s  i


C5


03

.s

'■+3

o
o

c"

o

o
o


•12

'q3

•  r-l

oT

-i-s

t>

gh

"Eb

o

O

'm'

CO

CO

o


03

S  o

to  +3


CO

CO


bo

O

s


03  ^

o

JO  tfi


CO


APPENDIX.


849


o
o


<II


3


a


bo

O

o


be

S

&.

o

o

o

03

+i

'C

bp

a

0)

be

o

o

5

cT

a"

X2

a

o

s


03

CO


03

'a

o
o

c
p

03


oJ"

03

03

crat

o

o

oT

a,

CO

oT

G

o

03

CO

c;
bb
oT

Oh

o

r-1
^3

>i

c3

-a

o

sproi

03

d<

>■>

03

ce

7t  03

_o

'3

03

p

to

.bp

,  to  sc
bniis

'S^

O
+s

C3

bo
O

&,

O

o

ment

J3

O
-►J

o

03

03

.  a

03
O

o

eS

o

03

p

lease

r— 1

03

o
o

.a

,  be

03
03

03

steal

03

-Q

sent,

3  s

o

O

o

O

03

+2

^4

03

bp
oT

CO


03

CO


03
03
ci

03


es


03


C3

bJD
O


•+3

03
03


03   ,

5    C  c=

o


c

o
o


ft


C

03


o

+3


03

c3
03

O


03

o


03-  C

ci

Q  o


03


c3


03
Oh


n3

03
03
CO

c3
03


03

&i  Q
o


.s

"5


03
t/w
03


bo


■73

a
a

o

C3


bo  'So  CO


o  5  .o


^2


o


03


03
p

p

■  I— '

^J
P
O

03


bo

O
03


Pi  o

p

03


CS
■4^


03


CO

s

bo
P
tp

03


T3

P  -
03

P

03


bt
P


CO
03

p"

03

ec

03
-U

to

'Ph

tas

=s

ost,

a

o

to

o

O

rP

03

.s

*r-i

of

P

CO

a

o

o

O

03

C

<!

'5  5^

P  c:

o

« I

03

_  f-1

eS

P  o

Uj

03  03

o  c


It;  '-O


c3
03
03

!^

03


O
>


CO


to

o

-*.2

a.'

CO


03


P^

o

^3


-P


03
43


ft.

ci

CO


03

o


03
(>
03

U

o
p

03
t>
03


03

O  .r


O


03

a

03

to

03

rH

o


P

oT
t>

o


rP

to


03
CP
C3

03

P

bo
o


P
03

rp"

CO

'S

a

o


T3
P

03
P

rt
O

be
P


CO


CO


03

o

oT  03


C3

c3


P
Ph


03
CS


03


03
03


o  ^

bb  Q


rP

03


S  o


,P


850


THE  Y0RUBA-8PEAKING  PEOPLES.


o


03
■r-t

13


C3


o


-73
c3


O

+3


.5  ^

^  to


o
o

Q  o


o
en

p
S

o

c»
O


o
o


o


O


o

S

O


o
o

s

<D


'ci  "x:

2  P


o


o  3

b  o


o


2


O)


p


^3


cS
>^

o
p
-13


<L>


o


c3


CD  pj


o
Is
o


o


t3


C3


be


&0


bo


o

■+3


a>
o

<D
cS

o

p


OJ  ^


cS


CD

•2  «
S  ^


03


CS  E:
9  CS


03


r3
o
P

Q  o


^       -       ■  ■

Ci


O  a

s  a

CD  to

_M  _


CS


t5
p

cS

CO  o


O  o
^  ^  ^=

^    a;  -r^


S


o

p

"S

&

g

p

o

o

o

'cS
&


c3

CD

bo


P  S


cS

P

p

to

oT

<D

o

bo

CD

P

cr"

rH

OQ

CP

CO

tu

a

•n

CQ

P

o

cS

o

-(J

s


rP

CO

H


p
o


o


bo


■73

P


CS

o

tn

>^

CD
03


CS  S


p
p

ace

'El

o

P

P

p

cS

OD

p^

p^

03

,  to

O

p

03
CS

O

■4-3

do

03
O
ci

cS

.2

03


cS


p
p

bo
c3
p
CP


o
o

rP

OQ


-  2


CO

c3
o

o

S-i

-P


-k3

P  !>»

P<  P

13  _

O  O

c3  -'^

P-1  cT


p
o

03

03


P
P^


P
03
U3


a

CO


00


a50^<Meo■*l0^o^^c30


i


APPENDIX.  351


CJ  r/3


i  bC  =^  >

I:-     g      2            -2  ^  ^  ^  o  -aT  ^

^                  3  -te    ^  S  ^  ^-  :S  ^  a  -g  ^  =i

o       _o        oSo:gcg-S-go|og  o?2o  o  o


«         a         '»>  .o        ,o        .o        ,o  .o        ,o  .o


O

1

<v

o

»— 1

>-

e3

Pi

&

ID

xpire

,  attain

03
O

CO

own,  fell

a  place

e,  hold,

,  shear

ike,  alio

e,  share

e  in  two

CD
f~i  ■

c3
an

die,  e

o
rt
a>

scrati
on

cut  d

be  in

receiv

hend

shave

love,

ee

twist.

divid

divid'

form.

o

to

o
-(J

o

pre

o

o

bb

o
+3

o

10

o

Lo,

iJfa,

Me,

O  .1  0^


5^  ,,         P+=  "^rf^  -2


-.iiOjCD  -^h^
bo       ^  ^-        C'^-*^  '1:3


^^:5    2a^    ^s  ij""^


?r  "aT  <£■  S  rS  _S  J»


CD

bo


bo       ^  o  ,

-  2^r22|  I

2     «     .s     •'i     o           ^  o  ^  ^

n3  ^  <D  ^


<d"  c  fee


CD

O

d

o

Ph

<D

be

ak

a

oT

o

con

<v

CO

to

<D


352


THE  YOEUBA-SFEAKING  PEOPLES.


O
1^


g


aT

-2  3


o


CO

O


k2


l>

(D


s


a. I


OS

o

ID

n


,^3


O


o


O  i-


<4J


<0

5


X


o
fcc


CO


•-  ".2,

^  "  Is

p  o

+^  q=  -iJ


O


/3


O


bD  g


CD  ^


O

Is

CO


0)


-i^   ^  ^


03


4


^  o

(D

4


c

bo
c3


'bo

o


O

o


o3


05

rH

s

.0


C3
O


03
-U

.0


o


O


a


13

o


cc
c3

^  bp
aT  o


§  o


c3
P


O


c:


,£1
o


o


0

si

.1

be

•on

arie

rple

ger

bo

oT

03

03

03

H

CO

c3

p

t/i

Oh

•ed

.s

0

qT

03

a

CO

03

oT

K

03

be

I—"

13

ut

0

to

full

to

troi

to

s

to

03
03

to

:3


bo  .S

:a  -  bo
o  ^

o

03  03


03
03

Id
O


*3

O

o


o


o  «


CO


c
bo


PJ

03

a

CO
03


o

1-1"  (Tl


o

a
a


ci
o


CO

I--


o


c
o


'So

CI


03


03
CO


W    bo  C
O

^  OS
^  ci

03

9


3


UTS


0

0

03

a

tani

u

a

ben

flay

be

B

be

j£

0

_fl3

c

0

1

0

i>

1--

o
c


'd

03


03  O

OQ
03


c
c


bo
c
o

03
CO


CO
03
03
03


o  —

oc  00


APPENDIX.


353


c

o

u

c

+->

a

o

io

Ti

.S

c

ere

>>

o

rt

05

"S

o

c3

on

be

OQ

,  bo

go

(3

be

0)

c

leave.

o

anoth

,  to  be

1  to

perfoi

cT

o

s

o


o
o


a

CS
3


c3


a

o
o

cT
"5

ii

o

o
ci
c;
u


o
O


o


IB
ft

o


O


J3  O  O
-•^  -u


o


o


o


S

a

o


60

a

o


o


a


c

60  ^


c3


o
Is


o


.ft

o

c

O

6

0)

(D
!h

-Q

O

O

1

.2
'3

60

O

o

u


C<2


<»

m

cS

,a

o

qT

3

CO

ft

CD

oT

ft

a

o

o

60

a
c3


tZJ


o

a

CO


o       3  .H  o


03

a
a


CD

ft

ft

c3


0
O


o
ft


CQ

o
o


I


u


00


o
o


CD


o


a>


g
c


ID

rJ3


O

60


ID


60
o
q3


C3

<D


<D


60

o

o

(D


03


O  ,^5


o
o

03
03


03
CJ

ft


03

o

O


=3  773

ft  d


•S

oi  o
ft  o

03

O  03


o
ft

CO


Ci

03


O
03


Ci


CC


03


03


n

03
ft

ft

ci


rd


,60  S


u
ci

OJ

ft
ft
ci


03

•>

'S

o

03


03

60  S


-4-'


ft

03

Es

CO


5  3  3^3


•5  ®

^  S  .


CO

CO


03

o

a

03      i-  P

r3  -S  -a


CO
o

o


p  o

00


CO


0.-

a

a


o

CJ
03


t  c

>:>  ft  H

„  a  .  a

">3   o  a  p

03  CO

^  05


to

CO


1^

00


ci

03

a


Co


00
CO


2  A


-a

C3

Ci


cn


u
c

ci


O


d

O


03

ci


O

C5  o


03

'S

o

03
ft

5f  '

03

d

2  Q


ci

CO
Ui
03
C3
03

a

03


CO


B  ^y.

03  S
.     c.  d


C5


45  a>
.60

«  3


CO


354


TEE  YOBUBA-SPUAKING  PEOPLES.


zs

O


O


03


o


bo

G  o


is"
c

CO


CQ

O

-(J


a

o


P.


C3


o
o


p

a;


tiX)

o

f — I

ID


6:


o
o


bo

'5


o  _


05
.Pi

o


bo


CO
CO

IV
ca

CO

O
P<

qT


CO

o


rP

cS

CO


CO

O


-P


o


OS      ^  .S  is


Pi

03
0>


bO
bo


CO


O


-P


hi.  P  .-2

^  W  g

S  °  °

o  ^  o


S


03

to

c3

-P
=1


o
o

S-i

-  .  s

^  -r^

g    ea  cT

P     p.  M

P    ci  S
C  P


bO


(-1

O

o

m
03

O


o

bo

c3

03

rP


p


03
lO

"S

CP


'5


05

^  t3  o)

03  ^
r— ;     O    03  o

P    ^     -tJ  ^

*^    03  Ph  ^


03


^  03


P

03


c3
03


a

o
o

03


o

„  bo  O)
03     C  U

-P  *3

rP  eS


B  P


o

CO


f-1
o

cS

s->

o

t-

03

03
,P

P


03
03


i>3

C5


CO

c3


c3
03


03


C5


>.      ~  c3

CO  J&5


03

05


£K  03
O  >

o

to  O
O     P  -P

p.  o

o"  to


<7?


00


03
05


o
o


ft3


Ci5


03
P


P

03  r-

g

bO  g  "


0.

e3


-1-3
o
c3


O
•73


P


P
c3


P

2


P.


P

03
Pi


P


o


'T3

p

03


CO

oT


-t3

03

03
J3


C3


O


o


CQ


p
p
o


O


^5


,-1

o  o


ec
o


o


APPENDIX.


es  iT  ^  -(-3  I-.  ,jq
O         a;  ^        c3        -Q  O  cQ


CO  d)


I


«  .S  ^  ^  &'='&^M


fi^       05  ft^


S  2       o  S  -2


rz2  .  r  p       o  o  .r^      #-Q  j3

^  S  °       o        oo       -So^-io    -.^-^  ^
fei^       :~       ."5  .o       CO       s       w       ^  o  "»


q     q  q


rrT  J-f  "  ^  »v

■d  p  °  -g      .S-  >;


g+=      ^-«      p*^<i>      r^^3      <soscg-+j  _o


00  as
o  o


O  rH


<7<l


TO


2a2


TEE  YOnUBA-SFEAKING  PEOPLES.


a

iert,

-rao

C3

OUtjl

o

ass

o

<U

o

ot

o

'O

o

aT

'o

oT

G3

o

t>

ab

c

rt

a

deno

tell.

oot

tur

due

o

1=

bar

ifj

o

0.1

Qj  O

"S

to

a

tn

'-5

a.

^0

5'o

a


grow

sour,  fev

possess

sow,

turn

own,

to

W

to

1

e

3

a


ti5


CO


o


s  a


to
to
o

03

c3

03

03

bo

.  rH

agi

P!

03

cS

&

0

eS

O
-1-3

c

O

03


o


CO

o

o

.—1

1— >

■— (

«5

CO

1—1

1—1

APPENDIX.


357


,Z1

o


o


bo


■73
(3

.o


03

(-1
O


<D


a

C3


CD


a


c3

a


o


c3


■73


1

a

o

CO


^  a
a  ^


03


o


:2


to

1=1


3


C3  M

c


O


bo


60

S3

O

o

0)

o


O

CO
ID


O

O
60


60  o

•3  ^


e5


o
o


O


o  §

3


CD


p

s

o


o

»— H

O


IB


CO


a


l-l


O  03

60
^  O


5tl
o


o


o


bib
o


I — I

,o


p
o


o


p

o
o

o


u

03


i


c3


a

03
-<-:>
03


o


03
XI

c3


Pi
o
M

03
03

Id

o


DO


o
oT

o


o

?-<
6C


03


O


o


o
m

03


03


03


O


CO

as
3


a:/

a


„  o


o


bo

c3


o

ast

03

60

-♦^

o

eS

o

u

03

03

>

03

be

c3

o

O
-u

reac

o

03


o


rJ3

o

f3


f>5


&5


m  CO

03

^  I
e


3

03

O

03

O


■+3

^03

a

o


a

cS

-J3

CO

e

03

g

03  03
PL,
Q  .


CO


CO


CO

CO


CO


CO


to

CO


CO


CO

CO


CO


o


358


THE


YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


03

o


03
O

o


O
u


o

a>
-♦J

c3
Cj

03

CB  03
Oh
Oi
m


c3


03


CD


■-a


I

o


O


o


<0  ^  ^

fcl  -P  _  03

03  ^  O  -73

■■-<  c3


c3
u
bo


T3

bo


CO

CO
03


O


D3


o


03

-2  a
-3  "


c2


O

o


6:  -C


6:
o


O)

o


a

c3

03

o


bo


oT

to

o

bo

.9

o

03

qT

o

O

C3

«a

03

lO

oT

CO

rt

03
03


03


03


p

o

C3


03

a

o

03


O

oT

^

03


03

-I
1^


03


O
EL,


O

to
03


n3

03

o

o  -^3

„  03


03
03

O


Ph
03
03
P.

oT

03
OQ

o
o


2


'o

C!

03
P.
O

c


P-I

■-C5
ei

.s"

CO

s

03
03

03

'Pi

O

o

c3

1-14

O

O

-4-3

o
o

03


03

c3

03


bp
o


43  i

o,      ^  03
03  o

-(J  ^

CO


TS
Pi
03

a


CO

"Ph

pl
c4
T3


50
o

03

o

03

a

o
o

9  o


Pi

03
CO

.03


03


0;

pi


Pi
O

CO


CO
PI

Pi


-U  ' — '
03

bo  ^


03


03

>-

•S  a

O  o
-IJ  ^


03

03
N

:3  a
a  =3


P.  .2


o


03

bo

c

«  J

2  ^

03  a

ta.-  Pi
r»  e  CO


Pi
S

C5


_2  Q


E^  E^


S

E^


TO

H


eo


CD


00  a>


O  i-l


APPENDIX.


359


c3
S

bo


2  -Sb


a

to  13


l-Q  O


to

0)


o  ^  o


1^  ^


60
O

o


o

to  -


'0


(D


c3


&0  f
1=1


CO


g

o
o


o  ^
o
o


ID

a
o


■rS


"P


a

E3


o


c3


o

-u

<o

ID

c3

c3

C3

c3

Oh

to

<U

CO

rH

CD

be

o  -tf

3

o


g3
El

oT
bo

'  Jt
to  .2

feo  o

cu


O
3

O

CO

<u


03

c8


O


CO

p


O  ^3

O
60


60

H

O


CD

60
P

-2

^  >-''^

5    5^    Q  o


CO


O


O
O
60


5t!
o


&

oi

03


-1-3

CI

i  ^  S


^  CS
CS


o


a


Co


03


QJ
>
03


I

03


3
-(J

03
60

C3

o


o


.2  -ii  S


03


03


O  oj


03
60


03


03


o


oT

?  o  o


03


60


to       -i  \ri       o       r-i       O)       Oi       o  cSj  co

lO  lO       >ra       lO       o       to  to  to       o  co


860


THE


YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


o


o


rt


old

old.

r-

O

S

5

rt

CO

o

p

o

o

o

o

to

to

ion

O

+2

o

%*
CO

n3


a,


05


H


cx)

to   50  CO


CO


1^


00  o


APPENDIX.


361


c

O

-4-3

<u

a

o
u

u  d

^  g

-2  %


a


05


ts-f  Br*


bo
R
O
ti
■1-3

CD

S

^  ^  -s  ^


o


c3


&5  CA)


C3  ^


CO


•  C2

8  ^


oo

C3

C


CO


"■3
P3


o

CD    cc  O

CO      CO  '

o  o


ID


^   o  S


o


a

rid

o

C3


o
+3


a


^  — I  o


C3  ID

(D
CO

-a


CD
PI


<5
C>5


a

03

CD

o
o

P-t
CO

o

i-i

-1-3

o

o

00


CO


Ol  CO

CO  cc


-sf-   >o  t—

cc


CO  C5

CO  CO


CO

(35  05


362


THE  YOBUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


o

ai
O

rH

•xs


a

»  i-H

bo

r-*
C«

PI
ej


X2
d
I — I

o
Pi

o


tc
ID


1 :


P!


(3

o

u  "

o  ^
m
mi

o

05
>-
c3

CQ
03

aa
<u

C3


tn
o


H
O

125


Pl
O


s

a>


C3
PI


o


be


a

o
(>


o  o


o  to


c3


a
_o
'■+3

c3

o
PI


o


03

a

o


o

03  i-C


03


03

tn


03  .is

03  O


a  M  a    g  ^


e3

03


p

O

re

ot

bo

p<

o

C3

o

P

a

kl
03

03

o

oT

to

!Ph

1 — 1

03

to

03
Pl

a

a

03

to
c:
gn

to

sera

a

o

o

to

O

+^

pl

o

how

oT

03

f=

omn

a

rP|

o
Ph

<

to

o

!3

p  pi
o  o

03

a

o  ^


e  p  -e
■  03

O  P-i


03

CO
O


c3

O


03
to


r-;

a

03  t>

p;  J

03

03  03
&:  ^


P


O  -tJ
to


^  a

to


03

a

o
o

o


03

a

o

S3


P

o


-PI

03

Ph  ,0
Ph
c3


P

03


03


_  -H^  03
rJ3    rP  ^


p  a

O  03


bo


03

o

o

a

03

a

O

p

fe:

•on

to

r-H

to

to

come  fi

P

r>

bo
P

mon

view

noti(

issui

03

p

o

rP


rP


-^3

P


c3


CO

p

C3
03

a


O  o

CO  _u

^  03

03  P

P  03

O  T3

•i-l  ^H

O  S


03  o
-P

H  ^  .


Pl

o


>3

03

P

O

o


2  a

03


bo
p

•  r-t

a

o


'.  P

r-i  a


^  03

?

03


a

o

03


CO  O


bn

rP

03

'ur

'Ph

P

to
to

o

03

03

O

-t-l

bo

P

03

03

_P
'C

rP

CO

c«

03

Ph

bo

03

Ph

_P

OS

'■+3

CO

APPENDIX.  363


"J  ✓ — \  a)    p-  -


«  ^  s


&0


&0


I


^  .9


CO  r«

e;  3  e;  g


o  -2  1^  o  -B  _

^— ^  .ri  L-  :.~    <"  Cr  CT


tin  03  pj


&0


03


p
O


'pJD

.3


c3


S  _  C


03


I


03


«3
03

H  bo
'3  ^


Id

03  .

P=  o


bo


03
03
ft

Ph
03


03


s


a

03
CO
03

Cm

03
CJ

bO  S

.9  ^


«*H  03

O  bo

C  03

a  r£5


03  bo  '

CO  a

m  .E3

03  >

Ph  bo

03  .r


bo


•T3


bO


o

lain-

O

CO

a

king

o

03

bO

ex

•  rH

-M
03

a

bo

ai'i

^<

a

C

O

03

o

03

o

is

03

Ph

of

sho

o

Pi
03

CO

oT

bo

tion

also

a

03

CO

thin

_cS

03

'ut

bo

03

a

03

a

•  r-t

o

!►

C3

■4J

CO

THE  YORUBA->'S PEAKING  PEOPLES.


CO
r-t

3

O

O

s
s


^    ^  ^


-3


g


^  o
o


o
+2


rt


I  I

.  o

Eb-g  ^


o
3


o

•+3


o  u
^

^  r=

bo  /zl

-  !^  .S

O    K-l  3

CO  'T'


O


Oh
3


a


05  —


03  O


^      3       §  <»
bo  ^  o


C3  O
O

.  .  «-


3

o


o


03


p
bo
o


bo  o


a  >^


I  o

O

bo  ^


to


I


O)  G3
O  <D


o
o

t/T

CO

3
o
o


„  o         «  o    _  „

^-C^  fc.  3  1^

CQ     ^  ^

c3  P-1


-a  o

o  a

%  o

•+J  o

,  -1-3
■51


fen  -g


PI

J-


^  tr

bo  -  =

o


c

O

III

P  O


^  S


c3

o


CO  _

i  g


 CS


(D  03

tu
tu


<D


bo


^  to  o
o  ^

3  ^  52


"S    rt  ^  ^  ^


3


c3  03

CO  B
O

bo


3
O

bo  .S


■4-3

bo
(P
&:


o


o
o


bo  15
n  2


bo

p

bo  '


a

c
o

CO


+3


bo  .2

■S  ^


bo  t!  .2
a  ,0  -=


and

1

ri

03

CO

_o

0

ri

cu

0

CO

bo

a

C

th

3

a

Ph

bo

O)

c

0

rt
Ol

E:

«3

CO

0
•  ^

rs

P3

0

0

ri

03
O

3
00


bC.S

e  ri


bo


^  .a


bo  s


O  o


bo
c


c/j

o

■73


CO

ri

03


bo  ?>


o    fe   "  &


u

03  O


a  3

a

03
03

bo
ri


O


o  ^


J-  ri
_  «^


03  ^

a  bo
o  c

"  "bb

03  c

O


a

c  p

ri

to
ri

^  a

^-  o

CO

03

^  C


bo
'03

-a


03

a

o


APPENDIX.


365


8  P


•  03  _G

^-^  03

a;    be  O  t3

o   fe  o        o  H

-  ,.0  73


1^

pi

5

a

see

SCO

ear

bo

ani

&

m
bD

of

ski

to

1  be,

o

bo

O

dren.

Be,

O

to  le

a

03


O

J3  oj


bo  ^

C  03


bo  ^  '
C    CO  ~


-03
^     §  03


c3
03

o


o


2


03

c

a3
bo


bo


^  'T3  to


IS,


bo


r>-  ^


03


03

C


■-3

O

03


bo  M

(3  03

•r;  J3  03

J  o

^  -^^  -

£  K)  S

■73  ^


03


a  bb  ^

O  S3


C


o


03


bo

c  '-a


o

%
a

03
03

bO
C3


03


^  1=1
.s  o


o

rH

03

S

oJ'

'S

Fro

tn

03

ing  1

liabl

bO

3

bO

es

O

p

•  rH

bo

bb

o

ai

P

03

bO

•  rH

03

O

c

'p

P

03

"5

O

<H-H

rH

e3

on

O

03
O

and

>-(

o

o

o
pi

hen

bo

bo
P

•  rH

u

03

530
P

&:

'-5

o

O

tH

es

3

3

c

CO

bC
P


CO
cs


bo

n:3

P

P

•  rH

bo

c3

_P

a"

,S

o

rH

ej-H

c3

bo

P

rn

a

o

03

Lh

c3

^H

O

2  t

rP

cn

•rH

•5  ^

rg
>-J  03
ri2  !>

feci
re  -K

03

r^


03

m

CO
03


pH  CO

K  eS
.52  §


03
03

&

03

Pi

o

•  I— I

•+J

C3
03
P

(3
o
o


bo
P

•  rH

03

rQ

Cm

O


O  2
o  o


CO
03

to

03

-a


13
P
es

P!

o

•  rH

O
P


rP


O

o


03  -t^


03


03  03


366


TJIE  YOliUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


C3

p

o


to


a


o


ID
C3


£  3


^  o


=3


3  ^


+3


bo


O


o
in

o
o


o


s
s


tn
O


OS


o


-+3

0
O


ID


rJ3


^-1

O


c3


(D     c  *N

^  (D

.2  'T3


ID  ^

^  o


o


(3
c3

(D

13

ID


OS


!-i

O


■+2


c3

cT


5tt

o


OS
ID


(3
O

bo  bo  -2
O  -c


o

p  O
c3


i-d


eS


4


o

g  ^


c3

a

ID

Ph
.>>

o

-+J
03

c3

^^


a  e

O  «J


O  o


c3

^  .2

^  -s

,  .  ID

— '  c
o


o
bo

S3  ID


bo


e3


o  S


o  <a

'I  .2

bo  c

.5  ®
'53  "o


o

u
o

bo


I

S3

c

CJ

ID


bo

a

o


bo


§  .2


bo  "5


+3

e>  o


5  bo


a

o
o

a

o


^  1

bo

S3

O  w


03

bo


bo

n


o
bO


bb  m

;S  ^

03

a

bo  2

.a  ^
M  .s

I  bO


bo

^1

_c

s

"-5

SOi

sa

f-«

<D

bo

_g

"S

,a

0

bo

-(->

S3

?s

m

<D

a

m

0

ID

OQ

a

t+-l

0

0

-  ID
S3  O


APPENDIX


367


c3


o


60


O  S

bo


o

O  O

■2  g  ■♦^


o
o


C3


as

1  15


■73

o


tt5   ^tl^  -53  ^  ^

CCJ  "73  +i


4-r  bO


2
o
o

o


o
o

o  o


a,  o

c5  ?^


<D      rH  <»


3  ^


o  "


-4J

id

c3

O  O)
O  ^

s


CO  ri


O


o


^3


o

o  a
^  3

o


tn  O


03


03


■73


05
O


^  ( — I


03  0)  _r
^  ^


05


05
O


C5  d


bo


o       3      rd  ^  rid

qd  CO    00  CO


05"  a
3  g


05


O  03
-4^


=2  ^
+j  ^

5    oT  o"
Cos
"  (d  s


1<


60


o


03  rC]


^  03

g  qd  =t:

CI  !d
o    ^  to

a,         to    CO  60  -)j


05


§   5  S


s


05


60-^

S

fO

O  03

3

to  o

.9  J


CQ


bo
05  _g
bo
03

to  CO


^  o  ^

C3  ■
'—V  t>

CI-    O  35


o  v.^

-£3


K

05

05

o

O

C3

«-)
o

oT

Ch— 1

c

05

C3

a

to

!d
o

Id
to

ce,

the

CO

c

05

o

to

•  I-*

exte

05
P(

cti

Ph
a

esses

T

ar

ns

1-5

&:

o

1— (

Pi

kl

C3

C5

05

O

CS

05

O
bo

a


bo  T3  22

(U        Ci  Id

S  =s  .8

^  60^


bo  ^


Pi  rfn


CO
CS


kl
05

o


o
o


bo
Id


bo


-  bo
bo  c


bo  bo's

Id  CI  rt

I.  >•  o

to  C3


03

lo  w

CO  ^

3


rid


o


368


THE


YOR UBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


e3
O


a

03

o

-*-J

03

ca

OS
X


o
o


a>


o  c


+3


u

•5

be


o


=3
C

03
03


c3


c
o


-5  ^    -  .s

^  e**  e>t

_^  :a     tq     o  »^


-3


OD

O
•+3


03


2


^  03


5tl


CO


« ^  i

O  ^


03
3


O


o


03     03   ~  rJ^


C3
rJ3


^  2


I         §  t§  t§


03
03
CO
O
PL,


ti^   fe^  3


53
>


o

p

ba

o
-(J

'o

'oT
C

bo

oT

O

o

o

rs

3

03

CO

Hwa

lecom

S

03

bo
o


•4-3

03

bo


^    o  o


03


03


03  -fJ

^  bO


t5


o

bo  o
o


O


o


o

03

M

03


a

o

£  c3


'3  CO


03


03

>
•  (-'

03
O

03


03
03
03

C3


2  O


o

m

o

c3

r-

5
o

Oj

.a  ^

c;  03
bo

o

03
O


>1

bo


03


(1<


a
p


03
O

to"
bo


a

CO


03
CO

C


03
t>
•  i-i

N  03

o


03

a

CO


03
03

«>  03

s


o

03    03'  2  :S  «r

o  ^  S

-  o  s


0)


to

03

03

■  ^
03
O


^3

03
+3

o


<;4-
o

r-t

.2

03

X.

03


03  03

O  ■•J

a  "

0.  a


to

^  C

03
CO


CO  o


03
03
C

03

■73

ci
o

J/J

'c

03


13
C
03

C
o


O

rP

03


APPENDIX.


369


a  ^

S3  9.


1^  .15
-5


O

^  'so

B  'So


o
o


pi!)


; — ;  <D


i

O  m
O

r— c  03


'-I  ^  if

03     o  pi

CU  o.


to  CO


03


03


^  1


—  «

03  °
^  -<-^
IS]  ■'-I

.2  03


3  PI


n3


CO


03

u
a

to


c3

O  03

03

JO  'is

CO


g.S  03


o

03

ki;  13

60


I


O


03  I

O  CO
O

>  o  9  'oS

S  f<l

tn  +=03


6  IS  I


CO
CO


a  ^
o


o


o


03


03


c3


s


03


O

O  oj


03


03


(3

q


c3


00


O     .S  03

- -i  ^  ^


03


O
O


'3^

03

CO

03

03

q

1

i

bo

a

o

lO  03

b2  bO

03  ^
^  OQ


o


o


t3


5  ^

I"  °
'El

l-S      03  — '


^  bo

o  ^-

CO  *N

?3  ^c;


(D  CO

-l3  'X3


03

Ph

to

£  ?^

bo  o
ria  ,o  -^^


Oh  O


t>>  O

O  O

^  CO

bo
c

CO  2:

03  HJ


c  22

Pi*  .2


ions,

nges

c3

c3

o

mes

O

03

nso

leti

o
o

1

03

a

03

bo

o

5

a

03

CO

03
CO

E=

CO

03

03

res

03

rd

-u

Ph

X

03

V — ^

O

Oj

03

.a  03

-p  -1^

S    r;  c3

c3  CO

.2

"5     O  -(J


o

CO


03


rd


03
03
CO

03

ti


rd

■1  ^

bo
I

'bb  ^

03


o   o  ^


o

&:

03
CO

o


03

bO

PI

•  t-H

o

l§

03

CO

1

o

•  t-H

03

bo

o

03

<

&

OQ

t-H

^    +3  EH


03


2b


370


THE  YORUBA-SPEAKLNG  PEOPLES.


c3
O


I


03


C


bo  O
O  'T3

o

,  I  o


^  bo

0  c3

1  i  1

te   o  2   o  o

S  -u  -|J


60

03

CO


bo       ^         «+H  c3


03

S

03


03


03


•T3

,5


S  2

-  02
03


O
O

O  03"

^  I


e3

tn
e5

a

6  S
03  [s;


to  g
'00  ^

S  to


•73  ^


O


O


03

O


03


o

„  03
^    O  ^

^„  ^  s

^  ^  ^


O


c3
«  03

bO


03


o

o .


03  ^


5

bO
Oh  03

a>  -r-

03

■  02


t«  :S  r=l  -^  ^  03
O         o    O  o

rs  K


^  I  ^  ^


c3


1

02

oT

.2

0

Ph

q  0

0

1^

02  S
03

02


o


a

03

o
c;

I — I
&
X


02

C3
'-J3
cS


O
(M


CO
O


APPENDIX.


371


I

a


'3


CD

13


o

.s

o

o

13

-l-i

'S

00

a

3

(D

•  rH

0)

CO

a"

Cj

a

*^

cle

CO

^  rt

Is  rd

^  CO


o

C3  rt

CO  a>


3
^   a  <D

D  £3
1-     OJ  c3


9   tio  '•


o

o  g


t5  a


t>-.


^  ^    :s  o  ^


60


O


I


a
.5


o


CO

o


-  Ch
rt


„  o


o  ^
rt


o  ^


o  ^  J  ^  I  2  ^


<^  rt
rt  §

Pi  'S


d
O)

cr


1^


bo


o

"rt

CO


O

-a


a
o


bo


a  ^


I

(3


.2

3


"S  bo


rt  nri


«  v2

o


o


r=r;


P
rd

CO


r— (  O


CD  C


rt


O
rt


03

P

a

bo

as

'rt'

CD

cu

o

uiqn

rt
q;
>-

-u
rt

CD

'00
0

rt

pers

CO

0,  to

rt

into

,  to

O)
rd

man

are

^  ^

— I  ^OJ


S3

•  rH


c


03


CO


o


o


'a  03  ^  ^  ^

CO  o


O

rrt


rt
o


54-1

o


o


•73

O


03"

bo

12

_g

flfec

rt

.2

CO

rt

3

0

•  rH

,rt

W

rt

CO

a<

rt

r^

rt

_a

lAl

bo  bo  CIh  ^  ~


0-

o


rt  c3

rt  03


bo

rt


■  S    d  CO


bo
_a

'rt

03
&,

c

bo
rt


a  bo  o
•  -H   rt  TH

bo^  ^

.5  ;g  .rt


bo


03  5


bo  a  S
.S  ^

13  a

a  8


a  b


2b2


03
rJrt


o


rt

03


S


rt

0

S-i

e

'a

s

bo

.s

0

o
o


03    CO  I

o  rt


CO


03
CO
CO

03  13

rt


M

03


rQ

rt  03

a

rrt
+»
o  <-a


u
o

03

rt


bo
o

'rt

CO

bo
c


372


THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


o

0


o3


!=>
O
O


o


CO


.S


d  bo


CO  s
TS

0


.5  O  ;2


„  <D
S  -2      S  o
4s       o  -iJ


03

0)

o

Oi

CD

c3
03

O

03

tt

S

reeii

— s

O

bo

03

a


o


03  ^


O


03


I

03

oT

Cl.

o


CD


4  a


C3
O


c3  C  S
fc  «


C3
03


e  j2  .<»  ^
Is  ^  ^

tn


s
S


03

44  oT

•r-  O

o  o

♦J

ci


03


0^  ^


03

03  03

53  bo


o


<i  a  ^


,  CI

S  42

03  O

t3  -U

03


03


S  o


03

c3

43

oT

o

13

o

'bb

S

a

to

&

SlOl

.S

ink)

up

'-3

'B

o

to

stow,  yie'

03

Id  o


o

C3


o

Pi

o


05  03


U3

tn

03
03
O


Ph  P

o


a

o


03


rH  t/3
3  03

•5  i

o


a

o


03

bC
o

•  r-<

CO
f-

03
t>
03

P5


03

42
o


en
G
O


tfi  CO

03  tZ3

CO  03

CO  •—I

2  ^

Ph  P

X  03


03
03


03
,  -U
03
03

d


cS  03

a  s


J2


-73
PI
O
C3

03
to

to

03

P-.
X

11


o

a

CO

a

o


'IS

cl

£  o  «


o


„  03

^  a

o


03  03

X

03

03
43

'bb


o

CO

03

a

03

UJ

o

03

_m

o

APPENDIX.


373


O


C/3  CD
5  ^


8


d

■  o


a


o


o


ft


CD  -t^


ca  o


c3


O  03


■  I— I

a

a>

r-l
•  f-l

ca
O

4"


o

o

bo

o

a  s

^  o  .2


o

^  44


c3


O  O


•-3
0


a  ^,


ft

oT

I — 1

To

O

o

»— -»
c3

ood,

nice

o
pa

o

be

d

tn

at

o

o

leai

CB

-(J

O

ft

-(J

O

CO

-(J

1

J3
O

C3  O

q  o


3^

c3


O


o


to

O

CO

a>

ft

7^
m

O

to

aT

a

N

nee

bJ3


d

ft
o


2  d
to  -d


CD
c3


(D
bo

-o

03

o
d


c3  d
O  O


CD


O
+3


o

rP


'o
•5?


rd


o


§


d
o


O


a

d  <;


o
5^


•+3

GQ


to


o

d

<o

rQ
<1>

c3


03


rd


C

  13

^  03

^ —  t-)
<o
at


5»3


O

CO
03
rd


374


TBE


YORVBA'SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


APPENDIX.


375


^  CD


(3

Cm

CO


fe-
ci


CO

O


60

.s

60

•-a
a

alk

alk

o

1

ID

•n

■4-:>

O

3 arate,

o

walkin

sta

qT

move

strc

O

o

slip

dissolv
from.

CD
CO

gsin

ositic

r-i

o

-.J

ace.

to

e,  pa

thele

Oh

60

r-]
•  rH

slowl,

gentl

melt,
liver

Ye,

t4-l

o

r«,

divid

CD

CD

O  ^2


o

60


(D  J3
t>     O  o

s

n3


CD

•r;


c3


C3  rfl


c3

o3  o


5tt
o


C3  1^


^  s

o3  o
CD     cu  •— I


03


c3  =+H    P         -tj  ^


O
60


O
60


CI  e3

CQ  c3    c3  o

03  O  CD

60  «=

c3  O


<D

ca  >
oj  OS


■73


cS


3


o


CD


o
o


!=;  O

O  60
O

60  O


CD
c3


-1-2

CB  60


G      ^      (T)  "

-4-a  -tJ


o


CD


C3


CD


o


CS  o


^   n  ^  5«
O  c


s


bo
CD


d  n3  ^  r=3    n  CD


•4^

o
o


(D


<D

H


C3


^  -p  d

O  C3  O
CO  ^  O


2


60  S

CD


CD


<D

H


t3

03

a

-t3

CO

bee;

C3

■n

+3

<D

in

CO

ca

CD

+=

03
O

a  may

-1.3

he

(33

60
P

nnec

terio

-«3

O

CD
(/J
<D

s

o

CO

,ed

.9

a

p

c«

C3

do

To

o

res

notii

p

cu

ed

S

be

-1-3

y<

ID

60

P

e3

ose

CD

fficu

eas

rCl
-4-3

'c3
C3
ti

-k3'

o

OS

'o

<A

r0

3

wi

CD

o

I

03
Ph

CO

c3


O
60


c3
o


bo  52
'rt  CD


<D  O


60  .

H  03

■75  ID

-4-3  (D

6C  60

-4_»       ^-^       CO     .rH  'rH


60

0  "
c3  <lj


I  r

p  o

P.=Q

S

60


o  «


'V
o


60
CO  C
60  'S


,-r  c

^  CD

p-t  ^

PU

o


5S  CD

S  -P

CO

CD  c3

a

s  ^

5  CD

-P  -f?


03

r0


a

o

CO


-4^

:3

.9  60
P

c3

0  ^

ca  u


376


THE  YOBUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


c3
O


1

CO

o

ft


bo


Ph

o
o


^  CO

O  CO


bo

o

en


OT  bn


-3


ft  ft


o


CO  „


5S  cc


.2

CO

a  a


o
u

ft


ft

a


r?  S


;5  s


o

o


O


CO
CO

ei


C3


CD

O
o


!C5


o

bo  m
o

O  03


03


O


f>3


o

ft

qT

bo

C

03

CO

03  ,


g     ^  Ct

cS


CO


ft

C3


!-  fe

^   ^  ^
c3  CO


ft


03


f-i  >

^"^

03

bo  5
O


03
ft

o

S-i

ft


§  ^

S  w  p
03  bo


03

bo
c

O  .
■+J


^       03  ^
rfl  CO

O

-r;


^  S  ^  -m


03

bo  S

C  03
CO  -1-3


CO

a

a

03


c3
PI

"ft


be-

ding,

S-I

03

CO

a

03

bo

d
0

0

ead

03

c3

-(-:<

H

CO

^

en

0

03

CO

&
-1-3

03  ^
;h  03


bo  ^

1^  a

03

bo

„  03

.a  ^
'a

i=i  ^

bo

S3

:s

a  03


03

bo
'be


03  P3
rp  O

3  "3

bO

03  ,


03  C

.2

CO

r4  03


O
O


(3

03
03

03
-P

S3

_o

o

03

(3

S3

O

o


bo

ft

ft  O
^  03


S3  03

bo  5^

c  a


03


CO

c

'rCl
CO


rG


bo

S3
03

X

03


CO  1-5

O  C
C3


S3
O


03

H


CO


fO
H


C/2
P


S3  C3

03

O  '73
CO

ci

g

C.  !-■

o  c


bo
^  3

c  3

.3

^  bO

03  d

•t5  '^^

C3  03

^5  Is
.3

be
c


CO  bD

a  <=

03  ,J3

a  o


C  03

T  6

bo  a

S3  ^

•.X3  bo

CO  c

-e>  ,^

03

O  bo

S3  C

03  •  —


to

S3

V5  bo
.2  !=

+3  ^3

S  ^


APPENDIX.


377


I


m
tn


C5

&2


to  ^


§  3  2  8


o
o


03


ID

ei  +3
CO  „


a  l's
CO  bo


t)0


o  o


to

CO

O


03


o
o


C3

o

CO
CD


03

CS

CO
•  I— I

a


03


CO
CO

a


o

03


03  g

T2  o
C  CO

O

+3


03


03

CO


c3


o

c3


03


-3  S

dst.

03

?H

or

p-

-1.3

CO
C3

bo  S

turn

go  1

'3

ute,

siro.

03

r  1

o
■+->

03

o

enti(

mist

Dz

c


S  03

(•1


03

1  1

03

c3  t>>

(>>  bo

-a

CQ  o

pt

a

den
cont:
sco]

tem

tJ  03
^  O

o
-(J

O  o

to

o

03

^-^^  -

O  '»3
03  ^

o
ci

so,

-(.3

I

a

p

Co  q

o

03

c3

03
+3


o


o
+3


■43


cS


03


bo

a


c3

CO


03
O

r~t
&|

03
t-*

O


03
03

o.


S  03


+3
03


03
>
•  rH

03

o

03


\  ;~    03  a;)

^  r—t      '  ^  ^  — ^      O  C3


c3

O
•+3


o
+3


.t3  s


CO

03

a

o
o


O  03
C3  173
03  c


o

bo


.23  bo


c3

o

J  ■  ^  eg

03  (i  r— I


O


a
p


.2

o


O  Pj

^  03

O  G

bo  rt

—  03


1=^
^2

03

03

03

+3
0

a

3

he

one

cont

-(J
d

03

03

0

th

a

0

03

'S

CO

C3

r-f

s

C3

ci

d

•4.3

0

0

03
rd


1       CO  ~

bo  d  'T3  gn


bo   S  Ph

t4_j       Q       ?H  ^

o   ^    5  _g


.2  '-'

"o  bo  d


03

,d


a

o


03
_^
"03

C3
O


03


d

CO

a

03


03    bo  -t^

d  d


o  t4
w  Is


03


O


bo  m  -jn

.a  •§

t>  "  d
•53  o

03       ^  .rH

a

o


bo


03
«

03

rd


THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


o


03


o  o


te  CI
o


CI,  8


o  o
bo  3


O


o  o


Co  -u


a

o

§  ^  ^  ^


o

CO

O


S  -a

PI  -IJ

CO


•73


CD


O  bo
-u  P.
o
■ — I


C3
O
HQ

O

-k^  O

-1-3


.2


o
-♦J

03


i«


C3

03


O


a  ^

o  2

bo  ^


'o

1^

tter

o

o
o

a}

03

3

p"

-(J

o

cu

CO

O

o~

'E3

a,  to

"J"

<^

CS

Ts

O)

o

o


bo
C

cn


„  O
P

03

a


o  ^


03


c3
03

03


J2


CO

1^  „


03  ~  S  lo
-S  -^S

c>3  K)  tx  &5


bo
c3


a  u

03  C3


O


00


03

c3


o


Ph

03
03


•3  ^


Zn


o

03


03

-1-3

O
PI
C3


0
c3


bFj

1

•  1— 1

C3

-w
C3

&

03

bS

o

bo

B

•  f— 1

>^

_P

Oh

cc

o

O

03

PI

O

O

a

oti

he

a

-1-3


c3


O

bO  PI

^    .5  r2


CO
CO
03


Pl

O  „

CO  aj


a

o


03
03
CC


pl

o

CO  ^

bo
P

a  03
'B

^  03


c3


O  O


O


ei
,£3

CO  g
CZJ  o


C3  12

CO  3
Oi  CJ3


!><  be
o  -3
e3


O
O

CO

E-


O


O
'  03


a

0)

pl

>■

•  pH

0

(1

03

tH

13

CD

n

e3

03

pl

bC
S

0
a

0

03

■4-3

-♦3

P


TS


5

03

a


CO


03


&

CO


APPENDIX.


379


s


O


O


o


44


D  C3


8  o


t3
O


ci
O
c3


O


O)

o

CO

o
o


o

o


o

C5


03
O


o


P


QJ


§0  9


o

cT

o
o

o


.rH  K.      CO  'U


13


OS

03

cu

a

o

o

era

o

o


i>2  r/3


tD    o  o

O  P-l


o


53


O
P


«S  03
O

o


P  13

03  ^
Ph  03

O


03
C3


O

03


S   ^  o


C3


03

to

CO
03
t>

P
03

Si

r7l  03

O  c+H

&l  c
CO  • — y


-Ci


O

O  -M

5  ^


S

c<5


•73
O
O


m  Co


0)

a

o
o


O     g  P

ci  o


c3
n3


5^


c3

03

a

CO


CO  •73

^  s

ft
ft

03  ^

bo
p


&0


2  '-^


p

O  03

p

o

03


60
P


P
c3


03
t>

-a

CO

H


o

rP


CO


ci


C4-t

 '  03

rP


=3    bo  i


O  03
I

=  CO

ci

03


■73
P
C3


bo
P

'fe

o

qp


03

03
rP


bo

.S  73
>->
-!-:>

a

P  C3


S  bo


-9  .a


03

rP


P

03  03

CO  CO

O  O


03
>

o

03
-P


bo

s  a
p


P

03

ft

;2  ^

d  o
P


bo
P


ft
03
m  o

03  CO


C


bo

.a

03


ci

is
05


bo
P


o
ft
a
>

03

bo

P


bo
P


C3
03


CO
P

*-!3

o

<1


bo


380


THE  YOBUB AS  PEAKING  PEOPLES.


c3

O


bo
o


rid


5X3


ci
S  O


ID


a

„  O

.o


g

o


o


2Q


bp

g

o

CO


03


O
O


bo


O


>  a
■sb  8

o


o


o


S


o

rH

tn

o

a

'o

Oh

CO

o

CO


o


o


o
o


a

CO

<I>


o


a


ID

1:3


^  j3  CQ


o

P  qT

bo  :3


o


o
o


o


o
+3


o


e3


^


A  C3


CI

O


03


-73


03

3


bo


'o


c3


(D

13
o"  0^


03

a


o


o


  03

^  a


13


o

03


03

rP


bo


c3

03


CO


03

a

o


o


03
Pi


c


d
o

C3


03


13


03

rP


c
o

C

-  03

?  13


I

03


03
>

o

a

o


H  1?  ts  ^

t-.     ^     O    P  ~


O  03
CO

bo  g


03

rP


03  C3

^  a  g.


o

03  o
bo  ^

o

rP  P


03


-3

-(-=
o
oT

_N

'q3

CO

O


o
Si


C3


to

o
-(J


a  §

p  3
"  -5


03
03
c3


P<  03


CO

rid
r-i

03

a

03

o
a
P

c3
( — t
&,


03

a

o
CO


C3

03
Ph  03
Ph

rt  ci

O  03
CO

03  03
bo

a

eS
,rj

o  o


P

03

13

•  rH

t>
03


c3    CO  s-t
c3  O


bo  -  bo
p    &.  p


-(J
o

p


03


CO


^  p

03  bo

-t^  p

03  03

PI


CO

p

O  03
CO  O

p

.2  c^


S3-


ci


^  S

.5  &

03  O
CO

03

^-  bo

bo  p

P  c«

P  "


03

bo
P

P  ,P  c3


APPENDIX.


a

o


■73

•  1—1

o


o


OS
o

o


CO

c3


o


03


I


0


-id

O

c


O)  o


8  f  ^

.o


o  ■
bo


-Q  o
„  -(J


■73


0)

o


•  I-l


^  I  ^  ^


c3


O


o


o

PI

zi  CD


ffl  s

o

'O  CL,

o

„  CO


CD


c3

03


p  ■

o

f-1

cS

'S

o

03

bo

to

-a

CS

ID

o

O
+J

ci

oT

03

c3

ep

&i

03


03


-2  *-

7^  ^


„  o


c

Ph  o  -

03  T3
^  03


03
O

id

T3


T3

03


03
N
C3


03

a

C3

q=l
o

-(J


03  cl


0-

o

03
•T3


CO


r3  «


o


S3


CO

O


o


bo

03


O


03


-O  rP|


o

03
CO


rd

^  00

03

o

i3  03

Q  -S


03

^  O

^  rd

a"  03


o


a  o


o
o


M

o
o
o

o
1

o

&2


bo  rPJ
1^


05


P

03


o

bo
(3


O  • -


-^3   _  O


rP


iO

o
bo

'3

_g

pi

'-+3

(O

"&

a

c

rP

CO
03

a

.a  f

'o

60  0

or

o
u

60

'X

p  =2

p

03

CO

ni

d

&  03

c

cord

and

p

c3


bo

60  .5

PI  p-(


a  e=


03


^  03

60  ^

O  CO

"3

^  03


03

to

rd

03

P

4-3

a

03

03

Ph

0

rP!

03

cn~

0

03

a

03
P

con

of

-p

CO

p

oT

a

C

60

c

■  rH

ci

0

0

CC

P

0

C

-1-:)

u

60
P

o
o

c3


382


THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


c3

O


only
•ans-

••  f  .

(Okan,  one).

(^Gara,  vei
sed  to  quali
arent,  cleai

1^

s  I

to  H)

.9


a>

CO

g

o

"o

CO

o

.g

-(J

cT
IT"

M

o

C5


o


O


s


a

m

o

2


■4J

O

o


pi

t-l

a


c3

o


o


.s


03

.2  S

Jo  ft<  pi


a


I

p

'fab  Q,


5j     O)  t-

5  >^


CO

H


o


03

^3


*-  d)

^  t2


§  a


to

a

03

o

CS

a


c

O

CO
ID

H


tl
c3

o

-4-:>

03

Id

03
-M

o

CO

m

03

a


^  a


T3

o

a

03

c3

P!

o

'ci

ci

bo

^

a

Si

o

be

a

t/3

1— 1

03

'S

.bp

03

'ob

.5

'co

03

a
o


a

03


03

to

a

03
c3
555


S-H

03


03


.o


03  03

a


03

a

o
o


oT  S  ^

S


o  „

13  X


a

o


03
O

c  a

03


O

^  a
.2

■> —  ^
o
a


a  ^
a


03

r£3


.  03


d

s.  ^
o

03
CO


03


a

ci

a  03


APPENDIX.


383


bo


o


C3
o


03


03

o


03

03
U


>
o
bo


"  -  ^
C  ^  S  CI
^  ^  ^  ^


03
>


1^  k'='


03


2  p


5

CO    oj  bo

^  .

C    ^     03    W  W


o


o


g  ^  .S  -3


rH     ^  .i-H
.§     03   S  03

o   o  o


(-7  ■'^
03      „  ^  „

^  k'=>

03  ;^


o

03


•^3

03

03


'73
03

o

03


03


2

Jo


03


P  03


O


bo


03


o

03
03


03   -S  O

03  r— I     ^  O


t>.

a

o

03


Id

P


o

!S2


4iJ     O  p

o  8  J  '

^  wq


03


a  %

^  bo


c3


'bb


5


e
„  e

s  s


bO
B


t2


C  bo


03


"        o  „  Is

t-.  rrj  03

+J  Oj

P  ^  Q


b     03  «

0^       r-*  W

c3


S"  ^  ^  _

.3  .5  ^  ^  c  c


P4
P


03
t)
03

C


O

a


^      ^  4:


bo

>2


03
,^3


■73

p

03


s

o


2


o


=3  -5


o
o


o
o


P    o  o

tK  03
^  'Ph


03

:3


a,  -2


CO

s  I

^  -p

60  c3
C

O  03

bp  o

'  g  s


C3
O

bO
P

°  'I
bo  CO  c3
P  -p


°  a

bo  13


S  -P  =3


a

o

to"

o

bo
c

idi

p

CS

cen

p

cn

o

CO

03


bO


03
rP


•>  03
O  O

bo  "-^S
o

O  P


be

.2  "


"     S  M

^    m  •

03

w    Qj  bo  ,

bo  rP  'j:;  03*

P       ^  rP  ■


03  ci
P

03  fl


03
r-t  ^

.s  «


03
03


03


„      -      „     03  P

Q  rP    c?    Ph  bo  O


Pi  -t^

03  •'-i
Ph

C  't-i

03  ^

fH  O

^  d

P.  -  n


^  o

03

I — I  ^

P^  ^

P  03

bO  O

.3

'03

o  p


c3
,P


C3


^  .S  :S


03
O

0

03

rJP


«3


O  03

Ph  03

a  ^

5  ^

03  03


P-l


3


p

03

:=i  -p

o


03
c3


8  a


384


THE  T0RUBA-8FEAKING  PEOPLES.


o


o

O   to  „


o
to

03

rJ3


O  rS


C3

a>

,  ■  ^
55  ^


o3


a.


r=1


.2  &  ^  .fc  bo'^fts;


O

o


-t3
o


3


3  5


'■+3

r-t


QQ  m


CO


O


03  H


03

'So


■+3


o  .2  "


1^  bo
aT

O  03

03  O

■  rH  a,


03


03
>

o
a

03
03


Cl,


00  Z


03  CO


a  -

CO


O    OJ  ^


03
rP


03


s


■73
03

O

o
u


3
o


o


03

oT


03


C  03
O  03


o  _a


to

03

o

_03
'Ph

O

.a  ^


S


03
O

03


s


+3
pi
O


03

a


03  CO
03
P-

03


03  H


C3  c^.,

o


CO


bo
C


60  §


o
o


O  03

60
•C  p
O

P-  o


53

p  >
60  c3


r  C


~1  03

^3


a

03

M

o

n


1=1


c3

o

03"  =3
-t3


03


o  .5


1  s
p.  g


P^


O

H


P-i

,— T

=^

cS
CO  5tt

o

03

03  ?^
'P^  ^


1  c3


APPENDIX.  385

It]  .O     OJ    -I^     &    F  ?  k"*^


to

S

&

o

<U

a"

o

ha

o

CO

O

3

_C

C3
■+-»

CO

O  PI


a,  o


O     -  o


03
O
C3

,  words)

away,
,  recei

M

'3
•+3

■«>»

take
keep,

J.  '

•+-3

o


C3
O


03
PI

a

03  c£

.2  S


CO


03
PI
03


03


S  ^  §  k<  03
r=<  r2


03    bb  to


03


&0


03

q3


03

03


p


03


03

rd


50

a


o

a

to"

s

bo

p;


O

pi

4i!  03"

-2  o

^  +2


03
PI-
CO


II


o
P!

o
o


I

Pi
o
o


03  e3


03


03

ps


M

c3
03

.S  15    ^  §

cS    o  o

tZJ     +3     -(J  CO


a  -5


03
03

PL,
CQ


CO

60  o

S  ' — '


•2,  ^-

^  PL,


^4

03


03

bo
o


bo


a
o

•  I-*

C3

o

oT

§  03


a


O
t-i

o


bo  a

03

'T3


e3
^-
c3
PL,

03
CO


Pi
O


PI

o  9


2  c


c3  c4

oT

bo  Pi

a  o

•  I— I

03
^  g

O

to

.2

^  60

bo.S

c3


03  a

bo


03

o


03


03  a;
rd  Pi

o

52  ^
pj

I  g
_  03

c3


a


43  tS  03


eS  03


•rH  M


C
PL,

bo

g

bo

03


386


THE  YORUBA-SPEAKim  PEOPLES.


u

o


=1


03  C3


Oh  ^b"  ^


be

a

CO

o


S


bjo


pi
o
o

c  aj


c3  O


o

<I>  C  !P
Ph  • «  O

S  1.1

o    "  o

^

e3


o  ^

Oh  QJ

2


o


CO


-1  ^

m  PI


03
I— t

5  ^


be


P  O  ^  U  C3  C4H


.s  -i

bo  'T3
C

O  03


a

o

o

03


03  O


G3
J3


C3

p
_n

'-5
c

o
o


,>»  bo


03


c3


cd  PI

to  p

o  o  8

^  s

+i  =4-1


o


a

o


3llect)

)  weigh)

itinue,

rec(

con

o

o

v

5^

4

03


o

PI

O    Si  bo

bo  S


to

a

03

u

o

03
PI


o    ~=  PI

f=i  .^  pi


P!


c3
o

03


03
5


^  03
03  C

rO  O


'bo


^  a

.1=1  o

03

=!3


03  P-


CO  to
to  03


bo  fl

.s

W  03


03
P!
O

>^
03

e
o


be

a


o


bo
c


c

03

to

03  03
r— ;  ^

■S  03
P  03

Ph  Ph  ei


03  03
C  O
O  P

bO  2

.5  ^

o

.11

03  f<

Ph  oj

03


rP

_bp


bo

.s

!5  o


r-  00
ted  C3

o  ^

03  O
^  O

^  be

oT
P

R


P

03


R
O


APPENDIX.


387


8  «3


OS

o

60


CD


o

a   g  l5  -2  a"


n3

<D


5n  ^


0


pi


CD


'B  g


o

HI
•iH

p-l
o


o


rJ3


03

ci
O


60

■"b  03
^  03

t<b

o  -
ci
o


C3


S3


o


03
-73


O


I

u

•  rH

03


ri4


C3  tb


03


o
■+2


03

oT

•  r-H

O


03
03

(U  r — 1
ZS  O


03


60  (3
S  03


■-3  5t3

X  "I'

03

°  1


c3


o

03

a
'S

O
•>


O  c3
O  <U


03
•72


.2f


o


42  nP


a  o

03

03  O
03

03


O


03
■73


n3
03

p

-3

03


ja  ^  03
K!  P,^J

!3  CO


2"  S


03
-a


o

Ph


60


'T3
c3


IS.


03
03


g  e  g
a

o

C3


03

X

03


o

rJ3


03

M
ci


a

o
o


"pj


O)

ji  s

O  tn


^^3

03


03


O
n3


o


03


ci
o


03'"  K§


g  ^


o

P3


c3


^  CO

ci  03
-  'T3


3  12"  cT

Jil

60  S

5  CO  ^


O  o


o

ci

oT

 ,  -fj

173  ci
O  ^

o  !^  -S


CD     CD  -+3

^


CO


•  3   •h  a

g  O  tZ!
CO     rP  -tJ


rP        £  riil


«     M  03

O  03


5  g  ?  -3


S  60


03

^  Si

^  1 — ^  03  S
-P     §  '5


CD
!^

O  03
P  !h
_y   ,P     P<  O


.60

a  ^


o  ^
3  ^
o

o


03


o

a


p


(3

03
rP


o
'^3  CO


(1-1

o

oT

03

60

o

CO

P-,  -P

P

a

o

03

CO

o

u

«

03

<D

03

«

oT

he

•S

C3

a

is

a

a

•n

o

o
•*■>

a

'-3

03

03

"a,

rH

Ci

a

to

•  i-H

o

CJ

a

O

rP

CO


rP

o

Ip

oT


o

C3
03
!->

_p"
'5


o
H


rP

o


03


P  Ci

^  o


03
03
P
03


M  hi)  °
c^  IP

S  o

rP


O


5^'    CO  O


M

ci

03
-P

o


„  03


03
03


C3

■  03


03


n.    03  '

1-^     o  -►r


03  -


ci  ci
oj  ^


o

to  CO


P
P

o

CO

n3
P

o


03

Ci

a


rP

CO

Ci


03
P

O
u

p4


1

03

P

•  r-(

1

o

_p

and

CO

fia

03

60

d

ci

ci

P

CO

P

60

a

ome

Tor

P
ci
1 — 1

:tno

bee

and

ree

>^

oT
M

P

03
CC

ci

03

•-^

03

a

P

cr'

2  c  2


388


THE  YORUBA-SFEAKING  PEOPLES.


O  !-«  -1^  — '

^.    -3  ^


o

c3


o
o
u
o


rill

9:  g  ^

O     t-i  o

O  QJ


QJ


QJ


&D  c2  rP     ^  a


-1-3

d

OJ


o


,£3

o  qT

:a  I


C

QJ


to

QJ


O

-4J


QJ


CJ
QJ
QJ
CO
QJ

60
QJ


s  2  ^

QJ    O  o


QJ  •*3

QJ,  T*


QJ

3


QJ  ^
c3  o


O

o


QJ
O

cT


OJ

o
o

CJ

qT

rd

o


o


QJ
O


o


a


o


CJ


^  8


CO

t-i
o


o


rd

S  bo
^  §

bo
9  ^


a  g  ^  53  g


QJ
QJ

m  a

«  o
u

o


a  -s  g

-  fl  -

a


c3

13


„r        -T  QJ


g  ^„
"  bo

n  QJ

a


o

o


QJ  CS


P-i      ^  QJ

CO    fii  ,  i-l


QJ
tS!
QJ
QJ


QJ


•f-H

£    QJ  P-1
^  S  .P


QJ


O


O


53  -T


a

QJ
QJ


O

o

rd


'TIS
QJ

on

\

CO
CO

ecti

d

QJ

o

QJ

d

f-t

!^

erb

d
d

d

QJ

>

o

CJ

C3

o

CO

to

•<-H

C3

bp

d

:«

Ts

CO

'Si

c3

QJ

O

rd

-P

CO

sfixed,
KP.

H

CO

d

CO

qT
o

twee

o

P^

d

QJ


QJ
C

o
o


bo  ^

QJ  S

QJ  O


&o3  1^
d  =J
O  Ph

o  ^  v..

S  ^  §)

CO   .5  'm


73


d

QJ


cs  d

QJ  .-.
d

8  ^

o


« 1


'fe    bo  O


^   .1^  QJ


o  _•

^  -o

aj  QJ

S  QJ

I-

^  bo

»,  OJ

d
o

-  1


CJ
CO

o  u


OJ  -d

QJ  O


QJ

a  o


so    o  £

d  CJ


o


_d
"o


S  QJ  C
^  bo  ^


bo

0

c

C3

'-J3
ci

QJ

conti

d

■f

c

CO

bo

0

QJ

d

•  t— t

-1-3

■£

'bb

c

ci
0

uu

bo

f—.

_c

H

'.S

0

d

'cj^

-3

X

0

0

C

APPENDIX.


389


o


o
cT


o


o

■4J


J3


I


C


o

-4-3


I

!h

CD

O
03


a
3


05
0
O

a

o

CD


9  o


1:3

o    o  *

e4.-i


-4-3

O
03


«  .Si-


bo


^  ^  »;


O    -1-3  S


-t-3

O


60

03


d

03

M


03


o

d  r2

<^  CO


o,


„  O

03  -tJ

M

a


60

d

o5


a

o

o  a


02  03

I-


O


P;  •§  §  =


o;


d

d

-  d

d  03

o  a


1   r

me

are

d  ^

'i-t  03

-1-3

)oil

CO

comp
hink

o

cn    Si  -1-3

)ok,  1:

to

o

03

^  u
■2    03-  °

ate

o

-1-3

Gh

arriv

^  g

cn  ^
C^'S  ft;

d

03


O
03


O

•+3

o


ft;  "5  ^  d"


o

CO


03


03

03

03


g

03  ^


03

oT

g

o

03

o

O

[2

o

03

-<-3

03


O

p

c3  '


ft;  ^


o
o


f-l

o

oT


03

-t3

05


d


o;


S^b;


c3


ft;


I

d  .

O  00

o  c

-"3  '03


d
o
cn

cS

a

o


d


"  03

d  e=


?P    S  rd


60

.5  P

'60  .o

d


03

oT

i  a

O  O


o


60  =:


03  ^

o  «


r—  .5  5


a


■  ^

a"  ''2

03  ^

8


o

tel

o

CO

CO

oge

o

-IJ

-1-3

"Eh

60

a

to

im

_d

'q3

CO

x>

03

a

03

CO

1

o

O

o

CO
!-

*^

03

co"

d

oT

P-i

SO

o

03

to

ti

s

O

d

3

03

d
o
•n

03
-4-3


a

rd
03


03

PL,  O
r/3  CO


03
03


-is  o


ft;  ^


03  .  C3  ^
be        ^  -O

03  O


o


p;


03


Q-i
O

o

CO


CO

to
03

d

a

03


d

o


.  J-


03


O

-4-3


6D

d


O  -4-=

'd

03  CO
U  03

d

03


03
r-d


d  o


03


d
o


o
d


03
60

03


d  o
bo  o

o

r-H  OJ

a  s
St

-s  a


O  o


2  ^  ^


03
0-.


c3

03


r-d  d
o  o
^  o

^  .a

r  ^

ci


THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


o


o

53

moi

Ph

o
-♦J

O

re

JO

o
"o


bo
o


p
o


o


el


0
C

o


a)


i  ^  ^

o  <o


'Of.


O  ~


P.5

c

^  c

-


Cq  ^  K;  ■«  -<


CD


Hz

tn
o


Pj  -P


o
o


o3


CO

o


"  o


o


^ — ^  o


1

s

effac

CO

'o

wi

en

SSI

to

o

ok.

o

o

•-Ci

)ire,  e

shed

-p

-+=

fini

'Ph

rP


CD


go

O

off,

r-l

CJ

and

so

l>
o

Ph

s

be

3

p

o

o

>^

Cl~

eS

<s

-13
tn

p

o

c3

US

O  ci


_p


o


c3


bJD  fi
a  _c3


0)
.JO


ci

<D  CO

bb""


t3

^    p.  a.  .i^  ^
•       cn  CC

^  ^  t;  —


c3

.p
p

o
,£3


<^  Oj
to

CO  o


o

rP

P

QJ
CD


IB


O     p  -(J

.B    !='  i=i

3


C6

a  s

P->  (D

o


CD

o
c


O
O  "3

,  ^    to  03


'3  o

c  -t^

g  o

C3

^  a


03

„  03
03

^  J5


bo

1

c

o

OS

eak:

03

off.

,p

ti-i

o

a

03

p

bo

P

o

.S

&

•  1— I

S

•eak

bo
.5

elt,

he

'PP

rH
P

H

o

CO

oT

CO

bo

'c

c

CO

bo


03

C3  rP


?r  o


to
cj


o

C3

03
O


bo


bp  if

«  I— I  ^

^  6


APPENDIX.


391


are,

o

0)

rike

)pen

c/J

bal

O
-»->

slap

etlii

M

oT

som

g

ain.

can

ith

1c

o

5  .2


o
o


o


>
o

a


^     "  _

XI  la  .a


-+3

^    a;  =3

3  ^


O


.Sin  .S^  -tJ


•  l-H


!=l


O


"  o


^  J  ^


o
X

05


c8  '-I

M  50
O


03
O


™  r— H

bo  60


05  13

03

-u>  ^

c   c  a

P(  GQ  O


03


C3


03


o


bo  .S  a


03


03     O     O     M  H
^   cm   "-5  Hp.

-  o  ^  93  ^


o


'3


03


'  o

13


0)


CO  ^

'±3


03

oT
o


03    Q  ^


03
03

m
O


ft,  ft.


c3
CJ

03

>H

O  03

2  3

03  ^
>  O
03  -U


■k9

O     03       •>  ~


0)

o


03


03

03  M


CS

a

60  -S

.S  «3

03

'o  a

o

I

p  C3


a

o

03  t-i
03

2  03

a  >

oT  "=

03  ,— r

^  03


>

o


03


o  ca

r/j  O


5  03
C3

-  a

-  ^  03
60

PI  cS

^  ra

m

O     C  03

<A  M


H

o

!Z5


§  03
03  3

O
CO

03  13
O

CO


1:3

>  03

o
P


Si,

03

O  60

■is  o

^  .2

-2  o
cii  o

rt  rP

Oh

t-i  03

g  ^

S  03


=4-1  m
O  p

P
03

p

t4-l

o


.9  ■:S

p.  60

2  °


392


THE  YORUBA-SPEAKING


PEOPLES.


o


o  o
o


o  ••-


o


be  g


g


CD

M
a

to  o


o


-C3  ^


1-1


42


■73  <I>


o  a


•4^


O


J4  O


s    -   p  g  e  c

O    bo  ^


p

o
w


o
o


o
n3


pi  bo
Ph  'S

O  Pk  <U


s-i  5


.2^  03  ns  CD  e3
I— H  "rr    a)    (u  M


O


QJ  tU

Ph  -iJ  ^H


<1>  O


o
o


o

O  o

.  -+-3

-  bo  ^
Q  Q  -2


2C3


^  OS

il  PI  S
■g  pi  ^

2  ^
bo


o
•+3


CZ3


a

O)

en
>>

O

a
0

ca


m


C4


a>
o
Pi


CO


■73

O
to


bo  S


bo  I

p  £

■-3  P
bo

.S  ^


,  O  bo


"  2

3  ^

bo

=  C

CJ  ter
Ph


t3  <t

O  ^3

be  ^

o

c

bo  CQ

•E  a

P  o

o  o

Ph

bo  <U


APPENDIX.  393


~       ■  if  S

S3  C  m

O  <B

,2  o  -S

, — I  CJ  .  d)  •

O  _j  Q)

y  ^  cn

§  ^  fl  «

-2  P.  a.


o


d

ush

m
OS
o

o

ba

o

ci

o

J— <

o

o

O

et

o

hen

m  rd        q=i  'T^


he

p-i

a

ick

CO

O

to

foo

C3      ;  O    pj   (D  t3


S    S    C>  O  CO

Sd  ^  a  ^  bo


bo  ^  f3  bo  t-j

"    "    S    I  a.  "  tS  §3

bo  bo  o  S  b£  .S  -43

•5        J3  :3  "  oj  a  pi

P  o  o    cj  ri-^  C

^         ^0  ^  5

S   -3    C  ^  /— s  p    (3  Pj

2         'fen  y  2    d  d

c  S  cn  o  OS  bo  .s


394


THE  Y0RUBA-8PEAKING  PEOPLES.


cS

u
o


<D


C3
O


a>


^  r— I  o


bo  o
O  "


■-a  o


bo


oT
o


to


-    «     O)  P

S  .t^     ^  S  .-g


60
<»

o  ^


c3


a5

E3


o


o

CO


o  <o


O  03


O


E3
O
•  I— I

bo


o  „

„  o


w  2  Ci


0

bb

I'

CI
bo
O

cT


S  ^  ^

eg    0)  ?j

>-  » — I
O


a>

rCl     S     O  3     O  -"T

•■^  Q  q  I  o  q

p  bo


09


TJ  o


03

■  >— 4

bo
o


03


IZl


c3


^    rt    r;  o

=^  1  -ST

bo  >

^  2    ^  =>


a


o
•  1-4

CO

O

■  ID


IB

c3


O


bo
O


-S  -i^^
.«  •?  3

a


P4  ^  bo  CI-


o  ^


05


o


cj

o
+2


o

0

oT
o


c3


C)       J3  ^


c3

a

O
CS


O)

CS  ^

a  .1:^  ^

^  ^  OJ

CD  —  -


03
,P

O
H


5  S


13  I

bo  >


O

H


c3


CO

c4


.2  o

.  bC^


„    CO  -^^


CO
03


O


CO  rrt

E3  03


c3  O


bo  -P

03

^~
1-

C  C3

03"  -p

i  a

O-  o


03


C3

CO


„  o

CO

a

I  °

bo  c3


APPENDIX.


395


1  i"  >.

qui

o

-fj  o

O

(Duro,
0  cease,

De,  or
up,  tie,
make  de

0)


aa  o

O

-is  bo
p


In


O


U

o


+3


c3


o


ho


a)

CO  00

5^


o
.2  .5


^     O    CS  'X


bo


I""

c!

o  C'
U

•~    C3  CJ


C3


.3

o


o

-+3


c3


03  03

g  «

03  ■— T  _Q

03  -

03
03

CD  CT'


a

03

m

03


O
03

bn


03


03


5  -5


o


bo


03

"03

„   00  o

-e  g
^  §^  f=  «

r-i<  03


O  03

S  «
03

a


r-  03


03

03

O  3

C3  S


o  o

S;5  O


o


cs  a  3

O  C3


^  _§  ^  3


S  .2


o

O

C3

O

H


03


03      U5  _

U3  O

P.  O

O      >^  CO

C2  Is
O


O

a

■  03


c3


'o

03


03
CC

rt

PL,

«-  2


C


03

C5
03


CO

CO  H
bo  03


rl3

o

bo


!>3


PS  ^

^  c3
^  O

bo  -?

g  S


2  03
0  t-l

o

03


O

*^    bo  ®

03


bo

bb  ^  —

•Ji^  03  Ei
_£3    rd  C7"

O  bo

a

bo  Id  ^
C     fe  C3

-03  "Ci

bo  S

^  o

03  <^


03


P  s

c

-TS  03

03    r0  ,

t  ^  I

03  .is

o


03


bo  '


03


CO


03

bO

03


396


THE


70RUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


O


CO  O


„  03


05

O  M

o


O
O

CO


^  a

o  p
to

CO


o


13

o


o


o


^  ^  bH
to    o  Ph


ou

rt

o

CO

o

s

o
o


CO

c
o


c  o


o


O


o

Ph


O


.2  2-3


o
o

QJ  CO
id


0

Ph


O


CO    S  o

§  ^  a


1

(D

O

CO

o

c3

a

13

o

par

CD

CO

rao

ran

o

io3


O
&

o


CD

a

o
o

.a


o


T3
O
CO


a>


-  }-<


P-l  o


o

m
M

O  .2

CO  ai


0
cS

o

,P


CO   ,


pH  r3


CO


f-i  CO

Ph  d
O

r  a>

a  o

Ph


bo

a

Si

d

CO

O

o

Ph

Cl

-a

a>

CO

03

be

bo

a

•  i-H

•rH

HJ

o

03

CO

Ph

P

C3


■X3
P
P

p

bJD


n
o


ilar

rP

o

sim

•  rH

rP

rP

floo

05
O
c3

o  .a

05

rO


P

o


o


05
CP


a

a

05


o


o3  c>|


p^^":o

;p   03  ^


o
o

rP


CD
rH
P
rQ


O


P  r-.


a


P

bO^


05  cS
tH  05

rQ  -M


a

05


O
♦J

rH

c3

'Ph
X

W


o


o


bo
P


CD  ^  'r^

P       rn"      O  -5

O     S  -g


P

o  _2
15  ^


bo


bo
P

■  p"'E

,  .a  o

^  :S  55


00

p


-H

be

P  cS


APPENDIX.


397


o

60


o

%  ^

-tJ  o

„  to


rG

^  O


o
PI


^  ^  ^  2

.3  P<


cc
o

•  rH


O  c3
G  cc


s

ft

3

ft

1

c3

'1 — a

fl

rn

o

'o

«^-(

to

up,

ID

ho

CO

=i

in

m

CJ

<1>

ft

ft

CO

CO

S


C2  Q


0^  1^
r-  O

O  ^


o  ^

faO  O


_&0

o


o
bo


ft  ^


O

60


03  ,—<

-a  o

a
o


03  o


o


03
!>
O

a


03


03


o


13
05


I  r-

^  o

03

ft  03
3


n:3
o
o


S   03  o;


03


ft  T3  =4H


OS

CD


bO  g

o  ^


CD


E3
ft


03

q3


1

CO

rG

03

/ — \

03

03

0

doi

c3

■

CO

hunt

rC

to

dislit

.0  sen

go

03
■+3

0

to  cul

sever.

pas

atcli,

luck  (

oT

C/3
C3
rC

1

Tch.

0

'03

«4-l

ft

0

r-*

0

cS

ft

ft

ft

0

03

03
>

o


o
+2


■ft


o

'ft


o3

a>


•^

S3


o
(3


o
o

03  55

o

I  ft


o3


03  ^

03  •TS

o  43

t3


bo


'■3

o


•73
(3
C3
O

bo


bo  o

a

o

bo  ^
c:  CO


bo

a


•3

•  ft  c5

CO  P!

03


ia  f?  c


ft  ^


bo


o

03
CO

s

ft


^  bo


Cj  CO


c3


13
03

-U
O
03

(3
C
o
o


bo

.a

'q3

pq


o


03

«3

'fH

o

!-.
O


^-1

bo


^  03-

S3  O
ci

03  rQ
rd  „

bo  c

^  ft


398


THE  YOliUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


O


3  aJ

t5  ^

o  .5

CO  •  —

cs  gn

Gj  O

"  fen
.f  ^


g


o


60


o


CO  00


o

a


■4-3  ;-i

o

OS  ,<u
a.  o

CO

"  CM

,0  K


io3


•  So


eat,

e3
a>

turn

O

CO

0

C3

inch

thick

1^

t-l


bp


to


CO
O


^-1  w


CO

3
3


.g


5  g

bo  ~
PI  cn

^  .2

o


w  (1/  C


.60

'S


CO

C


O

60
C


60       '2  a3

■~  p-  -


CO


■^3


iO  g


c
o


3


03

. — '  CO

60  J  ^


a;
6£


APPENDIX.


3y9


All  the  primitive  monosyllabic  verbs  have  now  been  grouped  under
these  eight  roots,  except  those  in  the  Yoruba  language  which  begin
with  the  letter  ?•,  and  the  following  :  —

TSHI.

1.  Je,  to  protect,  defend,  receive,  take.  This  probably  belongs  to
Eoot  V.  (c),  and  is  a  variation  of  sho,  to  watch,  observe,  guard
(Yoruba).

2.  Tyu,  to  rub,  brush,  cleanse,  wipe.  This  most  likely  is  a  varia-
tion of  Tsu,  and  belongs  to  Root  V.  (e)  or  (g).  In  the  Fanti  dialect
of  Tshi  it  is  pronounced  Tchu.

GA.

3.  She,  to  fear,  be  afraid  of,  respect.

EWE.

4.  To,  to  own.

5.  Gbe,  to  turn,  twist,  plait,  braid.

6.  Kpo,  to  look,  see,  peep  at,  seek  for,  search.

7.  Fo,  to  be  ready.

8.  Vu,  to  tear,  rend.

YORUBA.

9.  Di,  to  be  less  than,  to  compensate,  retaliate.  This  probably
belongs  to  Root  VIII.

10.  Lu,  to  bore,  perforate,  be  discovered.

11.  Yi,  to  be  tough  or  fibrous.

12.  Yi,  to  move,  turn.

In  Tshi,  Ga,  or  Ewe  the  letter  r  never  commences  a  word,  so  those
commencing  with  that  letter  in  Yoruba  have  doubtless  undergone  a
euphonic  change.  In  some  instances  an  initial  consonant  has  been
dropped.  Thus  Re,  to  be  tired,  faint,  or  weary,  to  fade,  wither,  be
red,  was  no  doubt  originally  Bre,  for  there  is  a  Tshi  verb  Bre,  to  be,
or  get,  tired,  and  also  a  verb  Bere,  to  be,  or  get,  red.  Similarly,
Ru,  to  perish,  be  lost,  putrify,  rot ;  Re,  to  moult,  fall  off"  (of  leaves
or  hair)  ,  Ro,  to  wither,  weaken,  droop,  be  blighted,  were  probably
originally  Bra,  Bre,  Bro,  or  Pra,  Pre,  Pro,  and  belong  to  Root  YII.


400  THE  YOEUBA-SPEAKING  PEOPLES.


(e)  and  (f).  Ri,  to  drown,  sink,  immerse,  lias  perhaps  been  changed
from  Mi;  Ro,  to  sound,  excite,  stimulate,  from  Bo,  and  Ru,  to
sprout,  flourish,  spring  up,  fromi^-w,  or  Fra.

Eecapitulating  our  eight  groups  or  roots,  we  lind  that —

1.  F  signifies  from,  forth,  coming  from,  issuing,  appearing.

2.  H  signifies  surface,  exterior,  outside.

3.  M  signifies  interior,  inside,  middle,  midst.

4.  N  signifies  spreading,  extending,  stretching.

5.  S  signifies  changing,  twisting,  turning.

6.  K  signifies  unity,  completeness,  being  unique.

7.  B  signifies  violence,  exertion.

8.  D  signifies  down,  deep.

These  coincide  with  the  primitive  consonants  of  the  four  languages.
Taking  the  consonants  which  in  Tshi  form,  by  means  of  a  vowel,  the
primitive  monosyllabic  verbs,  we  find  them  to  be  —

b,  d,  f,  g,  h,  j,  k,  m,  n,  p,  s,  t,  v,  w,  y.

In  Ga  and  Ewe  we  get  I  as  well,  and  in  Yoruba  both  I  and  r,  but
these  are  no  doubt  innovations.  Of  the  fifteen  consonants  of  the
Tshi language —

p  has  been  differentiated  from  &,  or  vice  versa.
V  from  /.

g,  always  hard,  is  a  variation  of  k.
j  is  a  variation  of  sh,  from  s.
i  is  a  variation  of  d,  or  vice  versa,
w  originated  from  o  or  u.
y  originated  from  e  or  i.

m  and  n  were  no  doubt  originally  the  same,  though  the  latter
seems  now  to  convey  a  different  set  of  notions.

The  fifteen  consonants  may  thus  be  reduced  to  (1)  b,  p  ;  (2)  f,  v  ;
(3)  k,  g  ;  (4)  h  ;  (5)  s,  sh,  j ;  (6)  d,  t ;  (7)  m,  n  (or  (7)  m  and
(8)  n),  which  agree  with  the  eight  groups  or  roots.

A  few  peculiarities  may  be  briefly  noted  :  —

(1)  The  same  notion  may  be  expressed  by  one  root  in  one  language
and  by  a  totally  different  root  in  another  language.  The  explanation
is  that  the  action  or  condition  is  regarded  from  a  difi'ereni  point  of
view.    Thus  we  get  the  verb  /m,  to  smell  (Ga),  from  the  point  of


APPENDIX.


•iOl


vieT  of  a  smoll  emitted  (Hoot  I.),*  and  Imam,  to  smell  (Tshi),  and
hive,  to  smell  (Ewe),  from  the  point  of  view  of  a  smell  perceived
(Root  IT.),  ilfa,  to  breathe  (Ga),  is  breathing  regarded  as  an
internal  action  (Root  III.)  ;  and  ha,  to  breathe.  (Ewe)  is  breathing
regarded  as  a  motion  of  the  surface  of  the  body.  Ferre,  to  fear
(Tshi),  and  fe,  fear,  fright  (Ga),  are  fear  considered  from  the  point  of
view  of  something  terrible,  harmful,  or  bad  appearing  or  coming
forth  and  causing  fear  ;  while  ehu,  fear  (Tshi),  is  fear  considered  as  a
condition  of  the  body.  This  peculiarity  is  perhaps  best  seen  in  the
case  of  verbs  meaning  to  speak,  utter  words.  Ka,  to  speak,  and  he,
to  say,  tell  (Ga)  ;  Ka-sa,  to  speak,  talk'(Tshi)  ;  and  ke,  to  exclaim
(Yoruba),  refer  to  speech  regarded  as  a  succession  of  words  uttered
singly  and  one  after  the  other  (Root  VI. ).  Be,  to  tell,  narrate
(Tshi)  ;  be  to  tell,  relate  (Ewe)  ;  and  hi,  to  ask,  enquire,  question
(Ga)  ;  refer  to  speech  regarded  as  between  two  or  more  persons  in
juxta  position  (Root  VII.).  Ba,  to  beg,  beseech  (Ga),  and  he,  to
beg,  beseech  (Yoruba)  may  likewise  be  considered  as  speech  regarded
as  the  medium  of  conversation  between  two  persons,  though  these
verbs  appear  more  properly  to  have  reference  to  the  bending  or  pro-
strating of  body  which  is  always  practised  by  supplicants.  Do,  to
say,  speak,  tell  (Ewe),  is  speech  regarded  as  connected  with  the
depths  of  the  month  or  throat  (Root  VIII.).  Se,  to  say,  and  shu,  to
speak  (Tshi)  ;  se,  to  deny,  and  so,  to  talk,  tell  (Yoruba)  ;  is  speech
regarded  as  a  succession  of  changes  of  sounds  or  words  (Root  V.).

(2)  Notions  which  are  closely  allied  and  which  we  might  reason-
ably expect  to  find  expressed  by  the  same  root  in  any  one  language
are  often  expressed  by  different  roots.  Thus  "  fire,"  and  "  to  flame,"
are  notions  closely  allied,  yet  in  Yoruba  "  fire  "  is  ina,  which  is  either
from  na,  to  spread,  extend,  or  from  na,  to  waste  (Root  IV.)  ;  and
"  to  flame  "  is  jo,  which  has  reference  to  the  twisting,  turning,  and
dancing  of  flames  (Root  V.).  The  verb  "  to  burn "  can  only  be
expressed  by  a  combination  of  the  two  in  the  compound  verb  jana.
In  Ewe,  "  fire  "  is  dso,  "the  twister,"  or  "the  dancer"  (Root  V.)  ;
while  "  to  burn "  is  fia,  wliich  refers  to  something  appearing  or
coming  forth,  whence  afi,  ashes  (Root  I.).

(3)  The  same  verb  can  often  be  used  to  express  actions  which

♦  "Whence /«,  burial,  because  corpses  are  always  kept  some  days  before  inter,
ment.

2  D


402  THE   YORUB A- SPEAKING  PEOPLES.

appear  to  be  diametrically  opposed.  Thus  the  Ga  verb  nme  (Root
III.),  can  be  used  to  mean  "  to  open,"  or  "  to  shut."  The  explana-
tion is  that  the  verb  really  expresses  an  action  affecting  the  interior
or  inside  of  something,  and  opening  exposes  the  inside  while  shutting
hides  it  from  view.  The  remainder  of  the  spoken  sentence  explains
to  the  hearer  the  sense  in  which  it  is  used,  or,  failing  that,  the  exact
meaning  is  indicated  by  gesture.*  If  a  man  were  to  say  "  I  nme  a
box  and  took  clothes  out,"  it  would  be  manifest  to  his  audience  that
nme  was  there  used  as  a  verb  "  to  open."  Similarly  the  verb  dsa
(Ga)  is  used  to  express  "  to  divide,"  or  "  to  join."  it  really  means
"  to  effect  a  change,"  and  so  can  only  be  used  with  regard  to  the
division  of  things  formerly  absolutely  united,  or  the  joining  of
things  completely  separate.  It  could  not,  for  instance,  be  used  to
express  a  joining  of  the  two  hands  of  the  same  psrson.

(4)  If  the  same  verb  may  express  notions  which  appear  to  be
diametrically  opposed,  of  course  the  same  root  may.  Thus,  under
Hoot  v.,  we  find  the  Tshi  verbs  so,  to  seize,  catch,  take  hold  of,  and
si,  to  stand,  put,  place,  set  ;  both  of  which  primarily  mean  a  change  of
position.  From  the  notion  of  taking  hold  of,  taking  into  the  hands,
comes  that  of  taking  up,  lifting,  which  is  seen  in  the  secondary  verbs
soa,  to  lift,  carry,  and  sorre,  to  rise,  ascend  ;  and  finally  so  comes  to
be  used  as  a  preposition  "  on,  upon,  above,  up."  By  a  similar  process
the  notion  of  standing,  putting,  placing,  leads  to  putting  out  of  the
hands  and  putting  down,  so  that  fimiUy  from  si  we  get  the  noun  asi,
bottom,  lower  part,  which  is  used  as  a  preposition  or  adverb  in  the
sense  of  "  under,  beneath,  below."  Thus  upon  or  above,  and  under  or
below,  are  expressed  by  the  same  root.  Possibly  the  fact  that  our
verb  "  to  rise  "  really  belongs  to  the  same  root  as  the  old  German
risan,  to  fall,  French  arriser,  to  let  fall,f  might  be  similarly
explained.

*  If  a  language  contained  many  words  such  as  this,  it  is  comprehensible  that
conversation  would  be  difficult  in  the  dark,  when  the  gesture  necessary  to  make
the  meaning  clear  could  not  be  seen.  It  has  been  asserted  that  a  tribe  near  Cape
Palmas  is  in  this  condition,  but  the  assertion  requires  corroboration.

t  Tylor — liesearches,  &c.,  p.  57.


I'iUNTEU  BY  NICHOLS  AND  SONS,  25,  I'AULlAMIi.NT  SXllEET,  WE6T.\1IN5TE1!,  S.W.


rWetlcome  Library  [
