vi : PREFACE.


the several subjects; with references to such passages as appeared to
be mgst important: it was therefore necessary, as well for this purpose,
as in order to procure all possible information that could tend to the
improvement of the work, to look over a select library of books en-
tirely with this view, making notes of the principal subjects discussed
in them, and examining carefully such parts as appeared to deserve
more than ordinary attention. Hence arose a catalogue of references;
respecting which it is sufficient to say, that the labour of arranging
about twenty thousand articles, in a systematic form, was by no means
less: considerable than that of collecting them. The transactions of
scientific societies, and the best and latest periodical publications,
which have so much multiplied the number of the,sources of informa-
tion, constituted no small part of the collection, which was thus to be
reduced into one body of science.


- With the addition of the materials acquifed in making this compi-
lation, and of the results of many original investigations; to: whicla
they had given rise, it became almost indispensable to copy the
whole. of the lectures once more, and to exchange some of them) for
others, which were wholly new; at the same time all possible pains
were taken to discover and to correct every obscurity of expression:or
of argument. Drawings were also to be inade, for representing tothe
reader the apparatus and experiments exhibited at the time of deliver-
ing the lectures, for showing the construction of a variety of machines:
and instruments connected with the different subjects to be explained,
and for illustrating them in many other ways. These figures have been’
extended to more than forty. plates, very closely engraved; and the
execution of the engravings has; been minutely superintended., But
the text of the lectures. has been made so independent of the figures,
that the reader is never interrupted in the middle of a chain of reason-
ing, but is referred, at the end of a paragraph, to a plate, which pee
always a sufficient explanation on the opposite page. |


PREFACE. 4 . = RM


ye bulk of aie. work is not so great, as to seemeibhs for its entire
s unreasonable portion of time or of labour. There may,
“id : ver, fase: some persons who would be satisfied with attending to
oe puted in which it diffets most, from former publications, without
Jeisure or inclination: to study the whole. To such it may be


Jo to bave those subjects pointed out, which appear to the au-
atheros igemevies of their notice,


aketiane of motion have, in the first place, sili
; octet to axioms simply mathematical, than has
wal; ar application of these doctrines to practical
i sme instances been facilitated. The passive
all kinds has been very fully investigated, and
. formed respecting it, which are of
and to the engineer, and which
some very elaborate calculations.


n Buch simplified, and fe Eee ex-
been illustrated by experiments of a
d of reasoning has been applied to the
propagation of sound, either in fluids
s of musical chords; the general prin-
g to half the height of a certain modu-
to all these cases: and a connexion
_sound to be obtained from a given
flexure ofany kind; or, in the case of
sound in a solid and the compressibility in

ne of sound and of sounding bodies in gene-
mn ed Rapretions, and the reas of music


P- of erat the curvature of


viii : PREFACE.


the images, formed by lenses and mirrors, has been correctly investi-
gated, and the inaccuracy of some former estimations has been de-
monstrated.


In the department of physical optics, the phenomena of halos and
parhelia have been explained, upon principles not entirely new, but


Jong forgotten : the functions of the eye have been minutely examined, -


and the mode of its accommodation to the perception of objects at
different distances ascertained: the various phenomena of coloured
light have been copiously described, and accurately represented by
coloured plates; and some new cases of the production of colours
have been pointed out, and have been referred to the general law of
double lights, by which a great variety of the experiments of former
opticians have also been explained ; and this law has been applied to
the establishment of a theory of the nature of light, which satisfacto-
rily removes almost every difficulty that has hitherto attended the
subject.


The theory of the tides has been reduced into an extremely simple
form, which appears to agree better with all the phenomena, than the
more intricate calculations which they have commonly been supposed
to require. With respect to the cohesion and capillary action of
liquids, I have had the good fortune to anticipate Mr. Laplace in
his late researches, and I have endeavoured to show, that my assump-
tions are more universally applicable to the facts, than those which
that justly celebrated mathematician has employed. I have also at-
tempted to throw some new light on the general properties of matter
in other forms: and on the doctrine of heat, which is materially con-
cerned in them ; and to deduce some useful conclusions from a com-
parison of various experiments on the elasticity of steam, on evapora-
tion, and on the indications of hygrometers. I have enumerated, in


a compendious and systematical form, the principal facts which have


os. eS


PREFACE. —
ith respect ito galvanic Oaetinieyy and. I have for-
able to. profit by Mr. Davy’s most important experi~
e lately been communicated to the Royal Society,
already given to this branch of science a nich
and a far greater extent, than it before possessed.

f the work can scarcely be called new, but several’

_which are related, have neriees the notice of

“a i the sciences.
hy ‘het

nents, if I may he allowed to give them that


ce, to which they relate. Among these
nm of mechanics, properly so called, a
of the force by which a body revolves
erties of cycloidal pendulums ; an
animal motions ; a comparison of
ts of different countries; and a convenient.


rs


10 ae “ican ggg ar sien


y ; considerations on the structure of the
, and on the firmness of wedges; and an
roof: for the purposes of machinery of

nt of bars for obtaining ‘rectilinear mo-
t eligible proportions of wheels and
iction of wheel work, and of balances; a
fa tooth for impelling a pallet without fric-


af the effect of temperature on steel springs;
ie best line of draught for a carriage ; an


-


x : PREFACE.


; , bd > >
investigation of the resistance to be overcome. by a wheel or roller;
and an estimation of the ultimate pressure produced by ablow. Si


. In the hydraulic and optical part, may be enumerated an over- |
flowing lamp ; a simplification of the rules for finding the velocity of |
running water ; remarks on the application of force to hydraulic ma-
f : chines ; a mode of letting out air from water pipes; an analysis of
. the human voice; and some arrangements for solar microscopes, and.
for other optical] instruments of a similar nature.


_ In the astronomical and physical division of the work, will be found
a general rule for determining the correction on account of aberration ;
a comparison of observations on the figure of the earth ; a table of
p : the order of electrical excitation; a chart of the variation of the com-.
; pass, and of the trade winds ;. formulae for finding the heat of summer
and winter ;, remarks on the theory of the winds ; and a comparative:

table of all the mechanical ports of a. mate of patoral, bodies. «+


| see oo. Sa of Sites sidniait bie heen thiore fully Wisonieed a in the daisvako
lgvaebi papers, which have,already) been published, in the Philosophi-
cal. Transactions and elsewhere, and which are now reprinted with cor-
rections and additions ; others. are summarily investigated in'the ma
_thematical elements, which form a part of the second volume, or in:


f ; r the remarks, which are EN irae in ‘their, proper dssitoes in the crept
of referepiieps:: gninigido “0% etd Vo iden) edets ae eal hit, ’
Big auc? Yo abort a 1 Deer AAP rE vile cia Pee, ,


re The arrangement of | in whole work is probably « different i in as
respects from any other that has yet been adopted ; the extent of the.


ra ™ ‘ subjects, which have been admitted, rendered it necessary to preserve
a very strict attention to a methodical and uniform system; and it is 7
ee ae pomenrn tink ines be considered as sciehecibeed 2 eae
PA fey ae ; i er He 3 phpein Mere Ww are ee se


‘a work ¢ culated to serve a8 a key, by 'r tneans of
be obtained to all the widely scattered treasures of
will ‘endble’those, who are desirous | “of extieniding
466i Barichlak department, to “obtain ‘expeditiotisly
ooks Cari afford thei." ee rene
FASE 2 Sao ¢* «
rising, that" tis ‘execution of this plan,
1al engagements of a different kind, and for
interruptions, should have occupied more than
signation of the professorship to the publica-
of it is in its nature incapable of perma-
logue must voquy to be continually ex-


the sciences for : a much longer pe-
io intimately connected with mathemati-
provements will always bear a very
er of dnnovations. I do not, however,
e is by any means complete, even with
elieve that the references, which it con-
0 lead those, who may ‘consult the passages
ery author of eminence that has treated of »


ance; but I trust that the number, which
ound inconsiderable; and it would have been’
ected any of reese without some chance of
a ;


*


>


'
*


PREFACE,


of the necessity of a second edition. I have already begun to collect
materials for a work, in a form nearly similar, relating to every depart-
ment of medical knowledge: this work will not, however, be speedily
ready for publication; it will be comparatively more concise than these
‘lectures, in proportion to what has been said and written respecting
physic, but, I hope, much more complete, with regard to all that is
known with certainty, and can be applied with utility.


Welbeck Street,
Soth March, 1807.


i
\
|


Mase xan ti Bealeton Hp are


Sp) st Le ae i a 6 ;
Beteanenieresies CONTENTS, sia hui


et) e Bealtiiie 'ait>


Tt roa | PART THE FIRST. MECHANICS.


Sieaues: Page 1. Lecture v. On confined motion;
42.

Motion limited by suspension, or by a smooth sur-
face; Effect of friction and of rotatory motion; In-
clined plane; 42. ‘Descent in the chords of a circle ;
Velocity of descent; 43. Ascending force; Energy;
Cycloidal pendulum; 44. Laws of pendulums; 45.
‘Swiftest descent; Circular pendulums, 46. Pendu-
lums with resistance; Revolving pendulums ; Compo-
‘sition of vibrations; Regulator for steam engines; 47.
an Circular road; Principle of the least action; 49, 49.

 Lecrure vi, On the motions of sim-


ple masses; 50...
Dalinition of's, woresble body, withowtsngard:to its
extension; 50. Inertia; Centre of inertia; Its pro~
perties; 51. Reciprocal forces; Quantity of motion;
52. Momentum ; Centre of inertia of a system; 53,
“Motion of the centre of inertia; 54. Action and re-
action; Newton’s illustrations; 55. Magnitude of re~
ciprocal forces; 56. Fall of a feather and of a piece
of gold; Lucretius; Relation between forces and dis-
‘tances; 57. Displacement of the earth by the effect
ofa machine; 58.
Lecture vir, On pressure and equi-
librium; 59.
Pressure, a force counteracted; Pressure and mo-
mentum incommensurable ; 59. Laws of pressure in-
cluded in those of motion; Opposition of pressures ;
60. Equilibrium of mechanical powers; Centre of
gravity; 61. Stability of equilibrium; 62. Stability
independent of equilibrium; 63. Situation and mo-
tions of the centre of gravity of animals; 64. Levers
of twokinds; Fundamental property of the lever; 65.
Series of levers; Bent levers; Oblique levers; 66.
Wheel and axis; Wheels and pinions; Double axis;


: ‘Leerure: xv


xiv CONTENTS,


‘6T. Pollies; 68. Blocks; Smeaton’s pullies; 69.
_ Oblique ropes ; Inclined plane ; 70. Wedges; Props, or
shores; 71. Screws; Nuts; Hunter’s screw; 72. De-


termination of mechanical power from virtual yeloci-_


ties; 73, 74.
Lecture vii. On collision; 75.
Motions of various bodies acting reciprocally;
Elastic bodies ; 75. Natare of repulsion ; Paperinpetos
an ivory ball ; Apparatus for experiments on collision}
76. Inelastic bodies; Energy ; 78. Measure of force ;
Relation of labour to. energy, 79, Preseryation of
energy; a of ascending force; Effect of a blow; 30
Rotation; Billiards; Reflection; 81, 82.
‘Lect re ‘rx. On the motions of con-


~al ,a0tom ;

- alo nected bodies; 83. ‘
Rotatory power 83., iGebcdection of the square of
ton’s apparatus ;. Centre of gyration;
G4, Centre of percussion and of oscillation; Free ro-
tation; 85, See corrections. Motion of a stick broken
by a blow 86. . Preponderance ; Greatest effect of
3 Experiments ;, 87, 88. Cautions with regard


pe ft eit reenaien yeni: p Re Au :


Small momentum of machines; ipo. of a
perpetual motion; 91,92.
On drawing,” writing,


“ “and measuring; 93.

_ Subjects, preliminary to the consideration of ptac-
tical ‘mechanics; Instrumental geometry ; Statics ; Pas-
sive strength 5 Friction ; 93, Drawing; Outline; Pen;
Pencil; Chalks; 94. Crayons; Indian ink; Water
colours; Body colours ; 95. Miniatures; Distemper;
Fresco; Oil; 96. Encaustic paintings; Enamel; Mo-
saic work; Writing; 97. Materials for writing; 98.
Pens; Inks Use of coloured inks for denoting num-
bers; 99. Polygraph; Telegraph; Geometrical in-
struments; Rulers; 100. Compasses; Flexible rul-
ers; 101.. Squares; Triangular compasses; Parallel
rulers; Marquois’s scales; 102. Pantograph; Pro-
portional compasses; 103. Sector; Measurement. of
angles; 104. Theodolites; Quadrants ; Dividing engine;
Vernier; Levelling; 105. Sines of angles; 106. Gun-
ter’s scale; Nicholson’s circle; Dendrometer; Arith-
metical machines; Standard measures; Quotation
from Laplace; 107. New measures; Decimal divi~


sions; 108. Length of the pendulum, and of the me-
ridian of the earth; 109. Measures of time; Objec-
tions ; 110. Comparison of measures; Instruments for
measuring; 111. Micrometrical scales ; Log lines; 119.
Lecture x1. On modelling, per-
spective, engraving, and print-
ing; 113.

Copying a statue} Modelling; Casting; 113. Per-
spective; Mechanical perspective; 114. Geometri-
cal pefspective; 115. Orthographical projection;
116; Projections of a sphere; 117.. Invention of en-
graving;’ Wood cuts; 118. Mode of engraving; Rul-
ings Mezzotinto; Etching; 119. Aqua tinta; 120.
Musical characters; Printing;,Copying letters; Print-
ing from stones; 121. Binks eeehadt Stereotype print-
ing; 122. ’
Bedrienste? On statics; 123.
“Weighing; 123. English and French weights ; Ba-
lances; 124.° False balances; 125. Weighing ma-
‘chines’; Steelyards; Bent lever balances; 126. Spring
steelyard; Dynamometer; 127. Animal actions ;
Strength of muscles; 128, Instances of strength;
Progressive motion; 129. Running; Pulling; 130,
Sources of motion; Work of a labouring man; 131.
Temporary exertions; Horses; 182. Wind; Water;
Steam; 133. mereseee Measurement of small
forces; 134. 0 5 ‘
Lecrune stm On passive strength


and friction; 135.

Immediate effécts of force on a solid; 135. Exten-
sion and compression; Rigidity; 136. Measure of
elasticity ; 137." Detrusion ;' Lateral adhesion; Flex-
ure; 138. Cause of irregulatities; Stiffness; 139,
Stiffuess of beams; Hollow beams; Torsion; 140.
Alteration; Ductility; 141. Temper of» metals;
Toughness; Brittleness; 142. Fracture; Strength;
Resilience; Effect of velocity; 143. Limit of strength
or resilience; 144, Qualities of natural bodies; Frac-
ture by simple compression; 145. Strength of lateral
adhesion ; Transverse force; 146. Fracture by flex-
ure; Comparative strength ‘and resilience; far.
Uses of resistances of different kinds ; Coach Spritigs ;
148. Comparison of direct and transverse strength;
Beam cut out of a tree; Hollow masts; °149. "Strong-
est forms of beams; 150. Machine: for measuring


 rault’s ropes; Wheels of carriages; 2

Siisasga farsi tdsariiengin, Comino, 2165!
ite " Bifect! of springs; 217. Aitachment of horses ; ‘Wheel
218; String of baskets or carts; 219. ane
PURE X1x. On modes of chang-
ing the forms of bodies ; 220.
ch ~ Compression; Pressés; Effect’of momentum ; 220,
"7 Printing press; sere 221: Oil mills; Ham-
- mering; Hydrostatic press; Extension; Laminat-
ing machine ; G! $ vice; 222. Wire drawing;
Pottery; Glassblowing; Percussion; 223, Forges;
Goldbeating ; Coining; Stamping; Penetration; 224;
Pile driving engine; 225. Sling ; Bow and arrow ; 226,
Whip; Division ; Cutting instraments ; Slitting mill ;
227. Lathes; Boring; 228. Agricultural instru
ments; Mining; Sawing; 229. Stonecutting; Grind-
ing;, 230, Polishing; 231.  Trituration; Powder
mills; Agitation; Threshing machines; 232. Corn
mills; 233. Kneading; Levigating ; Demolition ;
Bolt drawer ; 234. Burning; Blasting ; 235.
Lecture xx. Onthe history of me-

ehanics ; 236."
’ . Origin of the Grecian learning in Saye: Thales
936. Ionian school ; Italian school ; Pythagoras ; 297 ; &
Democritus; Invention of the arch ; 238. See correc-
tions. Archytas and Eudoxus; Aristotle; Foundation
o of Alexandria; 239. Epicurus; Archimedes; 240.
“Haley, Cumming, Siege of Syracuse; 241. Athenaens; Ctesibiue; 242.
ts of Arnold and Vitruvius; Middleages; 243. British manufactures ;
197. Proper- 244. Anglonorman’ aud Gothic arelitectare; 245,


-


aS ST


xvi


Roger Bacon; Clocks; Engraving and printing; 246.
Leonardo da Vinci; Bacon Lord Verulam ; Galileos
Napier; 247. Laws of collision; Hooke; Barrow ;
Newton; 248. Followers of Newton ; 249. Modern


PART THE SECOND.


Lecrure xxi. Onhydrostaties ; 257.
Hydrodynamics more dependent on experiment than
mechanics; 257. Division of the subject into Hy-
draulics, Acustics and Optics; 258. Hydrostatics ;
Definition of a fluid and a liquid; 259. Surface of a
gravitating fluid horizontal; 260. Surface of a re
volving fluid; Pressure of a fluid; 261. Magnitude
of hydrostatic pressure ; 262. Hydrostatic paradox;
263. Biowing with the mouth and lungs; Pressure
on the bank of a river; 264. Pressure on a concave
surface; Pressure of different fluids ; Equilibrium of
fluids with solids ; 265. Floating bodies; 266. Sta-
bility and oscillations of floating bodies; Buoyancy;
267. Bodies falling in fluids; Hooke’s hemisphere ;
Flexible vessels ; 268, 269. .
Lecrure xx11. On pneumatic equili-
brium; 270. aon

Properties of the air, and of gases; Mercurial co-
umn; 270. Steams and vapours; Weight of the air;
271. Experiments with the air pump; Constitution
of the atmosphere; 272. See Corrections. Measure~
ment of heights; Ascent of a bulloon; Pressure of
the atmosphere; 273. Magdeburg hemispheres; Na-
ture of suction; 274, Barometers; 275. Compres-
sibility of liquids; 276.

Lecrure xx111. On the theory of
hydraulics; 277.

General principle of ascending force; 277. Ber
noulli’s inferences; 278. Velocity of a jet of a fluid;
Ajutages of different kinds; 279. Contraction of a
jet; Effect of a short pipe; 280. Diverging pipe;
Experiments of Bernoulli, Venturi, and Matthew
Young; 281. Discharge through large apertures;
Vessels emptying themselves; 282. Locks; Siphons ;
283, Discharge through a vertical pipe; 284. Ex-
planation; Limit of velocity; Whirlpool; 285. In-
termitting springs; Ascending jcts; 286, Oscilla-
tions of fluids; Waves; 287. Reflection of waves;
988; Height of waves; Experimental exhibition of
waves; 289. Divergence of waves; Combinations of
waves; Applications; 290, Elastic pipes; Circula~
tion of the blood; 291,


CONTENTS.


mathematicians and mechanics; 250, Timekeepers:;.
Journals; Royal Institution; 251. Future prospects;
Use of a catalogue of references; 252. Table of the
chronology of mathematicians and mechanics; 253.


HY DRODYNAMICS.


Lecture xxiv. On the friction of
fluids; 292.

Experiments of Du Buat; Motions of rivers; 292.
Friction and resistance; 293. Examples of the velo~
city of rivers; Velocity at’ different depths; 29%.
Weres; 295. Changes and flexures of rivers; Late~
ral friction; 296. Venturi’s experiments; Ball sup-
ported by a jet; 297. Discharge of long pipes; Bent
pipes; 298. Dilatations of pipes; Effect of tempera-
ture; 299,

Lecture xxy. On hydraulic pres-
sure; 300. *

Pressure of fluids in motion; 300, Counterpres-
sure; Magnitude of the pressure and impulse of fluids ;
$01. Laws of hydraulic pressure; Particular case of
water wheels; Oblique impulse; 302. Distribution
of pressure; $03. Elevation and depression produced
by the motion of a floating body; Form of a ships
Body moving below the surface; 304. Convex sur~
faces; Hydraulic pressure of the air; 305. Concave
surfaces; Great effect ofan increase of velocity;
306. Reflection of a ball or stone; 307.
Lecture xxvi. On hydrostatic in-

struments, and hydraulic archi-


tecture; 308.

Statics and architecture of fluids; Hydrostatic ba-
lance; 308. Hydrometer; Glassglabules; 309, Spe-
cific gravities of particular substances; Mixtures ;
Spirit level; 310. Hydrostatic lamps; 311. Em-
bankments; Dikes: Rivers; $12. Reservoirs; Flood.
gates; 313, Strength of sluices and flood gates >.
Friction; 314. Canals; Piers; Harbours; 315.
Lecture xxvit. On the regulation


of hydraulic forces; 316,
Machinery of fluids; Waterpipes; Siphons; $16.
and valves; 317. Pitot’s tube; Hydrome-
tric fly; Captain Hamilton's hydraulic register ; 318,
Motions of the air; Weight and impulse of fluids ;
Raising weights by the descent of water ; 319. Effect
of velocity ; Overshot wheel ; 320, Undershot wheel ;


CONTENTS. | > yas ‘ vii


wind; 324, os echumcoeneanamand man s Romine; Hutton; Rumford; Du Buat; 364.
preeoveyce yi sii) 1 33 Black ; Montgolfier ; 865. Chronological table ; 366.
xvii ‘On hydraulic ma- Lecture xxxz. On the propagation
3 58 re Ta ea be bal Wik th “of sound ; 367.
wheel 5, Importance of acustics ; Division of the subject; De-
‘ent ruri’s drains finition of sound ; 367. Propagation of gound ; Velocity
328. Water of sound ; $68. Delineation of a sound; 369. Com-

5 of | bodi Transmission of sound
nF] Fore = pa wry ha wis byl conectok Correction on chennk
ing heat ; S71. Testis wpalloevaneegracs,
In liquids; $72. In solids; Divergence sof sound ;
Roll- 373; Reflection of sound; $74. Illustration by

FOF waves of water; Speaking trumpet ; Whispering gallery ;


. Lecture xxxir.' On the veuireenhi
- effects of sound; 378.
Origin of a simple sound; Of a, continued sound 5
378. ‘Musical sounds derived from vibrations ; Open
1) Pipess..Stopped. pipes; $79,. Harmonic _ sounds 5
$3 Ege Cremspartioesy toagttaiel ped ot colabe
r i Lateral vibrations; 380. Flexible chords and mem-
fF rkties) 981. Hgralone Sounds of chords; 382. Loaded
“wire; Revolutions of chords;‘ 883. Vibrations of
elastic rods; 384, Vibratiotis of plates, rings, and
vessels; Mixed vibrations of solids and fluids; 385.
3 Sympathetic sounds; Hearing ; 986. gah nopaaeh
the ear; 387. Delicacy of the ear ; 388.
Uf eneleihoc arte lhe remabd $89.
‘of harmonies; Combinations of sounds; $00.


eae? ‘Rhythm ; apes eatont Diatonié
scale 398, Half notes or sernitones ; 393." Mitior
e mode; Discords ; takes be Udsectpanimedds 3994: Tem-
 Peraiment 5 395. Distinction of the notes ; $96.” ;
Lecrone XXXIV, On musical i instru-
' ments; 397, >

F856 _ Divison of msl istrments; Harp; Lyre; 897.
“and Joha Ber. Harpsichord; Spine ; Pianoferte; Dulcimer; Clavi-
er D. Ber chord; Guitar; $98, Violins of different kinds;
Macias pate, Wanita Marigni ; acai


c


THR
§ ; Pear gag


xviii ; CONTENTS.


human voice; 400. Drum; Stacada; Bell; Harmo-
nica; Vox humana pipe ; 401. Simple wind instru-
ments; Mixed wind instruments; 402. History of
music; Lyre;' Hermes; Terpander; Pythagoras ; Si-
monides; 403. Tibia; Aristotle; Ctesibius; Pope
Gregory; 404. Guido; Bacon; Galileo; Mersenne;
Kircher ; Meibomius ; Wallis ; Newton; Brook Taf-
lor; Sauveur; 405. Lagrange; Euler; Bernoulli;
Dalembert; Sounds of rods; Grave harmonics of
Romieu and Tartini ; Sounds of pipes. Chladni ; 406.
Laplace; Chronological table ; 407. :
Lecrure xxxv. On the theory o'
optics ; 408. :
Importance of optics ; Division of the subject ; De-
finition of light ; 408. - Ray of light; Motion of light ;
Homogeheous mediums ; 409. Reflection ; 410. Re-
fraction ; 411. Polished surfaces; Return of a ray ;
Refractive density ; 412. Index of refractive power ;
Intermediate refraction; Total reflection; 413. Dis
optrics and catoptrics ; Focus ; 414. Plane speculum;
Principal focus; Convergence by reflection ; 415. Con-
cave and convex mirrors ; Prism; Multiplying glass ;
Lens; 416. Effects of 3 Focus of a lens ; 417.
Joint focus; Image ; Optical centre; 418, Curvature
of the image; 419. ~ ;
Lecrure xxxvr. On optical instru-.
ments ; 420. .
» Divergence of light; Photometers ; 420, Measure-
ment of refractive densities; Instruments strictly’
optical; 421. Images formed by Jenses and mirrors ;
Magnifiers ; Simple microscopes ; Globules ; 422. I-
lumination of an image ; BurningGlasses ; Materials
oflenses and mirrors; 493, Images visible in every
directions Camera obscura; 424. Solar microscope 5
425, Lucernal microscopes, Phantasmagaria ; 426.
Astronomical, telescope; Double microscope; 427.
Galilean, telescope; Common day telescope; Dr.
Herschel’s telescope 5 428. Newtonian, reflector $
Gregorian telescope ; Cassegrain's telescope ; Smith's
microscope ; Curvature 'of images in telescopes, 129.
Magnifying powers of telescopess Field glass ; 430.”
Double magnifier; Aberration from colour; Achro-
matic glasses; 431. , Achromatic eye piece; Micro-
meters ; 452, Divided speculum; 433.
Lecture xxxvi. Onphysical optics;
434, f


Sources of light ; Combustion ; Slow decomposition ;
434. Electricity; Friction ; Solar osphoris 433,
Emission’of light ; Velocity of light; Apparent aber-
ration ; 436. Oblique reflection ;/ Diffraction ; Dis-
persion; Colour; 437. Division of the spectrum ;
Light of different kinds; 438., Mixed lights ; Inmita+
tion of white light ; Primitive colours; 439, Mixture
of colours by rapid motion; Combinations 3440. At-
mospherical refraction; Horizontal refraction; 441,
Rainbows ; 442. Halos and parhelia ; 413. Refrac-,
tion of ice ; Complicated halos ; 444. Double refrac-
tion; Iceland spar; Second refraction; Transparent
plates ; 445, 446. °
Lecture xxxviit. On vision $447.

Description of the eye ; 447, Image on the retina ;
Advantages of the arrangement ; 448. Inversion of
the image ;. Instinct ; 449. Sensibility of the retina ;
Focus of the eye; Accommodation ; 450. Change in,
the crystalline lens ; Uses of the iris ; 451. Optome-
ter; Myopic and presbyopic sight; 452. , Single
vision ; Judgment of distance ; 453. Apparent mag-
nitudes of the sun and moon; Aerial perspective 5
Painting; 454. Panorama; Duration of sensations ;
Ocular spectra ; 455, 456.


Lecture xxxtx. On the nature of


light and colours ; 457.

. Theories respecting the nature of light ; 457. Sim-
ple propagation ; Transparent mediums ; 458. _ Uni-
formity of velocity; 459. Reflection and refraction ;
Partial reflection ; 460, Total reflection; 461.. Sources
of light 3 Aberration; Double refraction; 462.
Dispersion ; Colours of thin plates; 463. Alternate
union and extinction of colours; Light admitted by
two holes; 464. Supposed dimensions of undulations ;
Correction ; Stripes in a shadow 5 465, Light passing
through a narrow aperture ; Colours of striated sur—
faces; 466, Curved stripes of colours; Fringes near
ashadow ; 467. Colours of thin plates ; 468. Co-
tours of natural bodies ; 469. Colours of mixed plates ;
supernumerary rainbows; 470. Colours of concave
mirrors; Agreement of the Huygenian theory with
the phenomena ; 471.


LecrureE -x1. On the history of


_ optics ; 472.
Knowledge of the ancients; Empedocles; 479.


:


CONTENTS.’ xix


3 Alhazen ; guer; ‘Porterfield; Jurin; Smith; Dollond ; Hall ,
ge Oeecapall 478. Euler; 479. Lambert; Mathematical opti-

Dominis; Snel. cians; Mazéas; Datour ;» Comparetti ; Priestley ;
itz; Barrow; 480. Delaval ; R. Darwin; Atmospherical refrac-
Grimaldi 476: tion; Wollaston ; Ritter; Herschel ; 481. Laplace ;
3477. Bou- Attempts of the author 482. Chronological table ; 483°


ff THIRD. PHYSics; 485. +
insets ttn Crit oi. Predictions
of Halley and Clairaut 5 $22. Chronological table; 433,
TASTER. ‘xiv, On. the appear-
_ ances of the celestial bodies ; 523:
Cipla dea wie described "afer the teal
ones; Motions of the stars and sun; Motions of the
earth ; 523. Apparent revolution of the sun ; 524.
‘Sun’s apparent diameter ; Length of summer and win-
ter’; Day and night ; Sun’s apparent path ; 525, Cen-
trifugal force ; Places of the stars; Twilight, 526.
Relative positions and phases of the planets; 597.
Phases of the moon : Lunar eclipses ; 528. Eclipses
of the sun; Series of eclipses ; 529. Harvest moon ;
Eclipses of Jupiter's satellites; 530.. Comets; Light
aap Rtg worlds; 531, Fon-
ee teat ee peace. Mars ;
Ni dr pamicd planets ; Jupiter ; 534. Saturn;

planet  $35., ek

Lecture xiv. On Paiel astro-


- nomy; 536.) - tat
Shea aiedsnatiicba} Rin of < itt tha
heavens; Meridian ; 536. Astronomical instruments :
‘Time ; Sidereal day ; Solar day; Equation ‘of time 3

537. Dialling; Chronology ;' 538, Calendar; 539.
Improvement suggested ; Republican calendar ; Me-
~ tonic cycle ; Goldén’ number ; 540. Epact ; Moon’s
yf aware ral Astronomical time ; Quadrants ;
‘Transit instruments ; 541. Hadley’s quadrant ; De-
clinations ; Refraction and parallax ; 542. Latitudes:


planets: Artificial globe ; “ 365”. Planispheres :'506-
Orreries ; 567.

Lxcrore xivi. On Geography ; 568.

Particular account of the earth; Curvature of its

wes Dn te fp iene Ellipti-


xx CONTEN’S.


city; erent of degrees; 569. eee 570.
Climates; Sea and land; Continents; 571. Rivers;
Elevations ; 572, Mountains; 573. Different orders
of mountains; Internal parts of the earth; 574. Den-
sity of the earth; 575. ,

LecrurE xtLvir.


576.

Tides noticed by the ancients ; Daily changes; 576.
Monthly changes; Yearly changes; Connexion with
the moon; Effect of gravitation on a fluid sphere;
577. Primitive lunar tides; Comparison with a pen-
dulum ; 578. Direct and inverted tides; Tides of a
lake; 579. Resistance; Tides of the Atlantic; 580.
Particular modifications; 581, Tides of the Channels,
and of rivers; 582. Inferior and superior tides; Laws
of elevation and of depression; 583, Mode of ob-
serving the tides; Solar tides; Combination of tides;
584. Retardation of spring and neap tides; 585.
Increased height i in converging channels; Combina-
tions in particular ports; 586. Currents; Tides of the
atmosphere; 587, 588.. See corrections,
Lecrure xtviit. On the history


of astronomy ; 589.

Earliest astronomy ; Signs of the zodiac ; 589. Baby-
lonian observations; Chaldeans; Hermes ; Egyptians ;
Chinese; 590. Indians; Greeks; 591. Thales; Py-
thagoras; Meto; Alexandrian school; 592. Erato-
stheues ; Hipparchus; 593. Ptolemy; 594, Arabians;
Persians; 595. Copernicus; Tycho Brahe; 596.
Kepler; 597. Napier; Huygens; Cassini; Gravita-
tion; 598. Newton’s discoveries; Extract from Pem-
berton; 599, 600. British astronomers; Observatory
at Greenwich; 601. Determination of the longitude ;
Late discoveries; 602, 603. See corrections, Chrono-
Jogical table ; 604,

Lecture xzix. On the essential
“properties of matter; 605. /
Importance of minute objects; 605. Definition of


mater; Place of the investigation; 606. Essential


and accidental properties of matter; Extension ; Di-
visibility; 607. Actual division of matter; 608,
Impenetrability; 609. Permeability; Orders of sub=
stances; 610. Repulsion; Apparent contact; Git.
Laws of royelsion; 6.) | Dalton’s hypothesis; Re-


On the » tides;


pulsion of liquids and solids; Reciprocality of repul-
sion; 613. Inertia; Gravitation; Cause of Bravita-
tion; 614. Mathematical conceptions; Newton's
opinion; 615. Constitution of a. medium capable of
producing gravitation; 616. Difficulties; 617.
Lecrure 1. On cohesion; 618.
Accidental properties of matter; Laws of cohesion;
$18. Modification of cohesion by heat; Liquidity; 6197
Superficial cohesion; 620, Bubbles; Form of the sur=
face of a fluid ; 621. See corrections. Magnitude of the
force of cohesion; Ascent between two plates; 622.
Capillary tubes; Horizontal surface ; 623. Detached
portion of a liquid; Lycopodium ; Attractions and re-
pulsions of floating bodies ; 624. Apparent cohesion
of plates; Drop between plates; Oil spreading on.
water; Sponge; 625. Long column supported by
cohesion; Cohesion of solids; More perfect union;
626. Solidity; 627. Cause of solidity; Elasticity 5.
628. Stiffness; Strength; Softness; Ductility ; 629.
-Primary cause of cohesion; 630.
Lecrure tr.


effects of heat; 631.
Division of the subject of heat; Definition of heat
and cold; 631. Excitement of heat; Condensation a


Friction; Count Rumford’s experiments; 632. Ef-


fect of velocity; 633. Pictet’s experiments; Heat
from combustion; 634. Communication of heat;
Conducting powers; Fluids; 635. Radiation of heat;
Mr. Leslie’s discoveries; 636. Differences of solar
and culinary heat; Invisible heat ; Equilibrium of ra-
diant heat; 637. Apparent reflection of cold; Re-
frangibility of heat; 638. Blackening rays; Effects
of heat; Temporary effects; 639. Expansion of
gases; Condensation; 640. Expansion of fluids;
Diminution of cohesive powers; Boiling; Slow eva-
poration; 641, Contraction; Freezing; Expansion
of solids; 642. Liquefaction; Cracks from heat;
648. Permanent effects of heat; Glass drops; Tem-
pering 6f metals ; 644, 645.


Lecture ur. On the measures


_. and the nature of heat; 646.

_ Measures of expansion; Pyrometer; Scale of heat
646. Mixtures; -Suv’s rays, Expansion of solids an nd
feiian Damages: its Mielapit. Peper


On the sources and


CONTENTS. 7 xxi


ncter Different scales; 648. Temporary change of LecTUuRE LV. On magnetism ; 685.
“athermometér; Air thermometers; 649. Capacitics Resémblance of magnetism and electricity; Theory;
——farheats Natural zeros 650. Theory of eapacitiess ga5, Conducting powers; Magnetical substances;
GA. Chemical effects; Latent heat; 652. Mr. 656. Aurora borealis; North and South poles; At-
ve p Intimate nature of heat; Theory <tractions and repulsions; 687. Polarity; Arrange-
Gf caloric; Confotation; 688. Heat = qualitys ment of flingss Directive force; 099, ‘Terrestrial
Newton's opini 15 Vibrations; 654. Mechanical ef magnetism ;- Compass; Dipping needle; Illustra
Ml of vibration ; Chemical effects; Comparison tion; 689, ‘Temporary magnetism: Natural magnet 5
with sound; 655. General inferences; 656, 657- Magnetic poles of the earth; 690. Diurnal changes 5
ed Variation of the declination; Line of no declisiation ;
691. Dip; Artificial magnets; 692. Double touch ;
Magnetic paste; Division of a magnet; 693. Strik-
ing and ringing @ magnet; Hammering brass; Solu-
tion in an acid; 694. Resemblance of polarity to
crystallization 5 695. A
Lecrure xvi. On climates and


winds; 696.
Meteorology; Division of the subject ; Climates;


of temperature; Slow changes; 698. Heat of the
sea; Effect of freezing and thawing; Heat of the at-
mosphere; 699. Summer and winter; Temperatures
of different places; Local variations; 700. Winds ;
Periodical winds; Trade winds; Hadley; 701. Hal-
ley’s theory ; Atmosphere of Jupiter; Greater heat of
the northern hemisphere; 702. Westerly winds;
Local modifications; Monsoons; 703; Land and sea
breezes; Hurricanes; Variations of the barometer;
704, 705.

Lecrure tvit. On aqueous and


igneous meteors ; 706.

Evaporation, and its effects 5 Theory of Deluc and
Dalton; 706. Quantity of water evaporating ; Preci-
pitation; 707. Moisture; Mediterranean; Currents
at the Straights; Attraction of moisture; 708. By
Prévost; Hygrometers; 709. Natural hygrometer ;
Water contained in air; 710. Visible vapour; Dew ;
Mists; 711. Rain; Indications of the. barometer ;
Effects of mountains; 712. Periodical rains; Thun-
der and lightning; 713. Atmospherical electricity ;
"Thunderstorms; 714. Conductors; Sudden conden-
sations; 715. Waterspouts; Aurora borealis; Earth-
and Voleanos; 716. Volcanic countries;
Earthquakes of Calabria; 717. Eruptions of Vesu-


Xxii CONTENTS.


vius; 718, 719. Geological changes; Reality of va-
rious changes; 720. Effects of rivers and of the sea ;
Shooting stars; 721. Falling stones; 722.


Lecture tviit. On vegetation;


723.
* Sketch of natural history ; Minerals;Vegetables ; 723.
Animals ; 724. Distinctions ofanimals and vegetables;
725. Description of a vegetable: ‘Germination ,
Parts of plants; 726. Vessels; 727. Motion of the
sap; 728. Mr. Knight's experiments; Grafting ; 729.
Diseases of plants; Exposure to the air; Linnean
system; 730,731. System of Jussieu; 732.
Lecture 11x. On animal life;


733.

Classification of animals, according to Linné; 733.
Mammalia; Birds; 734. Amphibia; Fishes; 735.
Tosects; 736. Vermes; ‘787. Senses; Nutrition; 738.
Nervous’ system; 739. Nature of the nerves; Dis-
eases; 740. Natural cures; 741.


EXPLANATION OF


Lecture tx. On the history of


terrestrial physics; 749.

General retrospect; Knowledge of the ancients ;
742. Chinese ; Numa; Thales; Anaximander ; Anaxi-
menes ; 743, Pythagoras; Anaxagoras; Democritus;
Heraclitus; Plato; 744. Aristotle; Epicurus; 745. R.
Bacon; Discovery of the compass; Gesner; Aldro-
vandus; Gilbert of Colchester; 746. Variation of
the compass; F. Bacon; Opinions of heat; Drebel ;
747. Harvey; Circulation of the blood; Barometer;
Bauhins; Ray; Willughby; 748. Philosophical so-
cicties; Variation charts;. 749. Electricity; Lin-
hean system ;, Discoveries respecting heat; 750.
Theory of magnetism and electricity; Boscovich;
Hygrometry; 751. Galvanism; Pile of Volta; 752.
Mr. Davy's experiments; Dalton; Rumford; 753.
Herschel; Leslie; Capillary tubes; Laplace; 754.
Advantages to be expectell from modern. institutions ;
755. Chronological table ;. 756.


THE PLATES; 757.


4


Miaedihitider-s
S Rak from the bottom; for “therefor,” P, 146. L. 8, afler “194 insert, 125

c L. 8 from the bottom, for “IX,” read, X.
og eee for “1,” read, V. P. 169. L. 7, for “XIV, read, XIU.

Le IV,” read, P. 176. L. 19, for “the circle,” read, a second

P.196. L. 54.2, from the bottom, for “ If the fric-'
» tion: .to obviate this,” read, Since friction is always”
; increased by an increase of pressure, the-effect of any”
addition to the sustaining force must tend, in some de-
gree, to retard the vibrations, even if the friction be
somewhat less increased than the force propelling the
» balance. In order to obviate this retardation.

P. 238. L. 5 from the bottom, after “ arches,” in-
sert, since they must have left too small a space for
the passage of the water. If, however, we may be-
lieve Herodotus, whom Mr. King has quoted, this was


author, it was built by Nitocris, the immediate suc-
cessor of Semiramis: the stones were united by iron
» and lead, and beams were laid across them, which
were removed at night, in order to prevent the mutual
-~ depredations of the inhabitants of different parts of
the city.

P. 261. L. 19, for “XX,” read, XIX.

P. 267. L. 18, for “ heel,” read, pitch. *


read, corresponding logarithms.

~P. 202. L. 9, for “de,” read du.

P. 420. L. 2, for “more,” read, most.

P. 424, after line 5, insert,

Dr. Wollaston has very ingeniously applied the
effect of the reflection of two plane surfaces, inclined
to each other, to the construction of an instrument for
drawing, which he calls a camera lucida. He usually
employs the internal reflection of a prism of glass, of
which the four surfaces are ground so as to form pro~
per angles with each other. : Tbe image formed by
the first surface is inverted, and the secund reflection
restores it to its original position, but places it ina
direction which is at right angles with the direction of
the object ; so that when we look down through the


the objects immediately before us, while at the same
time the aperture, through which we look, is only partly
occupied by the edge of the prism, the remaining part
being left open, or simply covered with a lens, for the.
adwission of the direct rays of light, by which we may


in reality a kind of drawbridge. According to this’


P. 273. L. 3 from the bottom, omit “ logarithm of.”
L. 2 from the bottom, for “ numbers,”.


prism on a sheet of paper, we see a perfect picture of


Xxiv ADDITIONS AND CORRECTIONS.


see, at the same time, the paper and the pencil to be
employed, for making a drawing or acopy of any ob-
ject placed before us,

P. 425. L. 16, for “XXVII,” read, XXVIII.

P. 464. L. 15, for “ other points at,” read, at other
points,

P. 477. Last line but one, after telescopes,” in-
sert, but with respect to the theory of halos and par-
helia, he was less successfal than Mariotte had been

some years before.

P. 535. L. 7 from the bottom, for “ ecipses,” read,


species. ‘
P. 545... Running title. The numbers of all the


pages are too great by 20.

P. 587. L. 15. .17, for “the attraction .. is pro-
duced,” read, a current is observed in its most ex-
posed parts. .

P. 588, L. 14, 15, for “ on account . . moon’ read,
These currents, as well as the general current of the
sea, have been attributed by. some astronomers to the
immediate attraction of the sun and moon, and of the
satellites of Jupiter, which they have supposed to
act in the same manner as the attraction of the sun
operates in retarding the lunar motions ; but the fact
is, that, according to Mr. Laplace, the disturbing force
of the sun produces this effect on the moon only in pro-
portion as it increases her distance from the earth ;
consequently no such retardation can possibly be pro~
duced by the force of gravitation in the rotation of the
sea or of the atmosphere, and the whole effect must be
attributed to the operation of meteorological causes,
producing first the trade winds, and secondly occa-
sioning, by means of the friction of these winds, a simi-
lar motion in the sea. In the case of the atmosphere
of Jupiter, the effects of heat can indeed scarcely be
supposed to be very perceptible, and the rotation of
this planet being extremely rapid, it is not at all im-
possible that the satellites may exert an action on the
en aE somewhat analogous to the retardation of
the moon’s motion by the disturbing force of the sun.

P. 565, L. 12, for “ Almamoun, picshers son”, read,
rye the son.

603. L. 2. for “ The observations of the transit of

A were twice made in the South Seas”, read, Ob-

servations of the transit of Venus were made with
great care in the South Seas,

At the end, insert, For the latest improvement

that has been made in astronomy, we are also indebted

totbezeal and ingenuity of Dr. Olbers, who, in pursuit


of an opinion which he had formed, respecting the ori-
gin of the three small planets from the separation of
a larger one into fragments, has been in the habit of
of examining monthly that part of the heavens, in
which he supposes the event to have taken place, and
through which each of the bodies must necessarily pass.
He has had the good fortune to discover, in this man-
ner, a fourth planet, which nearly resembles the
three others im its‘appearance, except that it seems
to be considerably larger.

P. 621. L. 29, after “ descriptions,” insert,

We may form some idea of the effects of this mutual
action, by neglecting the force of repulsion, as Clairaut
has done, and attending only to that of cohesion.

P. 622, L. 5... 15, for“ [t may also . . densities,”
read, This mode of reasonii.g is however by no means
sufficient to explain all the phenomena ; for it may be
inferred from it that when the attractive power of the
solid is greater or less than half that of the liquid, the
surface of the liquid must, at its origin, be in the
same direction with that of the solid, instead of form~
ing an angle with it, as it often does in reality. But
the difficulty may be removed by reverting to the ge-
neral principle of superficial cohesion, and by com-
paring the common surface of the liquid and solid
with the surface of a single liquid, of which the attrac-
tive power is equal only to the difference of the re~
spective powers of the substances concerned. In this
manner it may be shown, that if the attractive power
of the solid be equal to that of the liquid, or still
greater, it will be wetted by the liquid, which will
rise until its surface acquires the same direction with
that of the solid ; and that in other cases, the angle of
contact will be greater, in proportion as the solid is less
attractive, A similar comparison is also equally ap-
plicable to the contact of two liquids of different den-
sities.

P. 630. L. 11, for “ one,” read, we.

P. 678. L. 7. for “ when in contact,” read, either
during their contact, or after separation.

P. 702. L.9..28, For “ Astronomers .. years,’?
read, “ nor can ‘any sufficient cause be found, in the
attractions of the celestial bodies, either for the
general easterly trade winds, or for the current of the sea
ina similar direction, which appears to be the imme-
diate effect of their friction on the surface of the water.”

P. 770. Fig, 172, add, The strap itself must how-
ever be made stronger when in the situation B,


= q
: a
“
Ss ‘

*

‘

‘
=
y
F


| MECHANICS.
‘< sor ~


k
4
ji
fj


a E


an.


2HqdU0¢


ie Frege y ag -
F * z: :
® * . F
2
{ 5 3
© ¥ ~ a
3


x


PATUTOAL TO 12009


Piety eae
: TQS Se


OTIHT GAAUTAY
‘ant oe sae ? ~


x‘? er) ‘
> le tes :


sitiiteal me we
at Stirsyre ita: To


ae


near to

who honour the theatre of the

are already acquainted with the na-

d promoters have been endeavouring

y no means superfluous, that I should define

ofthe utility that is likely to be derived from

eans of accomplishing its purposes; in order

bh, without difficulty, the most eligible track

ugh the regions of science; and that those who

ying me in the journey, may know precisely what

and what departments will more particularly arrest
Hy


are merely literary and philosophical, have in general
sed to themselves, to enlighten the understanding by the

yn phenomena, and to exercise the reasoning powers, by
car, B


2 LECTURE. Ie


‘ opening new fields for speculation. Other associations have been more par-

ticularly intended for the encouragement of the arts, of manufactures, and

of commerce. The primary and peculiar object of the Royal Institution of

Great Britain is professedly of an humbler, but not of a less interesting na-

ture. Itis, to apply to domestic convenience the improvements which have 4
been made in science, and to introduce into general practice sachamechanical
inventions as are of decided utility. But while it is chiefly engaged in this
pursuit, it extends its views, in some measure, to the promotion of the same
ends which belong to the particular provinces of other literary societies; and
it is the more impossible that such objects sliould be wholly excluded, as it
is upon the advancement of these that the specifie objects of the Institution
must ultimately depend. Hence the dissemination of the knowledge of
natural philosophy and chemistry becomes a very essential part of the design
of the Royal Institution: and this department must, in the natural order
of arrangement, be anterior to the application of the sciences to practical
uses, -To exclude all knowledge but that which has already been applied to
immediate utility, would be to reduce our faculties to a state of servitude,
and to frustrate the very purposes which we are labouring to accomplish.
No discovery, however remote in its nature from the subjects of daily ob-
servation, can with reason be declared wholly inapplicable to the benefit
of mankind,

It has therefore always appeared to me, to be not only the best beginning,
bat also an object of high and permanent importance in the plan of the In-
stitution, to direct the public attention to the cultivation of the elementary
doctrines of natural philosophy, as well speculative as practical. Those who
possess'the genuine spirit of scientific investigation, and who have tasted the
pure satisfaction arising from an advancement in intellectual acquirements,
are contented to proceed in theirresearches, without inquiring at every step,

what they gain by their newly discovered lights, and to what: practical pur-
poses they are applicable: they reccive.a sufficient gratification from the en-
largement of their views of the constitution of the universe, and experience,
‘in the immediate pursuit of knowledge, that pleasure which others wish to’
obtain more circuitous)y by itsmeans. And it is one of the principal advan-
tages of a liberal education, ia it creates a ounceptibility of an enjoyment
so elegautand.so rational sei 1249 62 bug sasnitmady ayoudug to YISvOueb


7
=


act


INFRODUCTION. ey


tio of my audience, to whose information it.will be
cular ambition to accommodate my lectures, consists of that sex,
sean thd custom of civilised society, is in some measure exempted from
‘that occupy the time and attention of the other
She a leisure hours, which are at the command of females'in the
of ‘society, may surely be apptopriated, with greater satis:
apes the mind; and’to the aequisition of know:
ig uusements as are only designed for facilitating the in+
MK time. The hours thus spentiwill unquestion
means of a little habit, as much more agreeable at the mot
must bé more capable of affording self approbation upon re-
sides, like the seasoning which reconciled the Spartans to

ite diet, they will even heighten the relish for those pursuits
ee exercise is as necessary to mental enjoy-

it health and vigour. In this point of
igitie degree supply the place of a sub-
@ sex or situation in life has denied’ them


ec we must not lose sight of the original ob-
ution; and we must therefore direct our attention
2 some deficiencies which may without sides
scientific principles; and by an ample collection
trative of machines, and of inventions of all kinds,
direct manner to contribute to the dissemination
ledge which is most particularly our object. So that we
[than academies of sciences, and more theoretical than
ment of arts; while we endeavour at the sate time
oceedings, by an annual recurrence to the élement-
ubservient to the purposes of both; and, as far as
practice the newést lights, which may from time to
lar branches of mechanical science. It is thus that
m, what the idolized suphists of antiquity but


TN


A LECTURE }.


verbally professed, to bring down philosophy from the heavens, and to make
her an inhabitant of the earth.


. To those who are engaged in the practical cultivation of various arts, sub-
servient to the conveniences of life, these lectures may be of some utility, by.
furnishing them with well, established principles, applicable to a variety of
cases, which may oceasionally occur to them, where a little deviation from the
ordinary routine of -their profession may be necessary. Unfortunately, the
hands that execute are too often inadequately supported by the head that di-
rects; and much labour is lost for want of a little previous application to the
fundamental doctrines of the mechanical sciences... Nor is, any exorbitant
portion of time or industry necessary for this purpose; for it happens singu-
larly enough, that almost all practical applications of science depend on prin-
ciples easily learnt; and, except in astronomy only, it has seldom been found
that very abstruse investigations have been, of great importance to society,
Our most refined analytical calculations,are by. far too imperfect to.apply to


all possible cases of mechanical actions, that can be proposed; and those pro-


blems which most frequently occur, may in general be solyed by methods.
sufficiently obvious; although, from a want of proper order and perspicuity
in the treatment of first principles, it has often happened that the most ele-
mentary propositions. have hem considered as requiring great study and ap-
plicatiogh hid net


“a We: may also be able to render an important service to society, and to conr
fer,a still more essential benefit on individuals, by repressing the premature
zeal of unskilful inventors. We need only read over the monthly accounts of pa;
tents, intended for securing, the pecuniary adyantages of useful discoveries, in
order to be convinced what, expense, of time and fortune is continually. lavish-
ed on the feeblest attempts to innovate and improve. If we can be successful
in convincing such inconsiderate enthusiasts of their real ignorance, or if we


can show them, that even, their own fairy, ground has been preoccupied, we


may save them from ,impending ruin, and may relieve the public from the
distraction of having its attention perpetually excited by unworthy objects.
The ridicule attendant on the name of a projector has, been in general but too


well deserved; for few, very few, who have aspired at improvement, haye ever


had the patience to submit their inventions to such experimental tests as common


ne nd_to.show that we wish only
a and aie to. sem the


ist. ios asin Seeapiand ‘Gia in
itcan be properly furs — BPs.
neg for apparatus, in whic :
bed in the lectures, will be ;
few other articles may per- :
partigular an explanation. , y
or sho. are already, too far ad- 4
orreading and for. literary conr- ‘
iy *y Our Library. in, time must
hich ‘axe too expensive for the private
Is. which axe necessary to complete
io which xeferences will oceasion~
ces. (Our! Journals, free from,comr
°; from, time’ to;time, with concise ac-
ties in- science and in the useful arts; and
nt to their editors to appropriate, as much
i lant, whateveris valuable in the publications
hen all. the advantages, which may reasonably. be:
tion, be fully «understood and impartially con-
few-persons of liberal, minds. will be indifferent
to-contribute.to.it and to participate in it.
mi) ; ba 3 : H ai
ch forbids the introduction of. any discussions. con-
ofessions, I shall always most willingly submit, and
ers the study of a considerable portion of a
to be of use to mankind in. any of them; and nothing
to individuals or to society, than the attempting to
on an parton conception of a few first principles only.


denice,


6. “LECTURE I.


In physic, the wisest can do but little, and the ignorant can only do worse
than nothing: and anxiously as we are disposed to seek whatever relief the
learned and experienced may be able to afford us, so cautiously ought we
to avoid the mischievous interference of the half studied empiric: in politics
and in religion, we need but to look back on the history of ‘kingdoms and
republics, in order to be aware of the mischiefs sehena ensue, when’ “ fools
rush in where angels fear to tread.”


Deeply impressed with the importance of mathematical investigations, both
for the advancement of science and for the improvement of the mind, I thought
it in the first place an indispensable duty to present the Royal Institution, in
my Syllabus, with a connected system of natural philosophy; on a plan seldom,
if ever, before executed in the most copious treatises: Proceeding from the
simplest axioms of abstract mathematics, the syllabus contains a strict demon-
stration of every proposition which I have found it necessary to employ through-
out the whole extent of natural philosophy. In the astronomical partionly,
some observations occur, ‘unsupported by mathematical evidence: here, how-
ever, it was as impracticable, as it would have been uscless, to attempt to enter
into investigations, which in many instances have been extended far beyond
the limits even of Newton's researches.. But for the sake of those who are
not disposed to undertake the labour of following, with mathematical ‘ac-


curacy, all the steps of the demonstrations on which the doctrines of the me-


chanical sciences are founded, I shall endeavour to avoid, in the whole of this
course of lectures, every intricacy which might be perplexing to a beginner,
and every argument which is fitter for the closet than for a public theatre. Here
I propose to support the same ptopositions by experimental proofs: not that I


consider such proofs as the most conclusive, or as more interesting to a truly”


philosophic 1 mind than a deduction from general principles; but because there
is a satisfaction in discovering the coincidence of theories with visible effects,


and because objects of sense are of advantage in assisting the ‘imagination to


comprehend, and the memory to retain, what in a more abstracted form


‘might bapa excite sufficient attention. Hye Rs ees “ilies chive ata


zs Ui werbjeie Tait) arte ud: mrcatas rel aye sana) Jeera


- This fale of apelin with siialiantnbgtliita;”cistieates F


the principal merit of modern philosophy. — e let the citizen of the


Nae cea dame ss aii pride myself, and congra-


INTRODUCTION. ¥


tulate my-andiencson. the. decided superiority of our own country, in the first
- establishment, and in the subsequent cultivation, of the true philosophy of the
‘operations of nature. T grant that we have at times been culpably negligent
of the labours of others; that we have of late suffered our neighbours to ex-
cel us in abstract mathematics, and perhaps, in some instances, in patient
_ and persevering observation of naked phenomena. We have not at this mo-
ment a Lagrange or a ‘Laplace: what we have, I do not think it necessary
to enumerate: but there is a certain combination of theoretical reasoning with
experimental inquiry, in which Great Britain, from the time of the reforma-
tion of philosophy, has never been inferior to any nation existing. I need

only refer to'the Transactions of the Royal Society, for abundant instances of
ee ice on allude; and I will venture to affirm,


Po eles enn importance to any that have preceded.
the world the true method of the


sick fre that barbarism in which the fol-'
I hoeonbhind tion of their master, had involved
spirit of innovation, under the name |
considerable part of Europe, again been
y that Newton advanced, with one gi-
of twilight into the noon day of science. A
otherwise have been deservedly the boast of
“obscure forerunners of Newton's glories. After
‘men succeeded, each of great individual merit; but,
n of the Newtonian discoveries, they chose tite
ii try, than to wander in search of the brilli-
) to judge of our cotemporaries; but we appear
of more than one philosopher,, whose names -
‘in'the same‘class'with the few that have been
t Out present business to enter into the history of
-supposed to be wholly unknown, we can have
h of the progress of each branch of natural.
ly introduced, after we have finished our inves-
ines belonging to it. _


ode of delivering these lectures, I shall in general in-
the formality of a written discourse, in favour of


eX


~


|
h
|
|
|
|
|


ee a


="


8 -LEUTURE 31.


the advantage of a superior degree of order and perspicuity.’ It would un-
questionably be desirable that every syllable advanced should be rendered per-
fectly easy and comprehensible even to the most uninformed; that the most
inattentive might find sufficient variety and entertainment in what is submit-
ted to them, to excite their curiosity, and that in all cases the pleasing, and
sometimes even the surprising, should be united with the instructive and the
important.’ But whenever there appears to be a real impossibility of recon-
ciling these various objects, I shall esteem it better to seek for substantial
utility than temporary amusement; for if we fail of being useful for want of
being sufficiently popular, we remain at least respectable: but if we are
unsuccessful in our attempts to amuse, we immediately appear trifling and con-
temptible. It shall however at all times be my endeavour to avoid each ex-
treme; and I trust, that I shall then only becondemned, when I am found ab-
struse from ostentation, or uninteresting from supineness. The most difficult.
thing for a teacher is, to'recollect how much it cost himself to learn, and to
accommodate his instruction to the apprehension of the uninformed: by bear-
ing in mind this observation, I hope to be able to render my lectures more
and more intelligible and familiar; not: by passing, over difficulties, but by
endeayouring to facilitate the task of overcoming them; and if at any time I
appear to have failed in this attempt, I shall think myself honoured by any
subsequent inquiries, that my audience may be disposed to make.


We have to extend our views over the whole circle of natural and artificial
knowledge, to consider in detail the principles and application of the philoso-
phy of nature and of art. We-are to discuss a great number of subjects, to
each of which a separate title and rank among the sciences has sometimes


. been assigned; and it is necessary, in order to obtain a distinct conception
’ of the foundation and relation of each subdivision, to pay particular attention


to the order in which the sciences are to be treated, and to the connexion
which subsists between them, as well as to the degree of importance, which
cach of them claims, with regard either to theory or to practice. To insist
on the propriety of a distinct and logical order is unnecessary; for however
superflueus we may deem the scholastic forms of rhetoric, it is confessedly
advantageous to the judgment as well as to the memory, to unite those things
which are naturally connected, and to separate those which are essentially dis-
tinct, When a traveller is desirous of becoming acquainted with a city or


INTRODUCTION. 9


unknown to him, he naturally begins by taking, from some
i a distant view of the distribution of its parts; and in the
manner, before we enter on the particular consideration of the subjects
¢ , it may be of use to form to ourselves a general: idea of the
ee eae are to be placed among them.
pethume pie we oe
Upon the advantages


of mathematical and_ philosophical investigation in
y to enlarge, because no liberal mind can require any:
ced how much the judgment is strengthened, and the
habits of reasoning with caution and accuracy. The
her, on the contrary, in danger, at least in some parts of
0 cosenaieii biassed in favour of natural philosophy ; 4
toa devotion. too much limited to science,
ntion to such literature as an elegant mind always de-
it. As to the practical importance of philosophical
of | arts, it Saeconlne overrated by some, but. no person is
s een too highly estimated, unless he has made
" eve ; that theory is capable of doing; such a one,
te in s : te obliged to confess the insufficiency of our
ver h reason to compli of their fallacy.
eee ‘i
omfine of lectures into three parts, was originally
ecession in which the appointed hours recur: but
nient than any other for the regular classification
eneral doctrines of motion, and their application to all
ure, supply the materials of the first two parts, of
ie motions of solid bodies, and the other of those of
eory of light. ‘The third part relates to the particular
ja of nature, and of the affections of bodies actually
, independently of the art of man; comprehending
f, and the doctrine of the properties of matter, pal of
D0} agents ws fatnaaot it.
Prenceodings ill ieimple and general principles,
combinations in particular cases, is by far the most


10. LECTURE I.


referable to certain fundamental laws. For these laws being once established,
each fact, as soon as it is known, assumes its place in the system, and is re-
tained in the memory by its relation to the rest as a connecting link. In the
analytical mode, on the contrary, which is absolutely necessary for the first
investigation of truth, we are obliged to begin by collecting a number of in-
sulated circumstances, which lead us back by degrees to the knowledge of
original principles, but which, until we arrive at those principles, are merely
a burden to the memory. For the phenomena of nature resemble the scatter-
ed leaves of the Sibylline prophecies; a word only, or a single syllable, is
‘written on each leaf, which, when- separately considered, conveys no in-
struction to the mind; butiwhen, by the labour of patient investigation,
every fragment is replaced in its appropriate connexion, ‘the whole ayy at -
once to speak a perspicuous and a harmonious language.


Proceeding therefore in the synthetical order, we set out from the abstract
doctrines of mathematics, ‘relating to quantity, space, and number, which we
pass over, as supposed to be previously understood, or as sufficiently explained
in the mathematical elements, and go on to their immediate application to
mechanics and hydrodynamics, or to such cases of the motions of solids and
fluids as are dependent on arbitrary assumptions, that is, where we do not
confine our inquiries to any particular cases of existing phenomena. By
means of principles which are deducible in a satisfactory manner from mathe-

. matical axioms, with the assistance only of the general logic of induction,
we shall be able to draw such conclusions, as are capable of giving us
very important information respecting the operations of nature and of art, and

° t to lay down such laws, as, to an uninformed person, it would appear to be be-
yond the powers of reason to determine, without the assistance of experiment.

| The affections of falling bodies, and of projectiles, the’ phenomena of bodies
E . revolving round a centre, the motions of pendulums, the properties of the centre
of gravity, the equilibrium of forces in machines of different kinds, the laws .

of preponderance, and the effects of collision ; all these are wholly referable to i”

axiomatical evidence,’ and are frequently applicable to important uses in prac- |
tice. Upon these foundations, we shall proceed to the general principles of
; machinery, and the application of forces of different kinds: we shall inquire
what are the principle sources of motion that we can subject to our command, —
é ~ > f


| INTRODUCTION. — Me


the purposes for which sineads employed, we shall separately examine the

principal machines and manufactures in which those tes are applied to the

: service of mankind, WIsTeitisge
‘en! hte WP aga», « te re : :

~ Such instruments and machines as are more or ite Scie lnaite subservient

to mathematical purposes, will be the first in order, including all the mechan- ~
ism of literature, the arts of .writing, engraving, and printing, in their various
branches, and the comparison of measures, with each other and with differ-
ent standards; the principles of perspective will also form a useful appendage

to the description of geometrical instruments. The determination of weights,
and of the magnitude of moving forces of various kinds, constituting the sci-
ence of statics, will be the next subject, and will be followed by the con-
sideration of the retarding force of friction, and of the passive strength of
the various materials, that are employed in building and in machinery. s


All these subjects are in part preparatory to the immediate examination of
the mechanical arts and manufactures, which are so numerous and complicated
as not to admit of regular arrangement without some difficulty: they may
however be divided into such as: are principally employed for resisting, for
inodifying; or for counteracting, any motion or force; thus architecture and
carpentry are chiefly intended to resist the force of gravitation: these compre-
hend the employments of the mason, the bricklayer, the joiner, the cabinet
maker, and the locksmith. In these departments it is often of the utmost im-
portance to the mechanic, to recur, especially in works of magnitude, to philoso-
phical principles; and in many other cases, where there is no need of much
calculation, we may still be of service, by collecting such inventions of in-

-artists, as are convenient and elegant, and which, although simple in
their principles, are not obvious in their arrangements; and in the same man-
ner we may be able, in taking a general view of other arts and manufactures,

; to explain their principles, where theory is concerned, and to exhibit practical
\". precedents, where the nature of the subject requires no refined investigation.


' The modification of motion and force includes its communication and alter-
— % : ation, by joints of various kinds, by wheelwork, and by cordage, and its
\y equalisation by means of timekeepers. The subject of wheelwork gives con-
siderable scope for mathematical research, and requires the more notice, as it


athe od


2 : LECTURE f-


has often been inaccurately treated: the consideration of cordage leads us to
that of union by twisting, and by intermixture of fibres; including the im-
portant arts of carding, combing, spinning, ropemaking, weaving, fulling,
felting, and papermaking; which constitute the employment of many mil-
lions of manufacturers, of all ages and sexes, in every part of the world, and
by which the animal and vegetable productions of a large portion of the sur-
face of the globe, are made to contribute, as well to the power and riches of
the individuals who supply them, as to the health and comfort of the public
that consumes. them. The admirable art of the watch and clock maker is a pe-
culiarly interesting department of practical mechanics, it affords employment
for mathematical investigation, for experimental inquiry, -and for ingenious in-
vention; and the perfection, which it has derived from a combination of these
means, does. honour as well to. the nations who have encouraged it, as to the
individuals who have been engaged. in it.


To counteract the powers of gravitation and of friction, is the object of
such machines as are used for raising and removing weights: cranes, friction
wheels, and carriages of all kinds, are referable to this head, and. some of
them have been the subjects of much speculation and experiment. Lastly, to
overcome and to modify the corpuscular forces of cohesion and repulsion, and
to change the external forms. of bodies, is the object of machinery intended for
compression, extension, penetration, attrition, trituration, agitation, and de-
molition. For these purposes we employ presses, forges, rolling, stamping,
coining, and milling machines; the processes of digging, ploughing, and
many other agricultural arts; boxing, mining; grinding, polishing, and turn-
ing; mills of various kinds, threshing mills, corn mills, oil mills, and powder
mills; besides the chemical agents concerned in blasting rocks, and in the oper-
ations of artillery. All these arts are comprehended in the department of me-
chanics, which constitutes the first division of this course. Not that we shall
be able to enter at large into-the detail of each; but having formed a general
outline, we may fill up its particular parts with more or less minuteness, as,
we may find more or less matter of importance to insert in each; and those
who wish to pursue the subjects further, will every where be able to derive
great assistance from the authors whose works, will be mentioned.


The doctrines of hydrodynamics relate to the motions and affections of


INTRODUCTION. 19


Aids, in which we no longer consider each distinct catiiehd that is cape of
_ separate motion, but where we attend to the effect of an infinite number of
particles, constituting a liquid or aeriform aggregate. The general theory of
such motions will be premised, under the heads hydrostatics, or the affections
of liquids at rest, pneumatostatics, or the properties of elastic fluids at rest;
and hydraulics, or the theory of fluids in motion. The practical application
of this theory to hydraulic and pneumatic machines is of very considerable
importance, and is as interesting to the philosopher as it is necessary to the
engineer. The employment of the force of water and wind to the best ad-
vantage, the draining of lands and mines, the supply of water for domestic
convenience, the manoeuvres of seamanship, the construction of the steam
engine, are all dependent upon hydrodynamical principles, and are often con-
sidered as comprehended in the scieuce of hydraulics. Harmonics and optics,
the remaining parts of this division, are more insulated: the doctrine of
sound, the theory of music, and the construction of musical instruments, are
a pleasing to the’intellect in theory, as they are gratifying to the senses in
practice; but the science of optics is not less interesting, and at the same
time far more useful; the instruments which it furnishes are of almost indis-
pensable necessity to the navigator, to the naturalist, to the physiologist, and
_evén to the man of business or pleasure. It is perhaps in this science that
many persons of the greatest genius have been the most happily employed:
The reasons for which it is classed as a division of hydrodynamics will be ex-
plained hereafter. / i

The cofitemplation 3 the particular phenomena of nature, as they are dis-
played in the universe at large, contributes perhaps less to the perfection of
any of the arts, which are immediately subservient to profit or convenience,
than the study of mechanics and hydrodynamics. But the dignity and mag-
nificence of some of these phenomena, and the beauty and variety of others,
render them highly interesting to the philosophical mind, at the same time
that some of them are of the utmost importance in their application to the
purposes of life. In all these respects the science of astronomy holds the first
tank; its uses in assisting navigation, and in regulating chronology, are be-
yond all calculation. Geography, and hydrography, or the particular histories
of the earth and sea, are immediately connected with astronomy. ‘The discus-
sion of the properties of matter in general, and of the alterations of tempera-


14 "LECTURE: L.,


ture to which all bodies are liable, has not hitherto received a distinct appel-
lation as ascience; but both these subjects require a separate’ consideration, and
afford a vast scope for speculation and for observation. » Electricity and magne-
tism are partly referable to the affections of matter, and partly'to, the agency. of
substances which appear to/agree with common matter in some properties, and
to differ from it in others. The phenomena produced: by these agents are
often such as excite a high degree of curiosity to inquire into their causes,
although the inquiry too often terminates only in astonishment; but we have
reason to expect considerable advancement in these scienves from. the singular
discoveries of modern chemists. The utility of the philosophy of electricity
is sufficiently exemplified in the general introduction of conductors for secur-
ing us against lightning, to say nothing of the occasional employment of
electricity in medicine; and since the important discovery of the compass, we
have only to lament that the changeable nature of magnetic. effects so much
limits the utility of that instrament for nautical and geographical purposes.
Of meteorology, and of geology, our knowledge is hitherto very imperfect;
notwithstanding many diffuse treatises which relate to them, we cannot boast
of having reduced them to any determinate laws; and yet there are some me-
teorological facts which well deserve our attention. Natural history is the last
of the sciences that it will be necessary for us to notice; some may think it
superfluous to attempt to give so superficial a sketch of this most extensive
subject, as our plan will allow; but it is still possible to select some general
observations respecting the methods of classification, as well as the philo-
sophy of natural history, which, although very concise, may yet be in some
measure instructive. This third division of the course would properly include,
together with the general properties of matter, and the particular actions of
its particles, the whole science of chemistry, but the variety and importance
of chemical researches, demand a separate and minute discussion; and the
novelty and beauty of many of the experiments with which the labours of our
cotemporaries have presented us, and which will be exhibited in the theatre
of the Royal Institution by the Professor of Chemistry, are sufficient to
make this department of natural philosophy the most entertaining of all the
sciences.


Such is the whole outline of our plan, and such are the practical uses, to
which the arts and sciences, comprehended in it, are principally applicable.


hip Laitaes allies


INTRODUCTION. 15


Before we proceed to the examination of its several parts, we must pause to
ee ee which is the-most generally to be adopted.
It depends on the axiom which has always been essentially concerned in every
of natural philosophy, but which has been more and more em-
ever since the revival of letters, under the name induction, and which
has eeahantitectflbaiaaelet ty’ ‘modern’ metapliysicians, That like causes
produce like effects, or, that in similar circumstances similar consequences en-
sue, is the most general and most important law of nature; it is the founda-
tion of all analogical reasoning, and is collected from constant een by

yrteesitc ra and unavoidable propensity tos eee minds) >

hy bmg eoiod -yveod i's 26d bole

ek aerial oldy, dane can have eeiylomners accurate woncepiiit of cau-
sation, or of the connexion. of a*cause with its effect, than a strong impression
of the observation, from ‘uniform experience, ‘that the one has constantly fol-
lowed the other. We do n6t'know the intimate nature of the connexion by
pera oy a stone to fall, or how the string of a bow urges the
arrow nor is there any original absurdity in supposing it possible
that the stone ‘might ‘have remained suspended in the air, or that the bow-
string might have passed’ ‘through the arrow as light passes through’ glass,
mri itis obvious that we cannot help concluding the stone’s weight to be the
cause x ies anid ‘that'every heavy ‘body will ‘falluinless supported; and
the pressure of the'string to be the cause of the arrow’s motion, and, that if
we shoot, the arrow will fly; if we hesitated to make these conclusions, we
should often pay y dear for our scepticism. This explanation is sufficient to
show the identity of the two expressions, that like causes produce like effects,
and, that in similar circumstances similar consequences ensue. And such 1s.
the ground of argument’ from ‘experience, ‘the simplest principle of reasoning,
after pure mathematical truths ;’*which appear to be so far prior to experi-
ence, as their contradiction’ tvrays implies an absurdity repugnant to the
imagination.


Gaya ago) | oP

In the application of» shadhétion, the greatest caution and circumspection
are necessary; for it is obvious that, before we can infer with certainty the
complete similarity of two events, we must be perfectly well assured that we
are acquainted with every’ circumstance Which can have any relation to their
causes, “The ertor of ‘some of the ancient schools consisted principally in the


16 LECTURE 1.


want of sufficient precaution in this respect; for although Bacon is, with
great justice, considered as the author of the most correct method of induc-
tion, yet, according to his own statement, it was chiefly the guarded and gra-
dual application of the mode of argument, that he laboured to introduce. He
remarks, that the Aristotelians, from a hasty observation of afew concurring
facts, proceeded immediately to deduce universal principles of science, and
fundamental laws of nature, and then derived from these, by their syllogisms,
all the particular cases, which ought to have been made intermediate steps in
. the inquiry. Of such an error we may easily find a familiar instance. We
observe, that, in general, heavy bodies fall to the ground unless they are sup-
ported; it was therefore concluded that all heavy bodies tend downwards:
and since flame was most frequently seen to rise upwards, it was inferred that
flame was naturally and absolutely light. Had sufficient precaution been em-
ployed in observing the effects of fluids on falling and on floating bodies, in
examining the relations of flame to the circumambient atmosphere, and in as-
certaining the specific gravity of the air at different temperatures, it would
readily have been discovered, that the greater weight of the colder air was the
cause of the ascent of the flame; flame being less heavy than air, but yet
having no positive tendency to ascend. -And_ accordingly the Epicureans,
whose arguments, as far as they related to matter and motion, were often
more accurate than those of their cotemporaries, had corrected this,error; for
we find in the second book of Lucretius a very just explanation of the pheno-
menon, ‘4s


“ See with what force yon river’s crystal stream
Resists the weight of many a massy beam.

To sink the wood the more we vainly toil,

The higher it rebounds, with swift recoil.

Yet that the beam would of itself ascend

No man will rashly venture to contend.

Thus too the flame has weight, though highly rare,
Nor mounts but when compelled by heavier air.”


It may be proper to notice here those axioms which are denominated by
Newton rules of philosophizing; although it must be confessed that they
render us very little immediate assistance in our investigations, The first is,


. INTRODUCTION. 17


that “no more causes re to be admitted as existing in nature, than are true,
si for explaining the phenomena to be considered:” the second,

re effects of the same kind are to be attributed, as far as is possible,

to the same causes:” thirdly, “those qualities of bodies which cannot be in-
creased nor diminished, and which are found in all bodies within the reach of
‘our experiments, are to be considered as general qualities of all bodies exist-
ing:” fourthly, “in experimental philosophy, propositions collected by induc-
tion from phenomena, are to be esteemed either accurately or very nearly true,
notwithstanding any contrary hypotheses, until other phenomena occur, by
Fs ol all hs es er |
ake an illustration ‘of’ ‘the remark, |'that these axioms, though strictly true,
are of ‘little real uti in assisting our investigations, I shall give an instance
ctricity. Supposing that we wish to determine, whe-
has weight; we are to inquire whether or no gra-
eerie tet operties which are described in the third rule, and
whether at rule will authorise us. to apply it to the electric fluid, as one of
nose ¢ Hee of bodies, ch MT Ws eaned nor diminished, which
are found in all bodies the reach of our experiments, aud which are
refore to be considered as general qualities of all bodies existing. Now

it ea ‘ to be in he first place uncertain whether or no the increase and di-
minution of gravity, from a change of distance, is strictly compatible with the
terms of the definition; _and in the second place, we are equally at a loss to
decide, whether or no the electric fluid can with propriety be called a body,
for it appears in some respects to be wholly different from tangible matter,
while it has other qualities in common with it. Such are the difficulties of
laying down general laws on so comprehensive a scale, that we shall find it
more secure to be contented to proceed gradually by closer inductions in par-
ticular cases. We shall however seldom be much embarrassed in the choice
of a mode of : rgumentation. The laws of motion, which will be the first
in mediate subjects Of discussion, have indeed sometimes been refered to
experimental evidence; but we shall be able to deduce them ail in a satis-
factory manner, by means of our general axiom, from reasonings purely ma-

; Toe: which, wherever they are applicable, are unquestionably prefer-
able to the imperfect evidence of the senses, employed in experimental inves-


moi


yeh Peery
e ect


setith RAND
ther or no the


Conn


von. 1. D


18


LECTURE IL


ON MOTION.


"THE whole science of mechanics depends on the laws of motion, either ac-
tually existing, or suppressed by the opposition of the forces which tend to
produce it, The nature of motion requires therefore to be particularly ex-
amined at the entrance of the science of mechanical philosophy ; and although
the subject is so abstract as to demand some ‘effort of the attention, being
seldom capable of receiving much immediate illustration, from the objects of
sense, yet we shall find it indispensable to our progress i in the investigation of
many particular problems of importance, to obtain, in the first place, a clear
conception of the properties and affections of motions of all kinds,


One of the ancient philosophers, on being asked for a definition of motion,
is said to have walked across the room, and to have answered, you see it, but
what it is, Icannottellyou. It does not, however, appear absolutely necessary
to appeal to the senses for the idea of motion: for a definition is the resolution
of a complex idea into the more simple elements which composeit; and, in the
present instance, these elements are, the existence of two points at a certain
distance, and after a certain interval of time, the existence of the same points
ata different distance; the difference of the distances being supposed to be as-
certained according to that postulate of geometry, which has in general been
tacitly understood, but which I have expressly inserted in the geometrical part
of my syllabus; requiring that the length of a line be capable of being identi-
fied;. whether by the effect of my object on the senses, or merely i in ima-
gination.


Motion, therefore, is the change of rectilinear distance between two points.
Allowing the accuracy of this definition, it appears that two points are ne-
1


~ £ al


)


oN MOTION, 19


_cessary to constitute motion; ‘that in all’cases when we are inquiring whether
or no: any, body),or ;point-is in motion, we must recur.to some other point
which,we can compare with it, and that if a single atom existed ; alone in the
universe,|it/could neither be said to be in motion nor at rest. _ This may seem
_ in.some measure paradoxical, but itis the necessary consequence of , our de-
’ finitiony and the:paradox is only owing to the difficulty of imagining the ex-
istence of a single atom, unsurrounded by innumerable ied of a space which’
We represent: -to ourselves as” “aasiniaail
"gine oft 6 exioitog lepaites pct tu
>It. has been for want of .a peesise definition of, the term sietion, eid
- authors have fallen into confusion with respect to absolute and relative mo-
tion. For the definition of motion, as the change of rectilinear distance be-
\ tween,two ‘points, appears to be the definition of what is commonly called) re-
lative motion; but,.on a strict examination, we shall find, that what we usu-
ally call absolute motion is merely, relative to some space, which we imagine
tobe, without motion, but which is so in imagination only. The space which
we. call quiescent, is,in'genieral the earth’s sufface; yet we well know, from
astronomical. considerations, that every point of the earth’s surface is perpe-
“tually in motion, and) that.in very. various directions: nor are any material
objects accessible to our senses, which we can consider as absolutely. motion-
Jess, or even as motionless with regard to.each other; .since the continual va-
tiation of temperature to,which all bodies are liable, and the minute agitations
arising from the motions of other bodies with which they are connected, will
always tend to produce some imperceptible change of their distances.


When therefore we assert, that.a body is absolutely at rest, we only mean to
_compare it with some large Space in which it is contained: for that there ex-
ists a body absolutely at rest, in as strict a sense as an absolutely straight line
may be conceived to exist, we cannot positively affirm; and if such a quies-
cent body did exist, we have no criterion by which it could be distinguished,
Supposing a ship to move at the rate of three miles in an hour, and a person
on board to walk or to be drawn towards the stern at the same rate, he would
be relatively i in motion; with respect to the ship, yet we might very properly
“consider him as absolutely at rest: but he would, on a more extended view,
be at rest only in relation to the earth’s surface; for he would still be revolv-
_ ing round the axis of the earth, and with the earth round the sun; and with


20 LECTURE If.


the sun and the'whole solar system, he would be slowly moving among the
"starry worlds which surround them.’ Now with respect to any effects’ within
the ship, all the subsequent relations are of no consequence, and the’chaiige
of his rectilinear distance from the various parts of the ship, is all that needs
to be considered in determining those effécts. Inthe same manner, if the ship:
appear, by comparison with the water only, to be moving through it with the
velocity of three miles an hour, and the water be moving at the same time in
a contrary direction at the same rate, in consequence of a tide’or current, the
ship will be at rest with respect to the shore, but the mutual actions of the ship
and the water will be the same as if the water were ynaaca tie ati nest, add the
ship in motions IVS tot


It is not sufficient to observe the increase or decrease of distance of 'a mov-
ing point from another single point only: .we must compare its successive si-
tuations with many other points surrounding it; and for this’ purpose these
points must be at rest among themselves, in order to be considered as belong-
ing to a quiescent space or surface; which may be defined as-a space or sur-
face, of which all the points remain always atequal distances from each other,
without any external influence. In this sense we must call the deck of the
ship a quiescent surface, whether the ship be at anchor or under sail: but we
must not consider a'surface revolving round a centre as a quiescent surface’;
for it will appear ‘hereafter that no such motion can‘ exist without the influ-
ence of a centripetal force, which renders it improper for determining the af.
fections-of a moving body.


; When! soint is in motion with respect to a quiescent space, it is ofterr
simply denominated a moving point, and the right line joining any two of its
places, immediately contiguous to each other, is called its direction. If it re-
mains continually in one right line drawn in the quiescent space, that line is
always the line of its direction; if it describes several right lines, each line is
‘the line of its direction as long as it continues in it; but if its pat _ becomes
‘curved, we can no longer consider it as perfectly coinciding at any time with
a right line, and we must recur to the letter of the definition, Aas supposing: a
right line to be drawn through two successive points in which it is found, and —

then if these points be conceived to approach ‘each other’ without limit, we
* shall ‘have the line of its direction. Now such a line is called in gennatiy a


.


ON MOTION. 21


ne ts the curve; ‘but does not cut it, eunnidink Sane abe curva-

ed. (Plate I. Fig. anes):

janie toleshi Jocxted :

0 scurate idew of Mi nature of siden, end of the im-

the ‘ens emplse ‘in speaking of its properti¢s, we may proceed to
: nical laws°to which it is subjected, and which are derivable

of the definitions:that have been premised. The first is, that

never quits the line of its direction without a disturbing cause :

g the same with ‘respect to all sides, ‘no reason can! be

wh pointshould:incliné to one side more than another; and

ner juction requites;' that’ the moving point should’ preserve
e one RE similarly situated on every side’ of the


This argument appears: to:be sufficiently satisfactory to give us. ground
t the law of motion here laid down may be considered as in-


2. lt was once proposedias a prize question

im, ‘to determine whether the laws of mo-
ntal; that is, whether they were to be consider-
ical truths. | eo then president of. the


Coram action, \'a’ ‘tines cohith he: sup-
hthe wise economy of nature. But this prin-
to. be capable of accommodation to any other
, ‘and the intricacy of the ‘theory tends only to en-
ec “obscurity; the laws of motion’ appear to be
the:simplést mathematical truths; granting only the
wri ty of matter with respect to’ motion, and allowing the
ke causes produce like effects. » If, however, any: person:
is at liberty to call these laws experimental axioms, col-.
‘ison of various phenomena;)'for we cannot easily reduce
ments, since we-cani never: remove ifrém our experiments
tt s causes; for either gravitation}; or the contact of
Hatenfese with all! La gia on we can ex-


(22 LECTURE 11.


come to consider its uniformity. Here the idea of time enters into our:sub-
ject. To define time in general is neither easy nor récessary;. but we’ must
have some measure of equal times. Our abstract idea of time depends on the
memory jof past sensations; but:it is obvious that the results of;anjintellectual
measure of the duration of time would! be liable to the: greatest uncertainty.
We may observe, that, on a journey, the|perpetual successionof various: ob-
jects will often make a week appear,| upon-retrospection, as long as a month
spent in a continuation of such employments.as are uniform, without being la-
borious; the multitude of new impressions not, only serving toincreasé the ap-
parent magnitude of the interval, by filling up its vacuities, but tending also
to diminish the vivacity of the ideas which they have superseded, andito give
them the character of the fainter recollections, of an earlier date. We are
therefore obliged to estimate the lapse of time by the changes in external ob-
jects: of these changes, the simplest and most convenient is the apparent mo-
tion of the sun, or rather of the stars, derived from the:actual rotation of | the
earth on its axis, which is not indeed an undisturbed rectilinear motion, bit
which is equally applicable to eyery practical purpose. | Hence we obtain, by
astronomical observations, the Well known measures of the Garetiber of time,
implied by the terms day, ee minute, and second,


Now the equality of times being thus estimated hee any one motion, all
other bodies moving without disturbance, | will describe equal successive parts
of their lines of direction in equal times. | And this is the second law of mo-
tion, which, with the ‘former law, constitutes Newton’s first axiom or law of
motion: “ that every body perseveres in its state of rest or uniform rectilinear
motion, except so far as it is compelled by some force to change it.” It ap-
pears that this second law is strictly deducible from the axioms and definitions
which have been premised, and principally from the consideration of the re-
lative nature of motion, and the total deficiency of a criterion of absolute mo-
tion. For, since the velocity of a body, moving without resistance or disturb-
ance, is only a relation to: another body, if the second body has no mechanical
connexion with the first, its state with respect to motion can have no effect
on the velocity of the first body, however great its comparative magnitude
may be: and if a body is at rest, there is nothing to determine it to begin to
move either to the right hand or to the left; if it is at rest with respect to
any other bodies, it will remain in the same condition, whatever the relative


ies ’
as el


ON MOTION. 23
dies may be, wheri compared with thé surrounding objects;


‘This law is also confirmed by its perfect agreement with all
ions, although it is too simple to admit of an’ imiinediate
fe éan never place any’ body in such circumstances as to be to-
m the operation of all accelerating’ or' retarding causes; and
fiom ‘such experiments as we can’ make, ‘would require in ge-
curate determination of the necessary cortections, a Sigler
‘the law which we wish to eribaintzate. 13
pees yews Hetle xiniog ali to sor owt dads

ed, ' sider the motion of a pitgedtie we have only to allow
o¢ of gravitation; Whichso modifies the’ effect, that the bo-
right line, but reinains in the ‘same vertical plane; whence


ae a Which its motion: began, as well as
‘case all’ these planes would’ be indifferent
r ricommon intersection, which could only
peer combining. arguments with observation, we
of the law of the revtilinear direction of undisturb-
direct experiment. Its uniformity is however
te’ examihitin ; ‘yet! froma consideration of the
tnice} “edmbined with the laws of gravitation, we
bicoinciicnce ler: the’ theory ‘with experiment.
tte to persevere in this ‘manner‘in the state of rest or
tion, is called its inertia.
Has 18d & noqu sbile of ohain ei
iinportane?’ to attend to the act peeitlon of motion,
é thati one motion existing at the same time. The
oe at the same time; in ‘the same body, is not
1 thout some difficulty. ‘| It'is in fact only a combina-
of felations that is considered: in the same manner as by
On Of Son to father, “antd ‘brother to”™brother, we obtain
fo wihéle, so By Conibiniing the motion of a man walk-
on of the ship, we determine the relative velocity
‘the earth’s surface. iy tis, however, nécessary, for
, to consider the affections of a space or birtace in


24 LECTURE 1.


motion, and to examine sas it, may, moye in the most eempln manner ‘with
bebiihk hind space. | ati yd bevise r ap: ’
it ry ahi i hy

If any erator of, points move in parallel fines, deseribing equal spaces in
equal times, they, are at, rest with respect to each. other; ; for it,may: easily, be
demonstrated that, the. rectilinear, distance of each, . from each. of the rest, rer
mains unchanged: ,and. if, all, the points of a plane move in; this manner on
another. plane, either, plane may be said, to be in rectilinear. motion with re-
spect to the other. This. is, easily. exemplified by causing one plane to move
on another, so that two or more of its points shall always remain in a given
right line in the second jplane:, as when a square is. made,to slide along/the
straight edge ofa, board, |, the surface, of , the; square is imrgetilinesr, meson
with respect to the board. ,, ABistail Fig.4-), . ; + meth 2oteiv5b
i hod. Stid..no0id ; wh ii 2

If, besides this general motionof ‘the ‘planesany, aia bpietisiada Mienase a
particular motion. in it, the point will .haye two motions with respect to the
other} plane, the one in common with its plang, and, the other peculiar to; it;
self; and the joint effect. of these motions with respect to,the second plane is
called the result of the two motions:, Thus, when a carriage moves on/a per-
fectly level road, all its points, describe parallel lines, and it is in rectilinear
motion with respect to,the road:. its wheels partake of,this motion, but haye
also a rotatory motion of their own;, and the result of the two motions of each
point of the wheels is the cycloid or trochoid that it describes in a quiescent
vertical plane. (Plate I. Fig..5.) en


When an arm is made to slide upon a bar, and a thread, fixed to the bar,
is made to pass, over a pulley at the end of the arm)next the bar, to a_slider
which is moveable along the arm, the slider moves on the arm with the. same,
velocity as the arm on the bar; but if the thread, instead of being fixed to the
slider, be passed again over a pulley attached to it, and then brought back, to
be fixed to the arm, the motion of the slider will be only half,that of the arm;
and this will be true in, whatever, position the arm be, fixed. , Here we have,
two motions in the slider, one in. common with the arm, and the other pecu-
liar to,itself, which may be either equal or unequal to,the first; and. by. trac-
ing a line on a fixed plane, with a point attached to the slider; we may easily
examine the joint result of both the motions. (Plate I. Fig. 6.)


ainsi


ON MOTION. a5


i of any two motions is the diagonal of the parallelogram, of

es would be described, in the same time, by the separate motions;
we have two:lines representing the directions and velocities of the
otions, and from the remoter extremity of each draw a line parallel
) the intersection of these lines will be the place of the moving
end of the given time. This is the necessary corisequence of the
of two ‘motions in the sense that has beén defined; it is also ca-
mplete illustration n by means of the secant that has been de-
i a 2) ed os


otion may be considered as tes rate ‘af any two or more
of composing it in this manner. Thus the line described by
Q sour: apparatus will be precisely the same, whether it be
in the given direction, or made to move on the arm
equal to that of the arm, or, when the arm is in a different
y half that velocity. (Plate I. Fig. 8.)- q
Aegiiog te hw OT 2s ieee)
Th le constitutes the important doctrine of the resolution of mo-
There is some difficulty in i imagining a slower motion to contain, as
seis two more rapid motions opposing each other: but in
ose ourselves adding or: subtracting mathematical
ust relinquish the prejudice, derived from our own feel-
ates the idea of effort with that of motion. When we
tas the result of equal and contrary motions, we use
ntation as when we say that a cipher is the sum of
rei oi ve S serge _ ten and minus


. here. siedbnbved: differs but little im its enunciation
vs of Aristotle, in his mechanical problems. He says,
y has two motions, bearing a constant proportion to
essarily describe the diameter of a parallelogram, of
he ratio of the two motions. It is obvious that this
s the consideration not only of uniform motions, but also,
y similarly accelerated or retarded: and we should scarce-
from the time at which the subject began to be so clear-
E


=—~E


26 LECTURE Ii.


ly understood, two thousand years would have elapsed, before this law began
to be applied to the determination of the velocity of bodies actuated by de-
flecting forces, which Newton has so simply and elegantly deduced from it.


In the laws of motion, which are the chief foundation of the Principia,
their great author introduces at once the consideration of forces; and the first


corollary stands thus; “a body describes the diagonal of a parallelogram by


two forces acting conjointly, in the same time in which it would describe its
sides by the same forces acting separately.” It appears, however, to be more
natural and perspicuous to defer the consideration of Erte until the simpler
doctrine of motion has been peor: examined, | nevib y
qT nto eh nities on ?
We may. eaily apvied to the composition of any number of different motions,
by combining them successively in pairs. Hence any equable motions, repre-
sented by the sides of a polygon, thatis, of a figure consisting of any number
of straight sides, being supposed to take place in the same moveable body, in
directions parallel to those sides, and in the order of going round the figure,
destroy each other, and the body remains at rest. |» We may understand the
truth of this proposition by imagining each motion to take place in succession


» for an equal small interval of time; then the point would describe a small


polygon similar to the original one; and, eae be pee at the end of. every

‘such jaterval, in its original. caituation.s1i iiislempaitor tea ib yi MUE
/ ' rott 0 26 (3. si3fy7 3 » ahi asl i rf Hbiit

-: When 1 the motions to be'c sbined : are SEA ETON itis Bats

Giplaabiahtto resolve each motion into three parts,) reduced, to, the directions


of three, given lines. perpendicular to. each other. , It is easy to find in this
_ manner by addition and subtraction only, the general. result of any number _


of motions. We may describe the flight of a bird, ascending i in an oblique
direction, by estimating its progress niorthwards or southwards, eastwards or


- westwatds, and at. the: same, time upwards, -and we may hus determine its


place as accurately, as certaining the immediate and angular ele
vation. of its path, and i veloci | the disection of its motion, “wish de’


ving art ty pyorcek et a]. ppitent ons Ra brasil als Hi,4 igi Shet ply. dulddu


coals dud ,udinoie mimeaul i iphone nvisen Pignen aot Pbnt ine aps afi ass
Benin shes ee etal @ efaadignt sn Anis & Sab Smus to
: “ial ead Om heed Pes singh yi ind init, wart aye


4 fa5 we ed as


ae


spr kaw Shirts “aida ae HOEROTURE Ti. ~


er i dit Aasittey Scie Rey 4


ON ACCELERATING FORCES.
arab ves sore ‘ i


yaa agen tone alt ct OF [hh yoo : ‘
Wriee hitherto only considered motion as already existing, without any
regard to its origin or alteration; we have seen that all undisturbed motions
are equable and rectilinear; and that two motions represented by the sides of
a parallelogram, cause a body to describe its diagonal by their joint effect.
We are now to examine the causes which produce or destroy motion. Any
cause of a change of the motion’ of a body, with respect to a quiescent space, is
called a force; that is, any cause which produces motion in a body at rest, or
which increases, diminishes, or modifies it in a body which was before in mo-
tion. Thus the power of gravitation, which causes a stone to fall to the
‘ground, is called aforce’; but when the stone, after descending down a hill,
rolls along a horizontal: plane, it is no longer impelled by any force, and its
relative motion continues unaltered, until it is gradually destroyed by the re-
tarding force of friction. Its perseverance in the state of motion or rest in
consequence of \the inertia of matter, has sometimes been expressed by the
term vis inertiae, orforce of inertia; but it appears to be somewhat inaccuraté
to ‘apply the ‘term force to a property, which is never the cause of a change of
motion i in the body to which it belongs.
si ‘eerie lis ira?
tt is a necessary condition in the definition of force, that it be the cause of

a change of motion with réspect to a quiescent space. For if the change were
only in thé relative motion of two points, it might happen without the opera-
tion of any force: thus, if a body be moving without disturbance, its motion
with respect to another body, not in the line of its direction, will be perpetually
changed; and this change, considered alone, would indicate the existence of
arepulsive force: and, on the other hand, two bodies may be subjected to the

action of an attractive force, while their distance remains unaltered, in con-
Sequence of the centrifugal effect of a rotatory motion. (Plate I. Fig. 9.)


$8 LECTURE Itt.


The exertion of an animal, the unbending of a bow, and the communica-
tion of motion by impulse, are familiar instances of the actions of forces. We
must not imagine that the idea of force is naturally connected with that of la-
bour or difficulty ; this association is only derived from habit, since our vo-
luntary actions are in general attended with a certain effort, which leaves an
impression almost inseparable from that of the force that it calls into action.


It is natural to inquire in what immediate manner any force acts, so as to
produce motion; for instance, by what means the earth causes a stone to gra-
vitate towards it. In some cases, indeed, we are disposed to imagine that we
understand better the nature of the action of a force, as, when a body in mo-
tion strikes another, we conceive that the impenetrability of matter is a suffi-
cient cause for the communication of motion, since the first body cannot con-
tinue its course without displacing the second; and it has been supposed that
if we could discover any similar impulse that might be the cause of gravita-
tion, we should have a perfect idea of its operation. But the fact is, that
even in cases of apparent impulse, the bodies impelling each other are not ac-
tually in contact; and if any analogy between gravitation and impulse be ever
established, it will not be by referring them both to the impenetrability of
matter, but to the intervention of some common agent, perhaps imponderable.
It was observed by Newton, that,a considerable force was necessary to bring
two pieces of glass into a degree of contact, which still was not quite perfect
and Professor Robison has estimated this force at a thousand, pounds for every
square inch. These extremely minute intervals have been ascertained by ob--
servations on the colours of the thin plate of air included between the glasses;
and when an image of these colours is exhibited by’means of the solar. mi--
croscope, it is very easily shown that the glasses are separated from each.
other, by the operation of this repulsive force, as soon as the pressure of the


screws which confine them is diminished; the rings of colours dependent on:


their distance contracting their dimensions accordingly. Hence it is obvious,.
that whenever two pieces of glass strike each other, without exerting: a pres-
sure equal to a thousand pounds on a square inch, they may affect each other's:
motion without actually coming into contact. Some persons might perhaps.
be disposed to’ attribute this repulsion to the elasticity of particles of air


adhering to the glass, “but I have found that the experiment succeeds equally


well in the vacuum of the epee i erminesi therefore ‘be contented to ac~


. ON ACCELERATING FORCES, © 89


e our total i ignorance of the intimate nature of forces of every kind;
and we are first to examine the effect of forces, considering only their magni-
tude and direction, hes any regard to their waht

' . ar ees we
he Tt was truly. oun by Descartes, that the state of motion is equally na-
_ tural with that of rest. When a body is once in motion, it requires no fo
68 power to sustain its velocity. If therefore a moving body is subjected
the influence of any force, which acts upon itn the line of its direction, its
; Pa will be either accelerated or retarded, accordingly -as the direction of
the force coincides with that of the motion, or is opposed to it. A stone, for
instance, beginning to fall, or projected downwards, by no means retains the
____ same velocity throughout its descent, but acquires more and more motion every
jnstant. We well know, that the greater the height ftom which a body falls,
: the more danger there is of its destroying whatever opposes its progress. In
the same manner, when a ball is thrown upwards, it gradually loses its motion
by the operation of gravitation, which is now a retarding force, and at last
begins again to descend. 3


_ Team here be prop tnguie wint is the precise meaning of the term ve~
_ to understand sufficiently the common use of the


bun iin a ey ie a correct definition of it. ‘The velocity of a
na id to be the yuantity or degree of its motion, independently of
om of its mass or magnitude; and it might always be measured
in a certain portion of time; for instance a second, if
ions than undisturbed or uniform motions: but the ve-
iderably within the second, and we must therefore
of it than the space actually described in any finite
ever the times be supposed infinitely short, the ele-
ved may be considered as the true measures of velocities.
gh smaller than any assignable quantity, may yet be
h each other; and the reason that they afford a true
y, is this, that the change produced in the velocity,
of time, must be absolutely inconsiderable in com-
e city, and the element of space becomes a true mea-
| velocity, in the same manner as any larger portion. of
re of a uniform velocity..


30 ; LECTURE ITIt. -


When the increase or diminution of the velocity of a moving body is uni-
form, its cause is called a uniform force: the spaces-which would be described
in any given time, with the actual velocity uniformly continued, being always
equally increased or diminished by the action of sucha force. Forexample, if
the velocities, at the beginning of any two separate seconds, be such, that the
‘body would describe one foot and ten feet in the respective seconds, if undis-
turbed, and the spaces actually described become two feet and eleven feet, each
being increased gne foot, the accelerating force must be denominated uniform. _


The power of gravitation, acting at or near the earth’s surface, may, with-
out sensible error, be considered as such a force. Thus, if a body begins to
fall from a state of rest, it describes about 16 feet, or more correctly 16,‘.,
in the first second; if it*begins a second with a velocity of 32 feet, it describes
32 and 16, or 48 feet, in this second. The decrease of the force of gravitation
in proportion to the squares of the distances from the earth’s centre, is barely
perceptible, at any heights within our reach, by the nicest tests that we can
employ.


‘The velocity produced by any uniformly accelerating force, is proportional
to the magnitude of the force, and the time of its operation conjointly. When
the forces are the same, a little consideration’ will convince us that, since every
equal portion of time adds equally to the velocity, the whole velocity produced
’ or destroyed must be in proportion to the whole time; and when the forces
differ, the velocities differ in the same ratio; for the forces are only measured
by the velocities which they generate. Thus a double force, in a double time,
produces a quadruple velocity. That a force producing a double velocity is
properly called a double force, may be shown from the laws of the composition
of motion; for when the equal sides of a parallelogram representing two se-
parate forces or motions, approach to each other, and at last coincide in direc-
tion, the diagonal of the parallelogram, representing their joint effect, becomes
equal to the sum of the sides. (Plate I. Fig. 10.)


The machine invented by Mr. Atwood furnishes us with a very convenient
mode of making experiments on accelerating forces. The velocity, produced
by the undiminished force of gravity, is much too great to be conveniently sub-
mitted to experimental examination; but by means of this apparatus, we can

2


ON ACCELERATING FORCES, : 31


diminish itinany degiee that is required. Two boxes, which are attached to a
thread passing over a pulley, may be filled with different weights, which coun-
‘terbalance each other, and constitute, together with the pulley, an inert mass,
which is put into motion by a small weight added to one of them. The time
of descent is measured by a second or half second pendulum, the space de-
scribed being ascertained by the place of a moveable stage, against which the
bottom of the descending box strikes: and when we wish to determine imme-
diately the velocity acquired at any point, by measuring the space uniformly
described in a given time, the accelerating force is removed, by means of a ring,
be ntercepts the preponderating weight, and the box proceeds with a uni-
so far as the friction of the machine retards it. By
cunt poporion of the preponderating weight to the whole weight of
se ms the: boxes, it is obvious that we may change the velocity of the descent, and
dor echibi the effects of forces of different magnitudes. The most conveni-
ent mode of letting the weights go, without danger of disturbance from their
vibrations, is o hold the lowest weight only, and to allow it to ascend at the

7 aagis “oii I. Fig. M1.)


d is proportional to the time of the action of the |
favitation, ‘ thus modified, is properly called a uni-
y be shown by placing the moyeable ring so as to
ly at two different points: thus the space uni-
by the box alone, is twice as great, when the force
of ten half seconds, as it is after a descent of five.
weight of the bar, we might show in a similar
dina given time is proportional to the force


fy ey


u the Putian of the whole space described in a
th s uniformly i increasing. The law discovered by
ibed is as the square of the time of descent, and
t » space which would be described in the same time
: of the most useful and interesting propositions
ics. Its truth is easily shown from mathema-
ng the time with the base, and the velocity
langle gradually increasing, of which the arca


32 LECTURE IIt.


will represent the space described; and we may observe, by means of Atwood’s
machine, that a quadruple space is always described in a double time, what-
ever may be the magnitude of the force. Of course, if the forces vary, ‘the
spaces are as the forces and as the squares of the times conjointly. (Plate I.
Fig. 12.) ‘ ,

It may also be demonstrated, that if a body falls through one foot in a se-
cond by means of a certain force, it will require a quadruple force to make it
fall through the same space in half a second; and in general, where the spaces
are equal, the forces are as the squares of the velocities. Wherever the space
and the force remain the same, whether the force be uniform .or not, the
squares of any two velocities, with which different bodies enter the space, will
receive equal additions while they pass through it.


When a force acts in a direction contrary to that of the moving body, we
may readily determine the retardation that it produces, by comparing the mo-
. tion with that of a body accelerated by the same force. For the degrees, by
which an ascending body loses its motion, are the same as those by which it
is again accelerated at the same points, when it has acquired its greatest height
and again descends. We may thus calculate to what height a body will rise
when projected upwards with a given velocity, and retarded by the force of
gravitation. Since the force of gravitation produces or destroys a velocity of
S¢ feet in every second, a velocity of 320 feet, for instance, will be destroyed
in 10 seconds; and according to what has been premised, a body will fall in
10seconds through a hundred times 16 feet, or 1600 feet, which is therefore
the height, to which a velocity of 320 feet in a second will carry a body, moving
without resistance in a vertical direction. We may also obtain the same result
by squaring oneeighth of the velocity: thus one eighth of 320 is 40, of which
the square is 1600, the height corresponding to the given velocity; and this
velocity is sometimes called the velocity due to the height.


»
? - 33 52 > a” 5 4 ° x
s obs Telhguatanpoetro ni HAVE
z ar eit fi ta I
aot a Bop eeanse imei Apraalth sathiqivbesie a i=
LA volition exe we ” oult tt CTURE IV, itl Pee Segond eager
apenas paper att pra le gi et : ;
stole re te
Leydele nn of nie as hawt ae perLacrivs FORCES.
shen deta enon ee ME oad oh ; mi 2A
3 lerbwper? Sthgievh, tit “bh besheie diel? : i!

It Teuashaesahnmncthion: the yelocity, amas bea an saalaeeliliy Save; ie


proportional to the time of its action, and the space described to the square of
the time. Weare next to consider the. more complicated cases of the action
of such forces. , When they are directed to a certain point,out of the line of


_ the motion which they affect, they become central forces, .of which we have


an example in the force of gravitation, considered as it governs the planetary
motions; and when this point becomes extremely distant in comparison with
the length of the body’s path, so that the force acts very nearly in parallel


» lines, the body comes under the denomination of a projectile, as, for instance,


ia ball apes tenes or obliquely,


ke accelerating aren therefore, igen to a point out of the line of direc.
fion.of a moving body, .deflects it from that line, and is then usually called a
centripetal force. And the natural tendency of the body to persevere in its
tectilinear motion, unless opposed by such a force, is sometimes called a cen-
trifugal force. How far the term. force -is properly applicable to the perse-
verance of a body i in its rectilinear motion,: may perhaps be liable to dispute.
If we allow the propriety of the appellation, we must extend the definition of
the term force to any change of the relative motion of two points, and we must


also allow the inertia of a body to be justly denominated a force. , The fact,


however, is certain, that all bodies revolving round a centre, havea tendency to
recede from the centre, in the direction of the tangent, and when. this force is
ereeerers: an equal centrifugal force must be exerted,


“The effects. of a Dentcisucel force may be observed in the familiar instance
of a stone placed in a sling, which may be made to revolve in’a vertical diree-


tion, and even at the upper part of its orbit, may adhere, as it were, notwith-
vol I. ° F


34 LECTURE Iv.


standing its weight, to the sling which is above it, in consequence of the ex-


cess of the centrifugal force above the force of gravitation.


It is alsoa centrifugal force that is the foundation of the amusement of a boy
driving a hoop. A hoop at rést, placed on its edge, would very quickly fall
to the ground; but when it is moving forwards, a slight inclination towards
cither side causes the parts to acquire a motion towards that side, those which
are uppermost being most affected by it; and this lateral motion, assisted
sometimes by the curvature of the surface of the hoop, causes its path to de-
viate from a rectilinear direction, so that instead of moving straight forwards,


. it turns to that side, towards which it began to incline; and in this po-


sition, its tendency to fall still further is counteracted by the centrifugal force,
and it generally makes several complete revolutions before it falls. The mo-
tion of a bowl, with: its bias, is of a similar nature; the centrifugal force
counteracting the tendency to curvilinear motion, so as to diminish it very’ con-
siderably, until the velocity is so much reduced, as to suffer it to describe a path
evidently curved, and becoming more and more so as the motion is slower.


© When a body is retained in a circular orbit, by a force directed to its centre,
its velocity is every where equal to that which it would acquire, in falling, by
means of the same force, if uniform, through half the radius, that is, through
one fourth of the diameter. This. proposition. affords a very convenient me-
thod of comparing the effects of central forces with those of ‘simple accele-


_ rating forces, and deserves to be retained in memory. We may in some mea-


sure demonstrate its truth by means of the whirling table: an apparatus which
is arranged on purpose for exhibiting the properties of central forces, although
it is more calculated for showing their comparative than their absolute magni-
tude; for accordingly as we place the string on the pullies, the two horizontal


‘arms may be made to revolve either with equal velocities, or one twice as fast


as the other. The sliding stages, which may be placed at different distances
from the centres, and which are made to move along the arms with as little
friction as possible, are in a certain proportion to the weights, which are to be
raised, by means of threads passing over pullies in the centres, as soon as the
centrifugal forces of the stages with their weights are sufficiently great; and
the experiment is to be so arranged, that when the velocity, having been gra-
dually increased, produces a sufficient centrifugal force, both stages may raise

2 -


ON DEFLECTIVE roncrs. 35


chad iint fly off at the same instant. | But, > for the present purpose, one
of the stages only is required, and the time of revolution may be measured
by a half second pendulum. » We may make the force, or the weight to be
¥ taised, equal to the weight of the revolving body, and we shall find that this
__ body will fly off when its'velocity becomes equal to that which would be ac- (
quired by any heavy body in falling through a height equal to half the dis-
tance from the centre, and as much greater as is sufficient for ee the:
arated oe the machine. (Plate I. Fig. 13.) f 7
ae ete ss sty ; seats Hides ’ ; id
‘coms this proposition we may eholiy calculate the velocity, vith which a
sling of a given length must revolve, in order to retain a stone im its place in
all positions; supposing the motion to be in a vertical plane, it is obvious
that the stone will have a tendency to fall when it is at the!uppermost point
of the orbit, unless the centrifugal force be atleast equal to the force of gra-
vity. Thus if the length of the sling be two feet, we must find the velocity
acquired by a heavy body in falling through a height of one foot; which will
be eight feet in a second, since eight times the square root of 1 is eight; and
this must be its velocity at the highest point; with this velocity it would per-
form each revolution in about a second and a half, but its motion in other
gs of its orbit will be greatly accelerated by the gravitation of the stone, ,


: It may also. me ‘dlamvouitrene, that when bodies revolve in equal sishen,
their centrifugal forces are proportional to the squares of their velocities.
‘Thus,. in the whirling table, the two stages being equally loaded, one of
them, which is made to revolve with twice the velocity of the other, will
lift four equal weights at the same instant that the other raises a single one,
But when two bodies revolve with equal velocities at different distances, the
forces are inversely as the distances; consequently the forces are, in all.cases,
; spare ‘as the ene the velocities, -and inversely as the distances. <5


‘If two dice revolve in equal times at different distances, the pais by
igo they are retained in their orbits are simply as the distances. _ If one of
‘ the stages of the whirling table be placed at twice the distance of the other,
oe & it will raise onins as great d weight, when the revolutions are performed in
; thewame: time.


EC


36 *  (DECTURE “Iv.


In general, the forces are.fis the distances: directly, and as the squares of


. the times of revolution inversely; Thus the same weight revolving ina


double time, at the same distance, will have. its effect reduced to one fourth,


but’ at a double distance the ata will hoots be inereased to a of) its ‘ori- it


Seeneeniscy dy AS fappo dviisobn rb Aes


ey triers:


‘From: these principles we may. dedizee the law which was dieaovcien by


- Kepler, in the motions of the planetary bodies, but which was first demon.
strated by Newton from mechanical considerations. Where the forces vary’


inversely as the squares of) the distances, ‘asin the case of gravitation, the
squares of the times of revolution are proportional to the cubes of the dis-
tances.. Thus.if the distance of one’ body be four times as. great as that of
another, the cube of 4 being: 64, which is the square of 8, the time of its
revolution will be 8 times as great as that of the first’ body. It would be
easy to show the truth of this proposition experimentally by means of the
whirling table, but the proof would be less striking than titons of me simpler
laws which have already been = down. fe

qbigow I gioasey esty cs {1 - Te 7H? zit }

Hitherto’ we have'supposed the orbit of a coenliind: body to ee a saiteee
circle; but it often happens’ in nature; as, for instance, in all the platietary
motions, that the orbit deviates more or less from a circular form; and in
such cases we may apply another very important law which was also disco-
vered by Kepler; that the right line joining a revolving body and its centre
of attraction, always describes:equab areas in equal times, and the velocity of
the body is thereforeialways inversely as’ the Snap earn drawn from: the,
centre: ‘to the ae: pass 2 van I. Fig. wile is Ri ae ee Lae
: The idedi cadilettiin of this law, sgeaitials ios esate was. one: of the most
elegant applications of the geometry of infinites or indivisibles; | a:branch of


mathematics of which Archimedes laid the foundations, which Cavalleri ‘and ;


Wallis greatly advanced, and which Newton brought near to perfection. Its
truth may be in some measure shown by an experiment on the revolution of
a ball suspended by a long thread, and drawn towards a point immediately


“under the point of suspension by: another thread; hich, may eitherbe held
in the hand, or have a weight attached to it. The ball being made to re- _


volve, its motion becomes evidently more rapid when it is drawn by the ho-


ee a


: ‘on berinerin Foner. ; 37


-d Seales when itis sifered to fly


“to:two points, and movirig!a ‘tracing poiitt 's eras
point of ps osama: koa mana Seep two. fixed.points are
__ called, its, foci... The inference respectitig the force: bywhich a bedy may be
+ made to revolve in an ellipsis, was first made by» Newton ; that: is, that’ ithe
force directed to its focus must be inversely as the square of the distance,
_ We have no‘other experimental proof: of\i this: theorem than astronomical ‘ob-
servations, which are indeed: perfectly decisive, but do seciriplogiint iss
anticipated: (Plate DLs Fig. 16.)) ob ors oti nen —s tibdagi:


AMT AD ole it g4-hvsooMe. cod Gow Iti ory dd _ogs-aurt
- There is another general proposition which is sometim: ‘use in the com-
parison of rectilinear and curvilitieat motions.: Two bodies being attracted in
the same manner towards a:given centre,! that. is, with .equal forces at equal
distances; if’ their ‘velocities ‘be: once‘ equal at equal distances;! they, will re-
main always equal atequal distances, whatever be their directions.» For in-
_ stance, if one cannon ball be shot obliquely upwards; and another perpendi-
_ cularly upwards, with the same velocity, the one will describe a curve, and
-—theother a straight line» but) their velocities will always remain equal, (not
at the same instants: of time,» but at/equal distances from the ‘earth's centre,
or after having ascended through equal vertical heights, although in different
directions: ‘This’ proposition’ has usually been made a step in the demonstra-
tion ofthe law of the force by which a body.is made to revolve in an ellipsis;
i - but there'isia much simpler method of) demonstrating that law,. — means of
oy some properties of the curvature of. fad suite vil “tr ile

” ee: ivy tOois w MARS ORO often i

| Tp treating of. the motion of pjicinas the: \feeve of iguiiipion may,
, without sensible error, be considered as: an equable force, acting in parallel
E “lines perpendicular to the horizon. Inireality, if »we ascend a mile from the
‘earth’s*surface, the actual weight of a-body is diminishetabout a two thou-
sandth part) or three grains andia half for every pound; and we may discover
)aaeaiey by means-of the vibrations of pendulums, which become a lit-


ee a a ara


t


38 2295 (LECTURESEV %o


tle slower When’ they are placed on the summits of very high mountains. . Ou


the other hand, a body not specifically heavier thaw water, gains more ‘in
apparent weight on account of the diminished density of the atmosphere at
great elevations, than it loses bythe increase of its distance from the earth.
But both these differences may; in all. common calculations, be wholly diste+
garded. The direction of gravity is always exactly perpendicular to the ho-
rizon, that is, to the surface of the earth, which is somewhat curved, on ac-
count of the earth’s spheroidical figure; but any small portion of this surface
may be practically consideredias a nate: and the vertical says oneisemaawe
to it) as parallel; to: each other, Howte 3 o}

_ The oblique ek wba a projectile may be the SEE understood. by
resolving ‘its velocity: into'two parts, | the! one in a horizontal, ‘the other in a
vertical direction, It appears from the doctrine of ‘the'conrposition of motion,
that the hrm a will not’ be affected by the force of gravitation
acting in.a di on perpendicular to it, and. that it will therefore continue
uniform; and that the vertical motion will also be the same as if the body had
no horizontal motion. :' ‘Thusif ;we let fall from the head of the mast of ashipa
weight, which partakes of its progressive motion, the weight will descend by
the side of the mast in the same manner, and with the same relative reser:
as if paishes the ship nor the weight had any panera motion,


We may therefore always determine the grestent height to which a projectile


will rise, by finding the height from which a body must fall, in order to gain:


a velocity equal to/its vertical velocity, or its velocity of ascent, that is, by


squaring one eighth of the number of feet»that it would rise in the first second |


if it were not retarded. For example, suppose a musket to'be so elevated that
the muzzle is. higher than the but-end by half of the length, thats, at an
angle of 30°; and let the ball. be discharged with a velocity of 1000 feet ina
second; ‘then its vertical velocity will be half as great, or 500 feet in a second:
now the square of one eighth of 500 is 3906, consequently. the height to which
the ball would vise, if unresisted by the air, is 8906 feet, or three quarters of a
mile. But in factya musket ball, actually shot upwards, with a velocity of 1670
feet in a second, whi /rise six or seven: miles | in a vacuum, is so re-
tarded by the air,

j vitigavd dante wahiobwen ty aditsidiesen So equa? Lime ee 1% rt a


ae


‘ loes not attain the height of a single mile. Rbnne.


i i


ON DEFLECTIVE FORCES. 39


We may easily find the time of the body’s ascent from its initial velocity ;
for the'timé of ascent is directly proportional to the velocity, and may be found
imseconds by dividing: the vertical velocity in'feet by 323 or if we divide by
have the time of ascent and descent; and then the horizontal
range may be found; »by calculating the‘distance deseribed in this time, withthe
uniform horizontal velocity.» ‘Thus, in the example that we have assumed, di-
) 6, we have 311 seconds for the whole time of therange ; but tlie
: Jiypdtcitase 06, olir-txlinghe being: 1000; and the perpendicular 500, ‘the base
will be 886 feet; consequently the horizontal range is 31 times 886, that is,
nearly 28000 feet, or above 5 miles. But ca syeeeenee at the eve will reduce
Se xa: ed caret
SA tae he vO a Tyas! elo port basests ddl sgl ovhee ss
Hilt tnpbecdedataytodiestichorisontal carpi a body; projected witha
___ given velocity; is always proportional to the sine of twice the angle of élevation:
that is, to'the elevationof the'muzzle of tlie piece ina situation’ twice asiremote
_ from a horizontal position as its actual situation.’ Herice it'follows, that'the
__ greatest horizontal range will be when the elevation is half a right angle; sup-
. Se ra, But the resistance of the air increases
with : ; and the same cause also makes the angle of descent
f' ascent, as we may observe in the track of a
For aches ‘the best elevation is’ somewhat less than 45°,
imes, when the velocity is very great, as little as 30°. But it usually
im the operations of tart causes, that near the point where any
t “or least; its: variation i is slower than elsewhere: a small
the angile of elevation, is of little consequence to the ex-
d that it continue’ between the limits of 45° and 35°;
he angular adjustment requires less wecuracy in this
er, whiely besides ‘the economy of powder, makes it it
Betice. (Plate Mi igi 175 °18.)° 9"
by yes mj Asem s90 ‘to oor yw sint ial :
, supposed to niove without sesiotiaedly ‘is always a
proposition’ was ‘first discovered by Galileo: ‘it fol-
doétrine of the composition of’ motion, combined
er established'concerning the fall of heavy
1y points’ o ifn piven right line; as many ‘lines be drawn,
and proportional to thé’squares of the corresponding


aT


40 2395 CECTURE IMs vo


segments of ‘thé first: line; the. curve in which all their extremities are found,
is.a parabola,, Now supposing the; first dineto be placed in the direction of
the initial, motion of a projectile, and! patallel ) vertical; lines, to! be drawn
gh any: points of it, ) propdrtional:to. the.squares of thé segments which

cut off, these, lines) will, represent» the effect of, gravitation, | during the
times in. which the same! segments, would have |been described, by the motion
of projection.alone; consequently the projectile will always be foundat the éx-
tremity of the vertical line conesponding: tothe, time elapsed, and-will thee:
fore describe a parabola, o¢Plate: ul. Figs) 1, IB:}oupsenod ; 1902 3 ti

tiene lt Ae. voaeseieor ols sic a a gba a
It is easy to slow by RS that the wath of a projectile isa perth
if we only let a ball descend from a certain point, along a groove, so as to ac-
quire. a known velocity, we may itrace on;,board)the parabola, which it will
afterwards describe, during) its free descent; and by: placing, rings, at different
parts of the curve, | we:may,,obseryethat it: wall pass nae them allavithout
sents a Figw ID )etix Iwtog eters btewsitoe
thw Meck is Kelpie dea diay aa a ig

lin poetical cases; on. a, fares scale, where the. sblopiiges of: a drvjecsilo: is
considerable, the resistance, of the atmosphere, is; so|great As’ ‘to-render the Ga-
lilean propositions of little or no use ;,and:a| complete determination of the
path, including all the circumstances. which may influence: it,’ <is attended
with ditiiculties almost insuperable. It appears. from, Robins’s experiments,
that the resistance of the airto an,izon ball of 4}-inches,in diameter, moving
at the.rate of 800 feet im a second, is equal to four, times its weight, and that
where; the, yelogity, is much greater,; the resistance increases far, more rapidly.
But what must very much diminish the probability of our deriving any. great
practical advantage from, the theory of .gunnery, .is an observation, made also
by Mx. Robins, that a, ball sometimes deviates ,three or four, hundred, yards
laterally, without any apparent reason; so that. we cannot; be jabsolutely' cer-
tain to come within this distance of our mark in any direction. The circum-
stance is probably owing to an accidental xotatory motion, communicated to
the ball in’ its passage. through the piece, causing therefore a greater friction
‘from the air on one side! than on the other; and it may im some;measure be re+
medied by employing a rifle, harrel, which determines the rotation of the ball in
such a manner that its axis,coineides at, first with, the path of. the ball, so that
the same face of the ball is turned in succession every. way. :. For the ordinary


ee es veel
, ered


42


LECTURE V.


“ON CONFINED MOTION.


WE have hitherto considered the principal cases, of motion, either undisturb-
ed, or simply subjected to the action of an accelerating, retarding, or deflec-
tive force. We now proceed to examine the effects of an additional modifica-
tion, which is introduced, when the motion is limited to a given line or surface
of any kind; the body cither being supposed to slide on the surface of a solid
actually extended,’ or being confined to an imaginary surface by its attach-
ment to a thread, or still more narrowly restricted, by means of two threads,
which allow it to move only-in a given line. Suspension is the most conveni-
ent mode of making experiments on confined motion ; but it is not always easy
to cause the body to remain in the surface that is required ; and to confine it in
this manner to a perfectly plane surface, isimpossible. When we suffer a body
to slide along any surface, there is a loss of force from friction, from the pro-
duction of rotatory motion, or from both these causes combined. The effect
of friction is obvious and well known; and we may be convinced of the re-
tardation attendant on the production of rotatory motion, by allowing two cy-
linders, of equal dimensions, to roll down an inclined plane; the one being co-
vered with sheet lead, the other having an equal weight of lead in its axis,
and being covered with paper; and both having similar projecting surfaces at
the ends, which come into contact with the plane: we may easily observe that
in the first cylinder, much more of the force is consumed in producing rotatory


motion, than in. the second, and that it therefore descends much more slowly.
(Plate IL. Fig. 20.) ‘


When a body is placed on an inclined plane, the force urging it to de-
scend, in the direction of the plane, is to the whole force of gravity, as the
height of the plane is to its length. This is demonstrable from the principles
of the composition of motion, and may also be shown experimentally with


ON CONFINED MOTION, 43


, when “ Riansides the doctrine of the equilibrium of forces,
But the interference of friction will only allow us to observe, with respect to the
velocities produced, that they nearly approach to those which the calculation
’ indicates. Thus if a plane be inclined one inch in 32, a ball will descend on
. - itin Loans instead of 64 feet, somewhat less than two feet.
tak tse
It may be anicels from the laws of accelerating forces, that when bodies
aden on any inclined planes, of equal heights, but of different inclinations,
the times of descent are as the lengths of ‘the planes, and the final velocities
’ are equal. Thus a body will acquire a velocity of 32 feet in a second, after
af having descended 16 feet, either in a vertical line or in an oblique direction; |
"but the time of descent will be as much greater than a second, as the oblique
length of the path is greater than 16 feet. This may be shown by experi-
ment, as nearly as the obstacles already mentioned will permit, the times be-
ing measured by a pendulum, or by a stop watch. (Plate II. Fig. 21.)


iy is an elegant proposition, of asimilar nature, which is still more capable
of confirmation; that is, that the times of falling through all
chords drawn to the lowest point of a circle are equal. If two or more bodies

ae are placed at different points of a circle, and suffered to descend at the same
; instant = enadheaa planes, which mect in the lowest point of the circle,
ere at the same time. (Plate II. Fig. 22.)


+.


'a body, descending along a given surface, is the same as that
freely through an equal height, not only when the surface
n it is a continued curve, in which the body is retain-
thread, or is supported by any regular surface, sup-
tion. We may easily show, by an experiment on a
ts velo is the same when it descends from the same
the form of its path, by observing the height to
€ opposite side of the lowest point. We may alter the
w hich it descends, by placing pins at different points, so
1e thread that supports the ball, and to form in succes-
-of motion; and we shall find, in all cases, that the body


Ad ; "LECTURE V.


Hence is derived the idea conveyed by the term living or ascending ovat
for since the height, to which a body will rise perpendicularly, is as the s
of its velocity, it will preserve a tendency to rise to a height which is as rs
square of its velocity, whatever may be the path into which it is directed,
provided that it meet with no abrupt angle, or that it rebound at each angle
in a new direction, without losing any velocity. The same idea is somewhat
‘more concisely expressed by the term energy, which indicates the tendency
of a body to ascend or to penetrate to a certain distance, in opposition to.a
retarding force.


The most important cases of the motion of bodies, confined to given sur-
faces, are those which relate to the properties of pendulums. Of these the
simplest is the motion of a body in a cycloidal path. The cycloid is a curve
which has many peculiarities; we have already seen that it is described by
marking the path of a given point in the circumference of a circle Which rolls
on aright line. Galileo was the first that considered it with attention, but
he failed in his attempts to investigate its properties. It is singular enough,
that the principal cause of his want of success was an inaccurate experiment:
in order to obtain some previous information respecting the area included by
it, he cut a board into a cycloidal form, and weighed it, and he inferred from
the experiment, that the area bore some irrational proportion to that of the


describing circle, while in fact it is exactly triple. In the same manner it has —


happened in later times,’ that Newton, in his closet, determined the figure of
the earth more accurately, than Cassini from actual measurement. It was
Huygens that first demonstrated the properties of the cycloidal pendulum,
which are of still more importance in the solution of various mechanical pro-
blems, than for the immediate purposes of timekeepers, to which that emi-
nent philosopher intended to apply them. (Plate I. Fig 5.)


If a body be suspended by a thread playing between two cycloidal cheeks,
it will describe another equal cycloid by the evolution of the thread, and the
time of vibration will be the same, in whatever part of the curve it may begin
to descend. Hence the vibrations of a body moving in a cycloid are denomi- _
nated isochronous, or of equal duration. This equality may be shown by let-
ting go two pendulous balls at the same instant, at different points of the curve,
and observing that they meet at the lowest point, (Plate II. Fig. 24.)


ON CONFINED MOTION. 45


_ The absolute time of the descent or ascent of a pendulum, in a cycloid, is to
the time in which any heavy body would fall through one half of the length
of the thread, as half the circumference of a circle to its diameter. It is
therefore nearly equal to the time-required for the descent of a body through
fof the length of the thread; and if we suffer the pendulum to descend, at
the same moment that a body falls, from a point elevated one fourth of the
length of the thread:above the point of suspension, ‘this body will meet the
_ pendulum at the lowest point of its vibration.. (Plate IL. Fig. 24.)
Hip pis at ens it te Jie sc oe ott a
by ence Rimiagiediiyihdthferved, that since the times of falling through any
Spaces, are as the square roots of those spaces, the times of vibration of differ-
ent pendulums areas the square roots of their lengths. Thus, the times of
vibration of pendulums of eee ae 4 foot in length, wil, be as 1 to 2: the
_ time of vibration of a pendulum 39 ,'7= inches in length is one second; the
smenote: eee Site igptsic sounds: ‘must be four-titues as great
, Dchiersecesanks epaits ysrsseber bat thal. suberetiel ¢
Ths. welbaity.iithijwhich »:peadsious. ‘body moves, at each point of a cy-
_ loidal. curve, may be represented, by supposing another pendulum to revolve
i uteameaarney —— from the loweSt point, ‘at the same time
to move, »and completing its revolution in the
> height, acquired by the pendulum revolving
s bee ‘to ‘the space described by the eat. vibrat-
Es ate Ute et ee
Eas T+
that the pendum vibioate through the whole curve,
ith the same velocity as the point of ‘the circle
‘iginally described the cycloid, provided that the
ee motion.


on this circumstance, that the relative force,
d along the curve, is always proportional to the dis-
point and it happens in many other instances of the
, it a similar law prevails: in all such cases, the vi-
ee space described corresponds to the versed
creasing uniformly, that is to canna any point


‘


ae


AG - é O/GVPEECTURE(V. 3 40


of a wheel revolving uolforply’ on iesigsis or rolling uniformly on 2 horizontal
; Plane; ; ‘ bog shgudidds fe; : : :
dy sig tsi .
i The cycloid is| the curve im which a;body may/descend, in the shortest
possible time, from a giyen';poimt, to andther obliquely below it. It may
easily be shown that abody descends more rapidly in. a ¢ycloid than in the
right line joing the;two points.. This. property is of little practical uti-
lity; the proposition was formerly considered as somewhat difficult to be
demonstrated, but of late, from the invention of new modes of calculation,
theorems of a similar nature have been much extended with great facility. The
experiment naturally suggests a familiar proverb, which cautions us against
being led away too precipitately by an appearance of brevi “me and facility.
(Plate IL. Fig. 25.) ful witsin
PORT Ror fh Ss aiats age
It has been found that: tlininbasmbaicnceal resulting from: the complicated
apparatus necessary to introduce a cycloidal motion, for the pendulums of
clocks, are amore than equivalent to the,advantage of perfect isochronism in
. theory, | For since,.in»small.cycloidalarcs, the cuvvature is nearly constant, the
time of vibration of a simple:circular pendulum must be ultimately the same,
as that of aicycloidal pendulum of the same length; but in larger ares, the time
must be somewhat greater, because the'circular are falls without the cycloidal,


: and is less inclined to, the,horizon at equal distances from the lowest point.
he This may be shown by a comparison of two equal pendulums, vibrating in arcs
of different extent: it may also be observed, by an experiment with two simple


} pendulums of different lengths, that theix; times of vibration, like those of cy-
cloidal_ pendulums,. ayé proportional to;the square roots of) their lengths; a f
| half second peteets being: only oeeiiare as nate ai apap vibrating om
| 3) i seconds,


5 ‘ -

We have been obliged to suppose the weight, as wéll as the inertia, of a pen~_
dulum, to be referred to one point, since we are not at present prepared to ex- Sa
amine the effect of the slight difference between the situations, and the velocities ie
of the different parts of the substances} employed in our experiments. — The na-
ture of rotatory motion requires to be more fully understood, before we can
attend to the Seiemminttion afishe ‘centres of vipa Sebaianet. various


ee - phen: ine


af


-


ey
.


ON CONFINED MOTION. 47


figures, that is, of the points in which: theirwhole weight maybe supposed to _
be concentrated, with regard to jits ote onthe times of their’ oo
ber reign lropitees Ant ube ett ms
It isitemarkable that poetic of. Senaiincs: hich: is a wing so
important in its application, may. still be préserved, notwithstanding the:in-
terference of a constant retarding force, such as the force of friction is in
many cases found to be, It has been shown by Newton, that each complete


_ vibration of a cycloidali pendulum, irétarded by a resistance of this nature, will


be shorter than the preceding one by a. certain constant space, but that it
oa Sepnrenbney te eneNe stg ar ti bon i iw Setiveloy air

caves 10 Wh SHOMagHii 199 ald paitosistALds Oo 5q59 .bror wh

' There is anginhaitnelieiy between the vibrations of vciduarne} ou the re-
volition of balls suspended from a fixed point. If a body, suspended by a
thread, revolve freely in a horizontal circle, the time of revolution will be the -
same, whenever the height of the point of suspension, above the plane of revo-
lution is the sime, whatever be the length of the thread. Thus, if anumber
of balls are fixed to threads, or rather wires,,.connected. to the same point of
an axis, which is made to revolve by means of the whiiling table, they will so
arrange sey aa as to remain very oo in the same an plane.
chat Fig. 26.) to sueestg
or © ahiwi sie by ; : is ff natt
“ni The. time of each re¥olution of the balls i is ial to ilke time occupied ‘by a
double vibration of a pendulum, of which the length is equal to the height of
the point of suspension above the plane in which they revolve; consequently
all the revolutions will be nearly. isochronous, while: the threads or wires
deyiate but little from a-vertical situation... In-fact, We may imagine sucli a


. revolution to be composed of two vibrations, of! a. simple pendulum;) Stith


at the same time, in directions at right angles to each other; for while:a pen-
dulum is vibrating from north to south, it is liable to the:impressiom of any
force, capable of causing a vibration from east to west; and the joint result of
both vibrations will be a.uniform revolution in a circle, if the vibrations are
equal and properly combined; but if they are unequal, the joint vibration will
be ultimately an ellipsis, the joint force being directed to its centre, and al-
ways eh eamrange the distance from that centre: (Plate II. Fig. 27.)


The near approach of . these revolutions to isochronism has sometimes been


48 OLECTURE MO ¥%0


applied to: the measurement of time, but more frequently, and more successfully,
to the regulation of the motions of machines. Thus in Mr. Watt's steam
engines, two balls are fixed at the ends of rods in continual revolution, and
as soon as the motion becomes:a little too rapid, the balls rise. considerably,
and tina cock, which diminishes the sere - steam hpdeniticd: (Plate IL
Fi Fig) 28. ) so ; vil

Wid
“The same Lig are applicable to many other cases of rotatory motion; for
instance, if we wish to determine the height, at which a ball, revolving with a
given velocity, will be retained in a spherical bowl; or the inclination of a
circular road, capable of counteracting the centrifugal force of a horse, running
round it: for the horse, like the ball of the revolving pendulum, has a cen-
trifugal tendency, which is greater as his velocity is greater: this centrifugal
force, combined with the force of gravity, composes a result, which, in the
case of the pendulum, is completely counteracted by the force of the thread or
wire, and must therefore be in the direction of the thread, and which obliges
the horse to place his legs in a similar direction, proceeding from an imaginary
point of Suspension above; since he would otherwise be liable to fall out-
wards, if his velocity were sufficiently great. But in order to withstand the
pressure of the horse’s legs, the road must be in a direction perpendicular to
them; otherwise its materials will naturally be forced outwards, until they pro-
duce an elevation sufficient to give the road the required form. Thus, if the
diameter of the ring were 40 feet, and the horse moved at the’ rate of 12 miles
an hour, he would perform about 500 revolutions in an hour, and half a revo-
lution in 3 seconds anda half. Now the length of a pendulum vibrating in
$4 seconds, must be 39 inches multiplied by the square of 34, or a little more
than 80 feet: the road must therefore be-perpendicular to the direction of a
line drawn to it froma point 80 feet above the centre of the ring; and its ex-
ternal circumference must be higher than its internal circumference by one
fourth of its breadth. It would however be improper to have a road of this
form in a manege, since the horse must be taught to perform all his rsretine
on a perfect plane.


There is a general principle of curvilinear motion, which is in itself of lit-
tle importance or practical utility, but which so far deserves to be noticed, as
it has been magnified by some philosophers into a fundamental law of nature.

2


ON CONFINED MOTION. 5 49


“curves that a body can describe, in moving from one point to
ays selects that, in which, if its velocity be supposed to be every
the distance that it describes, the sum of the infinitely
ILbe a minimum, that is, less than in any other path that the
. For example, if a body move freely, and. therefore with a
> in any | re curved surface, it will pass from one part of
nother by the shortest possible path, This has been called the


mpler laws of motion, and if those laws were eyen different
e, the: principle would be true in another sig au} in ano


A iy
vii Mag)

RAID | EW GF IWs

we alyeay ON ES a a

ei ihiu


ane ;
iiss 4
ay :
4 r - : sf .
1 4 Ae the yin
¢ ste ‘
4
-
° ’
\
:
: it
iH
4
: {
Ay '
150 \
os is
. ae bub
. eel y 5
J


“eee = Seer eee =


possible action ; it is however merely a mathematical in- -


See A


simpler course, by


50 |


LECTURE VI.


‘


ON THE MOTIONS OF SIMPLE MASSES.


FIITHERTO we have considered the motions of one or more single points .


or atoms only, without any regard to the bulk or mass of a moveable body:
but it now becomes necessary to attend also to the difference of the masses of
bodies in motion. This may however be done, without considering the actual
magnitude or extent of the body. We may easily conceive different masses
or bulks to be concentrated in a mathematical point; and it is most conveni-
ent to define a moveable body, as a moveable point or particle, composed of
other elementary particles, differing only in number, and thus constituting the
proportionally different mass or bulk of the body.

- Although, in our experiments on motion, we are obliged to have recourse to
material bodies, and although such bodies differ considerably from this defini-
tion of a single moveable body, yet they serve sufficiently well to represent


~ such bodies, especially when they are small, and regularly formed; and we


are here considering the doctrine of motion rather in a mathematical than ina
physical sense, so that we are able to neglect all such properties of matter as


are not immediately necessary to our purpose. Indeed though the general


properties of matter are usually placed at the entrance of elementary works on.
mechanics, it has yet been found necessary to omit the consideration of their
effects, in examining the laws and affections of motion. The forces of cohe-
sion and repulsion, for example, act, in general, ina a very complicated manner, in


almost all cases of the communication of motion; but to consider these opera- —


tions minutely i in treating of collision, would be to involve the subject in very
great and very unnecessary difficulties; and the complete investigation of


these properties of matter would require the employment of various branches


of mechanical and "rg ea science. We may therefore take a much —
ing sotele. My fheoeneal ia of actu I


:
= 1? ogee


ON THE MOTIONS OF SIMPLE MASSES. 1


matter; but in the mean time we must have, for our experimental illustrations,
some measure of the mass or bulk as here defined. We might employ spheri-


‘cal bodies, composed only of homogeneous substances, that is, of substances of
the same kind, and we might estimate the mass by the comparative magnitude,


‘imagining all the particles of eachsphere to be united in its centre. But it is
more convenient to anticipate, from the gravitation of matter, a measure of
the mass derived from the weight: since it can be proved that the weight of
a body is proportional to its absolute quantity of matter, supposing all matter
to be alike in its affections relative to motion. So that instead of numbering
the particles of each body, the same purpose is answered by determining their


comparative moet


Inertia, or a sider to persevere in a state of rest, orof uniform rectilinear’
motion, is a property attached to all matter, and may be considered as propor-
tional to the mass or weight of a body.. When the motions of asystem of bo-
dies are considered, their inertia may in some respects be referred to a single
point, which is called the centre of inertia. The centre of inertia of two bo-
dies is that point, in the right line joining them, which divides it into two.such


- portions, that the one is to the other, as the mass of the remoter body to that.


of the adjacent body. For instance, if one body weighs.a pound;. and’another
two pounds, and their distance is a yard, then the centre of inertia is at the
distance of twofeet from the smaller body, and one foot from tlie larger: and
the distance of each is to the whole distance, as. the weight of the other to the
whole weight. Also the products obtained by multiplying each weight by its
distance are equal: thus two multiplied by ai: is equal to one multiplied by
two. ene II. Fig. 29.)


This point is most commonly called the centre of gravity; it has also some-
times been denominated the centre of position. Since it has many properties
independent of the consideration of gravity, it ought not to derive its name
from gravitation, and the term centre of inertia begins now, with great propri-


ety, to be generally adopted.


The centre of inertia of any two bodies initially at rest, remains at rest, not-
Withstanding any reciprocal action of the bodies; thatis, notwithstanding any
action which affects the single particles of both equally, in increasing or dimi-


52 LECTURE VI.


nishing their distance. Foritmay be shown, from the principles of the compo-
sition of motion, that any force, acting in this manner, will cause each of the
two bodies to describe a space proportional to the’ magnitude of the other
body: thus a body of one pound will move through a space twice as great as
a body of two pounds weight, and the remaining parts of the original distance
will still be divided in the same proportion, by the original centreof inertia,
which therefore still remains the centre of inertia, and is at rest... And it fol-
lows also, that if the centre of inertia is at first in motion, its motion will not
be affected by any reciprocal action of the bodies. Lu


This important property is very capable of experimental illustration ; first
observing, that all known forces are reciprocal, and among the rest the action
of a spring: we place two unequal bodies so as to be separated when aspring
is set at liberty, and we find that they describe, in any given interval of time,
distances which are inversely as their weights; and that consequently. the


_ place of the centre of inertia remains unaltered. They may either be made to


float on water, or may be suspended by long threads; the spring may be de-
tached by burning a thread that confines it, and it may be observed whe-
ther or no they strike at the same instant two obstacles, placed at such dis-
tances as the theory requires ; or if they are suspended as pendulums, the arcs
which they describe may be measured, the velocities being always nearly pro-
portional to these arcs, and accurately so to their chords. (Plate II. Fig. 30.)


The same might also be shown of attractive as well as of repulsive forces.
For instance, if we placed ourselves in asmall boat, and pulled a rope tied to a
much larger one, we should draw ourselves towards the large boat with a mo-
tion as much more rapid than that of the large boat, as its weight is greater
than that of our own boat; and the two boats would meet in their common
centre of inertia, supposing the resistance of the water inconsiderable.


Having established this property of the centre of inertia, as alaw of motion,
we may derive from it the true estimate of the quantity of motion in differ-
ent bodies, in a much more satisfactory manner, than it has usually been ex-
plained. For since the same reciprocal action produces, in a body weighing
two pounds, only half the velocity that it produces in a body weighing one
pound, the cause being the same, the effects must be considered as equal, and


2


on THE MOTIONS ‘OF SIMPLE MASSES. ¢ 53


: eine: motion must always be measured by the joint ratio. of mass to
Bein velocity to velocity ;- that is, by the ratiq of the products, ‘obtained
itiplying the weight of each body by the number.expressing its yelo-
ea | these products’ are‘called the momenta: of the bodies.:| We appear to
pad ontaary this measure of motion from the most unexceptionable argh-
ments, ‘and we shall have occasion to apply the momentum thus estimated as
a true measure of force ; at the same time'that we allow the practical import-
ance of considering, in many cases, the efficacy of forces, according to another
criterion, when we multiply the mass by the square of the ‘velocity, in. order
to determine the energy: yet the true quantity of motion, or momentum, of
any. body, ‘is always to be understood, as the:product of its mass into its velo-
city... Thus a body weighing one pound, moving witha velocity of a hundred
feet in a second, has the same momentum, and the same quantity of motion,
= asa body of ten pounds, thoving: at the rate of ten fect ina second.
t cbeal VeLeO Rg kent ata: ” 1G Paeito: (msi
We may also demonstrate: ecelciienially, by nieans of Mr. Atwood’s ma-
chine, that the same momentum is generated, in a given time, by the same
_ preponderating force, whatever may be the quantity of matter moved. Thus
>), ifeeliey preponderating weight be one sixteenth of the whole weight of the
ny boxes, it will fall ‘one foot in a second, instead of 16, and a velocity of two
feet. ‘will be acquired by the whole mass, instead of'a velocity of 32 feet, which
’ the preponderating weight alone would have acquired, And when swe: com-
pare the centrifugal forces of ‘bodies revolving in the same time, at different
distances from the cehtte of motion, we find that a greater quantity of matter
‘for a smaller force ; so that two balls connected by a wire, with
‘to slide. either way, will retain ali cthes in their respective situations,
; 7 a aay a amon centre of inertia coincides with the centre of motion; the
cen fc each particle of the one being as much greater than that


‘of the other, as its he co or the number of the particles,
TTB fe. 13s :
cy CA :


amb


enough to Resins the centre of inertia of two \iédtes say,
single points ; since in general a much greater number of points
fe must therefore define the sense in which the term is in this
1. We proceed by considering the first and second of three or
@ single body, equal to both of them, and placed in their com-


ra


54 LECTURE VI.


mon centré of inertia ;, determining the centre of inertia of this, imaginary
body and the third body, and continuing a similar process for all the bodies
of the system. And it matters not with which of the bodies we begin the
operation, for it may be demonstrated, that the point thus found will be the
same by whatever steps it be determined. When we come to consider the
properties of the same point as the centre of gravity, we shall be able to pro-
duce an experimental proof of this assertion, since it will be found that there
is only one point in any system of bodies which possesses these -properties.
(Plate III, Fig. 7 : i


We may always lentes the motion of the centre of: inertia of a system
of moving bodies, by supposing their! masses to be united into one body, and
this body to receive at once’a momentum equal to that of each body of the
system, in a direction parallel) to its motion.» This may often be the most
conveniently done, by referring all the motions of this imaginary body to
three given directions, and collecting all the results into three:sums, which
will represent the motion of the centre of inertia of the system.)


We have already presupposed this proposition, when we have employed ma-
terial bodies of finite magnitude, that is, systems of material atoms, to represent
imaginary bodies of the same weight, condensed into their centres; and it
now appears, that the velocity and direction of the motions of such bodies as
we have employed, agree precisely with those of our imaginary material points.
We cannot attempt to confirm this law by experiment, because the deductions
from the sensible consequences of an experiment would require nearly the
same processes as the mathematical demonstration.


It is obvious that the result of any number of uniform and rectilinear mo- *_
tions, thus collected, must also be a uniform and rectilinear motion. The
centre of inertia of a system of bodies moving without disturbance, is, there-
fore, either at rest, or moving equably in a right line.


The mass, or weight, of each of any number of bodies, being multiplied by its
distance from a given plane, the products, collected into one sum, will be
equal to the whole weight of the system, multiplied by the distance of the
common centre of inertia from the same plane. And the proposition will be


_ ON THE MOTIONS OF SIMPLE MASSES. 55.


equally true, if instead of the shortest distances, we substitute the distances
from the same plane, | measured obliquely, in any directions always parallel to
each other. This property is peculiarly applicable to the consideration of the
centre. of gravity, and affords also the readiest means of oteeniating its place
seoiesscteounptieath forma ‘(Plate III. ~— $2.)


We ine pee seen that the place of the centre of inertia of two bodies
is not affected by any reciprocal action between them; and the same is true
of the actions of a system of three or more bodies. We might easily apply
our experiment on the reciprocal action of two bodies to a greater number,
but we should throw no further light on the subject, and the mode of obtain-
ing the vnaupayeut) would be somewhat complicated.


All the forces in nature, with which we are acquainted, act reciprocally be-
tween different masses of matter, so that any two bodies repelling or attracting


~ each other, are made to recede or approach with equal’ momenta. This cir-


cumstance is generally expressed by the third law of motion, that action and -
reaction are equal. There would be something peculiar, and almost incon-
ceivable, in a force which could affect unequally the similar particles of mat-
ter; or in the particles themselves, if they could be possessed of such differ-
ent degrees of mobility, as to be equally moveable with respect to one force,
and unequally with respect to another. For instance, a magnet and a piece
of iron, each weighing a pound, will remain in equilibrium when their weights
are opposed to each other by means of a balance; they will be separated with
equal velocities, if impelled by the unbending of a spring placed between them,
and it is difficult to conceive that they should approach cach other with une-
qual velocities in consequence of magnetic attraction, or of any other natural
force. The reciprocality of force is therefore a necessary law in the mathe-
matical consideration of mechanics, and it is also perfectly warranted by ex-
perience. The contrary supposition is so highly improbable, that the princi-
ple may almost as justly be termed a necessary axiom, as a phenomenon col-
lected frm observation.


Sie Tetac Newton observes, in his third law of motion, that ‘* reaction -is
always contrary and equal to action, or, that the mutual actions of two bodies
are always equal, and directed contrary ways.” He proceeds, “ if any body


56 } weuetaM TACBECTUBE: Yai TO a7 1


draws or presses another, it is itself as much drawn or pressed. If) any one
ptesses a stone with his finger, his finger is also pressed by the stone. If a
horse is drawing a weight tied to a rope, the horse is also equally drawn back-
wards towards the weight: for the rope, being distended throughout, wili in
the same endeavour to contract, urge the horse towards the weight, and the
weight towards the horse, and will impede the progress of the one as much as


it promotes the adyance of the other.” Now although Newton has always


applied this law in the most unexceptionable manner, yet it must be confessed
that the illustrations here quoted are clothed in such language as to have too
much the appearance of paradox. When we say that a thing presses another,
we commonly mean, that the thing pressing has a tendency to move forwards,
into the place of the thing pressed, but the stone would not sensibly advance
into the place of the finger, if it were removed ; and in the same manner we
understand, that a thing pulling another has a tendency to recede further from
the thing pulled, and to draw this after it; but it is obvious that the weight
which the horse is drawing would not return towards its first. situation, with


the horse in its train, although the exertion of the horse should intirely cease;


in these senses, therefore, we cannot say, that thestone presses, or,that the weight
pulls, and we have no reason to offend the just prejudices of a beginner, by
introducing paradoxical expressions without necessity: Yet it is true in, both
cases, that if all friction, and all connexion with the surrounding bodies, could
be instantaneously destroyed, the point of the finger and the stone would re-
cede from each other, and the horse and the weight would approach each


_ other, ‘with equal quantities of motion. And this is what we mean by the re-


ciprocality of forces, or the equality of action and reaction.


The quantity of ‘action of two attractive or repulsive bodies on each other


is partly dependent on their magnitude. When the bodies are of the same


kind, their mutual action is in the compound ratio of their bulks; that is, in
the ratio of the products of the numbers expressing their bulks. — For instance,
if two bodies, each containing ; a cubic inch of matter, attract or repel each
other with a force of a grain, and there be two other bodies, the one contain-
ing two inches, the other ten, of the same matter, then the mutual attraction”
or repulsion of these will be expressed by 20 grains ; for cach of the 10 inches


is attracted by each of the two with a force of a grain. And the mutual ac-
sie oR a ip tn oped ie 40; ea net Reiley


ON THE MOTIONS OF SIMPLE MASSES. 57


‘


the same, the attraction will be simply as the bulk of ‘the other:
F ‘of matter, in every body surrounding us, is considered as
to its weight; for it is inferred from experiment, that all material
Seeastesiaip subject to the power of gravitation towards the earth, and
are, i this force, of the same kind. For the apparent difference

in the velocity, with, which different substances fall through the atmosphere,
‘ is only owing to the resistance of the air, as is sometimes shown by an ex-.
periment on a feather and a piece of gold, falling in the vacuum of an air
pump; but the true cause was known long before the invention of this ma-
chine, and it is-distinctly’ explained in the second. book of Lucretius:

ie) OO REN aNN NE HAE plier ie er
being “In water or in air when weights sbabhdiahs

niente The heavier Sine more swiftly downwards tend.
Prenat y. the gales that gently play,
Oe OY mass a readier way, — TaveR :
eg mee sei petites space should fall, »
wile grout we should find in all.”
\ iterontd syelge ha eE Splat plite 2 Wir

We are therefore to suppose, that the different weights of equal: bulks of

depend merely on the greater or less number of particles
ee eny of any other characters: — sped


te their mutual action, that is, when we wish to know
ion of two bodies with respect to each other; for here
ir single motions with respect to the centre of iner-
y in the same ratio. This consideration is sometimes


lution by means of the attractive force of another, this
bsolutely at rest; but because it is more convenient to
j I


58 LECTURE Vi.


determine the effect of the attraction as directed to a fixed point, we consider
the force as residing in the common centre of inertia of the two bodies, which
remains at rest, as far as the mutual actions of those bodies only are concerned,
and it may be shown, that the force diminishes, as the square of the distance
of the bodies, either from this point or from each other, increases. | The reci-
procal forces of two bodies may therefore be considered as tending to or from
their common centre of inertia, as a fixed point; but it often’ happens that, the
difference of magnitude being very great, the motion of one of the bodies may
be disregarded. Thus we usually neglect the motion of the sun, in treating of
the planetary motions produced by his attraction, although, by means of very
nice observations, this motion becomes sensible. But it is utterly beyond the
power of our senses to discover the reciprocal motion of the earth produced
by any terrestrial cause, even by the most copious eruption of a volcano,
although, speaking mathematically, we cannot deny that, whenever a cannon
ball is fired upwards, the whole globe must suffer a minute depression in its.
course. The boast of Archimedes was therefore accompanied by an unneces-~
sary condition: ‘‘ give me,” said he, ‘* but a firm support, and I will move the
earth;” but granting him his support, he could only have displaced the earth
insensibly by the properties of his machines; and without»any such sup-
port, when he threw rocks upon the ships of Marcellus, he actually caused
the walls of Syracuse and theisland of Sicily to move northwards, with as much
momentum, as carried his projectiles southwards: against the Roman arma~
ments.


aid a, i i — ieee - hieiigiea


>, ~~. . €
aA .
_ + : ‘ ty guy"
.
- SO VATAP 5 y
" topebebn bevy Wi? VEDY ftom:
" 5 a
wht Soest eRe GFtast


‘eri LECTURE vu.
Wet WLAN oa :
jitter Sid 4


WMListe! eT zy


)


ON PRESSURE AND EQUILIBRIUM.
sth ound ai delw bats ite ,
speeite a Lie gB is od cco yet ‘ ; :
Wr have now examined the principal cases in whicha simple force is em-
ployed in the production of motion; it is of equal consequence to attend to


the opposition of here they prevent each other's action. A force
counteracted by ; orce, so that no motion is produced, becomes a
ressure: thus w inually exert a pressure, by means of our weight, up-
0 don which we stand, the seat on which we sit, and the bed on
which we sleep; but at the instant when we are falling or leaping, we neither
exert nor experience 2 pressure on any part. 5 this up
SAE aul? tH Volt vt


It was very truly asserted by the antients, that pressure and motion are ab-
solutely incommensurable as effects; for according to the definition of pres-
‘sure, the force appears to be what is called in logic a potential cause, which
is not in a state of activity: and since an interval of time must elapse after
the removal of the opposite force, before the first force can have caused any
actual motion, this effect of a finite time cannot with justice be conceived to
bear any proportion to the pressure, which is as it were a nascent effect only,
‘It is true thata large weight, pressing on a Spring, may keep it bent, in ex-
actly the same place, into which a smaller weight, falling on it with a certain
velocity, would inflect it: but, to retain a spring in a certain position, and to
bend it into that position, are effects absolutely incommensurable; the one
being a measure of the constant repulsive force of the spring, bent to acertain
_ point, the other of the sum of the effects of the same spring, in, various degrees
of flexure, fora certain time. Hence the smallest possible momentum is said
to be more than equivalent to the greatest possible pressure: a very light
weight, falling from a very minute distance, will force back a very strong
spring, although often through an imperceptible space only. But the impulse
of a stream of infinitely small particles, like those of which a fluid is supposed


60. = LECTURE VII,


to consist, striking an obstacle in a constant succession, may be counteracted
by a certain pressure, without producing any finite motion.


Nothing however forbids us to compare two pressures, by considering the
initial motions which they would produce, if: the opposition were removed ;
nor is there any difficulty in extending the laws of the composition of motion.
to the composition of pressure. For since we measure forces by the motions
which they produce, it is obvious that the composition of forces is included
. in the doctrine of the composition of motions; and when we combine three
forces according to the laws of motion, there can be no question but that the
resulting motion is truly determined in all cases, whatever may be its magni-
tude; nor can any reason be given why it should be otherwise, when this mo-
tion is evanescent, and the force becomes a pressure. The case is similar to
that ofa fraction, ‘which may still retain a real value, when both its numerator
and denominator become less than any assignable quantity. Some authors
on cate «rd indeed the most eminent, Bernoulli, | Dalembert, and La-
place, have deduced the laws of pressure, more : immediately, from the principle
of the equality of the effects of equal causes; and the demonstration: may be
found, in an improved form, in the article Dynamics of the Supplement of the
penis 1.049: arm but its steps are ne Sane and intricate.

We are therefore to sisi the momentum, or quantity of motion, which
would be produced by any force in action, as the measure of the pressure
‘occasioned by it, when opposed; and to understand by equal or proportion-
ate pressures, stich as are produced by forces which would generate equal or
proportionate momenta in'a given time. And it may be inferred, that two con-
trary pressures will balance each other, | when the momenta, which the forces
would separately produce, in contrary directions, are equal ; and that any
one pressure will counterbalance two others, when it would produce a mo-
mentum, equal and contrary to the-momentum which would be derived from


the joint result of the other fires, For, supposing each of two forces op- —


posed to each other to act for an instant, and to remain inactive for the next
equal instant, while the other force is exerted, it is obvious that these effects
‘will neutralise each other, so that the body, on which they até supposed to
‘operate, will retain its situation; but such an action is precisely half of the con-
tinued seni each f forces cotisbiquentty, since the halves completely counteract


soon paid galin hy the i Geliewai ‘ifort


’


ON PRESSURE €or ’ 61


may be extended ‘to any umber ot forces opposed to cach other. > ~
fyi "ic bie on a
ows ‘from the laws of the composition otion, pine thd result of
o pressures, expressed. by the sides: eenlitliee, will be represented by
~ its diagonal, and that, if a body remain at rest by means of three pressures,
must be related to each other in magnitude as the sides of a triangle
- parallel to their directions. This may be very completely shown by experi-
@ -ment. Weattach three weights to as'many threads, united in one point, and
ere ip ase then by drawing any triangle, of which the sides
are in: ‘the directions of the threads, or in parallel directions, we may always
express the magnitude of each weight, by the length of the side of the triangle


pares, ilearngs (Plate III. Fig. 33.)
wu JiTEsy : “


‘The most important of the problems relating to ienililriumn are such as con-

cern the machines which are usually ‘called mechanical powers. We are not,

_ however, to enter at present into all the properties and uses of these machines;

we have at first only toexamine them in astate of rest, since the determination

of their motion requires additic siderations, and their svblication: to prac-
_ tice fleet to wer subdi aoe our subject, ,


H “There i is nipeneral et of rulichisisical eqquilitsites, which includes the prin-
- cipal properties of most of these machines. If two or more bodies, con-
‘ in a be suspended from a given point, they will be at rest when
their centre of inertia is in the vertical line passing through the point of sus-
ae _ pension. The truth of this proposition may easily be illustrated, by the actual
Ne.” suspension of any body, or system of bodies, from or upon a fixed point; the
e t whole remaining in equilibrium, when the centre of inertia is either vertically
‘below the point of suspension, or above the point of support, or when the
fixed point coincides with the centre of inertia. And whatever may be the
form of a compound body, it may be considered as a system of bodies con-
nected together, the situation of the common centre of the inertia determining
ue igs position of the body. (Plate III. Fig. 34..38.)
> A)
Hence the centre of inertia is called thé centre of gravity; and it may be
‘practically found, by determining the intersection of two lines which become


|


>


62 , LECTURE VII. .


vertical in. any two positions in which the body is at rest.’ Thus, if we sus-
pend a board of an irregular form from any two points successively, and mark
the situation of the vertical line in each position, we may find by the inter-
section the place of the eo gravity: and it will appear that this in-
tersection will be the same, whatever positions we employ. — (Plate ILI.
Fig. 39.)


The consideration of the degree of stability of equilibrium is of material
importance in many mechanical operations. Like other variable quantities,
the stability may be positive, negative, or evanescent. The equilibrium is


positively more or less stable, when the centre of gravity would be obliged to.


ascend more or less rapidly, if it quitted the vertical line: the equilibrium is
tottering, and the stability is negative, when the centre of gravity would
descend if it were displaced; but when the centre of gravity coincides with
the centre of motion, or when its path would be a horizontal right line, the
equilibrium has been called insensible, but may more properly be termed neu-
tral, and the body will rest in any position, without tending either to fall, or
to return to its original situation. It is obvious that the centre of gravity
cannot move, without descending, when it is vertically over the fixed point,
nor without ascending, when it is immediately below it; so that in the one
case the equilibrium is tottering, and in the other stable. Hence we may
understand the reason of fixing the moveable handles of a vessel of any kind
at its upper part, in order that the centre of suspension may be always above
the centre of gravity. If they be fixed too low, the vessel will be liable to
overset, unless there be sufficient friction to retain it in its proper fonts:
(Plate III. Fig. 40.)


An oval surface, placed on a horizontal plane, is capable of a stable equili-
brium, when it rests on its side, or on the extremity of its lesser axis, and of
a tottering equilibrium, when it stands on the extremity of its greater axis.
But the equilibrium of a circle or a sphere is always neutral, for, when dis-
turbed, it neither recovers its first position, nor deviates further from it. A flat
body, resting on a sphere, will have its equilibrium tottering or stable, accord-
ingly as its centre of gravity is more or less than the sessaeieneeer of the
tty: above the brea contact. © iM III. ding 4l, 148: iui


ne Od: tah AT li =)idtaaheck


ON PRESSURE AND EQUILIBRIUM. 63


- The stability of a body supported on a flat basis, of a given extent, is of a
' different kind, and is independent of equilibrium. , For here, if the centre of
gtavity move either way, it must begin its motion in an inclined direction,
instead of describing a curve which is initially horizontal. The stability of
such a body becomes less and less, as it is more and more inclined, till, when
the centre of gravity is vertically over the margin of the basis, there is a tot-
tering equilibrium; and if the inclination be still further continued, the body
will fall, (Plate III. Fig. 43:) i


The broader the basis, and the lower the centre of gravity, the steeper must
the path of that centre be, and consequently the greater the stability. ‘Thus
the disposition of the weight in a carriage may considerably affect its stability,
by altering the place of the centre of gravity. A waggon loaded. with iron is
much less easily overturned, than when it is loaded with an equal weight of
hay; suppo the inequality of the road, or any accidental obstacle, to ele-
vate one side of the waggon, it will always recover its position, provided that
the centre of gravity remain within the vertical line, passing through the point
ef contact of the lower wheel and the ground; and it is obvious that the
higher the centre of gravity is situated, the sooner it passes this line. If
the velocity of the motion were very great, the wheel which is elevated
might be lifted off. the ground by the momentum, and the centre of gravity
might thus be carried beyond the vertical line, by means of an obstacle which
would not have overset the waggon, if it had been moving slowly. (Plate III.


Fig. 44.)


If a! person be sitting or standing in a carriage, the part of the carriage on
which he sits. or stands may be considered as representing the place of his
weight, provided that his situation be always perpendicular; but if the motion
be rapid, he will not be able to remain constantly in a posture perfectly erect,
and the centre of gravity of the carriage, with its passengers, will be some-
what more elevated, than it would be on this supposition.


~ The directiow of the initial motion of the centre of gravity readily explains
the suspension of a weight, or a bucket of water, ona rod resting on the end of
a table, when another rod is employed, to keep the bucket at such a distance
from the end of the first, that the centre of. gravity may be under the table;


——


a


w


64 LECTURE VII. .


for although the bucket. seems suspended by its handle, yet if the handle be-
gan to descend, the centre of gravity would be obliged to rise; consequently
the whole will retain its position, and remain at rest. (Plate III. Fig. 45.)


ils , i is
‘The apparent ascent of a loaded cylinder on an inclined plane, and the mo-
tion of a roller composed of two united cones, witha common axis, resting on
the edge of a triangle which is inclined to the horizon, may be easily .wnder-
stood from the same consideration. (Plate III. Fig. 46.)


We may also observe, in the equilibrium of animals, many circumstances il-
lustrative of the properties of the centre of gravity. When a person stands on
one foot, and leans forwards, in the attitude which is usually exhibited in the
statues of Mercury, the other foot is elevated behind, in order to bring back
the centre of gravity, so as to be vertically over some part of the foot on which
he stands. But on account of the conyex and irregular form of the foot, the
basis that it affords is really very narrow; hence when we attempt to stand on
one foot, we find it often necessary to use a muscular exertion, in order to bring
the point of support to that side towards which we are beginning to fall; and
when the basis is still more contracted, the body never remains at rest, but, by
asuccession of actions of this kind, sometimes too minute to be visible, it is
keptina state of perpetual vibration, without ever attaining such a position as
would give it any degree of positive stability; and thus it may be conceived to
be supported even on a single point, recovering its position, from time to time,
by means of a slight degree of rotatory motion, which is produced by its flex-
ure, and by the changes of the position of the extremities: hence, by habit, the
arts of ropedancers and balancers ‘are acquired. . Sometimes, however, the po-
sition of the balancer is not so difficult to be preserved as it appears, the cur-
vature of the wire in contact with the foot tending materially to assist him.


When we attempt to rise from a seat, we generally draw our feet inwards,
in order to bring the point of support into, or near, the vertical line passing
through the centre of gravity, and to create a tottering equilibrium, which is
favourable for. the beginning of motion, And before we rise, we bend the
upper part of the body forwards, in order to procure a momentum, capable of
carrying the centre of gravity beyond. the vertical line, passing thsoush the
point of. support.


ON PRESSURE AND EQUILIBRIUM. 65


- Whena horse ‘is walking, the centre of gravity is sometimes supported
only'by two feet of the same side, yet for a time so short, that its declension
\ towards the other side is easily recovered, after the legs on that side have re-
- sumed their activity., Some authors have thought it impossible that a qua-
et druped should stand for an instant with both feet of the same side raised from
an the earth; but when a horse is walking fast, it may very often be observed,
& that the print of the hind foot is considerably more\advanced than that of the
fore foot, which has been raised to make way for it.
e oration KSA HS BY on , ~ ‘
7 From the general law of the equilibrium of the centre of gravity, we may
deduce the properties of levers of all kinds. . It follows from the definition of
this point, that if two bodies be attached to a straight rod of inconsiderable
ia tr weight, they may be sustained in equilibrium, by a fixed point, or fulcrum,
' which divides their distance into portions which are inversely as their weights.


: And it is obvious that if any other’ equivalent forces be substituted for weights,
ating at the same distance from the fulcrum, and with the same inclination
| =e to the rod or lever, the conditions of equilibrium will be precisely the same.
a o- Also if either of the forces be transferred to an equal distance on the other


side of the fulcrum, and act there in a contrary direction, the equilibrium
{ will still remain, Hence we have two principal kinds of levers; the first, in
* __ which the fixed point, or fulcrum; is between the points at which the forces or
she ~ weights are applied; the second, where ‘the forces are applied, in contrary di-
rections, on the same side of the fulcrum. (Plate III. Fig. 47.)

Udsiiteisa 4 leap ai wh apt -
+ The-demonstrations of the fundamental property of the lever have been
very various. _ Archimedes himself has given us two. Huygens, Newton,
Maclaurin, Dr. Hamilton, and Mr. Vince, have elucidated ‘the same subject
by different methods of considering it. The demonstration of Archimedes,


neral and natural as one of Dr. Hamilton’s, nor so simple and convincing as
-Maclaurin’s, which it may be worth our while to’ notice. _ Supposing two

‘ on equal weights, of an ounce each, ‘to he fixed at the ends of the equal arms of
_-—s« @ lever of the first kind; in this case it is obvious that there will be an equi-
librium, since there is no reason why either weight should preponderate. It


a is also evident that the fulcrum supports the whole weight of two ounces,
neglecting that of the lever; consequently we may substitute for the fulcrum
vou. 1. K


f ‘as improved by Mr. Vince, is ingenious and elegant, but ‘it is‘neither so ge-


66 LECTURE VII.


a force equivalent to two ounces, drawing the: lever upwards; and instead of
one of the weights, we may place the end of the lever under a firm obstacle,
and the equilibrium will still remain, the lever being now of the second kind.
Here therefore, the weight remaining at the other end of the lever counter-
balances a force of two ounces, acting at half the distance from the new ful-
crum; and we may substitute for this force a weight of two ounces, acting at
an equal distance on the other side of that fulcrum, supposing the levér to be
sufficiently lengthened, and there will still be an equilibrium. | In this case the
fulcrum will sustain a weight of three ounces; and we may substitute for it a
force of three ounces acting upwards, and proceed as before. In) a similar
manner the demonstration may be extended to any commensurable proportion
of the arms, that is, any proportion that can be expressed by numbers; and
it is easy to show that the same law must be true of all ratios whatever, even
if they happen to be incommensurable, such as the side of a square, compared
to its diagonal, which cannot be accurately expressed by. any numbers what-
ever; the forces remaining always in equilibrium, when they are to each other
inversely as the distances at which they are applied.


It is sometimes more convenient to have a series of levers acting on each
other, with a moderate increase of power in each, than to have a single lever
equivalent in its effect. _We may also bend either arm of a lever in any man-
ner that we please, without altering its power, provided that the direction of
the force be perpendicular to the line drawn to the fulcrum; or if the force be
applied obliquely, it may always be imagined to act at the end of a lever equal
in length to the perpendicular let fall from the fulcrum on the direction of the
force. Thus, if two levers are connected by a rope or bar, when the direction
of one of them nearly coincides with that of the rope, a force applied trans- _
versely to the lever acts with a great mechanical advantage against the rope; —
but as the inclination increases, the advantage gradually diminishes, and
changes, at last, to an equal advantage on the side of the rope and the other
lever to which it is attached. When therefore a great force is required in the

» beginning of the motion, and afterwards a much smaller force with a greater _
velocity, this apparatus may be extremely convenient: thus, in opening a
steam valve, the pressure of the steam is at first to be overcome, and after this,

‘little or no additional force is required; and Mr. Watt has very ingeniously H

applic this yer of levers to the purpose in his sae canal Inthe |


ON PRESSURE AND EQUILIBRIUM. 67


, same manner, it is necessary that the platten of a printing press, or the part
w the paper on the types, should descend from a considerable


height, but it is only at the instant of taking off the impression that a great
eesti ae and both these ends are obtained by similar means in a pres¢
cd by Lord ogee an (Plate IL. Fig: 48, Ag.)


Pharietiow axis bear a very strong resemblance to the lever. If two
Riceadia, or tly flexible and inextensible lines, be wound in contrary di-
eee cylinders, drums, or rollers, moveable together on the
same axis, there will be an equilibrium, when the weights attached to the
- threads, or the forces ‘on them, are inversely as the radii of the cy-

8 as the diameters of which they are the halves. It may easily be
pies trate the weights have the same power in turning round the cy-
Y immediately’ attached to the arms of a lever, equal in
emidiame 7 and that the conditions of equilibrium will be
“th e. (eT nstr: y also be more immediately deduced from
a the position of ote , immediately below the axis of the ey-
Tine ghts to be inversely as the radii. With respect
neutral, and the cylinders will remain at rest
le cylinder is also often combined with a lever or
gp of the cylinder is to be compared with ‘the
Pate II. Fi Fig. 50:9 Haag
Oe various kinds, resemble, in their mecha-
leat! levers, or the combination of cylinders,
el and axis; but the form of the teeth may produce
, which will be mentioned when the practical con-
iscussed. }


——


nnected with a winch is composed of two cylinders,
‘ uncoiled from the smaller, while the other end
er; the weight being supported by a pulley running in

ditions of equilibrium are easily determined from the
y, and the effect of the machine is the same, as if
oa doea coiled round a simple cylinder, of a dia-
e of the diameters of the double axis. The


68 LECTURE Vil.


maghined is, however, much stro er than such a cylinder would be, and does —
not require so great a curvature in the ropes employed. ae IV. He. 51.)
The laws of the equilibrium of pullies have been wifetbed, _ by some writers
on mechanics, to those of the lever; but the comparison is, both unnecessary
and imperfect; in the simple case of two equal weights attached to a thread
passing over a single pulley, which is the only one that allows us to recur to
the properties of the lever, the conditions of equilibrium are axiomatically
evident, without any further reasoning; andin more complicated cases, the cal-
culations proceed on perfectly different grounds. We are; therefore, to con-
sider a pulley as a cylinder, moving on an axis, merely; in order to change
the direction of a thread, without friction; for whatever is demonstrable of
* pullies or their combina “ would be equally true of as many perfectly smooth
grooves, which do not bear the most distant analogy to the lever,
i , ; oitih . [} fe - si bay tue toyy
Now when the ditpctioh ofa cinta altered, by passing over any perfectly
: _£ smooth surface, it communicates the whole force acting on it; for the resist-
ance of a surface, without friction, can only be-in-a direction perpendicular
to itself and to the thread, and. the'operation of any force remains undisturbed
» se a resistance whichis ds: ith in ‘a direction Beane? to ite tad a ghey
: ‘ aii Caiebuatiys oils ip riban Cabyiv
ah fixed sales, ehenetiie hasitio. effeet in gubiing a cndtadasel advantage;
but by means of a moveable pulley, it is obvious that a weight may be sup-—
ported by two forces, each equivalent to half the weight, applied in a vertical
direction to the extremities of the thread; and these forces may be derived
from two weights, if the thread be made to pass over two fixed pullies inva
proper position; and if one of the ends be attached to a fixed point, and the _
other remain connected to its weight, the equilibrium will continue unimpair-
ed, each portion of the thread still supporting one half of the original weight;
ps _ so that, by means of a single moveable pulley, one body en coe ei equili-
5 se a isi gentle of double its weight. (Plate IV. Fi Ae bAav sti


a4 fag Hyd bettoegiee Ward ation 43


The modes iat btext ‘pollies are very rious, tn he aden hic 4


ON PRESSURE AND EQUILIBRIUM. 69


ie moveable block, each of them bearing a weight equivalent to
hick h is applied at the end of the thread. In the common ship’s
ullies or shieves are equal in magnitude, and placed side by side ;
nber cannot conveniently exceed two or three, without causing
aiback: when the force is applied to the rope. Mr. Smeaton,
reason, invented. asystem of pullies, arranged in two rows in cach
: larger, and the other smaller: the force being applied in the mid-
ope passes on the larger pullies, till it arrives at the last, then re-
. whole of the smaller series, to the opposite side, and comes
the larger, 4 be mp aelly attached in the middle. (Plate IV.


a .


f “be the pullies, in both blocks, be taken in the ratio of

mn ae thread intervening between them and the fixed

will be equal, each of them turning on its

y may therefore be fixed to a single axis in each

eing longer, there will be less accidental

_and even the necessary friction may, per-
be somewhat uthlate IV. Fig. fe)

eel Aaiatd sip. He

orting a moveable spaliae, be fixed, and the other

pulley, and the threads of this pulley be similarly

» counterpoised by a power, which is found by

here are moveable pullies; for it is obvious that ©

he effect. of the power. (Plate IV. Fig. 58.)


ngements, by which the effect of pullies may be in-
r instance, where one end of each rope is attached
ved; or where two of the pullies are connected by a
but these methods are of little practical utility.


te 7


it @ det) Std) ff é ee
sed the ropes, passing over the pullies, to be cither
f ra I 6 to each other; but. when their directions are
| to require to be modified accordingly. Thus,
e a aa and passed over two pullies, fixed at a


70 APES LECTURE VII,


distance from each other, so that two equal weights may be attached to their
extremities, the depression of the first weight below either pulley, will be to
its distance from the pulley, in the same proportion as half of the weight to
either of the other weights; and if, instead of having a weight attached to it,
one end of the thread be fixed to a firm obstacle, the effect will be precisely
the same. A machine of this kind is sometimes called a swig, perhaps by
corruption from swing. (Plate IV. Fig. 61.)


If all the weights are unequal, we must draw a triangle, of which the three
sides are in the same proportions as the weights; and we may determine the
directions of the threads, by placing such a triangle,with the side, representing
the middle weight, in a vertical position.


A force may also be applied obliquely to a wheel and axis. Supposing a
rope to be coiled obliquely round the axis, it will require, in order to preserve


‘the equilibrium, a force as much greater than would be sutticient, if it were


simply applied in the direction of the motion, as the length of any part of
the rope uncoiled is greater than the perpendicular distance of its extremity
from the axis. So that when the rope becomes very oblique, a great force is
required in order to counteract a much smaller one acting perpendicularly.
This remark may be in some measure illustrated by considering the method
used by joiners and stonecutters for keeping a saw straight: two ropes or
braces are twisted together by means of a pin or lever passing, between them,
and serve each other in place of an axis, round which they are coiled obliquely,
so that they act with great force, when they are sufficiently tight, and not too
much twisted, (Plate IV. Fig. 62.)


It appears from the laws which have already been laid down, respecting the


‘motions of bodies on inclined surfaces, that a weight, acting vertically, will


hold in equilibrium another weight, resting on an inclined plane, without
friction, when the first is to the second as the height of the plane to its ob-
lique length. The pressure on the plane is in this case to the weight resting
on it, as the horizontal length of the plane is to its oblique length. This
pressure may be measured experimentally, by substituting for the resistance
of the plane, that of a thread perpendicular to it. (Plate IV. Fig. 63.)


2


ic Siitigtah aie hin a a


ON~PRESSURE AND EQUILIBRIUM. 71


neiples are applicable to the equilibrium of the wedge. | A

solid which has three plane faces inclined to each other, and

lar ends; and we suppose the faces perfectly polished, so as to

. fric and that no force can act on them otherwise than in a

di . Now in order that three-forces, acting on the faces

ides of wedge, may hold each. other in equilibrium, each of them must

| Minooecni the length of the side on which it acts: they must also be

garts that their directions may meet in one point; for other-

t be completely opposed to each other, and a notary mo-
roduced. eon IV. Fig. igi

rit Syit, bor!
Me ch distrendsit mice, Leidiieivdi to be capable of re receiving a as
‘direction, but i in any other direction at plea-


yas the proportion of the forces required
v always be determined by drawing a triangle


mcommonly, that the force actually operating
nother force, acting in-a direction more or less
ly rests on one of the faces of the wedge which is:
being retained in its situation, by an obstacle or
-earang line, and the sliding away of the wedge
i force. A wedge'so situated, and supposed to

B with ut friction on a horizontal surface, is sometimes
ne ined p ne, and it will support the weight resting on it,

*e be to the weight, as the height of the plane is to its
d, or the obstacle helping to support the weight,
on, the magnitude of the forces must be determined:
— of three Lita (Plate IV. ae 65.)


= ii HSE fae. sta
i “blue 2 i a:
Apis outeiean ae
Moo. cheers
Eero he linemen


Fagainet a smooth vertical surfuce or wall, be em-
a weight, by means of a force which draws its.

tal surface, the horizontal force must be to: the
. of the bottom of the prop from the wall to its perpen--


>” lt


g
ji


72 LECTURE VII.


dicular height. And from similar principles, the conditions of the equilibrium
of arches, domes, and roofs may be determined. (Plate LV. Fig. 66, 67.)


The action of a screw depends on the same principles as that of an inclined
plane; for by rolling a thin and flexible wedge, for instance, a triangular
piece of card, round a cylinder, we form a screw. We may consider the force
tending to turn the screw round its axis, as applied horizontally to the base of
the wedge, and the weight which is to be raised as acting vertically on its in-
clined surface: the cireumference of the cylinder will represent the horizontal
length of the wedge, and the distance between the threads, measured in the
direction of the axis, will be its height, provided that the threads be single;
consequently, the forces required for the equilibrium are to each other, as the
height of one spire to the circumference of the screw. But besides these
forces, it is necessary that some obstacle be present, which may prevent the
body, on which the screw acts, from following it in its motion round its axis,
otherwise there can be no equilibrium. (Plate V. Vig. 68.)


The cylinder, which is the foundation of a screw, may be either convex or
concave, making a cylindrical or a tubular'screw, and these, when fitted to-
gether, are sometimes called a screw anda nut. The nut acts on the screw
with the same mechanical power as a single point would do, since it only di-
vides the pressuré among the different parts of the spire. In general the
screw is applied in combination with a lever, in order to procure an advantage
in overcoming the friction, which is always considerable in the simple screw
and nut, and which would resist a force applied immediately at the circum-
ference, without any diminution of its power. Sometimes the spires of a
screw are made to act on the teeth of a wheel, when avery slow motion of
the wheel, or a very rapid motion of the screw, is required for the purposes of
the machine. (Plate V. Fig. 69, 70.)


The power of screws may be increased,in a great proportion, by means of an
arrangement invented by Mr. Hunter; which is somewhat similar, in its opera-
tion, to the double axis already described. A cylindrical screw is bored, and
made at the same time a tubular screw, witha little difference in the distances
of the threads, so that when it is turned within a fixed nut, it rises or sinks a


ET Oe,


ON PRESSURE AND EQUILIBRIUM. 738


little more or less than the internal screw which perforates it would rise or
sink by the action of its own threads, and a weight attached to this internal
screw ascends, in each revolution, only through a space equal to the difference
of the height of the two coils. Here the machine is analogous to a very thin
wedge, of which the thickness is only equal to the difference of the distances
of the threads, and which of course acts with a great mechanical advantage.


_ It might in some cases be more convenient to make two cylindrical screws, of
different kinds, at different parts of the same axis, rather than to perforate it.


The friction of such machines is, however, a great impediment to their opera-
tion. (Plate V. Fig. 71.)


In all the kinds of equilibrium that we have considered, and in all other
eases that can be imagined, it will be found that the forces, or rather weights,
opposed to each other, are so arranged, that if they were put in motion, their
momenta in the direction of {gravity would, in the first instance, be equal and
contrary, the velocity being as much greater as the magnitude of the weight
is smaller, Thus, if an ounce weight, placed on a lever, at the distance of four
feet from the fulcrum, counterpoise a weight of four ounces at the distance of
one foot, the velocity with which the ounce would descend, if the lever were
moved, would be four times as great as that with which the weight of four
ounces would descend. A single moveable pulley ascends with half the ve-
locity of the end of the rope which is drawn upwards, and acts with a force
twice as great; a block of three shieves enables a weight to sustain another
six times as great; but the velocity, with which this weight ascends, is only
one sixth of that with which the smaller weight must descend. When a
weight rests on an inclined plane, of which the height is one half of the
length, it may be retained by the action of a weight of half its magnitude,
drawing it up the plane by means of a thread passing over a pulley; here if
the weight ascended or descended along the oblique surface, its velocity, re-
“duced to a yertical direction, would be half as great as that of the smaller
weight which balances it.


Some authors have considered this law as affording a fundamental demon-
stration of the conditions of equilibrium in all possible cases. For since,
wherever two weights are in equilibrium, if one of them descended, the other

VoL, I. L


: 1% i LECTURE VII. |.


.

must ascend with an equal quantity of motion, it appears absurd to suppose A

that the force of gravitation could produce these two equal and contrary effects yy.

: at the same time. But it ismore satisfactory to trace, in every case, the steps a
yo by which the immediate actions of the different weights are enabled to oppose

; each other; and the general law may then be inferred, by induction, from the
agreement of the)particular results, in sams a as ni ties resoning }

\- whieh tends to establish its truth, » ey at ;


¥ , begat yeh an it iheck a not Tor
‘o C15 gif PL} iiss
ubto, Ne t6 Bist bombianes ec ande ow ded? mutilinpo ae ebnid ala ek


baringe pichtipit te etna yerf fF tad best 9 to} dient Sd. ciy tyelt aortas
-a)eY Q0Rtm tuparsw geet Ut fade ft qaeriet re geadity tlors-ofiseedye


| va y 7‘ :

y Ioan ab pancdges tah ie ti bloc wibyery | Ao bi mib oft nd exaonate
bi

y


ae opt: Ro ph cebictaem aelt-26 aptsets deiacn © goled ypisalsy Sz yyiarenas
sit “to satin rétly okt ie ovate no basal ilpes s oonwe aH ed crab ance = hb
ed oStyenu dead ste! essatt-0 FyGt to Hhuinw!s Setogipianos ciataiak adt most o>
<i bdo sane ‘apttabotiber ls. we iz6levi ody souk sia

: Ot id xy anit to Lieelaw thaw Jeitheen arg 4 Aire io 46 Uludwe gbovo! tos

; egg ode ad hte 4basazes -yotiory oid: wrest: oh uf fis A bitte binge i aoduo
r scrote iy olor bug 2her wept avewth #i disiwn a90 sid to: fine oul Rorpinct  - °
' sapligns Foe dads ahaa. £3 sidan 2avoigle ots? te Jnold 6 pissig se: saiwi .’ Y
4 : ray 0% iho ah ghAspae 3 orl gtogr eins idee cOiw e@isek x cals te segana) en epinig nie.
[aa ait 39495) tanun tilgiore lle sae doitiw clsaw nil io. dizia ono
M4 { Ja3t0 Tid. osra, et sega jh dowiw Ae oartg, banilantis fin no atent, atkyisne
, sage ott Und to tgiéw «39, action st ad heoietog dcyyzanr tip)
SB 3 Ri od" 7 iil oq’ 170 uétimacy feeinds 2. to anadier, A. onalq, os « j
: st eTignelony #2 05 vr Sahel Lderee ls! guole babwsnsaby we ene
$ cis Seger naa boite deseo pot” ae: ait plage OPO. c
4 Sea Y .


+. ¢


aha =) Sipaniee:


t saan Latneriihiodtns
* drape 3a somielsiy aimee


‘eae Sais!


Re
ve rity ares
eae i hive page af LECTURE VIUl. ‘
ae Raga amet Le


2 pnd» st sais: th,
r

ae a eg pe i!
oo. Seb 3


ON COLLISION.
ath Ss ‘
4?
iiaeaeee into the laws and properties of the motions anid a test of
under the operation of one or more forces, and into the equili-
} forces, i in different circumstances, we are next to examine
e cases of the motions of various moveable bodies acting recipro-
1 other: - In all problems of this kind, it is of importance to re-
Spicbecontagtitae already laid down, respecting the centre of in-
 ertia,. tha es place réeavareaige by or reciprocal or mutual action of the
aaa pe torvietings: 3:
: ithaliowetss on: each other, so as to dung aie direction! of
ions, by means of any forces which preserve their activity
equal distances on every side, the relative velocities with
Lin iad agg to, or recede from each other, will always be
For example, the velocity of a comet, when it
in its descent towards the sun, is the same as its v elocity
ough, at different distances, its velocity has under-
3. In this case, the force acts continually, and at-
‘each other; but the force concerned in collision,
‘impels another, acts only during the time of more or
and tends to separate the bodies from each other. —
s itself as powerfully in causing the bodies to separate, |
city with which they meet each other, the bodies
¢: when the bodies meet each other without a re-
ey are called more or less inelastic. Ivory, metals,
ily, and almost perfectly’ elastic: clay, wax, mixed
other soft bodies, are almost inelastic: and the’ effects


76 LECTURE VIII.


of inelastic bodies may be imitated by elastic ones, if we cause them to unite
or adhere after an impulse, so as to destroy the etfect of the repulsive force
which tends to separate them.


When two bodies approach to each other, their form is in some degree
changed, and the more as the velocity is greater. In general, the repulsive
force exerted is exactly proportional to the degree in which a body is com-
pressed; and when a body strikes another, this force continues to be increased
until the relative motion has been destroyed, and the bodies are for an instant
at rest with respect to each other; the repulsive action then proceeds with an
intensity which is gradually diminished, and if the bodies are perfectly elastic,
they reassume their primitive form, and separate with a velocity equal to that
with which they before approached each other. Strictly speaking, the repul-
sion commences a little before the moment of actual contact, but only at a
distance which in common cases is imperceptible. The change of form of an
elastic substance, during collision, is easily shown by throwing a ball of ivory
on a slab of marble, or a piece of smooth iron, coloured with black lead, or
printing ink; or by suffering it to fall from various heights: the degree of
compression will then be indicated by the magnitude of the black spot which
appears on the ball. It may be shown, from the laws of pendulums, that, on
the supposition that the force is proportional to the degree of compression, its
greatest exertion is to the weight of a striking body, as the height from
which the body must have fallen, in order to acquire its velocity, to half the
depth of the impression.

For making experiments on the phenomena of collision, it is most conveni-
ent to suspend the bodies employed, by threads, in the manner‘of pendulums;
their velocities may then be easily measured, by observing the chords of the
arcs through which they descend or ascend, since the velocities acquired in
descending through circular arcs are always proportional to their chords; and
for this purpose, the apparatus is provided with a graduated are, which is com-
monly divided into equal parts, although it would be a little more correct to
place the divisions at the ends of arcs, of which the chords are expressed by
the corresponding numbers. (Pate V. Fig. 72.)


The simplest case of the collision of elastic bodies is when two equal balls —


ON COLLISION. 77


descend through equal arcs, so as to meet each other with equal velocities.
They recede from each other after collision with the same velocities, and rise
to the points from which they before descended, with a small deduction for
the resistance of the surrounding bodies.


When a ball at rest is struck by another equal ball, it receives a velocity
“equal to that of the ball whiclr strikes it, and this ball remains at rest. And
if two equal balls meet or overtake each other with any unequal velocities,
their motions will be exchanged, each rising to a height equal to that from
which the other descended.


The effect of collision takes place so rapidly, that if several equal balls be
disposed in a right line, in apparent contact with each other, and another
ball strike the first of them, they will all receive in succession the whole velo-
city of the moving ball before they begin to act on the succeeding ones; they
will then transmit the whole velocity to the succeeding balls, and remain en-
tirely at rest, so that the last ball only will fly off.


In the same manner, if two or more equal balls, in apparent contact, be in
motion, and strike against any number of others placed in a line, the first of
the moving balls will first drive off the most remote, and then the second the
last but one, of the row of balls which were at rest: so that the same number
of balls will fly off together on one side, as descended to strike the row of
balls on the other side; the others remaining at rest.


Tf the line of balls, instead of being loosely in contact, had been firmly
united, they would have been impelled with a smaller velocity, and the ball
striking them would have been reflected. For when a smaller elastic body
strikes a larger, it rebounds with a velocity less than its first velocity, and the
larger body proceeds also with a less velocity than that of the body striking it.
But if a larger body strikes a smaller, it still proceeds with a smaller velocity,
and the smaller body advances with a greater.


The momentum communicated by a smaller elastic body to a larger one ist
greater than its own, and when the first body is of a magnitude comparatively
“Inconsiderable, it rebounds with a velocity nearly as great as the velocity of


ea


Fe


73 LECTURE VIIt. — P


its impulse, and the second body acquires a momentum’ nearly twice as great
as that of: the-first. When a larger body strikes a smaller one, = communi-+
needs ee eee niyat lw Gant Reue at oF
; i *niget.oh?

In the communication of motion etibeck inelastic bodies, ‘the want of a
repulsive force, capable’ of separating them with an equal relative velocity, is
probably owing to a permanent change of form; such bedies receiving and
retaining a depression at the point of contact. When the velocity is too
small to produce this change of form, the bodies, however inalatin may.
usually be observed to rebound a little. iat ; ;


» Bodies} which are perfectly inelastic, remain in contact after collision; they
must therefore proceed with the same velocity as the centre of inertia had
before-collision. Thus, if two equal balls meet, with equal velocities, they
remain at rest;’ if one is'at rest, and the other strikes it, they proceed with
half the velocity.of the ball which was first in motion. If they are of un-
equal dimensions, the joint velocity is as much smaller than that of the strik-_
ing ball, as the weight of this ball is smaller than the sum of the weights of
both balls. “And ina similar manner, the effects of © wd given velocities: i in
a ball may is Lesh jorsealiciuie yi SANE F
vat follows mimsetdasaly” from thie properties of the ‘centre of Soedli: that
in all cases of collision, ‘whether of elastic or inelastic bodies, the sum of the. °
momenta of all the bodies of the system, that is, of their masses or weights
multiplied by the numbers expressing their velocities, is the same, when re-
duced to the same direction, after their mutual collision; as it was before
their collision, ~ When the bodies are perfectly elastic, it may also area
that the sum of their energies or —— ine in i ot respective direc- “is


tions remains » ie areas Hide , bigs kB 0 ies


‘The term. eahd may et Jappliedsi vith iat ene’
‘mass or weight of a body, into the square of the numb
locity. Thus, if a weight of one ounce moves with a‘ ty
pases "we may call its energy 15 {fa second body of oro umes have ave-
acuerdee ae s energy 1 twi anand


6 = ON COLLISION. 79
°
/


since the height of the body’s vertical ascent is in proportion to it; and some
have considered i it as the true measure of the quantity of motion; but although
this | n has been very universally rejected, yet the force thus estimated
_a distinct denomination. After the considerations and demon-
is which have been premised on the subject of forces, there can be no
le doubt with respect to the true measure of motion ; nor can there
be hesitation in allowing at once that since the same force, continued
for a double | time, is known to produce a double velocity, a double force
must also >a double velocity in the same time. Notwithstanding the
simplicity of view of the subject, Leibnitz, Smeaton, and many others,
have chosen to estimate the force of a moving body, by the product. ofits
mass into the square of its velocity; and though we cannot admit that this
_ timation of force is just, yet it may be allowed that many of | the’ sensible
effects of motion, and even the advantage of any. mechanical: power, ‘however
it may be employed, are usually proportional to this. product, or to the
; f the moving body, multiplied by the height from which it) must
- have fallen, in eeroateicie given velocity.. Thus a bullet, moving
with a double will penetrate to a quadruple depth in clay or tallow:
equi of one fourth of the weight, moving with a double
to-an equal depth: and, with a smaller quantity: of
n equal excavation in a shorter time. This appears at
sie sical: but, on the other hand, we are to consider
clay o alow as a uniformly retarding force, and it will
1 » Which it can destroy im a short time,,must be
vies a longer time for its destruction. . Thus also
osed by any body. toa force tending to break it, is to
ugh which it may be bent, before it breaks, being
force exerted. at every point of that space, the power of
t is proportional to. the erfergy of its anton, or to its
the square of. its sei :
ed ae 5
Hite foneevexiployed i in ‘inition nian the ight
a _eee proportional, not to themomentum, but
tined; since these forces are seldom to be considered
icin: invd; genetallgy act at some disadvantage,
pat onsiderable. . For instance, if-it be necessary to


Ae NR eee


80. rs; LECTURE VII.


obtain a certain velocity, by means of the descent of a heavy body from «
height, to which we carry it by a flight of steps, we must ascend, if we wish
to double the velocity, a quadruple number of steps, and this will cost us
nearly four times as much labour. In the same manner, if we press with a
given force on the shorter end of a lever, in order to move 2 weight at a
greater distance on the other side of the fulcrum, a certain portion of the
force is éxpended in the pressure which is supported by the fulcrum, and we
by no means produce the same momentum, as would have been obtained, by
the immediate action of an equal force, on the body to be moved.


An elastic ball, of 2 ounces weight, moving with a velocity of 3 feet in a
second, possesses an energy, as we have already seen, which may be ex-
pressed by 18. [f it strike a ball of 1 ounce which is at rest, its velocity
will be reduced to 1 foot in a second, and the smaller ball will receive a
velocity of 4 feet: the energy of the first ball will then be expressed by 2,
and that of the second by 16, making together 18, as before. The momentum
of the larger ball after collision is 2, that of the smaller 4, and the sum of
these is equal to the original momentum of the first ball.


Supposing the magnitude of an elastic body, whichis at rest, to be infinite,
‘it will receive twice the momentum of a small body that strikes it; but its
velocity, and consequently its energy, will be inconsiderable, since the
energy is expressed by the product of the momentum into the velocity... And
if the larger body be of a finite magnitude, but still much greater than the
smaller, its energy will be very small; that of the smaller, which rebounds
with a velocity not much less than its original velocity, being but little di-
minished. It is for this reason, that a man, having a heavy anvil placed on
his chest, can bear, without much inconvenience, the blow of a large hammer
striking on the anvil, while a much slighter blow of the hammer, acting im-
mediately on his body, would have fractured his ribs, and destroyed his life.
The anvil receives a momentum nearly twice as great as that of the hammer;
but its tendency to overcome the strength of the bones, and to crush the man,
is only proportional to its energy, which is nearly as much less than that of
the hammer, as four times the weight of the hammer is less than the weight
of the anvil. Thus, if the weight of the hammer were 5 pounds, and that of
the anvil 100, the energy of the anvil would be less than one fifth as great as


}


~


ON COLLISTON. * oF


that of the hhimmer, ‘Besides some further diminution, om account of the want
of perfect elasticity, ‘and from the effect of the larger surface of the anvil, in
dividing’ the pi ure occasioned by the blow, so as to enable a greater i
tion of the wh ge peng in resisting it.
Miuph ni te ke ou 3
‘When a body strikes another, in a direction which does not pass sisi
* its centre of gravity, the effect produced involves the consideration of rotatory’
motion, since in this ‘case the body ‘is made to revolve on an axis. But this
can never happen when the body is spherical, and its surface perfectly polish-
ed; since every impulse must then be perpendicular to the surface, and must
consequently be directed to the centre of the body. If the motion of a ball,
which strikes another, is not directed to its centre, the surface of contact must
be oblique with respect to its motion, and the second ball will only receive an
impulse in a direction perpendicular to this surface, while the first receives,
from its reaction, an equal impulsé“in a contrary direction, which is com-
bined with its primitive motion. ‘The magnitude of this impulse may be de-
termined by resolving the motion of the first ‘ball into two parts, the one pa-
rallel to the surface of contact, and the other perpendicular; the first part re-
maining always unaltered, the second being modified by the collision. If, for
example, the balls were equal, this second part of the motion would be de-
stroyed, and the xemaining motion would be in the direction of the surface
of contact, and perpendicular to that of the ball impelled.


Hence it follows, that if we wish to impel a billiard ball in a given direc-
tion, by the stroke of another ball, we have only to imagine a third ball to
be placed in contact with the first, immediately behind it in the line of the
required motion, and to aim at the centre of this imaginary ball: the first
ball will then be impelled in the required direction, and the second will also
continue to move in a direction perpendicular to it.


By a similar resolution of the motion of an elastic ball, we may determine
its path, when it is reflected from a fixed obstacle. That part of the motion,
which is in a direction parallel to the surface of the obstacle, remains undi-
Minished: the motion perpendicular to it is changed for an equal+motion
in a contrary direction, and the joint result of these constitutes a motion,
in a direction, which is equally inclined to the surface, with the first motion,

VoL. I. M


$2 LECTURE VII}.


but on the opposite side of the perpendicular. Of this we have also a familiar
instance in the motions of billiard balls; for we may obserye, that a ball re-
bounds from the cushion, in an angle equal to that in which it arrives at it;
and if we wish that our ball, after reflection, should strike another, placed in
a given situation, we may suppose a third ball to be situated at an equal
distance, on the other side of the cushion, and aim at this imaginary ball:


our ball will then strike the second ball, after reflection, with a direct im- -


pulse. We here suppose the reflection to take place when the centre of the
ball arrives at the cushion, while in fact the surface only comes into contact
with it; if we wish to be more accurate, we may place the imaginary ball, at
ap equal distance beyond the centre of a ball, lying in contact with the
nearest part of the cushion, instead of measuring the distance from the


- cushion itself, (Plate V. Fig. 73.)


When the number of bodies, which meet each other, is greater, and their
magnitudes and motions are diversified, the calculation of the effects of col-
lision becomes very intricate, and the problem is scarcely applicable to any
practical purpose. Those who are desirous of pursuing the investigation as a
mathematical amusement, will find all the assistance that they reais in the
profound and elegant works of Maclaurin, ’


: 83°
igisio te vhatizedo «touboru
: ;


adithin i tumor ss RROTURE: 1X.


ON THE MOTIONS OF CONNECTED BODIES.


«


THE motions of single bodies, acting in any manner on each other, which
we have been considering, as far as they belong to the effects of collision, are
of less importance to practical mechanics, than the affections of such bodies
‘as are united, so as either to revolve round a common centre, or to participate
in in each omer’ motions, by any kind of ssoragest


ti is only within half acentury, that the phenomena and effects of rotatory
motion have been sufficiently investigated. Newton committed a mistake,
' which is now universally acknowledged, in his computation of the precession
of the equinoxes, for want of attending sufficiently to the subject; and it is of
importatice in the calculation of many of the effects of mechanical arrange-
meiits, that it should be treated in an accurate manner.


The effect of a moving body, in producing motion in any other bodies, so
connected as to be capable of turning freely round a given centre, is jointly
proportional to its distance from that centre, ‘and to its momentum in the
direction of the motion ’to be produced. Thus a body, of one pound weight,
Moving with a velocity of one foot in a second, will have three times as great
an effect on a system of bodies, to which its whole force is communicated, at
the distance of one yard from the centre of their motion, as if it acted only
at the distance of a foot, on the same system of bodies: a double weight, or
adouble velocity, would also produce a double effect. For, supposing two
unequal bodies to be connected by an inflexibie line, and to move with
equal velocities, in a direction perpendicular to that of the line, it is demon-
strable, from the principles of the composition of motion, that they may be
wholly stopped by an obstacle applied to the centre of gravity, consequently
their effects, in turning the line round this point, are equal; here the mo-


84 LECTURE Ix.


‘menta are proportional to the weights, but the products obtained by multiply-


ing them by the distances from the centre, at which they act, are equal:
these products therefore represent the rotatory power of the respective bodies.
Hence in a connected system of bodies, revolving round a given point, with
equal angular velocities, the effect produced by the rotatory motion of each
body, as well as the force which is employed in producing it, is expressed by
the product of the mass multiplied by the square of the. velocity, since the
velocity is in this case proportional to the distance from the centre; and this.
product is the same that I have denominated the energy of a moving body.


These propositions are of great use in all inquiries respecting the operations
of machines; and it is of importance to bear in mind, that although the equi-
librium of a system of bodies is determined by the equality of the products
of their weights, into their effective'distances on each side of the centre,
yet that the estimation of the mechanical power of each body, when once
in motion, requires the mass to be multiplied -by the square of the distance,
or of the velocity. For this reason, together with some others, which have
been already mentioned, some have considered the square of the velocity as
affording the true measure of force; but the properties of motion, concerned
in the determination of rotatory power, are in reality no more than necessary
consequences of the simpler laws, on which the whole theory of “mechanics
is founded.


The effects of rotatory motion may be very eats 2 examined, by
means of an apparatus, similar to that which was employed for the same pur-
pose by Mr. Smeaton. A vertical axis is turned by a, thread, passing
over a pulley, and supporting a scale with weights; the thread may be applied
at different parts. of the axis, having different diameters, and the axis supports
two arms, on which two leaden weights are fixed, at distances which may be

"varied at pleasure. The same force will then. produce, in the same time, but
half the velocity, in the same situation. of the weights, when the thread: is ap-


plied to a part of the axis of half the diameter: and if the weights are removed |


to a double distance from the axis, a quadruple force will be required, in order
_ to produce an equal angular velocity in a given time. (Plate V. Fig. 74.)


-


When a number of connected bodies, or a single body of considerable mag-


)-


ON THE MOTIONS OF CONNECTED BODIES. 85


nitude, is made to revolve round a centre, it is sometimes necessary to in-


what point their masses might be supposed to be concentrated, so


2 as to preserve the same rotatory power, with the same angular velocity. This


_ point is called the centre of gyration. In a circle, or any portion of a circle,
_ turning round its centre, the square of the distance of this point, from-the
_ centre, is half the square of the semidiameter ; and the whole effect of the mo-
_ mentum of the circle, upon an obstacle at its circumference, is exactly half
__ as great as that of an equal quantity of matter, striking the obstacle with the
velocity of the circumference.
Ue ayes asset de
ibenaiaaniothen point,.of which the determination is of considerable utility
in many mechanical problems: this is the centre of percussion ; or the point
at which an obstacie must be applied, in order. to receive the whole effect of a
stroke of a body, which is revolving round.a given centre, without producing
any pressure, or strain, on, the centre,. or axis of motion. In a straight line,
~ ora slender rod, fixed at one extremity, the distance of this point, from the
centre of motion, is two thirds of the whole length..
tem 36 te rob td A bag yd ars
also the centre of oscillation,. the distance of which de-
| ermine the tne of exciton, or vibration, of the body, suspended as a
um » upon the given: centre of motion. It may easily be shown, that
1 long, d of equable thickness, suspended at one extremity, vi-
e sal } time as a ball suspended by a.jhrea', of which the length
0 cet. But if the rod were suspended on a centre, at some point
s t yi time of its vibration would be prolonged, so as to
of a simple pendulum of much greater length. This
9 balls, fixed at the end of a rod, with a centre of
o any part of the rod, for as the centre approaches the
= vibrations are rendered extremely slow. (Plate V.


f bodies, not fixed on an axis, might be considered
ct involves in its whole extent some intricacy of
astronomy, the investigation is scarcely applicable
b ur in practice. We may, however, examine a few

Lf two bodies be supposed to be connected by an in-


386 - LECTURE Ix.


flexible line, and to be moving with equal velocities in parallel directions; if
an immoyeable obstacle be applied, so as to form a fulcrum, at the common
centre of gravity, they will, as we have already seen, be wholly stopped: but
if the fulcrum be applied to any other part of the line, one of the bodies
will move: forwards, and the other backwards, with a velocity which may
easily be determined by calculating their rotatory power with respect to the
fulcrum. If the fulcrum be applied at a point of the line continued beyond
the bodies, the one will lose and the other gain velocity, since the quantity
of rotatory power will always remain unaltered: that point only which is de-
nominated the centre of oscillation retaining its original velocity. Now the
same inequality in the motion of the bodies, and consequently the same an-
gular velocity of rotation will be produced, if the connected bodies be ini-
tially at rest, and the fulcrum be applied to them with the same relative velo-
city. For example, if a straight rod or wire receive an impulse at one end in
a transverse direction, the centre of oscillation, which is at the distance of
two thirds of the length from the end struck, will at the first instant remain
at rest, consequently the centre will move with one fourth of the velocity of
the impulse, and this must be the velocity of the progressive motion of the
rod, since the centre of gravity of any body, which is at liberty, moves al-


_ ways with an equable velocity in a right line, while the whole rod will alsq


revolve equably round its centre, except such retardations as may arise from
foreign causes. In a similar manner the computation may be extended to
bodies of a more complicated form. Thus it has been calculated at what
point of each planet an impulse must have operated, in order to communicate
to it at one blow its rotation and its progressive motion in its orbit.


Those who have asserted that the motion of the centre of gravity of abody
can only be produced by an impulse, which is either wholly or partly directed
towards it, have obviously been mistaken. The centre of oscillation is the
only point which remains at rest with regard to the first effect of the stroke,
and the centre of gravity, which never coincides with the centre of oscilla-
tion, moves in the direction of the impulse, while the parts beyond the cen-
tre of oscillation begin to move in a contrary direction. Hence it is, that
a thin stick may be broken, by a blow on the middle, without injuring the
glasses on which it is supported: for the ends of the stick, instead of being
depressed by the stroke, would rise with half the velocity of the body which


w
ON THE MOTIONS OF CONNECTED BODIES. 87


strikes them, if the two portions were separated without the loss of any force.
Fi, But unless a 8 has been previously employed i in producing a partial se-
paration, it will frequently be found, that the stick has + serena enongh to

: beak the elas before iteives way. sintad


The subject of camcmlannnee, or of the action of! henicdhits or forces coun-
teracted by other forces, and incumbered with foreign matter to be put in
motion, requires for its discussion a previous. knowledge of the simple opera-
tion of forces, of the conditions of equilibrium, and of the estimation of rota-
tory power. The consideration of the effects of preponderance enables us to
determine, in some circumstances, the best possible proportions of the powers.
‘ _ of machines, for producing the required effects in the most advantage-

' ous manner. For, in order that motion may be produced, it is not sufficient
that there be an equilibrium, in procuring which a part only of the power is
expended, but there must be an excess of force above that which would be

necessary for the equilibrium ; and it is often of consequence to know what

portion of the power must be employed in each way, in order that the great-

est effect may be produced in a given time. We are sometimes told, that

what we gain in power, we lose in time. In one sense indeed the remark is.

true; thus one man can do no more by a powerful machine in ten hours,

“than ten men can do by a weaker machine in one hour; but in other senses

the assertion is often erroneous; for by increasing the mechanical advantage

‘ to a given degree, we may in some cases considerably increase. the perform-

ance of a machine, without adding to the force.


‘ According to the nature of the force employed, and to the construction
’ of the machine, a different calculation may be required for finding the best
ed: proportions of the forces to be employed; but a few simple instances will
. . serve to show the nature of the determination. Thus, in order that a smaller’
weight may raise a greater to a given vertical height, in the shortest time
possible, by means of an inclined plane, the length of the plane must be to

its height, as twice the greater weight to the smaller, so that the acting force

Ke May be twice as great as that which is simply required for the equilibrium.
“This may be shown experimentally, by causing three equal weights, sup-

ported on wheels, to ascend at'the same time as many inclined planes of the
same height, but of different lengths, by means of the descent of three other


88 an LECTURE Ix,


equal wéights, connected with the former three, by threads passing over pul-
lies. The length of one of the planes is twice its height, that of another
considerably more, and that of a third less: if the weights begin to rise at
the same time, the first will arrive at the top, before either of the others.
(Plate V. Fig. 76.)


If a given weight, or any equivalent force, be employed to raise another
equal weight, by means of levers, wheels, pullies, or any similar powers, the
greatest effect will be produced, if the acting weight be capable of sustaining,
in equilibrium, a weight about twice and a half as great as itself. This pro-
position may be very satisfactorily illustrated by an experiment. Three double
pullies being placed, independently of each other, on an axis, round which


“they move freely, the diameters of the two cylindrical portions, which com-


pose the first, being i in the ratio of 3 to 2, those of the second as 5 to 2, and
those of the third as 4 to 1, six equal weights are attached to them in pairs,
so that three may be raised by the descent of the other three, on the principle
of the wheel and axis. If then we hold the lower weights, by means of
threads, or otherwise, and let them go, so that they may begin to rise at the
same instant, it will appear evidently that the middle pulley raises its weight
the fastest; and consequently, that in this case, the ratio of 5 to @ is more
advantageous, than either a much less, or a much greater ratio. If the weight
to ‘be raised were very great in proportion to the descending weight, the ar-
rangement ought to be such, that this weight might retain, in equilibrium, a


weight about twice as great as that which is actually to be raised. If the -


descending weight were a hundred times as great as’ the ascending weight,
the greatest velocity would be obtained in this case, by making the descend-
ing weight capable of holding in equilibrium a weight one ninth as pots as
itself. (Plate VI. Fig. 77.) 3


The proportion required for the greatest effect is somewhat different, when
_ the heights, through which both the weights are to move, are limited, as they
usually must be in practical cases. Here, if we suppose the operation tobe
_ continually repeated, the effect will be greatest in a given time, when the | 1
ascending weight is between two thirds and one half, of the exact counter-_
poise to the descending weight. If, however, the force were accumulated
_ during the action of the —— there would be no limit to the sCianehaeies }


7


ON THE MOTIONS OF CONNECTED BODIES. 89


a slow motion. Thus, if we have a stream of water, filling a single reservoir,


- which is to raise a weight by means of its descent, the proportion here as-


_signed will be the best for performing the most work in a given time; but if

we chose to double our machine, so that one reservoir should be filled during
the descent of another, it would be proper to proportion the weights in such a
manner, that the whole time required for filling one of the reservoirs should
be ‘occupied i in the descent and the reascent of the other:


In stiles cases, if great accuracy were required, it would be necessary
in the calculation to add to the mass to be moved, the quantity of moveable
matter in the machine, reduced to a mean distance from the fulcrum or centre,
according to its rol power, in the same manner as the centre of gyration
is determined. But there is seldom occasion for such a degree of feo?
The magnitude of the pressure whieh is exerted on the fulcrum, ‘during
Motion of the connected ‘bodies, may always be determined, by comparing
the actual velocity of the centre ip oe gravity with that of a sien descending
 anmeee enter 2


Thdse phbjiiicedraind experiments must be allowed to require an attentive
consideration from those who are engaged in practical mechanies;’ and it is
natural to suppose thatthe proportions laid down may be adopted with safety,
and employed with success, and that we may sometimes derive important ad-
vantages from their application. But on more ‘mature consideration, we shall
find some practical reasons for caution in admitting them without material
alterations.

“ If a machine were constructed for raising a solid weight, and so arranged
as to perform its office in the shortest possible time with a given expense of
power, the weight would still possess, when it arrived at the place of its
destination, a considerable and still increasing velocity: in order that it might
retain its situation, it would be necessary that this velocity should be destroy-


» ed; if it were suddenly destroyed, the machinery would undergo astrain which


might be very injurious to it: and if the velocity were gradually diminished,
the time would no longer be the same as is supposed in the calculation. In
the second place, the forces generally employed are by no means uniformly


‘accelerating forces, like that of gravitation, to which the propositions which
VoL. N


~~ ws


90 LECTURE Ix.


we have been considering are adapted: they are not only less active when a
certain velocity has once been attained, but they are often capable of a tem-
porary increase or diminution of intensity at pleasure. We have seem the in-
convenience of producing a great final velocity, on account of its endanger-
ing the structure of the machine: if therefore our permanent force be calcu-
lated according to the common rule, so as:to be able to maintain the equili-
brium, and overcome the friction, the momentum or inertia of the weights,
when once set in motion, will be able to sustain that motion equably; and it
will not be difficult to give them a sufficient momentum, by a greater exer-
tion of the moving force, for a short space of time, at the beginning: and
this is in fact the trae mode of operation of many machines where animal
strength is employed. Other forces, for instance those of wiid and water,
: te themselves in some measure, at least with respect to the relative ve-
locity of the sails and the wind, or the floatboards and the water ; for we may
easily increase the resistance, until the most advantageous effect is produced.
Many authors, considering the pressure of a stream of water as analogous to
the impulse of a number of unconnected particles, striking the floatboards,.
and then ceasing to produce any further effect, have inferred, that the force ~
obtained by such an impulse must be as the square of the relative velocity,
and that the effect of an undershot wheel must be the. most advantageous,.
when its velocity is one third of that of the stream: but it will hereafter ap-
pear, that this estimation of hydraulic force is by no means accurate. If we
compare the greatest Mom with which a man or a horse can run or walk
without fatigue, to the velocity of the stream, and the actual velocity of that
part of the machine to which the force is applied, to the velocity of the float-
boards of a water wheel, the strength which can be exerted may be repre-
sented, according to the experiments of some authors, by the impulse of the
stream, as supposed to be proportional to the square of the relative velocity ;
consequently the same velocity would be most advantageous in both cases;
and the man or horse ought, according to these experiments, to move, when
his force is’ applied to a machine, with one third of the velocity with which
he could walk or run when at liberty. This, for a man, would be about a
mile and a half an hour ; for a horse, two or three miles: but in general both
men and horses appear to wouk most ‘advantageously with a emgore 4 some-
what greater than this.


ON THE MOTIONS OF CONNECTED BODIES, 91


Where a uniformly accelerating force, like that of gravitation, is employed
pps: it might often be of advantage to regulate its operation, so that
it might act nearly in the same manner as the forces that we have been con-
sidering - at first with greater intensity, and afterwards with sufficient power
ilibrium, and overcome the friction only. This might be done,
by means of a spiral barrel, like the fusee of a watch; and a similar modifica-


_ tion has sometimes been applied, ‘by causing the ascending weight, when it


arrives near the place of its destination, to act on a counterpoise, which resists
it with a force continually increasing, by the operation of a barrel of the same
kind, so as to prevent the effect of the shock which too rapid a motion would.
occasion. sa el P 2 y ‘

aii alt % ) - a

On the whole, we may conclude, that on account of the limited velocity
which is usually admissible in the operation of machines, a very small por-
tion of the moving force is expended in’ producing momentum; the velocity
of 3 miles an hour, would be generated in a heavy body, descending by its
own weight, in one seventh of a second, and a very short time is generally


' sufficient for obtaining as rapid a motion as the machine or the nature of - the


force will allow; and when this has been effected, the whole force is employed
in maintaining the equilibrium, and overcoming the resistance: so that the
common opinion, which has probably been formed without entering minutely
into the consideration of the subject, and which appears, when first we examine
its foundation with aceuracy, to lead to material errors, is in great measure nal
tified by a more profound investigation.


To seek for a source of motion in the construction of a machine, betrays a
gross ignorance of the principles on which all machines operate. The only
interest that we can takein the projects which have been tried for procuring a
perpetual motion, must arise from the opportunity that they afford us to ob-
serve the weakness of human reason; to see a man spending whole years in the
pursuit of an object, which a week's application to sober philosophy might have
convinced him was unattainable. The most satisfactory confutation of the
notion of the possibility of a perpetual motion, is derived from the considera-
tion of the properties of the centre of gravity: we have only to examine whe-
ther it will begin to descend or to ascend, when the machine moves, or whe-
esi Ttemain at rest. If it be so placed, that it must either remain at


$2 “LECTURE Ix.


rest or ascend, it is clear, from tlie laws of equilibrium, that no motion derived
from gravitation can take place: if it may descend, it must either continue
to descend for ever, with a finite velocity, which is impossible, or it must first
_descend and then ascend, with a vibratory motion, and then the; case will be
reducible to that of a pendulum, where it is obvious that no new motion is
generated, and that the friction and resistance of the air must soon destroy
the original motion. One of the most common fallacies, by which the super-
ficial projectors of machines for obtaining a perpetual motion have been de-
luded, has arisen from imagining, that any number of weights ascending by
acertain path, on one side of the centre of motion, and descending in the
other, at a greater distance, must cause a constant preponderance on. the side
of the descent: for this purpose, the weights have either been fixed on-hinges
which allow them to fall over at a certain point, so as to become more distant
from the centre, or made ide or roll aleng grooves or planes, which lead
them to a more remote part of the wheel, from whence they return as they
ascend; but it will appear on the inspection of such a machine, that although
some of the weights are more distant from the centre.than others, yet there is
always a proportionally smaller number of them on that side on which they.
have the greatest power; so that these circumstances precisely counterbalance
each other, (Plate VI. Fig. 78.)


» at 7 4 ~ fe ee
eng | : --
d ant) ia . _ ,
. ‘ ‘


99 . s 4


ii merveto we tietlo ili

genres ej. teu Taine
elite ant ow irs |, lisse ‘
5A f “LECTURE X.


nee daotoiie shi 2:! : tenet
ON DRAWING, WRITING, AND MEASURING.


Havinec inyestigated all the general principles and laws of motion, and

of mechanical power, we may now proceed to the consideration of particular

departments of practical mechanics. But before we can satisfactorily compare

the various forces, which we are to employ or to oppose, we must have some

mode of determining their magnitude; and we must begin by examining the

b spaces which are measures of. their action: a knowledge of the instruments

employed for delineation, and. of the rules of perspective projection, is also

necessarily required,as a previous step in the study of practical mechanics. We

* have therefore toconsider, as preliminary subjects, first the arts which ‘may be

expressed by the terms instrumental geometry, or the geometry of mechanics;:

| secondly, statics, or the mode of ascertaining the magnitude of weights, and

\ of other active forces; and thirdly, the examination of the passive strength of.
| materials of various kinds, and of the negative force of friction.


The art of drawing can scarcely be distinguished by any correct definition
from painting. In its simplest state, when we merely imitate an original laid
before us, it is called copying; and in writing, we only copy the letters of the
alphabet. (If we proceed in a mathematical, manner in the operation of draw-

‘ing, we require a number of geometrical instruments, which are still more
necessary for the first construction of diagrams or figures. In modelling and:
. sculpture, a solid is simply imitated; but when a solid is represented ona
Plane, the principles of perspective are employed in determining the position,
of the lines which are to form the picture. The productions of the arts of
drawing and.writing are multiplied and perpetuated by means of engraving
and printing; inventions which have been the sources of inestimable advantage
i the instruction and civilisation of mankind,


94 LECTURE X.,


In drawing, we may employ the pen, the pencil, chalks, crayons, inks,
water colours, or body colours; we may paint in miniature, in distemper, in


- fresco, in oils, in varnish, in wax, or in enamel; and we may imitate the


effects of painting, by mosaic work, or by tapestry.


The first step in copying a drawing, or in painting, is to procure a correct
outline : a master of the art can do this with sufficient accuracy, by such an
estimate of the proportions of the figures, as the eye alone enables him to
form; especially if he be assisted by lines, which divide the original into a
number of squares, and enable him to transfer their contents to the corre-
sponding squares of the copy, which may'in this manmer be reduced, or en-
larged, when it is required. Buta copy may sometimes be more expeditiously
made, by tracing immediately from the original; when the materials employed
are sufficiently transparent to admit the outlines to be seen through them; or,
where the original is of no value, by pricking a number of points through it, so
as to mark the copy, either at once, or by means of charcoal powder rubbed
through the holes, which is called stenciling: and for this purpose, an inter-
mediate copy may be formed ‘on semitransparent paper. Another method is


. to put a thin paper, rubbed with the powder of black lead, or of red chalk,!


between the original and the paper intended for the copy, and to pass ablunt)
point over all the lines to be traced, which produces correspondent lines on
the paper} this is called calking. Where the work is large; it may be cover-'
ed with a thin gauze, and its'outlines traced on the gauze with chalk, which
is then to be placed on the blank surface, and the chalk shaken 35 it, in the
way that a nrenie imarks a board with po line.
f mdgha tiie -eme ak. syns

The per’ soba fotinetiy? winch use For’ nniling rough’ shade, kad it is) still

sometimes employed for the same’ purpose, 'as'well as for assisting the effect of


the pencil. The appearances of uniform lights and shades must necessarily -


be imitated in drawings with the pen, as well as engravitigs, by a mixture of
the whiteness of the paper, with the blackness or colour of the ink, the eye


being too remote ‘to distinguish minutely’ the: separate lines,” by which the) !
effect is produced, although they do not entirely ‘escape ‘its observation: » In


this respect, drawings in pencils ‘and chalks have an advantage’ over engrav~
ings; these substances, after being laid on in lines, are spread, by:means of
rubbers, or pi of paper, leather, or ine, 's0 a8 to: produce a re:


On DRAWING, WRITING, AND MEASURING. 95


‘of tint. Some, indeed; are’ of opinion, that engravings, derive
iancy from the hatches'that are employed ‘in shading them, and
gute inequalities of: colour make every'tiht more pleasing. | In draw-
1 soem the adyantage of ‘rubbers is unquestionable... The
a drawing may be*made: to have an appearance of greater freedom
‘aualeeae recta. should .be*parallel, and when: they: are
crossed, moderately oblique to eachother; their direction stiould be governed
by that of the outline. Engravings i in mezzotinto exhibit no lines: but they
are re deficient in spirit ; and precision: the effect of aqua tinta approaches much

F 0 fidrawing ‘and it has’ similar-advantage in the niode ta
ecdeaeien: (Pinas V1.8 ))00 ©1123 wd in


Bera tno ‘that the’ best pencils are male Se English black lea, or
plumbago. - Of black’ chalks, the Italian i is harder and ‘more’generally. useful
mere has the disadvantage of not*being: easily removed,
bryouicone aaa without ‘leaving! brownish mark. | All
of.'a soft schistws’ or slate: they may be made
er, by dipping the drawings in. milk freed from
, which dissolves'the size or gum’ of: the paper.
s used, which serves-for a middle tint, andi lessens
i shades! only Being Rf black, —
tw On to hit! sono: fied Send vals aol V
c 's mixed upiwith ' gum) -water, or otlier native
ly also with:some chalk, plaster, or pipe clay, so as to
» for working in:the manner ‘of chalks. The prin-
ng them is their want vs ae to the eit
iS telesBidenadih. “y
OCR VEL Ae Death + vt
in light and shade only, the materials emploveda are
liquor! of the cuttle fish, ot bistre, which is extradted
last produce a. browner:and richer tint’ than the Indian
es, as well as water colours, there is'a great diversity in
isirtieeee some work with’a dry pencil; others with a
all their’ coloured drawings in black only, others use
ng. When a full pencil is used, care must be taken
tint dry sooner or Jater than the rest’ .When body


6 PY 1g T2ARL LECTURE Ke. wvi Wana vo


colours are'employed, ‘there is less difficulty.in producing a uniformity of tint
than with water colours,» each: coat of the colour being laid on in sufficient.
quantity to.cover all that is below it without mixing: hence it becomes easier
to make. any alterations that may -be required.) For water, colours. of all ,
descriptions, a certain quantity. of gumvis used, and sometimes,a size made of
isinglass, with a Jittle sugarcandy. Body colours contain less gum than other
water colours... Besides paper, wood, silk, and cotton nee ‘are sometimes
used for drawings in water colours. i
’ +4 i vt be ahs} ist |

In miniatures, the moet delicate tints, are laido on in péintsieiitl simple water
colours ; but for the draperies, . body evens are sometimes: used.' ‘They are
oman executed on ivory.

AQEZIG On, 20 * read Wee I

‘For painting» tnndiailiepen; the scdetira rei mined with a size inadahy boile
ing shreds of untanned leather, or,of parchment, for several :lours: this me-
thod is chiefly employed-for: colouring; walls: or paper, but sometimes for! paint-
ing on v cloth. For delicate, pe sapeget ‘the size cy be madeé with praaeel

S ul iwaeih” stit dtr podt ot-viar

When a ration: scieling i is painted in i fabed,1 the rough coat of ithe tlle
is covered with a coat’ of fine'sand and lime, , as far as it can be painted. before
it is dry, the coloursibeing: partly, imbibed) by! this coat, and thus becoming
durable. When they have been once laid on, no alteration can be made,
without: taking off the last coat of »plaster, and each.part must be completed
at once; ,it is therefore always necessary to/have @ finished drawing for a
copy; this is usually executed on paper, and is called a cartoon: The colours
can) be only of earths or metallic oxids; they! iare prepared as,for painting in
distemper. The only paintings of; the antients, which. have. ‘heen preseryed, .
were executed i in — oi eo !

j ezine bate. sae Sigil {ti patients Wet: 10
oThe art of pathic ti oil was first discovered by Van Eyck of one: ‘to-
wards the end of the 14th century: . icin eyo ‘only man-
ner in which paintings of are are mixed
with linseed eee oil, saved with oil of Saeed dicho with
a small portion of oil of turpentine, to assist in drying them; and with the.
occasional addition of other oily and resinous substances. ‘The work may. be —
aac wood, cloth, silk, paper, marble, om a eee


ON DRAWING, WRITING, AND MEASURING. 97


being first washed with size, and then primed with an oilcolour, which is usu-


“ally white, ‘but sometimes dark. Some painters have, however, preferred we


ground of distemper. The glare of the oil colours, or of the varnish, which
is added in order to give them brilliancy, is considered as an inconvenience
attending oil paintings; and capita the colours are too liable to fade or to
blacken by the effect of time. ‘ ‘ ,

“The encaustic paintings of the ancients were'imperfect approximations to
the art of painting in oil. Wax or resins were employed for retaining the
colours in their places; and they were applied by means of a moderate heat.
An effect ‘nearly similar is produced by dissolving the resins in spirits of wine,
as is done in painting in varnish. A much greater degrev- of heat is required


‘for paintings in enamel: for this purpose the colours are mixed with a glass


of easy fusion, and, when finely powdered, they are usually applied with oil of
turpentine, or sometimes oil of lavender, to a ground’ of’ ‘metal or porcelain;
they are afterwards fixed and vitrified by exposure to’the heat of a furnace. °


Mosaic work is performed by putting together small pieces of stone, or
baked clay, of various colours, so as to imitate the effects of painting: in tapes-
try, and in embroidery, uae same is vas by navi, or working in, threads of
different kinds.’ ©

oOo}

“The art of writing is of sitar utnaquity, but it is probably in all countries,
and certainly i in some, of 'a later date ithan that of drawing representations of
nature. The Mexicans, at the first arrival of the Spaniards in South America,
are said to have employed drawings as 4 mode of conveying intelligence;
some of them simply resembling the objects to which they related, others in-
tended as hieroglyphics; that is, like the antient Egyptian characters, of a
nature intermediate between drawing and writing. The Chinese have always


' used arbitrary marks to represent whole words, or the names of external ob-


jects, not resembling the objects to which they relate, nor composed of letters

appropriated to constituent parts of the sound, although they are said to be

combined from a few hundred radical characters expressive of the most simple

ideas. The art of writing’ with alphabetical letters must have been suflici-

ently understood, in the age of Moses, to serve the purpose of the promulga-

tion of laws and of religion: it is generally supposed to have been invented
VoL. 1, o


MIB. Gis EK |
\ MMENGS
eer re


¢
F


938 LECTURE X,


by the Phenicians. Among the Greeks it was in a yery imperfect state until
the time of the siege of Troy, or about 3000 years ago. The Chinese write ~
from above downwards, beginning on the right side; the other eastern na-
tions have always written from right to left. The most ancient Greek in-
scriptions are turned alternately backwards and forwards, the letters being re-
versed in the lines which begin on the right side; but the Greeks soon con-
fined themselves to that mode, which has been since adopted by all European
nations, and which appears to be in itself the most natural, at least for writ-
ing with a pen, and with the right hand.


The earliest methods of writing were probably such as rather deserve the
name of engraving; the letters being cut in stone, in wood, on sheets of lead,
on bark, or on leaves, For temporary purposes, they were formed on tablets
of wax, with a point called a stile, and this practice was long continued for
epistolary correspondence, and was not wholly out of use in the fourteenth
century. The stile was made of metal or of bone; its upper extremity was
flattened, for the purpose of erasing what had been written. The Egyptian
papyrus is said by Varro to™have been first used for writing, at the time of
the foundation of Alexandria; the leaves of palms, the inner bark of. trees,
or sometimes linen cloth, having been before employed. The exportation of
the papyrus was forbidden by Ptolemy, and in consequence of this prohibition,
skins of parchment, or of vellum, were first applied to the purpose of writing
at Pergamus, for the library of king Eumenes, whence they were called mem-
brana pergamena. To make the best paper, the widest and finest leaves of the
papyrus were matted together, united by a vegetable glue, and pressed till
they became sufficiently smooth; the coarser kinds were not used for writing,
but for commercial purposes. In China, paper is sometimes made of a thin
and almost transparent membrane taken from the bark of a tree, Paper of
cotton was introduced into Europe from the east in, the middle ages: it has
been since superseded by that which is made of linen rags, and which is also
an eastern invention; but for coarse and strong paper, old ropes of hemp are


"also used; and sometimes many other vegetable substances have been employed.


The strength and consistence of paper is owing to the lateral adhesion derived
from the intermixture of the fibres, assisted by the glutinous size, which is
also of use in obviating the bibulous quality of the paper, by filling up its —
pores. <r Bs a Te. sie


amt ae |


ON DRAWING, WRITING, AND MEASURING. 99


Ivory, and prepared ass’s skin, are sometimes employed for writing with 4
black lead pencil; for slates, a pencil of a softer kind of slate is used, The
ancient mathematicians usually constructed their diagrams on sand for the in-
struction of their pupils.


Pens of goos¢ quills, swan’s quills, or crow quills, were known as early as
the seventh century: in Europe they have generally superseded the reeds,
which were employed for writing by the ancients: but in India, reeds, canes,

“and bamboos, are still in use. In China a hair pencil is used instead of a pen.

The inks of the ancients ate said to have been made of a carbonaceous sub-

4 stance, and the modern Indian ink owes its blackness to similar materials.
Common writin? ink consists of a gallate of iron, suspended by means of a
little gum; the sulfuric acid, which remaifis mixed with it, is probably of no
consequence to its blackness. It has been observed, that an abundance of
the galli¢ acid produces a much blacker colour, than is obtained where this‘acid
is used int a stialler proportion. Mr. Ribaucouft’s method of making ink, is
- to boil cight ourices of galls, and four of logwood, in twelve pounds of water,
until the quantity is reduced to one half; and, having strained the decoction,
to add to it four ounces of sulfate of iron, one of sulfate of copper, three of
“gum arabic, and oné of sugar candy. But for ordinary purposes, it is sufficient to
infuse three ounces of galls for a day or two in a pint of water, and to add to
it an ounce of gum arabic, half an ounce of green sulfate of iron, or cop-
peras, and a drachm of sulfate of copper, or blue vitriol, or even a much
smaller quantity of gum and of copperas, if a very fluid ink is required. The
sulfate of copper produces a durable stain, but it does not immediately add
to the blackness of the ink: its principal use is to counteract the tendency of
the ink to become mouldy. Sometimes a mercurial salt is employed for the
same purpose, and a little cotton, if the inkstand is too open, is also useful in
preserving the ink ; but the addition of spirits is often insufficient, and is liable
to make the ink run.


It has been proposed to use inks of different colours for indicating different
numbers; so that by ten kinds of ink applied in different ways, any numbers
at pleasure might be expressed. Thus, in making an index of the words of an
author, each page might be readily covered with lines of different colours


+100 LECTURE X..


drawn in different directions, so that each word, when cut out, might indicate
the page to which} it belongs. ,


An ingenious instrument has lately been constructed, by means of which
copies may be multiplied with great facility; it is called the polygraph, and
consists of two or more pens, so connected by frames and springs, as, to move
always in parallel directions, each having an inkstand anda sheet of, | paper for
itself. In this manner five copies may be made at once with tolerable facility,
and themethod’ may perhaps hereafter be extended to a much greater number.


A mode of writing, perfectly different from any of those which have been
mentioned, is performed by means of the telegraph, which is justly consider-
ed as the invention of the ingenious Dr. Hooke. The ancients had attempted.
something similar, by the exhibition of torches on elevated situations; but Dr.
Hooke observes, that. the addition of the telescope is absolutely necessary for
- the practical success of the process ; and the directions which he gives for its.
performance differ very little from the plan which has since been generally:
adopted, first in France, and afterwards, with some variations, in this coun-
try. Dr. Hooke proposed the employment of alphabetical and other arbitrary
characters; at present it is usual to have six boards, each turning on its axis.
so as to appear or disappear at pleasure: these admit of sixty four combina-
tions, which are sufficient, besides indicating the letters of the alphabet, for
every other purpose that can be required. (Plate VI. Fig. 80, 81.)


Pens for drawing lines and figures differ sometimes from those which are
used for writing; they are made of two plates of steel inclined to each other
and adjusted by a screw; or sometimes of a plate of tin folded up, so as to.
include a receptacle for the ink; or of a glass tube drawn to a very fine point,
and still remaining perforated. In all these pens, as well as in common
pens, the ink is retained by its cohesion, and by the capillary attraction of the
pen; and it attaches itself to the paper by the operation of similar powers..


It is by'no means easy to comply strictly with that postulate of geometry,
which requires us to draw a straight line from one point to another. The
edge of a ruler,is.made straight by the instrument called a plane, which is
worked with a considerable velocity, and therefore naturally tends to move in.


ON DRAWING, WRITING, AND MEASURING. 101


a right line, besides that it is guided by the flatness of its lower surface. We
judge of the straightness of a line, by means of the well known property
of light, which moves only in right lines, so that if we look along the edge
of a ruler, we easily discover its irregularities; and this may be done with
still greater accuracy, if we look through a small hole made with a pin in a
card. Rulers of silver, brass, or ivory, have a material advantage over those
of wood, as they are not liable to be spoilt by warping. A pen filled with
ink cannot be applied close to the edge of a ruler without inconvenience ; it
is therefore best, for diagrams which require great accuracy, to draw the
lines first with a steel point, or a very hard black lead pencil, and to finish.
them with ink if necessary. The paper should also be fixed on a drawing
board; and plates of lead or copper may be employed, instead of paper, for.
very delicate purposes. The carpenter's chalk line is a useful instrument for
supplying the place of a very long ruler; it becomes straight when it is
stretched, because a right line is the shortest distance between any two»

points.. :


For drawing a circle of a given radius, we use compasses, with one point’
generally of metal, the other of various descriptions. Compasses are some-
times made with a spring, instead of a joint, and opened or shut by a screw:
sometimes a graduated are is fixed in one leg, and passes through the other;
and when great accusacy is required, hair compasses may be employed, having
a joint with a spring in one of the legs, which is bent a little by. means of’ a:
fine screw. Beam compasses are useful for drawing circles of larger radii:
they have also the advantage of being steadier than the common compasses,
and of admitting readily the application of a graduated scale, so as to indi-


‘cate the measure of the radius of the circle which is described. Sometimes,


for drawing portions of very large circles, two wheels, differing a little in dia-

meter, are fixed on a common: ‘axis, and thus. made to revolve round a point,

which is more or less distant, accordingly as the wheels are set at a greater or
less distance on the axis, the surface of the wheels tracing the circles on the
paper; or two'rulersjoined together, so as to form an angle, are made to slide:
against two points, oredges, projecting from a third ruler, so that the angular
point remains always in the arc of a circle. The same effect may be produced, .
somewhat more commodiously, by means of a thin piece of elastic wood,.
which is made to assume. any required curvature, by the action of screws, applis-


» 102 LECTURE xX.


ed to different parts of its concavity: it would, however, be more simple and
accurate to employ only one screw, in the middle of the arc, and to make
the flexible ruler, or bow, every where of such a thickness, as to assume a cir-
cular form in its utmost state of flexure: it would then retain the circular
form, without a sensible error, in every other position, (Plate VI. Fig.
82. . 85.)


For drawing a line perpendicular to another, we often employ a square ;
and if we use a rectangular drawing board, there is an additional convenience
in making the square to slide on its margin. Rulers also, of various descrip-
tions, are commonly made rectangular, in order to answer occasionally the


same purpose.


Triangular compasses are sometimes used, for laying down a triangle equal
to a given triangle; and by repeating the operation, any figure, which can be
divided into triangles, may be copied without the intersection of arcs: but the
same end is more commonly obtained, by pricking off the figure with a stcel
point. (Plate VI. Fig. 86.)


Various properties of parallel lines are employed in constructing parallel
rulers: a parallelogram with jointed angles is the most commonly used; two
equal rulers being united by equal cross’ bars placed in an: oblique position,
and turning on pins fixed in the rulers: the instrument is: much improved by
adding a third ruler, similarly united to the second, for then the obliquity of
one of the two motions may be made to correct that of the other. A simple


‘cylinder, or a round ruler, answers the purpose im a rough manner, and two


small rollers, fixed on the same axis, are also sometimes attached to a flat
ruler, and cause it to move so as to be always in parallel positions. A very
useful instrument for drawing parallel lines, at any given distances, is now
generally known by the name of Marquois’s scales, although it is by no means
of late invention; by sliding a triangle along a graduated ruler, we read off
the divisions on an amplified scale with great accuracy; but where the dis-
tances of the lines are great, the obliquity of this motion is a considerable
inconvenience. The ruler or square of the drawing board affords us lines
parallel to each other, in a certain position; and'if it be made with a joint,
or as the workmen call it, bevilled, it may be employed for the same purpose,


aad i


ON DRAWING, WRITING, AND MEASURING, 4103


in all other directions. The systems of lines, on which music is written, are
drawn at one stroke by a pen with five orifices, usually made of brass. It
was long since proposed to rule a whole page at once, with a more complicat-
ed pen of the same kind, and the greatest part of the paper, on which music
is written in this country, is actually ruled by such a machine, for which a
patent has been taken out. (Plate VI. Fig. 87, 88.)


The pantograph is used for copying figures, and at the same time reducing
or enlarging them; it consists of four rulers, two of them united by a joint at
the extremities, and receiving at the middle the other two, which are but
half as long, and are also united together, so as to form with the others a
jointed parallelogram, of which two of the sides are produced beyond the
angles ; if holes be made in these, and in one of the shorter rulers, so situated’
as to be in the same right line in any position of the instrument, they will
remain in a right line in any other position, and they will always divide this
line in the,same proportion: so that if one of the holes be placed on a fixed
axis or pin, a tracing point inserted in another, and a pencil in the third,
any figure delineated by the pencil will be similar to that which is described
by the tracing point, And instead of holes in the rulers, they may be fur-
nished with sliding sockets, to receive the axis, the point, and the pencil,
(Plate VI. Fig. 89.)


Proportional compasses are also of great use, in reducing lines and figures to
a different scale. This instrument consists of two legs, pointed at each end,
and turning on acentre, which slides in a groove common to both legs, and is
furnished with an index. The divisions of the scale are so laid down, that
the centre may divide the length of the legs from point to point in a given
proportion; hence, by the properties of similar triangles, when the legs are
opened to atiy extent, the intervals between each pair of points must be to
each other in the same ratio as the portions of the legs. Sometimes a screw
is added, for the sake of adjusting the centre with greater accuracy; and it is
usual to lay down scales for dividing the circumference of a circle into a
given number of parts, and for some other purposes; but the instrument
might be much improved by inserting, in the common scale, fractional or de-
cimal divisions, between the whole numbers, so that the legs might be di-


inn eel


aT


TS


104 LECTURE X,


vided, for example, in the ratio of 2 to 3, 3 to 4, or 4 to 5, or of 10 to 11, 12
or 13, at pleasure. (Plate VI. Fig. 90.)


The use of the sector depends also on the properties of similar triangles. The
scale of equal parts, which is laid down gn each leg, beginning from the cen-
tre, serves to determine the length of the legs of two equilateral triangles,
in any required proportion to each other, according to the division which we
mark, and the transverse distances from the corresponding points are neces-
sarily in the same proportion. Thus, if we have any line in a figure which we
wish to call three feet, or three inches, we may take the interval with a pair
of common compasses, and open the sector to such an angle, that it may ex-
tend from the third division of one leg to that of the other ; then all the other
divisions of the scale will furnish us with the lengths corresponding to any
distances that we may wish to lay down. The other scales usually engraved
on the sector are principally intended for trigonometrical calculations ‘on
similar principles. (Plate VII. Fig. 91.) f
. fiat ¥ ;

The magnitude of angles admits an easy determination and description, by
the comparison of the respective arcs with a circle, or with a right angle,
We may divide an angle geometrically, by continual bisection, into parts as
small as may be required, and by numbering these parts, we may define any
angle, with an error smaller than any assignable quantity. Bisections of
this kind are sometimes actually employed in the construction of instruments;
for instance, in one of the arcs of the mural quadrant of the observatory at
Greenwich, the right angle is divided into 96 parts, by the continual bisec-
tion of one sixth of the circle. There are also some practical methods of di-
viding angles into three or more equal parts, which are sufficiently accurate
for many purposes, although it is well known that in theory the perfect tri-
section of an angle is beyond the reach of plain geometry. This trisection is
necessary in the common division of the circle into 360 degrees, a number
which was probably chosen because it admits a great variety of divisors, and
because it nearly represents the diurnal and annual motion of the sun among
the stars. The circle being divided into 6 parts, the chord of each of which
is equal to the radius, these parts are divided into 60 degrees, each degree
into 60 minutes, and each minute into 60 seconds: further than this we can-


ON DRAWING, WRITING, AND MEASURING. 105


‘not easily carry the accuracy of our determination, although, in calculations,


decimal - division of aright angle, which has been lately adopted in France,
appears to have very. little advantage for the purposes of calculation, beyond
the common method, and its execution in practice must be much more
difficult. eeapepeetekt are


eet hdd ; : :

- Whole circles, or theodolites, divided into degrees and their parts, quadrants
and sextants, are usually employed in measuring angles; and protractors, se-
micircles, and lines of chords, in laying them off. The most convenient of
quadrants for general use is Hadley’s reflecting instrument, which is in fact
an octant or a sextant, but in which, for reasons depending on optical prin-
[ basi each area of the arc is reckoned for two.


= Bon the graduation of all instruments of this kind, of moderate dimensions,
Mr. Ramsden’s dividing engine is of great utility; the instrument being fixed
on the revolving plate of the enging, its arc is made to advance under the
cutting tool by very minute steps, regulated by the turns of a screw, of which-
each revolution is divided into a considerable number of equal parts. The
largest and finest instruments are, however, still usually divided by hand,
that is, by means of compasses. Some artists have first divided a straight
plate, and then made a hoop of it, which has served as a standard for further
processes. An arc of 7° 10’, of which the chord is one eighth of the radius,
may be employed as a test of the accuracy of the work. A micrometer screw
is often used in large instruments as a substitute for the minutest divisions; a
moveable part of the index being brought to coincide with the nearest point
; marked in the arc, by turning the screw through a part of its revolution,
which is measured by means of a graduated circle. But a simpler method of
reading off divisions with accuracy in common instruments, is the application.
of a vernier, an apparatus so called from its inventor. The space occupied
by eleven divisions of the scale being divided into ten parts on the index, the
coincidence of any of the divisions of the index with those of the scale,.
lt shows, by. its distance from the end, the number of tenths that are to be added.

to that of the intire divisions. (Plate VII. Fig. 92.),


’


There are several ways of measuring the angular elevation of. an_object
VoL. RP


we sometimes descend as far as tenths or even hundredths of a second. The


bh ie


106 ’ LECTURE xX.


‘above the horizon; at sea, the apparent horizon, formed by the: surface of the
water, affords the most convenient determination; but since the spectator is
somewhat elevated above the convex surface of the sea, the apparent horizon
is necessarily lower than the true horizon, and a correction: is’ therefore re-
quired according to the height. In the’ open sea this correction may be de-
termined by measuring thé whole angle above and below the apparent horizon,
and taking one fourth of the difference for the dip or depression. On shore,
a plumb line is the simplest instrument for determining the situation of the
horizon, and its accidental vibrations may be prevented by suspending the
weight in water or in oil. For small instruments, a spirit level, of which the
operation depends on hydrostatical principles, is capable of greater delicacy
than a plumb line. It readily indicates, wlien well made, an error of a single
second, but it requires some attention to avoid inequalities of temperature,
which would tend to disturb its figure. Well rectified ether is found, on ac-
count of its perfect fluidity, to be the best liquid for a spirit level! Ain arti-
ficial horizon is a reflecting surface, employed for obtainingan image, as much
below.the horizon, as the object is above it, and for measuring the angular dis-
tance of this image from the object: sometimes a plane speculum of glass or
metal is used for this purpose, being previously adjusted by: a spirit level; and
sometimes the surface of mercury, treacle, or tar, protected from the wind by
a vessel with holes in it, or by a glass cover, either detached, or simply
floating on the mercury, when this liquid is employed.


It is in many cases simpler and more convenient to estimate angles, not by
the arcs subtending them, but by their sines, or the perpendiculars falling
from one leg on the other. Thus, it is usual among miners, to say that the
ground rises or falls one foot, or one yard, in ten, when the sine of. the angle
of its inclination to the horizon is one tenth of the radius. Angles of different


' magnitudes are indeed proportional to the arcs, and not to the sines, so’ that


in this sense the sine is not a true measure of the comparative magnitude of
the angle; but in making calculations, we are more frequently obliged to em-
ploy the sine or cosine of an angle than the angle or are itself. It is, how-
ever, easy to pass from one of these elements to the others by means either of
trigonometrical tables, or of the seales engraved on the sector.


The sines, tangents, and secants laid down on the sector, may be*employed


; ee er DRAWING, WRITING, AND MEASURING, 107


ding properties of similar triangles, in the computation of propor-
tions. The ‘same purpose is answered by Gunter's scale, by the sliding rule,
and by the logarithmic circles of Clairaut and of Nicholson, which are em-
. ‘ployed. mechanically in the same manner as a table of logarithms is used arith-
} the proportion of any two numbers to each other being determined
| by the distance of the corresponding divisions on the scale; so that if we wish
| to double or to-halve a number, we have only to find the disiaabt from 1 to 2,

~ and to lay it off from the given number either way. (Plate VIL. Fig. 93, 94.)


‘The measurement of angles. is at once applied to the estimation of distances.
in the dendrometer or eter; a part of the instrument forms a base of.
known dimensions, Carle a angle at each extremity of this base ‘being mea-
sured with great accuracy, the distance.of the object:may be inferred from an

: easy calculation, or from actable. The most complete instruments. of this
___ kind:have two speculums for measuring the difference of the angles at once,
in the manner of ‘Hadley’s quadrant. Telescopic ‘scales or micrometers are
also sometimes used ‘for measuring ‘angles subtended by distant objects, of
which the magnitude is known or may be estimated, for example, by the
height of a tank of soldiers, and inferring at once the distance at which they
| (* ae wen : : ; is19 V0

|. Arithmetical and even fidaienical machines, of a jtens more complicated: na-

ture, have been invented and constructed with great labour and ingenuity; but

| they are rather to be considered as »mathematical toys, than as instruments
capable of any useful application.
» & v 3

An angle, ‘shaded ‘measured, can be verbally and numerically described;

_ by reference to the whole circle as a unit: but for the identification of the
measure of a right line, we haveno natural unit of this kind, and it is there-
fore necessary ‘to establish some arbitrary standard with which any given.
lengths and surfaces may be. compared. . It might be of advantage in the com-
munication between different countries to fix one single standard to be em-
ployed throughout ‘the world, ‘but this does not appear to be practically pos-
sible, even if it were determined what the standard ought to be. ‘* The ob-
servation of the isochronism of the’small vibrations of a pendulum, and the
¢ase and certainty with which.the length of a pendulum vibrating seconds.


a ob iia it» ened a


108 AVIRVZAIM GARLETUREIZW OVIWanc “Ko


may, be ascertained; have suggested,’ says) Mr. Laplacey:in: his» account of
the systein of the:world, ‘‘ the.idea of ‘employing: this lengtly.as a universal
measure. We cannot reflect. on.the prodigious: arumber. of measures iniuse,
not only among different nations, but even in the same country, their ca-
pricious and inconvenient divisions, the difficulty of determining and com-
paring them, the embarrassment and the frauds which they occasion in com-~
merce, without regarding, as one of the greatest benefits, that the improve-
ments of the sciences and the ordinances of civil’ governments can render to
humanity, the adoption of a system of measures, of which the divisions, being
uniform, may be easily employed in calculations, and which may be derived,
im a-manner the least arbitrary, from a fundamental | magnitude indicated by
nature itself, A nation that would introduce such ‘a system of measures,
would unite to the advantage of reaping the first fruits of the improvement,
the pleasure of seeing its example followed by other countries, of which it
would thus become the benefactor: for the slow but irresistible empire of
reason must at length prevail over national jealousies,’ and over all other ob-
-stacles that are opposed to a measure, of which the convenience is universally
felt. Such were the motives that determined: the constituent assembly to in-
trust the Academy of Sciences with this important charge., ‘The new system
of weights and measures is the result of the labours of the Committee, seconded
‘by the zeal and sarereet of Abit, members of the national _Tepresenta-
fionl»: eto: 2ocitionin feviewtos}


os The identity of the bateutation of decimal fractions and of whole num-
bers, leaves no doubt with respect to the advantage of the division of mea-
sures of all kinds into decimal parts: it is sufficient, in order to be convinced
of this, to‘compare the difficulty of compound multiplication and division,
with the facility of the same operations where whole numbers only are con-
- cerned, a facility that becomes still greater by means of logarithms, of which
the use may also be rendered extremely popular by simple and cheap instru-
ments, The decimal division was therefore adopted without hesitation ; and
in order to preserve the uniformity of the whole system, it was resolved to
deduce every thing from the same linear measure, and its decimal divisions.
The question was then reduced to the choice of this universal measure, to
which the name of metre was to be given. f


hss ON DRAWING, WRITING, AND MEASURING. 109


ength of the pendulum, and that of a meridian of the earth, are the
ncipal standards that nature affords us, for fixing the unit of linear
3. Both of these being independent of moral revolutions, they can-
not experience a sensible alteration without very great changes in the physical
constitution of | the earth. The first method, which is of easy execution, has
inconvenience of making the measure of length depend on two elements,
with respect to itself and to each other, gravitation, and time;
besides that the division of time into small portions is wholly arbitrary. It
was, resoly therefore, to employ the second method, which,” says Mr. La-
place, “ appears to be of very high antiquity; it is so natural to man to refer
measure f distance to the dimensions of the globe which he inhabits, in
laser cea rca himself from place to place, he may know, by the
denomination of h the space passed through alone, the relation of this space to
pct cement ofthe earth, This method has also the advantage of
nautical es correspond at once with celestial ones. The navi-

has often: } nt6:00m compare with each other the distance that he has
heavens corresponding to that distance; it is
a these measures should be readily obtained from
‘only the place of the units. But, for this purpose,
of linear measures must be an aliquot part of the ter-
h must correspond to one of the divisions of the cireum-
eae the ‘choice of the metre was reduced to that of the


} measured in 1740, from Dunkirk to the Pyrences,
or finding the magnitude of the quadrant of the meridian;
rate measurement of a larger arc was more likely to
avour of the new measures. Delambre and Méchain
with the direction of the operations for measuring
to Barcelona, and after making a proper correction for
r h, according to the measurement of the arc in Peru,
ined to be equal to 5130740 of the iron toise used at
ture being 614° of Fahrenheit: the ten millionth part


110 LECTURE xX.


of this quadrant was taken forthe unit or-metre. A standard was deposited * 7
in the custody of the legislative body, adjusted at the temperature of melting

ice. In order to be able always to identify this length, without recurring to

an actual measurement of the arc, it was of importance to compare it very

accurately with that of the pendulum vibrating seconds, and this has been

done with great care by Borda, at the observatory of Paris. The unit of mea-

sures of land is the are, or 100 square metres: a cubic metre of wood is called

astere, and a cubic decimetre, or a.cube of which the side is one tenth of a

metre, is a litre, or measure of fluids, :


“‘ Uniformity appeared to require that the day should be divided into ten
‘hours, the hour into a hundred minutes, and the minute. into a hundred se-
conds, This division, useful as it will be to astronomers, is of less advantage
in civil life, where arithmetical.operations are seldom performed.on the parts
of time; and the difficulty of adapting it to clocks and watches, together
with our commercial relations with foreign countries, have suspended its in-
troduction for the present. We may, however, asi that it. will ceultens
be brought into general use.” ele


Such is Mr. Laplace’s account of the new system of measures, as of
‘the joint labours of many of the ablest mathematicians on the continent,
There is not at present any great probability that it will ever be em in
this country. It is of little consequence from what the original unit has been
derived, unless we can with ease and accuracy recur to its origin: and whe-
ther a standard has been first adjusted according to the circumference of the
globe, or to the foot of an individual hero, the facility of comparing other
measures with it is the same. It is confessed that the pendulum affords the
a readiest method of recovering the standard when lost; and if it was necessary
for the Committee,of the French Academy to determine a unit absolutely ,
new, it would perhaps have been more eligible to fix on one which was  inde- N
pendent of any ulterior comparison, than to seek for an ideal perfection i in ate
tempting to copy from a more magnificent original: tosay nothing of the un-~
certainty with regard to the ellipticity of the earth, and the p jirregu-
‘larity of its form in various respects. On the other hand, itmust be allowed,
that the correct determination, of the length of the pendulum hhas sometimes eae


=Y


a


i PS Neng ee Se te 2: va
f ‘ ay ’ aE a ; i


been found more difficult than Mr. Laplace’s statement would lead us to sup-
pose it, and we cannot depend: on any measurement of it as totally exempt

from an error oft ~ ten. thousandth part bes the whole.

* ‘i 7%. (f 7
Seilatdtiaiets asidefinitivoly-establishet by the government of France, is equal
_ to 39,4755 English inches, measured, as it has-been usual in this country,
on a standard scale of brass, at the temperature of 62° of Fahrenheit; while
the French, on gore reduce’ the length of their measures to that
which: would acquire at the freezing point. Hence ten thousand inches
are nearly 254 metres, a thousand’ feet 305 metres. The length of the pen-
case lamtone London, was found by George Graham, from a
several experiments, all agreeing very nearly together, to be 39,*)5
inches. This is also nearly a mean between the length which may be de-
; with’ proper corrections, from Borda’s experiments at Paris, and Mr,
’s experiments made in London, with the apparatus invented by
ascertained is the difference between the lengths
pres oo pesos eal in different times. Mr. Whitchurst’s measures,
ipa 20 2 some corrections, which Mr. Nicholson has pointed out.
_ The fall of a heavy body in the first second’ appears, from this determination
re or Nn of the Lien to be sixteen feet one inch and a tenth.
‘a Sart


‘
| : ON DRAWING, WRITING, AND MEASURING. Tt


ei : 5 the! toise was 76 23, inches. In Germany the Rhinland
erally y used; 100 of eoereet make 103 English.

west Pp ees
mn. co ns 231 cai inches; an ale- gallon is the content of
| inch pipe. —

ents are used for the immediate comparison of the
ts parts, with other lengths or distances. Such are
al, verniers, micrometer screws, beam compasses,
measuring wheels. The greatest accuracy has ge-
obtained, in large distances, by means of rods,
in order to be less susceptible of such changes as
tions of temperature; General Roy, however, found


wt


112 ; LECTURE X.


ploy; and those who have continued the extensive survey which he began,”
even prefer it to every other. For the comparison of standards, and for de-
termining small distances with great precision, beam compasses, : or. scales
with sliding indices, furnished with microscopes and cross wires, have been
constructed by the artists of this country: in France, a lever has sometimes
been introduced, its longer arm having an ample range of motion, corres-
ponding to a very minute difference in the length of the substance which
acts on the shorter arm. But for common purposes the diagonal scale is suf-
ficiently accurate, and may be applied without the error of the thousandth
of. an inch: in cases where a very delicate vernier, or a micrometer screw is
applied, a magnifier is usually required. Mr. Coventry has, however, suc~
ceeded in making simple scales, which are accurate enough to measure the ten
thousandth of an inch. He draws parallel lines on glass, at this distance,
which are in some parts sufficiently regular, although’ they can only be seen


by the help of a powerful microscope: but those which are at the distance of


_the five thousandth of an inch are much more correct and distinct. » For dis
viding rectilinear scales of all kinds, Mr. Ramsden constructed a. ‘machine


which acts by the turns of a screw: others have employed an apparatus re-
sembling Marquois’s. ete! rulers. (Plate VII. Fig. 95. . 97.) ©
13) Opel A> to
The motion of a ship at sea is measured bya ‘Tok tine, or a rope divided by
knots into equal parts, and attached to a log, which is retained nearly at rest
by the resistance of the water. Attempts have also been made to cause a
littie waterwheel to turn by the motion of the ship, and to measure t both the —
rate and the distance run; and an instrument has been ited for doing
the same upon hydraulical principles; aising 1) ffere
heights, by means of the Pressure occasion


“We ath


tr ists * neh’
‘begin Tivo) a
19 Blea Sif a)


bl g


+ % 4 7 <3
: 113
vite
LECTURE XI.
oN. MODELLING, Sma ENGRAVING, AND
/ _- PRINTING.
¥ ee Aye “


98 f r measurin $: we are now | to consider, first, the methods of co-
_ pying solids, and of petting the their images on a plane surface; and | secondly,
perpetuating the works of the pen and of the poneiidiramipterin


"When pay ee sini copy of a solid of an irregular form, as, for
example, of a statue, we must determine the situation of a sufficient number
P - of points to guide us in our work with accuracy, by means of an instrument
ve capable of being fixed in any required situation, so that the extremity of a
or pin, may be in contact with each point in the original, and
red to a similar part of another frame, on which the copy is placed,
: ion being made, by degrees, in the block, so as to suffer the pin to

its proper place, at which it stops. (Plate VII. Fig. 98.)


“a aaa of the mechanical arts: the original is
Ip in a proper vessel; a mixture of prepared plaster and
he consistence of cream, is then poured on it; this in a short time

s, and is divided into several parts, in such a manner as not to injure
riginal figure in its removal. These pieces, being again united, form a
d for the ultimate cast. Sometimes a small figure is first modelled ina

re Wwax;*turpentine, and oil; ‘and a mould being formed on this,
rs ;


ined the principal instruments and materials employed for


114 LECTURE Xt.


the ultimate cast is made either of plaster, or of a composition of wax with
white lead and a little oil, which'serves as an imitation of marble.


We have, however, much less frequent occasion to make an exact copy of
a solid of any kind, than to represent its appearance by means of perspective


delineation. Supposing ourselves provided with proper materials for drawing, \


we may easily imitate, with the assistance of a correct eye, anda hand well
exercised, the figures and relative positions of objects actually before us, by
delineating them in the same form as they would appear to be projected on a
transparent surface placed before the eye. Considering the simplicity of this
process, it is almost surprising that the doctrine of perspective should have
been supposed to require a very serious study, and. that material errors should
have been committed with respect to it, by men "whose general merits in
other departments of painting is by no means contemptible. But it must be
confessed, that when, instead of imitating objects immediately before us, the
pencil is employed in embodying imaginary forms, calculated either for beauty


or for utility, a great degree of care and attention may be necessary, in order
-to produce a true representation of objects, which are either absent, or have


no existence: and here memory and fancy only will scarcely ever be suffi-
cient, without a recurrence to mathematical principles. To architects there-
fore, and to mechanics in general, a knowledge of perspective is almost in-
dispensable, whenever they wish to convey, by a srawing, an “dey (a idea of
their projected works.


%


If any assistance be required for the delineation of an object actually before


us, it may easily be obtairied in a mechanical manner, by means of a frame
with cross threads or wires, interposed between the eye and object. The
eye is applied to an aperture, which must be fixed, in order to preserve the
proportions of the picture; and which must be small, in order that the i
and the more distant objects may be viewed at the ‘same time, with  suffici

ent distinctness. The paper being furnished with corresponding lines, Ne
may observe in what division of the frame any conspicuous point of
ject appears, and may then represent its eneetiy a point simi


among the lines drawn on our paper; an a ree ea this ‘manner,
_a sufficient number of | sin Hated cor


‘ie ae


: the ation of .


re “iemiwopeceine, PERSPECTIVE, ENGRAVING, AND PRINTING. 115


proper ones. Sometimes, for the delineation of large objects requiring
nection, it has been found useful to employ two similar frames, the


ler than the other, and placed at a certain distance from it, so
; es 7 te yery part of the object, when seen through the corresponding divisions
- both frames, appears in the same manner as if the eye were situated at a
Teacee® point. It was in this manner that the elegant anatomical figures
of Albinus were executed, (Plate VII. Fig. 99. )
i ite required to lay down, in the stake of a picture, the projection
f which the actual dimensions and situation are given, we may
ite measures from the properties of similar triangles, and the
1 of the rectilinear motion of light. We may consider our picture
copy of a projection formed on an imaginary plane, which, as
@ picture, is generally supposed to be in a vertical situation, and
; on the horizontal plane, at the point where the objects to be
d begin. In order to find the position of the image of a given
, : determine the point in which a line parallel to it, passing
( eye, cuts the plane of the picture; this is called the
n line, and of all other lines parallel to it, since
any eit line, continued without limit, will be a right line di-
j but never passing it. When the lines to be represented
the distance of _ their vanishing point becomes in-
ze sare a also parallel to the lines and toeach other, The
that point which is nearest to the eye, is the vanish-
rpendicular to the picture; through this point it is
anda vertical line: we may then lay off downwards
e distance of the eye from the picture, in order to find
h serves to determine the position of any oblique
‘plane: for if we draw a ground plan of any object, con-
asa horizontal surface, we may find the yanishing point
s; - by drawing a line parallel to it through, the point
Li iil the horizontal vanishing line.” (Plate VII.


position of the image of ‘ given point of a line, we
image in such a manner, that its parts may be to each


116 ’ LECTURE Xt. rt


other, in the same proportion as the distance of the given point, and of the
eye, from the plane of projection. This may be readily done, when‘a ground
plan has been first made, by drawing a line from any point in the plan, to
the point of distance, which will cut the whole i image of the line in the point
= (Plate VII. Fig. 102.)

When it is required to debeliias a point in a line parallel to the picture,.
we may suppose a line to be drawn through it perpendicular to the picture,
and, by finding the image of this line, we may intersect the former image in


- the point required. It is thus that the height of any number of columns, or


figures, at different distances, may be’ readily determined. (Plate VIII.
Fig. 103.) r


The projection of curvilinear figures is most conveniently effected, by draw-
ing across them parallel lines, which form small squares or rectangles, throwing
these divisions into perspective, and tracing a curve through the correspond-
ing points. There are also methods of determining mathematically, or of
drawing mechanically the ellipsis, which results from the projection of a circle,
in a given position, but they are considerably intricate, ant a steady hand i is


seldom in want of them. oe VIII. Fig. 104.) a


This system of perspective must necessarily be employed when we i to


_ represent objects, which appear to us under angles of considerable magnitude,


and to give them as much as possible the appearance of an imitation of nature.
But for almost all purposes of science, and of mechanical practice, the most


convenient representation is the orthographical projection, where the distance.


of the eye, from the plane, is supposed to be increased without limit, and

rays of light passing to the eye to be parallel to each other. In order to re-
present any object in this manner, we must assume one line for ‘the direction
of the centre of the picture, to which the images of all lines perpendicular to $


the plane of projection must be parallel, and another for’that of the point of >


distance, by means of which we may measure the first lines, as if that point —
were actually within reach; and in this manner we may determine the place


of any number of points of the object to be delineated. ig VII.
Figy a , eh; + 5 rs ; oy hat ms


f*


on MODELLING, PERSPECTIVE, ENGRAVING, AND PRINTING. 117


Ae ‘we wish to-apply the mechanical method of drawing by the assistance
. ofa frame to this mode of representation, instead of a fixed aperture for a
sight, ora second frame of smaller dimensions, we must employ a second

’ frame of the same magnitude with the first, in the manner which has already
been described. Professor Camper has censured Albinus for not adopting
this “method i in his figures: but subjects so large as those which he has re-
presented would. shave had less of the appearance of nature, if they had been
projected. semegre nicely, 2 nor would such Baplections have been material ly

isis. iba t
se ea

» Te frequently happens, that in peatoplion and detsbantsiond drawings, we
torepresent, ona plane, the whole, ora part of a spherical surface.

“a: Here, i if we employ the orthographical projection, the distortion will be such,
_ that the parts. near the apparent circumference will be so much contracted,
as to.render it. impossible to exhibit them with distinctness. It is, therefore,
more convenient, i ‘this case, to employ the stereographical projection, where

j py at d to be ata moderate distance from the object.» The place

a within or without the sphere, at pleasure,

e magnitude of the portion which we wish to represent,
vena may be viewed with the least eee,


yy py ay be placed, which ial the bisidnee and im-
, that the image of every circle, greater or lesser, still re-
int is'in the surface itself, at the extremity of the di-
‘the plane of projection; and this is the point usually
phical projection of the sphere, which serves for the
of problems in spherical trigonometry.’ The pro-
e of the sphere would occupy ah infinite space, but
he hemisphere, the utmost distortion of the linear mea-
ortion of 2 to 1, each degtee at the circumference of
a space twice as great as at the centre. The angles,
in crossing each other, are also correctly represented,


118 LECTURE XI.


is to trace cross lines on them, with the assistance of such a frame as has been
described for drawing in perspective, representing the appearance of uniform
squares or rectangles, and to delineate in each of these the corresponding
: farts of the object, ona the drawing which serves as a copy.


The arts of wisiteg sail drawing, in all their varieties, are extended in
their performance, and perpetuated i in their duration, by means of engraving
and printing. If there is any one circumstance to which we can peculiarly at-
tribute the more rapid progress of general civilisation in modern than in ancient
times, it is the facility of multiplying copies of literary productions of all
kinds, by the assistance’of these arts, The distinguishing character of print-
ing consists in the employment of moveable types: the art of engraving is
more siinple, and in some of. its forms, more ancient. The Romans were in
the habit of using seals and stamps, for marking letters and words on wax and
‘on pottery; it was usual in the middle ages to employ perforated plates of
‘metal as patterns for guiding’a brush, by means of which the capital letters
were inserted in some manuscripts, and the Chinese are said to have been long
in possession of the art of printing books: from wooden blocks. It was in this
form that printing was first introduced into Europe, in the beginning of the
fifteenth century. There seems to have been formerly a method of engraving
on wood with greater ease and accuracy than is now practised; the hatches
may be observed in old wooden cuts to cross each other more frequently, ‘and
with greater freedom, than in modern works, although some have conjectured,
with considerable appearance of probability, that these old engravings were
in reality etched in relief on metal. ‘The art of engraying on wood is, how-
eves, at.present in a high degree of perfection in this country, and blocks are
still frequently used for mathematical diagrams and other simple figures; © for
although they are somewhat more expensive than copper plates, they wear
much longer, anil they have the advantage of being printed off’ at the same
time with the letterpress, and of being included in the same page with the
text to which they belong, since thetink is applied to the projecting #8 ts
only, both of these cuts and of the.common perteting types.


The jethod of engraving on plates of pewter or of ‘copper, and of taking
impressions, by means of the portion of ink retained in the furrows cut by
the graver; -was also introduced in the fifteenth century. ‘Vor dry engraving,


(ON MODELLING, PERSPECTIVE, ENGRAVING, AND PRINTING. 119


“the drawing, if i itis not executed in black lead, is generally prepared by

2 oil ‘over its principal features, and the outline is transferred to

fis ch has a thin coat of white wax laid on it, by placing the draw-
nit, adsdiabitag te wie a burnisher ; sometimes a drawing in Indian ink,

if n of its gum, may be transferred i in this manner

Pes “ae e applic 2 pencil. When written characters are to be en-

“graved, “the pla ial on a cushion, ‘so as<to be readily turned under the

ae which is a great convenience in sea curved lines.
Jee at 1G

In laying. on equable shades of bibterabie extent, much flavin is saved

by the use of a ruling machine, which enables us to draw lines, at any re-

quired distance, very accurately parallel, and either straight, or following
each other's gentle undulations, in order to avoid the appearance of stiffness.

This machine, like the dividing engine, is sometimes adjusted by the revolu-
ie tions of a screw, and sometimes by theroblique motion of a triangular slider.
ie Besides the cutting graver, which. is of a prismatic form, terminated by an
oblique surface, other instruments are Occasionally employed;. the dry needle

makes a very fine line, and leaves the metal that it has displaced, to be rub-

’ bed off by another tool. Sometimes a ‘number of detached excavations are
formed by a pointed instrument, and the projections are afterwards removed;
this is called stippling. A burnisher and some- charcoal are required for

“erasing the strokes of the graver, when it is necessary, and for polishing the
Pha . tis seldom, however, that a plate is begun and completed by dry


engraving only.
= For engraving in mezzotinto, the plate is roughened, by scraping it in
" _ every direction with a tool made for the purpose, $0 that an impression from


it, in this state, would be wholly dark; the lights are then inserted, by re-
moving the inequalities of the surface, in particular parts, by means of a
smooth scraper, and a burnisher. As the plate wears in printing, some of
these parts are liable to have the grain a little raised again, so that the lights
are less clear in the later impressions than in the proofs. It is well known,
that in common engravings the proofs are usually the darkest throughout.


The most expeditious and most generally useful mode of working on cop-
per, is the process of etching. The plate, being covered with a proper var-


‘


01290 .pri reise ¢ OM) vy OBEOTURE KL vavk] oy 1 eccou


nish, is usually blackened with smoke, and the drawing is placed on it, with the
interposition of a paper rubbed over-with red chalk, which, when the drawing
-is traced with‘a wooden point, adheres to the varnish, in the form of the out-
line: or if it is required that the ultimate impression be turned the same way
as the drawing, an intermediate outline must be procured in the same man-
ner on a separate paper, and then. transferred to the plate, All the outlines
thus marked are traced with needles, which make as many furrows in the
varnish, and leave the copper bare: the shades are inserted with the assist-
ance of the ruling machine, wherever parallel lines can be employed. The
plate thus prepared, and furnished with an elevated border of a proper con-
sistence, is subjected to the action of the diluted nitric acid, until all the
parts are sufficiently corroded, care being taken in the mean. time to sweep
off the air bubbles as they collect, and to stop out, or cover with a new var-
nish, the lighter parts, which are soonest completed, When the varnish is re-
moved, the finishing touches are added with the graver: and if the plate re-
quires further corrosion, the varnish may sometimes be replaced, without fill-
ing up the lines, by applying it on a ball or cushion, taking care to avoid


any oblique motion. It is said that the acid sometimes operates so as to un- -


ermine the metal on each side, and to render the furrows wider as they be-
come deeper, and that for this reason in etchings, as well ds in mezzotintos,
the later impressions are sometimes darker than the proofs; bit this is by no
means universally true. It is well known to chemists, that glass 2% me cor-
roded in a similar manner by means of the fluoric acid.


‘ial etching may also be Kovcdttinaty executed by using a varnish mixed
with mutton fat, and drawing upon a paper laid on the plate; the varnish
then adheres to the back of the paper, under the lines which are drawn, and
is immediately removed when the paper is taken off, without the use of


“needles, . Sometimes the outlines only are etched, and the plate is fninbed i in


mezzotinto. ; «


In the mode of engraving ellk-diiines ‘ites the pri hiving a first
etched, the shades are also produced by corrosion, the parts being prepared
by various methods, so as to. be partially protected from the action of the

-acid. Sometimes a little resin, very finely powdered, is sifted on the plate,


which is then sufficiently warmed to. make the particles adhere + it; some- -


Ae \
ON MODELLING, PERSPECTIVE, ENGRAVING, AND PRINTING. 12]
ee Fase


’ with a spirituous solution of resin, which cracks through-
out in drying ; and if a strong line be any where required, it may be traced
with a mixture of whiting with some adhesive substance, before the varnish
is laid on; this will cause it to break up at that part; or the varnish may be
bad pattially removed, by rubbing it with spirits, or with an essential oil. The
lighter parts may be covered, during the corrosion, with a second varnish,

, ” which defends them from the acid. This mode of engraving succeeds very
: well in ‘imitating: the effect of drawings, but the plates are soon worn out. In

to ju en state of the work, an impression of any part of the
te off, by rs on ita little plaster of Paris mixed with


eur a en gure

Musical ‘hatacters are Scitty stamped with punches; in this country, on
panes of pewter, but in France generally on copper. Mr. Rochon has in-
vented a machine for stamping letters on copper, instead of printing, but the

‘method does not appear to’ have — ee, employed.

+ IAs A jes

lw whan ‘ plate n may nad been engraved, when an impression
it is covered with printing ink of the finest kind, by
balls, and then wiped, chiefly with the hand, so that the ink
To removed from. ‘the polished. surface; it is then placed, with the
per, ona board, between flannels, and strongly pressed in pass-
; evo wooden rollers, By frequent use the plate loses its sharpness,
to be retouched; hence arises the greater value of first
- proper precautions in cleaning the plate, its delicacy may


rang


hile it is moist, may be reversed, by passing it desagh
‘paper. And by writing with a peculiar ink, even
y be thus copied on thin paper, and the impression will be
‘side. Mr. Montbret proposes to putsome sugar candy
1d ee errewailizes pape means of @ hot iron,


it method of multiplying drawings has been lately in-

The drawings are made with an unctuous compo-

of a crayon or of an ink, on a soft stone of a calcarious
as :


tie a Man Mis


182 : LECTURE XI. *


nature,‘ somewhat like a stone marle. When the drawing is finished, the
stone is moistened, and imbibes so much water, that the printing ink will
not adhere to it, except at the parts where the crayon or the ink has been


_ applied; and in this manner an impression is procured, which has much of


the freedom and spirit of an original drawing. When the ink is used, a little
acid is afterwards-applied to the stone, in order to corrode its intermediate
parts ; and the bold stile of the impression much resembles that of the old
wooden cuts.


The art of printing with separate types was invented soon after the in-
troduction of wooden blocks into Europe. The improvement was great and
important. The year 1443, or 1444, is considered as the date of the oldest
printed book; but the precise time and place of the invention remain some-
what doubtful: the art, however, advanced towards perfection by very rapid
steps. ‘The letters are first cut, in a reversed form, on steel. punches; with
these a matrix of copper is stamped, and the matrix forms the lower part of
the mould in which the types are cast; the metal is a composition of lead
and antimony, which is easily fusible. Thus the printed sheet is the
fourth form of the letter, reckoning from the original engraving on the punch:
in the stereotype printing, lately invented, or rather improved and revived,
it is the sixth. In this method, when a form for the side of a sheet has been
composed, made up, corrected, and locked up by wedges in the chase or
iron frame, which confines it, a mould of the whole is formed in fine plaster, -


‘and as many repetitions of it may be cast very thin, in type metal, as will serve


to print for the use of a century, without the expense of keeping a large
quantity of types made up, or of providing paper id a numerous impression
at once. se ,
ee. ee ere ee eee
The modes of arranging the » types, in boxes: or cases, of composing the
separate lines on the stick, and making them up by degrees into pages and
forms, of correcting the press, of applying the ink, and taking off the im-
pression, are entirely calculated for the simplicity and convenience of the
manual spettiogs concerned, and seit little or no detailed ae


f (2 ‘i


Foe Jette Ste of Sid,


Noes ‘ait abs a Sib eae) aaa


~ . th Se Rot a] . * et


.


123
re wir
pcos LECTURE XII.
ON STATICS.


THE examination of the magnitude of the various forces, employed in prac-
tical mechanics, constitutes the doctrine of statics. The term statics, in a
strict sense, implies the determination of weights only; but it may without
impropriety be extended to the estimation of forces of all kinds, especially
active forces, that can be compared with weights, in the same manner as the
term hydrostatics comprehends every thing that relates to the equilibrium of
fluids. The measurement of the passive strength of the materials employed,
the changes produced in them by the forces which they resist, and the laws
- of the negative force of friction, are also subjects immediately introductory to
"the particular constructions and uses of machinery, and nearly connected
with the apkaeabriggt of statics.

‘The art of weighing i is peculiarly important, as it furnishes us with the
only practical mode of determining the quantity of matter in a given body.
We might indeed cause two bodies to meet each other with known velocities,
and from the effects of their collision, we might determine their comparative
momenta, and the proportion of their masses; but.it is obvious that this pro-
cess would be exceedingly troublesome, and incapable of great accuracy; we
therefore recur to the well known law of gravitation, that the weight of
every, body is proportional to the quantity of matter that it contains, and we
judge of its mass from its weight. If all bodies were of equal density, we
might determine their masses from their external dimensions; but we seldom
find even a single body which is of uniform density throughout; and even if
we had such a body, it would in general be much easier to weigh it correctly

7 than to measure it.


The weight of a body is commonly ascertained, by comparing it immediately


124 ; LECTURE XII.


with other weights of known dimensions: but sometimes the flexure of a
spring is employed for the comparison. Standard weights have generally been
deduced from a certain measure of a known substance, and in particular of
water. According to the most accurate experiments, when the barometer is
at 30 inches, and Fahrenheit’s thermometer at 62°, 12 wine gallons of distilled
water weigh exactly 100 pounds avoirdupois, each containing 7000 grains


‘troy; and a cubic inch weighs 252} grains. A hogshead of water, wine


measure, weighs, therefore, 525 pounds, and a tun 2100 pounds, which is
nearly equal to a ton weight. Mr. Barlow supposes that the tun measure of
water contained originally 62 cubic feet, and weighed 2000 pounds, which
was also called a ton weight, the gallon being somewhat smaller than it is at
present, and the cubic foot weighing exactly 1000 ounces, or 62} pounds,
A quarter of wheat weighed about a quarter of a ton, and a bushel as much
as a cubic foot of water. A chaldron of coals was also considered as equiva-
lent to a ton, although it now weighs nearly half as much more. But at the
mean temperature of this climate, or 52°, a cubic foot of distilled water
weighs only 998 ounces. The avoirdupois ounce appears to agree very nearly .
with the ancient Roman ounce. Of the old French weight, 100 pounds
made 108 English pounds avoirdupois. The gramme of the new weights is a
cubic centimetre of pure water at its greatest density, that is, about the
temperature of 39° of Fahrenheit; it is equal to 15¢ English grains: hence
the chiliogramme is 2} pounds, and five myriogrammes are nearly a hundred
weight. Five grammes of silver, including one tenth of alloy, make a franc,
which is one eightieth better than the old franc or livre, and is intrinsically
worth nearly ninepence three farthings English.


‘The instruments usually employed for the comparison of weights are either
balances, orsteelyards. In the common balance, the weights of the substances
compared are. e equal ; ina compound weighing machine, we use weights which
are smaller, in a certain proportion, than those which they represent: in the
steelyard, a single weight acquires different values at different parts of the
arm, and in the bent lever balance, the position of the arms determines the
magnitude of the counterpoise. The cleyemeeaunn ene, .


gre soem of Mee dae? esse ae aie if ht


ei


ON STATICS, 195


scales, being freely suspended. from fixed points in the beam, act on them al-


ways in the direction of gravity; and the effect is the same as if the whole
weight were concentrated in those points. The beam supports the scales, and
is itself supported, by means of fine edges of hard steel, working on steel, agate,
or t, in order that ‘the motion may be free, and the distances of the


points precisely defined. ‘Ihe best beams are made of two hollow cones of |


brass, united at their bases; they are lifted off their supports when the ba-
lance is not used, in order to avoid. accidental injuries; the scales also are
supported, so as not to hang from the beam, until they have received their
weights. According to the position of the fulcrum, with respect to the points


"of suspension of the scales, the equilibrium of the balance may be either stable,
neutral, or tottering; or if the beam be too flexible, it may pass from one ~


of these states to the other by the effect of the weights. The stable equili-
brium is the most usual and the best, because it gives us an opportunity of
determining the degree of inequality of the weights, by the position in which
the centre of gravity rests, or by the middle point of the vibrations of the
beam, which are sometimes measured by an index, pointing to a graduated
arc. If, however, the fulcrum be too much elevated above the centre of
gravity, the equilibrium may be too stable, and may require too great an in-
equality, in order to produce a sensible preponderance. If, on the contrary,


' by the elevation of the points of suspension of the scales, the equilibrium be


rendered tottering, the lower scale will not rise, even if it be somewhat less
loaded than the upper; and steclyards of this construction have sometimes
been employed, in order to impose on the purchaser by the appearance of an
ample weight. It is necessary, where great accuracy is desired, to bring the
equilibrium yery near the state of neutrality, and to make the vibrations of
the beam slow and extensive, whether the scales have weights in them or
not: for this purpose a small weight is sometimes inclosed within the beam,
which is raised or depressed at pleasure, by a screw, so as to bring the
centre of gravity of the whole moveable apparatus, as near to the fulcrum as
may be required for the occasion. Mr. Ramsden’s balance, made for the
Royal Society, is capable of weighing ten pounds, and turns with. one ten
millionth part of the weight. (Plate VIII. Fig. 107. . 109.)


The arms of a balance have sometimes been made unequal for fraudulent
Purposes, the weight being placed nearer to the fulcrum than the substance


he i 126 LECTURE XII.


: to be weighed. It is obvious that the fraud may be detected, by changing
the places of the contents of the two scales. In such a case, if a counterpoise
_to the same weight be determined in each situation, the sum of both will be
greater than twice the weight; and the purchaser would be sure of having
even more than his due, by requesting the seller to weigh half in the one scale
and half in the other. For example, if one arm of the beam were only three
fourths as long as the other, the counterpoise, to a weight of twelve ounces,
would be nine ounces in one scale, and sixteen in the other, making. together
twenty five instead of twenty four ounces. (Plate VIII. Fig. 110.)


Supposing the beams of a balance to be accidentally unequal, either in
length or in weight, we may still weigh in it with accuracy, by making a
perfect counterpoise of any kind to a weight, and then removing the weight
and putting in its place as much of the substance to be weighed, as is sufli-
cient to restore the equilibrium.


The weights may also be reduced, or increased, in proportion to the length
of the arms, if they differ from each other, care being taken to put the weights
always into the same scale. This is actually performed in weighing machines,
where a composition of levers is employed, in order to enable us to determine
the weight of large masses by means of vee of moderate dimensions.
(Plate IX. Fig. 111.) -


When the effective lengths of one or both arms of the beam are capable of
being varied, by changing the points of suspension according to the divisions

_ ofa scale, the instrument is called a steelyard. Where one weight only is used,
it is not necessary that the two arms should exactly balance each other, since
P the divisions may be so placed as to make the necessary adjustment; but it is :
sometimes convenient to have two or three weights, of difierent magnitudes, 4
_ and for this purpose the instrument should be in equilibrium without any f

weight. In such cases, great accuracy may be obtained by. applying a small
weighttint the end, in tip fonntiok erica aay aa ee Be cha


‘ The arms of balan though dentildagell i
- out limit, if they cynthia
a) ties ae iii Beh iis: = -s


=


ON STATICS. 127


fectly vertical, since, in this position, the weight may be overpowered by
the minutest counterpoise acting on the other arm. The centre of gravity
being, in the common balance, very nearly ina right line between the weights,


in order that it may be immediately below the fulcrum, the arm must have a


very considerable angular motion for a slight inequality of the weights; but
in the bent lever balance, the centre of gravity is at such a distance from the
fulcrum, that a moderate motion of. the arms may bring it into the vertical
line. This motion is measured by an index on a graduated are, which gives
the instrument a considerable range; and where expedition is particularly
desired, it may often be used with advantage; but if the weights to be de-
termined are large, the scale becomes very much contracted, and the instru-
ment requires to be levelled with great accuracy. A counterpoise acting on
a spiral or conical barrel, has also been applied to a similar purpose; it is ca-
pable of a scale somewhat more extended than a bent lever balance, but it is
less simple, and scarcely more accurate. (Plate IX. Fig. 113.)


A spring, which is usually of a spiral form, being made to support a hook
by the intervention of a graduated bar, the divisions of this bar, which are
drawn out beyond the fixed point, indicate the weight supported by the hook.
This instrument is called a spring steelyard. Mr. Hanin’s spring steelyard


has a long index, which revolves on a centre, and shows at once the weight


according to the standards of different countries. The divisions of the scales
in moderate flexures of the spring are nearly equal: hence it may be inferred,
that the space through which a spring is bent, and consequently its curva-
ture, or change of curvature, is simply proportional to the force which acts
on it, and that the vibrations of a weight supported by a Spring, must; like
those of a cycloidal pendulum, be performed in equal times, whatever may be
their'magnitude. The strength of all springs is somewhat diminished by
heat, and for each degree of Fahrenheit that the temperature is raised, we
must deduct about one part in five thousand from the apparent weight in-
dicated by the spring steelyard. (Plate IX. Fig. 114.)


The spring steelyard affords us the most convenient method of measuring
the immediate intensity of the forces exerted by animals of different kinds,
in the labour which they perform. When it is adapted for this purpose, it is
sometimes called the dynamometer. We may also estimate the force of an


128 LECTURE XII.


animal, which is employed in drawing a distant boat or carriage, “by the in-
clination of the rope or chain to the horizon, compared'with the weight of

that portion of it which the animal supports, that is, of the part which extends '
to the point where the curve becomes horizontal.


All animal actions, or, at least, all the external actions of animals, are ulti-
‘mately dependent on the contractions and relaxations of the fleshy parts,
which are called muscles. The operation of the particular muscles belongs
_properly to the science of physiology; but their mechanism may in general
‘be understood from the properties of the lever and of the centre of gravity.
The bones are the levers, the joints the fulcrums, and the force is applied by
the muscles, which are usually attached to the bones by the intervention of
tendinous cords. _ When a muscle contracts in the direction of its fibres, it
becomes at the same time thicker, and its total bulk is little if at all diminish-
ed: when it relaxes itself, it is merely passive, for the fibres, being extremely
flexible, can have little or no effect in separating the parts to which they are
attached; this separation is generally performed by the action of other mus-
cles, which are called the antagonists of the first, but sometimes by elastic
ligaments, or by other means. The bone forms a lever of the second kind,
where the two forces opposing each other are on the same side of the fulcrum.
In general the insertion of a muscle is much nearer to the fulcrum than the
point of action, ‘and the obliquity of its direction gives it a still greater me-
chanical disadvantage with regard to rotatory power; but it is more conve-
nient in the animal economy to produce a great contractile force, than a great
extent in the original motion. For instance, when the arm is raised by the
exertion of the deltoid muscle of the shoulder, a very strong contraction takes
place in the muscle, but the action is only continued through a short space ;
had the contractile power been weaker and more extensive, the shouldef must
have been made higher, in order to give it sufficient purchase, and the pro-
jection would have been inconvenient.


Borelli has calculated that the immediate force of the biceps, or double-

. headed muscle which bends the arm, is equivalent to about 300 pounds, and
that of the muscles which raise the lower jaw, above 500 in man, but in beasts
of prey far greater. It is obvious that in muscles of the same kind, the

strength must be as the number of fibres, or as the extent of the surface which


2


(ON STATICS. 499


eee formed yeti’: sat retliy it is not improbable that


useles. of a healthy” man is equivalent to about
inch their section. The weakest man can lift
potas man/400. Topham, a carpénter}
Desaguliers, ds. He rolled up’ a strong
dish ca - — with “his teeth” and knees'a table six’


; ‘long, with a c med wifi a the end. He bent a poker, three
inches in circum stare a righ ‘angle, by striking it upon his left fore


arm: another he ben eta cae neck ; and snapped a hempen rope
two inches in circumférence. A few years ago etnerk sii a person at Oxford
who could-hold his arm extended for half a minute, with half a hundred weight
hanging “on his little finger. A young” gentleman, who- es,
himself as a pedestrian: by going 90 miles in 19 hours, has also lifted tw
Wiha rer »one:in each hand, and madeé them meet over his ra
“ vu wi u ol

 Spatltiones feats of strength spptrentiy’ extraordinary have been exhibited
by men who have not. been possessed of any material superiority. De-
saguliers relates, that one of them used to withstand the force of two horses
drawing at a girdle passed round his middle, ‘while his feet acted’on a firm
obstacle. By falling suddenly backwards, in an oblique position, he broke a
rope which was fixed’a little before his feet. He supported: one or two men
by forming his body into an arch; and by a harness fitted to his hips, he sus-
tained a cannon, weighing two or three thousand pounds. In all these cases
the muscles principally employed: are the extensors of the legs and thighs, but
the passive strength of the bones is more concerned than the active force of
the muscles. In the instance, mentioned’ by Lahire, of a young man who
raised. an ass from the ground, by cords tied to the hair of his head, the sensi-
bility of the nerves of the skin must have been diminished’ by habit, so as to
olloye the hair to be thus forcibly extended, without immoderate pain.


Tha, application of ‘animal force is usually eefein by means of a pro-
gressive motion. The muscles employed in this process are in general, if not
‘always, the strongest of the body, both by nature, and by habit; so that
when force alone is required, it is most advantageously obtained from their
exertions.. In walking, the centre of gravity is moved forwards with a ve-


locity nearly uniform, If the legs were perfectly inflexible, the centre of
VOL. 1. s


180 LECTURE XII.


gravity would describe; in succession, portions of circles,.of which each leg
would alternately be the radius: but if the velocity were great enough to
create a centrifugal force more than equivalent to the force of gravity, the
pressure would be removed from each leg after the first instant of its touching
the ground; the path would become parabolic instead of circular, and the
walking would be conyerted into running: for the difference between walk-
ing and running is this, that in running, one foot is removed from the
ground before the other touches it; while in walking, the hindmost foot is
only raised after the foremost has touched the ground. Now supposing the
length of the inflexible leg three feet, the centrifugal force would becéme
equal to the weight, with a velocity which would be acquired by a heavy
body in falling through a foot and a half, that is, near 10 feet in a second,
or 7 miles an hour; and. this is the utmost velocity with which it would be
mechanically possible to walk with inflexible legs... But the flexibility of the
legs makes the progressive motion much more uniform, by softening the
angles of the path, which the centre of gravity describes, and rendering it
either more or less curved at pleasure; so that it becomes mechanically if not
physically possible, to walk with a velocity somewhat greater than 7 miles.an
hour, and to run or dance with as small a velocity as we please, since we
may make the path of the centre of gravity somewhat less, or much more
curved, than a circle described on the point of the foot as a centre. (Plate
IX. Fig. 115, 116.)


The flexions and extensions of the legs are also almost the only means
by which an impulse is given to the body; if the legs were perfectly inflexible,
it would be extremely difficult, although not absolutely impossible, to obtain
a progressive motion. The centre of gravity is principally impelled forwards
in the beginning of the ascending part of the curve which it describes, in
walking, by the action of the leg which is left behind, but in running or
hopping, by that of the only foot which touches the ground at any one time.
When we thrust against any obstacle, or draw a rope in a horizontal, or ina
descending direction, the body is inclined forwards, atid in some cases its
action is limited by the effect of the weight of the body reduced to the direc-
tion of the line of draught: but we much more usually draw or pull in an as-


cending direction, so that our whole muscular force may be exerted without
any limit of this kind. ;


ON STATICS, — 131


‘It happens, however, very frequently, that we have occasion for motions of
such a ‘nature as to’ be more conveniently performed by the hands and arms
than by the action of walking or running; and where delicacy is required
rather than’ strength, the form of the hand and fingers gives the human spe-
cies a great superigrity overall other animals, although by no means, as some
authors have supposed, an advantage equivalent to that of the higher perfec-
tion of the intellectual powers. It is true, as we may observe in the manu-
factories:of this country, that: machinery has been invented by which a power
of any kind may be converted to purposes seemingly the most intricate and
refined; iand afterall thathas been ddne bya Watt and an Arkwright, it is diffi-
cult to determine a agessh limit to the icigoaiaity of mechanical invention. -
nhs Off diet when a

. It is necessary to codilider; 3 in ddantnintons the different sources of motion,
nabontyihe immediate magnitude of the forces which they produce, but also
the velocity with which they are capable of acting, and the time for which
that action cai be continued. | ‘The daily work of a labouring man, of middle:
age, and in good health, will serve asa convenient unit for’ the comparison
of moving powers of all kinds. It may be most easily remembered in this
form: a.man can raise a weight of 10 pounds to the height of 10 feet in a
second, and can continue this labour for 10 hours a day. The actual velocity
of the man’s motion must vary according to the mode in-which his force is ap-
plied; but we suppose that velocity to be such as to. give the greatest effect
under the circumstances of the machine. This is a moderate estimate of the
work of a labourer, without any deduction for friction. Desaguliers states
the performance of aman working at a winch, with the assistance of a fly, as
considerably greater, but he does not allege any correct experiments in sup-
portiof his estimate., Professor Robison, however, mentions a hydraulic ma-
chine in which the effect was actually more than one tenth greater, without
making any allowanee for friction; so that it is probable, considering the loss
both from friction and from the momentum with which the water must have
been disengaged, that the immediate performance was at least one third more
than this unit; the machine was worked by a light man carryinga weight, and
walking backwards and forwards on a lever. According to Mr. Buchanan’s ex-
periments, an action like that of ringing bells produced an effect about one third
greater than turning a winch, and the action of rowing, an effect four ninths
greater; but it does not appear that these experiments were continued for a


152 } LECTURE *X1Is


whole day; .and the greatest number of observations make: the daily! per-
formance of workmen considerably less. It is: indeed seldom that the
muscles employed in progressive motion ‘are’ so much exerted as im the ar-
; rangement described by Professor Robison. A ice in the operation icall-
ed sculling, is said to beat a European at his oar, 6 et oye ime 8 ee
Gee VE AIO)
Fora short time amuch greater effect than thiern may Beiprodisced by'a great
) -exertion: thus a man weighing! above 160 pounds can ‘ascend by:means of
: steps, at the rate of more than three feet in a second; ‘for'a quarter, or per-
haps half'a minute; and this is‘an effort five times’ as’ great as that which can
‘be continued fora day. Usually, however, where the hands:are chiefly em-)
ployed, whether in turning a winch, or in pumping, it is only possible to exert
’ a double, or at most a triple action, fora minute or two: thus, although a
machine may only enable a man to raise a hogshead of waterin a minute tothe
height of ten feet for a whole day, yet itis easy to work it so rapidly fora
single minute as to raise double the quantity, | or to raise a single hogshead to
a height of twenty feet. The whole exertion of force must be a little greater:
' : than that which is thus estimated, because a ‘certain degree of superfluous:
momentum must be generated in removing weights from one situation to
another: es this loss oes UT PETER PTT eirkeountives ict ties lite)
V Deadiset rr ChOUp e eGAl mo
“The motions of carrying a nd: oiidontalbyied cdirelial an exertion of a differ-
ent kind, and admits of no direct comparison with the application of a
constant force to ‘overcome the gravitation of a weight, or any other im--
mediate resistance. The work ofa labourer thus employed is however
confined within moderate limits.. A strong porter can carry/200 pounds at i
the rate of three miles an hour; and, for a short distance, even’ 300 pounds®; a
a chairman carries 150 pounds, and walks four miles an hour; and in Turkey
it is said that there are porters, who, by stooping forwards, and placing the
weight very low on their backs, areenabled to carry from 700 to 900 pounds.’ ,
The subjects of Mr. Coulomb's experiments appear to have beemeitherweaker, ae
or more inactiye, than the generality of porters in this country: ree
that the most advantageous load for a: man of common strength is | beh a
hundred weight; or, if he is.to return without a burden, 1 oo


X


refit Seth ertt a ett gta whit ite hott AP Reeth: & ytiamae oil: eer: -) th


Bais ser i chia) oy sears ett ; a


ON STATICS. 133


force is s greater, but-it cannot support the labour of more then 8
hours a day, when drawing with a force of 200 pounds, or of 6 hours when
with a force of 240, walking two miles and a half an hour. It is generally

‘that i in drawing up a steep ascent a horse is only equivalent ‘to 3 or
4 men, and the employment of horses in walking wheels, where, the action
is similar to that of ascending a hill, has for this reason been condemned,

_ For;men,on the contrary, an ascent of any kind appears to afford a favourable

le of exertion, But, perhaps, the weight of the carriage, and of the horse

~ tse has not always been sufficiently considered in the comparison. The
strength of a mule i is equal to that of three or four men. The expense: of
in general about twice or three times as great as the hire of

-aday Is er; so that the force of horses may be reckoned ahont half as ex-

pensive as that of men. The horse Childers is said, although, perhaps, with-

out. sufficient authority, to have run an English mile in a single minute ; his
velocity, must in this case have been. 88 feet in a second, which would have
been st Sint him on an inclined plane without ie or in @


shel oy Jog sling, to the ee shaun me feet.


ie seats hich


Mr. Colon, saple many BS Re oP /was
working eight hours a day; its whole performance
jof. the daily labour of 34 men; 25 square feet
of one labourer. The expense of the machinery,
bly, amount to less than. half the expenseiof a
apable of exerting the-same force.» Where a stream of
a ts fore € is gencrally,.more convenient, because more
a‘ he win .
x um ity es at
of best construction, with a. thirty; inch, ples hi
yi sy since. it acts without intermission, will perform
°s, ordof 600 men, each square inch of the piston being
labourer, According to Mr. Boulton, the consumption
ds of coals, will raise 48000 cubic feet of water 10 feet
Fecal ahem, of $+ men, or perhaps more:
of coals is seldom more than that of the work of a
day; but the expense of the machinery generally
somewhat more than half as expensive as the number
is substituted... According to other accounts, a 24 inch


af mt OF orsod atl hae | ;


—_—


134 LECTURE XII.


cylinder, being equivalent to about 7% horses,’ requires | only a chaldton of
coals i in a day, each bushel doing the work of ten men, |


The force of gunpowder is employed with eens where a very powerful
action is required for a short space, as in dividing rocks, or in generating a
great velocity in a projectile. As a source of moméntum or energy only, this
power is by no means economical, the daily labour of'a man being equivalent
to the effect of about 40 pounds of powder; but the advantage of artillery
consists in having the force communicated by means of an elastic fluid ex-
tremely rare, ‘which is capable of generating a very great velocity in the ball
only, without any waste of atudots in Ehdanee a ancy mionientum in any
other substance,

f 2. . ~~

The conipaditive force of different kinds of gunpowder is determined by an
eprouvette, or powder’ proof: the effect is measured by the angular motion of
a little wheel, ‘a projecting ‘part of ‘which is impelled by the explosion of a


small quantity of the powder, while’ the friction of a spring or a weight —


creates a resistance which may be varied if it be required. The absolute
force of a given quantity of powder may be ascertained éither by suspending a
cannon as a pendulum, and measuring its angular’ recoil; or by shooting into
a large block; and alates: the velocity which is ‘inipatted to it'by the ball.


»il ? ' yur ) i : uu
ye measuring very small attractive or a with great ac-
curacy, the most convenient test is furnished by th ts of twisting. An

arm or beam is suspended horizontally by a fares wire, and the force re-

quired to cause the beam to make one or more ‘revolutions being ascertained,

we may divide the circle described by its extremities into as many parts as
we think proper, and the force required to bring the beam into any position
will always be proportional,..without a sensible error, to the magnitude of
the part of the circle intercepted between the given position and that in
which the arm would naturally rest. When the force is of s a nature as
to be capable of producing a vibration, the body on which it acts being sus-
pended by the thread of a silkworm, or of a spider, we may ¢ compare its


magnitude with that of gravitation, by observing the time required for each


vibration, and determining the operation of the force according to the laws
of pendulums. It is in this manner that the forces concerned in the effects


of electricity and of magneti ve been measured by’ Mr, Coulomb. © 494 ho


we


EE


a"


ceva » er co st


rr fa tte SA com P ‘
yea Shite aint MECRO I SIL.


‘ON PASSIVE STRENGTH AND FRICTION, .


:


HE passive strength of the inbbstial employed in the mechanical arts de-
~ or the cohesive and repulsive forces. of their particles, and on the
bane of their structure. The consideration of the intimate nature of these
forces ‘belongs to the discussion of the physical properties of matter; but the
estimation of their magnitude, and of their relative value in various circum-
stances, is of undeniable importance to practical mechanics, and requires to
be examined asa continuation of the subject of statics. The retarding force
of friction is very nearly allied to some kinds of passive strength, and rh be
in whe aaa Lr agate’ tetany on considerations.


The istivat effects of any sli betty on # solid body, may be redleae to
seven denominations ; extension, Conipression, detrasion, flexure, torsion,
alteration, and fracture. When a weight is suspended below a fixed point,
the suspending substance’ is extended, or stretched, and retains its form by
its cohesion, assisted by i its. rigidity: when the weight is supported by a
block, or pillar, placed below it, the block is compressed, and resists pri-
marily by a repulsive’ force, but secondarily also by its rigidity. The effect
here called detrusion, is produced when a transverse force is applied close to
a fixed point, in the same manner as the blades of a pair of scissors act on
the pin, and the foree which resists this operation is principally the rigidity,
or lateral adhesion of the strata of the substance, but it conld scarcely be
effectual without some degree of cohesive and repulsive force. When three
or more forces are applied’ to different parts of any substance, they produce
flexure, that is, they bend it, some of its parts being extended, and others
compressed, In torsion, or twisting, the central particles remain in their
natural state, while those which are in opposite parts of the circumference


136 : LECTURE XIII.


' are detruded, or displaced, in opposite directions. The operation of forces ,
applied in any of these ways may produce a permanent alteration, or change
of figure, in substances sufficiently soft, and perhaps, in a certain degree, in
all substances: this change is sometimes called by workmen settling, or tak-
ing a set. But the limit of all these effects is fracture, which is the conse-
quence of the application of any force capable of overcoming the strength of
the substance, and to which the generality of writers on mechanics have ~
_ hitherto confined their attention. o

The forces, by which the form of any substance is changed, may also be di-
vided into two kinds, simple pressure, and impulse ; but. it is only with fe-
gard to fracture that it will be necessary to take the force of impulse into
Cone temaion. a a

Extension and compression follow so nearly the same laws, that they may
be best understood by comparison with each other. ‘The cohesive and re-
pulsive forces, which resist these effects, depend almost as much on the
solidity, or rigidity of the substances, as on the attractions and repulsions
which are their immediate causes: fora ‘substance perfectly liquid, although
its particles are in full possession of their attractive and repulsive powers,
may be extended or compressed by the smallest force that can be applied to
it. Itis not indeed certain that the actual distances of the particles of all
bodies are increased when they are extended, or diminished i they are
compressed: for these ges are generally accompanied by contrary changes
in other parts of the same substance, although probably in a smaller degree.
We may easily observe, that if we compress a pi of elastic gum in any
direction, it extends itself in other directions if we extend it in length,
"its breadth and thickness are diminished. | :

f

If the rigidity of a body were infinite, and all lateral motions of its par-
ticles were prevented, the direct cohesion alone would be the measure of the
force e required to produce extension, and the direct repulsion of the force =.
required to produce compression ; in this respect indeed, the actual rigidity of =
some substances may be considered’ as infinite, wherever the extension or
compression is moderate, and no permanent alteration of form is produced;

ts be tae and within these limits these nevateaices may be called penton cleat If


ON PASSIVE. STRENGTH AND FRICTION. ‘137


f | the cohesion ‘and repulsion were’ infinite, ‘and the rigidity limited, ‘the only
effect of force would be to produce alteration of form: and such bodies would
be perfectly inelastic, but they would be harder or softer according to the de-
gree of rigidity.
om 4 vay * ” nk
Ibis found by cetiaoma hie the measure of the sardenision and compres-
sion of uniform elastic bodies is simply proportional to the force which oc-

__easions it; at least when the forces are comparatively small. Thus if a weight

, of 100 pounds lengthened a rod of steel one hundredth of an inch, a weight


of 200 would lengthen it very nearly two hundredths, and a weight of 300,


pounds three hundredths. The same weights acting in a contrary direction

would also shorten it one, two, or three hundredths respectively. The former

t “part of this law was discovered by Dr. Hooke, and the effects appear to be

perfectly. cpp nt ‘an “those which are more a observable in mane

fluids Hae

. chips Bs olypie a 1) ong 980

4 “shdlealinasmtsintaidaati< may express the elasticity of any substance

by ines certain column of the same substance, which may be de-

lulus of its elasticity, and of which the weight is such,

tion to it would increase it in the same proportion,as the weight

ehrenean shorten, by its pressure, a portion of the substance of equal dia-


by a weight of 1000 pounds, the weight of the modulus of its elasticity would
hie ea ‘or more accurately 99000, which is to 100000 in
nas 99 to 100. In the same manner, we must suppose
m of any weight from that of the modulus will also di-
ratio that the equivalent force would extend any por-
nee. The height of. the modulus is the same, for the same
its breadth and thickness. may be: for atmospheric air,
d for Steel nearly 1500. This supposition is sufficiently
Xpe ts, to be considered at least as a good approximation :

e weight of the modulus must always exceed the utmost
the substance, and that the compression produced by
ce its dimensions to one half: and I have found that
ressing a piece of elastic gum to half its length will
fany times that length, and then break or tear it; and
¥


“meter. Thus if a rod of any kind, 100 inche$ long, were compressed 1 inch -


1338 LECTURE XIII,


also that a force capable of extending it to twice its length will only com-
press it to two thirds. In this substance, and others of a similar nature, the
resistance appears to be much diminished by the facility by which a contrary
change i is produced in a different direction; so that the cohesion and repul-
sion thus estimated appears to be very weak, unless when the rigidity is in-
creased by a great degree of cold. It would be easy to ascertain the specific
gravity of such a substance in different states of tension and compression,
and some light might be thrown, by the comparison, on the nature and oper-
ation of the forces which are concerned.


_ It is difficult to compare the lateral adhesion, or the force which resists the
detrusion of the parts of a solid, with any form of direct cohesion. This force
constitutes the rigidity or hardness of a solid body, and is wholly absent from
liquids, although their immediate cohesion appears to be nearly equal to that
of solids. Some experiments have been made on the fracture of bodies by
means of detrusion, but it does not appear that the force necessary to pro-
duce a temporary derangement of this kind has ever been examined: itymay
be inferred, however, from the properties of twisted substances, that the
force varies in the simple ratio of the distance of the particles from their
natural position, and it must also be simply proportional to the magnitude of
the surface to which it is applied.


The most usual, as well as the most important effect, produced by the ap-
. plication of force, is flexure. When a force acts ona straight column in the
direction of its axis, it can only compress or extend it equally through its
whole substance; but if the direction of the force be only parallel to the axis,
and applied to some point more or less remote from it, the compression or ex-_ ;
tension will obviously be partial: it may be shown that in a rectangular q
column, when the compressing force is applied to a point more distant from |
the axis than one sixth of the depth, the remoter surface will no longer be
compressed but extended, and it may be demonstrated that the distance of
the neutral point from the axis is inversely as that of the point to which the
force is applied. From the effect of this partial compression, the column
ean ci and ae e axis at any point —


_ON PASSIVE STRENGTH AND FRICTION. _ 139


bent in any degree that the nature of the substance will allow. If the co-
“fumn was originally bent, any force, however small, applied to the extre-
- mities of the axis, will increase the curvature according to the same law, but -
if the column was originally straight, it cannot be kept in a state of flexure
by any longitudinal force acting ‘precisely on the axis, unless it be greater
‘ than a certain determinate force, which varies according to the dimensions of
¥ the column. It is not however true, as some authors have asserted, that
every column pressed by such a force must necessarily be bent; its state
when it is straight, and submitted to the operation of such a force, will re-
semble a tottering equilibrium, in which a body may remain at rest until


_ some disturbs it, The figure of a column naturally straight,
but bent a little by a longitudinal force, will coincide with that of the har-
‘ monic curve, in which the curvature is as the distance from the basis, (Plate


IX. Figeti7.. 121.) Bier oF

rs] garage ad hyy rash iy - Ws

Ree nlp eh OOD may be observed in all the experiments which
have been made on the flexure of columns and rafters exposed to longitudinal _
_ forces; and there is no doubt but that some of them were occasioned by the
__ difieulty of applying the force precisely at the extremities of the axis, and
inequalities of the substances, of which the fibres must


her end: and if a rod be simply supported at each end,
point will be proportional to the product of the two parts
divides it. But when the weights are supposed to be
en points of the rod only, the curvature always decreases
these points and the points of support. (Plate IX. Fig:


pris h : ~
“substance is measured by the force required to cause it
en small space in the direction of the force. It is only
this property with regard to forces applied transversely.
stiffness is directly as the breadth and the cube of the depth


4 7 7
140 «+ LECTURE X11,


of the beam, and inversely as the cube of its length. Thus if we have a
beam which is twice as long as another, we must make it, in order to ob+
tain an equal stiffness, either twice as deep, or eight times as broad. The
property of stiffness is fully as useful in many) works, of art as the ultimate
"strength with which a body resists fracture: thus. for a shelf, a lintel; or a
chimney piece, a great degree of flexure would be almost as inconvenient ds
a rupture of the substance. , i


When a beam is supported at both ends,’ its stiffness, is twice as great (as
that of a beam of half the length firmly fixed. at one end; and if both ends
are firmly fixed, the stiffness is again quadrupled. . For if thei,whole beam
were inverted and supported by a fulcrum in the middle, each half would :re-
semble a separate beam fixed at one end, and the fulcrum would, bear the
sum of two equal weights placed at the extremities, disregarding that of the
beam; and consequently the same flexure will be produced by placing a
double weight on the middle of the beam in an inverted position,’ If both
ends were firmly fixed; the curvature would be every where as. the distance
from the middle of. each half, the whole being in the same state as four se-
parate beams fixed. at their extremities: each of these, beams would be eight
times as stiff as beams of twice the length, andthe whole beam, im this state,
would be eight times as ‘stiff as if the ends were simply supported. | It is,
however, difficult to fix the ends of abeam so firmly as to increase its resistance
in thi8 proportion, unless it be continued both wei een. beyond the
supporte, : Oy, : ' : / rete Mews: tei Yi

ott % i 7 bevoughte Tq ions of

t It is evident that. a a ee or hollow "etm, tieon tidied much
stiffer than the same quantity of matter in a solid form: the stiffness is indeed

- increased nearly in proportion to the square of the diameter, since the cohe-—

‘sion and repulsion are equally enentod = pe es sege ser iota ha
ona longer lever. aque too etiog. ati} etniud ‘seat bap av Unirotin:

HM sCuer ae: ;

Torsion, or twisting, consists in the lateral dnpcemen cordetrsion, of


ON PASSIVE STRENGTH AND FRICTION. 141


be extended, and, in order to preserve the equilibrium, the internal ones would


be contracted ; and it may be shown that the whole wire would be shortened
one fourth’as much as the external fibres would be extended if the length re-
mained undiminished; and that the force would vary as the cube of the angle
through which the wire is twisted. But the force of torsion, as it is de-
termined by experiment, varies simply as the angle of torsion; it cannot,’
therefore; be explained by the action of longitudinal fibres only; but it ap-
pears rather to depend principally, if not intirely, on the rigidity, or lateral
adhesion, which resists the detrusion of the particles. If a wire be twice as
thick as another of the same length, it will require sixteen times as much force
to twist it once round; the stiffness varying as the fourth power of the dia-
meter, that is, as the square of its square. But if tite length vary, it is
obvious that the resistance “ the force of ‘torsion will be inversely as the
+1 sth etek: laniden 303 soca) ; ;

ap. schasanity aikecmbony of form is most perceptible in such substances as
are most destitute: of rigidity, and approach most'to the nature of fluids. It
limits» the strength of materials with regard ‘to practical’ purposes, al-
mostvasyimuch as’ fracture, since in general the force’ which is capable of
producing: this effect, is sufficient, with a sniall-addition, to increase it till
fracture takes»place: -A’ smaller force than’ that ‘which has first produced av’
alteration of'form, is seldom capable either of increasing, or of removing it,
a circumstance’ which’ gives such materials, as are susceptible of an alteration
of this kind, a great advantage for many purposes of convenience and of art.
The more*capable a body ‘is of a permanent alteration’ of form, the more
ductile it:is:said ‘tobe ;: pure gold and°silver, lead, annealed iron and copper,
wax when warm, glass when red hot, atid clay when moist, possess consider-
able ductility. Wood admits of little permanent change of form, except in
agreen state, although it sometimes settles'a little, when it has been exposed
to’ pressure. Even stone will become permanently bent in the course
of. «years; ‘as we may observe in old marble chimney pieces.“ But the most
ductile of all solid substances ' appears to be a spider’s web. Mr. Bennet
twisted a thread of this kind many thousand times, and shortened it more
than a fourth of its length, yet it showed no disposition to untwist.


A ductile substance acquires the same’ cohesive and repulsive powers with


2 rile apap per a TAA ENE 8S arg atta” PE PENS AO ee A Clie ae Naa eae ea
pases LAG TE RE NSE ERT TL, gl A NE I


142 LECTURE XxIIif.


regard to its new form, as it possessed in its. original state; and when the
alteration of form has once commenced, those powers are. neither increased
nor diminished by continuing the operation : the degree of flexure or torsion,
required for producing a further alteration, appears also to be little varied:
thus if the spider’s web could at first be twisted only one half round, so as to
retain the power of returning to its original state, without any permanent
alteration of form, it would never acquire the power r of returning more than
half a revolution, however it might be twisted. From a want of attention to
this consideration, a late respectable author has called in question, without
sufficient reason, the accuracy of Mr. Bennet’s experiments.


A variation of ductility, in any substance, does not appear to depend on
any change in the magnitude of the ultimate powers of cohesion and repul-
sion. Steel, whether perfectly hard, or of the softest temper, resists flexure
with equal force, when the deviations from the natural state are small: but
at a certain point the steel, if soft, begins to undergo an alteration of form;


. at another point it breaks if much hardened; but when the, hardness is mo-


derate, it is capable of a much greater curvature without either permanent
alteration or fracture ; and this quality, which is valuable for the purposes of
springs, is called toughness, and is opposed to rigidity and brittleness on the
one side, and to ductility on the other, There may, however,.'be an ap-
parent difference in the stiffness of some substances in different states, arising
from the greater facility with which their dimensions are extended in one di-
rection while they ,are contracted in another:, thus elastic gum appears: to
possess a much greater degree of stiffness when its hardness is increased by
cold than when it is at a more elevated temperature; but the change pro-
duced in this case by heat is not an increase of that ductility. which facilitates
a permanent alteration of form, but rather of the toughness which allows a
temporary change of figure, continuing only while the force is applied.. The
effect of forging and of wiredrawing tends to lessen the ductility of metals,
and to render them tough, and even rigid: so that in hammering copper and
brass, and in drawing wire, it is n to anneal the metals more than
once by fire, in order to restore their ductility, which is lessened by the opera-
tion. The corrosion of the surface of a metal by -an acid is also said to.


_ render it brittle; but it is not impossible that this apparent brittleness may


be occasioned by some irregulasity i in tna elie seidsjdie so bdialel


ON PASSIVE STRENGTH AND FRICTION. 143


- The last effect of force'on solid materials is their fracture, which, as well as
the former changes, may be produced either by impulse, or by pressure alone.
The action which resists pressure is called strength, and that which resists
impulse may properly be termed resilience. ‘The strength of every body is in
the joint ratio of its immediate cohesion and repulsion, or elasticity, and of
its toughness, or the degree in which it may be extended, compressed, or
otherwise deranged, without a separation of its parts. The resilience is
jointly proportional to its strength and its toughness, and is measured by the
product of the mass and the square of the velocity of a body capable of break-
ing it, or of the mass and the height from which it must fall in order to ac-
quire that velocity ; while the strength is merely measured by the greatest
pressure that it can support in a state of rest.


The simplest way in which a body can be broken, is by tearing it asunder.
The cohesive force continues to be increased as long as the tenacity of the
substance allows the particles to be separated from each other without a per-
manent alteration of form; when this has been produced, the same force, if its
action is continued, is generally capable of causing a. total solution of con-
tinuity; and sometimes a separation takes place without any previous —
tion of this kind that can be observed.


It follows from the nature of resilience, that a body of a pound weight,
falling from the height of a yard, will produce the same effect in breaking
any substance, as a body of three pounds falling from the height of a foot;
so that here, as well as in the estimation of mechanical power, it is the energy,
and not the momentum, that is to be considered as the measure of the effect.
If we know the strength of any substance, and the degree in which it is ca-
pable of extension, we may easily determine its resilience from a consideration
of the laws of pendulums. For the same weight which would break it by
pressure, will acquire a sufficient impulse for breaking it, if it fall froma
height equal to half the space through which the substance may be extended,
supposing the direction of the stroke to be horizontal, so that its effect may
not be increased by the force of gravity. Thus if the pressure of a weight of
100 pounds broke a given substance, after extending it through the space of
an inch, the same weight would break it by striking it with the velocity that
would be acquired by the fall of a heavy body from the height of half an


144 ' CLECTURE MIMI. 8 yi ses


inch, and a weight of one pound would break it. “2 falling from a height of
50 inches. : ;


It is obvious that the cohesive strength, as well as the resilience, of any sub-
stance must be simply proportional to the magnitude of its. transverse section,
that is, of the surface of fracture. Some experiments appear to show that it
increases in a greater proportion than this surface, others that it increases in
a’smaller proportion; but itis probable that in both cases some accidental ir-
regularities must have interfered, and that a wire two inches in diameter is
exactly four times as strong as a wire one inch in diameter. The length has
no effect either in increasing or in diminishing the cohesive strength; but the
resilience is proportional to the length, since a similar extension of a longer
fibre ag4 a greater elongation.


There i is however a limit beyond which the ealitiies: ofa a body striking
another cannot be increased without overcoming its resilience, and breaking
it, however small the bulk of the’ first body may be, and this limit depends
on the inertia of the parts of the second body, which must not be disregarded
when they are impelled with a considerable velocity. For it is demonstrable ©
that there is a certain velocity, dependent on the nature of a substance, with
which the effect of any impulse or pressure is transmitted through it; a cer-
tain portion of time, which is shorter accordingly as the body ‘is more
elastic, being required for the propagation of the force through any part of
it; and if the actual velocity of any impulse be in a greater proportion to this
velocity than the extension or compression, of which the substance is capable,
is to its whole length, it is obvious that a separation must be produced, since
no parts can be extended or compressed which are not yet affected by the im-
pulse, and the length of the portion affected at any instant is not sufficient to
allow the required extension or compression. Thus if the velocity with
which an impression is transmitted by a certain kind of wood be 15000 feet in
a second, and it be susceptible of compression to the extent of <3, of its
length, the greatest velocity that it can resist will be 75 feet in a second,
which is equal to that of a body falling from a height of about 90 feet. And
by asimilar comparison we may determine the velocity which will be suftici-
ent to penetrate or to break off a substance in any other manner; if we calcu-
late the velocity required to convey the impulse from one part of the substance


“ON PASSIVE STRENGTH AND FRICTION. 145


to the other, and ascertain the degree in which it can have its dimensions
altered without fracture.


It is easy to understand, from this statement, the different qualities of na-

tural bodies with respect to hardness, softness,, toughness, and_brittleness.

- A column of chalk, capable of supporting only a pound, will perhaps be com-

pressed by it only a thousandth part of its length; a column of elastic gum,

capable of suspending a pound, may be extended to more than twice its length,

the elastic gum will therefore resist the energy of an impulse incomparably

greater than the chalk. A diamond, so hard as_to resist an enormous pres-

"sure, may be broken, by a moderate blow, with a small hammer. A weight
of 1000 pounds, moving with a velocity of one foot in a second, and acting’
on a small surface of a board, may possess sufficient energy to break or to ’
penetrate it; with a velocity of 100 feet in a second, a weight of 4, of a

pound will possess the same energy, and produce the same effect, if it act on

a similar surface; but if the wood be so constituted, as to be wholly incapable
of resisting a melocity of 100 feet in a second, it -may be penetrated by a

we weight of +3» of a pound as well as by one tenth, and by a moderately soft
_ body as well as by a harder one. The whole board, however, if at liberty,

~ would ‘receive. a much greater momentum from the impulse of the large
weight, ‘than from that of the small one, its action being continued for a
much longer time. And itis for this reason that a ball shot by_a pistol will

+ perforate a sheet of paper standing upright on a table, without overturning it.
by 30 Natt |e
rength Reeathier: hardness, of a substance, exposed to the action of 2

d § to'compress it, must not be confounded with its resistance to
tu ly and tending to produce flexure. A slender rod
yields to a longitudinal pressure, commonly bends before it
, way at last to the force by a transverse fracture; but a
‘ick, and even a thick pillar of wood, is crushed without
erally by a smaller force than that which would produce or
n this case the parts slide away laterally, and in a rect-
ere of the substance is uniform, and not fibrous,
, 2 make nearly a right angle with each other, sup-
nc x from the lateral adhesion, in the direction of any
D, to be cayaly proportional to that section: but if this force,
u


146 LECTURE XIII.


like that of friction, is increased by a pressure which tends to bring the parts
into closer contact, the angle left after fracture must be more acute. (Plate
X. Fig. 124.)


The power of the force of lateral adhesion, in resisting fracture, is consider-
. ed by Mr. Coulomb as nearly equal to that of the direct cohesion of the same
substance, or a little greater; while Professor Robison makes it twice as
great. If, however, this force be supposed to be simply equal to the direct
cohesion, it may be inferred that the strength of a square bar in resisting
compression is twice as great as its cohesive strength, allowing that the frac-
ture takes place in the surface of least resistance. It is, however, seldom
that the strength, with which a body resists compression, is f so great a pro-
portion as this to its cohesive strength; and where the substance is in any
degree composed of fibres, they must naturally produce great irregularities by
their flexure. The strength in resisting compression, must, according to
this statement, be simply proportional to the magnitude of the section of the
substance, although some experiments on freestone appear to indicate that
when the-section is increased, the strength is increased in a greater proportion;
and there is no reason to suppose that it can be influenced either way by the
length. A cylindrical or prismatic form is therefore the best that can be
given to materials of a given bulk, in order to enable them to resist a force
which tends to crush them, except that the additional pressure of their own
weight on the lower parts, requires that those parts should be a little stronger
than the upper parts. It appears also that something is gained by making
the outline a little convex externally: for it may be demonstrated, that for a
column or upright beam, to be cut out of a slab of equable thickness, supposing
the strength to be independent of pressure, the strongest form is a circle.
(Plate IX. Fig. 126, 127.) _ 335


WiPiias ls Bina ib Neckom ‘eid Newcaereres Boece applied very ual e/a
point, its lateral adhesion is overpowered by the effect which we have called
detrusion, and its strength in this case is therefore generally somewhat greater
than its direct cohesive strength. But when cane 43
immediately applied is at a distance from c about


ON PASSIVE STRENGTH AND FRICTION. 147


Fleurs the most usual manner in which fracture is produced; the super-
* ficial parts on the convex side are most extended, and usually give way first;
except in soft fibrous substances, such as moist or green wood, which is more
easily crushed than torn; and in this case the concave side fails first, and be-
comes crippled, and the piece still remains_suspended by the cohesion of the
‘fibres. “After the convex surface has been-cracked, the whole substance is
usually separated, but not always; for example, a triangular beam, with one
a of the edges uppermost, may be charged with such a weight that the upper
he ihe edge aed Betrided and the lower part may remain intire.
TE at me a eS
When a. column or rafter is broken by the operation of a longitudinal pres-
sure, the stiffness of the column being once overcome, a small addition of force is
usually | sufficient to produce fracture, unless the pressure has been applied to a
part more | or less distant from the axis; for in this case a moderate force may


produce a ‘flexure, and a much greater force may be required to
break the But in general, the stiffness of columns is of more con-
: sare hi ‘in resisting transverse fracture.


The stre of beams of the same kind, and fixed in the same manner, in

rse force, is simply as their breadth, as the square of their

Paes leer this length. Thus if a beam be twice as broad as

; mart \ strong, but if it be twice as deep, it will be

; increase of depth not only doubles the number

eles, but also gives each of them a double power, by in-

of the levers on which they act. -The increase of the

‘am must also obviously weaken it, by giving a mechanical ad-

r which tends to break it: and some experiments appear

ng 1 is diminished i ina proportion somewhat greater than
h is increased. ’

Bn ti ays A
1 ie ‘supported ‘at‘both ends, like its stiffness, is twice
le beam of half the length,which is fixed at one end ;
ye whole bea eae See if both the ends are


aul


148 LECTURE XIII.


a law very different from that which determines its strength, for it is simply
proportional to the bulk or weight of the beam, whether it be shorter or
longer, narrower or wider, shallower or deeper, solid or hollow. Thus a beam
ten feet long will support but half as great a. pressuré, without breaking, as
a beam of the same breadth and depth, which is only five feet in length; but
it will bear the impulse of a double weight striking against it with a given
velocity, and will require that a given body should fall from a double height
in order to break it.»


It is therefore of great consequence ini the determination of the form and
quantity of the materials to be employed for any mechanical purpose, that
we should consider the nature as well as the magnitude of the forces which
are to be resisted. Stiffness, strength, or resilience, may be separately or
jointly required in various degrees. For a cieling, stiffness would be princi-
pally desirable; for a door, strength; for the floor of a ball room, resilience ;
for a coach spring, resilience and flexibility, that is, resilience without stiff-
ness. An observatory should be as stiff as possible, a ship as strong as pos-
sible, a cable as resilient as possible.


It is a common remark that a floor which shakes is the strongest; and, im-
probable as it appears at first sight, it may perhaps be founded in truth: for
if the absolute strength of a stiff and a shaking floor were equal, the shaking
floor would bear the effects of motion with the least injury. _ It is possible
that a stiff floor, which would support a numerous assembly, might give way
at a ball; while a more resilient one, which would be suited for dancing,
might be destroyed by a crowded concert.

A coach spring, divided into plates, has the same power of resisting, with-
out being broken, the momentum of the carriage, arising from sudden eleva-
tions and depressions, as it would possess if it formed one entire mass,
while its greater flexibility allows it to regulate these motions in a much more
gradual and gentle manner. A single piece of timber may perhaps sometimes
have too much of the flexibility of a coach spring, its strata sliding in some
degree on each other: in such a case its stiffness and strength may be in-
creased by binding it very firmly with hoops. ,


ae Se


ON PASSIVE STRENGTH AND FRICTION. 149


. The transverse strength of a perfectly elastic substance, fixed at one end,
is to its direct cohesive strength as the depth of the substance to six times its
iength. This proportion is equally applicable to such substances as resist
compression more strongly than extension: for their immediate repulsive
force is probably not greater than their cohesive force, when their dimensions
are equally changed,so that the middle of the beam is always in its natural state;
and when the curvature is sufficient to overcome the cohesive force, the
whole beam must give way. ° When, however, the substance is less capable
of resisting compression than extension, the concave surface gives way first,
and the strength depends immediately.on the repulsive strength of the sub-
stance. This is perhaps the reason, that, in experiments on beams of oak,
the transverse strength has seldom been found in a greater ratio to the whole
cohesive strength than that of the depth to nine times the length.


It may be inferred from the consideration of the nature of the different
kinds of resistance which have been explained, that if we have a cylindrical
tree a foot in diameter, which is to be formed into a prismatic beam by flat-
tening its sides, we shall gain the greatest stiffness by making the breadth or
thickness 6 inches, and the depth 103, the greatest strength by making the
breadth 7 inches and the depth 93, and the greatestsresilience by making the
beam square. The stiffness and the strength of the beam may be much in-
creased by cutting the tree into four pieces, turning their edges outwards,
and wniting them so as to make a hollow beam: but it will require great
Strength of union, to make the wholeact as one piece, and the resilience of
the beam will be rather diminished than increased by the operation.


The adoption of the hollow masts and beams which an ingenious mechanic
has lately introduced, requires, therefore; some caution. For where an im-
pulse is to be resisted, such a mast is.no. stronger than a solid mast of the
same weight, and much weaker than a solid mast of the same diameter. The
force of the wind is, however, rather to be considered as constituting a pres-
Sure than a finite impulse, except when a sudden squall carries a loose sail
before it with considerable velocity. A similar caution may also be extended
to some other attempts to make improvements in naval architecture: it is a
common opinion, and perhaps a well founded one, that flexibility is of great


x


150 Ory} LECTURE XIII.


advantage to a ship’s sailing; if therefore we sacrifice too much resilience to
strength, and too much of both to stiffness, we may perhaps create greater
evils than those which we wish to avoid.


We have hitherto supposed the beams, of which the strength has been com-


_ pared, to be prismatic, that is, of equal breadth and thickness throughout,


which is not only the simplest form in theory, but the most generally useful in
practice. If however we have the power of giving any form that we please to
materials of a certain weight, which may often be done where several smaller
pieces are to be cut out of a larger one, or a larger one to be composed of
several smaller ones, or where the materials are either ductile or fusible, it is
frequently possible to determine a more advantageous form than that of an
equable beam or column. For since the extension which the parts of the
substance admit, without giving way, is the limit of their strength, if the
depth of a beam be everywhere equal, and the curvature unequal, the frac-
ture will first take place where the curvature is greatest, and the superfluous
strength of the other parts will be lost; so that, in order to have the greatest
strength that agiven quantity of materials is capable of affording in a beam of


- given length, the form must be such that the strength may be everywhere
equal, the tension of the surface being equal throughout; and the depth -


must be as much smaller as the curvature is greater. It is also necessary to
consider whether the substance is likely to be crushed, and whether it is li-
able to be broken by detrusion, rather than by flexure. Sometimes the depth
of the beam may be limited, and sometimes its breadth; or it may be required
that the breadth and depth may be always equal or proportional to each other,
and the force may be either applied at one end of the beam, or it may be
equally divided throughout its length ; it may also principally depend on the
weight of the substance itself; and the strongest form will be different, accord-
ing to the different conditions of its application. In the most common cases,
the outline must be either triangular, or parabolic, as if the point of the tri-
angle were rounded off ; but the curves required are sometimes ‘of miuch m more
difficult i inrestiontions (Plate X. Fig. 128). 5 vai, ) {!


; idizest


The strength of bodies is ere ccapiipal in sessile Mei as in the
case of sath iia wheels and pinions, rudders of ships, and serews of als


Meith eh Stl


ON PASSIVE STRENGTH AND FRICTION. 151


kinds: but there is seldom occasion to determine their absolute strength in
resisting a force thus applied: if they are sufficiently stiff, their parts are not
often separated by any violent efforts.


In order to investigate the strength of the various substances employed for
the purposes of the mechanical arts, it is most convenient to use a ma-
chine furnished with proper supports, and gripes, or vices, for holding the ma-
terials, and with steelyards for ascertaining the magnitude of the force ap-
plied, while the extension or compression is produced by a screw or a winch,
with the intervention of a wire, a chain, or a cord: provision ought also to
be made for varying the direction of the force, when the flexure of the ma-
terials renders such a change necessary, (Plate XI. Fig. 148.)


According to the experiments of various authors, the cohesive strength of
a square inch of razor steel is about 150 thousand pounds, of soft steel 120,
of wrought iron 80, of cast iron 50; of good rope 20, of oak, beech, and
willow wood, im the direction of their fibres 12, of fir 8, and of lead about
$ thousand pounds: the cohesive strength of a square inch of brick 300, and
of freestone 200. Teak wood, the tectona grandis, is said to be still stronger
than oak. _ ( "


The weight of the modulus of the elasticity of a square inch of steel, or
that weight which would be capable of compressing it to half its dimensions,
is about 3 million pounds; hence it follows, that when a square inch of steel
is torn asunder by a weight of 150000 pounds, its length is first increased to
one twentieth more than its natural dimensions.


The strength of different materials, in resisting compression, is liable to
great yariation. In steel, and in willow wood, the cohesive and repulsive
strength appear to be nearly equal. Oak will suspend much more than fir;
but fir will support twice,as much as oak; probably on account of the curva-
ture of the fibres of oak. Freestone has been found to support about 2000
pounds for each square inch, oak in some practical cases more than 4000.

<=


The strongest wood of each tree is neither at the centre nor at the circum-
ference, but in the middle between both; and in Europe it is generally thicker


a>


i
6
oa
;


" the protuberant particles, which must be broken, bent, or compres


152 | pBECTURE xi.


and firmer on the south east side of the tree. Although iron is much stronger
than wood, yet it is more liable to accidental imperfections; and when it
fails, it gives no warning of its approaching fracture. The equable quality of
steel may be ascertained by corrosion in an acid; but there is no easy mode
of detecting internal flaws.in a bar of iron, and we can only rely on the ho-
nesty of the workman for its soundness. . Wood, when it is crippled, com-
plains, or emits a sound, and after this, although it is much weakened, it
may still retain strength enough to be of service. Stone sometimes throws


’ off small splinters when it is beginning to give way: it is said to be capable


of supporting by much the greatest weight when it is placed in that position,


~ with respect to the horizon, in which it has been found in the quarry.


It is obvious that when the bulk of the substance Mabaved becomes
very considerable, its weight may bear so great a proportion to its strength
as to add materially to the load to be supported. In most cases the weight
increases more rapidly than the strength, and causes a practical limitation
of the magnitude of our machines and edifices. We sce also a similar limit
in nature: a tree never grows to the height of 100 yards; an animal is never:
strong enough to overset a mountain. It has been observed that whales are
often larger thanany land animals, because their weight is more supported by
the pressure of the medium i in ase 2 they swim.


The force of friction, which rebate the sliding of different bodies on each
other, seems tobe intimately connected with that lateral adhesion, or rigidity,
which is opposed to the internal displacement of the parts of a single body, by
the effect which we have denominated detrusion: and when the friction is con-
sidered as resisting pressure rather than motion, it approaches still more nearly
to the same force. It is probably derived in great measure from the str ;


motion of the bodies on each other: but it is not always te
of such particles can be asserted, much less can they be made. re ible to
the senses, and we can only examine the effects which they may be supposed


to produce, by immediate experiments on ‘the forces required to counteract


them. Such experiments have been made on a very Piel scale by
Musschenbroek and Coulomb, and many r of | ha On Li
by Mr. beacon senteninee


ON PASSIVE STRENGTH AND FRICTION. 153


_ *_—- With afew exceptions, the friction of all solid bodies is, either perfectly, or
“very” nearly, a uniformly retarding force, neither increasing nor diminishing
when the relative velocity of the bodies concerned is changed. The friction
ee of some rough substances is a little increased with the velocity, but, as they
become more polished, this variation disappears. When, however, the mo-
tion is wholly extinct, and the bodies remain in contact with each other,
their adhesion is usually greater than the friction, and by a continuation of
the contact, it may become twice or even thrice as great, especially where the
iy ae -and the substances but moderately hard.
sebiatggteasal > : i
“tthe truth of the dascusions thet friclion in's uniformly Seas force, may
be shown very conveniently by means of Atwood’s machine for experiments
on accelerated motion. By suffering the axis of the pulley to rest on the
surface of -any fixed substance, we may subject it to a friction of which the
magnitude may be varied by different methods; and we shall find that the
motions of the-boxes still indicate the action of a uniformly accelerating
force, the spaces described being always proportional to the squares of the
; times of descent; it follows, therefore, that since the operation of gravity is
uniform, that of friction which is deducted from it at each instant, must
also be uniform, in order that the dara acceleration may follow the
i BiH, ati this
vaerscativdis Oe aarti hice ai
» the force of | tis may! also be shown by the deseant
bstance on an inclined plane: if the body be caused to begin its
a onan it will be. retarded, when the resistance is
the r ¢ force of gravity: in this case the retardation will
i ar pi the resistance not diminishing with the
D ry, the relative weight overpowers the resistance
be jousitinually. accelerated, the resistance not being
e of the velocity. But since every experiment of
rformed in the presence of the air, the resistance of: this
another law, will in the mi one the acceleration.


Mi sili fealy.r


, with some. caliente that the Sed of
ni: tothe weight or pressure that brings the sub-
contact, independently of the magnitude of their sur-


x .


| <a = TiS


| =a


154 LECTURE XIIl.


faces: but Mr. Coulomb has observed that in many cases there is, besides
this force, another resistance, amounting to several pounds for each square
foot of the surface, which is independent of the pressure; and by calculating
these forces separately, we may probably always ascertain the whole resist-
ance with sufficient accuracy.. This constant portion is usually much smaller
than that which varies with the weight, and in all common cases it may be
safely neglected, and the friction of stone on stone may be called equal to
one half of the pressure, that of wood on wood one third, and that of metal
on metal one fourth; and this may serve as an estimate sufficiently accurate
for calculating the effects of machines; although, if their parts were perfectly
adjusted to each other, and all the surfaces well polished, the friction would
not in geheral exceed one eighth of the pressure, whatever might be the na-
ture of the materials. The application of unctuous substances lessens, the
friction in the first instance; but unless they are frequently renewed, they
sometimes tend rather to increase it.
*

The simplest mode of ascertaining the magnitude of the friction of two
bodies, is to incline their common surface to the horizon until the one begins
to slide on the other: this point determines the magnitude of their adhesion ;
but in order to find that of their friction when they are in motion, they must
be first separated, and then allowed to move on each other, while the whole
apparatus is gently agitated, The friction will then be to the pressure, as the
height of the inclined plane to its horizontal length, when the inclination is
barely such as to allow the continuance of any motion. which is imparted to
the substance placed on the plane.


. It follows from the doctrine of the resolution of force, that when any body
is to be drawn along a horizontal surface, which produces a resistance propor-
tionate to the pressure, a part of the force may be advantageously employed
in diminishing the pressure produced by the weight of the body; hence, in
order for the most advantageous application of the force, its direction must
be inclined tothe horizon, and it may be demonstrated, that the inclination
must be the same with that of a plane-on which the relative weight of the
body is precisely equal to the friction.. Thus if we can determine the incli-
nation of a road which is barely sufficient for a carriage to descend on it by
its own weight, the same inclination will be the best possible for the appli-


ON PASSIVE STRENGTH AND FRICTION. 155


cation of any force by which the carriage is to be drawn along a Meee
road of the same materials.


It is obvious that an inclined plane, on which a weight, rests by means of
an adhesion proportionate to the pressure, can never be forced backwards by
any increase of that pressure, since the resistance increases in the same pro-


‘portion, and continues always sufficient to prevent the relative motion of the


weight and the inclined. plane. Two such planes, put together, would con-
stitute a wedge, which would be equally incapable of giving way to a pressure
applied to its opposite surfaces, each of them possessing simildr properties
with respect tofriction. Thus, if the friction or adhesion were exactly one
eighth of the pressure, the height of the inclined plane would be one eighth of


its length, and the back of the wedge one fourth. Such a wedge would
therefore possess a perfect stability with respect to any forces acting on its


inclined surfaces. + But the effects of agitation, and the minute tremors pro-
duced by percussion, have a great tendency to diminish the force of adhesion,
by interrupting the intimacy of contact; and where a pin, a nail, or a screw
is required to retain its situation with firmness, the inclination of the surfaces
must be smaller than the angle of such a wedge as is barely capable of afford-
ing a sufficient resistance in theory.


It appears, therefore, that the force of lateral adhesion, acting between two
bodies in contact, is of great importance in all mechanical arts; the firmness
of architecture and of carpentry depends in great measure on it. This kind of
resistance being equally powerful, when the force is applied in the direction of
the surface, to whatever part of the surface it may tend, it follows that any
body which is subjected to friction on all sides, will retain its situation with
the same force, that was used in overcoming the friction, in order to bring it
into that situation, or rather with a greater force, since the lateral adhesion is
generally a little greater than the friction: so that a cylindrical wire cannot
be withdrawn from a perforation in a board, by any direct force less than that
which was employed in introducing it; and this kind of stability,«together
with that of a wedge or nail resisting a lateral pressure, constitutes the se-
curity of the lighter structures of carpentry, while those of architecture re-
ceive a great part of their firmness from the accumulation of weight, which


: 156 : won LECTURE XIIN {7 |


makes the resistance of their lower parts. ‘to exe Tater ‘motion almost i in-


superable.


e When ahard body penetrates another, or when a substance is ground away ;
Rescate the by the attrition of another, the force, which opposes the motion, is to be con-
iy : sidered, like the force of friction, asa uniformly retarding force. There is no ¢
: reason for imagining the stiffness of a bar, whether longer or shorter, to de- 3
pend on the velocity of the body that bends it, and the: ‘space through which : |
: it may be bent, without breaking, is also limited only by ‘the toughness of B
fe the materials. In the same manner, when the internal parts of a solid are : ¥
D broken and displaced by the penetration of another, or its external parts. na
hex ; : _ abraded by its attrition, the resistance is the same, whatever the velocity et
pati may be, and the space described by the body, before its velocity is destroyed, ;
i ae th is always proportional to the square of that velocity, or to the energy which ae


results from a combination of the proportions of the wieioteap ‘and the n seit os
mentum, — . * “pe


:


se fore ares tore’


nasitina ofit. pee beoisrisend sh


‘pe Dente Math ul ao atersaont teria


ceheatiecd
Yate Jat ew Outed. +:


tive sen fiearhie t?


git ¢ tieend 03 ebia qeznen gs Le


iaissilig tgiote youd 4


Ddtygon) «litiiiee to
abe holt rte itech ea ns
yt it ee miiboan,”
wate? ibBiny


157,


sr stom es 8 LNA VNB


ON ARCHITECTURE AND CARPENTRY. -
|: bfx ty ot pypitigivis” ste fie ; Hive “chickens gal rived
} istics! } 4 girsl p Ry i“ paibr ne : 0
} THE subjects, which’ we have lately examined, are to be considered as pre-
{ liminary to the particular departments of practical mechanics. The first di-
! vision of these is to consist of such as are employed in resisting forces of various ©
_ kinds, but they may almost all be referred, without inconvenience, to the ge- '
neral heads of architecture and carpentry, of which the principal business is, to
resist the force of gravitation. Architecture, in its most extensive sense, may
be understood as comprehending carpentry, but the term is more usually ap-
plied to the employment of those’ materials, which are only required to: resist
the effects of a force tending principally to produce compression, while the
materials used by carpenters are frequently subjected to the operation of a
force which tends to extend or to bend them: the works of architects being
commonly executed in stone or brick, and those of carpenters in wood, ne,
hs . the occasional use of iron and other metals, in both cases,


' The simplest problem in mechanical architecture appears to be, to deter-

‘mine the most eligible form for a column. The length and weight being sup-

I posed to be given, it is of importance to investigate the form which affords
the greatest possible strength ;) but it is somewhat, difficult to ascertain the
r % precise nature and direction of all'the forces which are to be resisted. If we

f considered the column as a beam fixed in the ground, and impelled by a
[ transverse force, it ought to be much tapered, and reduced almost to a point
| at its extremity; but it: is seldom that any force of this kind can be power-
ful enough ito do more than overcome the weight alone of the column,
and it is only necessary td) regard the load which presses. vertically on it;
and whether we consider the force as tending to bend or to crush it, the
forms commdnly employed will appear to be sufficiently eligible. Mr. La-


Fa


r .


158 LECTURE XIV.


grange seems to have been misled by some intricacies of mathematical investi-
gation, too remote from physical accuracy, when he calculated that a cylinder
was the strongest form for resisting flexure; that form approaches in reality
much more nearly to an oblong spheroid, of which the outline is elliptical.
The consideration of the flexure of a column is, however; of little practical
importance in architecture, for upon a rough estimate of the properties of
the materials usually employed, it may be computed that a column of stone
must be about forty ‘times as high as it is thick, in order to be capable of
being bent by any weight which will not crush it; although a bar of wood
or of iron may be bent by a longitudinal force, if its length exceed about
twelve times its thickness. The force may therefore be considered as tend-
ing only to crush the column; and) since the inferior parts must support
the weight of the superior parts, in addition to the load which presses on
the whole column, their thickness ought to be somewhat increased; and it
appears from a consideration of the direction in which the fracture is most
easily effected, that the outline ought to be made a little convex externally,
and more curved above than below, which is the usual, although not the _
universal practice; an elliptic are!is perhaps the most eligible outline, ‘or a
curve formed by bending a ruler fixed at the summit of the column; some-
times the form is made to differ little from a cone, but such a figure is very
inelegant. The diminution of the thickness amountsin general to about one
sixth or one seventh of the whole, and sometimes to one fourth. (Plate XI.
Fig. 149.) :


For a light house, where a great force of wind and water was to be resist-
ed, Mr. Smeaton chose a curve with its concavity turned outwards. If we
calculated what would be the best form for a wooden pillar, intended to re-
main always immersed in the water to a certain depth, we should find that a
cone or pyramid would possess the greatest possible strength for supporting
the motion of the water; and a cone more acute than this would be equally
capable of resisting the force of the wind, supposing it to he less active than
that of the water; the part below the water might, therefore, be widened so
as to become a portion of a more obtuse ‘cone, the upper part remaining
more slender; and the greatest agitation of the sea being near its surface,
the basis of the pillar might be a little contracted, so as to have the outline
of the lower part a little convex outwards, if the depth of the water were

‘ 2


ON ARCHITECTURE) AND CARPENTRY. — 159


considerable. But in» “the case of a building of stone, the strength often de-
pends as much on the weight of. the materials as on their cohesive power:
and the lateral adhesion, which is materially influenced by the weight,
constitutes a very important part of the strength. For resisting a force
which tends to overset the building, the form) in which the weight gives
the greatest strength is that of a conoid, or a solid of which the outline is a
parabola, concave towards the axis: and for procuring, by means of the
weight, a lateral adhesion which is every where proportional to the force, the
form must be cylindrical. Sothatin a building circumstanced as we have sup-
posed the pillar to be, there appears to be no reason for making either portion
of the outline taken separately, convex towards the axis, although the angu-
lar junction of the two portions of cones might very properly be rounded off;
and the upper parts might bea little enlarged if it were desirable to reduce
the thickness of, the walls... But the Eddystone light house is completely
aboye the level of ‘the sea, although in stormy weather every: part of it is ex-
posed to the action of the waves, the water being sometimes thrown up to a
much greater height than that of the light house: so that it may be consider-
ed as exposed to the force of a fluid more and more powerful as itis nearer to
the foundation ;, and in’ this point of:yiew: its fornr differs but little from that
which the most accurate theory would point out; ‘but it: is probably ia little
weaker about the middle of its height, or somewhat lower, than in any other
part, (Plate XI. Fig. 150.) : i

A wall must be reduced in thickness as it rises, for the same reason as a
column is diminished; and if the wall is a part of a house, it must be reduced
in/a still greater degree, since the load, which is to be supported by it at dif-
ferent parts of its height, is usually much varied, by the weight of the floors,
and of the contents of the apartments. ,, But sometimes the obliquity of the
surface of the wall may become inconvenient, by promoting the growth of moss
and weeds, In building a wall, the first precaution that is required, is to
dig deep enough to ascertain the nature of the ground; the next, to lay a
sufficiently extensive and firm foundation; and it has been very properly re-
comniended that where a well'is wanted, it should be dug before the founda-
tions ofthe house are laid, in order'to examine the qualities of the different
strata which are to support them. The disposition of the stones, or bricks, is
hota matter of indifference ; the strength is obviously greatest when all the


160 » (Sos LECTURE xiv.


surfaces are either horizontal or vertical; for if they’are oblique, they must’
have a tendency to slide’ away laterally, and the wall must be very liable to
crack: hence the reticulated walls, sometimes employed by the ancients, of
which all the joints were oblique, possessed but little durability. » If the ma-
terials are thrown together without order, they press on the parts'in contact
with them ; but occasionally, as in the case of piers, or quays, this circum-
stance may be of some advantage in opposing external pressure; or at least
the effect of such a pressure may remove the inconvenience which would
oven arise ~~ the: at ce of the structure. |»


In some cases it is necessary to unite the stones of a building ‘mechanically,
either by cramps of iron, fixed by. means of melted lead, or’ by other methods,
similar to those which are more usually employed in carpentry.| Mr. Smeaton’
was obliged to fix the stones of his light house! to the rock'and to each other,


by dovetail joints, and to connect each horizontal tier with the ‘tier below it,


by pins of wood passing through the stones, with wedges driven in at each end,
to make them expand, and tie the stones fast together.:!! But, ‘in general, itis
sufficient toiemploy: mortar, made ofilime or’ terras,) and sand}! of which ‘the
utility depends principally:on the firmness and cohesive strength that it ac-
quires in ‘consequence: of its: chemicall »properties; » Sometimes the whole
structure is composed of a mass which is at first soft, but hardens as it dries ;
in this manner mud walls are built; and the materials called pisé are of a si-
milar nature. Lee XI, Fi is: iat )

“The wall or oi Phen. raised, must in general’ help to. ieaignitee a single
Tintel or beam, an arch, +2 dome, or a roof of carpentry. ‘The strength of the
lintel depends more on the nature of the substance, than on any art employed
in forming it, excepting the precaution to'give it as much depthvas is con-
venient, especially towards the middle, if the depth be any where unequal;
but the construction of an arch rs exo TM ET scope for the exertion of
mechanical science.

The intiptent theory of the arch, supporting itself in equilibrium, is that of
Dr. Hooke, the greatest of ‘all philosophical mechanics.' The arch, when it
has only its own weight to bear, may be considered as the inversion of a chain
suspended at each end; for the chain hangs in such a form, that the weight of


oi


ON ARCHITECTURE AND CARPENTRY. 161


each link is held in equilibrium by the result of the two forces acting at its ex-
tremities ; and these forces or tensions are produced, the one by the weight of
the portion of the chain below the link, the other by the same weight increased
by that of the link; both of them acting originally in a vertical direction. Now
supposing the chain inverted, so as to constitute an arch of the same form
and weight, the relative situations of all the lines, indicating the directions of
the forces, will remain the same, the forces acting only in contrary directions,
so that they are compounded in a similar manner, and balance each other on
“the same conditions, but with this difference, that the equilibrium of the
chain is stable, and that of the arch tottering This property of the equili-
brium renders an accurate experimental proof of the proposition somewhat
difficult; but it may be shown that a slight degree of friction is sufficient for
retaining in equilibrium an arch formed by the inversion of a chain of beads.
The figureis called a catenaria,when the links are supposed to be infinitely small,
and the curvature is greatest at the middle of thechain. It is notat all necessary
to the experiment that the links of the chain be equal; the same method may
be applied to the determination of the form requisite for an equilibrium, what-
ever may be the length or weight of the constituent parts of the arch; and when
the arch is to be loaded unequally in different parts, we may introduce this cir-
cumstance into the experiment, heii! proportional weights from
different parts of the chain. Thus we may employ wires or other chains to
_represent the pressure, and adjusting them by degrees, till their extremities
hang in a given line, we may find the form which will best support the weight
of the Materials, the upper surface, or extrados, of the arch being represented by
the ine in an inverted position, while the original chain shows the form
of the intrados, or of the curve required for the arch stones themselvés. In
commion cases, the form thus determined will differ little from a circular are,
of the extent of about one third of a whole circle, rising from the abutments
with an inclination of 30° to the vertical line, and it never acquires a direction
much more nearly perpendicular to the horizon. It usually becomes more
curved at some distance below the summit,and then again less curved. (Plate
XI. Fig. 152. . 154.)


But the supposition of an arch resisting a weight, which acts only in a ver-
tical direction, is by no means perfectly applicable to cases which generally
occur in practice. The pressure of loose stones and earth, moistened as they


vo . Y


ee
‘


162 LECTURE XIY.


frequently aré by rain, is exerted very nearly in the same manner as the pres-
sure of fluids, which act equally in all directions: and even if they were united
into a mass, they would constitute a kind of wedge, and would thus produce
a pressure of a similar nature, notwithstanding the precaution recommended
by some authors, of making the surfaces of the arch stones vertical and hori-
zontal only. This precaution is, however, in all respects unnecessary, because
the effect which it is intended to obviate, is productive of no inconvenience,
except that of exercising the skill of thearchitect. The effect of such a pres-
sure only requires a greater curvature near the abutments, reducing the form
nearly to that of an ellipsis, and allowing the arch to’rise at first in a vertical
direction.


A bridge must also beso calculated as to support itself without being in
danger of falling by the defect of the lateral adhesion of its parts, and in order
that it may in this respect be of equal strength throughout, its depth at
each point must be proportional to the weight of the parts beyond it. This
property belongs to the curve denominated logarithmic, the length cor-
responding to the logarithm of the depth. If the strength were afforded
by the arch stones only, this condition might be fulfilled by giving them the
requisite thickness, independently of the general form of the arch : but the
whole of the materials employed in the construction of the bridge, must be
considered as adding to the strength, and the magnitude of the adhesion as
depending in great measure on the general outline. as


We must examine in the next place what is the most advantageous form
for supporting any weight which may occasionally be placed on the bridge,
in particular at its weakest part, which is usually the middle. Supposing
the depth at the summit of the arch and at the abutments to be given, it may
be reduced considerably in the intermediate parts, without impairing the
strength, and the outline may be composed of parabolic arcs, haying their
convexity turned towards each other. This remark also would be only ap-
plicable to the arch stones, if they afforded the whole strength of the
bridge, but it must be extended in some measure to the whole of the
materials forming it.


If therefore we combine together the curve best calculated for resisting the
2 Be


: ON ARCHITECTURE AND CARPENTRY. _ 165 ~


pressure of a fluid, which is nearly elliptical, the logarithmic, and the pa-
rabolie curves, allowing to each its due proportion of influence, we may
estimate, from the comparison, which is the fittest form for an arch intended
to support a road. And in general, whether the road be horizontal, or a
little inclined, we may infer that an ellipsis, not differing much from a
circle, is the best calculated to comply as much as possible with all the con-
ditions. (Plate XI. Fig. 155.)


The tier of bricks" bliquely, which is usually placed over a window
or a door, isa real but so flat as to allow the apparent outline to be
horizontal. Mr. Coulomb observes, that the greatest strength is obtained
by causing all the joints to tend to a single point: but little dependence can


be placed on so flat an arch, since it produces a lateral thrust which may easily


overpower the resistance of the wall. For the horizontal force, required to
support each end of any arch, is equal to the weight of a quantity of the
materials which are supported by its summit; supposed to be continued, of
their actual depth, to the length of a semidiameter of the circle of which the
summit of the arch is a portion. This simple calculation will enable anar-
chitect to avoid such accidents, as have too often happened to bridges for want
of sufficient firmness in the abutments. The equilibrium of a bridge, so far
as it depends only om the form of the arch, is naturally tottering, and the
smallest force which is capable of deranging it, may completely destroy the
structure; but when the stones or blocks composing it have flat surfaces in
contact with each other, itis necessary that the line expressing the direc-
tion of the pressure be so inuch disturbed, as to exceed at some part the li-
mits of these surfaces, before the blocks can be displaced. When this curve,
indicating the general pressure which results from the effect of a disturb-
ing force, combined with the original thrust, becomes more remote from
the centre of the blocks than one sixth of their depth, the joints will begin
_to open on the convex side; but the arch may still stand, while the curve
ins within the limits of the blocks.
is f Whole

It is desirable that the piers of bridges should be so firm, as to be able not
only to support the weight of half of each adjoining arch, but also to sustain,
in case of the failure of one of those arches, the horizontal thrust of the other;
and the same condition is obviously necessary for the stability of walls of any


|
i
re


164 LECTURE XIV.


kind which support an arched or vaulted roof, wherever tliere is no oppor-
tunity of assisting the strength by ties or chains of any kind. There are two
ways in which such a pier or wall may give way: it may either be overset, or
caused to slide away horizontally; but since the friction or adhesion which
resists the horizontal motion is usually greater than one third of the pressure,
it seldom happens that the whole thrust of the arch is so oblique as not to
produce a suflicient vertical pressure for sequring the stability in this respect;
and it is only necessary to make the pier heavy enough to resist the force
which tends to oversetit. It-is not, however, the weight of the pier only, but
that of the half of the arch which rests on it, that resists any effort to over-
set it, and in order that the pier may stand, the sum of these weights, act-
ing on the end of a lever equal to half the thickness of the pier, must be
more than equivalent to the horizontal thrust, acting on the whole height of
the pier. The pier may also be simply considered as forming a continuation
of the arch, and the stability will be preserved as long as the curve, indicat-
ing the direction of the pressure, remains within its substance. ;


The arches of Black Friars bridge are of an oval form, composed of cir-
cular arcs,and differing but little from ellipses; the arch stones are so large that
the pressure in any direction might be very greatly increased without caus-
ing the general result to exceed the limits of their magnitude, or even to
approach very near to their surfaces. (Plate XII. Fig. 156.)


The construction of a dome is less difficult than that of an arch, since the
tendency of each part to fall is counteracted, not only by the pressure of the
parts above and below, but also by the resistance of those which are situ-
ated on each side. Adome may therefore be erected without any tempo-
rary support, like the centre which is ‘required for the construction of an
arch, and it may at last be left open at the summit, without. standing in
need of a keystone, since the pressure of the lower parts is sufficiently re-


sisted, by the collateral parts of the same horizontal tier, to. prevent the pos-


sibility of their falling in, or of their forcing out the upper parts. The weight
of the dome may however force out its lower parts, if it rises in a direction
too nearly vertical; and supposing its form spherical, : and its thickness
equable, .it will require to be confined by a hoop or chain as soon as ‘the 5;
becomes eleven fourteenths of the we diameter. — But if the t


ee Cie WD |


ON ARCHITECTURE AND CARPENTRY. 165


the dome be diminished as it rises, it will not require to be bound. so high:
thus, if the increase of thickness in descending begin at about 30 degrees
from the summit, and be continued until, at about 60 degrees, the dome be-
comes a little more than twice as thick as at first, the equilibrium will be
so far secure; and at this distance it would be proper to employ either a
chain, or some external pressure, to preserve the stability, since the weight
itself would require to be increased without limit, if it were the only source
of pressure on the lower parts. (Plate XII. Fig: 157.)


The dome of St. Paul's cathedral is elliptical, and is built of wood, and
confined by strong chains, consisting of iron bars; that of the Pantheon at
Rome is nearly circular, and its lower parts are so much thicker than its
upper parts, as to afford sufficient resistance to their pressure: they are sup-
ported by walls of great thickness, and furnished with many projections
which answer the purpose : abutments and buttresses. (Plate XII. Fig.
158, 159.) "


A knowledge of the parts and proportions usually assigned to. columns, and
to buildings in general, and of their technical names and divisions, belongs
rather to the subject of ornamental than to that of useful architecture; and
the consideration of symmetry and ce is in great measure foreign to
that of the mechanical properties of bodies, which it is our present busi-
ness to investigate. — The five orders of ancient architecture are found to


‘differ considerably in their proportions, in the different remains of Greek


and Roman edifices ;. but there always remain some characteristic distinctions:
the Tuscan is. known by its strength and simplicity, without any peculiar
ornament; the Doric by its triglyphs, or triangular grooves, above each
column, imagined to, represent the ends of beams; the Ionic by. the large
volutes, and the Corinthian by the foliage, respectively enveloping their
capitals; and the Composite usually by the combination of, both these
characters; each order being lighter than the preceding, and being sometimes
employed with it in the upper parts of the same building. In general, the
length of the Tuscan column, with its capital, is equal to about seven
diameters of the base, that of the Doric eight, of the Ionic nine,
and of the Corinthian and Composite ten diameters. (Plate XII. Fig.
60. . 164.)


166 a a a BIVE 97 hss


The Gothic | architects | “appear to have been superior to the Greeks
in the mechanical Sos of the ‘parts, of ‘their edifices, so as to
produce the most effect in- ving the general equi-
librium. They: made e ; essential member ° disp Beildings a constituent
part of their system of ornament, and eyen those embellishments, ‘which, by a
superficial observer,might be deemed useless or ita ejudicial, are frequently cal-


culated, either by their s wee vei | t, to serve some beneficial
purposes. The pointed « hi es well calculated for equilibrium,
but when it has a pil ecg on its summit, it is exceedingly strong.
The most celebrated lern architects have sometimes been less successful
than those of the midd yes; and for want of paying sufficient attention to


mechanical principles, have committed such errors in their attempts to pro-
cure an equilibrium, as have. been followed by the most mischievous conse-
quences. Examples of this might out in the bridges of ourown
country, and the churches of others; but » masters of the true theory
of pressure, we shall be able to avoid similar errors, without examining the
particular circumstances which have occasioned these acciiege. (Plate XII.
Fig. 165.) °° { : HG

g- 165.) ‘ ae OS

“The principles of. equilibrium, which are employed in architecture, are
equally applicable to many cases i entry; and where the work is princi-
pally calculated to withstand a th there i is little difference inthe operation
of the forces concerned; but where a tie’i is introduced, that is, a piece which
resists principally _: strength, the oe often require to be ar-

ne


“e


ranged i in a differen er. The general pri le, that three forces, in
order to retain each: other equilibrium, must be proportional to the sides
of a triangle corresponding to their directions, is sufficient for determining
the distribution of pressure in almost all cases that can oceur. The conclu-
sions which have been drawn from this principle, and from other similar con-
siderations, respecting the strength of materials, will also be of great use in
directing us how to determine the best forms for beams, rafters, and timbers
of all kinds, and how to eae and connect them in me best manner with
each other. _ .


The siplcneil of the cohesive strength of materials in carpentry intro-
duces a difficulty which scarcely exists in architecture. Two blocks, placed


ON ARCHITECTURE AND CARPENTRY. 167


on each other, resist the force of a weight compressing them, as effectually as if
they formed but one piece: but they have no sensible cohesion to enable them
to withstand a force tending to separate them, and if they are required to co-

cohesive strength, some mde of uniting them must be found.
For this purpose, it is generally necessary to. sacrifice a considerable portion
- of the strength of the materials employed. The most usual mode is to place
the ends of the pieces side by side, first reducing their dimensions, where a
regular outline is required; and to procure a firm adhesion between them by
means of external pressure, or to employ the natural adhesion of some parts
which are-made. to project beyond the rest in each piece, and receive in their

: interstices the corresponding projections of the other piece.


“Where'the adhesion i is produced by external pressure only, it is of advan-
tage to subdivide the joints into a considerable number of parts, as is usually
done in the masts of ships, and to make the junction of any two pieces, fol-
lowing each other in the same line, as distant as possible from any other
yaa for in this manner, the loss of strength may be diminished almost
m risers distance between the joints be great enough
; each part. The junction may also be formed by
ne; but the obliquity must be so great that any lateral pressure
4 creas e stability of the wedge, the length being in a greater pro-
ehh pressure to the adhesion that it occasions; and
e together very: aye by means of tt or esi

oe wich chy lg oe

WF 5c ete d
mn of some prctcteay parts in each piece is em-
m1 ‘he: sufficiently long to secure their strength,

; oa ogg possible, partly because the contigu-

vated for their reception, and partly because their
they projet more than one sixth of their length.
‘this manner is sa to be i wea XL.

Bh ve by ise '

HEY s dona sd year aero
‘a compound beam, Satended t to resist a
direction, it is necessary to avoid, as much
“the beam in that direction, and to secure


«= ~ : x ” - GX
Tat ey ae
“: Wp Steak <e - i
eR ‘Es x: rec he Ae
s = <2 3? ‘ae
168 tH mate emit


the union with the greatest care on the convex side of the beam, which is
stretched by the operation of the force. Where no inconvenience can re-
sult from the projection of a piece on one side, it is easy to preserve the
strength unimpaired, by splicing or fishing i it on the convex side; and if the
depth of the piece added be only half as great as that of the original beam,
the strength will be somewhat increased by the operation, supposing the two
ends to meet each other without any connexi 0 h pieces require, how-
ever, to be firmly united, either by pins passing tht 1 them, or by blocks
or joggles let in to a certain depth, in order to prevent their sliding on each
other; and this mode ‘of union i is stronger than scarfing them, because it does
not diminish the depth. — XILL. Fig. 170, 171.)


Where the pieces: to be ‘seatinstied together are in different directions, the
end of one of them is usually reduced in its : size, and becomes a tenon, while
a mortise is cut in the other for its reception, and the joint is also often se-
cured still more firmly by a strap of iron. If a joist be let-into a beam, at its
upper edge, and made very tight by wedges, the strength of the beam will
not be materially diminished; but the vicissitudes of moisture and dryness
may very much impair the firmness of the union, and the end of the joist
may fail in dry weather to afford sufficient resistance to the flexure of the
beam: so that in some cases it might be more adviseable to cut the mortise
near the middle of the depth of the beam. If two pieces meet obliquely, and
one of them exerts a thrust against the other, the simplest mode of opposing
this thrust is to bind them together by a strap of iron fixed to the second
piece; this strap renders it | impossible for the first to advance without having
its extremity crushed; it is also common to make a mortise in the second
piece, a part of which serves as an abutment for the first: and for this pur-
pose the piece must be continued far enough beyond the abutment to give the
projection sufficient force of adhesion, a condition which is the more easily
fulfilled when the action of the strap produces a pressure on it. The assist-
ance of a strap is still more indispensable where the pieces are perpendicular to
each other, and the force tends to draw one of them away from the other: in
this case the mortise may be made a little wider at the remoter part, and the
end of the tenon may, be made to fit it by driving in wedges, in the same
manner as Mr. Smeaton united his blocks of stone; but a large mortise would
weaken the beam too much, and a strong strap or hoop is usually required for


% |


“ON ARCHITECTURE AND CARPENTRY. 169


additional, security. Such a strap ought always = be as straight as pedeitibe
so as to act only in the direction of the force to be resisted: it has been too
customary to accommodate the strap to the form of the beams, or to make it
deviate in other ways from aright line: but wherever a strap is bent in any di-
rection, to a distance from a:right line equal only toits depth in that direction,
its strength is so reduced, as not to exceed one seventh of what it would have
been, if it had remained straight. (Plate XIV. Fig. 172. . 174.)


It isequally. necessary in all other cases which occur in carpentry, to avoid
as much as possible a transverse strain, the disadvantage of which is obvious


from the great inferiority of the strength of any substance, resisting a trans-


verse force, to its primitive cohesive or repulsive strength.. For similar
reasons, it is proper to avoid employing a very open angle at a point where a
load is supported, ‘the great ea of the two pieces forming the angle re-
quiring them to exert a great force in order to oppose a much smaller one.


Allowance must also be made for the contraction of the timber, and care -


must. be taken that it do not so alter the arrangement of the parts, as to bring
a disproportionate strain on a point not calculated to support it. If the two
pieces forming an obtuse angle consisted, either wholly or partly, of wood cut
across the grain, and the piece joining their extremities were cut in the usual
manner, the oblique pieces would contract considerably more as they became
drier, and the angle would become more obtuse, so that the strain, produced
by a given weight, would be greater than in the original state of the triangle.
Sometimes the work is liable to be deranged by the operation of a lateral force,
which may have appeared too trifling to produce any considerable effect, but
which may still destroy the greater part of the strength, by causing the re-
sistances to deviate from the plane of the forces which they are intended to


Oppose.

The framing of a roof is one of the most common and most important sub-
jects for the employment of the theory of carpentry. If the rafters were
simply to abut on the walls, they would force them outwards; a tie beam is
therefore necessary; to counteract the thrust. In order to enable the tie


beam to support a weight, a king post is suspended from the rafters; and
frequently braces are again erected from the bottom of the king post, to sup-


VoL, f. Zz


iy 170 LECTURE XIV.


port the middle of the rafters. Sometimes a flat or less inclined portion ‘is
placéd in the middle, forming a kirb or mansard roof, somewhat resembling an
arch; this form has the advantage, when it is properly proportioned, of lessening
the: transverse strain‘on.the rafters, by making them shorter; ‘but this pur-
pose is answered equally well by the addition of ‘the braces which have been
already mentioned.» A’ kirb roof affords, ‘however, a greater space within,
than a plain roof of ‘the same height, and produces also somewhat less strain
on the tie beam or on the abutments: the tie beam may be suspended from it
by a king post .and:two queen posts, descending perpendicularly from the
joints; and the place of'the King post may ‘be supplied by a cross|beam unit-
ing the heads of the queen posts: and ‘keeping themat a'proper distance; this
beam may: also be suspended by:a shorter king post from the summit. Sucha
roof appears to be more advantageous than’ it = been commonly supposed.
Ss, XA. Fig- ae Be a7 )
I A in

» The angle of inclination of'd see to the hotiobn usually varies in different
climates: in Italy the height is generally less than one fourth of the breadth;
in England it was formerly three fourths, but it now commonly approaches
much more to the Italian proportion.» In northern climates, ‘a steep roof’ is
required on account of falls of snow, which greatly increase the lateral ‘thrust
of the rafters;' for the horizontal force exerted by a roof is always pro-'
portional to’ the length of ‘a line perpendicular to the rafter, descending from ’
its extremity till it meets another similar line drawn from the opposite rafter;
and this perpendicular is obviously much increased when the roof becomes very
flat. But for bearing the transverse strain, which tends to break the rafters
themselves, a low roof is stronger than a high one, supposing the number of
braces ‘and queen posts equal on both: for if we have to support a given weight
by a beam or rafter, whether it be placed in the middle, or equally divided through-
out the length, we neither gain nor lose force by lengthening the beam and rais-
ing it higher, while the horizontal span continues the same, since the obli-
quity lessens: the effect of the weight precisely in the same ratio that the
length of the beam diminishes its strength; but by lengthening the beam we
also add to the weight which is to be supported, and we thus diminish the
-strength of the roof. It must be observed, in calculating the strength of a
rafter, that the slight flexure, produced by the transverse strain, has a material


Vr Ae a ’ i’ . - -
bas p -


ON ARCHITECTURE AND CARPENTRY. 171


’ effect in diminishing its strength in resisting a longitudinal force; and this _
diminution must be determined according to the principles that have been laid
down respecting the equilibrium of elastic substances.


Wooden bridges, and the temporary centres on which arches of stone are
supported during their construction, depend nearly on the same principles as
roofs: the external parts usually support a thrust, and the internal act as
ties; but the abutments are generally capable of withstanding a horizontal

thrust without inconvenience, so that by their assistance the strain on the
ties is: considerably diminished. Great strength may also be obtained, where
it is practicable to support each part of the centre by two beams, in the di-
rection of chords, rere ee, on the abutments. (Plate XIV.

Fig. 178, 1792) TH yes


a


B. -Theiv: various drticles of. household furniture belong to subordinate benishives
of carpentry, but their form:is in general more accommodated to conveni-
ence and elegance than to strength and durability. Yet even in making a
chair, there is room for error and for improvement ; the same principles that
direct us in framing a roof, are capable of application here; but if they were
implicitly followed, they would lead us to the employment of bars crossing
each other in an inelegant manner. Doors, gates, locks, and hinges, are
either parts of the carpenter’s employment, or appendages to his works; and
it is possible that,by attentive consideration, improvements might be made in
all of them.. Mr. Parker has devoted much time and labour to the subject of
gates, with their hinges and fastenings, and has presented to the Royal In-
stitution a very useful collection of models, which show the result of his in-
vestigations.


i


172 vi


LECTURE XV. :


ON MACHINERY.


HAVING taken a general view of those branches of practical mechanics
in which forces are to be resisted, we are next to consider the modifications
of forces and of motions; and in the first place the modes of applying
forces, of changing their direction and intensity, and of communicating
them to different parts of our machines by the intervention of rods, joints,
cranks, wheelwork, ropes, or other flexible substances; in the second place,
the structure of these substances, and the methods by which the union of
flexible fibres in general may be effected ; and in the third place, the regula-
lation and equalisation of motion, by means of clocks and watches.


The modes of applying mechanical forces are almost as various as the
machines that are constructed, and the purposes for which they are employ-
ed: bitin general, the strength of men is applied by means of levers, or
winches, or by walking wheels, which slide beneath them as they attempt to
ascend; and that of other animals, by a horizontal arm projecting from a ver-
tical axis, to which they are harnessed, and sometimes also by causing them
to walk on or in a moveable wheel. Many of these arrangements may how-
ever be very conveniently considered as belonging to the particular objects
for which each machine is constructed, especially to the modes of raising
weights by cranes, and of grinding substances by mills.


When motion is simply communicated to a substance placed before the
moving body, such materials must be employed as are capable of exerting
a repulsive force, or a thrust; and these are generally of the same kind as
are sometimes concerned in the operations of architecture, but more com-
monly in those of carpentry, particularly metal and wood. But when the
body to be moved is behind the moving power, and is pulled along by it,


ON MACHINERY. 178


chains or ropes are sometimes more convenient. In the union of wood for
moveable machinery, it is generally advisable to avoid employing pins or
bolts of metal; for these, by their superior weight and hardness, somet imes
pate Pons a in contact with them, and tins loose. :
il

When the ditecatia of ee motion wthianidion sedis is also to’be changed, levers
or cranks may be employed, united by joints or hinges of various kinds.
Sometimes a long series of connected rods is suspended by other rods or
chains, so as'to convey the effect of the force to a considerable distance; in
this case the motion is generally alternate, when, for example, pumps are
wotked by means of a waterwheel at a distance from the shaft in which the
pumps are placed. In this arrangement, there is no necessary loss on ac-
count of the alternation of the motion of the rods; for if they are suspend-
ed at equal distances from a number of fixed points, they will move back-
wards and forwards, in the manner of a single pendulum; but the magnitude
of the friction’ is the principal inconvenience produced by the weight of
the series. Where a lever is employed for changing the direction of a great
force, its strength may be increased by the addition of a frame projecting in
the direction of its depth; and if the lever is bent, a cross piece uniting its


arms is aoe more sar (Plate XIV. Figs 180. . 182.)


mt
For the communication of a rotatory motion, Dr. Hooke’s universal joint is
sometimes of use, especially when the inclination is not required to be ma-
terially changed ; but if the obliquity is great, the rotation is not commu-
nicated equably to the new axis at all points of its revolution. This joint
is formed: bya’ crossy:making the diameters of two semicircles, one of
which is fixed at the end’ of ‘each axisi (Plate XIV. Fig. 183.)


The best mode of connecting a rotatory motion with an alternate one, is, in
all common cases, to: employ a crauk, acting’on one end of a long rod,


which has ajointat the other.» If the ‘rotatory motion of the crank be


equable, the progressive motion of the rod will be gradually accelerated
and retarded, and for a considerable part of the revolution the force exert-
ed will be nearly uniform: but if we attempted to communicate at once
to the rod its whole velocity in each direction, as has sometimes been done


by inclined planes, or by wheelwork, the motion would become extremely
3


aa


ee


a74 LECTURE, X Vie ¢


irregular, and the serena srould be destroyed by the strain, get XIV.


Fig. 184.) .. ; & Oi Stdectvbs yileruss

On the other handit must be observed, that the force applied to a ma-
chine may, in general, be, divided into two portions; the one employed in op-
posing another force, so as |to produce,equilibrium only, the-other in generat-
ing momentum. With respect to the first portion, a single crank has the
inconvenience of changing continually the mechanical advantage of the ma-
chine; with respect to the second, its motion in the second quarter of its re-
volution is accelerated, instead of being retarded, by the inertia which- this
portion) of the force is intended. to overcome: and from, a combination of both


’ these causes, the motion must necessarily be rendered very irregular. They


may, however, be completely, removed by employing always cranks in pairs,
one of them being fixed so, as to make a right angle with the other, which
is also the best position’ fortwo. winches to be turned by two labourers ;. since
the point of. the circle,ia, which a» man can exert his greatest strength, is
nearly at the distance ofa right angle, or a little more, from oe point at
which his force is smallest. ||, ‘i

An alternate motion may be comunicated to a rod, so that: the, force may
be either uniformly exerted, or varied according to any given law, by means
of an inclined, surface, formed into a proper curve, and acting on a/friction
wheel fixed to, the rod ; and a single plane surface, placed obliquely, would
answer sufficiently well for this purpose. But in such cases, aswell as when
a cranky is used, it is necessary to employ other means. for supporting the
rod in its proper situation; this may, either be done. by. additional. friction
wheels, or in. a more elegant manner, by such -an arrangement of} jointed
rods, as will cause the extremity of one of them to move ina curve which
does not sensibly differ from aright line. If we fix two pins ina beam, so
as to connect to it two equal rods, of which the extremities are joined: by a
third, and the end of this third rod which is nearest to the centre of the
beam be connected toa second beam ofa proper length,; the opposite end, of
the rod will initially describe a right line; and for this purpose the length of
the second beam must be to the, distance of the nearest pin from the centre
as that distance is to the distance of the pins from each other. | ‘Fhe same


effect may also be produced by means, of a frame, made of two pieces, each a


2


r ON MACHINERY. 175


yard long, united by joints to each other, and to two other pieces of a foot
each; one of the first pieces being fixed, if the shorter piece opposite to it .
be produced to’ the length of four feet, its extremity will move at first in a
tight line. The proportions « of the rods may also” be made more convenient
thai’ these, ‘and’ others may be added to them, ‘if it be required, which may
make a line move so as to rewiain always i in parallel ‘directions. (Plate XIV.
Fig. 185. . 188. )

But of all the modes of communicating ‘motion, the most extensively use-
ful is the employment of wheelwork, which is capable of varying its direc-
tion and its’ ong pt without any tina :


Wheels are sometimes turned by simple contact with each other; some-
times by the intervention of cords, straps, or chains, passing over them; and
in these cases the minute protuberances of the surfaces, or whatever else may
be the cause of friction,’ preverits: their sliding” ‘on each other. Where a

broad strap runs on’a wheel, it is ‘usually confined to its situation, not by
causing the margin of the wheel to project, but, on the contrary, by mak-
ing *he middle prominent: the reason of this may be understood by ex-
amining the manner in whicha tight strap running on a cone would tend to
run towards its thickest part. Sometimes also pins are fixed in the wheels, and
admitted into perforations in the straps; a mode only practicable where
the motion is slow and'steady. A smooth motion may also be obtained, with,
considerable force, by forming the surfaces of the wheels into brushes of hair.
(Plate Xv. Fig. 189.)


More’ commonly, as eves: the circumferences of the contiguous wheels
are formed into teeth, impelling each other, as with the extremities of so many
levers, either exactly or nearly in the common direction of the circum-
ferences; and sometimes an endless screw is substituted for one of the
wheels. In forming the teeth of wheels, it is of consequence to determine
the curvature which will procure an equable communication of motion, with
the least possible friction. For the equable communication of motion, two
methods have been recommended ; one, that the lower part of the face of
each tooth should be a straight line in the direction of the radius, and the
upper a portion of an epicycloid, that is, of a curve described by a point of a


176 LECTURE XV...


circle rolling on the wheel, of which the diameter must be half that of the
opposite wheel; and in this case it is demonstrable that the plane surface of
each tooth will act on the curved surface of the opposite tooth so as to pro-
duce an equable angular motion in both wheels: the other method is, to
form all the surfaces into portions of the involutes of circles, or the curves
described by a point of a thread which has been wound round the wheel,
while it is uncoiled; and this method appears to answer the purpose in an
easier and simpler manner than the former. It may be experimentally de-
monstrated, that an equable motion is produced by the action of these curves
on each other: if we cut two boards into forms terminated by them, divide
the surfaces by lines into equal or proportional angular portions, and fix
them on any two centres, we shall find that as they revolve, whatever parts
of the surfaces may be in contact, the corresponding lines will always mect
each other. (Plate XV. Fig. 190. . 192.)


Both of these methods may be derived from the general principle, that the
teeth of the one wheel must be of such a form, that their outline may be
described by the revolution of a curve upon a given citclé, while the outline
of the teeth of the other wheel is described by the same curve revolving
within the circle. It has been supposed by some of the best authors that the
epicycloidal tooth has also the advantage of completely avoiding friction;
this is however by no means true, and it is even impracticable to invent any
form for the teeth of a wheel, which will enable them to act on other teeth
without friction. In order to diminish it as much as possible, the teeth
must be as small and as numerous as is consistent with strength and dura-
bility ; for the effect of friction always increases with the distance of the
point of contact from the line joining the centres of the wheels. In calcu-
lating the quantity of the friction, the velocity. with which the parts slide
over each other has generally been taken for its measure: this is a slight
inaccuracy of conception, for, as we have already seen, the actual resist-
ance is not at all increased by increasing the relative velocity; but the
effect of that resistance,in retarding the motion of the wheels, may be shown,
from the general laws of mechanics, to be proportional to the relative ve-
locity thus ascertained. When it is possible to make one wheel act on
teeth fixed in the concave surface of another, the friction may be thus dimi-.
nished in the proportion of the difference of the diameters to their sum. If.


ON MACHINERY. 177


the face of the teeth, where they are in cantact, is too much inclined to the
radius; their mutual friction is not much affected, but agreat pressure on their
axes is produced; and this occasions a strain on the machinery, as well as an
increase of the friction on the axes.) — ‘ds
“ois Mj Dua Ja f Ba
If itis desired to dishes a great angular velécity with the smailest possible
quantity of wheelwork, the diameter of each wheel must be between three
and four times a8 great as that of the pinion on which it acts. Where the
pinion impels the wheel, it. is sometimes made with three or four teeth only;
but it is much better in general to have at least six or eight; and considering
the additional labour of increasing the number of wheels, it may ‘be advisable
to allot more teeth to each of them than the number resulting from the calcu-
lation; so that we may allow 30 or 40 teeth to a-wheel acting on a pinion of 6
or 8.» In'works which do not tequire a great degree of strength, the wheels
have sometimesa much greater number of teeth than this; and on the other hand,
an endless screw or a spiral actsas apinion of one tooth, since it propels the wheel
through the breadthof one tooth only in each revolution. For a pinion of
six teeth, it would be better to have a wheel of 35 or 37 than 36; for each
tooth of the wheel would thus act in turn upon each tooth of the pinion, and
the work would be more equally worn than if the'same teeth continued to
meet in each revolution, ‘The teeth of the pinion should also be somewhat
stronger than those of the wheel, in order to support the more frequent recur-
rence of friction. It has been proposed, for the coarser kinds of wheelwork,
to divide the distance between the middle points of two adjoining teeth into
30 parts, and to allot 16 to the tooth of the woke £4 13 to that of the
om ee 1 va Basen: of:motion = i
The wheel and pinion may either be situated in the same plane, both being
commonly of the kind denominated spur wheels, or their planes‘may form an
angle: in this case one of them may be a crown or contrate wheel, or both of
' them may be bevilled, the teeth being cut obliquely. According tothe rela-
tive magnitude of ‘the wheels, the angle of the bevil must be different, so
that the velocities of the wheels may be in the same proportion at both ends
of their oblique faces: for this purpose, the faces of all the teeth must be di-
rected to the point where the axes would meet, (Plate XV. Fig. 193, 194.)


iT 4, if


VOL. I. aa


“os = "4
.


178 LECTURE XV.


Incases where a motion not quite equable is required, as it sometimes hap-
pens in the construction of clocks, but more frequently in orreries, the wheels
may either be divided a little unequally, or the axis may be placed a little out
of the centre; and these eccentric wheels may either act on other eccentrie
wheels, or, if they are made as contrate wheels, upon a lengthened pinion.
(Plate XV. Tig. 195, 196.)


An arrangement is sometimes made for separating wheels which are in-
tended to turn each other, and for replacing them at pleasure; the wheels are
said to be thrown by these pensions out of gear and into gear again.


‘When a wheel revolves round Sodhie and isso faxed as to remain nearly i ina
parallel direction, and to cause the central wheel to turn round its axis, the
apparatus is called a sun and planet wheel. In this case, the circumference
of the central wheel moves as fast as that of the revolving wheel, each point
of which describes a circle equal in diameter to the distance of the centres of
the two wheels: consequently, when the wheels are equal, the central wheel
makes two revolutions, every time that the exterior wheel travels round its
If the central wheel be fixed, and the exterior wheel be caused to: turn, on its
own centre during its revolution, by the effect of the contact of the teeth, it


‘ will make in every revolution, one turn more with respect to the surrounding


objects, than it would make, if its centre were at rest, during one turn of the
wheel which is fixed: and this circumstance must be recollected when such
wheel are employed in Pinpataciarne

At iy .

Wheels are usually rund wood, of iron, either cast or wrought, of steel,
or of brass. The teeth of wheels of metal are generally cut by means of a ma-
chine; the wheel is fixed on an axis, which also carries a plate furnished with
a variety of circles, divided into different numbers of equal parts, marked
by small excavations; these are brought in succession. under the point ofa
spring, which holds the axis firm, while the intervals between the teeth are
expeditiously cut out by a revolving saw of steel. The teeth are afterwards
finished bya file; and a machine has also been inyented for ihe and
worting the file. ioe XV. Figs 197.) > Wt Lskilis


t owe “ir cert cyte


It is frequently necessary in machinery to protract the time of F sppication


‘ lh av
.
yee ‘


ON MACHINERY. 179


of a given force, or to reserve a part of it for future use. This is generally
effected by suffering a weight to descend, which has been previously raised,
or a spring to unbend itself from a state of forcible flexure, as is exemplified
in the weights and springs of clocks and watches. The common kitchen


__ jack is also employed for protracting and equalising the operation of a weight:


in the patent jack ‘the same effect is produced by an alternate motion, the
axis being impelled backwards and forwards, as in clocks and watches, by
means of an escapement, and the place of a balance spring being supplied by
the twisting and untwisting of a cord.


In these machines, as well as in many others of greater magnitude, the fly
wheel is a very important part, its velocity being increased by the operation
of any part of the force which happens to be superfluous, and its rotatory
power serving to continue the motion when the force is diminished or with-
drawn. Thus, when a man turns a winch, he can exert twice as much force
in some positions as in others, and a fly enables him in some cases to do
nearly one third more work., In the pile engine, also, without the help of
the fly, the horses would fall for want of a counterpoise, as soon as the
weight is disengaged. Such a fly ought to be heavy, and its motion must
not be too rapid, ‘otherwise the resistance of the air will destroy too much of
the motion ; but in the kitchen jack,as well as in the striking part of a clock,
where the superfluous force is purposely destroyed, the fly is made light, and
strikes the air with a broad surface. An effect similar to that of a fly anda
spring is sometimes produced in hydraulic machines by the introduction of an
air vessel, the air contained in which is compressed more or less according to
the intensity of the force, and exerts a more uniform pressure in expelling the
fluid which is forced irregularly into it.


180


‘LECTURE XVI. eh nt: ate at


ON THE. UNION OF FLEXIBLE FIBRES.


Tur strength of cordage, and of other substances which are elitoyed i in
the communication of motion, where flexibility is required, as wellias the
utility of other flexible materials which serve for furniture or for ‘clothing,
' depends principally upon the lateral adhesion produced by twisting, or by'the
intermixture of fibres. The union’ of flexible fibres, therefore, being fre-
quently subservient to the communication of motion, and the machinery, usually
employed for producing it, belonging immediately to the subject of the mo-
dification of motion, we may with propriety consider at present, as far as
our plan will allow us, those important branches of the mechanical arts, of
which the object is to effect a union of this kind.


When a chain is made of wire, each link is separately bent, and’remains
united with the neighbouring links in virtue of its rigidity: but the fibres of
vegetable and of animal substances must be united by other means. For
this purpose we have recourse to the force of friction, or rather of lateral ad-
hesion, and the fibres are so disposed, that besides the mutual. pressure
which their own elasticity causes them to exert, any additional force applied
in the direction of the length of the aggregate, tends to bring the parts into
closer contact, and to augment the adhesion, in the same manner as we have
already seen that a wedge and a screw may be retained in their situations. The
simple art of tying a knot, and the more complicated processes of spinning,
ropemaking, weaving, and felting, derive their utility from this principle.


When a line is coiled round a cylinder, for instance, in letting down
a weight, by means of a rope which slides on a post, or on such a
grooved cylinder as is sometimes employed to enable a person to lower him-


self from a window in cases of fire, the pressure on the whole circumference
1


2 ON THE UNION OF. FLEXIBLE FIBRES. 181


. is to the weight, as twice the circumference to the diameter; supposing, for
5 example, that the friction of rope on metal were one tenth of the pressure,
then a single coil of rope round a cylinder of metal would support about two
thirds of the weight; or if the weights acting on the different ends are dif-
ferent, the adhesion may be a little greater or less than in this proportion,
| according to the manner in which the rope is applied. If such a rope
} _ made two or three coils, it would-be impossible to apply a force sufficient
to cause it to slide in the grooves.
a rOlAl
From considering the effect of a force which is counteracted by other forces
acting obliquely, we may understand both the effect of twisting, in binding


the parts of a rope together, and its i inconvenience, in causing the strength ,


: of the fibres to act with a mechanical disadvantage. The greater the obli-
| * quity of the fibres, the greater will be their adhesion, but the greater
also -will be their immediate tension, in consequence of the action of a
given force in the direction of the rope: so that after employing as much ob-
liquity and as much tension, as is sutlicient to connect the fibres firmly, in
all cases of relaxation and of flexure, and to prevent in some measure the
penetration of moisture, all that is superfluously added tends to overpower
the primitive cohesion of the fibres in the direction of their length.


The mechanism of. bili silent is easily understood;. care is taken,
where the hand is employed; to intermix the’ fibres sufficiently, and to en-
gage their extremities as much as possible in the centre; for it is obvious
that if any fibre were wholly external to the rest, it could not be retained in
the yarn; in general, however, \the materials are previously in such a state of
intermixture as to render this precaution unnecessary. Where we have a
i number of single continuous fibres, as in reeled silk, they are sutticiently con-
nected by twisting, and we have no need of spinning. In both cases such
machinery, has been invented for performing the necessary yey as is
both honourable and lucrative to the British nation.


A single thread or yarn, consisting of fibres twisted together, has a ten-

eae deney to untwist itself; the external pzrts are the most strained in the opera-
, tion, and at first shorten the thread, until the internal parts have no longer
room for spreading out laterally, as they must necessarily do when their


182 LECTURE XVI.


length is diminished; the elasticity of all the parts, therefore, resists,and tends
to restore the thread to its natural state. But if two such threads are retained |
in contact at a given point of the circumference of each, this point is rendered
stationary by the opposition of the equal forces acting in contrary directions,
and becomes the centre, round which both threads are carried by the remain-
ing forces, so that they continue to twist round each other till the new com-
bination causes a tension, capable of counterbalancing the remaining tension
of the original threads. Three, four, or more threads may be united nearly
in the same manner: a strand consists of a considerable number of yarns thus
twisted together, generaliy from sixteen to twenty five, a hawser of three
strands, a shroud of four, and a cable of three: hawsers or shrouds. «Shroud
laid cordage has the disadvantage of being hollow in the centre, or of re-
quiring a greater change of form in the strands to fill up the vacuity, and in
undergoing this change, the cordage stretchés, and is unequally strained.
The relative position and the comparative tension of all the fibres in these com-
plicated combinations are not very easily determined by calculation; but it is
found by experience to be most advantageous to the strength of the ropes to
twist the strands, when they are to be compounded, in such a direction as to
untwist the yarns of which they are formed; that is, to increase the twist of
the strands themselves: and probably the greatest strength is obtained when
the ultimate obliquity of the constituent fibres is the least, and the most
equable. This advantage is obtained in a considerable degree by Mr. Hud-
dart’s method of adjusting the length of the strand to its position in the
rope, and his registered cordage appears to derive a decided superiority from
this arrangement of the strands. A very strong rope may also be made by


‘twisting five or six strands round a seventh as an axis: the central strand, or


heart, is found after much use to be chafed to oakum; it should be more
twisted than the rest, in order to allow it to extend a little; such ropes are,
however, unfit for Ponte tigging, or for any use in which they are | liable to

be frequently bent. rOy O08 Qe igh 1 ice

it of sido fies Sia ie: *

Ropes are most commonly made of hemp, but various other vegetables are
occasionally employed; the Chinese ve ee of
trees furnish cordage to other nations; j


ample of the use of the bark of the lime tree, Sas


matting. The finest iad pt nd


ON THE UNION OF FLEXIBLE FIBRES. : 183


flowers of hemp are on different plants; the male plants are
mace and ‘Tequire tobe first pulled. They are prepared for dressing by
being exposed to the air, and the fibrous part is separated from the dry pulp
F by beating and hackling. In spinning the yarn, the hemp is fastened round
the waist; the wheel is turned by an assistant, and the spinner, walking back-
ae wards, draws out the fibres with his hands. When one length of the walk
me , it is immediately reeled, to prevent its untwisting. The ma-
“chines employed i in continuing the process of ropemaking are of simple con-
3 ‘struction, but both skill and attention are required in applying them so as to
att produce an equable texture in every part of the rope. The tendency of two
___ strands to twist, in consequence of the tension arising from the original twist
“ofthe yarns, isnot sutlicient to. procure an equilibrium, because of the friction
nd | ‘to be overcome; hence it is necessary to employ force in order to
assist this tendency, and the strands or ropes afterwards retain spontancously
the form which has thus been given them: the largest ropes even require ex-
ast ier order to make them twist at all.
v3 osbl had | We an do" Ugh nl :
; The constituent ropes of a common peabléy when sadslas, are stronger than
tecable, in the proportion of about 4 to 3; and a rope worked up from yarns
1 to 135 yards, has been found to be stronger than when
, in the ratio of 6 to 5. The difference is owing partly
of the fibres, and partly to the unequal tension produced by
Ms. Huddart’s ropes of 100 yarns lose but about one eighth of the
f the yarns; and his experiments appear to show that similar
>in ¢ ‘common manner retain only one half of their original strength.


isthe


some of the fibres, which cause them to be disproportionally


o said to be weaker when wet than when dry, perhaps
iis. the fibres to slide more readily on each other, or be-
ater is in general favourable to separation of any kind.

ae without danger, one fifth as many tons as
ence contains inches.

)

Seo. but not less extensively petal: Its gaia

sts the strength of the soil which produces st; its cultwva-


although sometimes necessary for their preservation fronr~-
n their strength, probably because it produces partial ad- ~


184 : LECTURE XYI.


tion is encouraged in this country by a bounty from government, and a large
quantity is also imported from the north of Europe. The plant, while green,
is laid in water for ten, days, and undergoes a chemical change, which softens
the pulpy part, without injuring the strength of the fibres, and renders it
more easy, when it has been dried and exposed to the air for a fortnight, to
separate the two substances in'the process of dressing it. This is performed
by beating it with the edge of a flat piece of wood, the stroke being oblique,
and nearly in the direction of the fibres, and afterwards combing it, in order
to reduce the fibres into regular order, and to prepare them for spinning. The
refuse, consisting of the shorter fibres, is tow.


Cotton is a fine fibrous substance, that envelopes the seeds of a plant. -The
best is brought from the isle of Bourbons but by far the greatest quantity
from the West Indies, although the Turkish dominions as well as the East
Indies furnish us with a considerable supply. It is usually white, but there
is a yellow kind, which is used for nankeens. It is separated from the seeds
by means of rollers, between which it passes, and leaves the seeds behind. It
is then beaten, ona flake, or a stool covered with a texture of cord. Next, it
is carded, either by hand, the fibres being drawn into regular order by cards,
that is, by brushes of fine pointed wire; or, more commonly, by machinery,
the cards being disposed in cylinders which revolve nearly in contact with
each other. The drawing or roving machine then draws it into long flakes,
a state preparatory to its being spun by Sir Richard Arkwright's machines or
Jennies, which form at once forty threads by the labour of one person.


= The silkworm is bred in the greatest abundance in Italy and in Asia; it has
lately been introduced very successfully into the British possessions in the
East Indies. The principal food of the caterpillar is the white mulberry tree,
which is too delicate to thrive well in northern climates: in Italy the trees
are planted in beds, like willows, and the foliage is cut as it is wanted: The
room in which the worms are fed, is kept at the temperature of 80 degrees of
Fahrenheit. The eggs of a former year are hatched either by animal heat, or
by that of the sun; at the age of six weeks, the caterpillars begin to spin,
first’ a light external texture, which is carded and spun for coarse silk, and
afterwards a compact oval pod or cocoon, of one continued thread. The
threads of several cocoons are recled off at the same time: for this purpose


ON THE UNION OF FLEXIBLE FIBRES: 185


they are generally put into warm water, which kills the chrysalis; but when it


is preserved, it soon turns to a moth, which lives but a few days, taking no
food, rae dies aber producing eggs for the next season,

The sill is diets yellow or white, but the white is an nclidental variety
only. By repeated washings, the yellow silk is bleached, and that which is
originally white, acquires a more perfect whiteness. Soap*is also used for re
moving a gummy substance that Sroeerenes the silk of the cocoons.


Wool is distinguished into two principal varieties, long and short weil
The longest is from Lincolnshire; -it is combed, by means of instruments
furnished with a double row of long and sharp teeth of iron or steel; it is re-
peatedly drawn from one comb to the other, heat being used in the process,
and also a little oil. ‘The fleeces of long wool are generally heavier than those
of short wool, but less valuable, on‘ account of their coarseness; ‘they are
used for worsteds, and for’cloths in which the separate threads remain visible,
as stuffs, shalloons, serges, and tammies. Short wool, on the contrary, is
carded, and is used for cloths in which the individual threads are concealed
Cr are ee np a (ois)

“The: pane use of thread and yarn, when spun, is for the arises of
weaving. The same force of lateral adhesion that retains the twisted fibres
of each thread in their situations, is here also employed in giving firmness to
the cloth; and this adhesion is generally increased by the action of any external

k force, tending to strain the whole texture.


The first step in weaving is to form a warp, which consists of threads
placed side by side, continued through the length of the piece, and sufficient
in number to constitute its breadth. This being wound on a beam or roller,
in the loom, the threads are drawn through a harness, consisting of loops
formed by twine fixed to bars or frames, which elevates and depresses the
threads in succession by means of treadles, moved by the feet, in an order

which is different, according to the different nature of the intended work ;
f the cross thread or woof, being-thrown between them at each alternation, by
| means of a shuttle, and forced into its’ place by a batten or comb, made of
\" vol. I. Bb


186 LECTURE XVI.


wire or reeds, while the piece, in proportion as it is completed, is rolled up-
‘on a second beam, opposite to the first.


Crape is composed of threads which are so strongly twisted, as to have a dis-
position to curl, and in weaving it, moisture is sometimes employed, in order
te obviate this tendency during the process. Woollen cloth, when woven, is
rendered stronger and more compact by means of the fulling mill, in which it
is beaten by heavy hammers of , wood, at the same time that fullers’ earth, or
alcaline substances of animal origin, are applied in order to cleanse it. In
this operation, both its length and breadth are diminished, and it is reduced
to.a texture approaching to that of felt. The reason of the contraction is pro-
bably this, that all the fibres are bent by the operation of the hammer, but.not
all equally, and those which have been the most bent are prevented by their
adhesion. to the neighbouring fibres from returning to | their original length.
After fulling, the cloth is roughened by means of teasels, which are cultivated
for the purpose; and the most projecting fibres are enh away Me the operation
of shearing. . nigh


The latiieal adhesion of fibres of various Line gives strength also to felted

- substances, assisted, as some assert, by minute barbs, with which the fibres of

furs are said to be furnished. .The whole strength is, however, -much inferior

to that.of cloth; partly because the fibres are in general macht and
partly, because their biirip ‘is less praenie piel sce


ae oo


The etn éommoaly used for frlding are nthe furs of rabbits 2


mixed with each other,and with sheep’s wool, in various proportions,according _


to the quality requixed.. A very fine fur has lately been discoyered on the
skin of a species of seal, mixed with its hair, and it has been employed not
only for felting, but also for spinning and weaying into a cloth resembling the
- shawls of the East Indies. fur of the rabbit is also mixed witha coarser
hait, which isseparated from it, by being first pulled off from the skins, with
a sharper knife. The materials to. benign aut inalenabely: piri Regan


Someta ibrations of an elastic string; the


wae 2. 2a


ON THE UNION OF FLEXIBLE FIBRES. i 187


neal ‘uniform arrangement. This texture, when pressed under cloths and
, ere 2 readily unites into a mass of some firmness ; this mass is dipped into
| or containing a little sulfuric acid, and when intended for a hat, is
i into a large conical figure, which is reduced in its dimensions by
“working it with the hands, and is formed into a flat surface, with several con-
centric folds, which are still more compacted in order to make the brim, and

i Bi circular part of the crown, and forced ona block, which serves as a mould
poles orn part. The black dye. is composed of logwood, sulfate of
a little acetite of copper, or verdigris; and the stiffening is a thin


slue Fe

’ 4 apt beryt pers NET TOY | al
. | The texture of paper is sbaicely different + is that of felt, eta chat its
fibres are less visible to the naked eye. To make white paper, linen rags are
5 antag lean water in a mill, into a paste of the consistence of cream: a
portion of paste is taken up in a wire sieve, which is passed obliquely
epi inl this sen little shaken, subsides into a sheet, which is

turned out ona 1; a number of sheets being thus formed, they

a 4 the interposition of flannel, and afterwards alone, —
re still moist. For thick paper, two or more sheets are laid on
the first pressing. To fill up the pores of the paper, and to
ength, a size is employed, which is generally made by boiling
ni it oF untanned leather. ‘Sometimes the size is added after


pal cases of the union of flexible fibres, for the different

or of convenience. Their importance is such that they
orth thy of a more detailed consideration; but we are not
teri: improvements in these departments be mechanical
of theoretical Tefinements.


rT
Wy


ait


ae a ee


a


188


LECTURE XVII.


ON TIMEKEEPERS.


"THE measurement of time by clocks and watches is a very important and in-
teresting department of practical mechanics. The subject is intimately con-
nected with the consideration of astronomical instruments, but it is not essen-
tially dependent on astronomical principles.


Time. is measured by motion; but in order that motion may be a true
measure of time, it must be equable., Now a motion perfectly free and un-
disturbed, and consequently uniform, is rendered unattainable by the resist-
ances inseparable from the actual constitution of material substances, It
becomes therefore necessary to inquire for some mode of approximating to such
a motion.. Astronomical determinations of time, which are the most accurate,
can only be made under particular circumstances, and -even then they as-
sist us but little in dividing time into small portions,


The first timekeepers somewhat.resembled the hour glasses which are still
occasionally employed ; they measured the escape of a certain quantity, not of
sand, but of water, through a small aperture. In these clepsydrae, it ap-
pears from Vitruvius’s account that wheelwork was employed, and the hour
was shown on a graduated scale; the graduations were also probably so ad-
justed as to correct the error arising from the inequality of the velocity oc-
casioned by the variation of the height of the water in the reservoir. This
inconvenience was however sometimes wholly avoided, by means of a con-
stant steam, which kept the vessel full, or still more elegantly, by the siphon
of Hero, which was a bent tube supported by a float, so that its lower orifice,
at which the water was discharged, was always at a certain distance below the
surface. Dr. Hooke proposed to keep the reservoir full, by means of a

2


ON TIMEKEEPERS, 189


semicylindrical counterpoise, so that the time might be determined either
from the measure or weight of the quantity of water discharged, or from the
position of the counterpoise. Various other modes might also be devised for
making cheap and simple timekeepers on similar principles, dependent on the
motion of various liquids or elastic fluids; but great accuracy could scarcely
be expected from them. A candle sometimes serves as a coarse measure of
time; and by burning a thread which passes through it, it may easily be
made to answer the purpose of an alarm. -


Clocks and watches are machines in which wheelwork is employed for the
measurement of time, being driven by a weight or by a spring, and regulat-
ed by a pendulum or a balance. Watches differ from clocks, in being port-
able, and this eases excludes the pendulum and the weight from their
construction.


It is conjectured that the Saracens had clocks which were moved by
weights, as early as the eleventh century. Trithemius mentions an orrery,
moved by a weight, and keeping time, which was sent, in 1239, by the
Sultan of Egypt, as a present to the Emperor Frederic Il. Wallingford, in
1326, had made a clock which was regulated by a fly. The use of such a fly
in equalising motion depends on the resistance of the air, which increases ra-
pidly when the velocity is increased, and therefore prevents any great ine-
quality in the motion, as long as the moving power varies but little; and if
[° the action of the weight were transmitted with perfect regularity by the

wheels, and the specific gravity of the air remained unaltered by pressure or

by temperature, a fly clock might be a perfect machine, the weight being
always exactly counterbalanced by the resistance of the air,attending a certain
velocity of the fly; and it might even be possible to regulate the inequalities
of the action of the weight, by causing the fly to open and shut, or to turn on
an axis, by means of a spring, according to the magnitude of the resistance.
The unequal density of the air would however still remain uncompensated;
and in this respect a liquid would be a better medium than an elastic fluid.
For experiments which are but of short duration, and which require great
precision, a chronometer regulated by a simple fly is still a useful instru-
ment. Mr. Whitehurst’s apparatus for measuring the time occupied in the
descent of heavy bodies, is governed by a fly; the index is stopped by the


ge LECTURE XVII.


machinery, and points out the time elapsed without an error of the hundredth
_ part of a second... ;


The alternate eee of a balance, thrown backwards and forwards by the
successive actions of a wheel impelling its pallets, is also capable of produc-
ing a degree of uniformity in the motion of the wheel; for the force operat-
ing on the pallet is consumed in destroying a velocity in one direction, and
in generating a velocity in the.contrary direction; and the space. in which it
acts being nearly the same, in all cases, the velocity generated will also be
nearly the same at all times, as long as the force remains the same. ‘The ad-
dition of a balance to a clock was made soon after the year 1400, for Ar-
| nault, who died in 1465, describes a planisphere, constructed by his master De
. Fondeur, which had a balance with a scapement like that of a common watch,

but without aspring. Such a balance vibrates much more slowly than a ba-
lance provided witha spring; if the balance spring of a common watch be re-
moyed, the hands will pass over the space of about twenty eight minutes in
an hour.


\


, It is said that before the pendulum was used, a balance wheel was some-
times suspended in a horizontal position by a thread passing through its axis,
which coiled round it, and caused it to rise and fall as it oscillated backwards
and forwards. This mode of regulation differed but little in principle from
the modern pendulums, but it was more complicated and less accurate.

r Huygens, in somewhat later times, constructed a clock with a revolving
» weight, which rose higher, and increased the resistance, whenever an aug-
| mentation of the force increased the velocity; and he caused the thread,
which supported the weight, to bend round a curve of sucha form as to pre-

serve the equality of the revolutions.


A chronometer may be constructed on this principle for measuring small por-

tions of time, which appears to be capable of greater accuracy than Mr.

Whitehurst’s apparatus, and by means of which an interval of a thousandth

part of a second may possibly be rendered sensible. . If two revolving pendu-

I lums be connected with a vertical axis, in such a manner, as to move two
weights backwards and forwards accordingly as they fly off to a greater or

smaller distance, the weights sliding, during their revolution, ona fixed sur-


i :
a
= a


ON TIMEKEEPERS. ; 191


face, a small increase of velocity will considerably increase the distance of
the weights from the axis, dnd consequently the éffect of their friction, so
that the machine will be immediately retarded, and its motion may thus be
made extremely regular. It may be turned by a string coiled round the up-
per part, and this string may serve as a support to a barrel, sliding ona
square part_of the axis, which will consequently descend as it revolves. Its
surface, being smooth, may be covered either with paper or with wax, anda
pencil or a point of metal may be pressed against it by a fine spring, so as to
describe always a spiral line on the barrel, except when the spring is forced a
little on one side by touching it slightly, either with the hand, or by means
of any body of which the motion is to be examined, whether it be a falling
weight, a vibrating chord or rod, or any other moving substance. In this
manner, supposing a barrel a foot in circumference to revolve in two se-
conds, each hundredth of an inch would correspond to the six hundredth
part of a second; and the scale might be still further enlarged if it were ne-
cessary. (Plate XV. Fig. 198.)


By means of: this instrament we may measure, without difficulty, the
frequency of the vibrations of sounding bodies, by connecting them with a
point, which will describe an undulated path on the roller. These vibrations
may also serve in a very simple manner for the measurement of the minutest
intervals of time; for if a body, of which the vibrations are of a certain
degree of frequency, be caused to vibrate during the revolution of an axis,
and to mark its vibrations on a roller, the traces will serve as a correct index
of the time occupied by any part of a revolution, and the motion of any other
body may be very accurately compared with the number of alternations
marked, in the same time, by the vibrating body. For many purposes, the
machine, if heavy enough, might be turned by a handle only, care being
taken to keep the balls in a proper position, and it would be convenient to
have the descent of the barrel regulated by the action of a screw, and
capable of being suspended at pleasure.


But for the general purposes of timekeepers, all other inventions have
been almost universally superseded by the pendulum and the balance
spring, or pendulum spring. About the year 1000, Ibn Junis, and the
other Arabian astronomers were in the habit of measuring time, during their


; -


——2___


192 LECTURE XVII.


observations, by the vibrations of pendulums; but they never connected
them with machinery. The equality of the times occupied by these vibra-
tions, whether larger or smaller, was known to Galileo in 1600, and some
time before 1633, he proposed that they should be applied to the regulation
of clocks. But Sanctorius, in his conimentary on Avicenna, describes an in-
strument to which he had himself applied the pendulum in 1612. Huygens
made the same application only in 1658, which is the date of ‘his work on
the subject. In the same year, Hooke applied a spring to the balance of a
watch; and soon after, he conceived the idea of improving timekeepers sufii-
ciently for ascertaining the longitude at sea, but he was interrupted in the
pursuit of his plan, Hooke was also probably the first that employed for a
clock a heavy weight vibrating in a small arc; an arrangement from which.
the peculiar advantages of a pendulum are principally derived.


The objects which require the greatest attention in the construction of ,
timekeepers, are these; to preserve the moving power, or sustaining force,
as equable as possible, to apply this force to the pendulum or balance in the
most eligible manner, and to employ a pendulum or balance of which the vi-
brations are in their nature as nearly isochronous as possible. In clocks, the
sustaining force, being generally derived from a weight, is already sufficiently ,
equable, provided that care be taken that the line by which it is suspended may
be of equal thickness throughout, and may act ona perfect cylinder. But
in some clocks, and in all watches, the moving power is a spring. One of the _
first clock springs is said to have been an old sword blade; a clock with such
a spring was lately preserved at Brussels: the spring which is at present used,
is a thin elastic Plate of steel, coiled into a spiral form. Every spring exerts _
the more force as it is more bent; in order to correct this inequality, the
chain or cord by which it acts on the work is wound on a spiral. fusee; 80 St
that, in proportion as the force is lessened, it is applied to a larger cylinder,
or a longer lever. The general outline of the fusee must. be nearly such,
that its thickness at any part may diminish in the sa Pais apenas eae it


| _ becomes more distant from the point at which the fore would See alte ‘OE
_ gether, the curve being that which is, i al

; workmen have in general no other rule than a h \ ( Ce

; 2 XV. Fig. 199.) msl. 004 <yape oti rwothdse ara pi ee anata, ‘~

| tind ms Hoh Arate najuseper ‘ts Luter! ” an an CSE meh (etd gage aT ‘


en


on! visemes. 198


Solahaiang all trite precautions in the immediate ea’ of the
" wtiahendapitns, ‘the irregular action of the teeth of the wheels, the in-
creasing tenacity of the oil usually employed, and other accidental disturb -
ances, make it still desirable to procure a further equalisation of the force,
__ which is sometimes obtained in clocks, by raising the loaded arm of a lever
= to a given height, whence. it may descend; and in watches, by bending a
: spring into’a given position, from which it may return, so as to limit with
; great precision the propelling force employed in each vibration. The ne-
cessity 0} ‘oil is sometimes in great measure removed’ by jewelling
the holes in which the axes or verges run; a perforation being made in a
‘a diamond applied upon this, in ‘coiitact with the end of the


‘to diminish the friction. bails 2. sidaoe. iid
Qu Spee oni Wudiemog™ :

There are also different fidethodd of continuing therd action of the sfuinse}
while the clock or watch is wound up: a spring is interposed between the
fusee and. the wheel impelled by it, a little inferior in force to the original
' weight or spring, so as to remain always bent, until, when the pressure of
_ the main spring is removed, it begins to act upon a fixed point on one side,
* and upon the wheel of the fusee on the other, so that it Sool the work


a its teeth wit on one side in those of'a wheel
art of the fusee, and on the other side with the internal teeth


also to turn the hoop round, and to continue the motion.


by which the sustaining force is communicated to the pen-
emands a greater exertion of skill and accuracy than any
eeper. Sometimes the alternate motion of the pendu-

‘ei the action of a crank, but this construction sub-
he irregularities of the wheelwork, and is liable to se-
‘A crank cannot properly be called a scapement, for
mology of the term, the pendulum must escape for a
c ion of the wheelwork, and in general, the more indepen-
Oe ec


axis; ‘the hardness and high hove of these stunt tending very Dagon ;


with the work, so that the same pressure which winds _


fb


r


194 i : LECTURE, XVII.)


dent. its. motion is rendered, the, better is the, effect, of the machine, The
simplest forms,in common use are the crutch scapement for a clock; and the
pallets with aj vertical wheel, fora watch; the dead beat scapement, and,
the cylinder, with a horizontal ; wheel, are improvements ‘on thesé; and the:


‘detached aig is a still further elena


The cantidiaceenionte pallell be the: Stash ‘dia: sacl aA is an
arch in the plane of the scape wheel, and parallel to that in which the pen-
dulum, vibrates, supporting at each extremity a pallet, of. which) the face i is
a plane, and which is impelled in its turn.by. the teeth of the scape wheel.
The'faces are’ so inclined, that the pallets are alternately forced, by the ac-
tion of the teeth,, to retire from:the centre of the wheel: and great care is
taken in making the teeth exactly at equal distances, so’ that they may fall
regularly on the pallet, immediately after the disengagement of the teeth on
the other aids from the, opposite pallet. (Plate XVI. Fig. Rau do


In the common Tantele the axis of the balance is parallel to the plane of


_ the scape wheel, which is.a contrate or crown wheel, and the flat pallets are
fixed on, the axis of | the balance, at the opposite parts of the circumference of


the scape wheel. Sir XVI. Fig. 202. a


In both these cases, the impulse given to cone pallet carries ohhe opposite
pallet with some force against \the approaching: tooth, and drives the wheel a


.


little backwards, with a, visible recoil... Here the sustaining power, being ap-


‘plied principally at the extremities of the vibrations, disturbs'their isochronism,


or the equality of the times in which they are performed, by partially in-


creasing the force. We may recollect that, in order that all vibrations; of


- whatever magnitude, may be performed in equal times, the force must be


exactly proportional to the distance from a given’ point, consequently, if\ an
-additional force be applied’ near, the extremities, of the vibration only; the
longer vibrations will occupy less time than the shorter; and we may) observe


_that, by ,adding to the force of ,the springiof a commén watch with the key,


we may accelerate its motion, at, the) same time, that» the angular. magnitude


of the vibration is increased. The motion of the balance also, ‘being ‘slowest [


at the extremities of, its, vibration,, where} the sustaining force is applied, is
_more affected, bys the inequalities of this force than if eee eeaces its
a a ty wy


tert =


ON “PI MEKEEPERS. ; z 195


-acignntinagh? an equal space in the middle off the vibration? «Yet 'a good
eléck ‘on this: construction’ may keep time without am error of the ten
‘thousandth part of the whole, and a watch within a two thousandth. | In the
“eommon watch scapement}' there is little friction, for the force acts almost
ig perpendicularly on the pallet; it appears to have been the oldest scapement,
_ ‘and was erhployéd before the application of springs'to' balances! it requires a
Considerable extent of motion in-the balance, and cannot therefore well be
bs Anca dened with such’ pendulums as vibrate in small ares. The crutch
Yon the'‘contrary, cannot be’applied immediately to a vibration in
‘ y'large are; but by the interposition of a lever'with a roller; of of a part
wheel witi a pinion, it’ may be adapted to the balance of a watch; and
hole walelies his constricted Wy Emery; Letherland, and! fetter “apes e to
have succeeded very well" cong 29 ;
Mieitrntn onl oF BiniOOt min, Aopes gine suigeoo. ody dsiv
| Te avid the taconveniences of the recoiling: Liiinensiial Mn. Grahan i in-
"vented or introduced ‘the dead beat for! the clock, and the cylinder for the
watch. In both of these, the tooth of the scape wheel rests, during the
greater! ‘of the ‘vibtation, oi cylindrical ‘surface, and acts on the in-
Ni it, short'time only, in the of each vibration; so that a
power scarcely” pfoduices a sensible derangement of


sis to go, the frequency of its vibrations is scarcely
cr tgp water will keep» time* within’ about a ten
pirsens if a little oil bé frequently applied to it, or if the
‘wruby: and the timekeeper'in the observatory at Green-
t,scapement, made by Graham, ‘varies from true time
. (Plate XVI. Fig. ‘a0, 204.)
nslert orfs Sale ase ons peat. a
‘ffictTedi of Ale teeth of scsi wheel on tid cylinder
city of 'the oil, “where it is’ employed, ‘may interfere in
the time of vibration, ‘especially by the irregularities to
“If the friction’ were perfectly uniform, it would
hronism, but friction is always" increased by an in-
ence, therefore, the effect of .any addition to the sus-
tenid'in some degree to retard the vibrations; and to ob-
ces, on which’ the teeth rest, have sometimes been so


- ‘


+ for’ which ever way we turn the key of a horizontal’ watch,


bh! Oe


-


196 ; LECTURE XVII,


formed as to create a slight recoil; but, this constraction does! not appear-to
have been very successful in practice... The friction may, however, be con-
siderably diminished by the, duplex scapement, apparently so called from the
double series of teeth employed. ‘The teeth of ‘the more prominent series are
detained on a cylinder so small as to be unfit for receiving an impulse from
them, the balance is therefore impelled by the other series of teeth, acting on
a pallet at a greater, distance from its axis. The French haye sometimes em-
ployed a construction somewhat similar, which they call the comma scapement,
the teeth first resting on asmallarch of repose, and then impelling the curved
surface of a-pallet extending toa considerable distance beyond it... In both
\these cases the single pallet, which is impelled by a tooth of a simple form,
requires less labour in the execution than a number of a larger teeth, each of
which is to be finished with great accuracy: but watches on these construc-
tions, especially those with the comma scapement, are too liable to be stopped
by any sudden motion, although the duplex scapement begins to be fre-
patio employed for ineohe Sosekerpares, (Plate XVI. Fig. BOF).


“Mr, Hives avoided all fri jon: on the, pallet, by. ccmesitiaiy it with the
pendulum by means of a slender spring, so flexible as to follow the motion of
the scape wheel to a sufficient extent without sliding on its. teeth... But, the
.construction which is most: usually employed where the greatest accuracy is
required, is the detached scapement; in which the teeth of the scape wheel
always rest on a detent, excepting a short interyal,, when it is unlocked: in
order to impel the pallets. Mr: Mudge employed a detached scapement, ac-
tuated by a.subsidiary spring, of which the force is, scarcely liable to any va-
riation; the detent being unlocked. by the motion of the balance, Mr. Haley
has refined still further on this construction, by causing the subsidiary spring


to unlock the wheel in its return, so that the balance is relieved from this ac-_ .


tion, which may. sometimes. produce a slight irregularity. These construc-


tions are, however, much, too, delicate for. common pocket , watches. In a.
clock, Mr. Cumming has employed a detached scapement, in which a lever is:


\raised to a certain height by each tooth of the scape wheel, and acts immedi-


ately on the pendulum, in its descent in the middle. of the vibration, . The


scape ‘wheel isunlocked by the pendulum during its ascent, and a variation ;
of the pressure may, therefore, produce a very slight inequality in nore :


of, the aa “Mr, Nicholson. has Sener to. st eer


ON TIMEKEEPERS. AEs, (197


traction in which the scape wheel only. assists the eee ‘in


means be considered as detached. Te is, however, easy” to
+t of Mr. Cumming's scapement, if it can be called-a defect,
similar to that which Mr. Haley has applied to watches; each


a, that it ceases to act on the pendulum, and remaining in-
ndulum meets it. (Plate XVI. Fig. 206, 207.) es!
the scapements of Madge and Cumming are parts, OF the
but - timekeepers now commonly made by Arnold, Earnshaw,
I others, tooth i is detained by a pallet or pin projecting froma lever,
Bonn which i is. forced back by the balance, at, the Moment that the
s itse tself to another of the teeth. Mr. Arnold , employs an
on a single point of the pallet;..Mr. Earnshaw
: tooth first act on the point of the pallet, and then
flat surface of the pallet, In other respects there
e scapements ; and both the artists have been judged
c reward for their success. - inte XVL Fig. #08, 209.) »
f »? te
4 nts principal objects mhicke pote Be bis attention of. the
Bd a pendulum or balance of, which the visors


pera!


ractice is much greater than the advantage deriv-
f + vibration, confined to a small arc, is sufficiently
nd ‘purposes. The error of such a vibration is nearly
are of the are described by the pendulum, and


in nee’ seconda, if the arc were very Siah con-
and would lose: 105 seconds by having the vibra-
of four degrees. In order to avoid the friction
ed by the motion of the ‘pendulum on an axis, it is
ya fi sible Springs ie is wholly free from friction,


contraction may tend to produce pce V


198 LECTURE XVII.


The duiiticity of this spring adds a minute force to the j Bower of giavitalion?
which acts on the pendulum, and this force must be considered when the-
length of a simple pettdulum is compared with the frequency of its vibra-
tions. It does not, however, interfere with the ‘equality of the vibrations : ,
among each other; for in all springs, Dr. Hooke’s general law, that the force j


increases as the degree of flexure, is found for moderate oscillations to be per- i
: fectly accurate; such a force, therefore, accelerates the larger ‘and the smaller


vibrations’ precisely in the same degree. But in balances, it is desirable to ”
have the velocity, and the extent of the vibration, as great as possible, in

order that the motion may be the less influenced by the inequalities of the
sustaining power; and in large excursions, Dr. Hooke’s law is not so pre-

cisely true; there must alsonecessarily be some inaccuracy from the loss of a

certain portion of the force in generating the momentum of the spring itself,
which, ‘ when the form’ is spiral, introduces great intricacy into the calcula- %
tion of the properties of the vibration. Yet it has been found by experiment 7
that’a certain length’ may be determined for almost every spring, which Will
afford vibrations either perfectly or very nearly isochronous, In order that
the weight or inertia'of the spring may interfere the less with the regula ‘
of its motion, it is’ sometimes’ tapered, and made thinner at the extremit

it is tow also! usual in the best watches to employ a spring coiled into a
cylindrical form, like that of the spring of a bell, of which the motion ap-
pears to be’ somewhat more regular than that of a flat spiral. This was in-
deed the original construction, but was ptobably laid aside on account of the
‘space: which it required: The balance springs are made of the finest steel,
and the best are manufactured in this country, although the French are said
to have the art of making their main springs of a better temper than ours,
Sometimes the balance spring is made of an alloy of gold and | copper; thes
springs are very elastic, but they are too liable to break. | Ir. Earns


serves, that the strength of a spring always diminishes a Tittle as i it wears;


dust and the dete etre ‘the oil douttuat: the @ exten


diminished force of the spring. "Bat it is perhaps me zi
‘compensation, as saibbnere independent 0


be San . ss ON PIMEKEEPERS. ‘% 199.


Aa sti opal the error. The strength of the spring is found, to be less im-
paired ‘by, use when it is hardened than when the steel is softer. - At some-
Bese, that. from a sudden motion, or from some other accidental
circun: stance, the balance of a timekeeper may be thrown beyond the point

— atavhi ’ pallets. are impelled by the scape wheels, and*the whole motion
may. y from this cause be interrupted. To prevent this accident, a small. bar
or pin is: usually fixed on the balance spring, which. is ‘carried outwards
when the vibration begins to be extended too far,. and stops the further, pro-
eh by intercepting. a pin which projects from it. - This.ar-


banking the balance. . 4
oy °emkte wont jek’ 3c:
1 Wel have already seen t that the squares of the times of ihisGos of two pen-
a, are proportional | to their lengths; so so that if we add to a pendulum
ws th part of its length, we increase the time of its vibration very,
4 4 reo io nih But since all bodies are.expanded. by heat, the
- of the atmosphere must necessarily produce changes
wt ee of pendulums, and it may be observed thata
slowly in summer than in winter, The same ex;
+ effect in, the motion of a balance, andi the increase of
3 also a diminution of the elasti¢ force of ‘the’ spring it-
ver, a great difference in the expansibilities of various.
y deal i is one of the least expansible, and is therefore often
of pendulums. Brass expands one part in a hundred
“degree of Fahrenheit, or, a, little more on less. than this,
ins more or less zine. Glass. and platina are less than
brass, iron about two thirds, and mercury three times
m,of brass would therefore make one vibration inj ten
at 50°, and, would lose 83. seconds in a day; a bar
een lose much more;. for I haye observed that
ie clasticity of steel have lost, in frequency, as much
part for a: single degree of, Fahrenheit; and, Berthoud
it. whe pa clocks probably with a} pendulum, of steel, loses: 20
atch loses eight minutes. seams ot aby P*yapyiee ij
2 biel bits: iiie to woh a tert OF IG.O0) es P3e] (jr IE
pegiiaye: been the first that attempted to compensate
erature by the different. expansibilities, of various sub-


x


= P »


oF


‘and then to turn away what is et eon ore:
ee ee 8


200 LECTURE XVIL


stances. He employed, for a pendulum, a tube partly filled with mercury ;
when the tube expanded by the effect of heat, the mercury expanded much
more; so that its surface rose a little more than the end of the pendulum was
depressed, and the centre of oscillation remained stationary. This mode of
compensation is still sometimes practised with success; but the gridiron pen-
dulum is more commonly used: it was the invention of Harrison, who com-
bined seven bars, of iron or steel,and of brass,in such a manner, that the bars of
brass raised the weight as much as the bars of iron depressed it. At present
five bars only are usually employed, two of them being of a mixture of zinc
and silver, and three of steel. Mr. Ellicott suspended a pendulum at the ex-


*. tremity of a lever, which was supported by a pillar of brass, much nearer -


to the fulcrum; as the pendulum expanded, the end of the lever was raised
in the same’ degree, and the weight remained-at its original distance from
the point of suspension, which was determined by a fixed plate, transmitting


' the slender spring, as usual, between two opposite edges. The. same effect is


produced more simply by suspending the pendulum from the summit of a bar
nearly parallel to it, and of the same substance with itself, resting ona fix-
ed support, and either of the same length with the pendulum, or a little
longer, accordingly as the distance of the fixed plate from the point of sup-
port of the ‘bar, is determined by materials which may be considered as
nearly’ of an invariable length, or as liable to a certain degree of n ceend


(Plate pin Fig. 210.)


ly


“All these methods: of compensation are ais to clocks; for sriecohong it
is usual to unite together two metals which differ in expansibility, so as to


forma compound plate; one side of the plate is commonly of steel, the other


of’ brass, and it is obvious that any increase of temperature, by causing the
brass to expand more than the steel, must bend the whole plate. Such a
plate is variously applied; the most’ accurate method, which is employed by -


Arnold and other modern artists, is to make it a part of the balance itself,
fixing a weight on its extremity, which is brought nearer to the centre, by.
‘the increase of curvature-of the plate, whenever the expansion of the arms of


the balance tends to remove it further off. The best way of making the
plate appears to be to turn a ring of steel, and to immerse it in melted brass,


ON TIMEKEEPERS, 201
\


pensate not only for the expansion produced by heat, but also for the dimi-
nution of the elasticity of the spring. Sometimes also a plate has been ap-
im such a way as to shorten the spring when the temperature is increased,
an operation similar to that which serves to regulate a common watch,
ped clip, that, determines the effective length of the spring, being moved
backwards and forwards; and a similar effect has also been produced by
ing this clip into two parts, one of which is fixed to a compound
e, and is made to approach the other so as to confine the spring more
ae thus diminish its length, upon an increase of temperature.


la 211.)


; The re of a compound lai has also been applied ina simple and ele-
: inal Mr. Nicholson to the pendulum of a clock, by causing it to
the upper extremity of the pendulum. The plate is placed horizon-
tally, the brass being | “uppermost, and carries the pendulum in the middle,
~ while the ends rest on two fixed points, of which the distance may. be ad-
, _ justed with “great accuracy, so that when the temperature is increased, the
curvature he plate may raise the rod of the pendulum, enough to keep
i constant distance below the fixed point, which deter-
(Plate XVI. Fig. 212.)


opposed to the motion of a pendulum by the air, affects in

ocity, and the variation of the density of the atmosphere
roduce some irregularities in timekeepers: they are, how-
-sensible. Derham found that the resistance of the air
n of ahalf second pendulum about four vibrations in
ng the arc in which it vibrated: and when the vibra-
to their original magnitude, the resistance of the air pro-
of eight vibrations in the same time. But a heavy pen-
a small arc, is very little affected by this resistance,
re ‘essential parts of the watchmaker’s art, there are se-
nsiderations which require his attention; the striking part
in clocks, and in repeating watches, no inconsiderable
the machine. But the apparatus employed on these oc-
er refinement of invention nor delicacy of execution.
pd


.


ae


302 LECTURE XVII,


In old clocks, the number of hours struck is usually determined by the revo-
lution of a certain portion of a wheel, which supports an arm, and allows the
hammer to strike, until at a proper time it fallsinto a notch. In watches,
and in more modern clocks, the same effect is produced by means of a spiral
-of 12 teeth, revolving once in 12 hours. 5


It is of considerable importance to the accurate performance of a good
clock, that it should be firmly fixed to a solid support. Any unsteadiness in
the support causes the point of suspension to follow the motion of the pen-
dulum, and enlarges the diameter of the circle of which the pendulum de-
scribes an arc; it must, therefore, tend in general toretard the motion of the
clock. Sometimes, however, an unsteady support may be of such a nature as
to accelerate the motion; and an observation of this kind, made by
Berthoud, has suggested to Bernoulli a theory of compound vibrations,
which may perhaps be true in some cases, but is by no means universally
applicable to every case. On account of some circumstances of this _
kind, it happens that when two clocks are placed near each other, and rest
in some degree on the same support, they have often a remarkable effect on
each other’s vibrations, so as to continue going for several days, without va-
rying a single second, even when they would have differed considerably if
otherwise situated: and it sometimes happens that the clock which goes the
more slowly of the two will set the other in motion, and then stop itself; a
circumstance which has been explained from the greater frequency of the vi-
brations of a circular pendulum when confined to a smaller arc, the tendency
of the pendulums to vibrate in the same time causing the shorter to describe
an arc continually larger and larger, and the longer to contract its vibrations,
until at last its motion entirely ceases. This sympathy has some resemblance *

_to the alternate vibrations of two scales hanging on the same beam, one of
which may often be observed to stop its vibrations when the other begins to
move, and to resume its motion when its companion is at rest; but it is still
more analogous to the mutual influence of two strings, or even two organ
pipes, which, though not separately tuned to a perfect unison, still influence.
each other's vibrations in such “a manner as to produce Senne Bie Mots
paepbarde sings sir it 4h Re 1 AUR i Ep SOE hi 7 Le
205 Rk 20 Taipei Se ig sues SHY bo sins ne
y rapa ike com - a uj ag _ agate


2038


LECTURE XVIII.


ON RAISING AND REMOVING WEIGHTS.


"Te eptieddies.ascangement of our subject leads us, after having consi-
dered the modifications of force, to those machines which are intended for
counteracting it, or for producing motion in opposition to an existing force.
The simplest of the forces to be counteracted, is gravitation, and it is one of
__ the most common employments of mechanical powers to raise a weight from a
lower to a higher situation. This operation is also intimately connected with
the modes of overcoming the corpuscular force of friction or adhesion, which
constitutes the principal difficulty in removing bodies horizontally from place
to weil for if we had only to produce motion in an unresisting mass of mat~
& tehaey d waggon might in time be drawn along by a silk worm’s thread.
n The g and removing of weights, therefore, together with the modes of
; avoiding friction in in general, constitute the first part of the subject of the
Bre: aan of forces, and the remaining part relates to the machinery in-
1g the other corpuscular powers of bodies, by such opera-
to change their external forms.


A's


weights, which involve only the mechanics of solid
| levers, capstans, wheels, pullies, inclined planes, screws,
ombinations, in the form of cranes.


nple instrument, but of most extensive utility in raising
ight. We may recollect that levers are distinguished
is accordingly as the power and weight are on differ-
e side of the fulcrum; the forces counteracting each
e case in the same direction, in the other, in opposite
yhen a man lifts a stone by means of a lever of the first
a fulcrum between himself and the stone, he presses down


204 ‘ LECTURE XVIII.


the end of the lever, and the utmost force that he can apply is equal to the

whole weight of his body: but when he thrusts the lever under the stone, so

that its extremity bears on the ground, it becomes a lever of the second kind,

and in order to raise the stone, he must now draw the end of the lever up-

wards. In this direction, a strong man can exert a force equivalent to twice

his weight; consequently the second kind of lever possesses here a temporary

advantage over the first; although, if the operation were continued, the

workman would be more fatigued by raising even the same weight by this

method, than if he could conveniently apply his weight to a lever of the first

kind ; and for this purpose, cross bars have sometimes been added to levers, in

order to enable several workmen to stand on them with advantage at once.

A bent lever operates precisely with the same power as a straight one, provid-

ed that the forces be applied in a similar manner with respect to its arms:

“and in all cases, the forces capable of balancing each other are inversely as
the distances of the points of action from the fulcrum. Some addition of force

is necessary for overcoming the equilibrium, and producing motion, but the
velocity of the motion being seldom of much consequence, a small preponder-

ance. is usually sufficient.

The principal inconvenience of the lever is the short extent of its action: this

may, however, be obviated by meansof the invention of Perrault, in which two

pins are fixed inthe lever, at a short distance from each other, sliding in two
pairs of vertical grooves, provided with ratchets, so that when the long arm of
the lever is pulled by means of a rope, the nearer’pin serves as a fulcrum, and the

more distant one is elevated at the same time with the weight, and is detain-

ed in its place by the click; but when the rope is slackened, the weight sinks

a little, and raises the pin, which first served as a fulcrum, to a higher place.
in its groove. The same effects may also be produced by catches or clicks rest-

ing upon ratchets on the opposite sides of a single upright bar, which passes

through a perforation in’the lever. There must, however, be a considerable

loss of force, from the continual intermission of the motion. (Plate XVIL. is
Big. aT nf; boda asl Meclnatadria Wek dra;


Shin axis with a winch, chasi is, a lever ini at ‘the re is ore Ponce the.
common machine for raising a bucket out of a well. A vertical or upright
axis, with two or more levers inserted into jit, becomes a capstan. ai In these


oem


ON RAISING AND REMOVING WEIGHTS. 205


cases, if we wish to estimate the force with accuracy, we must add to the
radius of the axis half the thickness of the rope, i we compare it with the
arm of the lever,


Sometimes the weight of a reservoir or bucket of water isemployed for rais-
ing another bucket, filled with coals or other materials, by means of a rope or
chain, coiled round a cylinder or drum, or two drums of different sizes. This
machine is called a water whimsey: when the bucket of water has reached the
bottom, a valve is opened by striking against a pin, and lets out the water.
In a machine of this kind, employed in the Duke of Bridgwater’s coal works,’
the water descends thirty yards, and raises a smaller quantity of coals from a
depth of sixty. In such cases, supposing the action to be single, and the
stream of water to be unemployed during the descent of the reservoir, a consi-
derable preponderance may beadvantageously employed in giving velocity tothe
weights, provided that the machinery be not liable to injury from their impulse.


An erect axis or drum, turned by the force of horses walking ina circle, is
used for raising coals and other weights, and is called a gin, probably by cor-
ruption from engine: the buckets being attached to the opposite ends of a rope
which passes round the drum, and which is drawn by means of its adhesion to
the drum. One of the buckets descends empty, while the other is drawn up
full, and when the motions of the buckets are to be changed, the horses are
turned, or the wheels are made to impel the axis ina contrary direction, when
any bn 4 moving power is employed.


When a ship’s anchor is weighed, the cable itself would be too large to be
bent round the capstan; it is therefore connected with it by means of an end-
less rope, called the messenger. As the messenger is coiled round the lower
part of the capstan, it quits the upper part; so that its place becomes lower and
lower, till at last it has no longer room on the capstan; it is therefore neces-
sary to force it up from time to time: this is called surging the messenger ;
it is commonly done by beating it, and to facilitate the operation, the
capstan is made somewhat conical. It has been proposed to employ lifters in
different parts of the circumference, which are raised once in each revolution,
by passing over an inclined plane, with the interposition of friction wheels ;
4 patent has been taken out forthe invention, and it has already been intro-


206 LECTURE XYIII.


duced in the navy. Some experienced judges, however, are of opinion, that
it would be better and more simple to employ a capstan so much tapered, that
the tension of the ropeitself, guided only by apulley, might always be suffi- :
cient to bring the messenger into its place.


The capstan, which consists of two cylinders of different sizes on the same
axis, with a rope passing from the smaller one over a pulley, which is con-
nected with the weight, and returning to be wound up by the larger one, is
very powerful in its, operation; but it requires a great length of rope for a


small extent of motion. (Plate IV. Fig. 51.)


Wheelwork is employed in a variety of ways for raising weights: its powers
are in all cases derived from the same principles as the actions of levers, each
wheel and pinion being considered as composed of a series of bent levers, of
which the axis is the common fulcrum, and which act in succession on the
teeth of the next wheel. The simplest combination of wheelwork used for
this purpose constitutes a jack; a bar which is furnished with teeth on one:
side, being raised by the last pinion. Such instruments were not unknown even
to the ancients; the barulcus described by Hero was a machine of this nature.


A series of buckets council ropes, and passing over a wheel, is often
employed for raising water to a small height; and sometimes even for solid
substances in the state of powder, in particular for raising flour, ina corn mill;
and in this case the flour must be brought within reach of the buckets by means
of a revolving spiral, which pushes it gradually forwards. When a weight of
any kind is raised in buckets distributed through the circumference of a wheel,
the force, required for retaining the weight in equilibrium, is as much less
than the weight, as the diameter of a circle is less than half the circumference,
the remainder of the weight being supported by the axis of te heels: 14


Pullies, and their combinations, in blocks, are onisiahally Baden on
board of ships. They are very convenient where only a moderate increase of
power is required; but in order to procure a very great advantage, the number
of separate pullies or sheaves must be very much multiplied; a great length
of rope must also be employed; and it is said that in a pair of blocks with _
te alin oxi two thirds of th aren a ction 9


ON RAISING AND REMOVING WEIGHTS. » "807


rigidity of the ropes. The inconvenience resulting from a large number of
pullies, may, however, as ‘we have already seen, be considerably lessened
when they are arranged in Mr. Smeaton’s manner, the acting rope being in-
troduced in the middle, so as to cause no obliquity in the block. Tackles,
or combinations of pullies for raising weights, are most conveniently sup-
ported on shore by means of shears, which consist of three rods, or poles,
resting on the ground, and meeting each other in the point of - suspension.
' For raising stones in building, two poles are employed, with a rope fixed to
their summit, which keeps them in a proper position; their lower ends are
usually connected by a third pole, which serves asan axis. (Plate IV. Fig. 56.
Plate XVIL. Fig. 214.)


Sometimes a pulley is drawn horizontally along a frame, setting out from

__ the point where the rope is fixed, so that while the bucket is raised, it is

also transferred diagonally to the opposite end of the scaffolding. ‘This ap-

paratus is used in some of ‘the Cornish stream works, in which the earth of a

whole valley is raised, inorder to be washed for the separation of tin ore.
(Plate XVI. Fig. 215.)


1h fixed inclined plane is often of use in assisting the elevation of great

; weights, by means of other machinery. It is supposed that in all the edifices
bf. teed antiquity, where great masses of stone were employed, as in the
sof Egypt, and the druidi¢al temples of this country, these vast
e elevated on inclined planes of earth, or of scaffolding, with the
9 of levers and rollers. Inclined planes are frequently used for
of one canal into another; and sometimes the local cir-
that this may be done with great convenience, merely
led boat to descend, and to turn the axis which raises an
mple of this may be seen, on a large scale, in the Duke
al. This canal is extended, above ground, for forty
an underground navigation twelve miles long joins it at
the coal mines under Walkden moor. ‘At a height of
s another subterraneous portion, nearly six miles in
between these levels is formed by an inclined plane:
own loaded, and proceed three miles along the tunnel into
‘The inclined plane is fixed in a stratum of stone, which


208 LECTURE XVIII.


fortunately has the most eligible inclination of 1 in 4, and is 33 yards in
thickness, affording the most advantageous means of fixing every part of the
machinery with perfect security. The whole length of the plane is 151 yards,
besides a lock of 18 yards at the upper end, (Plate XVII. Fig. 216.)

Inclined planes are also universally employed for facilitating the ascent of
heights, by men or by animals; they may either be uniform, as roads, or the
general inclination of the surface may be superseded by the formation of
separate steps or stairs. The inclination of the surface may be governed by
the proportion of the strength of the animal to its weight, the force required
to support any weight on a plane being to the whole weight as the height of
the plane to its length; and if the plane be a little less inclined than the
exact equilibrium would require, the animal will be able to acquire a sufficient
velocity at first to carry it-easily up the ascent with a motion nearly equable.
The strength of a labourer may be advantageously employed in ascending a
given height by a flight of steps, and placing himself on a stage which may
raise a weight by its descent; but it appears that the force of other animals
is less calculated for exertions of this kind.


The screw is not often immediately applied to the elevation of weights;
although sometimes a number of screws has been used for raising by
slow degrees a large and unmanageable weight, for instance, that of an
obelisc: and a perpetual screw is frequently employed in giving motion to
wheelwork. Such machines possess a considerable mechanical advantage,
but they are subject to much friction, and are deficient in durability. Mr.
Hunter’s double screw might be applied with advantage, if the extent of the
motion required were extremely small ;. but this limitation confines its utility
within very narrow bounds.


A crane ig a machine for raising weights by means of a rope or chain,
descending from an arm, which is capable of horizontal motion, and passing
over.a pulley to be wound up on an axis. The axis is turned, either im-
mediately, or with the interposition of wheelwork, by a winch, by the hori-
zontal bars of a windlass, or by a walking wheel, and sometimes by the force
of wind, of water, or of steam. A walking wheelis an advantageous mode
of employing the strength of a.labourer, but the bulk of the machine is


ON RAISING AND REMOVING WEIGHTS. ~ 209


sometimes inconvenient and detrimental: when, however, the man walks
upon the wheel, and not within it, this objection is in great measure obvi-
ated. A walking wheel requires to be provided with some method of pre-
venting the dangerous consequences of the rapid descent of the weight, in
case of an accidental fall of the labourer: for this purpose, a catch is usually
employed, to prevent any retrograde motion; a bar has also sometimes been
suspended from the axis of the wheel, on which the man may support him-
self with his, hands, and other similar precautions have been adopted. Some-.
times the plane of a walking wheel is but little inclined to the horizon, and
the man walks on its flat surface. In either case the labour of horses, asses,
or oxen, may be substituted for that of men: but for cranes this substitution
would be very disadvantageous, since much force would be lost in stopping
frequently so bulky a machine as would be. required. The employment of a
turnspit dog is an humble example of the same operation, and even. goats
appear to have been sometimes made to climb in a similar manner. Ina
walking wheel used for raising water at Carisbrook Castle, in the Isle of
Wight, the work was performed by the same individual ass for the whole of
~ forty five years preceding 1771. Walking wheels have also been invented, on
which horses were to act externally with their fore feet or hind feet only;
“but they have seldom, if ever, been applied to practical purposes. In general
it is advisable that walking wheels for quadrupeds should present to them a
path as little elevated as possible; and it might probably be of advantage to
harness them either to a fixed point, or to a spring or weight, which would
enable them to exert a considerable force even in a horizontal direction; but
probably after all they might be more advantageously employed in a circular
mill walk. (Plate XVII. Fig. 217.)


Mr. White's crane affords a good specimen of an oblique walking wheel;
the force may be varied accordingly as the labourer stands at a point more or
less distant from the centre; and in order to avoid accidents, a break is
always acting on the axis of the wheel by its friction, except when it is re-
moved by the pressure of the man’s hand on a lever, upon which he leans as he
walks. The force is also varied in some cranes by changing the pinion, which
acts on the principal wheel, and an expanding drum has been contrived for
the same purpose, consisting of a number of bars moveable in spiral grooves,


voL. I, Ee


bs


210 LECTURE XVIII.


so as to form a greater or smaller cylinder at pleasure. In order to place the
weight in any situation that may be required, the pulley may be made to slide
horizontally on the gib or arm. (Plate XVIT. Fig. 218.)


A model of a crane was exhibited some years ago to the Royal Society, in
which a large wheel fixed to a short axis was made to roll round on a plane,
while the lower end of its axis was connected by a joint with another axis in
a vertical position: then the wheel, having to describe a circumference some-
what larger than its own, was turned slowly, and therefore powerfully, round
its axis, and the motion was communicated to the fixed axis. The machine,
however, appears to be more curious than useful.


Sometimes a steelyard has been combined with a crane, for weighing goods
at the same time that they are raised by it. A small crane, fixed in a carriage,
is convenient for loading and unloading goods. In France, the carts used on
the wharfs are generally so long as to reach the ground behind when depressed,
and to furnish an inclined plane, along which the goods are raised by a lever
and axis, or a kind of capstan, fixed in front.


For taking hold of stones which are to be raised by means of a'rope, a hole’
is sometimes formed in them, wider within than at its opening, and in this’
a lewis is inserted, consisting of two inverted wedges, separated by a plug, to


_ which they are fastened by a pin. (Plate XVII. Fig. 219.)


When a rope or chain, which is to raise a weight, is so long as to require a
counterpoise, the effect of this may be varied a to the length of the
rope, which is unbent, by hanging it on a second rope or chain, bee aces
a mene aes slowly turned by a = and Lac weol

‘ The use’ of. cranes is so eiteaive ad wo SodapttadA that aia tile
have been often multiplied on account of local circumstances, or even from:


caprice; but the constructions which have been prosiear yo Gia a Pe
et Ene and from them it will be ¢ to ju P \Varaagee


’ Racin i


ON RAISING AND REMOVING WEIGHTS. 211


another, the most natural and obvious method, if. they are portable, is to
carry them. There is, however, some scope for theory even in this common
operation, and we have seen that-calculations have been made in order to de-
’ termine the most advantageous burden for a porter to carry, but the experi-
ence of a few trials would in general be a better guide. . Some carry weights

on their heads, others on their shoulders, others low down on their backs: and

pr to the situation of the burden, they bend forwards or backwards, so

that the common centre of gravity of the weight and the body comes immedi-

ately or very nearly over some part of the ground between their feet. The

difficulty of carrying a weight at the extremity of a long rod is easily under-

stood from the properties of the lever, and the same principles will enable us

; to determine the distribution of a load between two porters, in whatever -way

E they may carry it. | Supposing the weight to be placed on a porter’s horse, or
~hand barrow, and at equal distances from both extremities, each of the men
will Apseed an equal portion of it; but if it be nearer to the one than

to the o », the load will be distributed, in. the same proportion as the poles
are by the centre of the burden. . For instance, if the weight were
300° pounds, and it were one foot distant from. the one, and two from the
other, the first would have to carry 200 pounds, and the second 100. If the

_ porters ascend a hill, or a flight of steps, the distribution of the load will re-
sci same, provided that the centre of the weight lie in the plane of the
i ia ‘if the weight consists of a large body placed on that plane,

of, gravity being above it, the effect of .an inclination to
“horizon, may. "materially change the distribution of the load, since
will ah ehwraye be determined by the distance of the ends of the poles
sing perpendicularly through the centre of gravity; so that,
vere sufficient, the whole burden might rest on the lower
1 the same manner, if the weight were suspended below the
mn would cause a greater proportion of the load to be borne

©. The force is, however, only thus distributed as long as
orters continue parallel to each other; but the inequality
ened bye change of the directions in which they would
y that those directions should meet in some part
ing cities the centre of gravity; the magnitude
en be determinéd by the length of the side of a triangle
rection, and the load might be either equally or un-


212 LECTURE XVIII,


equally divided, according to the positions of the arms, (Plate XVII. Fig-
220, 221.)


A man can carry in general a weight four or five times as great as that
which he can raise continually in a vertical direction with the same velocity :
so that we may consider the resistance to be overcome as a kind of friction
which amounts to about a fourth or a fifth of the weight. If we attempted to
draw a weight along a horizontal surface, the resistance of the surface would
often not only impede the motion, but also injure the texture of the substance
to bemoved. This injury may, however, be avoided by the interposition of a
simple frame or dray, and the dray may be armed with a substance subject to

-little friction, as with iron: the friction may also be somewhat further dimi-
nished by making the outline of the dray a little convex below so that a slight
agitation may be continually produced during its motion. Sometimes the ©
simple expedient of placing a load on two poles of elastic wood, the thickest
ends of which are supported by the horse, and the thinner drag on the
ground, is of use both in diminishing the friction, by confining it to a smaller
and smoother surface, and in equalising the motion, by the flexibility of the
poles,


It often happens that agitation of any kind enables us to lessen consider-
ably the friction between two bodies, especially when they are elastic. If
we wish, for instance, to draw a ring along aniron rod, by a thread which is
nearly perpendicular to it, we may exert all our strength in vain if we apply
it by slow degrees, since the increase of force continues to increase the ad-
hesion. But if we pull the ring suddenly, and then slacken the thread, it
rebounds from the rod by its elasticity, and in this manner it slides readily
along, by a continuance of alternations. In such a case, however, it would
be more natural, if the thread were sufficiently heavy, to give it a serpentine
motion, which would draw the ring in a more oblique direction. It is said
that when a screw is fixed very firmly in a piece of iron, it may be extricated
much more easily while the iron is filed in some neighbouring part. The


agitation thus produced probably operates in a manner somewhat similar to
that of the rod,


Friction may in general be considerably diminished by the interposition of


ON RAISING AND REMOVING WEIGHTS. 213


oily substances, where the surfaces are of such a nature as to admit of their


application. ‘Thus common oil, tallow, or tar, are usually interposed between


metals which work on each other. It is necessary to attend to the chemical
properties of the oil, and to take care that it be not of sucha nature as to
corrode the metals employed, especially where the work requires great ac-
curacy. ‘Tallow is liable to lose its lubricating quality, unless it be frequently
renewed. Between surfaces of wood, soap is sometimes applied, but more
commonly black lead, which becomes highly polished. The -advantages of
canals, and of navigation in general, are principally derived from the facility
with which the particles of fluids make way for the motion of bodies floating
on them.


The interposition of rollers or of balls bears some resemblance to the appli-
cation of fluids. Supposing the surfaces to be flat and parallel, a roller
moves between them without any friction: but it has still to overcome the
resistance occasioned by the depression which it produces in the substance
on which it moves, and which is greater or less according to the softness and
want of elasticity of the substance. If the substance were perfectly elastic,
the temporary depression would produce no resistance, because the tendency to
rise behind the roller would be exactly equivalent to the force opposing its
progress before; and the actual resistance only arises from a greater or
smaller want of elasticity in the materials concerned. The continued change
of place of the rollers is often a material objection to their employment; their
action may in some cases be prolonged by fixing wheels on their extremities,
as well as by some other arrangements; but these methods are too compli-
cated to afford much practical utility. Rollers may also be placed between
two cylinders, the one conyex and the other concave, and the friction may
in this manner be wholly removed, whatever may be the magnitude of the
rollers. (Plate XVII. Fig. 229, 223.)


The effect of friction in any machine being always diminished, in propor-
tion as the velocity of the parts sliding on each other is diminished, it is ob-
vious that by reducing the dimensions of the axis of a wheel as much as possi-
ble, we also reduce the friction. When the pressure on theaxis is derived
principally from the weight of the wheel itself, the friction may be lessened
by placing the wheel in a horizontal position, and making the axis vertical:


214 ¢ LECTURE XVIII.


for in this manner the weight may be supported on an axis ending in
a very small surface, and the effect of the friction on this surface will be
about one third less than if it acted at the circumference. The velocity of
the parts sliding on each other may be still more reduced, by placing each
extremity of the axis on another wheel, or between two wheels, on which
the axis rolls as they turn round, so that the friction is transferred to the
axis of these wheels, of which the motion is very slow. But when a
great weight is to be supported, it is necessary that the friction wheels be
very strong, and very accurately formed; for if their surface were irregu-
lar, they might stand still, and their use would be destroyed. (Plate
XVIII. Fig. 224.)

Perrault attempted to avoid all friction by supporting the axis of a wheel
in the coil of arope, which allowed it to turn while the whole wheel ascended
and descended; but the stiffness of a rope occasions in general even a greater
resistance than the friction for which it is substituted.


The wheels of carriages owea great part of their utility to the diminution of
friction, which is as much less in a carriage than in a dray, as the diameter
of the axle is less than that of the wheel, even supposing the dray to slide on
a greased surface of iron. The wheels also assist us in drawing the carriage
over an obstacle, for the path which the axis of the wheel describes, is always
smoother and less abrupt than the surface of a rough road on which the wheel

rolls. It is obyious that both these advantages are more completely attained
by large wheels than by smaller ones ; the dimensions of the axis not being in-
creased in the same proportion with those of the wheel,and the path of the axis,
to which that of the centre of gravity is similar, consisting of portions of larger
circles, and consequently being less curved; and if the wheels are elastic, and
rebound from an obstacle, the difference is still increased. It is, however, barely
possible, that the curvature of the obstacle to be overcome may be intermediate
between those of a larger and of a smaller wheel; and in this case the higher
wheel will touch a remoter part of the obstacle, so that the path of the axis
will form an abrupt angle, while the smaller wheel follows the curve, and
produces a more equable motion; this, however, is a case of rare occurrence, and
an advantage of little importance. (Plate XVIII. Fig. 225, 226.)


es

ON RAISING AND REMOVING WEIGHTS. 215

The greater part of the resistance to the motion of a carriage very frequently
arises from the continual displacement of a portion of the materials of the road,
which do not react on the wheels with perfect elasticity, but undergo a _per-
manent change of form proportional to the loss of force. Hence, ina soft
sand, although the axles of the wheels may move in a direction perfectly hori-
zontal, the draught becomes extremely heavy. The more the wheel sinks,
the greater is the resistance, and if we suppose the degree of elasticity of the
materials, and their immediate resistance at different depths to be known, we
may calculate the effect of their reaction in retarding the motion of the car-
riage. Thus, if the materials were perfectly inelastic, acting only on the pre-
ceding half of the immersed portion of the wheel, and their immediate pres-
sure or resistance were simply proportional to the depth, like that of fluids, or of
elastic substances, the horizontal resistance would be to the weight nearly as the
depth of the part immersed to two thirds of its length; but if the Pressure i in-
creased as the square of the depth, which is a more probable supposition, the ye-
sistance would be to the weight as the depth to about four fifths of the
length; the pressure may even vary still more rapidly, and we may
consider the proportion of the resistance to the weightas no greater than that
of the depth of the part immersed to its length, or of half this length to the
diameter of the wheel; and if the materials are in any degree elastic, the resist-
ance will be lessened accordingly. But onany of these suppositions,it may be
shown that the resistance may be reduced to one half,either by making a wheel
a little less than three times as high, or about eight times as broad as the given
‘wheel. This consideration is of particular consequence in soft and boggy soils,
as wellas in sandy countries ; thus, in moving timber in a moist situation, it be-
comes extremely advantageous to employ very high wheels, and they have the
additional convenience that the timber may be suspended from the axles by
chains, without the labour of raising it so high as would be necessary for

placing it upona carriage of any kind. (Plate XVIII. Fig. 227.)


But the magnitude of wheels is practically limited, by the strength or the
weight of the materials of which they are made, by the danger of overturn-
ing when the centre of gravity is raised too high, and in the case of the first
pair of wheels of a four wheeled carriage, by the inconvenience that would
arise, in turning a corner, with a wheel which might interfere with the body
of the carriage. It is also of advantage that the draught of a horse should be in


7


216 LECTURE XVIII.


a direction somewhat ascending, partly on account of the shape of the horse's
shoulder, and partly because the principal force that he exerts is in the direc-
tion of a line passing through the point of contact of his hind feet with the
ground... But a reason equally strong, for having the draught in this direc-

- tion, is, that a part of the force may always be advantageously employed in
lessening the pressure on the ground; and to answer this purpose the most
effectually, the inclination of the traces or shafts ought to be the same with
that of a road on which the carriage would begin or continue to descend by
its own weight only. In order to apply the force in this manner to both
pairs of wheels, where there are four, the line of draught ought to be
directed to a point half way between them, or rather to a point immediately
under the centre of gravity of the carriage; and such a line would always
pass above the axis of the fore wheels. If the line of draught pass immedi-
ately through this axis, the pressure on the hind wheels will remain un-
altered; and if the traces or shafts be fixed still lower, the pressure
on the hind wheels will even be somewhat increased by the draught.
It is evident, therefore, that this advantage cannot be obtained if the fore
wheels are very high; we may also understand that in some cases the com-
mon opinion of the eligibility of placing a;load over the fore wheels, rather
than the hind wheels, may have some foundation in truth. When several
horses are employed, the draught of.all but the last must be nearly horizontal;
in this case the flexure of the chain brings it into a position somewhat more
favourable for the action of the horses; but the same cause makes the direc-
tion of its attachment to the waggon unfavourable; further than this there is
no absolute loss of force, but it appears to be advisable to cause the shaft
horse to draw in a direction as much elevated as possible; and on the whole
it is probable that horses drawing singly have a material advantage, when
they do not require additional attendance from the drivers.


The practice of making broad wheels conical has obviously the disadvan-

‘ tageous effect of producing a friction at each edge of the wheel, when the
carriage is moving in a straight line; for such a wheel, if it moved alone,

would always describe a circle round the vertex of the cone to which it be-

longs. When the wheels are narrow,a slight inclination of the spokes appears

to be of use in keeping them more steady on the axles than if they were

exactly yertical; and when, by an inclination of the body of the carriage, a


ON RAISING AND REMOVING WEIGHTS. 217


greater proportion of the load is thrown on the lower wheel, its spokes, being
then in a vertical position, are able to exert all their strength with advantage.
The axles being a little conical, in order that they may not become loose, or
may easily be tightened as they wear, it is necessary that they should be bent
down, so that their lower surfaces may be horizontal, otherwise the wheels
would press too much on the linch pin. For this reason, the distance between
the wheels should be a little greater dbove than below, and their surfaces of
course slightly conical. (Plate XVIII. Fig. 298.)


It has been proposed to-fix the wheels to their respective axles, to continue
the axles as far as the middle of the carriage only, and to cause them.to turn on
friction wheels or rollers; a plan which may succeed if the apparatus is not
too complicated for use; but in fact the immediate friction on the axles is not
great enough to render this refinement necessary. If both opposite wheels
were fixed to a single axis, one of them would be dragged backwards and the
other forwards, whenever the motion deviated from a straight line; and a_si-
milar effect. actually takes arp in those carriages which are supported on a
single roller. -


Theeffect of the suspension of a carriage on springs isto smilie its motion,
" sby causing every change to be more gradually communicated to it, by means
of the flexibility of the.springs, and by consuming a certain portion of every
sudden impulse in generating a‘degree of rotatory motion. This rotatory mo-
tion depends on the oblique position of the straps suspending the carriage,
which, prevents its swinging in a parallel direction; sucha vibration as would
take .place if the straps were parallel, would be too extensive, unless they
(were very short, and then the motion would be somewhat rougher. The ob-
Jliquity\of the straps.tends also in some measure-to, retain the carriage in a ho-
rizontal position: sfor if they were parallel, both being vertical, the lower
one would have to support the greater portion of the weight, at least accord-
ing to/the common mode of fixing them to the bottom of the carriage, the
-spring, therefore, ,being flexible, it would be still further depressed. But
when the straps are oblique, | the upper one assumes always the more vertical
Position, and consequently bears more of the load; for when a body of any
‘Kind is supported by two oblique forces; their horizontal thrusts must be


equal, otherwise the body would move laterally; and in order that the hori-
VoL. 1. Ff


218 LECTURE XVIII.


zontal portions of the forces may be equal, the more inclined to the horizon
must be the greater: the upper spring will, therefore, be a little depressed,
and the carriage will remain more nearly horizontal than if the springs were
parallel. The reason for dividing the springs into-separate plates has already
been explained: the beam of the carriage,that unites the whee ls, supplies the
strength necessary for forming the communication between the axles: if the
body of the carriage itself were to perform this office, the springs would re-
quire to be so strong that they could have little or no effect in equalising the
motion, and we should have a waggon instead of a coach. The ease with
which a carriage moves, depends not only on the elasticity of the springs,
but also on the small degree of stability of the equilibrium, of which we
may judge in some measure, by tracing the path which the centre of gravity
must describe, when the carriage swings. (Plate XVIII. Fig. 229.)


The modes of attaching horses and oxen to carriages are different in different
countries, nor is iteasy to determine the most eligible method. » When horses
are harnessed to draw side by side, they are usually attached to the opposite
ends of a bar or lever; and if their strength is very unequal, the bar is some-
times unequally divided by the fulcrum, the weaker horse being made to act
en the longer bar, and being thus enabled to counteract the greater force of
his companion. But even without this inequality, a compensation takes
place, for the centre on which the bar moves is always considerably behind
the points of attachment of the horses; and when one of them falls back a
little, the effective arm of the lever becomes more perpendicular to the diree-
tion of his force, and gives him a greater power, while the opposite arm be-
comes more oblique, and causes the other horse to act at a disadvantage: so
that there is a kind of stability in the equilibrium. If the fulcrum were
further forwards than the extremity of the bar, the two horses could never
draw together with convenience. (Plate XVIII. Fig. 230.)


In mining countries, and in collieries, it is usual, for facilitating the mo-
tion of the carriages employed in moving the ore or the coals, to lay wheel-
ways of wood or iron along the road on which they are to pass; and this
practice has of late been extended in some cases as a substitute for 'the con-
struction of navigable canals. Where there is a turning, the carriages are
usually received on a frame, supported by a pivot, which allows them to be


ON RAISING AND REMOVING WEIGHTS. 219


tumned with great ease. In particular situations, these waggons are
Joaded by little carts, rolling without direction down inclined planes, and
emptying themselves; they are also provided with similar contrivances for
being readily unloaded, when they arrive at the place of their destination.
The carriages used for drawing loaded boats over inclined planes, where they
have to ascend and again to descend, are made to preserve their level by
having at one end four wheels instead of two, on the same transverse line;
the outer ones as much higher than the pair at the other end, as the inner
ones are lower; and the wheelway being so laid, that either the largest or the
smallest act on it, accordingly as the corresponding part of the plane is lower
or higher than the opposite end. It is possible that roads paved with iron
may hereafter be employed for the purpose of expeditious travelling, since
there is scarcely any resistance to be overcome, except that of the air, and
such roads would allow the velocity: to’be increased almost without limit. -

For removing earth from one situation to another, a series of baskets has
sometimes been hung on twe endless ropes, moving on pulli¢s of such a form,
as to suffer the bars supporting the baskets to pass freely over them; the
baskets being moved by means of a winch, acting on the rope by a wheel
like one of the pullies. Sometimes also a series of little carts has been con-
nected by ropes, and drawn in a circle or oval up and down an inclined plane.
These methods may be adopted in making roads, where a hill is to be levelled,
and the materials are to be employed in filling up the valley below: but in
such cases two carts, connected by a cylinder or windlass, are generally’
sufficient; and they may be arranged in the same manner as the carriages for
femoving boats on an inclined plane.


220


LECTURE XIX.


ON MODES OF CHANGING THE FORMS OF BODIES.


"THE corpuscular forces by which bodies retain their peculiar forms of aggre-
gation, require in many cases to be counteracted or modified by mechanical
processes: thus we have frequent occasion to compress bodies into a smaller
space, to augment their dimensions in a particular direction, to divide their
substance, either partially or totally, in given lines or surfaces, or to destroy
their general form, by reducing them into more minute portions; and we may
consider these subjects as principally referable to the effects of compression,
extension, penetration, division, attrition, digging, boring, agitation, tritura-
tion and demolition. The two first of these articles depend on such a changé
as we have examined, in considering the strength of materials, under the name
of alteration, the remainder on fracture.


The instruments peculiarly intended for compression are in general of
the description of presses;' and the most common act by means of a screw.
The friction on the screw interferes considerably with the power of the ma-
chine; but it isof use in keeping the press fixed inasituation into which it has
been brought by force. The screw is always turned by a lever; for without
this assistance, however powerful it might be, the friction would render it al-
most useless. When great force is required, the screw is made as close as is
consistent with the strength of its spires. Mr. Hunter’s double screw may
also be used with advantage, where only a small extent of motion is required.
The screw ofa printing press, or of a stamping press, is, on the contrary, open,
and it is caused to descend with considerable momentum, the handle being
loaded with a weight. Wherever a force is so employed as to produce an im-
pulse which acts on any body, the momentum, which is the result of the
action of the force for a certain time, is usually much more powerful than the


oy
a rn etabens 2 _


ON MODES OF CHANGING THE FORMS OF BODIES. 221


simple pressure; the degree of its efficacy depends, however, on the degree of

compressibility of the substance. Thus, if a heavy body fall from a certain

height, so as to acquire a momentum, in consequence of the force of gravity, .
it will ultimately exert on the substance upon which it falls, a force about as

much greater than its weight, as the space, through which the surface of the

substance struck is depressed, by means of the impulse, is less than twice the

height from which the body has fallen; and unless either the substance is

very compressible, or the height very small, this force must be incomparably

greater than the pressure of the weight only.


For a printing press, a single heavy roller is sometimes made to pass over
the paper, when it has been laid on the types; and since the whole action of
such a roller is confined to a small part, at any one time, it is said to exert


‘sufficient force, and to perform its work more equably than a common press;


but its operation must be comparatively slow. A common mangle for linen
acts nearly in a similar manner. In calendering mills, the force of a spring is
employed, for exerting a arcane on the block, with which the materials are
glazed. Y


The copper plate printing press,and the machine for copying letters, are com-
posed of two rollers, parallel to each other, pressing on the substance which
is interposed, and which is brought into its situation partly by the friction of
the surface of the rol.er, and partly by external force.


The rollers, by which sugar canes are pressed, are in general situated verti-
cally, the middle one of three being turned by horses, by mules, or by water,
and the canes being made to return round it, so as to’ pass through both in-
terstices in succession. It appears to be of some advantage in presses of this
kind, that all the rollers should be turned independently of their action on the
materials interposed, since the friction of two rollers may tend to draw the
materials into the space between them, with more regularity and greater force,
than the action of a single roller would do. For this reason, it may be ad-
visable to retain the toothed wheels turning the rollers, even when their axes
are not firmly fixed, -but held together by an elastic hoop. (Plate XVIII.
Fig. 231.)


229 “LECTURE XIX.


In oil mills, a still greater momentum is applied to the purpose of compres-
sion than in the printing press: hammers, or long wooden beams, placed-ver-
tically, are raised by a water wheel, and suffered to fall on wedges, which act
very forcibly on the materials contained in bags on each side.

; : ' a i}

Compression is also sometimes performed by the operation of hammering:
thus, cast brass is generally hammered before it is used, in order to increase its
strength; the hammer renders it so much stiffer, that if it is necessary to pre-
serve its ductility,it must be frequently annealed by exposure to heat. Anvils
and vices are necessary appendages tothe hammer; their use depends princi-
pally on their firmness, which is chiefly derived from weight in the one case,
and from strength in the other; and pincers may be considered as portable
vices.

For the purpose of producing a continued pressure on such substances as
havea tendency to contract their dimensions, under the operation of a press,
a spring has been interposed between the press and the materials, which is
capable of pursuing them with a certain degree of force: the utility of such
an arrangement must, however, be extremely limited. Mr. Bramah has ap-
i plied a well known law of hydrostatics to the construction ofa very useful press,
which i is simple, powerful, and gp ‘


Extension is seldom performed by forces that tend immediately to increase
the dimensions of the substance only: it is generally procured by reducing ~
the magnitude of the substance in another direction, sometimes by means of
pressure, but more effectually by percussion. The rollers of the press em-
ployed for laminating metals are turned by machinery, and are capable of being
moved backwards and forwards, in order to repeat the operation on the same
substance; their distance is adjusted by screws, which are turned at once by
pinions fixed on the same axis, in order that they may be always parallel. In
this manner lead, copper, and silver, are rolled into plates, and a thin plate
of silver being soldered to a thicker one of copper, the compound plate is ‘sub
mitted again to the action of the press, and made so thin as to be afforded at
a moderate expense. The glazier’s vice is a ‘machine of the same nature, for “
forming window lead: the softness of the lead enables it to assume the re- ;


ee ae


—_—s ni : ,
u 2 pe ony


ps eta awl


ON MODES OF CHANGING THE FORMS OF BODIES. 228


quired shape, in consequence of the pressure of the rollers or wheels; and the
circumference of these wheels is indented, in order to draw the lead along
by the corresponding elevations. (Plate XVIII. Fig. 232.)


In drawing wire, the force is originally applied in the direction of the ex-
tension, but it produces a much stronger lateral compression, by means of
the conical apertures through which the wire is successively drawn. For
holding the large wire, pincers aré at first used, which embrace it strongly
while they pull, and open when they advance to a new position, the inter-
ruption being perhaps of use, by enabling the pincers to acquire a certain mo-
mentum before they begin to extend the wire; but afterwards, when the
wire is finer, it is simply drawn through the aperture from one wheel or
drum to another. During the operation, it requires frequent annealing,
which causes a scale to form on its surface; and this must be removed by
‘rolling it in a barrel with proper materials; for the application of an acid is
said to injure the temper of the metal. Copper is sometimes drawn into wire
so large as to serye for the bolts used in shipbuilding, especially for sheathing
ship’s bottoms. Silver wire, thinly covered with gold, is rendered extremely
fine, and then flattened, in order to be fit for making gold thread: the thick-
ness of the gold is inconceivably small, much less than the millionth part of
an inch, and sometimes only a ten millionth. 29


In order to form the handles of vessels of earthenware, the clay is forced
through a hole of a proper shape in an iron box. The operation of the:pot-
ter’s wheel consists in great measure of compression and extension, performed
by the hands; the vessels are finished, when they are partly dry, in a lathe,
or by other instruments; some kinds of earthenware are formed in a mould
only.

When a thread or a plate of glass is extended in a semifluid state, it has a
tendency to preserve an equable thickness throughout: this is derived from
the effect of the air in cooling it, the thinnest parts becoming immediately'a
little colder than the rest, and consequently harder, so that they retain their
thickness, until the neighbouring parts are brought into a similar state,


Extension is performed by means of percussion, in forges, and in the com-


204 (LECTURE) XYx.


mon operation of the smith’s hammer. In forges, the hammers are raised by
machinery, and thrown forcibly against a spring, so as to recoil with great
velocity. With the help of this spring, the hammer sometimes makes 500
strokes in a minute, its force being many times greater than the weight of
‘the hammer, Such forges are used in making malleable iron, in forming
copper plates, and in manufacturing steel. (Plate XVIII. Fig. 233.)


Gold is beaten between the intestines of animals, on a marble anvil; for
this purpose it is alloyed with copper or silver. It is reduced to the thick-
ness of little more than the three hundred thousandth of an inch. Silver
leaf is about the hundred and sixty thousandth: it is made of silver without
alloy.


The operation of ‘coining depends ‘also principally on an extension of the
‘metal into 'the.recesses of the die ; it is performed by a strong pressure, united
with a considerable impulse, communicated by a screw like that of a printing

“press; and ‘sometimes the ra any is formed w recent blows,of a
vhammer rey


Thin plates of silvered copper are moulded into any figure peter may be re-
quired, by being placed between two corresponding stamps, of which the
one is fixed, and the other attached to the bottom of a heavy hammer. The
hammer is raised and suffered to fall in.a right line, by means of ,pincers,
‘which open when they have acquired a certain height. Sometimes the con-
tact, produced by’ the forcible impulse ofa die, is sufficiently intimate to cause

" a'thin plate of silver to coheve permanently with a'surface of iron; and this
“mode of ‘uniting metals is actually employed in somermanufacturea’ aud 30
Rito
The operations of perforating, cutting, turning, boring, ‘digging, sawing,
~ grinding, and polishing, resemble each other, in great with res
‘to the: minute actions econ tata wha rcome.


ON MODES OF CHANGING THE! FORMS OF BODIES. 295


greater as the edge is thinner. “The resistance opposed by a solid, or even
by a soft substance, to the motion of a body tending to penetrate it, appears
to resemble in some measure ‘the force of friction, which is nearly uniform,
cwhether the motion be slow or rapid, destroying a certain quantity of
momentum ina certain time, whatever the whole velocity may be, or what-
- ever may be the space described. Hence arises the advantage of giving a
great velocity toa body whichis to penetrate another, the distance to which
a body penetrates being as the square of its velocity, or as its energy ; and a
‘certain degree of energy being required in order to make it even penetrate at
all. It is true that when we exchange a slaw motion for a more rapid one, by
‘the immediate action of any mechanical power, we can only obtain the same
energy from the same power, for we must diminish the mass in the same pro-
portion as the square of the velocity is increased ; but a very small part of the
force, which is consumed in the operation of a machine of ‘any kind, is em-
ployed in generating momentum; by much the greatest part is spent in over-
coming resistances which vary but little with the velocity; a small portion
only of the resistance increasing in proportion to the square of the velocity ;
so that by applying a triple force, we may obtain more than a double velocity,
. and more than a quadruple effect: and besides it has already been observed
that when the velocity begins to excced a certain limit, the effect is increased
in a much greater proportion than that of its square. The same work is also
performed ‘with less pressure, and less strain on the machinery, where a great
velocity is employed. It is on account of the efficacy of velocity, in facilitat-
ing penetration, that soft substances, moving very swiftly, will readily per-
forate much harder ones; and for the same reason a gunshot wound, and
even the loss of a limb, takes place with so little disturbance of the neigh-
douring parts, that it is sometimes scarcely felt. The advantage of an impulse,
however inconsiderable, above a pressure, however great, may be easily under-
stood from the ease with which a moderate blow of a hammer causes a nail
to penetrate a substance, into which the whole force of the arm could not
have thrust it.’


Hi the engine for driving the piles, or upright beams, used for the founda-
tions of buildings in water, or in soft ground, the weight is raised slowly to
a considerable height, in order that, in falling, it may acquire sufficient
energy to propel the pile with efficacy. The same force, if applied by very
powerful machinery immediately to the pile, would perhaps produce an equal

voL. I. cg


226 F LECTURE XIix.


ffect in driving it, but it would be absolutely impossible in practice to con-
struct machinery strong enough for the purpose, and if it were possible, there
would be an immense loss of force from the friction. For example, supposing
a weight of 500 pounds, falling from a height of 50 feet, to drive the pile
2 inches at each stroke; then, if the resistance be considered as nearly uni-
form, its magnitude, must be about 150 thousand pounds, and the same moy-
ing power, with a mechanical advantage of 300 to 1, would perform the work
in the same time. _ But for this purpose some parts of the machinery must be
able to support a strain equivalent to the draught of 600 horses. . In the pile
driving engine, the forceps, or tongs, sometimes called the monkey, ‘or fol-
lower, ‘is.opened ‘as soon as the weight arrives at its greatest height; and at
the same time a lever detaches the drum, employed for raising the weight,
from the. axis or .windlass, at which the horses are drawing; the follower
then descends. after the weight, uucoiling the rope from the drum, and
the force of the horses is employed in turning a fly wheel, until the con-
nexion with the weight is again restored. (Plate XVIII. Fig 234.)


When we throw a stone, or a missile weapon of any kind, with the hand,
the stone can acquire no greater velocity than the hand itself, accompanied
by the neighbouring part of the arm: so that the whole velocity must be pro-
duced in a mass of ‘matter comparatively very large. A sling enables us to
throw a stone or a ball much further; for here the stone may be moved with
a velocity far greater than the hand that impels it, although the action of the
force on the stone is indirect, and the resistance ofthe air consider-
able. | An.clastic bow, furnished witha strong and light string, enables
us. to, apply;.to an arrow or to a ball the whole force of our arms, unencum-
bered with any considerable.portion of matter, that requires to be moved with
the arrow; hence a very great velocity may be obtained in this manner, An
air gun possesses the same advantage in a still greater degree, and the force
of fired. gunpowder excels perhaps all others, from its concentrating an im-
mense force in the form of an inconceivably light elastic fluid; of course a ball
impelled by this force, becomes a most effectual instrument in penetrating the
most refractory substances. We may easily calculate the velocity of an arrow,
by comparing its motion with that of a pendulum, if we know the proportion
of its weight to the force that bends the bow; including in the weight a small
addition for the inertia of the bow and bowstring; the height to which the
arrow will tise, being abeut as much greater than the space. through which


ON MODES OF CHANGING THE FORMS OF BODIES. 227


the bowstring acts on it, as the greatest force applied in drawing the bow is


greater than twice the weight to be moved.


The action of a whip, either on the air, or on a solid body, depends on™
the increase of velocity, occasioned by the successive transmission of the mo-
tion from a thicker to a thinner portion of its flexible substance, so that at
last, the energy of the lash, and of its knots, gives it a sufficient capability of
exciting sound, or of inflicting pain.


The instruments generally employed for the division of solid bodies, ar¢
wedges, chisels, knives, and scissors; they sometimes act by pressure only,
but they are more powerful when impulse is added to it. Hatchets, planes,
saws, and files, always act with some rapidity. Cutting instruments are in
general very thin wedges, but the edge itself is usually much more obtuse;
Mr. Nicholson has estimated the angle, formed ultimately by the surfaces
constituting the finest edge, at about 56 degrees. Knives are sometimes fixed
on wheels, so as to revolve in a direction oblique to their edges, as in some
machines for cutting chaff, where the straw is also drawn forwards, through
a space variable at pleasure, during each revolution of the knife. An instru-
ment of a similar nature has also been invented for the purpose of cutting


_ weeds under water. ”


For the edges of all cutting instruments, steel is principally employed.
After being hardened, by plunging it when red hot into cold water, it is


. tempered, by laying it on a heated iron, or more accurately, by Mr. Stodart’s


method, of immersing it in a metallic composition in the state of fusion.
When its surface has acquired a yellow tinge, it is fit for edge tools, and the
degree of heat proper for watch springs is indicated by a blue colour. The
backs of knives are often made of iron, which is less brittle than steek: these
Substances are generally welded together, by hammering them when red hot;


» but sometimes, in large instruments, a back of iron is only rivetted on.


The iron employed for making nails, and other small articles, is first rolled
into flat bars, and then cut into narrow rods, by causing it to paag Nee
the cylinders of the’slitting mill, the surfaces of which are formed inte rect-


228, LECTURE XIX. ©


angular grooves, and which are placed close to each other, \so that the ‘pro-
minent parts of the one are opposed to the depressions of the other, and the
bars are divided by the pressure of the opposite forces, acting transversely at
the same points, so as to separate them by the effect which we have already
considered under the name detrusion. ‘The. same machinery also generally
works a pair of large shears, for cutting bars of any kind. (Plate XVIIL,
Fig. 235.)


The lathe isan elegant instrument, in which a considerable relative velocity
is produced between the tool and the substance to be cut, by the revolution
of. this substance on an axis, while the tool is supported by arest. Orna-
mental lathes admit of a great variety of mechanical contrivance, but they are
of little practical use, except for amusement. Picture frames are, however,
sometimes turned in oval lathes; and in the manufacture of buttons, machines

of a similar nature are occasionally employed. . The effect of every lathe of a
"complicated construction depends on a certain degree of motion of which its
axis is capable: if this motion be governed by a screw, a screw of any dia-
meter may be turned by its assistance; if by a frame producing an elliptic ;
. eurve, any number of ovals, having the same centre, may be described at
onee;,.and if a moveable point connected with the work, be pressed by a
strong spring against a pattern of any kind, placed at one end of the axis, a
copy, of the same form, may be made at the other end of the axis.


The process of boring is a combination of penetration and division, and
sometimes of attrition. Awls, gimlets, screws, augers, and centrebits, are
various forms of borers. The drill has the advantage of a rapid motion, com-
municated by the drill bow, which turns it round by means of a little wheel
or pulley. In boring cannon, the tool is at rest, while the cannon revolves,
and by this arrangement the bore of the cannon. is formed with much more
accuracy than according to the old method of putting the borer in motion;
perhaps because the inertia of so large a mass of matter, as constitutes the can-
non, assists in defining the axis of revolution with more accuracy. The borer
is pressed against the cannon by a weight, hung on the arm of a bent spring,
and during the operation, the outside is also turned into its intended shape by
the application of proper instruments. Cylinders for steam engines are cast


’


>


ON MODES OF CHANGING THE FORMS OF BODIES. 229°


hollow, and: kfterwards bored; but in this case the borer revolves, and the
cylinder remains at rest. — chogish


Ploughs, spades, pickaxes, mattocks, harrows, and other agricultural in-
struments, resemble in their operation the chisel and the wedge: the numer-
ous'diversities in their form and the complications of their'structure, are de-
termined more by the various modifications of their action, required for par-
ticular purposes, than by any material difference in the mode of application
of the principles on which they depend. (Plate XVIII. Fig. 236.) J


The process of minmgis a combination of boring and digging. Shafts are
sunk, levels are driven, and drains are carried off, by the help of picks or
pickaxes, wedges, and hammers, the rocks being also sometimes loosenedby
blasting with gunpowder. In searching for coal, ashaft is sunk through the up-
permost soft strata; and the rock is then bored, by striking it continually with
an iron borer, terminating in an edge of steel, which is in the mean time turned
partly round; and at proper intervals a scoop is let down, to draw up the
loose fragments. In this manner a perforation is sometimes made for more
than a hundred fathoms, the borer being lengthened by pieces screwed on
to it; it is then partly supported by a counterpoise, and is worked by ma-
chinery; if it happens to break, the piece is raised by a rod furnished with a
hollow cone, like an extinguisher, which is driven down on it. Sometimes
the borer is furnished with knives, which are: made to act on any part at
pleasure, and to scrape off a portion of the surrounding substance, which is
collected in a proper receptacle.


For sawing wood on a large scale, sawing mills are very advantageously
employed, being usually driven by water. Several saws are generally fixed
in a frame, parallel to each other; they are worked up and down by a crank,
andat every alternation a wheel is drawn round a little, by a catch, or click,and
moves forwards the frame which supports the timber. When the machine is
employed for cutting the fellies which form the circumference of wheels, the
frame supporting the timber is made to turn round a centre. A circular saw is
used in the construction of blocks and pullies; and in order to make the motion
more secure from the effect of accidental irregularities, the wheels are made
to turn each other by contact only, without teeth. ‘The machinery for mak-


230. ; LECTURE, XIXe 45 4


ing blocks, in the Royal dock yard at Portsmouth, has been latéty much .im-.
proved and enlarged; it is worked by a steam engine, the action of which is,
applied to a great variety of purposes. The advantage of a saw which re-
volves continually, appears to be very considerable, since a much greater velo-
city may be given,to it than can be obtained when the motion is alternate.
Such a saw;has also sometimes been applied to cutting off _ under
water.


In mills for sawing marble into slabs, dhe | saws are drawn backwards and
forwards horizontally: they are made of soft iron, without teeth; and sand
being applied to them, with water, during the operation, the sand is partly
imbedded in the iron, and grinds away the marble.


Granite is worked by driving a number of thin wedges very gradually into
it, at various parts of the section desired; and sometimes wedges of wood are
employed, which being moistened by water, their expansion separates the parts
from each other. It is also said that many stones may be divided by drawing
lines. on them with oil, and then exposing them to heat. Perhaps some pro-
cesses of this kind might be performed with advantage under water; itis well
known that glass may be cut ina rough manner under water, withans much
difficulty, by a common pair of scissors.


For reducing the magnitude of a substance in a particular part, instruments
of attrition are used; rasps, files, grindstones, and hones; and of all these
the immediate actions appear to resemble those of chisels and saws. The
hatches of files are cut with a hard chisel while the steel is soft, and the files
are afterwards hardened. In using the grindstone, water is applied,in order to
avoid the inconvenience produced by too much heat; and sometimes tallow is
substituted for water with equal advantage: but oil is not found to answer the
same purpose; and it has been conjectured that the cold continually occasion-
ed by the melting of the tallow at the point of friction, serves as asubstitute
for the cooling effect of the evaporation of the water. For grinding and po-
lishing steel, the grindstones are made to revolve, either vertically or horizontally,
with a velocity so great as to describe sometimes as much as 60 feet in a
second. ‘The steel is also in some cases drawn backwards and forwards hori=" -
zontally on a circular surface, and in order that the action may be-equally di-


ON MODES OF CHANGING THE FORMS OF BODIES, 231


vided’ throughout the surface, it is allowed to revolve on an axis by means
of the friction; its motion being confined to one disection by the action of a


'. Various substances, chiefly of mineral origin, are also used, on account of

their hardness, as intermediate materials, for grinding and polishing others.

These are diamond dust, corundum, emery, tripoli, putty, glass, sand, flint,

red oxid of iron, or crocus mattis, and prepared chalk; they are sometimes ~
applied in loose powder, and sometimes fixed on leather, wood, or paper.

Cuttle fish bone, and seal skin, are furnished by the animal kingdom, and

Dutch rushes by the vegetable; these are employed chiefly in polishing wood

or ivory.


Marble is made smooth by rubbing one piece on another, with the interposi-
tion of sand; the polishing blocks are sometimes caused to revolve by machi-
nery in a trough, in which the marble:is placed under water, and are drawn
at the same time gradually to and from the centre; or the slab itself, with the
frame on which it rests, is drawn slowly backwards and forwards, while the
blocks are working on it. Granite is polished with iron rubbers, by means of
sand, emery, and putty; it is necessary-to take care during the operation
that the water, which trickles down from the rubbers, and carries with
it some of the iron, may not collect below the columns, and stain them;
but this inconvenience may be wholly avoided by employing rubbers of.
glass. ’

Optical lenses are fixed on blocks by means of a:cement, and ground with
emery, by a tool of proper convexity or concavity: if they are small, a large
number is fixed on°the blocks at the same time. The tool is sometimes first
turned round its axis by machinery, and when the lenses are to be finished, a
compound motion is given to it by means of a crank; and in order to make
it more smooth, the wheels turn each other by. brushes instead of cogs. The
point of the lens-where its two surfaces are parallel, is determined by looking
through it at-a minute object, while it is fixed on a wheel with a-tubular axis,
and shifting it, until the object no-longer appears to move; a:circle is then
described, as it revolves, in order to mark its outline.


4


232 2108, 20 LECTURE XIX.
-


Machines for trituration, by means of which the larger masses of matter are


* crushed, broken, or ground, -into smaller parts, are in general. comprehended


under the denomination of mills. After the pestle and mortar, the simplest
machine of this kind appears to be the stamping mill; the stampers resemble
the hammers of the mill employed in the extraction of oils from seeds, and
the machine is used for reducing to powder the ores of metals, and sometimes
also barks, and linseed; the surface of the stampers being armed with iron
or steel. But barks and seeds are more usually ground by the repeated /pres-
sure of two wheels of stone, rolling on an axis which is forced in a hori-
zontal direction round a fixed point.’ A nobleman of distinguished rank and
talents has lately employed for a mortar mill, a wheel of cast iron, formed of
two portions of cones, joined at their bases: after thirty revolutions, the
mortar being sufficiently ground, a bell rings, and the horse stops.


The materials for making gunpowder are also ground by a wheel revolving
in a trough: in order to corn them, they are moistened, and put into boxes
with a number of holes in their bottoms, and these boxes being placed side
by side, ina circular frame, suspended by cords, the frame is agitated by a
erank revolving horizontally, and the paste shaken through the holes: the
corns are polished by causing them to revolve rapidly within a barrel.


A revolving barrel is used for forming and polishing small round bodies of
different kinds, and it is often employed in agriculture as a churn for making
butter. The purpose of agitation is perhaps more effectually answered by an
alternate motion, which has sometimes been produced in a barrel churn, by
means of a cordiattached to'a heavy pendulum.


Threshing machines are of two kinds; the one consists of a number of fiails,
beating the corn nearly in the same manner as they are used by labourers ;
in the other, which is more commonly employed in this country, thecorn is’
drawn along by two revolving rollers, and caused to pass between a cylinder,‘
and its concave cover, while a number of blocks, projecting from the surface
of the cylinder, beat or rub out the grains very effectually from the ears ; the corn
falls out at the lower part, ‘and is winnowed by a fan which the machine turns
at the same time. In this manner itis said that'a horse will thresh about 100

2 é


ON MODES OF CHANGING THE FORMS OF BODIES, 233


bushels of corn in a day. Itis commonly reckoned the work of a labourer to
Rey about six bushels inaday. (Plate XVIII. Fig. 237.)


' ‘Soute kinids'of grain are occasionally ground in mills of iron or steel, which
_ “consist of a solid cylinder or cone turning within a hollow one, both the
, surfaces being cut obliquely into tecth. But the common mill for grinding
- corn is composed of two circular stones of silicious grit, placed horizontally ;
the upper one revolves with considerable velocity, and is supported by an axis
passing through the lower one, at a distance variable at pleasure: When the

- diameter is five feet, the stone usually makes about 90 revolutions in a minute;
if, the velocity were greater, the flour would be too much heated. The corn
is shaken out of a funnel, or hopper, by means of projections from the revolv-
"ing axis, which strike against the orifice; it passes through the middle of the
. upper millstone, and is readily admitted between the stones; the lower stone
is slightly convex, and the upper one somewhat more concave, so that the
corn passes over more than half the radius of the stone before it begins to be
ground: after being reduced to powder, it is discharged at the circum-
ference, its escape being favoured by the convexity of the lower stone, as well
as by the centrifugal force. The surface of the stones is cut into grooves,
in order to make them act more readily and effectually on the corn. The re-
: sistance, in grinding wheat, has been estimated at about a thirty fifth of the
‘ weight of the millstone. The stones have sometimes been placed vertically,
and the axis supported on friction wheels: but the common position appears _
* be more eligible for mills on a large scale. It is said that a man anda
i op n grind by a hand mill a bushel of wheat in an hour; in a watermill,
dressing of a bushel of wheat is equivalent to the effect of
f water falling through a height of 10 feet, which is
as the work of a labourer for alittle more than half an hour.
en the velocity is increased by the irregular action of the
is sometimes forced rapidly through the mill, without being
id. There is an elegant method of preventing this,by means
ce of two balls, which fly out as soon as the velocity i is
y rise in the are of a circle, allow the end ofa lever to
e the opposite end of the lever descends with the upper
it a little nearer to the lower ove. The bran or husk
the flour, by sifting it in the bolting mill, which consists of a


uh


hg bok
i ’


234 —Ci LECTURE XIx.


cylindrical sieve, placed in an inclined position, and turned by machinery.
(Plate XVIII. Fig 238.)


‘When the flour is made into bread, the dough requires to be kneaded: for
this purpose a machine is sometimes used, in which four or more bars, parallel
to the axis of motion, are turned round, by means of a walking wheel. The
dough is placed in acircular trough, in which the bars revolve not quite in the
middle, so as to approach in each revolution to one of its sides, and thus the
dough is perpetually compelled to change its form.


A machine of nearly the same construction is employed for levigating flints,
after they have first been made red hot, and plunged into cold water, in order ;
to render them friable. They are mixed, when it is necessary, with other
large stones, and the water, in which the process is performed, carries off the
powder, and deposits its coarser parts in a short time, while the finer remain
- much longer suspended, and are thus separated from the rest.


‘When a mechanical structure is to be demolished, or a natural substance to
be broken into smaller parts, we have often occasion to employ the collected
force of men, the powers of machinery, or the expansive force of chemical
agents. Battering rams, or wooden beams, suspended by ropes, and armed
with iron, which were used by the warriors of antiquity in besieging a town,
are now generally superseded by the introduction of artillery, although
they may perhaps still afford, in some cases, a more economical and
equally powerful -mode of operation. The same momentum, and the same
energy, may be given to a battering ram at a less expense than to a cannon
ball; but it is probable that the efficacy of a cannon ball is chiefly owing
to the augmentation of its velocity beyond that limit, which is the utmost
that the substance to be destroyed can sustain without giving way, inde-
pendently of the mass of the body which strikes it.


For demolishing smaller aggregates, pincers, hammers, and crows, are
generally sufficient ; to these sometimes more complicated instruments are
added. Thus, for example, several machines have been invented for draw-
ing out ship’s bolts. A hook which grapples like the common instrument
for drawing teeth, has been applied for holding them firmly, and sometimes


Abs


ON MODES OF CHANGING THE FORMS OF BODIES. ! 235


a’screw, turned by means of wheelwork, has been used for gaining a force
sufficient to overcome their adhesion. In all such cases, however, the effect
of percussion has a considerable advantage; and even if other means are em-
ployed, it is of use to begin with lessening the firmness of the adhesion by the
blows of a hammer; and in this manner a screw may be extracted, which is
so firmly attached by its rust, as to be immoveable by other means.

The expansive force of heat is frequently of great service in dividing rocks,
or in destroying old buildings. This is sometimes done simply by the appli-
cation of fire, asin the mine of Rammelsberg, in the Hartz, where the stra~
‘tum containing the ore is of such a nature, partly, perhaps, on account of the
‘combustible matter which enters into its composition, that, by the effect of
a large quantity of fuel, which is burnt in the vast excavation, of which it forms
the side,it is rendered so friable as to be worked with ease. More commonly,
however, the force of gunpowder is employed, and rocks are generally blasted
with great convenience by an explosion of this powerful agent. A hole being
bored to the depth of three or four feet, the powder is placed at the bottom,
and a wire being introduced, small stones and sand are rammed round it,


and the wire is withdrawn, leaving a communication for firing the powder, by


means of a train of sufficient length to insure the safety of the workman.
It is said that the explosion is more efficacious when the powder does not fill


: the whole of the cavity ; this, however, appears to require confirmation. The


chemical powers, which are the ultimate causes of the operation of gunpow-
der, hin toa department of philosophy which it is not our business to in-

te: but the elasticity of the gases and vapours which are extricated, as
heat which accompanies their produetion, will be considered
the subsequent divisions of this Course of Lectures.


236


LECTURE Xx.


ON THE HISTORY OF MECHANICS,


"THE order which we have pursued, in considering the various departments
of mechanical science, has been in great measure synthetical, dictated by
the plan of proceeding logically from the most simple principles to their more
complicated combinations, so as to build at every step on foundations which
had been firmly laid before: and this method is unquestionably the best
adapted for the expeditious progress of a student in sciences with which he
is unacquainted. But having once acquired a certain degree of knowledge,
he is anxious to be informed by what steps that knowledge was originally
’ obtained, and to what individuals mankind is indebted for each improvement
that has been successively made. Hence, although we cannot attempt to
enter into a complete history of mechanics, it may still be satisfactory to
take a short retrospect of afew of the most remarkable eras in mechanical
philosophy, and in those parts of mathematics on which it sci
depends.

It is universally allowed that the Greeks derived the elements of mathema-
tical; mechanical, and astronomical learning from Egypt and from the East.
Diogenes Laertius,~who appears to be very desirous of claiming, for his
countrymen, the merit of originality, does not deny that Thales and Pytha-
goras acquired much of their knowledge in their travels. Thales of Miletus
is the first that can be supposed to have introduced these studies into Greece.
Moeris, who was probably a king of Egypt, and Theuth or Thoth, a native
of the same country, are mentioned as having laid the foundations of geome-
try; but the science could scarcely have extended, in those ages, further than
was barely necessary for the measurement of land: since Thales, or evena
later philosopher, is said to have first discoverea that two lines ss


ON THE HISTORY OF MECHANICS. 237


the extremities of the diameter of a circle, and meeting in any other part of
its circumference form with each other aright angle. Thales was one of the
seven whom antiquity distinguished by the appellation of wise men; he
flourished about 600 years before the Christian era, and he was the father of
the Ionian school, the members of which, in subsequent tintes, devoted them-
ain more e particularly to the study of moral than of natural philosophy. .


The Italian school, on the contrary, which was aud by Deckeening
appears to have been more inclined to the study of nature and of its laws; al-
though none of the departments of human knowledge were excluded from
_ the pursuits of either of these principal divisions-of the Grecian sages, until

_ Socrates introduced, into the Ionian school, a taste for metaphysical speculations,
which excluded almost all disposition to reason coolly and clearly on natural
causes and effects. To Pythagoras, philosophy is indebted for the name

5 which it bears; his predecessors had been in-the habit of calling themselves
. isg; he chose to be denominated a lover of wisdom only. He had studied
a under Pherecydes, and Pherecydes under Pittacus: but with respect to mathe-
matical and mechanical researches, it does not appear that either of his teach-
~ ershad_ ‘made any improvements, On his return from his travels in Egypt and
the East, i in the time of the last Tarquin, about 500 years before Christ, he
found his native country Samos under the dominion of the tyrant Polycrates,
and went as a voluntary exile to seek a tranquil retreat in a corner of Italy.
; ie pi tlre he studied aust taught the laws of nature.


Pa


Biches: stores possession aetna

, With glowing heart and liberal hand,
treasures o’er the listening land.

ing crowd the laws of nature hears,
truth in silent awe reveres.”


us the ‘opinion may be, that Pythagoras was acquainted
Vitation, it is certain that he made considerable improve-


238 LECTURE Xx.


ments both in mathematics and in mechanics, and in particular that he dis-
covered the well known relation between the hypotenuse and the sides of a
right angled triangle, and demonstrated that the square of the hypotenuse is
always equal to the sum of the squares of the sides. This theorem is more
essential to the perfection of geometry than any other proposition that can be
named: and if we may judge by the story of his having sacrificed a hecatomb
tothe Muses, on occasion of the discovery, heseems to have had a foresight of
the magnificence of the edifice, that wasin subsequent times to be built on this
foundation.


Democritus of Abdera lived about a century after Pythagoras, whose works
he studied, and whose principles he adopted. He appears to have been possess-
ed of very extensive knowledge and profound learning; but little remains of
his works, excepting their titles. Some have attributed to him the invention
-of the method of arranging stones so as to form an arch. Seneca thinks that
so simple an invention must have been practised in earlier ages: but Mr. King
has endeavoured to show that its general introduction in building was of much
later date. Architecture, and other mechanical arts had however been con-
siderably advanced some time before this period, if it is true that Ctesiphon
or Chersiphron, who built the temple of Ephesus, was cotemporary with
Croesus and Thales. It is uncertain at what time bridges of stone were first
built; anditis doubtful whether the art of building bridges of wood was very
well understood in those ages: for according to Herodotus, it was commonly
believed, that Thales avoided the noocaid of procuring a passage over the‘
Halys for the army of Croesus, by encamping them on its banks, and cutting
a channel for the river in their rear, although the historian himself is of opi-
nion, that they passed over bridges which already existed. Curtius speaks ofa
bridge of stone over the Euphrates at Babylon, which appears to have been
built long before the time of Alexander, whose expedition he relates; and it
is scarcely probable that a stone bridge could have withstood the impulse of
so rapid a river, if it had been supported by columns only, without arches.
We are informed by Pliny that Ctesiphon lowered his large blocks of stone by
placing them on heaps of sand bags, and letting out the sand by degrees; it

* does not appear how he raised them, but the inclined plane seems to afford
the simplest and most obvious method. ‘


2


ON THE HISTORY OF MECHANICS. 239


Archytasof Tarentum, and Eudoxus of Cnidus were also Pythagoreans. They
were the first that attempted to make the mathematical sciences familiar by
popular illustrations; and Archytas is said by some to have invented the pul-
ley and the screw. They lived nearly 150 years after Pythagoras, and geo-
- metry had made in the mean time very rapid advances, for the properties of

the conic sections were well known to these philosophers. ‘‘ The first per-
sons,” says Plutarch, ‘‘ that cultivated the method of organic geometry}were of
the school of Eudoxus and Archytas. ‘These philosophers introduced elegance
and variety into science, by illustrations derived from sensible objects, and
made use of mechanical contrivances for expediting and familiarising the solu-
tions of problems, which, if more mathematically treated, are complicated
and difficult: each of them invented a method of determining in this manner
the magnitude of two mean proportionals between two given lines, by the as-
sistance of certain curves and sections. Plato by no means approved of their
mode of proceeding,and reprehended them severely,as giving up and pervert-
ing the most essential advantages of geometry, and causing the science to
revert from pure and incorporeal forms to the qualities of sensible bodies,
_ subjected to narrow and servile restraints. It was for this reason that practi-
cal mechanics were separated from geometry, and were long neglected by
philosophers, being cousidered as a department only of the art of war.”


Aristotle, who was almost the last of the Ionian school, flourished a little
less than half a century after Archytas; he was perhaps the author of no ori-
ginal discoveries relating to the principles of mechanics, but we find, in his
treatise on this science, the law of the composition of motion very distinctly
laid down; he makes, however, some mistakes respecting the properties of
levers. His general merit in elegant literature, as well as in natural history
and natural philosophy, is too. well known to require encomium.


The foundation of Alexandria commences a period memorable for science
in general, but more particularly for mathematics and astronomy. Dino-
crates was the architect whom Alexander employed in laying out and in
building this celebrated city. Among those who studied in this school, the
Sciences are indebted to none more than to Euclid, who lived about $00 _
years before our era. It is uncertain how much of his Elements may have
been derived from his own investigations ; but the masterly manner in which


240 . LECTURE Xx.


this well known work is arranged, and the precision and accuracy which reign
in every part of it, demand almost as great a share of praise as is due to ori-
ginal discovery.


_ Epicurus was a cotemporary of Euclid, and is considered as the last of the
Pythagorean or Italian philosophers. Thé penetration that he discovered in
assigning the true causes to many mechanical phenomena, his explanations of
which are copied by Lucretius, is sufficient to induce us to look forwards
with impatience to the publication of such of his works, as have lately been
discovered among the manuscripts of Herculaneum. Apollonius of Perga lived
about half a century later; the elegance and extent of his investigations of
the most abstruse properties of the conic sections left but little to be added
to them by more modern geometricians. The architect Philo appears to have
been more ancient than Apollonius: but he is not the Philo whose essay on
warlike engines is published in the collection of the Ancient mathematicians;
since this author was a pupil of Ctesibius.


For the demonstration of the fundamental properties of the lever and of _
the centre of gravity; for the discovery of the laws of hydrostatics, and of the
modes of determining the specific gravities of bodies; for the construction of
the first cranes, and of the first planetarium; and for those improvements of
the methods of mathematical investigation which have been the basis of every
modern refinement in analytical calculation; for all these additions to our
knowledge and our powers, we are indebted to Archimedes. On a character
so conspicuous, we can with pleasure dwell long enough to attend to some
particulars of his history, which are related by Plutarch, in his account of the
siege of Syracuse; omitting, however, such details as are evidently
fabulous. ‘‘ Archimedes,” says Plutarch, ‘‘ armed with his own inven-
tions only, made light of the splendour of the Roman preparations, and of
the glory of the name of Marcellus. And these were inventions that he even
considered as of subordinate value, as geometrical playthings, which had been
the amusements of ‘his leisure hours. It was king Hiero that first induced
him to transfer a portion of his science from intellectual to material objects,
and to condescend in some degree to the comprehension of the multitude, by
giving a sensible form to those truths,which in their abstract state are disco-
verable only to the reasoning faculty. Archimedes, who was a friend and a


ee


ON THE HISTORY OF MECHEBICE: 241


relation of Hiero, had asserted that any weight whatever might be moved by

any given power: and depending on the validity of his arguments, had given
scope to his imagination, and boasted that if he had another earth to which
he could step over, he would draw the whole of the present globe out of its
place. Hiero, surprised at the boldness of his assertion, requested him to
give some substantial proof of its truth, by moving a great weight with a
small power: upon this Archimedes procured a ship, which was with great
labour drawn up on the shore, and having completely manned and freighted
her, he seated himself at a distance, and by lightly touching the first move-
ment of a machine, he drew her along as smoothly and as safely as if she had
been sailing in the deepest water. Hiero, full of astonishment, and admiring
the powers of mechanical art, prevailed on Archimedes to construct such en-
gines both of defence and of offence, as might be of use to him in case of a
siege: for these, however, Hiero, who lived a life of peace and prosperity, was
not so unfortunate as to have occasion; but they now became highly valua-
ble to the Syracusans, and they were of the more'advantage, as theirinventor was
present, to direct their use. And in fact the whole people of Syracuse con-
stituted but a part of Archimedes’s corporeal machinery, and he was the soul
thatmoved and governed the whole. All other arms were deserted, and they
employed his engines alone, both for their own defence, and for the annoy-
ance of the enemy. In short, the Romans soon became so terrified, that if
they saw a stick ora rope upon the walls, they cried out that it was some
machine of Archimedes, and immediately fled; so that Marcellus at last deter-
mined to desist from attempting to take the place by assault, and resolved to
blockade it only.

“« Archimedes, ‘esnaver, had such depth of intellect, and such sublimity
of mind, that notwithstanding he had obtained, by these inventions, the
credit and glory of an intelligence rather divine than human, he thought it
unworthy of him to leave any written treatise on the subject, considering
practical mechanics, and every art that is concerned in satisfying the wants
of life, as ignoble and sordid; and resting all his hopes of fame on those
works, in which the magnificent and the elegant are exhibited, unconta-
minated by the imperfections of the material world: works that are comparable
to nothing else that the mind of man has produced; in which the subject only
contends with the mode of treating it, the magnitude and beauty of the one

VoL, I. ri


-—


F
;


Méwuliie.ytasioal a century later than /


242 LECTURE XxX. 3


being rivalled by the accuracy and vigour of the other. It is impossible that
propositions more difficult and important should be deduced from simpler and‘
purer elements. Some attribute this excellence to his natural genius, others to
his indefatigable application, which has given to every thing that he has
attempted the appearance of having been performed'with ease. For we might
ourselves search in vain for a demonstration of his propositions; but so smooth |
and direct is the way by which he leads us, that when we have once passed
it, we fancy that we could readily have found it without assistance. We may,
therefore, easily give credit to what is said of him, that being as it were fas-
cinated by this domestic syren, that bore him company, he often neglected his
food and his clothing; that when sometimes brought by compulsion to the
baths, he used to draw his figures in the ashes of the fire places, and to make


his calculations upon the cosmetics that were employed by the attendants; de-


riving, like a true votary of the muses, every pleasure from an intellectual
origin. Among all his beautiful discoveries, he is said'to have chosen that
of the proportion of the sphere and cylinder for his sepulchral honours; re-
questing of his friends that they would place on his tomb a cylinder contain-
ing a ‘sphere, and inscribe on it the ratio which he had first determined.


“ By artifice, and through the thoughtlessness and security of a au of 4
festivity, the Romans at length obtained possession of Syracuse, and in the {
pillage, although orders had been issued that the life of Archimedes should |
be spared, he was killed by a private soldier. His death is variously related, §
butjall accounts agree, that Marcellus was deeply concerned for his loss, that ay
he held his assassin in abhorrence, and conferred distinguished favours on his
surviving relations.” This event is supposed to have hap about 212°
years before the birth of Christ: and the cultivation o' .
which had been continued for four hundred years: _ epderenen enacts a
is RUA Re LDR AOR SSRN i easter doa sibat

ter i" fee ht ie vie. 3 age. Ss Sigdwnss

“There lived, however, in the mean time, some mathematicians and mechanics _
of considerable merit... A work on warlike machines, addressed to Marcellus
by Athenaeus, is still, extant, and. und. in the splendid collection —


Use WN erRAER, as


ON THE HISTORY oF MECHANICS. ° 243


vscsmeusbaslilieetis investigation. Hero was of the same’school, and his pur-
_suits were similar ;some of his treatises on hydraulics, pneumatics, and mechanics,
are. published i in the collection of Ancient mathematicians, and some others are
still extant in manuscript. We are informed by Pappus, that Hero and Philo
__ had referred the properties of the lever, the wheel and axis, the pulley, the
wedge, and the screw, to the same fundamental principle; so that the theory
of | the mechanical powers began at that time to be extremely well understood. —
The treatises of Hero on pneumatics and on automatons contain many very
ingenious inventions, but they are rather calculated for amusement than for
utility ; among them is a cupping instrument, which operates nearly in the
anner of an air pump. A work of Bito, on warlike machinery, addressed
S¢ 2 king Attalus, is saslodedst in the same collection.
“Mabravias was an te of great general knowledge: he lived snndies one of
the earliest of the Caesars, and the greatest part of our information respecting
_ the mechanics of antiquity has been derived from his works. Apollodorus was
employed by Trajan, in building a bridge over the Danube, in the year 102;
he has left a treatise on besieging a town, which is to be found among the
usiengraatinene Diophantus, Pappus, and Proclus, were mathematicians
nence; Diophantus confined himself in great measure to arithmetic
a re geometry; but the last book of Pappus’s collections is devoted
to. mechanics, and Proclus wrote a treatise on motion, which is still extant.
The rudiments of algebraical notation and calculation may be found in the works
mantus SHOR the Arabians appear to have first practised the method of
eisigenes! by literal characters; they made, however, no
, and mathematics i in general remained nearly aN


2"


in which learning bind science were involved in
middle ages, the arts subservient to the convenience of
t measure neglected. It is evident from many remains
is manufactures had attained, in Greece and at Rome,a
n; but the irruptions of the barbarians were as effectual
1ements of civilisation,as in checking the pursuit of li-
nts: our own country was not the earliest in recovering the
ost, but it has always received with open arms those.


19 - . 7 ever


244 LECTURE XxX.


who have excelled in them ; and the improvements which have been made,
within a few centuries, in the British manufactures, have obtained for them a
celebrity unrivalled by those of any other nation. Theancient Britons are sup-
posed to have made, in common with the other Celtic nations, coarse cloths and
felts of wool, and perhaps some articles of linen; their chariots of war, which
are mentioned by Caesar, could not have been executed without some skill in
the arts of the carpenterand the smith. ‘The Romans introduced a certain degree
of civilisation into England, but it appears to have been in great measure
forgotten soon after they left the country. In the seventh century, several
architects and workmen were brought from the continent by Wilfrid and
Biscop; they restored the practice of building with stone, which had been
generally superseded by wood, and laid the foundation for other i improve-
ments. In the time of king Alfred, the English goldsmiths began to excel,
and before the conquest, the woollen manufactures had acquired a consider-
able degree of perfection. The paper now in use was introduced about the
year 1100; it was probably imported from the continent, since the linen —
manufacture was little advanced in England till 150 years later; but em-
broidery was much practised, although in the 12th century silks were princi-
pally woven in Sicily. The manufactory of cloth was considerably improved,
in the 14th century, by the establishment of Kempe and other Flemish weavers
in England: and many of the arts were benefited, about the same time, by the
invention of the method of drawing wire, which was first introduced at Nu-
remberg. In the succeeding century, the increasing number of hands em-
ployed in various manufactures, suggested to some mind of superior penetra-
tion the great principle of the division of labour, by which each individual is
enabled to acquire so high a degree of perfection in a very limited branch of
each manufacture, that the whole work is performed much more perfectly, as
well as more expeditiously, than if it had been begun and completed by any
one person, even of greater abilities and experience. The invention of the
modern spinning wheel is attributed to'Jiirgen of Brunswick, and the year
1530 is assigned as its date: England -soon profited by the improvement ;
many manufacturers took refuge in this country from the Duke of Alva’s per-
secutions in Flanders, and before the end of the century a new medification
of the art of weaving was introduced by Lee of Cambridge, who invented
the stocking loom, imitating the texture of the knit stockings, which were
first manufactured in Spain about the year 1550. * Mills for drawing wie and.


Pi ee ee ee ee .* ~~ o Pee


ON THE HISTORY OF MECHANICS. 245


for slitting iron were also first erected in the sixteenth century; Birming-
ham and Sheffield were even at that time, according to Camden, celebrated
for their manufactures; and the machinery which has been since introduced
at different periods in those places, affords a facility and expedition which
astonish every unexperienced spectator. The names of Watt and of Boulton
have acquired a just celebrity from their refined improvements; but many
other mechanics of inferior rank have exhibited a degree of ingenuity which
would have done honour to the most distinguished talents. The manufactures
of Manchester are also of considerable antiquity; but they are very greatly
indebted to the inventions of Arkwright and his followers, which have also’
been introduced in many other parts of the united kingdom. The import-
ance of these improvements may be estimated from the quantity of cotton
which is annually imported into Great Britain; in 1787, it amounted to 23
‘million pounds, and gave employment to 420 thousand manufacturers; in
1791, it was increased to 32 millions: about one half is consumed in white
goods, one fourth in fustians, and the remainder in hosiery, mixtures, and
candle wicks. But the woollen manufactory affords a subsistence to above a
million persons, who receive annually for their work about nine millions
Diitin.: os tl as much wool as is worth about three.


sd iecldenctite, ti Anglonorman stile prevailed in this country from the
conquest to the beginning of the thirteenth century; the arch was frequently
employed, and its form was semicircular. The Gothic architecture, dis-
tinguished by its pointed arches, which is said to have originated from the
Saracens, was first introduced into England about the year 1170, and was
more and more generally adopted for about three centuries. Of the architects
of this school, two of the most celebrated were William of Sens, and Walter
of Coventry: the most elegant specimen of its performances is, perhaps, King’s
College Chapel at Cambridge, which was founded by Henry the Sixth, and
begun in the year 1441. The Cathedral of Lincoln appears to have been one
of the earliest Gothic edifices; Westminster Abbey was finished about 1285,
the Minster of York was begun a few years afterwards; and it is difficult to
determine which of these three buildings most deserves the attention of the
antiquary'and the architect, or whether’ the Cathedral at Canterbury may
not be equal to either of them,


et doi Pa tsls ue N we. Se


246 LECTURE Xx.


In the midst of an age of darkness, an insulated individual arrests our at-
tention by merits of no ordinary kind. Roger Bacon was born at Ilchester,
in the year 1214; it is well known that his experiments had led him to a
discovery of the properties of gunpowder, although he humanely concealed
the nature of its composition from the public, and described it only in an
enigma: the extent of his optical knowledge has been variously estimated,
but it was unquestionably much greater than that of the ancient philosophers.
He appears, however, to have had some companions in his mechanical pur-
suits; he declares that he had seem chariots which could move with incredible
rapidity, without the help of animals; he describes a diving bell; and he says
that he had been informed, on good authority, that machines had been made,
by the assistance of which men might fly through the air. Cimabue, who
first began to revive the long neglected art of painting, was cotemporary with
Bacon. The use of oil in painting is commonly supposed to have been in-
troduced by Van Eyck, but there are traces, in the records of this country, of
its employment as early as the year 1239. : .


4


. The clepsydrae, or water timekeepers of the ancients appear to have been

gradually transformed, in the middle ages, into the clocks of the Saracens
and of the Arabians; and these were introduced into Europe in the thirteenth
century. About the year 1290, turret clocks were erected at Westminster and
at Canterbury. The first clock, of which we know the construction, is that
which was made by Wallingford in 1326, and which was regulated by a fly;
and the second that of Defondeur, or Fusorius, with a simple balance, made
about 1400. But it appears that some portable watches had been constructed.
in the beginning of the fourteenth century; and about the year 1460, several
clock makers are said to have come to England from Flanders.


The art of engraving on metal,and of printing with the rolling press, is sup-
posed to have been invented in the year 1423. Some attribute the art of
printing with types, to Laurentius Coster of Haerlem, who, as they say, in
1430, employed for the purpose separate blocks of wood, tied together with
thread. Gensfleich, one of his workmen, went to Mentz, and was there as-
sisted by Gutenberg, who invented types of metal.. But the best authors ap-
pear to disbelieve this story; and Gutenberg, in partnership with Fust and


te 2 * a eo ae ae 1 ee 2


Schaeffer, is the first that is universally allowed to have practised the art. Tt
was introduced into this country by William Caxton.


Leonardo da Vinci, the most dvedusplisbed man of his age, was born about
the year 1443, and excelled not only in painting and poetry, but also in ar-
chitecture, mathematics, and mechanics. The state of practical mechanics
in this and the subsequent centuries may be estimated from Ramelli’s collec-
tion of machines, which contains several curious and useful inventions; some
of them long since forgotten, and even lately proposed again as new. «


The — OF Bacon, Lord Srenitins although not immediately tending to


the advancement of mathematics or of mechanics, are ‘universally allowed to.
have conduced very materially to the improvement of every branch of science,
by the introduction of a correct and conclusive method of philosophical ar-
gument and inquiry. Guido Ubaldi published, in 1577, a treatise on me-
chanics, not wholly exempt from inaccuracies, and in the following year a
valuable commentaty on the works of Archimedes: some of the properties
of projectiles were about the same time rather imagined than demonstrated
by Tartalea: Benedetti soon after began to reason correctly respecting the
principles of mechanics; but it was reserved for Galileo to lay the founda-
tions of the discoveries, which have succeeded each other with increasing ra-
pidity for more than two centuries. He investigated, in the year 1589, the
laws of accelerating forces, and showed the nature of the curve which is
described by a projectile: he inferred from observation the isochronism of
the vibrations of a pendulum, and the principle was soon after applied by
Sanctorius to the regulation of timekeepers. Stevinus, a Dutchman, was
the first that clearly stated the important law by which the equilibrium of any
three forces is determined : and the properties of the centre of gravity were
Successively investigated by Lueas Valerius, Lafaille, and Guldinus, who
made some additions to the elegant propositions of Archimedes which relate
to ie y


Th


The application of the more intricate parts of the mathematics, to practical
Purposes of all kinds, has become incomparably easier and more convenient
since the invention of logarithms. This important improvement was made by
Baron Napier; his tables were published in 1614: ‘and they were reduced to:


ON THE HISTORY OF MECHANICS. 247.


248 LECTURE Xx.


2 still more useful form by the labours of Briggs and of Gunter. Descartes, :
about the same time, was making considerable additions to the science of

algebra, and the mathematics were soon after enriched by Cavalleri’s inven-

tion of the method of indivisibles. This method was founded on the prin-

ciples introduced by Archimedes, it was further improved by Wallis, and it

led to the still more valuable invention of the fluxional analysis.


The laws of collision were investigated nearly at the same time in England
by Wren and Wallis, and in France by Huygens. After the discoveries of
Archimedes and of Galileo, those of Huygens hold the third place, in the.
order of time, among the greatest benefits that have been conferred on sci- -
ence. His theory of cycloidal pendulums, and his doctrine of central forces
were the immediate foundations of Newton's improvements.


Hooke was as great in mechanical practice, and in ingenious contrivance,
as Huygens was in more philosophical theory; he was the first that applied
the balance spring to watches, and he improved the mode of employing pen-
dulums in clocks; the quadrant, the telescope, and the microscope, were ma-
terially indebted to him; he had the earliest suspicions of the true nature of
the cause that retains the planets in their orbits; and the multitude of his
inventions is far too great to be enumerated in a sisi history of the progress

> of science. ha ;


The composition of motion, and several other mechanical and optical sub-
jects, are elegantly treated in the lectures published by the learned Dr, Bar-
row. He was professor of mathematics at Cambridge, and voluntarily res
signed his chair to make way for his successor, the pride of his country, and
the ornament of mankind. Sir Isaac Newton was born at Woolsthorpe in

Lincolnshire, on Christmas day in 1642, the year of Galileo's death: — ete

i age of 12 he was sent to school at Grantham, and at 18 to Cambridge. H
made some important improvements in algebraical analysis, and laid he
foundation of his admirable method of pean agar Sak old;


sins embe in 1672. rete iin mes


ON THE HISTORY OF MECHANICS. 249


ties! of the'universe, are developedin his Mathematical Principles of Natural ~


Philosophy, first published in 1687. The following year he was chosen.


representative of the university of Cambridge, in parliament, and in 1696, he’


was placed, upon the recommendation of the Earl of Halifax, in a lucrative situa-
tion in the Mint. From 1703 until his death in 1727, he continued president
of the Royal Society, andenjoyed, to the age of 80, an uninterrupted state of
good health. He was knighted by Queen Anne, in 1705, and died possessed
of a considerable fortune. “ He had the singular happiness,” says Mr. Fon-
tenelle, ‘‘of obtaining, during his life,all the credit and consideration to which
his sublime researches and his fortunate discoveries entitled him. All men of
science, ina country which produces so many, placed Newton, by a kind of
acclamation, at their head; they acknowledged him for their chief and their
master; no opponent, nor even a cool admirer, dared to appear. His philosophy
was adopted throughout England, and it is supported in the Royal Society, and:
inall the excellent productions of the members of that Society, with as much:
confidence, as if it had been consecrated by the respect of a long course: of}
ages.” A remarkable instance of the extent and refinement of Newton’s ma
thematical acquirements may be found in a paper of a celebrated moderni
mathematician, on the subject of atmospherical refraction; Mr. Kramp observes,
with a mixture of surprise and doubt, that Newton appears to have been ac-


quainted with those methods of algebraical calculation which he had himself, ,


pursued; at the same time he says that this is almost incredible, since ‘‘ he
must have discovered certain improvements in. the higher analysis. which were
unknown even to Euler, and to every other mathematician before Laplace.”


Although Newton was unquestionably the first inventor of the method of
flaxions, yet Leibnitz, whether he had receivedany hints.of Newton’s ideas,.
as there is some reason. to suspect, or whether his investigations were wholly,
independent of those of Newton, was the first that published any work on the
subject ; and he extended its’ application to ‘many important problems;
earlier; perhaps, than any English mathematician. Jamesiand John Bernoulli
also pursued the same studies with. consideyable success, and the general laws
of mechanics were very elegantly: investigated, and-successfully. applied by
‘these three contemporary philosophers on. the continent, while Machin, Cotes,
Halley, and Demoivre, were applying themselves to similar’ pursuits in this
country. Perrault, Lahire, Amontons, and Parent, members of the Parisian

VoL. 1. Kk


250. LECTURE Xx.


academy of sciences, were the authors of thany useful investigations; rélating
to practical. mechanics ; but. few of thent Were made public till after the year
1700; some of their inventions made theit appearance much later, in. the va-
luable collection of machines approved by the academy, and some of them
have been inserted in the useful work published by Leupold, at Leipzig, under,
the title of a Theatrum Machinarum. . Throughout the last century, the,
transactions of various societies, established for the promotion’ of science; be-,
came every year more numerous, and the publication of the literary journals of
Leipzig and of Paris formed a mode of communication, which was extremely
serviceable in facilitating the dissemination of all ew discoveries,


The philosophy of Newton assumed also a more populdr and attractive form
in the writings of Clarke, Pemberton, Maclaurin, and Musschenbroek, and
the lectures of $'Gravesande and Desaguliers; at the same time that its
more refined investigations were pursued with success in this country by Mac-
Tiurin: ‘and Simipson, ‘and on the continent by Hermann, Daniel Bernoulli,
Leonard) Euler, and: Clairaut. Maclaurin, Bernoulli, arid Euler, had the
honour of sharing with each other the. prize, proposed by the academy of
sciences at Paris, for the best essay on the intricate subject of the tides; but a
premature death prevented Maclaurin from long pursuing the career which he
began so successfully. Bernoulli and Euler continued for many yeats to vie
with each other, for the elegance and extent of their researches: Euler appears -
to havé been the more pectend mathematician, and Bernoulli the more ac-
curate philosopher,


The latter half of the eighteenth century was in many respects extremely
auspicious to thé progress of the*sciences; the names of Dalembert, Lan-
den, Waring, Frisi, Robison, Lagrange, and Laplace, deserve to bé enume-
rated in the first class of mathematicians and theoretical mechanics; ‘those of
Smeaton, Wedgwood, and Watt are noless distinguished for their success in
improving the practice of the useful arts and manufactures. _ The union of alt
these objects, into one system of knowledge, was effected, on a magnificent
scale, in the Encyclopédie, a work which does asmuch honour to the labour and
geiius of some of its authors, as it reflects disgrace on the principles and poli-
ties of others. The Society for the encouragement of arts, manufactures, and
commerce, was established in London about the same time that the Ency-


ON THE HISTORY OF MECHANICS. f 251


‘clopédie began to appear at Paris, and its premiums and publications have,


without doubt, excited a degree of attention to the subjects of practical me-
chanics, and agricultural, as well as commercial improvements, which must
have been beneficial both to individuals and to the public. The academy
of Paris began to print, in 1762, a collection of the descriptions of arts and
trades of all kinds, on a still more extended scale than had been attempted
in the Encyclopédie; the work was carried to a very. considerable length,
but it by no means comprehends all the articles which were intended to
compose it. )


The oa watches has been so much improved, by the artists both


of this country and of France, that they have been rendered capable of afford-


ing very essential service to navigation, especially since the astronomical
methods of! determining a ship’s place have been brought to such a: degree
of perfection, as greatly to facilitate the frequent correction of the accidental
errors ofthe timekeeper.» The first artist that constructed watches, suffici-
ently accurate for the determination of the longitude, was William Harrison,
who was indebted to himself alone for his education and his inventions; in
1765 he received for his labours, from the Board of eee ate the —


reward of ten thousand: pee :


J hondion _ ‘ ti]

‘There has sativoaly been @ period, in any age of the world, in which the
sciences, and literature in general, have been so rapidly promoted, and so uni-
versally disseminated, as within’the last forty years. This advancement has
partly been the cause, and partly the effect, of the great multiplication of scien-
tific journals, cyclopaedias, and encyclopaedias, which have been annually in-
creasing since the beginning of the Journal de Physique in 1773; supported by
the interest which they have derived, in great measure, from the new and amus-
ing discoveries and improvements, which have been made in chemistry and na-
tural history: some of the most copious of these works have had a sale, un-
precedented even for books of more moderate extent.


© The charter of the Royal Institution is dated in 1799; its foundation will
hot perhaps make an era in the history of the refinements of science; but if
it be hereafter found to have given notoriety to what is useful, and popularity
to what is elegant, the purposes of those who established it will not have been
frustrated.


9352 | LECTURE xx.


After all that has been effected by the united labours and talents of the


philosophers who have been mentioned, and of many more, who, though less
fortunate, have yet been highly meritorious, there is still ample opportunity
for the employment of genius and industry in following their steps. To sup-'
pose that little or nothing remains to be done, betrays a want either of know-
ledge, or of courage. The experimental researches of some of the greatest philo-
sophers have been very imperfectly conducted, and the most interesting results
may be expected from repeating and diversifying them., Whatever advances
our neighbours may have made beyond us, in intricate calculations and com-)
binations, we are still able to vie with them, and shall probably long
remain so, in the accuracy of our instruments, and in the art of using them
with precaution and with success.


“When, however, we contemplate the astonishing magnitude, to: which,a
collection of books in any department of science may even at present be ex-
tended, and the miscellaneous nature of the works in which many of the'most va-
Inable disquisitions have been communicated to.the public, together with the
natural disposition to indolence, which a high degree of civilisation too fre-
quently encourages, there is the greatest reason to apprehend, that from the
continual multiplication of new essays, which are merely repetitions of others
that have been forgotten, the sciences will shortly be overwhelmed by their
own unwieldy bulk, that the pile will begin to totter under its own weight,
and that all the additional matter that we heap on it, will only. tend to-add-to
the extent of the basis, without increasing the elevation and dignity of the fabric.
Having been impressed, from continued experience, with the truth of this observa-
tion, Ihave employed no small portion of time and labour,in order to obtain an
effectual remedy for the evil; and I trust that, in future, every one who is de-
sirous of enlarging the sphere of our knowledge, with respect to any branch
of science, connected with the subject of these Lectures, will find it easy, by
consulting the authors who will be quoted in my catalogue of references, to
collect that previous knowledge of all that has been already done with the
same view, which, in justice to himself, he ought to acquire before he enters
on the pursuit, or at any rate, in justice to the public, before he calls on the
world at large to participate in his improvements and discoveries.


= — -


.


‘my


253


ON THE HISTORY OF MECHANICS,


w<
=a28


PHANTUS


=
=
swose


SEN EC A.


VITRUVIUS


CHRONOLOGY OF MATHEMATICIANS AND MECHANICS.


a oh eas Sa are aes ol poleTe
antiie nied t ole reset mete oe 7 a be


j es
Ret rea


54 " a az


toa Sage


et
se ey
ors
¥ a ] 7 he Casa
Chita wa: TAB iAVAt lad
/ Meh D190} live Ay ear say ton,
TIO G es A) 3 DAA AOS ; »
x - ae Pes :


j et es ‘e -eoamiani ban tr seth fey cord acl permis |
cae: re ne -mopteniges trad ovett ent nor rare


i : oa
2 .
ss COURSE OF LECTURES
RRR Beek OB Aiea! .


s Ys st 4; % / : j =
ON


RAL PHILOSOPHY


-


i} s Fi! ;
| HYDRODYNAMICs.
»


a ZS


ergs


OR LH thi wFAy ¥


Con a bey


ae
NHT <KA


oe cag  . aplika Y econdy it

aa ¢ = ' ¢ is
l ~ v q : ‘ yp . tot Ay fe
Y = MO hy 15 RS ae


, A


_ COURSE OF LECTURES


ok “NATURAL PHILOSOPHY
be re i ea ER AND THE
_ MECHANICAL ARTS.


¥ Ay a eee A Saeki tia,


Sadie
¥ One


He anh A ePaielos BRCTURE? XX.
Ved they, dome eared) te f wiikosg ' ils% 3
oy Send ton ei otect) a & Fecy cmt ve
cbc aeanaleay ai hi HYD OSTATICS.


Ri raiioen pig od lh H hea


ype properties and affections of fluids, and the aad and puta


‘motions, are tobe the subjects of the second division of ‘this
~ Although these properties are in reality derived from’ the
ellen the doctrines of pure mechanics, theyare yet in’
le of being referred, in a demonstrative and accurate
tion of simple and general causes. We are therefore fre-
e rf of calling i in the assistance of experimental deter-
: -as well as others, the science of’ hydrodyna~
y hold siniadte rank, between mathematical mechanics
‘la treating of the mechanics of solid bodies, we are
ms, or self evident truths, almost inseparable from the
an mind; to deduce from them the general laws of
with little chance of error, to every combi-
ees in-which we have occasion to examine their conse-
aires only a certain degree of attention and of mathgma-


ul


258 ; LECTURE XX1.


tical knowledge, to be perfectly convinced of the justice of all our conclusions,
without any reference to experimental proof. But here our abstract reason-
ings begin to fail; and whether from the imperfection of our modes of consi-
dering the mechanical actions of the particles of fluids on each other, or from
the deficiencies of our analytical calculations, or, as there is more reason to
suppdse, from a combination of both these causes, all attempts to reduce the
affections of fluids to a perfect mechanical theory have been hitherto unsuc-
cessful. At the same tinie it will appear, that by a proper mixture of calcu-
lation with experiment, we may obtain sufficient foundations for all such de-
terminations as are likely to be of any practical utility. -


The whole of the subjects, which will be classed under the denomination
Hydrodynamics, may be divided into three general heads; Hydraulics,
Acustics, and Optics; terms. which are sufficiently understood, as relating
to the common properties of fluids, to sound, and to light; but which do
not allow of a very strict definition, without a still further division. The
first subdivision which we shall consider, will relate to the laws of the
equilibrium of fluids, or of the opposition of forces acting on them, without
producing actual motion, comprehending hydrostatics, or the doctrine of
the equilibrium of liquids, either within themselves, or with moveable bodies ;
and pneumatostatics, or the equilibrium of elastic fluids. The actual motions of
fluids will be considered in the second subdivision: and the third. will
relate to the instruments and machines in which the principles of hydrostatics,
hydraulics, and pneumatics, are applied to the purposes of the arts or of
domestic convenience. The science of hydraulics must -be allowed to be of as
great importance to civil life, and especially to a maritime nation, as any de-
partment of practical mechanics, Let us only reflect for a moment to what
the metropolis of England would be reduced, if deprived of pipes for the con-
veyance of water, of pumps, and of fire engines; and how much the commerce
of the whole kingdom has been facilitated by the formation of navigable canals,
and we shall soon be convinced of the obligations that we owe to the art of
modifying the motion of water, and to the principles of hydraulics, on which

_ that art depends.


The facts concerned inacustics and harmonics, or the doctrine of sound, and
the science of music, are not exclusively dependent on the characteristic pro-


- a Yo~ety


ON HYDROSTATICS. 259


perties of fluids. In these departments, although we can by no means ex-

plain with precision the manner in which every appearance is produced, we

shall still find a variety of very beautiful phenomena, which have indeed been

too’ generally neglected, and supposed to be of the most abstruse and unin-

F y telligible nature; but which, when carefully examined, will appear to be :
much more within the reach of calculation, than the simplest doctrines of

hydraulics. We may also apply some of these phenomena to a very complete

explanation of an extensive class of facts in optics, which, in whatever

other way they are considered, are inextricably obscure. Whether this ex- °

planation may or may not be admitted as satisfactory, it deserves at least a

fair examination; it would, therefore, be impossible to assign to the science

i of optics an earlier place in the order of the system, even if we agree with

those, who imagine that all the phenomena of light depend on causes wholly

deducible from the mechanics of solid bodies.


We must commence thesubject of hydrostatics, or the doctrine of the equili-
brium of liquids, with a definition of the essential characteristics of a fluid
substance. The most eligible definition appears to be, that a fluid is a
collection of material particles, which may be considered as infinitely small,
and as moving freely on each other in every direction, without friction.
Some have defined a fluid as a substance which communicates pressure equally
in all directions; but this appears to be a description of a property derivable
from the former assumption, which is certainly more simple; and although it
may be somewhat difficult to deduce it mathematically, in a manner strictly
demonstrative, yet we may obtain from mathematical considerations a suffi-
cient conviction of its truth, without assuming it as a fundamental or
axiomatic character. A fluid which has no immediate tendency to expand
when at liberty, is commonly considered as a liquid: thus water, oil, and
mercury, are liquids; air and steam are fluids, but not liquids.


We shall for the present consider a liquid as without either compressibility
‘or expansibility: and we must neglect some other physical properties essen+
tial to liquids, such as cohesion and capillary attraction; although in reality
the particles of liquids are found, by very nice experiments, to be subject to the
same laws of elasticity which we have already examined with regard tosolids,


260 LECTURE XXI,


and are possessed also of cohesive powers, which essentially distinguish them
from elastic fluids, and which resist any force tending directly to separate the
particles from each other, while they admit any lateral motion with perfect
Paci facility, In treating of hydrostatics, therefore, we suppose the fluids con-
j a “Src cerned to be of uniform density throughout; and as far as elastic fluids agree
5 ‘with this deseription, they are subject-to the same laws with liquids; on the
other hand, all fluids, as far as they are compressible, possess properties simi-
Jar to those which will hereafter be examined, when we mnneasiaaea the. meet:
‘ of pneumatic online


The first law of ator whieh arrests our attention, is this, that the sur--
| = face of every homogeneous gravitating fluid, when at rest,is horizontal. If any
part of the surface were inclined to: the horizon, the superficial particles would
- necessarily tend towards its lowest part, in the same manner as if they moved
2 without friction on the inclined surface of a solid. And if any two portions of i]

the surface of the fluid are separated, as in two branches of a tube or pipe, how-
ever they may be situated, the fluid cannot remain at rest, unless the surfaces be
in the same level plane:. for if we imagine such a tube, containing water, to be
made of ice, and to be immersed im a large reservoir of water, and. then
* thawed, the water will make a part of the general contents of the reservoir, and
consequently will remain at rest, if its surfaces are level with that of the re-
servoir: and it is obvious that the tube has acquired no new power of sup-
porting it from being thawed: consequently, the water would have remained
in equilibrium at the same height in the original state of the solid tube.’ The
experimental proof of this proposition is easy and obvious, and the property
affords one of the most usual modes of determininga horizontal surface. But
when we compare the heights of fluids occupying tubes of different magni-
tudes, it is necessary, if the tubes are small, to apply a slight correction on
account of the actions of the tubes on the fluids which they contain,
which are more apparent, as their diameters are smaller. The same cause
produces also a curvature in each separate surface, which is always visible
at the point of contact with the tube or vessel. (Plate XIX. Fig 239.)


If several separate fluids of different kinds be contained in the same vessel,
they will never remain at rest unless all the surfaces intervening between ~


4,


ON HYDROSTATICS, 261


bart: which i is ere to the | pressure of the atmosphere.


ihe poren gravitation, strictly peelings does not act sicenitit in paral:

lel lines, so ‘that the surface of lakes, instead of being perfectly plane,

becomes, like that of the earth, a little convex. It is obvious that the surface

of a fluid must always be perpendicular to the direction of the joint results

of all the. forces which act on it; and since the earth turns round on its axis,

the centrifugal force resulting from its motion is combined with that. of
gravity, in determining the position of the general surface of the ocean.


iA sithidas omabixintion of a centrifugal force with gravitation may rae ob-
_ served when a bucket is suspended by a rope, and caused to turn round on
‘its axis by twisting the rope: the direction of the joint forces is such that
the'surface, in order to be perpendicular to it, must assume a parabolic form.
When also any number of different fluids are made to revolve in the same
manner, or when they are inclosed in a glass globe and turned by means of
the whirling table, the surfaces which separate them acquire always the forms
ia Of parabolic conoids, when the axis remains in a vertical position: but if the
_ axis be in any other position, the situation of the surface will be of more diffi~
Driieaisceaiveg per XX. Fig: 240.)


auht
it


hae and immersed in a lighter fluid, the equili-
‘ing, since, if it were once disturbed, it would never be


ning it, or of any other surface, real or imaginary,

ual to the weight of a column of the fluid, of which
particle, and the height to its depth below the sur-
s, if we have a vessel of water one foot deep, each.


Tee


them be horizontal; and this is in fact the state of the surface of common li- |


will sustain the. pressure of a cubic foot of water,


anion Be


262 LECTURE XXI.


or nearly 1000 ounces: if we havea vessel of mercury an inch in depth, cach
square foot will sustain a pressure of one twelfth part of a cubic foot of mer-
cury, or 1130 ounces; the atmosphere presses on each square foot of the earth's
surface with a force of about 34000 ounces, which is equivalent to the pressure
of a column of mercury 30 inches high. The pressure of the water ona small
portion of the lowest part of the side of the vessel containing it, is also equal
to the weight supported by an equal portion of the bottom; but we cannot esti-
mate the force sustained by any large portion of the side, without considering
the different depths below the surface, at which its difierent parts are si-
tuated.


It is obvious that if we conceive a fluid to be divided by an imaginary
surface of any kind, the particles contiguous to it are urged on either side by
equal forces, the fluid below resisting them, and pressing them upwards,
with as much force as the fluid above presses them downwards, their own
weight being comparatively inconsiderable, for without this equality of
pressures, they could not possibly remain at rest. And if we employ a
vessel of such a form as to occupy the place of any superior portion of the
fluid, the pressure against that part of the vessel which is thus substituted
will be the same that before supported the weight of the fluid removed; and
in order that all may remain in equilibrium, the vessel must itself exert an
equal pressure on the fluid below it; so that the pressure on the bottom will
be the same as if the vessel had remained in its original state, and were filled
to the same height with the fluid. (Plate XIX. Fig. 242.)


In order to understand this the more readily, we may suppose the portion
of the fluid, instead of being removed, to have been congealed into a solid
mass of equal ‘density; it is obvious that this congelation of the fluid would
not have altered the quantity of its pressure; it would, therefore, have re-
mained in equilibrium with the water below; the mass might also be united
with the sides of the vessel, so as to form a part of it, without increasing or
diminishing any of the pressures concerned: and we should thus obtain a
vessel similar to that which was the subject of our investigation, the pres-
sure on the bottom being always the same, as if the mass, supposed to be
congealed, had remained fluid. Thus, the peers on the base of a conical


ON HYDROSTATICS. 263


ar pyramidical vessel, full of water, is three times as great as the weight of
the water, since its content is one third of that of a-column of the same
height, and standing on the same base. (Plate XIX, Fig. 243.)


- In this manner the smallest given quantity of any fluid contained in a pipe
may be made to produce a pressure equivalent to any given weight, however


‘large, which rests on the cover of a close vessel communicating with the


pipe, and this may bedone either by diminishing the diameter of the pipe,
and increasing its height, while the weight is supported by ’a surface of


- a certain extent, or by increasing the magnitude of this surface, without


adding to the height of the pipe; for in either case the ultimate force of the
fluid, in supporting the weight, will be equal to the weight of a column of


_ the same height, standing on the whole surface which is subjected to its action.


And if the effect of the column be increased by any additional pressure, in-
dependent of its weight, that pressure may be represented by supposing the
height of the column to be augmented ; and the effect of the additional pres-
sure will also be increased in proportion to the magnitude of the surface
which supports the weight. It is on this principle that the pressure of water
has been applied, by Mr. Bramah, to the construction of a very convenient
press. (Plate XIX. Fig. 244.) :


Although this property of fluids is the cause of some results which would
scarcely be expected by a person not accustomed to reflect on the subject,
and has, therefore, not improperly, been called the hydrostatic paradox, yet
it depends wholly on the general and acknowledged principles of mechanical
forces; nor ean we agree with those authors, who have asserted, that a very
small quantity of a fluid may, ‘‘ without acting at any mechanical advantage”
whatever, be made to balance a weight of any assignable magnitude: for
the immediate operation of the force very much resembles, in the most com-
mon cases, the effect of a wedge, orof a moveable inclined plane; thus, a.
wedge remains in equilibrium, when the forces acting on each side are in pro-
portion to its length, like the hydrostatic pressure on a vessel of a similar form,
The conditions of the equilibrium of fluids may also be determined, in all cases,
from the general law of the descent of the centre of gravity to the lowest point.
Thus, it is easy to show that even when two branches of a tube are of


264 LECTURE Xxt.


unequal diameter, a fluid must stand at the same height in both of them, in
order to remain in equilibrium: for if any portion be supposed to stand, in
either leg, above the surface of the fluid in the other leg, it is obvious that
its centre of gravity may be lowered, by removing so much of it as will raise
the fluid in the opposite leg-to its own level, the situation of the fluid’below
remaining unaltered: consequently the centre of gravity of the whole fluid can:
riever acquire its lowest situation, unless both the surfaces are in the same level.


The air, and all other elastic fluids, are equally subject with liquids to this
general law. Thus, a much greater force is required, in order to produce a
blast of a given intensity, with a large pair of bellows, than with a smaller
pair; and for the same reason, it is much easier to a glassblower, when he
uses a blowpipe, to employ the muscles of his mouth and lips, than those:of_
his chest, although these are much more powerful. | If we estimate the sec-
tion of the chest at a foot square, it will require a force of seventy pounds to:
raise a column of mercury an inch high, by means of the muscles of respira-
tion,. but the section of the mouth is scarcely more than eight or nine square
inches, and a pressure of the same intensity may here be produced by a force
of about four pounds. The glassblower obtains, besides, the advantage of
being able to continue to breathe during the operation, the communication
of the chest with the nostrils remaining open, while the root of the tongue is
pressed against the palate.


* It is obvious that the pressure on each square inch of the side of a vessel,

er on each square foot of the bank of a river, continually increases. in de-

scending towards the bottom. If we wish to know the sum of the pressures
on all the parts of the side or bank, we must take some mean depth by which
we can estimate it; and this must be the depth of the point which would be
the centre of gravity of the surface, if it were possessed of weight. ' Thus, if
we had a hollow cube filled with water, the centre of gravity of each side
being in its middle point, the pressure on each of the upright sides would be
half as great as the pressure on the bottom, that is, it would be equal to half
the weight of the water contained in the ag


If, however, we wished to support the aide of din ialie externally sig a
force applied at a single point, that point must be at the distance of one


ON A RAGTATIOS ; 265


may be represented by a line equal in length to its depth below the surface,
and a series of such, lines may be supposed to constitute a triangle, of which
tre of gravity will indicate, the place of the centre of pressure of the
. a and. the height of the centre of gravity, will always be one third of
_ that of the triangle .  Itis easily, inferred, from, this representation, that the
pressure on the side of a yessel, or ona bank, of a given length, is pro-
ortional to the square of the depth, below the water, to which it extends,

+ (Plate XIX, Fig. 245.)
ee co Sea siyisw's
; of the pi bise presuste; ona a concave or convex sais may
labsteadedeside by the position of its centre of gravity ; but such a de-
fg oso practical utility, since the portions of the forces, which
act im different directions, must” ‘always destroy each other. Thus, the per-
the whole internal surface of a sphere filled with a
s great as the weight of the fluid; but the force tending
sree siti of any vertical circle, is only: three


are) of different specic, gravities, that is, if equal bulks of
eiglits, their opposite pressures will counterbalance each
's above the common surface are inversely as their spe-
Pedic; that the greater density of the one will pre-
or its deficiency in height. ‘Thus, a column of mercury,
sight of 30 inches, in a tube, will support the pressure of a
: jishanother branch of the tube, exactly 34 feet high: since
0 cubic inches of mneroney. i is equal to that of 408 cubic
petite: XIX. Fig. 246.) _
a iesideres the properties of fluids in contact with soli
veable,and of invariable form; but it often happens t that an
es which are moveable; and they are sometimes ‘contained i in
th form is susceptible of variation ; in these cases, other con-
ry for the determination of the equilibrium. of fluids and
tly in tai Sint plore: the Pent of floating bodies


third d of the height me from thejbottom.. For. the pressure at each ale


—.


266 LECTURE xxi.
When a solid body floats in a fluid, it displaces a quantity of the fluid, equat


to itself in weight ; and every Solid, which is incapable of doing this, must sink.
For in order that the solid may remain at rest, the pressure of the fluid below


_ it, reduced toa vertical direction, must be precisely equal to its weight; bat


before the body was immersed, the same pressure was exerted on the portion
of the fluid which is now displaced, and’ was exactly counterbalanced by its
weight; consequently that weight was equal to the weight of the floating
body.


Since the force, which supports the weight of a floating body, is the pres-


_ sure of the fluid immediately below it, if this pressure be removed or dimi-


nished, the body may remain ‘at rest below the surface of the fluid, even when

it is specifically lighter. Thus’ a ‘piece of' very smooth wood will remain, for
some time, in contact with the flat bottom of a vessel of water, until the water
insinuates itself beneath, it; and it will continue at the bottom of a vessel of
mercury, without any tendency to risé, since the merc ury has no disposition
to penetrate, like water, into‘any minute interstices which may be capable of
admitting it. And, for a similar reason, if the pressure of the incumbent
fluid be removed from the upper surface of a solid substance, wholly immers-
ed in it, the ‘solid may remain suspended, although heavier than an equal
bulk of the fluid. Thus,if a tube or vessel of any kind, open above and below,
have a bottom of metal, ground so as to come into perfect-contact with it,

without being fixed, the bottom will appear to adhere to the vessel, when it is
immersed to a sufficient depth i in water, the vessel remaining omutye


In order that a floating body ‘ may remain in equilibrium, it is dens shies!
‘sary that its centre of gravity be in the same vertical line with the centre of
gravity of the fluid displaced; otherwise the weight of the solid will not be
completely counteracted by the pressure of the fluid, The nature of the equi-

4ibrium, with respect to stability, is determined by the position of the meta-
centre, or centre of pressure, which may be considered as a fixed point of
suspension, or support, for the solid body. Itis obvious that when the lower
surface of the body is spherical or cylindrical, the metacentre ‘must coincide
with. the centre of the figure, since the height ‘of ‘this point, as well as the
form of the portion of the fluid displaced, must remain invariable in all cireum-
stances, and the nature of the equilibrium will depend on the distance of the


= | > on eel


stability whates ever its. density, Pay, 8 be. (Plate XIX. Fig. 247.)


“wf


ON HYDROSTATICS.
Ost A 267


ve ‘low the centre of the sphere or cylinder. And the

als eee re ms an be’ aan ‘ermined from the gy Ue éxtent of
e disp! ced portion o Fy rie fluid, compared with its’ ‘bulk, ‘and
wi ithe situation of i . tre of g gravity. “For e mple, if a rectangular beam
: gon its. herr ‘the height o of the me acentre above the centre of
gravity will be to the breadth of the beat, as the breadth to twelve times


: the depth of the: part immersed. Hence, i if the beam be square, it will float


is en € ther th the art immersed or the part above ‘the surface is less
EY UIE SI sue f .
than rig he who le; ut when it is ess unequally di divided by t the surface 4
ll over st If, ‘however, the breadth be so ‘increased as to be
n ithe depth, it will ] possess a certain degree of ,


Ww


‘When the equilibrium “Of a floating body is stable, it may oscillate back-
ards, eg ip 1 Abe rig Router of the quiescent position : and the


he : id in power’ as the stability 1 is greater in

cone i “i the balk kof, ie bod Such oscillations may also be com-
bined with others which take lace ie a transverse direction: a ship, for ex-
ample, thay, roll on, an axis. i in the : direction ‘of her length, and may heel, at the
same, time, upon a ‘second axis i in the direction of the ‘beams. Besides these
rotatory, ‘vibrations, ‘a, floating b body. which i is suffered to fall i into a ‘fluid, will
gommonly, rise. and sink several. Aimes by its own weight; and in all these
cases, the, vibrations, of. any one kind, ‘when they are small, are performed
nearly in equal times : but various and intricate combinations 1 may sometimes
arise, from the difference of the times, in which the vibrations of different kinds


are reine?


When, a, ‘solid, body is pacts immersed in a fluid, and is retained in its
situation by an external force, it loses as much of its weight as is equivalent
to_an equal bulk of the fluid, For, conceiving the fluid, which is displaced
by. the body, to. haye been converted into a solid by congelation, it is obvious
that. it would retain its ‘situation, and the difference of the ] pressures of the fluid


on its various parts would be exactly sufficient to support its weight. But


these pressures, will, be, , the, same if a body of any other kind be substituted
fovsheseensrele fluid ; their ‘buoyant. effect may, therefore, be always esti-
mated by, the weight of a portion of the fluid equal in bulk to the solid.


268 LECTURE &XI.


- Thus, aa a little figure, containing. a bubble of air, is gieadiel ist a jar of
water, which is so covered by a bladder that it may be compressed by the
hand, the bulk of the figure with its bubble is diminished by the pressure, | ia
is, therefore, less supported by the water, and it begins to sink: and when
the hand is removed, it immediately rises again, (Plate XIX. Fig. 248.)


While a body is actually rising or sinking in a fluid, é ith ' an ecbaiabaaa
motion, the force of gravity being partly employed in generating momentum,
either in the fluid or in the solid, the whole Pressure on the bottom of the
vessel is necessarily somewhat lessened. Hence the apparent weight of ‘a ja
of water will suffer a slight diminution, while a bullet is descending it in it, or

while bubbles of air are rising in it, but the difference can seldom be great
enough to be ates easily discoverable fo the senses. lees nnd na

It sometimes happens that a solid body is 5 partly ligt by’ a “fluid, and
partly by another solid; ‘of this, we have an example in in one of Dr. Hooke’s
ingenious inventions for keeping a a vessel always full. A half cylinder,ora he-
misphere, being partly supported on anaxis, which is in the plane of the sur-
face of the fluid, its weight is so adjusted, as to be equal to that of a portion —
of the fluid of half its magnitude: when the vessél is full, it is half immersed,
and exerts no pressure on the axis: it descends as ‘the ‘fluid ‘is is exhausted,” and
its tendency to turn round its ‘axis can only be counteracted, by the pressure
of the fluid on its flat side, as long a as the surface ‘of the’ Temaining portion
of the fluid retains its original level. "(Plate XIX. Ti ‘ig. 249. ye p


When a fluid is contained in a a vessel of a flexible nature, the sides of the
vessel will always become curved, in Consequence | of the pressure, and the
more, in proportion as the pressure is greater; the forth’ of the curved surface
will also be such that the common centre of gravity of tle’ fluid and the ves-
sel. may descend to the lowest point that the circumstances of the ‘ese allow;
this form is generally of too intricate a nature to be determined. by” ‘ Aleula-
tion: no’ mathematician has ‘hitherto been’ able’ to investigate, for example,
the curvature which a square or rectangular bag of leather will ‘assume wien
filled with water or with corn. © When,” “indééd, one dimension only of a ves-
selis considered, for instance, ‘when the bottom ‘of a cistern is supposed to be
flexible, and to be fixed at two opposite sides, While the’ ends are simply in


ON HYDROSTATICS. 269


contact with upright walls, without allowing the water to run out, the na-
ure an. may be determined with tolerable facility, whether the
eig ee itself be considered or not. If the weight be exactly

of the water, the form of a semicircle will agree with the
; “of equilibrium, as Bernoulli has demonstrated, supposing the
at the distance of its diameter; but if the weight of the bottom
ed d, the curvature: will be every where proportional to the distance

‘ ataatthace; the form being the same as that of an elastic rod, bent
two forces in the direction of the surface, The same principles, with a
t ce in the calculations, will serve to determine the forms adapt-


ibrium of arches, intended for supporting the weight of superin-
ds, or of such soft materials as approach nearly in their operation
ct fluids. (Plate XIX. Fig. 250.)


we race’ WEL


ie serena I Iberet) ot Ie
u _E acoaitioe tie Bhti:y' 6 ee


)


: wtistiw Sas iw 3 = aT Lf4a;. “oO
Sleiss (hs: # “z) oi > 3 a ‘ez iol VY
Bout Io oR! oviessgzy nf). ‘tos "
+ He teas? 4 4
oe uw . ; 4 peat Sy
Der zinger ne tt fede WEG 6,


BOF lines Ue SIO and Sif) ;


LECTURE XXL


ON PNEUMATIC EQUILIBRIUM.


"THE taws of the-pressure and equilibrium.of liquids, . which are-the peculiar
subjects of hydrostatics, are,also applicable in general to fluids, of all, kinds,
as-far-as’they are compatible with the compressibility of those fluids, sr aith
their tendency to expand. ,


Elastic fluids are distinguished from liquids by the absence of all cohesive
force, or by their immediate tendency to expand when they are at liberty.
Such are atmospheric air, steam, and gases of various kinds; and the consi-
deration of these fluids, in the state of rest, constitutes the doctrine of pneu-
matostatics, or of the equilibrium of elastic fluids.


That the air is a material substance, capable of resisting pressure, is easily.
shown, by inverting an empty jar'in water; and by the operation of transfer-
ring airs and gases from, vessel to vessel, in the pneumatic apparatus used by
chemists. The tendéncy of the air to expand is shown by the experiment in
which a flaccid bladder becomes distended, and shrivelled fruit recovers its
full size, as soon as the external pressure is removed from it, by the operation
of the air pump: and the magnitude of this expansive force is more distinctly
secn, when a portion of air is inclosed in a glass vessel, together with some
mercury, in which the mouth of a tube is immersed, while the other end is
open, and without the vessel; so that when the whole apparatus is inclosed in
a very long jar, and the air of the jar is exhausted, the column of mercury
becomes the measure of the expansive force of the air. (Plate XIX. Fig.
251.)


If the diameter of the tube, in’ an apparatus of this kind, were very smail in


comparison with the bulk of the air confined, the column of mercury would


ON PNEUMATIC EQUILIBRIUM, a71


be raised, in the ordinary circumstances of the atmosphere, to the height of
nearly 80 inchés. But supposing the magnitude of the tube such, that the
portion of air must expand to twice its natural bulk, before the mercury ac-
quired a height. ‘sufficient to counterpoise it, this height would be 15 inches
only. For ‘it appeats to be a general law of all elastic fluids, that their pres-
sure on any given surface is diminished exactly in the same proportion as
their bulk is increased. If, therefore, the column of mercury in the vacuum
‘of the air pump were 60 inches high, the air would be reduced to half its
natural bulk; and for the same reason, the pressure of a column of 30 inches -
of mercury in the open air will ‘reduceany portion of air to half its bulk, since
the natural pressure of-the atmosphere, which is equal to that of about 30
‘inches of mércury, is doubled by the addition of an equal pressure, In the
‘same manner the density ‘of the air in a diving bell is doubled at the depth of
‘$4 feet below the surface of the water, and tripled at the depth of 68 feet.
This law was discovered by Dr. Hooke; ‘he found, however, that when a very
great pressure had been applied, so that the density became many times’
greater than in the natural ‘state, the elasticity appeared to be somewhat less
increased than the dénsity; but this exception to the general law has not
been confirmed by later'and more’accurate experiments.


‘Not only’ the’ comition ‘air of the atmosphere, and other permanently elastic
Gases, but ‘also.steams atid vapours of all kinds, ‘appear to be equally subject
‘to ‘this universal law: they must, however, be examined at temperatures sufiici-
“ent to preserve them in‘a state of elasticity; ‘for example,if we wished to deter-
‘mine the force of steam twice as dense as that which is usually produced, we
“should be obliged to employ aheat 30 or40 degrees above that of boiling water:
‘we should then find that ‘stéam of such a density as to support, when confin-
“ed in‘a dry vessel, the pressure of a column of 30 inches of mercury, would
‘be teduced to half its bulk by the pressure of a column of 60 inches. But if
“we increased the pressute’ much ‘beyond ‘this, the steam would be converted
“into water, and the experiment would be at an end.


"That ‘the air Which “surrounds us is subjected to the power of gra-
“vitation, and possesses weight, "may be shown by weighing a vessel which
*has been exhausted ‘by ‘means of the'air pump, and then allowing the air to


enter, and weighing it-a-second time. Jn thismanner-we may ascertain the


a7e ) LECTURE /XX1m, |


specific gravity of the air, even if the exhaustion is only-partial, provided
that we know the proportion of the air left in the vessel to that which it,


originally contained. The pressure derived from the weight, of the air is also -
the cause of the ascent of hydrogen gas, or of another portion of air which .


is rarefied by heat, and carries with it the smoke of a fire ; and, the effect is
made more conspicuous, when either the hydrogen. gas, or the heated


air, is confined in a balloon. The diminution of the apparent weight of a -


body, by means of the pressure of the surrounding air, is also shown, by the
destruction of the equilibrium between two bodies of different densities, upon
their removal from the open air into the vacuum of an air pump. For this
purpose, a light hollow bulb of glass may be exactly counterpoised.in the air
by a much smaller weight of brass, with an index, which shows, on a graduated
scale, the degree in which the large ball is made to preponderate in the re-


ceiver of the air pump, by the rarefaction of the air, lessening the buoyant _


power which helps to support its weight. (Plate XIX. Fig. 259.)


From this combination of weight ol ‘elasticity, i in the atmosphere, it
follows, that its upper parts must be much more rare than those which are
nearer to the earth, since the density is every where proportional to the whole


‘of the superincumbent weight. The weight of a column of air one foot ii


height is one twenty eight thousandth of the whole pressure; consequently
that pressure is increased one twenty eight, thousandth by the addition of the


-weight of one foot, and the next foot will be denser in the same proportion,


since the density is always proportionate to the pressure; the pressure thus in-
creased will therefore still be equal to twenty eight thousand times the weight
of the next foot. The same reasoning may be continued without limit,and_ it


-may be shown, that while we suppose the height to vary by any uniform steps,
“as by distances of a foot or a mile, the pressures and densities will increase in

continual proportion; thus, at the height of about 3000 fathoms, the density
- will be about half as great as at the earth’s surface ; at the height of 6000, one


fourth; at 9000, oneeighth as great. Hence it is inferred that the height i in
fathoms may be’ readily found from the logarithm of the number expressing the


bers are
‘taken larger and — by equal rts shies piioee tg pain:


XN


“density of the air: for the logarithm of the number 2, multiplied by 10000, - i
is 3010, the logarithm of 4, 6020, and- that of. 8, 9031; the octal ie
~ numbers always increasing in continual proportion, _ when hen the num


ON PNEUMATIC EQUILIBRIUM. - 273


Hence we obtain an-easy method of determining the heights of mountains
with tolerable accuracy: for if a bottle of air were closely stopped on the
summit of a mountain, and, being brought in this state into the plain below,
its mouth were inserted into a vessel of water or of mercury, a certain portion
of the liquid would: enter the bottle; this being weighed, if it were found to.
be one-half of the quantity that the whole bottle would contain, it might be
concluded that the air on the mountain possessed only half of the natural
density, and that its height was 3000 fathoms, It appears also, from this
statement, that the height of a column of equal density with any part of the
atmosphere, equivalent to the pressure to which that part is subjected, is
every where an to about mm feet.


Many corrections are, Rebun necessary for ascertaining the heights-of
mountains with all the precision that the nature of this kind of measure-
ment admits; ) and they involve several determinations, which require a pre-


‘vious knowledge of the effects: ‘of heat, and of the nature of the ascent of


ig which cannot be om ar with propriety “ present.


We may easily ascertain, on the same suieneliin the height to which a
balloon will ascend, if we are acquainted with its bulk and with its weight:
thus, supposing its weight 500 pounds, and its bulk suchas to enable it to raise
300 pounds more, its specific gravity nvust be five eighths as great as that of the
air, and it will continue to rise, ~until it reach the height, at which the air
is of the same density = but the logarithm of eight fifths, multiplied by 10000,
is 2040; and this is the number of fathoms contained in the height, which
will, therefore, bea little more than two miles and a quarter. It may be
found, by pursuing the’ calculation, that at the distance of the earth’s-semi-
diameter, or nearly 4000 miles; above its surface, theair, if it existed, would
become so rare, that a cubic inch would occupy a space equal to‘the sphere
of Saturn’s orbit: and on the other hand, if there were a mine about 42 miles
deep, the air would beeome as dense as quicksilver at the bottom of it.


It appears, therefore, that all bodies existing on or near the earth's surface
mity be considered as subjected to the pressure of a column of air, 28000 feet
high, supposing its Gent every where equal to that whichit possesses at the

VoL. 1 wn :


|


;


274 ’ \\RECTURE XXIL


earth’s:surface,and which is isually such, that'100 wine gallons weigha potind
avoirdupois, creating a pressure equal to that of 30 inches of mercury, or 34 feet’
of water, and which amounts to 14% pounds for each square inch... ‘This pressure
acts in all directions on every substance which is exposed ‘to. it: but »being
counterbalanced by the natural elasticity of these substatices, it! produces iw
common no apparent effects; when, however, by means of the ait pump, or
otnerwise, the pressure of the air is removed from one side of a body, while it
continues to act on the other, its operation becomes extremely evident. Thus,
when two hollow hemispheres, in contact with each other, are: exhausted of air,
they are made to cohere with great force; they are named! Magdeburg hemis-,
pheres, because Otto von Guerike,of Magdeburg, constructed. two such hemis-
pheres, of sufficient magnitude to withstand the draught of the emperor's six
coach horses, pulling with all their force to separate them. | By a similar pres-
sure,a thin square bottle may be crushed when it is sufficiently exhausted, and
a bladder may be torn with a loud noise: and the hand being placed oni the
mouth of a vessel whichis connected with the air pump, it is fixed to it very
forcibly, when the exhaustion is performed, by the pressure of the air on the
back of the hand; the fluids also, which circulate in the bloodvessels of the
hand, are forced towards its lower surface, and the effect which is called suction
is produced in a very striking manner. It is on the same principle that cupping
glasses are employed, a partial exhaustion being procured) by means of the
flame of tow, which heats the air, and expels a,great part of it; so that the
remainder, when it cools, is considerably rarefied.

It was Galileo that first explained the nature of suction from the effects
of the pressure of the atmosphere; and his pupil Torricelli confirmed his
‘doctrines by employing a column of mercury, of sufficient height to overcome
the whole pressure of the atmosphere, and to produce a vacuum in the upper
part of the tube or vessel containing it. In the operation of sucking up a
fluid through a pipe, with the mouth or otherwise, the pressure of the air is
but partially removed from the upper surface of the fluid, and it becomes ca-
pable of ascending to a height which is determined by the difference of the
densities of the air within and without the cavity concerned: thus, an ex-
haustion of one fourth of the air of the cavity would enable us to raise water
to the height of 8; feet, and mercury to 74 inches, above the level of the re-_


ON PNEUMATIC PaUESEREIUM. 275


servoir from which itrises.. We can draw upa much higher column of mercury
by. sucking with the muscles of the mouth only, than by inspiring with the
chest, and the difference is much more marked than the difference in the
forces with which we can blow: for in sucking, the cavity of the mouth is
very much contracted by the ptessure- of the external air, and the same force,
_ exerted on a smaller surface, is capable of iaieanetie a much greater hy-
; "deans “oben pressure.


| When a tube of glass, about three feet long, closed at one end and open at
the « , is filled with mercury, and then immersed in a bason of the same
‘fluid, the pressure of the atmosphere is wholly removed from the upper sur-
- face of the mercury in the tube, while it continues to act on the mercury in
the bason, and by its means on the lower surface of the column in the tube.
If such a tube be placed under the receiver of an air pump, the mercury will
_ subsidein the tube, accordingly as the pressure of the atmosphere is diminished;
ee ee: rendered very perfect, it will descend very nearly to
- the level bil bason or reservoir. When the air is readmitted, the
m ; the level of the sea, to the height of about 30 inches;
atsome times than at others, the height varies between
inches. This well known instrument, from its use in mea-
of the air,is called a barometer. | In the same manner.a co-
om 30 to 35 feet in height may be sustained in the pipe of a
1 pipe were longer than this, a vacuum would be produced in
0 it, and she pump would be incapable of acting.


peithe height of the mereury in the barometer with, greater
ecuracy, the scale has sometimes been amplified by various.
yg the upper part. of the tube into an oblique posi-
f barometer, or by making the lower part horizontal,
er diameter than, the upper, or by making the whole tube
, and slightly conical, or by placing a float on the sur-
Pais the reservoir, and causing an axis, whieh carries an
by its motion. But a good simple barometer, about one
in diameter, furnished with a vernier, is_perhaps fully as
these more. complicated instruments. In order to exclude
completely from the tube, the mercury must at least be


276 | “LECTURE XXIT. 0867 9


shaken’ in it fora considerable time, the tube being held in an inverted posi-
tion; and where great accuracy is required, the mercury must be boiled in
the tube. The reservoir most commonly employed is a flat wooden box;
with a bottom of leather’; the cover, which is unscrewed at pleasure, ‘being
cemented to the tube. Sometimes a screw is made to act on the leather, by
means of which the surface ofthe mercury is always brought toa certain level, .
- indicated by a float, whatever portion of it may be contained in the tube;
but the necessity of this adjustment may be easily avoided, by allowing the
mercury to play freely between two horizontal surfaces 6f wood, of moderate
extent,and at the distance of one seventh of an inch: the height may then be
always measured from the upper surface, without sensible error. | But if the
surfaces were closer than this, the fogs would Heecyoyt toad in the tube.
(ee XIX. Hig. 254.)
— i tr sa ser eo
The same imethod which is employed $i determining the elation tell
the heights and densities of elastic fluids, ‘may be extended to all bodies ©
which are in any degree compressible, and of which the elasticity is subjected
to laws similar to those which are discoverable in the’air and in othér gases:
and it is not improbable that these laws are generally applicable to all bodies
in nature, as far as their texture will allow them to submit to the operation
of pressure, without wholly losing their form. Water, for example, has
been observed by Canton to be compressed one twenty two thousandth of
its bulk by a force equal to that of the pressure of the atmosphere ; consequently
this force may be represented by that of a column of water 750 thousand feet
in height; the density of the water at the bottom of a lake, or of the sea, will
be increased by the pressure of the superincumbent'fluid; and supposing the
, _ law of compression to resemble that of the air, it may be inferred that at the
depth of 100 ‘miles, its density would be doubled; and that ‘at 200 it would
be quadrupled. The same measures would also be applicable
of mereuty. But there is Teason to ‘suppose ‘that they ‘they are in both


lisee’'too wate ; i > ytheie help weevtsece Tyined fs
Ws pyar t re ine peat alten? tote wile" iit
toda sstoK aicitie byes of aE: S LRT ae nilow ae Mya
og it apithiog!’ wc jie alii casi! pie gee IB OR, Re bibs rf
obits br iabhds tl! Labatt ‘ong se in :
og temil Ye: Jeon qanaieit: ai} or) oct tnt eee vag ae:


277


LECTURE XXIII.


ares (ON THE THEORY OF HYDRAULICS,

devin ty 83, sLtaihir « sia

(> seks Beat ‘ a! t r :
Havine ebtisidered the principal: canes of ithe equilibrium of auids, both
liquid and aeriform, we proceed to examine the theory ‘of their motions.
Notwithstanding the difficulties attending the mathematical theory of hy-
draulics, so much has already ‘been done, by the assistance of practical inves-
tigations, that;we may in general, by comparing the results of former-experi-
nients: with our calculations, predict the effect of any proposed arrangement,


and this is a degree of accuracy fully sufficient for practice, and which indeed
ould sea: expected from the state of the science at the begin-
E y. Many of these improvements have been derived from
on “of the mature and magnitude of the friction of fluids, which
‘it might be supposed to be very inconsiderable, is
4, so much importance in the application of the: theory of hy-
ical'cases, and to affect'the modes of calculation so materially,
Per Bethan ‘in a separate lecture. ‘> ut
7 Se oO} eI
eral princip Facor-ateotioical action, ‘which was first distinctly
' tid which has been made by Daniel Bernoulli the basis of
itions in hydrodynamics. Supposing that no force is
n of motion between different bodies, considered as
they always acquire such velocities in descending
ote a of the system is capable of as-
equal to'that from which it descended, notwithstanding
7 n the bodies. The truth of this principle may
m the laws of collision, compared with the properties of
forees. Thus, if an elastic ball, weighing 10


wii error of more than one fifth, or perhaps‘one tenth of the whole: -


“i eens height of 1 foot,be caused to act in any mannee


ee


SP EE
‘


“


278 . LECTURE XXIII.


ona similar ball of one ounce, so as to lose the whole of its motion, the smaller
ball will acquire a velocity capable of carrying it to the height of 10 feet. It is
true that some other suppositions must be made,in applying this law to the de-
termination of the motions of fluids,and that in many cases it becomes necessary
to suppose that a certain portion of ascending force or energy is lost,in conse-
quence of the internal motions of the particles of the fluid. But still, with pro-
per restrictions and corrections, the principle affords us a ready method of
obtaining solutions of problems, which, without some such assistance, it would
be almost impossible to investigate. The principal hypothesis which is assum-
ed by Bernoulli, without either demonstration, or even the appearance of
perfect accuracy, is this, that all the particles of a fluid in motion, contained in
apy one transverse section of the vessels or pipes through which it runs, must
always move with equal velocities ; thus, if water. be descending through a
vessel of any form, either regular or irregular, he supposes the particles
at the same height to move with the same velocity ; so that the velocity of
every particle in every part of a cylindrical vessel 10 inches in diameter,
through which a fluid is moving, must be one hundredth part as, great as in
passing through a circular orifice, an inch in diameter, made in its bottom,
It is evident that this cannot possibly be true of the portions of the fluid near-
est the bottom of the vessel, since the particles most distant from the orifice
must be nearly at rest, while those which are immediately over the orifice
are in rapid motion; but still the calculations founded on the hypothesis
agree tolerably well with experiments. In this case the actual descent, in any
instant,may be estimated by the removal of the quantity discharged,from the
surface of the fluid to the orifice, since the intermediate space remains always
occupied. The ascending force thus obtained is to be distributed throughout
the fluid,according to the respective velocities of its different portions; and it
may easily be shown, that when the orifice is small,the part which belongs to
the fluid im the vessel is wholly inconsiderable in comparison with theascend-
ing force required for the escape of the small portion which is flowing through
the orifice, and the whole ascending force may, therefore, be. supposed to
be employed in the motion of this portion; so that it will acquire the velocity
of a body falling from the whole height of the surface.of the reservoir, or the
velocity due to that height. It appears also that very nearly the same velocity
is acquired by almost the first-particles that escape from the orifice, so that
no sensible time elapses before the jet flows with its utmost velocity.


ON THE THEORY OF HYDRAULICS. 279


- "This velocity may be found, as we have already seen, by multiplying the square
root of the height of the reservoir; expressed in feet, by 8,or more correctly, by
8,3 thus, if the height be 4 feet, the velocity will be sixteen feet in a second ;
if the height be 9 feet, the velocity will be 24, the squares of 2 and 3 being
4and 9;/and ifthe height were 14 feet, the velocity would be 30 feet in a
second, and a circular orifice an inch in diameter would discharge exactly an
ale. gallon i inasecond, In the same manner, the pressure of the atmosphere
being equal to that which would be produced by a column of air of uniform
density 28000 feet high, the air would rush into a vacuum with a Megang d
of more than 1300 fect in a second.


The -yelocity i is also equal, whatever may be the direction of the sthean ;
for since the pressure of fluids acts equally in all directions, at equal depths,
the cause being the same, the effect must also be the same. And if the mo-
_ tion be occasioned by « a pressure derived from a force of any other kind, the
effect may be found by calculating the height of a column of the fluid, which
would be capable of producing an equal pressure. When also the force
arises from the difference of two pressures, the velocity may be determined
amen) ‘Thus, the pressure of a column of water, 1 foot in height,

; would. force the air through a small orifice, with a velocity of 230 feet in a
second, corresponding to the height of 830 feet ; a column of mercury 1 inch
ait would | produce the same effect as a reservoir of water more than
as high, and the force of the air confined in a closed bottle
of the air pump, will cause a jet to rise to the same height
f mercury ' which measures the difference of the elasticities of the
: me in the receiver.


ions are se confirmed by experiment in cases when
which. the fluid runs is particularly constracted;; that ~


id may glide along them for some distance, and escape in
the axis of the stream. A short cylindrical pipe is found
; ‘in some measure; but the end may be more aypeeely


a


—————


280 LECTURE XXIII.


stream contracts itself, after it has passed the orifice, forthe distance of about
half its diameter, so that at this point its thickness is only four fifths as
great as at its passage; and the quantity discharged is only five eighths as
great as that which the whole orifice would furnish, according to the preced~
ing calculation: instead, therefore,of multiplying the square root of the height
by 8, we may employ the multiplier 5 for determining the actual discharge.
But the velocity, where the stream is most contracted, is only one thirtieth
less than that which is due to. the whole height; and when the jet is dis-

_ charged in a direction nearly perpendicular, it rises almost as high as the sur~
face of the fluid in the reservoir.


This contraction’ of the stream, and the consequent diminution of the
discharge, is unquestionably owing to the interference of the particles of the
fluid coming from the parts on each side of the orifice, with those which are
moving directly towards it; and the effect is more perceptible when the orifice
ismade by a pipe projecting within the reservoir,so that some of the particles
approaching it must acquire in their path a motion contrary to that of the
stream. It would be possible to obtain an approximate calculation of the
magnitude of this contraction, from the equilibrium which must subsist be-
tween the centrifugal forces of the particles, as they pass out of the orifice,
describing various curves, according to their various situations, and the pres~
sure required for the-contraction of the internal parts of the stream, which:
obliges the particles to move more rapidly as they proceed, and which must
be proportional to the height required~for producing this acceleration.

(Plate XX. Fig. 255.) :


When a short cylindrical tube is added to the orifice, itis probable that the
motion of the fluid within the tube is still in some measure similar: but the
vessel must now be supposed to be prolonged, and to have a new orifice at the
end of the tube, at which the particles cannot arrive by any lateral motions,
and which will, therefore, not be liable to a second contraction: the discharge
may, therefore, be estimated nearly according to the true measure of this:
erifice; the original pressure of the fluid continuing to act until the stream
escapes,


+


The effect of a short pipe, in increasing the discharge, ceases. when: the


:


ON THE THEORY OF HYDRAULICS. 23r


water separates from its sides, so that it is no longer filled by the stream:

since there is then nothing to distinguish its motion from that of a stream’
passing through a simple orifice: but the increase is not owing merely to the

cohesion of the water to the sides of the pipe; for the effect, as I have found

by experiment, is nearly the same in the motion of air as in that’of water.

The contraction caused by the motion of the water at the entrance of the

short pipe, may be considered simply as a contraction in the pipe itself, and

the subsequent part of the pipe either as cylindrical or as nearly conical: for
in this case it follows, from the general law on which Bernoulli’s-calculations
are founded, that as long as the fluid remains in one mass, the discharge will

be nearly the same, as if the mouth of the pipe were the only orifice, suppos-
ing that no force is lost: and the exceptions which Bernoulli has made to the
general application of the principle in such cases,although partly supported by
experiments, have been extended somewhat further, both by himself and
by other authors, than those experiments have warranted. In the case of a
diverging conical pipe, or of a pipe with a conical termination, the discharge
is found to be considerably greater than that which a cylindrical pipe would
produce, but not quite so great as would be produced on the supposition that
no force is Toat. ignore XX. Fig. 256.)


- This sbinies ee the effects of a cylindrical and conical pipe is
strongly supported by the experiments of Venturi, compared with those of
Bernoulli. Bernoulli found that when a small tube was inserted into any
part of a conical pipe, in which the water was flowing towards the wider end,
not only none of the water escaped through the tube, but the water of a
vessel, placed at a considerable distance below, was drawn up by it; Venturi
observed the same, when the tube was inserted into the side of a cylindrical
pipe, near to its origin; and in both cases air'was absorbed, as well as water,
so that cohesion could not be in any manner concerned. But the pressure of
the atmosphere is generally necessary for all effects of this kind, and both
Venturi and Dr. Matthew Young have: observed, that a short pipe has no
effect, in increasing the discharge through an orifice, in the vacuum of an air
pump: but even if the difference were sometimes found to exist in the ab-
sence of atmospherical pressure, it might be produced by an accideutal co-
hesion, like that which sometimes causes a column of mercury to remain sus-
pended in similar circumstances. (Plate XX. Fig. 257.)

VOL I. oo is


982 LECTURE XXIII,


The effect of ajutages of different kinds, on the quantity of water dis-
charged through an orifice of a given magnitude, may be most conveniently
exhibited by placing them side by side at the same height in a reservoir, and
suffering the water to begin to flow at the same moment through any two of
them; the quantities discharged in a given time will then obviously indicate
the respective velocities. Ifa very long pipe were employed, ‘some time would
‘be required before the velocity became uniform ; but in such cases the retardation
arising from friction is so considerable, as to causeastill greater deviation from
the quantity which would be discharged by ashorter pipe in the same time.


When the aperture, through which a fluid is discharged, instead of being
vevery way of inconsiderable magnitude, is continued throughout the height
of the vessel, and is every where of equal breadth, the velocity must be
materially different at different parts of its height; but we may find the
quantity of the discharge, by supposing the whole velocity equal to two
thirds of the velocity at the lowest point. And we may find the quantity
discharged by an orifice not continued to the surface, but still of consider-
able height, by subtracting from the whole discharge of an orifice so con-
tinued, that which would have been produced by such a portion of it, as must
be shut up, in order to form the orifice actually existing. But in this case,
the result will seldom differ materially, from that which is found by consi-


dering the pressure, on the whole orifice, as derived from the height of the


fluid above its centre.
When a cylindrical vessel empties itself by a minute orifice, the velocity of
the surface, which is always in the same proportion to the yelocity of the fluid
in the orifice, is, therefore, uniformly retarded, and follows, in its descent the
same law as a heavy body, projected upwards, in its ascent; consequently
the space actually described, in the whole time of descent, is equal to half of
that which would have been described, if the initial motion had been uni-
formly continued; and in the time that such a vessel occupies, in emptying
itself, twice the quantity of the fluid would be discharged if it were kept
full by anew supply. This may be easily shown, by filling two cylindrical.
vessels, having equal orifices in their bottoms, and while the one is left to


empty itself, pouring into the other the contents of two other equal vessels,


in succession, so as to keep it constantly full; for Ai be seen that both —
“operations will terminate at the same instant. Ze: Loe


ON THE THEORY OF HYDRAULICS. - 283


A similar law may be applied to the filling of a lock, from a reservoir of
constant height; for in all such cases, twice as long a time is required for
the effect,as would be necessary if the initial velocity were continued. The im-
mersion of the orifice in a large reservoir has been found to make no differ_.
ence in the magnitude of the discharge, so that the pressure may always be
estimated by the difference of the levels of the two surfaces. Thus, when
a number of reservoirs communicate with each other by orifices of any dimen-
sions, the velocity of the fluid flowing through each orifice being inversely
as the magnitude of the orifice, and being produced by the difference of the
heights of the fluid in the contiguous reservoirs, this difference must be every
where as the square of the corresponding velocity. But if the reservoirs’
were small, and the orifices opposite and near to each other, a much smaller
difference in the heights of the surfaces would be sufficient for producing the
required velocity. The same circumstances must be considered, in deter-
mining the velocity of a fluid, forced through a vessel divided by several par-
titions, with an orifice in each; if the orifices are small in proportion to their
distance from each other, and if they are turned in different directions, each.
orifice will require an additional pressure, equivalent to the whole velocity
produced in it: but if the partitions occupy a smnall part only of the vessel,
and are placed near to each other, the retardation will be much less con-
siderable. Cases of this kind occur very frequently in the passage of water
through the pipes and valves of pumps, and it is, therefore, of consequence
to avoid all unnecessary expansions, as well as contractions, in pipes and in
canals, since there is alwaysa useless expense of force in restoring the velocity
which is lost in the wider parts,


When a siphon, or bent tube, is filled with a fluid, and its extremities are
immersed in fluids of the same kind, contained in different vessels, if both their
surfaces. are on the same level; the whole remains-at rest; but if otherwise,
the longer column in the siphon preponderates, and the pressure of the at-
mosphere forces up the fluid from the higher vessel, until the equilibrium is
restored ; provided, however, that this pressure be sufficiently powerful: for
if the height of the tube were more than 34 fect for water, or than 30 inches
for mercury, the pressure of the atmosphere would be incapable of foreing
up the fluid to its highest part, and this part remaining empty, the fluid could
no longer continue to run, (Plate XX. Fig. 258.)


O84 LECTURE XX1ifi.


If the lower vessel be allowed to empty itself, the siphon will continue
running as long as it is supplied from the upper, with a velocity nearly cor-
responding to the height of that portion of the fluid in the longer leg, which
is not counterbalanced by the fluid in the shorter; that is, to the height of the
surface of the upper vessel above that of the lower one, or above the end of the si-
phon, when it is no longer immersed; for the height of the pipe is in all cases to
be considered as constituting a part of that height which produces the pressure. -
Thus the discharge of a pipe, descending from the side or bottom of a vessel,
is nearly the same as from a similar horizontal pipe, inserted into a reservoir
of the whole height of the descending pipe and of the fluid above it; and
this is true even when the depth of the vessel is inconsiderable,in comparison
with the length of the pipe, if its capacity is sufficient to keep the pipe
running full. It appears at first sight extremely paradoxical, that the whole
water discharged, each particle of which is subjected to the action of gravi-
tation in a pipe 16 feet long, for half a second only, should acquire the velo-
city of 32 feet in a second, which would require, in common circumstances,
the action of the same force of gravitation for’a whole second, and this fact
may be considered as favourable to the opinion of those, who wish to esti-
mate the magnitude of a force, rather by the space through- which it is con-
tinued, than by the time during which it acts; but if we attend to the nature
of hydrostatical pressure, we shall find that the effect of the column on the
atmosphere is such,as to produce, or to develope, a portion of accelerating force
which is actually greater than the weight of the particles immediately con- .
cerned. Ifa doubtcould be entertained of the truth of this theory, it might
be easily removed by recurring to the general law of ascending force, since
it follows from that law, that each particle, which descends in any manner
through the space of 16 feet, must acquire, either for itself or for some other
particles, a power of ascending to the same height; and on the other hand,
the event of the experiment confirms the general law. For if we fix a shallow
funnel ona yertical pipe, and pour water into it, so as to keep it constantly
full, while the pipe discharges itself into a reservoir, out of which the water runs
through a second pipe, placed horizontally, of exactly the same dimensions
_ With the first, the height, at which the water in the reservoir becomes sta-
tionary, will be very nearly equal to the height of the funnel above its sur-
face, so that the same height produces the same velocity in both cases.
(Plate XX. Fig. 259.)


ON THE THEORY OF HYDRAULICS. : 285


4 We may understand the action of the forces immediately concerned in this
experiment, by attending to the mutual effects of the water and of the at-


city equal to that of the whole water in the pipe, otherwise there would be
a vacuum in the upper part of the pipe, which the pressure of the atmo-
sphere will not permit; and this pressure, considered as a hydrostatic force,
is equal to that which would be derived in any other way from a column of
the same height with the pipe, since the weight of the water in the pipe is
- wholly employed in diminishing the-counterpressure of the atmosphere below,
- not only in, the beginning, when it is at rest, but also while it is in motion ;
for that motion being uniform throughout its descent, the power of gravi-
tation is expended in producing pressure only; so that the pressure of the
_ atmosphere on the water in the funnel becomes completely analogous to the
pressure of a reservoir of water, of the same height with the pipe. The cir-
cumstance, which causes the appearance of paradox in this experiment, exists
also in the simplest case of the discharge of water; for it may be shown, that
the portion of accelerating force actually employed in generating the velocity’
ie tream is discharged through a small orifice, is twice as great
: fluid on a part of the vessel equal in extent to the ori-
e same manner the quantity of force exerted by the atmosphere
‘in the funnel, as well as that with which the descending fluid
ir below, is equal to twice the weight of the quantity existing

e


eve , a limit, which the mean velocity in such a pipe can
nd: wh ch is derived from the magnitude of the pressure of the
F ‘the water cannot enter the pipe with a greater velocity


ure of the atmosphere ; and this pressure being equivalent to
of water 34 feet high, the velocity derived from it is about)
; $0 that if the vertical pipe were more than 34 feet: long,

m in a part of it near the funnel. | t


on siderable length descends from a inter) if the sup-
canty, and eam if it approach the orifice obliquely,


mosphere. The water entering the orifice must immediately acquire a velo- _


—


286 LECTURE XXIII.


which must necessarily revolve round the orifice, will unite in producing a
vacuity in the centre; and when this happens, the discharge is considerably di-
minished.


In order that a siphon may run, it is obvious that it must first be filled;
and when itis once filled, it will continue to run till the reservoir is ex-
hausted, as far as the level of its upper orifice. And from this circumstance,
the phenomena of some intermitting springs have been explained, which
only begin to run, when the reservoirs from which they originate have been
filled. by continued rains, and then go on to exhaust them, even though the
weather may be dry. From a combination of several such siphons and re-
servoirs, a great number of alternations may sometimes be produced. ee
XX. Fig. 260.)


Since the velocity of e stream or jet issuing in any direction, out of a simple
orifice, or a converging one, is nearly equal to that of a heavy body falling
from the height of the reservoir, it will rise, if directed upwards, very nearly
to the same height, excepting a slight difference occasioned by the resistance of
the air,and by the force which is lost,in producing the velocity with which the
particles must escape laterally, before they begin to descend. The truth of
this conclusion is easily confirmed by experiment. (Plate XX, Fig. 261.)


If a jet issue in an oblique or in a horizgntal direction, its form will be
parabolic, since every particle tends, as a separate projectile, to describe the
same parabola in its range: and it may be demonstrated, that if it be emitted
horizontally from any part of the side of a vessel, standing on a horizontal:
plane, and a circle be described, having the whole height of the fluid for its.
diameter, the jet will reach the plane, at a distance from the vessel twiceas
great as the distance of that point of the circle, through which it would have. ‘
passed, if it’ had continued to move horizontally. And if the jet rise in any- it
angle from the bottom of the vessel, the utmost height of its ascent will be ie
equal to that of the point in which it would meet the same semicircle, fit: fe
continued to move in a right line, and the horizontal range will be equal to noi 5
times the distance, intercepted between the same point and
This law is equally true with regard to eer pageenacnias asaecieig
is most conveniently exhibited in the motion of a jet. (Plate eS


ON THE THEORY OF HYDRAULICS, 287


We have hitherto considered the motions of fluids as continued principally
in the same direction; but they are frequently subjected to alternations of
motion, which bear a considerable analogy to the vibrations of pendulums ;
thus, if a long tube be immersed in a fluid, in a vertical direction, and the
surface of the fluid within the tube be elevated a very little, by some external
cause, the wholé contents of the fluid will be urged downwards by a force,
which decreases in proportion to the elevation of the surface above the
general level of the vessel, and when both surfaces have acquired the same
level, the motion will be continued by the inertia of the particles of the fluid,
until it be destroyed by the difference of pressures, which now tends to retard
it; and this alternation will continue, until the motion be destroyed by fric-
tion and by other resistances. It is also obvious, that since any two vibra- -
tions, in which the forces are proportional to the spaces to be described, are
performed in equal times, these alternations will require exactly the same
time for their completion,as the vibrations of a pendulum, of which the length
is equal to that of the whole tube; for the relative force in the tube is to
the whole force of gravity as the elevation’ or depression is to the whole
length of the tube. Hence it follows, that if two such tubes were united
below, so as to forma single bent tube, the vibrations might take place in
the whole compound tube, in the same manner, and in the same time, as in
each of the separate tubes; nor would the effects be materially altered if
any part of the middle of the tube were in a horizontal or in an oblique di-
rection, provided that the whole length remained unaltered. In such a tube
also, all vibrations, even if of considerable extent, would be performed in the
same time, and would long remain nearly of the same magnitude; but ina
single tube, open below, the vibrations would continually become less ex-
tensive, and their duration would also be altered as well as their extent;
besides the unavoidable resistances, which would in both cases interfere with
the regularity of the effects.


But it does not appear that the laws of the vibrations of fluids in pipes will
at all serve to elucidate the phenomena of waves. Sit Isaac Newton has sup-
posed that each wave may be compared with the fluid oscillating in a bent
pipe; but the analogy is by far too distant to allow us to found any demon-
stration on it. The motions of waves have been investigated in a new and
improved manner by Mr. Lagrange; and I have given a concise demonstra-


288 Pa LECTURE XXIII,


tion of a theorem similar to his, but pethaps still more general and explicit. It


appears from these determinations, that supposing the fluids concerned to be.


infinitely elastic, that is, absolutely incompressible, and free from friction
of all kinds, any small impulse,communicated to a fluid, would be transmitted
every way along its surface, with a velocity equal to that which a heavy. body
would acquire in falling through half the depth of the fluid; and I have


reason to believe, from observation and experiment, that where the elevation.


or depression of the surface is considerably extensive in proportion to the
depth, the velocity approaches nearly to that which is thus determined,
being frequently deficient one eighth or one tenth. only of the whole; in
other cases, where a number of small waves follow each other at intervals
considerably less.than the depth, I have endeavoured to calculate the retar-
dation which must be occasioned by the imperfect elasticity or compressibility.
of the fluid; but it seems probable that the motion of small waves is. still
much slower than this calculation appears to indicate... ey


. Whatever corrections these determinations of the velocity of waves may be
found to require, the laws of their propagation may still be safely inferred
from. the investigation. Thus, it may be shown, supposing the waves to flow
ina narrow canal of equable depth, that, whatever the initial figure of the
waves may be, every part of the surface of the fluid will assume in succession the
same form, except that the original elevationsand depressions, extending their in-
fluence in both directions, will produce effects only half as"great on each side,
and those effects will then be continued until they are destroyed by resist-
ances of various kinds. It may also be inferred, that the surface of a fluid
thus agitated by any series of impressions, will receive the effects of another
series,in the same manner as a horizontal surface,and that the undulations, thus
crossing each other, will proceed without any interruption, the motion of each


particle being always the sum or difference of the motions belonging to the.


separate series.


Supposing two equal and similar series of waves to meet each other in such
a-canal, in opposite directions, the point in which their similar parts meet
must be free from all horizontal motion, so that any fixed obstacle in an up-
right position would have the same effect on the motions of the fluid on
either side as the opposition of a similar series; and this effect constitutes the


ON THE THEORY OF HYDRAULICS. . . 289


teflection of a series of waves,which is easily observed, when they strike against a
steep wall or bank ; and when this reflection is sufficiently regular, it is easy to
show, that the combination of the direct with the reflected motions must
constitute a vibration, of such a nature, that the whole surface is divided into
portions, which appear to vibrate alternately upwards and downwards, without
any progressive motion, while the points which separate the portions remain

~ always in their natural level. (Plate XX. Fig. 263.)


But those series of waves which are usually observable in any broad sur-
face, and which constitute a number of concentric circles, are usually re-
flected in such a manner as to appear to diverge after reflection from a centre
beyond the surface which reflects them, and to be subject to all those laws,

‘which are more commonly noticed in the phenomena of reflected light; but
as these laws are of more practical importance in their application to optics,
than to hydr , it is unnecessary at present to examine their consequences
in detail. It. y, however, be easily understood, that a new series of waves,
proceeding a centre at the same distance behind the reflecting surface,
as the centre of the original seriés is before it, would produce precisely the ~
same effect as a fixed obstacle; consequently the law of reflection at equal
angles is a very simple inference from this mode of reasoning. (Plate XX.
Fig. 264.0000 3 .


a ‘
es of waves proceeds in an equable canal, it is obvious that the
of the whole fluid neither rises nor falls; from this analogy, as
n the general application of thelaw of ascending force, itis probable

e es of the propagation of waves, the place of the centre’of gravity
tered; so that when a circular wave spreads further and further
, its height is not diminished in the same ratio as its diameter
the square of its height only varies in this proportion ; that
a yard in diameter, and an inch high, will retain a height


nomena of waves may be very conveniently exhibited, by
d shallow vessel, with_a bottom of glass, surrounded by
horizon, in order to avoid the confusion which would
ntinual reflections produced by perpendicular surfaces. The
Pp-


290 et LECTURE XXIII.


waves) may be excited by the vibrations of an elastic rod or wire, loaded
with a weight, by means of which its motions may be madé more or less rapid
at pleasure; and the form and progress of the waves may be easily observed,
by placing a light under the vessel, so that their shadows may fall ona white
surface, extended in an inclined position above. In this manner the minutest*
inflections of the surface of the water may be made nee conspicuous,
(Plate XX. Fig. 265.)


- By means of this apparatus, we may examine the manner in whicli a wave
diverges, when a portion of it has been intercepted on either side or on both
sides. Thus, if a wave is admitted, by an aperture which is very narrow in pro-
portion to its own breadth, into the surface of a part of the water which is
at rest, it diverges from the aperture as from anew centre; but when the
aperture is considerably wider than the wave, the waye confines its motion in
great measure to its original direction, with some. small divergence, while it
is joined on each side by fainter circular portions, spreading, med the mr
only. (Plate XX. Fig. 266.) ny sat


When two equal series of circular waves, proceeding eta centres near
each other, begin their motions at the same time, they must'so cross each
other, in some parts of their progress, that the elevations of the one series tend
to fill.up the depressions of the other; and this effect may be actually ob-
seryed, by throwing two stones of equal size into a pond at the same instant;
for we may easily distinguish, in favourable circumstances, the series of points
in which this effect takes place, forming continued curves, in which the water
remains smooth, while it is strongly agitated in the intermediate parts.
These curves are of the kind denominated hyperbolas,each point of the curve
_ being so situated with respect to its foci, as to be nearer to one than the

bes by a certain constant distance. it XX. Fig. 267.:)ii7)) gen

¢ Bt @ t)iaw aera
"The sabi of waves is of le immediate sanaaieae for any practical ap-
plication than some sts ami of hydraulies; Roteinncteint: samme


ON. THE THEORY OF HYDRAULICS, ; 291


It may Be by steps nearly similar to those by which the velocity of
the motions of waves is investigated, that a fluid which is contained in an
f elastic pipe, and which receives an impulse at any part of the pipe, will
transmit its effects, with the same velocity, as a wave would have in a reser-
: voir, of that depth which measures the elasticity of the pipe, that is, with
half the yelocity which a body would acquire, in falling from the height at
which a portion of the fluid, connected with the contents of the pipe, would
stand i in a vertical tube. It is in this manner that the blood is transmitted,
of the impulse given to it by the heart through the bloodvessels;


sted by the temporary ‘actions of the muscular coats of the
use a contraction more rapid than the dilatation; while the


i


a ‘ast


oti: Bw
ia \ aa et Payline:


ib ih?


we


292 .


LECTURE XXIV


-


ON THE FRICTION OF FLUIDS.


WE have hitherto considered the motions of fluids independently of the
resistance which they undergo from the vessels containing them, and from
the surfaces in contact with them, as well as from the interference of the
neighbouring particles with each other; there is, however, a variety of cases
of yery common occurrence, in which these frictions most materially affect
the results of our calculations; so that before this subject was laboriously
and judiciously investigated by the Chevalier de Buat, it was almost impossi-
ble to apply any part of our theoretical knowledge of hydraulics to practical
purposes. are

” The effect of friction is particularly exemplified by the motions of rivers,
in which almost the whole force of gravity is employed in overcoming it.
When the inclination and the dimensions of a river continue uniform, the
velocity is also every where equal; for otherwise the depth would become
unequal: here, therefore, the force of gravitation must be an exact counter-
poise to the resistance which is to be overcome, in order that the water may
flow with its actual velocity; this velocity having been originally derived
from the effect of a greater inclination near the origin of the river. When
the river is thus proceeding, with an equable motion, it is said to be in train;
and it is obvious that no increase of its length will produce any alteration
inits velocity. There is, therefore, a very material difference between the course
of a river, and the descent of a body, with an accelerated motion, along an in-
clined surface. For when a solid body is placed on an inclined plane, the
force of friction is either great enough to overpower its relative weight, and
to retain it at rest, or else the friction is constantly less than the gravita-
tion, and the motion is always accelerated. But the resistance to the mo-
tions of fluids arises principally from different causes; not from the tenacity of


ON THE FRICTION OF FLUIDS. 293


the fluids, which, where it exists; is a force nearly uniform, like that of
friction, but principally from the irregular motions and mutual collisions of
their particles ; and in this case, according to the laws of mechanics, it must
-vary nearly in proportion to the square of the velocity. For when a body
is moving in a line of a certain curvature, the centrifugal force is always as
the square of the velocity; and the particles of water in contact with the sides
and bottom of a river or pipe, must be deflected, in consequence of the
minute irregularities of the surfaces on which they slide, into nearly the same
curvilinear paths, whatever their velocity may be;so that the resistance, which
is in great measure occasioned by this centrifugal force, must also vary as the
square of the velocity. ‘Thus’also the curvature assumed by the outline of a
stream of water issuing from a simple orifice, which constitutes the contrac-
tion already described, is very nearly the same, whatever the velocity may
be: nor does the friction increase with the pressure, as is demonstrated by
an experiment of Professor Robison on the: oscillations of a fluid through a
bent tube, terminated ‘by two: bulbs, which were performed in the same time,
whether the tube was in a horizontal or in: a vertical position... Mr. Coulomb
has also proved the same fact by experiments on the vibrations of bodies
immersed in fluids, and suspended by twisted wires; he finds that precisely
at the surface, the friction is somewhat greater than at any depth below it:
‘he also considers a certain part of the friction as simply proportional to the
velocity, anda very small portion only, in common fluids, as perfectly inde-
pendent of it.


It is obvious that wherever the friction varies as the square of the velocity,
or even when it increases in any degree with the velocity, there must always
‘be a limit, which the velocity can never exceed, by means of any constant
force, and this limit must ‘be the velocity at which the resistance would be-

“coine equal to the force. “It is for this reason that a light body, descending
through the air, soon acquires a velocity nearly uniform ; and if it be caused,
by any external force, to move for a time more rapidly, it will again be speed-
ily retarded, until its velocity be restored very nearly to its original state.
In the same manner the weight of the water in a river, which has once ac-
quired a stationary velocity, is wholly employed in overcoming the. friction
‘produced by the bottom and the banks.


Se


Be lls


294 LECTURE XXIV.


From considering the effect of the magnitude of the surface exposed. to the
friction of the water, in comparison with the whole quantity contained in
the river, together with the degree in which the river is inclined to the ho-
rizon, we may determine, by following the methods adopted by Mr. Buat,
the velocity of any river of which we know the dimensions‘and the inclina-
tion. Supposing the whole quantity of water to be spread on a horizontal
surface, equal in extent to the bottom and sides of the river, the height, at
which it would stand, is called the hydraulic mean depth; and it may be
shown that the square of the velocity must be jointly proportional to the
hydraulic mean depth, and to the fall ina given length. If we measure
the inclination by the fall in 2800 yards, the square of the velocity in a se-


‘cond will be nearly equal to the product of this fall multiplied by the hydraulic


mean depth. For example, in the Ganges, and, in some other great rivers,
the mean depth being about 30 feet, and the fall 4 inches in a’ mile, the
fall in 2800 yards will be about 6} inches, which, multiplied by 360 inches,
gives 2340 inches for the square of the mean velocity, and 48} inches, or
about four feet, forthe mean velocity in a second, that is, not quite
three miles an hour, which is the usual velocity of rivers moderately rapid.
If, however, great precision were required in the determination, some fur-
ther corrections would be necessary, on account of the deviation of the resist-
ance from the exact proportion of the squares of the velocities; since. the
friction, as we have already seen, does not increase quite so fast as this..


It is obvious that the friction of a fluid, moving on the surface of a solid
alone, would not produce any material retardation of its motion, if the par-
ticles of the fluid themselves: were capable of moving on each other, without
the least resistance ; for in this case a small portion of the fluid, in immediate
contact with the solid, might remain at rest; and the remaining mass of the
fluid might slide over this portion without any retardation. It appears, how-
ever, that the water in contact with the bottom of a river moves, with a very
considerable velocity, and the water next above this only alittle faster, so
that the velocity increases almost uniformly as we ascend towards the surface.
It follows, therefore, that the resistance must be much. greater where the
particles of water slide on each other, than where they glide along the sur-
face of a solid. This. internal friction operates gradually throughout the


water; the surface being retarded by the particles immediately below it,


besides its own relative weight, by the friction of the waterabove, tending
to draw it ‘forwards, and by that of the water below, tending still more to
retard it; the | retardation being ‘communicated, from below upwards, in
such’ “a manner as to be every where equivalent to the relative weight of
the water above the part considered. It appears from observation, that when
we have determined the mean velocity in English inches, we may find the
icial velocity, very nearly, by adding to it its square root, and the ve-
ae m aged subtracting from it the same number: thus the square
early 7, the superficial velocity of the Ganges | will be about

pest or 4 ae Tinches i in a second, and the velocity at the bottom 413,
There are, however, frequent irregularities in the proportions of the velocities
at different depths, and it has sometimes been observed, perhaps on account
of the resistance of the air, that the velocity is a little less, immediately at

a surface, than a few gechcs below it


I> HOS ay lesnsg + rain


the vebaeey of a river is also rpbaecatty greater in the
s; and the motion of the particles in the middle must
those which are below them, but also by those on each
the ‘ contrary, are drdgged on by the water in the middle:
‘tend, therefore, to draw the sides towards them, which they
ut lowering the surface of the fluid next to the banks, in
ake the difference of level an equivalent to this tendency
. This appears to be the reason, that the surface of a
y be ‘observed to be slightly convex, or a little ¢le-
Oia int i! t


"a river is sce be ay interrupted by a were ora fall, natural
cases the velocity may be calculated in the same manner
dfrom a reservoir through an aperture of consi-
posing the whole section of the were to be such an aper-


he aperture would be precisely equal to the actual velo-
he extent of the swell caused by a were, or by any par-
me hehe the bed of a river, may also be found by first


ON THE FRICTION OF FLUIDS. £95


lobe particles by the next inferior stratum, and each stratum being actuated,


so much higher, that the velocity of a fluid issuing from it


4


296 LECTURE XXIV.


determining the height at which the surface must stand immediately above
_ the were, and then calculating the inclination of the surface which will be
required for producing the actual velocity, in the river thus made deeper;
which of course will determine the situation of ‘the surface where the water
approaches the were; and this surface, which is more nearly horizontal than
the general surface of the river, will be so joined to it as to have a curvature
nearly uniform throughout. ) .


It appears from calculations of the effects of various changes in the dimen-
sions of rivers, as well as from immediate observation, that a considerable
diminution of the breadth of a river at a particular place, will often producé
but a small elevation of its surface. The velocity, however, may sometimes
be considerably increased by such a change, and where the bottom is of a
loose nature, its particles may be carried away by means of the increased ve-

‘locity, and the bed of the river may be deepened.


Where a river bends in a considerable degree, it is generally remarked that
the velocity of the water is greater near the concave than the convex side of
the flexure, that is, at the greatest distance from the centre of its curva-
ture. This effect is probably occasioned by the centrifugal force, which ac-
cumulates the water on that side; so that the banks are undermined, and the
channel is deepened by its friction, Some authors have been led to expect
that the velocity would be greater nearest to the convex bank, because the
inclination of the surface must be a little greater there; but the effect of the -
accelerating force, in any short distance, is inconsiderable, and itis more than
compensated by the want of depth. It may easily be understood, that, all
angles and flexures must diminish the general velocity Bic are aetien,
and the more as iiss are more rita '


milar manner; but this opinion. a ce mene
_ Fespect to those particles which receive their ic
voir from the impulse ofa stream which enters

this fact in a clear point of view, was made


ON THE FRICTION OF FLUIDS, : 297


four times as-much air as it naturally contained had been condensed by means
of a syringe, and causing the current to pass through a small box, in which
the bason of a barometer was placed, the mercury was depressed more than
two inches, in consequence of the rarefaction which the current produced im
the air of the box. (Plate XXI. Fig 268.) é tial


Professor Venturi has also made several experiments of a similar nature on the
motion of water: he observes that not only the water in contact with a stream
is drawn along by it, but that the air in the neighbourhood of a jet is also made:
to partake of its motion. When the mouth of a pipe, through which a stream of
water is discharged, is introduced into a vessel a little below the surface of the
water which it contains, and is allowed to escape by ascending an inclined sur-
face placed opposite to the pipe, and leading over the side of the vessel, the stream
not only ascends this surface without leaving any portion ofvitself behind, but
carries also with it the whole of the water of the vessel, until its surface be-
comes leyel-with the'lowest part of the stream. (Plate XXI. Fig. 269.)

cer he ha  A a wg h Stik s< . ‘ be bode
wi fa jet of water,in drawing towards it a current of air,is in some

: trated by an‘experiment which is often exhibited among the
nts of hydraulics.» A’ ball. of cork, or even an egg, being placed in’
ddle of a jet, which throws up a’ pretty large stream to a moderate
the ball, instead of falling,or being thrown off, as it might naturally
en expected to do,remains either nearly stationary, or playing up and
as thi 2 experiment is continued. Besides the current of air which
d,and which tends to support the ball in a stable equilibrium,
water, combined with its centrifugal force in turning round’
) drawing it back, when it has declined a little on either side,
m has been principally in contact with the other side. A’
y be observed in the motions of the air only, as I have
scperiments of which an account is published in the Philo-
ctions. Thus, if we bénd a long plate of metal into the form
d suspend it in the middle by a thread, so that it may move


{


owards the extremity, instead of retreating before the

contrary appear to be attracted; the pressure of the at-
diminished by the centrifugal force of the current, which

yt py


and if we then blow on its’ convex surface with a tube’


é


298 LECTURE} XX1@v. %


glides. along the convex surface, because it finds a readier passage in the neigh-
bourhood of. the solid, towards: which itis:urged!by the impulse of the’parti+
cles of the air-approachingit.om one: side; and; by: the defect-ef pressure‘on the
other side, occasioned by the removal of a certain portion ofthe air:which it
carries with it. (Plate XXI. Fig. 270; 271.)


From considerations similar to those by which the! velocity of a river is! de-
termined, we may calculate the) quantity of ‘water discharged from a pipe of
any given dimensions, and in any position. The:same éxpressions will serve
for estimating the magnitude-of the friction in botlvcases; the pipe being
considered. as.a small river, of which the mean depthis: one fourth of its dia-
meter: but a part only of the force of gravity! is ndw expended in overcoming
the friction, the rest. being: employed:in producing the momentum of the
water. We may obtain a sufficiently accurate determination of the velocity,
by. supposing the height of. the reservoirabove'the orifice! of the pipe to be
diminished in the same proportion as the diameter of the pipe would be in-
creased by adding to it one fiftieth part of the length, and finding the whole
velocity corresponding to four fifths: of this height. Thus, if ‘the diameter
of the pipe were one inch, and’ its length 100 inches, we must suppose'the’
effectiveheight to be reduced to one third by the friction,and the discharge must’
be calculated from a-height four fifths as great as'this,which may be considered’
asareduction derived from the interference of the particles,entering the pipe,
with each other’s motions. If the diameter of the pipe had been two-inches,
the height must only have been supposed to be reduced to one half by’ the’
friction; such a pipe would, therefore, discharge about five times’as much
water as the former, although of only twice the diameter; and this circum-
starice requires the attentioniof all these: who:are comoersied ini fapalating: tit?
distribution of water by for aapcrag x: or for any other ’

a 7h cay FL Yee SOT Aan

In such cases it becomes ako frequently necesry ' chloe

oer % io ae vse


in which a small pipe is inserted into a larger;
_ is a loss of force according to the degree of B3
water, which may be calculated, if it be required; but if a
_ another through which the water is r very rapidly, im
trary to that of the stream, its discharge will not only’ be much’smaller than) —
i.e Sea eho scjacidady Jn. metimes such a pipe wi


ON THE FRICTION OF FLUIDS. 299


charge nothing at all; on the contrary, like the air in Hauksbee’s experiment,
the water which it contains may be dragged after the stream in the larger


pipe.


‘The bad effect of unnecessary dilatations, as well as contractions, in aque-
ducts and in pipes, may be understood from what has been already said of the
loss of force attendant on every change of velocity; a circumstance of a si-
milar nature sometimes happens in the animal economy. When an artery is
dilated so as to form an aneurism, it has been observed that the artery is
usually distended above the cavity; and this effect is easily understood from
the ‘actual increase of resistance which ‘the aneurism produces, united perhaps
~with the previous debility of ‘the artery.


Mr. Gerstner,’has found by some very accurate observations on the motion
of water in very ’small pipes, that the resistance is considerably affected by
the ‘temperature at which the experiment is performed; but in the cases of
rivers, and of such pipes as are‘commonly used in practice, no variations of
temperature, to which ‘they*can be ‘liable, will produce any sensible effects.
His experiments indicate a resistance, where the tubes are very small, which
follows a law so different from that which is observed in more common cases,
that it-appears to be owing to some other cause: this cause is perhaps the-ca-
pillary attraction ‘of the open-end of the tube, and it is the more probable
that the resistance depends on some’such circumstance, as ‘there is reason to
think that the irregularity ony be in great ‘measure removed by placing the
tube eset under water.


300 na pea


LECTURE XXvV. a bie


ON HYDRAULIC PRESSURE.


THE mutual effects of fluids and moveable solids on each other depend
principally on the laws of hydraulic pressure, and of the resistance of fluids,
which haye been considered by Bernoulli as constituting a. separate depart-
ment of hydrodynamics, under the name of hydraulicostatics, and which are
of the utmost practical importance, since the application of the powers of
wind or water to the working of mills, and to the navigation of ships,are wholly
dependent on them. | The impulse of a/fluid differs very materially from that
‘of a solid, for in the motions »of solids, the. least possible finite momentum
must overpower the strongest possible pressure; but since the, particles.of
fluids are supposed to be infinitely small, the momentum of a fluid stream
may always be balanced by a certain determinate pressure, without producing
motion in the solid opposed to it; so that this division of the subject, of hy-
draulics has nothing .analogous to it in simple mechanics, It, is true that
when a certain quantity of a fluid is made to concentrate its action almost
instantaneously, its effect is nearly similar to that of a solid, for here the
essential distinction, derived from the successive action of the particles, no
longer exists. Thus, when a stream of fluid filling a pipe acts suddenly oh an
obstacle at the end of it, it requires to be resisted by a force far greater than
that which originally caused its motion, unless the action of the force be con-
tinued through a considerable space: and for this reason the strength of the
pipe ought to be so calculated as to be able to resist this action; its inten-
sity may, however, be easily diminished by means of an air vessel com-
municating with the pipe, which will allow the motion to be changed ina
less abrupt manner. But in the principal cases which we are about to consider,
the action of the fluid on the solid is supposed to be confined to such of its
particles as are nearly in contact with the surface.


ON HYDRAULIC PRESSURE. ~ $01
When a part of the weight of any fluid is expended in producing a motion
in any direction, an equal force is deducted from its pressure on the vessel
in that direction: for the gravitation,employed in generating velocity, cannot
at the same time be causing pressure; and when the motion produced is in
any other direction than a vertical one, its obliquity must be immediately de-
rived from the reaction of the vessel, or of some fixed obstacle; for it is ob-
vious that a vertical force, like that of gravity, cannot of itself erodiave an
ane: or a horizontal motion.


If a small stream exit from the bottom of a vessel, the weight expend-
_ed in producing its motion is equal to that of a column of the fluid standing
on'a base equal to the contracted orifice, and of twice the height of the
‘vessel. Thus, if the vessel be 16 feet high, the velocity of the stream will
be $2 feet in a second, and a.column 32 feet in length will pass through the
orifice in each second, with the whole velocity derivable from its weight
acting for the same time; so much, therefore, of the pressure of the fluid in
the reservoir must be expended in producing this motion, and must of course
be deducted from the whole force with which the fluid acts on the bottom of
the reservoir; in the same manner as when two unequal weights are connected
by means ofa thread passing over a pulley, and one of them begins to des-
cend, the pressure on the pulley is diminished, by a quantity, which is as much
less than the sum of the weights, as the velocity of their common centre of
gravity is less than the velocity of a body falling freely. If the stream issue
from the vessel in any other direction, the effect of the diminution of the
pressure in that direction will be nearly the same as if the vessel were sub-
jected to an equal pressure of any other kind in a contrary direction; and if
the vessel be moveable, it will receive a progressive or rotatory motion in
that direction. Thus, when a vessel or pipe is fixed on a centre, and a stream
of water is discharged from it by a lateral orifice, the vessel turns round at
first with an accelerated motion, but on’ account of the force consumed in
producing the rotatory motion, in successive portions of the water, the velocity
soon becomes nearly stationary. (Plate XXI. Fig. 372.)


From similar reasoning it appears, that the effect of a detached jet ona
plane surface perpendicular to it must be equivalent to the weight of a po:
of the same stream equal in length to twice the height which is capable of ;


a


= Se


- have e frequently been very erroncousy sated, | ibn eam
liaulewee seeding AGIAN Ey aod ye ve
When a jet strikes a ‘plas wc Bigeye, i nein


'$02 LECTURE XXY.


ducing the velocity. And this result is confirmed by,experiments: but it i
necessary, that the diameter of the plane be at least four times as great as
that of the jet, in order that the full effect may be produced. When also a
stream acts on an obstacle in a channel sufliciently closed, on all sides, to pre-
vent the escape of any considerable portion of water, its effect is nearly the
same as that of a jet playing on a large surface. But if the plane, opposed to
the jet, be only equal to it in diameter, or if it be placed in an unlimited
stream, the whole velocity of the fluid column will not be destroyed, it will
only be divided and diverted from its course, its parts continuing to move
on,in oblique directions; in such cases the pressure is usually found to be
simply equivalent to the weight of a column equal in height to the reservoir, the
surface being ‘subjected to a pressure nearly similar to that which acts ona
part of the bottom of a vessel, while a stream is-descending through a large
aperture in another part of it. (Plate XXI. Fig. 273,)


It is obvious that, in all these cases, the pressure varies as the square of the
velocity, since the height required to produce any velocity is proportional) to
its square. This inference was first made in a more simple manner, from com-
paring the impulse of a fluid on a solid with that of a number of separate


particles, striking the surface of the body, each of which would produce an -


effect proportional to its velocity, while the whole number of particles, acting
ina given time, would also vary in the-same ratio. _ Ifthe solid were in.mo-
‘tion, and the fluid either in motion or at rest, it/is obvious that the relative
velocity of the solid and the fluid, with regard to each other, would be the only
cause of their mutual effects, and that the hydraulic pressure or resistance
must be dependent on this velocity alone, except so far as the limited dimen-
‘sions of the reservoir, containing the fluid, might produce a difference in the
‘internal motions of its particles in different cases. Thus, where the fluid is so
confined, ‘that the whole of the stream acts on a succession of planes, each
portion into which it is divided may be considered as an inelastic solid, strik-
‘ing on the surface exposed to it with a certain velocity: /and in


force must be considered as simply martin ty ymace nn € yy and


not to its square. For want of this’


ON HYDRAULIC PREssURE. 303


the body forwards, in its own’ direction, is found to be very nearly pro-
portional to the height to which the jet would rise, if it were similarly in-
clined to the horizon. But when a plane is situated thus obliquely with
respect to a wide stream, the force’impelling it in tlhe direction of the stream
is somewhat less diminished by the obliquity, at least if we make allowance
for its itttercepting a smaller portion of the stream: thus, if the anterior part
of a solid be terminated by a wedge more or less acute, the resistance, ac-
cording to the simplest theory of the resolution of forces, might be found by
deseribing @ circle on half the base of the wedge as a diameter, which would
cut off a part from the oblique side of the ‘wedge that would be the mea-
sure of the resistance, the whole side representing the resistance to the same’
solid without the wedge: but the resistance is always somewhat more than


the fraction thus found one ten millionth of the cube of the number of de-
grees contained in the external angle of the wedge. (Plate XXI. Fig. 274.)


~ The pressure of a fluid, striking perpendicularly on a plane surface, has been

found to be very different at different parts of the surface; being greatest at

the centre, and least towards the edges; so that if an aperture be made in

the eentre of a circular plane, covering the mouth of a bent tube, the fluid

within it will rise half as high again as if the whole mouth were open. It is

also observable, that two bodies, equal and similar in the form of the part

b meeting the fluid, undergo very different degrees of resistance according to
he the forms of their posterior terminations, and that’ a thin circular plate is
much more retarded than a long cylinder of the same diameter. These cir-
| cumstances are utterly inexplicable upon the vague approximation of sup-
posing the resistance produced by the immediate impulse of separate particles
of the fluid on the solid; but they are no longer surprising, when we consider
the true mode of action of continuous fluids, since all the motion which is pro-
duced by the fluid in the'solid or by the solid in the fluid is communicated
much more by means of pressure than by immediate impulse. The minute
operations of this pressure are too intricate to be accurately developed, but we
may observe in general, that when a body moves along the surface ofa resisting
medium at rest, or when an obstacle at rest is opposed to a fluid-in equable mo-

- tion, the pressure is increased before the moving: substance, and diminished be-
hind it; so that thesurface is elevated at the one part, anddepressed at the other,


this, and the portion to be added may be found, very nearly, by adding to’


304 LECTURE XX¥.


rrr ss


and the more as the velocity is greater. Now it is obvious that the pressure
must be greatest where the elevation is greatest, and hence a perforation at the
centre of the surface indicates a greater pressure than at the circumference.,
Behind the body, this pressure becomes negative, and has sometimes been
called nonpressure; hence it happens that a tube, opening in the centre of the
posterior surface, exhibits the fluid within it depressed below the level of the
| general surface of the water.. Thus, if we suppose the velocity of a body,
terminated by perpendicular surfaces, to be 8 feet in a second, it will require
; the pressure of about a foot, to produce such a velocity, and we may, there-
fore, expect an elevation of about a foot before the body, and an equal de-
pression behind it: consequently an equivalent difference must be found in
the pressure of the water at any equal depths on the anterior and posterior
surfaces of the body. The water elevated before the body escapes continually
towards each side, and the deficiency behind is also filled up in some measure
by the particles rushing in and following the body: but there is in both cases,
a certain quantity of water which moves forwards, and constitutes what is
called the dead water: before, where it is usually most observable, it forms — F
an irregular triangle, of which the sides are convex inwards. If the
posterior part of the body be formed likea wedge, the water on each side will d
be advancing to fill up the vacuity, even while it remains in contact with the -
sides, and the negative pressure will be considerably diminished. For this
reason, the bottoms of ships are made to terminate behind in a shape some-
what resembling a wedge; and the same economy may be observed in the
forms of fishes, calculated by nature for following their prey with the great-.
est possible rapidity. In general, fishes, as well as ships, are of a more obtuse.
form before ethan behind, but it is not certain that there would be any ma-
‘terial difference in the resistance ina contrary direction, although some experi-.
, ments seem to favour such an opinion. Perhaps if the natural form of the dead.
& water, moving before an obtuse body, were ascertained, it might serve to indi- a
cate a solid calculated to move through the water with the least resistance ;,
for the water must naturally assume such a form for inaaynipeotion, and, 6,
_ the friction of fluids on solids being less is n that of fh ithi i
themselves, the resistance would be diminish li | of
same form for a fluid. (Plate XX. Fig 275.) diced ab. Wan tn


A -taivoury Tinta igi onien
‘Supposing a body 1, tobresscnals (


=


ON HYDRAULIC PRESSURE. 305


its surface, there will still’ be an elevation before and a depression behind it,
the less in height, and the greater in-extent, as the depth at which the body
is situated is greater. Such an elevation appears to be in some measure
analogous to the effect of a low were thrown across a river, which raises its
surface, and) prodydes aswell.


__ If two or more oslita, differently formed, the resistances to the motions of
which had_ been ascertained, were caused to move through a fluid in contact ©
with each other, it is obvious that the paths described by the particles of the
fluid, in gliding by them, must be very materially altered by their junction ; ;
and it seems natural to expect that the joint disturbance produced in the
motions of the fluid, when the surfaces are so united as to form a convex
outline, would be somewhat less than if each surface were considered sepa-
rately. Accordingly it is found that no calculation, deduced from experiments
on the resistance opposed to oblique. plane surfaces, will determine with ac-
curacy the resistance to a curved surface. It appears from experiment: that
the resistance to the motion of a sphere is usually about two fifths of the re-
sistance to a flat circular substance of an equal diameter. The resistance: to
the motion of a concave: surface is greater than to a plane, and it is easily
understood, that si ‘since the direction, in which the particles of the fluid recede
from the solid, must be materially influenced by the form of the solid exposed
to their.action, their motion in this case must be partly retrograde, when
they glide along towards the edges of the concave surface, and a greater
portion of force must have been employed, than when they escape with a small-
_er deviation from their original direction. (Plate XXI. Fig. 276.)


For some reason which is not well understood, the hydraulic pressure of
the air appears to be somewhat greater, in proportion to its density, than that
of water. It has, been found that the perpendicular impulse of the air,
on a plane surface, is more than equivalent to the weight of a column of air
of a height corresponding to the velocity, and the excess is said by some to
amount to one third, by others to two thirds of that weight. The resist-
ance appears also to be a little greater for.a large surface, than for a number of
smaller ones, which are together of equal extent.


The resistance or impulse of the air, on each square foot of a surface directly
VOL, 1 Rr


B06 if U 20GROTUREUXXV I
opposed:to it, may im general befound, with tolerable accuracy, in pounds, by
dividing the ‘square of the velocity in a) second, expressed’in feet, by 500.
Thus, if the velocity were 100 feet in a second, the pressure on each square:
foot would be 20 pounds; if 1000 feet, 2000 pounds. For a:sphere of a foot
.in diameter, we may divide the square of the velocity by 1600. _We may
also find, in a similar manner, the utmost velocity that a given body can
acquire or retain in falling through the air; for’ the velocity at which the !re-
sistance is equal to the weight: must be its limit. Thus, if a sphere one foot
in diameter weighed 100 pounds, the square of its utmost velocity would be
160000, and the velocity itself 400 feet in a second; if a stone of such di-
mensions entered the atmosphere with a greater velocity, its motion would
very soon be reduced to this limit; and a lighter or a smaller body would move
still more slowly. The weight of Mr. Garnerin’s parachute, with its whole
load, was about a quarter of a pound for each square foot, the square of its
greatest velocity must, therefore, have beenabout 125, and the velocity 11 feetina
second, which is no greater than that with which a person woulddescend, in leap-
ing from a height of two feet, without stooping. Mr: Garnerin found the velo-
city even less than this, and it is not improbable that the concave form of the
parachute might considerably increase the resistance. Thus, Mr.
found that a plate 9 inches long, when bent into an are of which the chord
was 73, had the resistance increased more than one seventh. The diminution
of ‘the resistance of the air by the obliquity of the surface is,still less than
that of the resistance of water: thus, the resistance on the oblique surfaces
of a wedge is not quite so much less than the | resistance on <phase as its
breadth is less than the length of those surfaces, ey 2


When the velocity of a body moving through an elastic fluid is very great, —
the resistance is increased in a much greater proportion than the square of
the velocity: thus, the retardation beisfroniieingsi esi 2 ad

' 1000 feet in a second, or a little more, becomes ceeolh
the calculation indicates. The reason of this change:
condensation of the air before the ball is necessarily cc
tion, which is very intensely compressed, because th
only spread through the air with a certain ,


eget


than that of the ball; and this smaller portion of air TR oot be smack .
more condensed than a larger portion a cH +


Dr a


_ON HYDRAULIC PRESSURE. $07


ball moves slowly, its effect at any instant is in some degree divided through-
out all that part of the atmosphere, which the sound of the report has reached;
- and if the ball follows the sound very speedily, it is obvious that the portion
ore the ball, which partakes of the effect, must be very small.
; observed to be propagated with a velocity of about 1130 feet in

a cqnnon ball may. be discharged with a velocity of 2000; but
is is very speedily lost, so as to be wholly useless with regard to

‘the ball. ‘If, therefore, we wish to increase the range of a
, must increase its weight; for the resistance increases only
surface of the ball, while the weight is determined by its


td explain,in a manner perfectly satisfactory, the reflection of
‘or of a stone, which strikes the surface of the sea, or of a piece
f ¢ direétion. We may, however, assign ‘some causes

s materially concerned in this effect. In the first'place the
ting at first for some time on the lower part of the ball,
u,adegree of rotatory motion, by means of which the ball,
son the mass of water which is heaped up before it, and
He friction t6 roll upwatds, ‘so thit it mounts again to a


i


essure of the water 4t a depth’ so inconsiderable. But a more
use th n this appears to be the continual succession of new sur-
tat tg he depressed, and which may be supposed to react on the
vee the dame effect;'as a more intense pressure would have
ed stationary ; and the mutual action of the water and
npared to the impulse of an- oblique stream, moving with
ball, which would impel it much more powerfully than the
géure at a much greater depth. It happens in this case,
appear to be the most familiar to us,
it the clearest and simplest explanation. - es eS
‘ ho iad ie“ borated att obaitagem sy
{. 49 mr deol DBRIo to S yi ssREpit u
ip awd sae eat i fara uryosy
i EALOTI BA ete


ito” Ho ;oonelad Sitetadibell b intits


Dhan ‘it could possibly have attained by the mete hy-”


;


LECTURE XXVIL i m3 esa


“ON ‘avpnostintc ‘INSTRUMENTS, AND HYDRAULIC


ARCHITECTURE.


WE hover now examined the fabdasweeted cosh of the principal departments
of hydrodynamics, which may be considered as constituting the theory of the
acience: we are next to proceed. to the application of this theory to,a variety
of practical purposes., Following the same general order as we haye observed


in mechanics, our first division will be analogous) to the subject . of statics,


and will relate to hydrostatic instruments; the second to architecture, con-,
taining some particulars respecting canals and embankments; the: third. to.
machinery, comprehending the modification and application of. the force of
fluids considered as inelastic; the fourth and the fifth to the methods of rais-
ing and removing weights, in which the principal, hydraulic. and pneumatic.
aachines will be respectively explained, and, as a part of this subject, the. appli-..
cation of pneumatic force will also be examined., cal
The principles of hydrostatics: are very frequently applied to the determi--
nation of the specific gravities of the various productions of nature or of art. ,
The diminution of the apparent weight of a solid body, upon immersion into
a fluid, affords an easy method of comparing its density with that of the fluid,
For the weight of the solid being previously determined, if we examine how
much that weight is diminished by plunging the body in pure water, we shall
have the weight of an equal bulk of water; and thence we may immediately
obtain the proportion of the specific gravity of the body to that of water,
which is the usual standard of comparison. And if we weigh a solid of
given magnitude, for instance, a ball of glass, first in water, and then in any
other fluid, the quantities of weight lost in each case will be in the same pro-
portion as the specific gravities of the two fluids. A balance adapted for such
examinations is called a hydrostatic balance; on one side it has a scale as


Le | tales


ON HYDROSTATIC INSTRUMENTS, AND HYDRAULIC ARCHITECTURE. 309


usual, and on the other a loop of fine wire, or of horse. hair, for holding the


suspended in a similar manner: sometimes also a dish is added for holding any
loose substances which will sink in water,: proper. counterpoises being used. as
equivalents for the weight of the dish either in air or in water; and when a
body lighter than water is examined, a weight of known magnitude and
hose i is mnployed for wit it. (Plate XXL Fig. 277.) : ;
i Va. ;
o'The + specific ‘gravities of any substances, and in pendcalee of such ; as are
‘ lighter than water, may also be very conveniently determined by means of a
common balance, employing a phial with a conical ground stopple, filling it
first with water, and then either with a given fluid, or with a portion of the
solid of which the weight has been ascertained, hart with as much water.
as is sufficient to exclude all the air.


For: the ‘speedy examination of a variety of fluids, differing but little in
i specific gravity from some known standard, a hydrometer may he very con~
r ed. This instrument is said to have been invented by Ar-
; consists of a hollow ball, with a weight below it, and a slender
graduated as to express the specific gravity of the fluid by the
ch it ‘sinks. Sometimes the instrument is sunk to a certain
1s of weights placed in a dish at the end of the stem; or different
Vv ts arpalets it below, while the graduations. of the scale are still ob-
may even be applied to finding the specific gravities of solids,
placed: in the dish at the end of the stem, and then in a
from the bulb below the water. (Plate XXI.

. With: i ae heaves i
of ascertaining the specific gravities of fluids differing but
er in density, is to have a series of globules of glass, so
ond to the specific gravities indicated by as many numbers,
n them; and, throwing several of them together into the
of them remains nearly stationary, without cither
‘sinking. This method, though not expeditious, ap-
e from error: the globules are sold by patent, adapted
of the strength of spirituous liquors.


solid to be weighed, which may be changed occasionally for a ball of glass, -


310 LECTURE xxV?.


In whatever manner we compare the specific gravities of bodies with that \
of water, it is necessary, for very accurate experiments, either that the water
be employed at the temperature of the air when moderately warm, or that a
proper correction should be made for its change of bulk at different tempera-
tures. Platina, the densest known substance, is 23 times as heavy,as dis-
tilled water, gold 194, mercury 134, lead 114, silver-11, copper 9, ironand
steel 73, stony substances usually about 2%, rectified spirits, naphtha, the
lightest liquid.2,, cork about}, common air,;,, steam;%<, and pure hydrogen
2a8ystc>. From this comparison, the weight of a cubic foot of any of these
substances may be easily determined; since a cubic foot of. water weighs
nearly 1000‘ ounces avoirdupois, or more nearly 998; thus a cubic foot of
gold would weigh about 195000 ounces, and be worth above 60 000 pounds
sterling; a cubic foot of iron weighs 7750 ounces, ooh 6 ait foot of com-
mon stone ae 2500. 4 :


The method of measuring the bulk of solid bodies by immersing them in a
fluid was applied, by its inventor Archimedes, to the detection of a fraud in
the composition of a mixed metal: and at present the principal use of hydro-
meters is for ascertaining, by the specific gravity of a compound of alcohol and
water, the proportional quantities of its ingredients. | But in all experiments of
this kind, it is necessary to be aware, that a considerable change of the joint
bulk of two substances is often produced by their mixture: and that in ge-
neral their dimensions are considerably contracted. Thus, 18 gallons of
water, and 18 of alcohol, instead of 36 gallons, make only 35, consequently |
the specific’ gravity of the compound is one 35th greater than the mean of the
specific gravities of the ingredients. And in some cases the whole dimensions
of a single substance may even be contracted by the addition of another sub- }
stance: thus iron, by the addition of one dos hoe of its bulk of platina, becomes at
contracted one fortieth of that bull: Nisraosm $5 sbday Seem a

STH OF 21 wi. Wt aemio toed ot

The use of the spittin depends on the tendency of all flui
a horizontal surface, and the freedom, with which th ein
on each other, renders it an instrument capable of t
tube, which is Mit ci gates inte eing neat
the tube, and will never be stationary t th


ON HYDROSTATIC INSTRUMENTS, AND HYDRAULIC ARCHITECTURE. $11


proper »place,, unless'the instrument be very accurately horizontal, or in the
same position in which the mark was adjusted. The surface of the bubble,
especially when it is small, cannot, in a strict sense, be called perfectly hori-
zontal, since its form approaches nearly to that of a sphere; but in order that
the centre of gravity of the water may attain the lowest possible situation, the
bubble must necessarily occupy the highest point of the tube. (Plate XXI.
Fig. 279. ) "


The principles of hydrostatics have been employed in various ways for sup-
plying lamps with oil. It is found that alamp will burn, without consuming
any considerable portion of its wick, as long as it is amply supplied with oil ;
hence it becomes desirable that it should always be level with the surface of the re-
servoir, and this may be effected sufticiently well by placing the wick at the
edge of a very large vessel,or atthe end ofa tube projecting from such a yessel,or
from a vessel closed above, and opening only by an orifice below, which lets in
the air'as the oil escapes through it. | But all these methods are often attended
with inconveniences of various kinds, especially where the lamp is to be em-
ployed likea candle, and placed on a table. A French artist has applied a
little pump, which is worked by means of a spring, for raising the oil from a
vessel under the lamp; but this refinement is too complicated to be practi-
cally useful. Mr. .Keir’s lamp contains a divided cavity, one part of which is
filled with oil, and the other with a saline or saccharine fluid of greater density,
so that when the oil contained in the upper part of the tube is exhausted, its
place is partly supplied by a fresh portion, which is forced up in consequence
of the descent of the denser fluid in a much larger vessel. Still, however; the
surface must be lowered by degrees; but by combining the invention with
Dr. Hooke’s semicylindrical counterpoise, a little modified, the height of this
fluid may be so regulated, that the surface of the oil may remain almost in-
variable, until the reservoir is quite exhausted. For this purpose, the centre
of gravity of the counterpoise must be a little higher than the line which bi-
sects it; and its specific gravity must be about three fourths as great as that of
the fluid ; and in this manner it may be made to raise the surface of the hea-
vier fluid,in proportion asa greater quantity of it escapes,to supply the place of
the oil; and to keep it always at a sufficient height above the surface which
separates it from the oil, so that the wick may be amply and almost arte
supplied. (Plate XXI. Fig. 280.)


a


gig LECTURE XXVI.


The art of embankment is a branch of architecture entirely dependent on
hydrostatical and hydraulic principles. In Holland, and in some parts of
Germany, thisart is indispensable to the existence of large tracts of country;
and even in this island,it has been of extensive utility,in gaining and securing
ground on the sea coast. ©The construction of canals,and the management of
rivers and harbours, are also dependent on the same Principles ; and these im-
portant subjects have been discussed by various writers, in many copious
treatises, expressly devoted to hydraulic architecture.


When a bank or dike is to be constructed, it must be composed of ma-
terials capable of resisting, by their weight, the effort of the fluid to overturn
them; by their lateral adhesion, the force tending to thrust them aside hori-
zontally; and by their density and tenacity, the penetration of the water into
their substance. Ifthe water be in motion, they must also be able to resist
its friction, without being carried away by it, and they must be arranged in
such a form, as to be least liable to be undermined. For many of these
reasons, the surface of the bank exposed to the water must be inclined to the
horizon: the line expressing the general direction of the pressure of the water
ought to be confined entirely within its substance, so: that no force thus
applied may be able to overturn it as a whole; and this condition
will always be fulfilled, when the sides of the; bank make an angle with
each other not less than a right angle. The pressure acting on a bank thus
inclined will also tend to condense the materials, and to increase their la-
teral adhesion, and the particles will become less liable to crumble away by
their weight, than if the surface were more nearly vertical. For embankments
opposed to the sea, a bank much inclined has also the additional advantage
of breaking the force of the waves very effectually. An embankment of this
kind is usually furnished with drains, formed by wooden pipes or by brick-
work, closed by falling doors, or valves, which allow the water to flow out at
low water, but do not permit the tide to enter. To prevent the penetration
of the water, clay is often used, either mixed with gravel, or sunk in a deep
trench cut on each side of the canal or reservoir. (Plate XXI. Fig. 281.)


The greater or less velocity of a river must determine what substances are
capable of withstanding its tendency to disturb them; some are carried away by
a velocity of a few inches in a second, others remain at rest when the velocity


ON HYDROSTATIC INSPRUMENTS, AND HYDRAULIC ARCHITECTURE, 315


amounts to several feet. But in general, the velocity of a river is sufficient to
produce a gradual transfer of the particles of its bed, which are shifted slowly.
downwards, towards the sea, being occasionally deposited in those parts.
where the water has least motion, and serving at last to form the new land,
which is always advancing into the sea, on each side of the mouth of a large

' river. It has been recommended, as a good form for a navigable river or
canal, to make the breadth of the horizontal bottom one fifth of that of the
surface, and the depth three tenths. (Plate XXI. Fig. 282.)


Ifa oa or a reservoir were confined by a perpendicular agitiacs of boards,
and it were required to support it by a single prop, the prop should be placed,
as we have already seen, at the distance of one third of the whole height:
from the bottom; but it would be always more convenient in practice to fix

_ the side of the reservoir at the bottom, than to allow the whole pressure to be
/, supported by the prop, and it might also be strengthened by means of ribs,
. thicker below than above, so as to produce an equal strength throughout,
: wherever the | might be placed: but if the side were formed of a single
plank, of ickness, the strain would be most equally divided by

placing the Prop very ne near the middle of its height.
S) 0b V4 et

The strength of 1h materials employed for flood gates sad! sluices requires
“to be 0 according to the principles, which have been laid down, in
tre € passive strength of substances used for purposes simply me-

si chanical calculations become in this case much more intricate. Thus,
- Grtines eure or plank, of a uniform elastic substance, constituting
the bi of pipe or cistern, and simply supported at the circumference,

d calculation is required for determining the. proportion of”

; of ‘a square plate of the same breadth, supported only at
is, since at each point of the circular piece, there are two cur-
aire to be considered. The square plate will support a.
twice as heavy as the weight which would break it,if placed at
if I have been correct in the calculation, a circular plate will

of water nearly sixteen sevenths as greatas a square plate, But
it will be sufficient to consider the strength as derived.
nce opposed to the flexure in one direction, since the addi-


obtained from the lateral supports, may very properly be neg-- |


.


SUAAASROSTORDE | LECTURE XXVI. UTIKE OITATEANO YI


“lected, as only assisting in affording that additional security which is always
“necessary, to compensate for any accidental defects of the materials. It has
been asserted that the strength of a square plate is doubled when it is. rit

ata onboth: sgergti as this appears to be a mistakes! « x 7

ft


» We may, Geditie be contented with determining the stiain on the ma-
térials in that direction in which they afford the greatest resistance, either
from the shorter distance between the supports, or by the disposition of the
fibres;'and it will be always most eligible to combine these circumstances,
so that the fibres of the wood may be arranged in’ the direction of the short-
est dimensions of the sluice. Ifa sluice be supported above and below only,
the greatest strain will be at the-distance of about three sevenths ofits height
from’ the bottom ; and it is at this point that the greatest strength is required.
But if the boards forming the sluice be fixed across it, in horizontal direc-
tions, their strength must” be greatest at the bottom... (Plate. Fibs thins
= ) +S ey

wi ey eb a sl A es So

In the construction of flood gates, “the principles of carpentry. must be ap-
plied in a manner nearly similat to that which serves for the determination of
the best forms of roofs. The flood gates, if they are double, without a solid
obstacle between them, must meet at an angle: and when this angle is very
open, the thrust against the walls or hinges must necessarily be very great.
If, however, the angle were too acute, the floof gates would require to be
lengthened, and in this case their strength would be far more diminished than
that of a roof similarly elevated, since the hydrostatic pressure actsalways
with full force in a perpendicular direction. The. thickness required for
each flood gate may be determined in the same manner as the thickness ah a
sluice.

Where a sluice board of considerable dimensions is to be occasionally
raised, it may be necessary to ascertain the force which will be required for
overcoming its friction; this friction is nearly proportional to the whole pres-
sure of the water, and may be found, with sufficient:accuracy, in pounds, by
multiplying the square of the depth of the sluice, in feet, by.10. Thus, if
the depth be 3 feet, the friction or adhesion will be about 90 pounds for each
foot of the breadth.


‘


ON HYDROSTATIC INSTRUMENTS, AND HYDRAULIC ARCHITECTURE. 515


If the side of a canal gives way, it is sometimes of consequence to prevent,
as much as possible, the escape of the water. For this purpose it is usual to
have doors or valves in various parts of the canal, which, when the water is
at rest, lie nearly flat at the bottom; but when it begins to run over them,
with a considerable velocity, they are raised by its force, and put a stop to
its motion.


The utility of the introduction of canals into a commercial country may
be estimated in some measure by the effect of the same labour, employed in
removing weights by land carriage and by water. Thus, a single horse can
scarcely ‘draw more than a ton weight on the best road, but on a canal, the
same horse can draw a boat of 30 tons at the same rate.

tar ;
The construction of piers and quays, and the management of harbours, .are
also important departments of hydraulic architecture; it often happens that
besides the application of the general principles of mechanics and hydrostatics
to these purposes, the pectliar circumstances of the case may indicate to an
ingenious artist a mode of performing the required work in an effectual and
economical manner. We may find a good example of such an arrangement, in
the-account given, by Mr. Smeaton, of the method which he adopted for the
improvement of the port of Ramsgate, and which indeed resembles some that
had, been before employed in similar cases: by forming a large excavation,
which is furnished with flood gates, and is constantly filled at high water,
he has procured a number of artificial torrents, which escape through the


sluices, and become powerful agents for carrying away the matter deposited by _


the sea, and tending to impede the navigation of the harbour.


z


Jo


316


LECTURE XXVIII.
ON THE REGULATION OF HYDRAULIC FORCES.


"THOSE modifications of the motions of fluids which are employed either for
conducting them from place to place, or for applying their powers to the pro-
duction of mechanical'effects,may be considered as constituting a separate di-
vision of practical hydraulics, which is analogous to the subject of general
machinery in practital mechanics. :


A supply of water may be obtained from a reservoir, situated above the level
at which it is wanted, whatever its distance may be, either by means of open”
canals, or aqueducts, or of closed:pipes. Where an uninterrupted declivity
cannot be obtained, it is necessary to employ pipes, which may be bent up-
wards or downwards at pleasure, provided that no part of them be more than
thirty feet above the reservoir, and when the pipe is once filled, the water will
continue to flow from the lower orifice ; but it is best in all such cases to
avoid unnecessary angles ; for when the pipe rises and falls again, ‘a portion of
the air; which is always contained in water, is frequently collected in the
angle, and very materially impedes the progress of the water through the pipe.
When the bent part is wholly below the orifices of the pipe, this air may be
discharged by various methods. The ancients used small upright pipes, called
columnaria, rising from the convexity of the principal pipe, to the level of the
reservoir, and suffering the air to escape without wasting any of the water.
It may however frequently be inconvenient or impossible to apply a pipe of
this kind; and the same purpose may be answered, by fixing on the pipe a
box containing a small valve, which opens downwards, and is supported by
a float, so as to remain shut while the box is full of water, and to fall open
when any air is collected in it. (Plate XXI. Fig. 288.)


If the pipe were formed into a siphon, having its flexure above both orifices,


*
oo


} # »
fh oN THE REGULATION OF HYDRAULIC FORCES. 317


it would be necessary to bend it upwards at the extremities, in order to keep
it always fall: but in this case the accumulation of the air would be extremely
inconvenient, since it would collect so much the more copiously, as the water
in the upper part of the pipe would be more free from pressure, and neither of
the methods which have been mentioned would be of any use in extricating
it, It has been usual in such cases to force a quantity of water violently
through the pipe,in order to carry the air with it; but perhaps the sameveffect
might be produced much more easily, by making asmall airtight valve in the
upper part of the pipe, opening outwards, and a Ropceck immediately before
‘it: the stopcock being suddenly turned as often ‘as might be necessary, the
momentum of the water in the pipe would ptobably carry it forwards with
sufficient force to throw out the air; or, if it were necessary external pressure —
might be added, and the air might even in this manner be discharged by the
valve much more readily than without it. But it might be still simpler to
have a pretty large vessel of water screwed on to the pipe, which would not
be filled with air for a considerable time ; and which, when full, might be taken
oteidnennenen se water, (Plate XXI. Fig. 285.)

\ anf ob? LOGE,

“The diameter of'a pipe, required for conveying a given quantity of water to
agiven distance, may be calculated from the experiments of Mr. Buat, which
have been already mentioned. Pipes are usually made of wood, of lead, or of

cast iron; but-most commonly of ledd; and of late tinned copper has been
-d with considerable advantage. A pipe of lead will bear the pressure
) of water 100 feet high, if its thickness be one hundredth of its
even less than this; but when any alternation of motion is pro-
: ch 2 much stronger pipe is required, and it is usual to make leaden pipes
am ins a oh than in this proportion.
; The form and constmction. of stopcocks and valves are very vasious, ac-
ding to their various situations and uses. Stopcocks usually consist of a
part, perforated in a particular direction, and capable of
cket formed in the pipe, so as to open or shut the passage
mes: to form a communication with either of two or
leasure. A valve is employed where the fluid is to be allowed

rection only, and not to return. For water, those valves
the passage least; and none appears to fulfil


318 LECTURE XXVIII.


this condition better than the common clack valve of leather, which is generally
either single, ordivided into two parts ; but it is sometimes. composed of four
parts, united so asto forma pyramid, nearly resembling the double and triple
yalyes which are formed by nature in the hearts of animals. A board, or a
round: flat. piece of metal, divided unequally by an axis on which it moves,
makes also a very good simple:valve. . Where a valve is intended to intercept


the passage of steam, it must be of metal; such a valve is generally a flat _


plate, with its edge ground a little conically, and guided in its motion by a


wire or pin. For air, valyes are commonly made ‘of oiled silk, supported y hs


paiuepet plate or grating. (Plate XXL. Fig. 286, 287.)


Béforeiwe consider the application of the force of fluids in motion’ to prac-
tical purposes,» we mustiattend to the methods of measuring the velocity of
their motions.. This may be done either by a comparison with linear mea-
sures, or by instruments founded 'on the laws of hydraulic pressure. One of
the best of such instruments is the tube invented by Pitot, and improved by |
Buat. A funnel is presented to the stream, and the water in a vertical tube
connected with it is elevated above the level of the river, nearly to the height
corresponding to the velocity : but it is said that the result will be less liable
to error, if the funnel, be covered by a plate with a small orifice in its centre,
the elevation being in this case always half as great again as the height due to
the velocity. Other instruments, intended for the same purpose, require some
previous experiments for determining the degree in which they are,affected by

different velocities ; in this manner the hydrometrical: fly ,is adjusted; the
impulse of the water on two inclined planes turning an axis to which. they
are fixed, and by its means a series of wheels, with’ an index, which expresses
the space described during the.time of observations), Instruments similar to
these have also sometimes been employed, for measuring the relative velocity,
with which a ship under way passes through the water ; and an apparatus, re-


sembling Pitot's, es otro apn tai Whe
addition of a tube inserted into:it on a level wi


iantigseae! di'thia upacthier he
distance described, including: the eff all 1
If — small, it will beneensary


ON THE REGULATION OF’ HYDRAULIC BORGES. ‘S19


Senge ee is considerably retarded by. any coma itiegatth degree of
cold. But when the aperture, which determines the magnitude of the discharge,

is wholly under water, as Captain: Hamilton has placed it, this source of error
is Labeda diminished: (Plate may Fig. 288, 289.)

Sa oot hays!
The sibiiond of ‘ite air may ‘also ‘ Sa by instruments similar to
those’ which are employed for determining the velocity of streams of water.
hi inauricerrn the wind is sometimes indicated by a wind dial, consisting
bail -anindex, connected by wheels with a common vane or weather-
cock. I may be found by means of wind gages of different kinds:

these ae ‘sometimes constructed by opposing a flat surface to the wind, the
4 pressure measured by the flexure of a spring, or by the winding ‘up of
_aweight Peete and sometimes by. receiving the stream in the
‘mouth of a funnel, so as to raise a»column of water, ina vertical tube, to a
mt #0: the pressure, or to condense.a quantity of air inclosed in


? \


D a horizontal tube, which leads to: the cavity. A little
drometrical fly, “may also be employed for yrs ‘the
owith, the st is atria awatch. ©

eel “Sat 3 uO2 ert

ods of asistyhes the force of fluids to useful purposes are
ht, their impulse, or their pressure.- The weight of


y causing it to act within a pipe on a moveable piston, or by
in nto the buckets of a revolving wheel ; its impulse may be di-
dicularly or obliquely against a moveable surface ; and its
obtain, without any immediate impulse, by causing a
ho ontally out of a moveable pipe which revolves round an
orce of the air can only be applied by means of its: ‘impulse, and
ployed either pire or obliquely. an
ted in a shigla reservoir, which? serves to soi pump
the mode of its operation may be determined ‘from’ me-
only ; and it is obvious that if we are desirous of pre-
hole force of the water, we must. employ a second reservoir to

he descent of the first, which may either descend in its turn,

pera


f


e which -is' indicated by the place of a small portion of -


J, by collecting it in a reservoir,which alternately ascends -


on


— | ee


$20: ' BECTURE XXVIII


or empty itself into the first when it has ascended again to its original situa-
tion. The action of a column of water, inclosed in a pipe, is of a nature
nearly similar to that of such a reservoir, excepting that the apparatus is
more liable to friction; the arrangement of its parts is nearly similar, although
in an inverted position, to that which is more commonly employed for rais-
ing water by means of pumps. But both these methods of employing the
weight of water, are in great measure confined to those cases in which it is
to be procured in a small quantity, and may be allowed to descend through a
considerable height, and when the circumstances do not allow us to employ
machines which require a greater space.


We have seen that in order to determine the effect of any force employed
in machinery, we must consider not only its magnitude, but also the velo-
eity with which it can be brought into action, and we must estimate the ul-
timate value of the power, by the joint ratio, or the product, of the force and
the velocity. Thus, if we hada corn mill, for example, in which we wished
the millstone to revolve with a certain velocity, and to overcome a given
resistance, and supposing that this effect could be obtained by means of
@ certain train of wheels from a given source of motion; if the velocity
of the motion at its source be reduced to one half, we must double the
diameter of one of the wheels by which the force is communicated, in
order to.give the millstone the desired velocity, and thus we must introduce
a mechanical disadvantage, which can only be compensated by a double in-
tensity in the force at its origin,


If we apply this estimation of effect to the motion of an overshot wheel,
we shall find that the velocity of the wheel,and consequently its breadth, and
the magnitude of its buckets, is perfectly indifferent with respect to the
value of its operation: for supposing the stream to enter the buckets with the
uniform velocity of the wheel, the quantity of water in the wheel at any one
time, and. consequently the pressure, must be inversely as the velocity, so
that the product of the force into the velocity will be the same, however
they. may separately vary. If, however, the velocity were to become very
considerable, it would be necessary to sacrifice a material part of the fall, in
order that. the water might acquire this’ velocity before its arrival at the wheels
but a fall of one foot, or even less, is sufficient for producing any velocity.


ON THE REGULATION OF HYDRAULIC FORCES. S21


that would be practically convenient : and it is obvious, on the other hand,
that a certain velocity may be procured from a wheel moving rapidly, with
less machinery than from another which moves more slowly. _ In general the
velocity of the surface of the wheel is between two and six feet in a second ;
and whether it be greater or smaller, the force actually applied will always
be equal in effect to the weight of a portion of the stream employed, equal in
length to the height of the wheel. In order to avoid the resistance which

might be occasioned by the stagnant water below the wheel, it is a good
practice to turn the stream backwards upon its nearer half, so that the water,
when discharged, may run off in the general direction of its motion. (Plate
XXb Fig. 290.)


Iewe suffer the stream of water to acquire the utmost velocity that the
whole fall can produce, and to strike horizontally against the floatboards of
an undershot wheel, or if we wish to.employ the force of a river running in a
direction nearly horizontal, the wheel must move, in order to produce the
greatest effect, with half the velocity of the stream. For the whole quantity
of water impelling the floatboards is nearly the same, whatever may be the ve-~
locity, especially if the wheel is properly inclosed in a narrow channel, and
hence it’ is easy to calculate that the greatest possible effect will be produced
when the relative velocity of the stream, striking the floatboards, is equal to
the velocity of the wheel itself. The pressure on the floatboards is equal to
that of a stream containing the same quantity of water, and striking a fixed
obstacle with half the velocity, that is, such a stream as escapes from the
wheel, which must be twice as deep or twice as wide as the original stream,
since its motion is only one half as rapid; and a column of such a stream, of
twice the height due to its velocity, that is, of half the height of the fall,
being, as we have already seen, the measure of the hydraulic pressure, this
force will be precisely half as great as that of a similar column, acting on an
‘overshot wheel, which moves with the same velocity. But the stream thus
retarded will not retain the other half of its mechanical power; since its
greatest effect will be in the same proportion to that of an equal streamacting
on an overshot wheel with one fourth of the fall of the former: and the re-
maining fourth of the power is lost in producing the change of form of the
water and in overcoming its friction. In whatever way we apply the
force of water, we shall find that the mechanical power which it possesses

Vol. I. Tt


—


v
$22 _ LECTURE XXVII.


must be measured by the’ product of the quantity multiplied by the height
from which it descends: for example, a hogshead of water capable of descend-
ing from a height of 10 feet, possesses the same power as 10 hogsheads des-
cending from a height of one foot; and a cistern filled to the height of 10
feet above its orifice possesses 100 times as much power as the same cistern
filled to the height of one foot only.

When, therefore, the fall is sufficiently great, an overshot wheel is far pre-
ferable to an undershot wheel, and where the fall is too small for an overshot
wheel, it is most advisable to employ a breast wheel, which partakes of its
properties ; its floatboards consisting of two portions meeting at an angle, so
as to approach to the nature of buckets, and the water being also in some measure
confined within them by the assistance of a sweep or arched channel which fol-
lows the curve of the wheel, without coming too nearly into contact with it,
so as to produce wnnecessary friction. When the circumstances do not


admit even of a breast wheel, we must be contented with an undershot


- wheel: it isrecommended, for “ahi a wheel, that the floatboards be so placed


as to be perpendicular to the surface of the water at the time that they rise
out of it: that only one half of each should ever be below the surface, and
that from three to five should be immersed at once, according to the m

nitude of the*wheel. Sometimes, however, it has been thought eligible to
employ a much smaller number: thus the water wheel which propels Mr.
‘Symington’s steam boat has only six floatboards in its whole circumference.
pes XXII. Fig. 291, 292.)


Since the ates escaping from an undershot wheel still retains a part of


its velocity, it is obvious that this may be employed for turning a second.


wheel, if it be desirable to preserve as much as possible of the force, In this
case, by causing the first wheel to move with two thirds of the velocity of the
stréam, the.whole effect of both will be one third greater than that of a single


wheel placed in the same stream ; but it must be considered nt fig eel


of the ae will also be materially increased, — : ie Tea,
ten cele he
“Considerable errors wees frequently been made ‘by, santhenssticias and
practical mechanics in the estimation of ‘the force of the wind or the water —
on oblique surfaces : een arisen from inattention to the di


‘


ON THE REGULATION OF HYDRAULIC FORCES. 323


‘tion between pressure and ‘mechanical power. It may be demonstrated that
the greatest possible pressure of the wind or water, on a given oblique sur-
face at rest, tending to turn it in a direction perpendicular to that of the wind,

js obtained when the surface forms an angle of about 55° with the wind; but
that the mechanical power of such a pressure, which is to be estimated from
acombination of its intensity with the velocity of the surface, may be in-
creased without limit by increasing the angle of inclination,and consequently
the velocity» The utmost effect that could be thus obtained would be equal
to that of the same wind or stream acting on the floatboards of an undershot
wheel: but since in all practical cases the velocity is limited, the effect will
be somewhat smaller than this: for example, if the mean velocity of the sails
or floatboards be supposed equal to that of the wind, the mechanical power
will be more than four fifths as great as that of an undershot wheel, that is, in
the case of a windmill, more than four fifths of the utmost effect that can be
obtained from the wind. In such a case Maclaurin has shown that the sails
ought to make an angle of 74°with the direction of the wind: but in practice
it is found most advantageous to make the angle somewhat greater than this,
the velocity of the extremities of the sails being usually, according to Mr.
Smeaton, more than twice as great as that of the wind. It appears, there-
fore, that the oblique sails of the common windmill are in their nature almost
as well calculated to make the best use of any hydraulic force as an undershot
wheel; and since they act without intermission throughout their whole revo-
lution, they have a decided advantage over such machines as require the sails
or fans to be exposed to a more limited stream of the wind, during one half only
of their motion, which is necessary in the horizontal windmill, where a screen is
employed for covering them while they are moving in a direction contrary to
that of the wind: and such machines, according to Smeaton, are found to per-
form little more than one tenth of the work of those which are more usually
employed. The sails of a common windmill are frequently made to change their
Situation according to the direction of the wind, by means of a small wheel, with
Sails of the same kind, which turns round whenever the wind strikes on
either side of it, and drives a pinion turning the whole machinery ; the sails
are sometimes made to furl or unfurl themselves, according to the velocity of
the wind, by means of a revolving pendulum, which rises to a greater or less
height,in order to prevent the injury which the flour would suffer from too great
2 rapidity in the motion, or any other accidents which might happen i ina mill


324 LECTURE XXVIII.


)


of a different nature. The inclination of the axis of a windmill to the horizon is
principally intended to allow room for the action of the wind at the lower
part, where it would be weakened if the sails came too nearly in contact with
the building, as they must do if they were perfectly upright. When it is
_ necessary to stop the motion of a windmill, a break is applied to the surface
of a large wheel, so that its friction operates with a considerable mechanical
advantage. Water wheels with oblique floatboards are sometimes used with
good effect in China and in the south of France: for tide wheels, such float-
boards have the advantage that they may be easily made to turn on a hinge
with the stream, so as to impel the wheel in the same direction whether the —
tide be flowing or ebbing. (Plate XXII. Fig. chee telat


A smoke jack is a windmill in miniature; a kite affords a very fasiliat ex-
ample of the effect of the oblique impulse of the air,of which the action first
causes a pressure perpendicular to the surface of the kite, and this force,
combined with the resistance of the string, produces vertical result capable
of counteracting the weight of the kite. (Plate XXII. Fig. 294.) |


The counterpressure of the water, occasioned by the escape of a stream from
amoveable reservoir, was applied by Parent to the purpose of turning a mill-
stone, and various other authors have described machines of a similar nature :
they may be constructed with little or'no wheel work, and it does not appear
to be necessary that much of the force of the water should be lost in their
operation; but they have never been practically copa net nor
have they perhaps ever had a fair trial. " rat ti


aa 7
Opa


The art of seamanship depends almost entirely sacl pat totihnt of the
forces and resistances of air and water, and if the laws of tiy deacon
with respect to oblique and curved surfaces, were wadioye ce certai


y) ,


would be the best * pone form of a sp
her rigging.


~ When a ship Sainte immediately
in setting her sails, and her velocity is’


ON THE REGULATION OF HYDRAULIC FORCES. 325


by the resistance of the water: but for sailing with a side wind, it becomes
necessary that the immediate force of the wind should be considerably mo-
dified.


If we had a circular vessel or tub, with a single mast, and a sail perfectly
flat, and if the sail were placed in a direction deviating but little from that of
the wind, the tub would begin to move in a direction nearly at right angles


. to that of the wind, since the impulse of the wind acts almost entirely in a


direction perpendicular to that of the sail: but the slightest inequality of the
dimensions of the sail, or of the force of the wind, would immediately disturb
the position of the vessel; and in order to avoid this inconvenience, it would
be necessary to have a moveable body projecting into the water, so as to create
a resistance by means of which the vessel might be steered, and the sail con-
fined to its proper place: and this might be done more effectually by chang-
ing the form of the vessel from round to oval; it would then also have the
advantage of moving much more easily through the water in the direction of
its length than a circular vessel of equal size, and of creating still more re-
sistance in a transverse direction, so that when urged by an oblique force, it
would move in some measure obliquely, but always much more nearly in the
direction of its length than of its breadth. The angular deviation from the
track of the ship is called its lee way, and if we know the direction of the
sails, and the actual proportions of the resistances opposed to the ship’s
motion in different directions, we may calculate from these resistances the
magnitude of the angular deviation or lee way: but hitherto such calcula-
tions have generally indicated a lee way three or four times as great as that
which has been observed. The use of the keel is not only to assist in confin-
ing the motion of the ship to its proper direction, but also to diminish the
disposition to vibrate from side to side, which would interfere with the
effect of the sails, and produce many other inconveniences. When the prin-
cipal force of the wind is applied to the anterior part of the ship, her head
would be naturally turned from the wind if the rudder were not made to pro-
ject from the stern in a contrary direction, and to present the surface of an
inclined plane to the water which glides along the keel, so as to preserve the
ship, by means of the pressure which it receives, in any direction that may be
required for her manoeuvres. Commonly,however,although the sails may be so
arranged that the principal force of the wind appears to be on the fore part of


[sor


a |


Trey
ae,


326 LECTURE, XXVII.


the ship, ‘the curvature of the sails, or some other cause, throws the pressure
further backwards, and ‘the action of the rudder is necessary ‘to prevent the
ship’s head turning towards the wind. (Plate XXII. Fig 295.) fil


- When a ship is steering in this manner on’a side wind, the effect of the
wind has a natural tendency to overset her, and if she is too crank, that is,
deficient in stability, she cannot sail well, otherwise than directly before the
wind, The place of the centre of gravity, compared with that of the méta-
centre, or imaginary centre of pressure, determines the degree of stability,
and the most general way of increasing it is to lessen the weight of the
upper part, and of the rigging of the vessel, to diminish her height, or to in--
crease her breadth, and to stow the ballast as low as possible in the hold.
Too little attention has frequently been paid to this subject, as well as to
many other departments of naval architecture; and although mere théore-
tical inyestigations have hitherto been but of little service to the actual


practice of seamanship, yet it cannot. be doubted that an attention to what


has already been discovered of the laws of hydrodynamics, as well as to the
principles of mechanics in general, must be of great advantage to the navigator,
in enabling him to derive from his own experience all the benefits, which a
correct mode of reasoning is capable of procuring him.


=


307


LECTURE XXVIII.


ON HYDRAULIC MACHINES.


WE shall apply the denomination of hydraulic machines to such only, as
are intended for counteracting the gravity of water, that is, for raising it


from a lower situation to a higher. The simplest of these are buckets, bucket °


wheels, and friction ropes; moveable pipes are the next in order ; and pumps of
various kinds constitute the most extensive and the most important part of
the subject. Besides these and some other similar machines, hydraulic air
vessels and artificial fountains will also require to be examined. 4


A series of earthen pitchers, connected by ropes, and turned by trundles


or pinions, over which they pass, has long been used in Spain, under the.


name of noria: in this country, buckets of wood are sometimes employed in


a similar manner. A bucket wheel is the reverse of an overshot waterwheel, —


and the water may be raised by buckets nearly similar to those which are
calculated for’receiving it in its descent: sometimes the buckets are hung on
pins, so as to remain full during the whole ascent; but these wheels are liable
to be frequently out of repair. Sometimes the reverse of an undershot wheel
or rather of a breast wheel, is employed as a throwing wheel, either in a verti-
cal orin an inclined position. Such wheels are frequently used for drain ing


-fens, and are turned by windmills ; the floatboards are not placed. im the di-


tection which would be best for an undershot wheel, but on the same princi+
ple, so as tobe perpendicular to the surface when they rise out of it, in order
that the water may the more easily flow off them. (Plate XXII. Fig.
296 : . 298.)


, Instead of a series of buckets connected by ropes or chains, a similar effect
18 Sometimes produced by a simple rope, or a bundle of ropes, passing over a
wheel above, and a pulley below, moving with a velocity of about 8 or 10


$28 : LECTURE XXVIII.


feet in a second, and drawing a certain quantity of water up by its friction.
It is probable that the water commonly ascends with about half the velocity
of the rope, and on this supposition we might calculate its depth on the rope
by comparing its relative motion with that of a little river: but the rules,
which serve for calculating the velocity of rivers, do not perfectly agree in
this case with the results of direct experiments ; for the friction required for
elevating the quantity raised by such a machine, appeats from calculation to
correspond to a velocity about twice as great as the actual relative velocity.
While the water is principally supported by the friction of the rope,
its own cohesion is amply sufficient to prevent its wholly falling, or being
scattered, by any accidental inequality of the motion, (Plate XXII. Fig.
299.) . t
raj. eee ‘

The lateral friction of water has been applied in a very simple manner by
Venturi to the draining of land, by means of a stream which runs through it,
allowing the stream to acquire sufficient velocity to, carry it over an inclined
surface, and to drag with it a certain portion of water from the lowest part
of this surface: but the quantity of water raised in this manner must be very


. inconsiderable, and the loss of force by friction very great.


A system of spiral pipes may be placed in the plane of a wheel, receiving
the water at its circumference, and raising it by degrees, as the wheel turns,
towards the axis, where it is discharged; the motion of the wheel being
usually derived from the same stream which supplies the pipes; but the
height to which the water is raised by this machine is very small in propor-
tion to its bulk. A single pipe wound spirally round a cylinder which re-
volves on an axis in an oblique. situation, . has. been denominated the
screw of Archimedes, and is called in Germany the water snail. Its opera-
tion, like that of the flat spiral, may be easily conceived by imagining a
flexible pipe to be laid on an inclined plane, and its lower part to be gra-
dually elevated, so that the fluid in the angle or bend of the pipe may be
forced to rise; or by supposing a tube, formed into a hoop, to be rolled up
the same plane, the fluid being forced by the elevation of the tube behind it
to run as it were up hill. This instrament is sometimes made by fixing a
spiral, partition round a cylinder, and covering it. with an external coating,
either of wood or of metal; it should be so placed with respect to the surface


(


ON HYDRAULIC MACHINES, 329


of the water as to fill in each turn one half of a convolution; for when the
orifice remains always immersed, its effect is much diminished. It is gene-
rally inclined to the horizon in an angle of between 45-and 60 degrees ; hence
* itis obvious that’ its utility is limited to those cases in which the water is
only to be raised to a moderate height. The spiral is seldom single, but
usually consists of three or four separate coils, forming a screw which rises
_slowly round the cylinder. (Plate XXII. Fig. 300, 301.)


- An instrument of a similar nature is called by the Germans a water screw ;
it consists of a cylinder with its spiral projections detached from the external
cylinder or coating, within which it revolves. This machine might not im-
properly be considered as a pump, but its operation is precisely similar to that
of the screw of Archimedes. It is evident that some loss must here be oc-
casioned by the want of perfect contact between the screw and its cover;
in general, at least one third of the water runs back, and the machine cannot
be placed at a greater elevation than 30°; it is ‘also very easily clogged by
accidental impurities of the water: yet it has been found to raise more water than
the screw of Archimedes, when the lower ends of both are immersed to a coi-
siderable depth; so that if the height of the surface of the water to be raiséd
were liable to any great variations, the water screw might b be 4 si ripen to the
screw of Archimedes. (Plate XXII. Fig. 302.) ;
#5 aye a ih .
“Wiles opie pipe, consisting of many convolutions, artanged cithéltn’ 4
i Plane, or in a cylindrical or conical surface,’ and revolving round a
is connected at one end by a watertight joint with an as-
‘eending pipe, while the other end receives during each revolution nearly
_ equal quantities of , and water, the imachine is called a spiral pump. It was
_ invent 1746, by-Andrew Wirtz, a pewterer at Zurich, and it is said to
‘with great success at Florence and in Russia: it has also been
country by Lord Stanhope, and I have made trial of it for
a height of forty feet. ‘The end of the pipe is furnished with
8 ‘as much water as will fill half a coil, which enters the
» the spoon has arrived at its highest situation, the other
of air, which communicates the pressure of the column of
ng portion, and in this manner the effect of nearly 4
nthe whee is united, and becomes sal to that of the co*
Oe at


330 LECTURE XXVIII. .


Jumn of water, or of water mixed with air, in the ascending pipe. The air.
nearest the joint is compressed into a space much smaller than that which it
occupied at its entrance, so that’ where the height is considerable, it be-
comes advisable to admit a larger portion of air than would naturally fill
half the coil, and this lessens the quantity of water raised, but it lessens also
the force required to turn the machine. The joint ought to be conical, in
order that it may be tightened when it becomes loose,’ and the pressure ought
to be removed from it as much as_ possible. The loss of power, supposing
the machine well constructed, arises only from the friction of the water’ on
the pipe, and the friction of the wheel on its axis; and where a large quantity
of water.is to be raised to a moderate height, both of thesé resistances may
be rendered inconsiderable. But when the height is’ very great, the
length of the spiral must be much increased, so that the weight of the pipe
becomes extremely cumbersome, and causes a great. friction ‘on the
axis, as well as a strain’on the machinery : thus, for a height of 40 feet, I
found that the wheel required above 100 feet of a pipe which was three
quarters of an inch in diameter; and more than one half: of the pipe being
always full of water, we have to overcome the friction of about 80 feet of
such a pipe, which will require 24 times as much excess of pressure to pro-
duce a given velocity, as if there were no friction. The centrifugal force of
the water in the wheel would also materially impede its ascent if the velocity
were considerable, since it would be ‘always possible to turn it so rapidly as
to throw the whole water back into the spoon. The machine which I had
erected being out of repair, I thought it more eligible to substitute for ita
common forcing pump, than to attempt to make any further improvement in
it, under circumstances so unfavourable. But if the wheel with its pipes were
entirely made of wood, it might in many cases succeed better: or the pipes
might be made of tinned Copper, or even of earthenware, which might be
cheaper and lighter than lead. (Plate XXII. Fig. 303.)


i rq :

The centrifugal force, which is an impediment to the operation of Wirtz’s
machines, has sometimes been employed, together with the pressure of the at-
mosphere, as an immediate agent in raising water, by means of the rotatory
pump. This machine consists of a vertical pipe, caused to revolye round its
axis, and connected above with a horizontal pipe, which is open atone or at
both ends, the whole being furnished with proper valves to prevent the


ON HYDRAULIC MACHINES. 331


escape of the water when the machine is at rest. As soon as the rotation
becomes sufficiently rapid, the centrifugal force of the water in the horizon-
tal pipe causes it to be discharged at the end, its place being supplied-by
means of the pressure of the atmosphere on the reservoir below, which forces
the water to ascend through the vertical pipe. It has also been proposed to
turn a machine of this kind by the counterpressure of another portion of
water, in the manner of Parent’s mill, where there is fall enough to carry it
off. This machine may be so arranged that, according to theory, little of the
force applied may be lost; but it has failed of producing in practice a very.
advantageous effect. (Plate XXIII. Fig. 304.)


A pump is a machine so well known, and so generally used, that the deno-
mination has not uncommonly been extended to hydraulic machines of all
kinds; but the term, in its strictest sense, is to be understood of those ma-
chines,in which the water is raised by the motion of one solid within another,
and this motion is usually alternate, but sometimes continued so as to consti-
tute a rotation. In all the pumps most commonly used, a cavity is enlarged
and contracted by turns, the water being admitted into it through one valve,
and discharged through another.


One of the simplest pumps, for raising a large quantity of water toa small
height, is made by fitting two upright beams or plungers, of equal thickness
throughout, into cavities nearly of the same size, allowing them only room
to move without friction, and connecting the plungers by a horizontal beam
moving ona pivot. The water being admitted, during the ascent of each
plunger, by a large valve in the bottom of the cavity, it is forced, when, the
plunger descends, to escape through a second valve in the side of the cavity,
and to ascend by a wide pipe to the level of the beam. The plungers ought
not to be in any degree tapered, because of the great force which would be un-
necessarily consumed, in continually throwing out the water, with great velocity,
as they descend, from the interstice formed by their elevation. This pump may
be worked by a labourer, walking backwards and forwards, cither.on the beam or
on a board suspended below it. By means of an apparatus of this kind, describ-
ed by Professor Robison, an active man, loaded with a weight of thirty pounds,
has been able to raise 580 pounds of water every minute, to a height of 114
feet, for ten hours a day, without fatigue ; this is the greatest effect produced
by a labourer that has ever been correctly stated, by any.author; it is equi-


332 LECTURE XXVIII.


valent to somewhat more than 11 pounds raised through 10 feet in a second,.
instead of 10 pounds, which is a fair estimate of the usual force of a man,
without any deduction for friction. (Plate XXIII. Fig. 305.) .


It is obVious that if the plungers were so well fitted to the cavity as to
prevent the escape of any water between them, the ascending pipe might
convey the water to any required height; the machine would then become a
forcing pump, and the plungers might be shortened at pleasure, so as to
assume the form of a piston sliding within a barrel. The piston might also
be situated above the level of the reservoir, and in this case the water would
be forced up after it by the pressure of the atmosphere to the height of about
30 feet, but not much further: and even this height would be somewhat too
great for practice, because the water might sometimes follow the piston in its
ascent too slowly. Such a pump, partaking of the nature of a forcing and a
sucking pump, is sometimes called a mixed pump. In Delahire’s pump, the
same piston is made to serve a double purpose, the rod working in a collar
of leathers, and the water being admitted and expelled in a similar manner,
above and below the piston, by means of a double apparatus of valyes and
pipes. (Plate XXIII. Fig. 306.)


For forcing pumps of all kinds, the common piston, with a collar of loose
and elastic leather, is preferable to those of a more complicated structure :
the pressure of the water on the inside of the leather makes it sufficiently
tight, and the friction is inconsiderable. In some pumps the leather is
omitted, for the sake of simplicity, the loss of water being compensated by
the greater durability of the pump; and this loss will be the smaller in propor-
tion as the motion of the piston is more rapid. (Plate XXIII. Fig. 307.)


Mr. Bramah has very ingeniously applied a forcing pump, by means of the i,
well known properties of hydrostatic pressure, to the construction of a con-
venient and powerful press. The water is forced, by a small pump, into a
barrel in which it acts on a much larger piston ; consequently this piston is
urged by a force as much greater than that which acts on the first pump rod,
as its surface is greater than that of the small one, (Plate XXIII. Fig.
308; )


In the common sucking pump, the valve through which the water escapes


ON HYDRAULIC MACHINES. 3383


is placed within the piston itself, so that the same barrel serves for the ascent
of the water, which rises in one continued line, whilé the piston is raised,
and rests on the fixed valve while it is depressed. The velocity of the stroke
ought never to be less than 4 inches in a second, nor greater than two or
three feet; the stroke should also be as long as possible, in order to avoid
unnecessary loss of water during the descent of the valves. The diameter of
the pipe, through which the water rises to the barrel, ought not to be less than
two thirds of the diameter of the barrel itself. (Plate XXIII. Fig. 309.)


_.A bag of leather has also been employed for connecting the piston of-a
pump with the barrel, and in this manner nearly avoiding all friction: but it
is probable that the want of durability would be a great objection to such a
machine. (aia cic Fig. 310. ) :

Where the height, iistiogh which the water is to be raised, is conplaoeitii
some inconvenience might arise from the length of the barrel through which
the piston. rod of a sucking pump would have to descend, in order that the
piston might remain within the limits of atmospheric pressure. This may be
avoided by placing the moveable valve below the fixed valve,and introducing
the piston at the bottom ofthe barrel. Such a machine is called a lifting pump:
in common with other forcing pumps, it has the disadvantage of thrusting the
piston before the rod, and thus tending to bend the rod, and produce an
unequal friction on the piston, while, in the sucking pump, the principal force
ee “ straighten the rod. - XXIII. Fig. 311.)


“The ro of sucking pump may also be’ tthede to work in a collar of leather,
the water may be forced through a valve into an ascending pipe. By
, air vessel to this, or to any other forcing pump, its motion may
its performance improved ; for if the orifice of the air
itly large, the water may be forced into it, during the stroke .
np, with any velocity that may be required, and with little resistance
O1 while the loss of force, from the frequent accelerations and
of the whole body of water, in a long pipe, must always be con-
» condensed air, reacting on the water, expels it more gra-
inu: ¢ so that the air vessel has an effect analo-
el in mechanics. (Plate XXIIL Fig. $12.)


3384 LECTURE XXVIII) «(


If, instead of forcing the water to a certain height through a pipe, we
cause it to form a detached jet,we convert the forcing pump into a fire engine;
and in general two barrels, acting alternately, are connected, for this purpose,
with the same air vessel; so that the discharge is thus rendered very nearly
uniform. >The form of the ajutage, or orifice of the pipe, is by no means in-
different to the effect of the ‘machine, since the height of the jet may be
much increased by making if moderately contracted, and a little conical
rather than cylindrical. When the air vessel is half filled with water, the
height of such a jet will be about 30 feet, when two thirds filled, about 60,
the height being always nearly proportional to the degree of condensation of.
the air, or to the excess of its density above that of the surrounding atmo-
sphere. Sometimes a double forcing pump, or fire engine, is formed by the
alternate rotatory motion of a flat piston within a cylindrical barrel; the
axis of its motion coinciding with that of the barrel, and the barrel being
divided by a partition into two cavities, which are filled and emptied in the
same way as the separate barrels of the common fire engine. | The mechani-
cal advantage of this machine is nearly the same as that of the more usual
constructions, but it appears to be somewhat more simple than a common
engine of equal force. The partition may be extended throughout the
diameter of the cylinder, the opposite pairs of cavities being made to com-
municate with each other, and thus both sides of the piston may be merece’
at once. (Plate XXIIL Fig. 913.)

aif

A piston placed -in a sich manner has sometimes sien made to revolve
continually, and to force the water through a pipe by means of a slider or a
spring, which intercepts its passage in any other direction.. Machines of this
kind have beer invented ‘and reinvented, by Ramelli, Cayalleri, Amontons,
Prince Rupert, Dr: Hooke, Mr. Bramah, and Mr. Gwynn. Mr. Gwynn’s
engine; which has been employed: in many cases with considerable success,
consists’ of a piston or roller nearly elliptical, well fitted to the cylinder
within’ which it revolves, with a valve pressed lightly against it by a spring,
which causes a considerable part of the water contained in the cylinder to’
be forced; in each revolution into the:pipe: the whole machine’is made of
brass; the spring requires very little force, for the pressure of the water on
the,valve ‘keeps it always close to the roller, and the friction arising from
this cause is even an objection to the machine.” ‘The stream, although never


ON HYDRAULIC MACHINES. ° ‘335


wholly. intermitted, is, however, by no means uniform in its velocity.
(Plate XXIII. Pig. 314. . 317.)


» The pipes, through which water is raised, by pumps of any kind, ought to
be as short and as straight as possible; thus, if we had to raise water to a
height of 20 feet, and to carry it to a horizontal distance of 100 by means
_ ofa forcing pump,it would be more advantageous to raise it first vertically into a
cistern 20 feet above the reservoir, and then to let it run along horizontally,or
find its level in a ‘bent pipe, than to connect the pump immediately with a
single pipe carried to the place of its destination. And for the same reason
a sucking pump should be placed as nearly over the well as possible, in
" order to avoid a loss of force in working it. If very small pipes are used;
they will much increase the resistance, by the friction which they occasion.


Water has been sometimes raised by stuffed cushions, or by oval blocks of
wood, connected with an endless rope, and caused by means of two wheels
or drums, to rise in succession in the same barrel, carrying the water in a
continual stream before them; but the magnitude of the friction of the
cushions appears to be an objection to this method. From the resemblance
of the apparatus to a string of beads, it has been called a bead pump, or a
paternoster work. When flat boards are united by chains, and employed
instead of these cushions, the machine may be denominated a cellular pump;
and in this case the barrel is usually square, and placed in an inclined posi+
tion, but there is a considerable loss from the facility with which the water
runs back.) The chain pump generally used in the navy is a pump of this
kind, with an upright barrel, through which leathers, strung on a chain, are
drawn in’ constant succession; these pumps are only employed, when a
large quantity of water. is to be raised, and they must be worked with con-
‘siderable velocity in order to produce any effect at all. Mr. Cole has im-
proved the construction of the chain pump, so as materially to increase the
quantity of water raised by it. (Plate XXIII. Fig. 318.)


- It is frequently necessary to procure alternate motion in'pumps by means
of wheelwork, and for this purpose the application of a crank is the most
usual and perhaps the best method: Provided thatthe bar by whick: it acts
be sufficiently long, very little will be lost by the obliquity of its situation, and


336 LECTURE XKVIIEL.


it is easy, by means of rollers, or of a compound frame, to confine the head of
the pump rod to a rectilinear motion. When any other mode is employed, it
must be remembered that the motion of the pump rod oughtalways to be
slower at the beginning of each alternation, since a considerable part of the
force is consumed in setting the water in motion, especially where the pipe
is long, and the velocity considerable. Butit may happen that, from the nature
of hydraulic pressure under other circumstances, the resistance may be nearly
equal throughout the stroke: for example, when the motion of the piston is
slow in comparison of that of the water in the pipe, or when the force em-
ployed in producing velocity is inconsiderable, in comparison with that which
is required for counteracting the pressure. In such cases it may sometimes
be eligible to employ inclined surfaces, of such forms as are best adapted
to communicate the most advantageous velocity to the pump rod by their
pressure on a roller, which may be confined to its proper direction by the
same means as when a crank is used. (Plate XIV. Fig. 184. . 187.)


_ The Chinese work. their cellular pumps, or bead pumps, by walking on
bars which project from the axis of the wheel or drum that drives them, and
whatever objection may be made to the choice of the machine, the mode of
communicating motion to it must be allowed to be advantageous.


Pumps have sometimes been worked by means of the weight of water
acting within a barrel, which resembles a second pump placed in an inverted
position. The only objection to the machine appears to be the magnitude of
the friction, and even this inconvenience may perhaps be inconsiderable.
The invention is-by no means modern, but it is best known in Germany
under the name of Héll’s. machine, and it has been introduced into this
country by Mr. Westgarth and»Mr. Trevithick. A chain pump, or a series
of buckets, may also be applied, in a manner nearly similar, to the working of
machinery of any kind. (Plate XXIIL. Fig. 319.) ;


The mediation of a portion of air is employed for raising water, not only in
the spiral pump, but also in the air vessels of Schemnitz. A column of water,
descending through a pipe into a closed reservoir, full of air, obliges the air
toact,; by means of a Pipe, leading from the upper part of the reservoir or
air vessel, on the water in a second reservoir, at any distancé either below ot


ON HYDRAULIC MACHINES. ~ 387


above it, and forces this water to ascend through a third pipe to any height
less than that of the first column. The air vessel is then emptied, and the
second reservoir filled, and the whole operation is repeated. The air must,
however, acquire a density equivalent to the pressure, before it can begin’ to
act; so that if the height of the columns were 34 feet, it must be reduced to
half its dimensions before any water would be raised; and thus half of the
force would be lost; in the same manner, if the height were 68 feet, two
thirds of the force. would be lost, But» where the height is small, the
force lost in this manner is not greater than that\ which is usually spent in
overcoming friction and other imperfections of the machinery employed; for
the quantity of water, actually raised by any machine, is not often greater .
than half the power which is consumed. The force of the tide, or of a
river rising and falling with the tide, might easily be applied by a machine of
this kind, to the purposes of irrigation. (Plate XXIII. Fig. 30,
$21.) )


The fountain of Hero precisely resembles in its operation the hydraulic
vessels of Schemnitz, which were probably suggested to their inventor
by the construction of this fountain. The first reservoir of the fountain is
lower than the orifice of the jet; a pipe descends from it to the air vessel, °
which is at some distance below, and the pressure of the air is communi-
cated, by an ascending tube, to a third cavity, containing the water which
supplies the jet. Many other hydraulic and pneumatic instruments, intend-
ed for amusement only, and some of them of much more complicated
structure, are also described in the works of Hero. (Plate XXIII.
Fig. 322.)


The spontaneous vicissitudes of the pressure of the air, occasioned by
changes in the weight and temperature of the atmosphere, have been applied,
by means of a series of reservoirs, furnished with proper valves, to the purpose
of raising water by degrees toa moderate height. But it seldom happens that
such changes are capable of producing an elevation in the water of each re-
servoir of more than a few inches, or at most a foot or two, in aday: and
the whole quantity raised must, therefore, be very inconsiderable.


The momentum of a stream of water, flowing through a long pipe, has also
been employed for raising a small quantity of water to a considerable height.
vol. 1. a


338 LECTURE XXVIII;


The passage of the pipe being stopped by a valve, which is raised by the
stream, a$ soon as its motion becomes sufficiently rapid, the whole column of
fluid must necessarily concentrate its action almost instantaneously on the
valve; and in this manner it loses, as we have before observed, the character-
istic property of hydraulic pressure, and acts as if it were a single solid; so
that, supposing the pipe to be perfectly elastic, and inextensible, the impulse
must overcome any pressure, however great, that might be’ opposed to it,
-and ifthe valve open into a pipe leading to an air vessel, a certain quantity
of the water will be forced in, so as to condense the air, more or less rapidly,
to the degree that maybe required, for raising a portion of: the water
contained in it, to any given height. Mr. Whitehurst appears: to have
been the first that employed this method: it was afterwards improved by
Mr. Boulton; and the same’ machine has lately attracted much attention in
France under the denomination of the hydraulic ram of Mr. Montgolfier:
(Plate XXIII. Fig. 323.)


339.


LECTURE XXIX.


ON PNEUMATIC MACHINES.


PNEUMATIC machines are such as ave principally dependent, in their


operation, upon the properties of elastic fluids ; they may be calculated either’
for diminishing or increasing their density and pressure, as air pumps and
condensers; or for directing and applying their force, as bellows, ventilators,
steam engines, and guns. f
The density and pressure of the air maybe diminished, or the air may’ |
be perfectly or very nearly withdrawn from a given space, either by means
of a column of mercury, or by the air pump. The ancients sometimes
exhausted a vessel imperfectly hy the repeated action of the mouth, and.
preserved the rarefaction by the assistance of a stopcock. The Torri’:
cellian vacuum, obtained by inverting a receiver filled with mercury, and


‘furnished with a descending tube at least 30 inches long, is the most perfect


that can be procured; but there is generally a portion of air adhering to the
vessels, and mixed with the mercury, which may often be considerably di-
minished by agitation, but can only be completely expelled by boiling the
mercury for some time in the vessel and its tube, previously to their inver-
sion, (Plate XXIV. Fig. 324.)


The construction of an air pump greatly resembles that of a common
sucking pump for raising water; but the difference in the operation to be
performed requires a difference in several particular arrangements. The
objects are, to rarefy or exhaust the air as completely, as expeditiously, and
as easily, as possible, In order that the exhaustion may be complete, itis
necessary that no air remain in the barrel when the valve is opened, and that
the process be very long continued. For, supposing all the parts of an air |
pump to be perfectly well fitted, and the exhaustion to be carried on for any


Bethan i. >


340 LECTURE XX{x.


length of time, the limit of its perfection will bea rarefaction expressed
by the proportion of the air remaining in the barrel, when the piston is down,
to the whole air that the barrel is capable of containing; for such will be the
rarity of the air in the barrel when the piston is raised. It becomes, there-
fore, of consequence to lessen the quantity of this residual air as much as
possible; and at the same time to take care that the valve may be capable of
being accurately closed and easily opened, or that a stopcock may be occa-
sionally substituted for it, which may be opened and shut by external force,
when the elasticity of the air remaining is too small to lift the valve. In
pumping water from 4 well, we raise an equal quantity at each stroke, but in
the air pump, we withdraw at most only equal bulks of the air differently rare-
fied, so that the quantity extracted is continually diminished as the operation
proceeds, ‘Thus, if one tenth of the air were exhausted by the first stroke, only
nine tenths as much, thatis, one tenth of the remainder, would be drawn out
by the second ; hence, in order that the process may be expeditious, it is
of importance to have the barrel as large as possible in proportion to the
receiver.’ In cases where the presence of aqueous vapour would be of no
eonsequence, the exhaustion might be made very rapidly by filling the whole


‘apparatus with water, which was the method first employed by Otto von


Guericke, the inventor of the modern air pump. J


In order to lessen the labour of the operation, two barrels may be em-
ployed, and so connected as to work alternately ; in this manner the pressure
of the atmosphere, acting on both pistons at once, opposes no resistance to
their motion in either direction. In Smeaton’s pump a single barrel has
nearly the same advantage, the rod of the piston working in a collar of
leathers with oil, and the air being excluded from the upper part of the
barrel by a valve, through which the air passes when the piston is raised
near to the top; so that in the descent of the piston there is a vacuum
above it, and the air below opens the valve much earlier, and passes more
completely through it, than in the common air pump; and.the piston is only
exposed to the whole pressure of the atmosphere during the discharge of the
air through the upper-valve. (Plate XXIV. Fig. 925.)


That the air is really removed by the. operation of the air pump, may be
demonstrated by various experiments, which show the absence of its resist-


2


SL


ON PNEUMATIO MACHINES. $41


ance, of its ‘buoyant effect, and of its pressure; such are the descent of a
guinea and a feather at the same time, the equal duration of the motion of
two fly wheels, with their plates placed in different directions, the preponder-
ance of the larger of two bodies which balance each other in the open air,
the descent of mercury or of water in a barometrical tube, the playing of a
fountain’ urged by the expansion of a portion of confined air, and the ebul-
lition of ether, or of water moderately warm. (Plate XXIV. Fig. 326,
327.)


The degree of perfection of the vacuum formed by the air pump, or the
rarity of the air remaining in the receiver, is measured by gages of different
kinds. The simplest gage is a short tube filled with mercury, and inverted
in a bason of the’ same ‘fluid: in this the mercury begins to descend when
the elasticity of the air becomes diminished in the proportion of the height
of the gage to that of the barometer; but on account of the capillary at-
traction of the particles of mercury for each other, there is a depression
within the tube, differing in quantity according to its magnitude, which
renders it difficult to observe the exact situation of the surface when the
height of the column is very small, although, if that height were correctly
ascertained, the allowance to be made for the depression might easily be
calculated. It is, however, more usual to employ the long barometer gage,
in which the pressure is removed from the upper surface of the column of
mercury in proportion as the exhaustion proceeds, and the height to which
it is raised by the pressure of the external atmosphere, is compared with that
of a common barometer, the difference always indicating the density of the
air Jeft in the receiver. | Sometimes also a bent tube is employed instead of
the short gage, the difference of the height in its two branches indicating
the pressure; and this instrument has the advantage of requiring no cor-
rection on account of capillary attraction, since the depressions of the two co-
lumns exactly counterbalance each other. But in all these cases the mercury
must be well boiled in the tubes; and in the bent tube, or siphon gage, the
Operation is somewhat difficult.


The pressure indicated by a gage of any kind depends on the elasticity
of the whole of the fluid remaining in the receiver; but this fluid is not
always atmospheric air alone. In all common temperatures, water,


“342 LECTURE XXIXx.


and many other liquids, have the property of emitting a vapour which pos-
sesses a very sensible degree of elasticity; so that if either water, or any
moist substance, be present under the receiver, it will be impossible to pro-
cure a total absence of pressure, the short mercurial gage commonly stand-
ing at the height of at least half an inch, in the best pumps. Hence, the
vacuum may be made more perfect when the receiver is ground to the plate -
of the pump, with the interposition of an unctuous substance, than when ~
it is placed on wet leather, as it has sometimes been usual todo. The
quantity of atmospherical or incondensable air actually existing in the re-
ceiver, whether mixed with vapour or alone, is measured by means of
Smeaton’s pear gage, which is left open under the receiver during the ex-

haustion, and having its orifice then plunged, by means of a wire passing |
through a collar of leather, into a bason of mercury, receives, upon the
readmission of the air, as much of the mercury as is sufficient to fill it, leaving
only in a tube rising from the neck of the gage, the small quantity of air
which had before filled the whole cavity, so that from the space occupied
by this air, compared, by means of previous measurements, with the capacity
of the gage, the degree of exhaustion of the pump with respect to air may be
estimated. Itis said that inan air pump of Cuthbertson’s construction, sucha
rarefaction has been procured that the air sustained but one hundredth part
of an inch of mercury, that is, it was expanded to nearly 3000 times its ori-
ginal bulk. The pear gage often indicates a much more complete exhaus-
tion, but this measurenient relates only to the quantity of dry air present.


(Plate XXIV. Fig. 328.)


A condenser is the reverse of an air pump; and sometimes the same
machine is made to serve for both purposes ; but the condenser requires more
strength than the air pump, and less delicacy. The gage for measuring the
degree of condensation is a small portion of air contained in a graduated
cylindrical tube, the space that it occupies being indicated by a drop of
mercury which confines it. (Plate XXIV. Fig. 329.)


Diving bells were formerly supplied with air by means of barrels let down
continually from the surface of the water, and taken into the bell by the
divers ; but it is now more usual to force down a constant stream by means
of a pump resembling a condenser in. its construction and operation: the


ON PNEUMATIC MACHINES. : 343


heated air is suffered to escape by a stopcock at-the upper part of the bell,
When proper care is taken to lower the machine gradually, the diver can
support the pressure of an atmosphere of twice or thrice the natural density.
It would be advisable that every diver should be provided with a float of
_ cork, or with a hollow ball of metal, which might be sufficient to raise him
slowly to the surface, in case of any accident happening to the bell; for want
of a precaution of this kind, several lives have been lost from confusion in
the signals. (Plate XXIV. Fig. 330.)
Bellows are commonly made of boards connected by leather, so as to
allow of alternately increasing and diminishing the magnitude of their cavities,
the air being supplied from without by a valve. The blast must be inter-
mitted while the cavity is replenished ; and in order to avoid this ineonyeni-
ence, a second cavity is sometimes added, and loaded with a weight, which
preserves the continuity of the stream. _ If great uniformity be required in the
blast, it will be necessary to take care that the cavity be so formed as to be
equally diminished while the weight descends through equal spaces; but not-
withstanding this precaution, there must always be an additional velocity
while the new supply of air is entering from the first cavity. Sometimes the
construction of the bellows resembles that of a forcing pump; and then, if
-the barrel is single, a second barrel, loaded with a weight, must be provided,
in order to equalise the blast: or a vessel inverted in water, and either loaded
or fixed, may supply the place of the second barrel. The first cavity may
also be formed of a similar inverted vessel, suspended to a beam, so as to be
moved up and down in the water, and such a machine is much used, in large
founderies, under the name of hydraulic bellows. The quantity of water em-
ployed may be much diminished, and the operation expedited, by introduc-
‘ing, in the centre of the inverted vessel, a fixed solid, or an internal inverted
vessel, capable of nearly filling up the cavity of the moveable vessel when
‘it is in its lowest position, so that the water only occupies a part of the
interstice between the vessels. (Plate XXIV. Fig. 331.)


The gasometer differs little from the hydraulic bellows, except that it is
“provided with stopcocks instead of valves, and the moveable cylinder is sup-
ported by a counterpoise, which, in the best kind, acts on a spiral fusee,


344 LECTURE XXIXx.


calculated to correct the difference of pressure arising from the greater or less
immersion of the cylinder. (Plate XXIV. Fig. $32.)


- A shower of water, or even an irregular stream, being conveyed through
a descending pipe, plunged into the water of a reservoir, a large quantity
of air is carried down with the water, and rises to the upper part of an in-
verted vessel which surrounds the pipe, whence it may be conveyed through
another pipe, in a rapid stream, for any required purpose; and the water es-
capes at the bottom of the air vessel into the general reservoir, from the
surface of which it runs off. The quantity of air supplied by these shower
bellows is, however, small. (Plate XXIV. Fig. 333.)


The velocity of the blast produced by any pressure, forcing the air through
a pipe of moderate dimensions, may readily be determined from the height of
a column of air equivalent to the pressure. Thus, if the hydraulic bellows


were worked with a constant pressure of 4 feet of water, the velocity would.


correspond to a height of about 3300 feet, and the air would move through a
space of about 460 feet in a second. But in this calculation no allowance is
made for any of the causes which diminish in all cases the discharge of fluids,
and the velocity actually observed is only five eighths as great as that which cor-
responds to the height; that is, in the example here given, 285 feet in a
second, when the air escapes through a small orifice; -but when it moves in
a pipe, about three fourths, or 345 feet. If the pipe were of considerable
length, there would also be a diminution of velocity on account of friction.
In some bellows actually employed, a pressure equivalent to 9 feet of water is
applied, and in this case the velocity must be about 500 feet in a pees

Bellows may be used for the ventilation of amine, either by forcing air
into it, or by drawing it out through:a pipe connected with the valve.
The wind may also be received by the mouth of a tube a little conical, and
may be made to cause a current where it is conveyed; such an instrument is
sometimes called a windsail, or a horse head. It has been proposed to draw
the air up through a pipe by the lateral friction of a current of air received
by such a funnel, but the effect would probably be too small to be of much
practical utility. ;


ON PNEUMATIC MACHINES. 345


A corn fan is turned by the hand, or by machinery ; its simplest operation
is to cause a portion of air to revolve with it, and-to create a wind in the di-
rection of its circumference. But when a small fan is made to revolve-with.
great rapidity, as in Papin’s Hessian bellows, the centrifugal force «causes
the air admitted at the centre to rush towards the circumference, and to. pass
with great velocity through a pipe inserted there. The common ventilator
placed in windows, which revolves in the same manner as a smoke jack, ‘in
consequence of the impulse of a current of air, serves only to retard a little
the entrance of that current, to disperse it in some measure in different di-
rections, and to prevent any sudden increase of the intensity of the draught ;
but it has little or no power of acting on the air,so as to prevent the decrease
of the velocity of the current. (Plate XXIV. Fig. 334.)


The ranialion: of heat affords us also a very effectual sia of ventilation,
Its action upon air at common temperatures occasions an expansion of
about +t. for every degree that Fahrenheit’s thermometer is raised; the air
becomes in the same proportion lighter, and the fluid below it is consequently
relieved from a part of its weight: the pressure of the surrounding atmosphere,
therefore, preponderates,and the lighter column is forced upwards. When the.
shaft of amine communicates with the external air at two. different heights,
there is generally:a sufficient ventilation from the difference of the tempera=
tures‘of the air in the shaft, and of the surrounding atmosphere: for the
temperature ofthe earth is nearly invariable, it therefore causes the airim
the shaft to be warmer in winter than the external air, and colder in sum~
mer; so that there is a current upwards in winter, and downwards in sum-
mer; and in the more temperate seasons, the alternations take place
in the course of the day and night. For a similar reason, there is
often .a current down a common chimney in summer; but when the fire


- is burning, the whole air of the chimney is heated, and ascends the more


rapidly as the height is greater. It would be easy,,.from the principles
of hydraulics, if the length of the chimney, and the mean temperature -
of the air . in it-were given, to calculate the velocity of; the draught: thus,
if the height of the chimney were 50 feet, and the air contained in it
10 degrees hotter than. the external air, the expansion would be one ‘fit
tieth, and, the pressure of the \whole column being» diminished. one fi:
tieth, the difference would be equivalent. to a column of one foot in height,
You. 1: yy é


346 LECTURE XXIX.


and such a column would represent the pressure causing the draught, which


might, therefore, be expected to have a velocity of 6 feet in a second. If
the room were perfectly closed, the air contained in it would by degrees
become so much lighter than the external air, as would be equivalent to one


foot of the height of the column causing the pressure, and the current.


would then stop; if fresh air were gradually admitted by a small ori-
fice, the current would again go on, but the air in the room would always
remain somewhat rarer than the external atmosphere, unless a fresh supply
were admitted through ample openings.

The object of a-chimney is not so much to ventilate the room, as to pro-

vide a sufficiently rapid supply of air for maintaining the process of com-
bustion, and to carry off the products of that process: hence, it is desirable
to allow as little air as possible to enter the chimney without passing through
the fire; and this is the best general mode: of avoiding smoky chimnies.
For wind furnaces, the flue should be as equable as possible, throughout its
height, or widened rather than contracted in its ascent, and free from any
considerable angles.
‘The ascent of a balloon is an effect of the same kind as that of air in a
chimney, and arises sometimes from the same cause, when the air within it
is expanded by heat; but more commonly from the greater rarity of hydro-
gen gas, with which the balloon is filled, and which, when pure, is only one
thirteenth as heavy as atmospherical air, but as it’ is commonly used, about
one fifth or one sixth. .


.. The steam engine is perhaps the most magnificent effort of mechanical
power; it has undergone successive changes, and it appears to have been
brought very near to perfection by the improvements of Mr. Watt. The
pressure of steam was first applied bythe Marquis of Worcester, and after-
wards by Savery, to act immediately on the surface of -water contained in a
close vessel,and this water was forced, by the elasticity of the steam,-to ascend
through a pipe. But-a great degree of heat was required for raising water to
any considerable height by this machine: for, in! order that steam may be
made capable of supporting, in addition to the atmospherical. pressure, a
column of 34 feet of water, its temperature must be raised to 248° of Fahren-
4 t :


_ ON PNEUMATIC MACHINES. 347


heit, and fora column of 68 feet, to 271°; such a pressure, also, acting
on'the internal surface of the vessels, made it necessary that they should be
extremely strong; and the height to which water could be drawn up from:
below, when the steam was condensed, was limited to 33 or 34 feet. Astill
greater objection was, however, the great quantity of steam necessarily’
wasted, on account of its coming into contact with the cold water and the
receiver, the surfaces of which required to be heated to its own temperature,
before the water could be expelled; hence a tenth or a twentieth part only
of the steam produced could be effective; and there would probably have
been a still greater loss, but for the difficulty with which heat is conducted
downwards in fluids, These inconveniences were in great measure avoided
in Newcomen’s engine, where the steam was gradually introduced into a
cylinder, and suddenly condensed by a jet of water, so that the piston was
forced down with great violence by the pressure of the atmosphere, which pro-
duced the effective stroke; this effect was,- however, partly employed in rais-
ing a'counterpoise, which descended upon the readmission of the steam, and
worked a forcing pump in its return, when water was to be raised. The
condensation, although rapid, was, however, neither instantaneous, nor
complete, for the water injected into the cylinder had its temperature
considerably raised by the heat emitted by the steam during its condensation ;
it could only reduce the reinaining steam to its own temperature, and at
this temperature it might still retain a certain degree of elasticity; thus, at
the temperature of 180° steam is found to be capable of sustaining about
half the pressure of the atmosphere, so that the ‘depression of the piston
must-have been considerably retarded by the remaining elasticity of the steam,
when the water was much heated. The water of the jet was let off when'the
piston was lowest, and was afterwards pumped up to serve the boiler, as it had
the advantage of being already hot. This engine, with Beighton’s apparatus for
turning the cocks, was until Jately in general use, and it is still very frequently
émployed. In this, as well as in other steam engines, the boiler is furnished
with a safety valve, which is raised when the force of the steam beconies a little
greater than that of the atmospheric pressure; and it is supplied with water by
means of another valve,which is opened, when the surface of the water within
it falls too low, by the depression of a block of stone, which is partly supported
by the water. (Plate XXIV. Fig. 335, 336.)


348 LECTURE XXIx.


. The cylinder of Beighton’s machine is necessarily much cooled by the ad-
mission of thejet, and by exposure tothe air. Mr. Watt has avoided this in-
convenience by performing the condensation in a separate vessel, into which
a‘small jet is flowing without intermission; and by introducing the steam
alternately above and below the piston, the external air is wholly excluded ;


the piston rod working in a collar of leathers, so that the machine has a_


double action, somewhat resembling that of Lahire’s double pump; and the
stroke being equally effectual in each direction, the same cylinder, by means
of an increased quantity of steam, performs twice as much-work as in the
common engine. We might also. employ, if we thought proper, a lower
temperature than that at which water usually boils, and work in this man-
ner with a smaller quantity of steam; but there would be some difficulty in
completely preventing the insinuation of the common air. On the other
hand, we may raise the fire so as to furnish steam at 220° or more, and thus
obtain a power somewhat greater than that of the atmospheric pressure; and
‘this is found to be the most advantageous mode of working the engine; but
the excess of the force above the atmospheric pressure cannot be greater than
that which is equiyalent to the column of water descending to supply the
boiler, since the water could not be regularly admitted in opposition to such
a pressure. The steam might also be allowed to expand itself within the cy-
linder for some time after its admission, and in this manner it appears from
calculation that much more force might be obtained from it than if it were
condensed in the usual manner .as soon as its admission ceases; but’ the


force of steam thus expanding is much diminished by the cold which always -


accompanies such an expansion, and this method would be liable to several
other practical inconveniences.


The peculiarities of Mr. Watt’s construction require also some other ad-
ditional arrangements; thus, it is necessary to have a pump, to raise not only
the water out of the condenser, but, also the air, which is always extricated
from the water during the process of boiling. If the water.employed has
been obtained from deep wells or mines, it contains. more air than usual, and
ought to be exposed for some time inan open reservoir before itis used ; for it ap-
pears that the quantity of air,which can be contained in water, is nearly in propor-
tion to the pressure to which it is subjected. ‘The admission of the steam into


ON PNEUMATIC MACHINES. 319.


the cylinder is regulated by the action of a double revolving pendulum.
The piston is preserved in a situation very nearly vertical by means of a
moveable parallelogram, fixed on the beam, which corrects its curvilinear
motion by a contrary curvature.. In the old engines, a chain working on an
arch was sufficient, because there was no thrust upwards. Whena rotatory
motion is required, it may be obtained either by means of a crank, or of a sun
and planet wheel,with the assistance of a fly wheel; this machinery is generally
applied to the opposite end of the beam; but it is sometimes immediately con-
nected with the piston, and the beam is not employed. The cylinder is usually
inclosed within a case, and the interval is filled with steam, which serves to
confine the heat yery effectually. (Plate XXIV. Fig. 337.)


The steam engines of Messrs. Boulton and Watt are said to save three fourths
of the fuel formerly used; and it appears that only one fourth of the whole
force of the steam is wasted: Such a machine, with a thirty inch cylinder,
performs the work of 120 horses, working 8 hours each in the day.


When the water producing the condensation is to be raised from a great
depth, a considerable force is sometimes lost in pumping it up. Hence,
Mr. Trevithick has attempted, as Mr. Watt had indeed long before pro-
posed, to avoid entirely the necessity of condensation, by employing steam
ata very high temperature, and allowing it to escape, when its elasticity is
so reduced by expansion, as only to equal that of the atmosphere: the air
pump is also unnecessary in this construction,and for a small machine, it may
perhaps succeed tolerably well. But there must always be a very consi-
derable loss of steam, and although the expense of fuel may not be increased
quite in the same proportion as the elasticity of the steam, yet the differ-
ence is probably inconsiderable. A great number of less essential alterations
have also been made in Mr. Watt's arrangements by various engineers, but
they have generally been calculated either for obtaining some subordinate
Purpose of convenience, or for imposing on the public by a fallacious appear-
ance of novelty. (Plate XXIV. Fig. 338.)


1]
The force of steam, or of heated vapour, is probably also the immediate
agent in the astonishing effects produced by the explosion of gunpowder.
The initial elasticity of the fluid by which a cannon ball is impelled, ap-


350 : LECTURE XXIX.


pears, from Bernoulli's calculation, to be at least equal to ten thousand times
the pressure of the atmosphere, and upon the most moderate computation,
from Count Rumford’s experiments, to be more than three times as great as
this. The quantity of moisture, or of water of crystallization, contained in
the powder, is certainly too small to furnish steam enough for so great an
effect. We have no reason to suppose that the elasticity of a given quantity
’ of any aeriform fluid or vapour is increased more than about one five hundreth
for each degree of Fahrenheit that its temperaturé is elevated; and if we
suppose the heat to be raised to more than 5000 degrees, the force'of each
grain of water converted into steam will only be increased tenfold ; so that
if the elasticity were 40 thousand times as great, the density must be 4
thousand times as great as that of ordinary steam, and the whole space must
be filled with an aqueous vapour almost twice as dense as water itself. It is,
therefore, probable that some other parts of the materials assume, together
with the water, the state of vapour, and possess in this form a much greater
elasticity than that of the steam: for the quantity of fluids permanently
elastic, which are extricated, must be allowed to be wholly inadequate to the
effect.


The force of fired gunpowder is found to be very nearly proportional to
the quantity employed; consequently, if we neglect the cousideration of the
resistance of the atmosphere, the square of the velocity of the ball, the
height to which it will rise, and its greatest horizontal range, must be di-
rectly as the quantity of powder, and inversely as the weight of the ball.
Count Rumford, however, found that the same quantity of powder exerted
somewhat more force on a large ball than on a smaller one. ,


The essential properties of a gun are to confine the elastic fluid as com-
pletely as possible, and to direct the motion of the bullet in a rectilinear path ;
and hence arises the necessity of an accurate bore. The advantage of a rifle
barrel is principally derived from the more perfect contact of the bullet with
its cavity; it is also supposed to produce a rotation round an axis in the di-
rection of its motion, which renders it less liable to deviations from its path on
account of irregularities in the resistance of the air. "The usual charge of
powder is one fifth or one sixth of the weight of the ball, and for battering


ON PNEUMATIC MACHINES, 355


one third. When a24 pounder is fired with two thirds of its weight of powder, it
may be thrown almost four miles, the resistance of the air reducing the
distance to about one fifth of that which it would describe in a vacuum.


Bullets of all kinds are usually cast in separate moulds: shot are granu-
lated by allowing the lead, melted with a little arsenic, to pass through
perforations in the bottom of a vessel, and to drop in a shower into water.
The patent shot fall in this process through a height of 120 feet: the round-
est are separated by rolling them down an inclined plane slightly grooved,
those which are of an irregular fornt falling off at the sides.
its i,

Condensed air may also be employed for propelling a bullet by means of
an air gun, an instrument of considerable antiquity, but of little utility. Tt
is obvious that no human force can so far increase the density of air as to
make its elasticity at all comparable to that of the fluid evolved » by
fired gunpowder, and even if it were reduced to such a state, its effects’
would still be far inferior to those of gunpowder; for the utmost velocity,
with which it could expand itself, would not exceed 1300 feet in a second,
and it would, therefore, be incapable of imparting to a ball a velocity even
as great as this, while the vapour of gunpowder impels a heavy ball with a
velocity of more than’2000 feet in a second. When, however, it is consi-
dered that by far the greatest part of such a velocity as this is usclessly em-
ployed, and that the mechanical power which is practically obtained from
gunpowder is much more expensive than an equivalent exertion of any of the
ordinary sources of motion, it must be allowed that the force of condensed
air may possibly be applied in some cases, with advantage, as a substitute for
that of gunpowder. (Plate XXIV. Fig. 339.)


BIAS tis ee lm,


St aan a a ae ena


a youn 9958


LECTURE XXX.
ON THE HISTORY OF HYDRAULICS AND PNEUMATICS.


NOTWITHSTANDING a few observations and experiments made by.
Aristotle and his predecessors, the properties of fluids had scarcely been the
subjects of much accurate investigation before the time of Archimedes. The
progress, which the science of hydrostatics in particular made under this
eminent mathematician, does the highest honour to his genius and penetra-.
tion. | His treatise on floating bodies, although the theorems which it.con-
tains»are not .so general as they have been rendered since the late improve-
ments in the methods of calculation, still affords us instances of very in-


. genious determinations of the equilibrium of floating bodies of different


forms, grounded on the true principles of the opposition of the general direc-
tions of the weight of the body and of the pressure of the fluid ; and in this man-
ner he has shown, in what. cases the equilibrium of conical and conoidal solids
will be stable, and in what cases unstable. Archimedes was the inyentor of
the mode of measuring the bulk of a solid by immersing it in a fluid: to us, .
indeed, there appears to have been little difficulty in the discovery, but the
ancients thought otherwise: Vitruvius observes that this invention indicates
a degree of ingenuity almost incredible. The philosopher himself is said to
have valued it is so highly, that. when it first occurred to him, in a public
bath; he hastened home in an ecstasy, without recollecting to clothe him-
self, in order to apply it to the determination of the specific gravity of
Hiero’s crown, and to the detection of the fraud of the maker, who had _re-
turned the crown equal in weight to the gold that was given him, but had ~
adulterated it with silver, and imagined, that on account of the complicated
form of the work, which rendered it almost impossible to determine its bulk
by calculation, he must infallibly escape conviction. The hydrometer,
which has sometimes been attributed to Hypatia, a learned Greek lady of


| |.


ON THE HISTORY OF HYDRAULICS AND PNEUMATICS. — 353


Constantinople, is mentioned by Fannius, an early writer on weights and
measures, and is ascribed by him to Archimedes.


The forcing pump, or rather the fire engine, was the invention of Ctesibius of
Alexandria, the greatest mechanic of antiquity after Archimedes. He is
also said to have invented the clepsydra, for the hydraulic measurement of
time, and Philo informs us that he constructed an air gun, for propelling
a stone, or rather’a ball, by means of air, previously condensed by a syringe.
The ball was not immediately exposed to the action of the air, but was im-
pelled by the longer end of a lever, while the air acted on the shorter.
Ctesibius is said to have been the son of a barber, and to have had his at-
tention turned to mechanics and pneumatics, by being employed to fit a
shutter, with a counterpoise sliding in a wooden pipe, for his father’s shop
window. :


‘Hero was a-cotemporary, and a scholar of Ctesibius; he describes, in his
treatise on pneumatics, a number of very ingenious inventions, a few of
which are calculated for utility, but the greater part for amusement only;
they are principally siphons variously concealed and combined, fountains,
and water organs, besides the syringe and the fire engine. The description
of this engine agrees precisely with the construction which is at this day —
the most usual; it consists of two barrels, discharging the water alternately
into’ dn air vessel; and it appears from Vitruvius, that this was the
original form in. which Ctesibius invented the pump. Hero supposes thé
possibility of a vacuum in the intervals of the particles of bodies, ob-
serving that without it no body could be compressible; but he imagines that
avacuum cannot exist throughout a perceptible space, and thence derives the
principle of suction. The air contained in a given cavity may be rarefied,
he says, by sucking outa part of it, and he describes a cupping instrument,
which approaches very nearly to the nature of an imperfect air pump.
€Plate XXIV. Fig. 324.)


After the time of Ctesibius and Hero, the science of hydraulics made
little further progress, until the revival of letters. The Romans had water
mills: in the time of Julius Caesar, which are described by Vitruvius; and
it appears that their! aqueducts were well built, and their waterpipes well

VoL. I, Zz


354 LECTURE XXX.


arranged. Pipes of lead were, however, less frequent than at present, from
an apprehension of the poisonous quality of the metal, which was not wholly
without foundation. Some say that the ancients had no chimnies, but


' whatever may be the authorities, the opinion is extremely improbable,


It was in the middle ages that navigable canals began to be considerably


multiplied, first in China, and afterwards in other parts of the world.’ The


canal from the Trent to the Witham, which is the oldest in England, is said
to have been dug in 1134. The date of the earliest windmills has been re-
ferred to the year 1299. The invention of gunpowder possesses perhaps an
equal claim with theart of printing, to the honour of being considered as consti-
tuting the most marked feature, that distinguishes the character of ancient from
that of modern times; its introduction must necessarily have tended to
produce material alterations, and perhaps improvements, in the habits. of
nations and of individuals. It is said to have been known long since to the
Chinese, and our countryman Roger Bacon was evidently acquainted with
its properties; but it was not actually employed in Europe or in its neighbour.
hood till about the year 1330; and the earliest artillery appears to have been
that which was used by the Moors, at the siege of Algesiras, in 1334... King
Edward had four pieces of cannon at the memorable battle of Cressy, in
1346. sey ¥ itt


About the year 1600, Galileo made the important discovery of the effects of
the weight and pressure of the atmosphere, in the operation of suction, and in
various other phenomena. Before his time, it was generally supposed that
water was raised by a sucking pump, on account of the impossibility of the
existence of a vacuum: if, however, a vacuum had been impossible in na-
ture, the water would have followed the piston to all heights, however great, but
Galileo found that the height of its ascent was limited to about 34 feet, and con-
cluded that the weight ofa column of this height was the measure of the magni-
tude of the atmospherical pressure. His pupil Torricelli afterwards confirmed
the explanation, by showing that a column of mercury was only supported
when its weight was equal to that of a column of water standing on the
same base; hence the vacuum obtained by means of mercury is-often called
the Torricellian vacuum. Torricelli corrected also, in 1644, the mistake of
Castelli respecting the quantities of water discharged’ by equal orifices, at


ON THE HISTORY OF HYDRAULICS‘ AND PNEUMATICS. 355.


different distances below the surface of the water in the reservoir. Castelli’s


them really tended: to the improvement of the science of hydraulics,
but others appeared to show, that. a double height of the head of. water
produced ja double, discharge. Torricelli’s more. accurate observations
proved that.a,quadruple, height was required in order to produce a double
yelocity; and his assertions were afterwards fully confirmed by Mariotte and


so ew haiiietrsimy


ta ditsles habinbethe: year 1654, Otto’ von Guericke, of Magdeburg, first
constructed a machine similar to the air pump, by inserting the barrel-of a fire
engine into a cask of water, so that when the water was drawn out by the


operation of the piston,, the, cavity. of the cask remained nearly void of all»


material substance. But finding that. the air rushed in between or through

the staves of the cask, he inclosed.a/smaller cask in a larger one, and made

the vacuum in, the/internal one more complete, while the intervening space
remained filled with water;, yet still he found that the water was forced into

the inner cask through the pores of the wood, He then procured a sphere of.

copper, about two feet in diameter, and was exhausting it in the same way,

when the pressure of the air crushed it, with a loud noise. This machine

was more properly a water pump, than an air pump, but the inventor soon

after improved his apparatus, and made all the experiments which are to this

day the most usually exhibited with the air pump, such as the apparent
cohesion of two exhausted hemispheres, the playing of a jet by. means of the
expansion of a quantity of air inclosed in a jar, the determination of the

air’s weight, and others of a similar nature. He also observed, that for

i very accurate experiments, the yalve of the pump might be raised at each
sek by extol fa and he particularly noticed the perpetual production
that he generally employed, which caused an imper-
Anaccount of his experiments was first published
by Caspar Schott, and afterwards by himself, in his
rimenta nova Magdeburgica, printed in 1672 at Am-
evi | 4 : ‘


ye sy 1658, Hooke finished an air pump for Boyle, t-te la-


experiments, made about. 1640, were the first of the kind, and some of


356 : LECTURE XXX,


boratory he was an assistant: it was’ more convenient than Guericke’s, but:
the vacuum was not so perfect; yet Boyle’s numerous and judicious experi-
ments gave, to the exhausted receiver of the air pump, the:name of the Boy-
lean vacuum, by which it was long known in the greatest part of Europe.
Hooke’s air pump had two barrels, and with some improvements by Hauks-
bee, it remained in common use, until the introduction of Smeaton’s pump,
which, however, has not wholly superseded it. The theory of pneumatics
was also considerably indebted to Hooke’s important experiments on the
elasticity of the air, which were afterwards confirmed and extended by
Mariotte and Amontons, in France, by Hales in this rabies by Richmann
at Petersburg.


. About the same time the first steam engine was constructed, by the cele-
brated Marquis of Worcester. Hints of the possibility of such a machine had
been given a hundred years before, by Matthesius, in’ a collection of sermons
intitled Sarepta, and at a subsequent period by Brunau; but the Marquis of
Worcester professes to have carried the projectinto full effect, as we are inform-
ed by his account of what he called a fire water work, which is one of his
Century of Inventions, first published in 1663, and which is thus described :
“ I have taken apiece of a whole cannon, whereof the end was burst,and filled it
three quarters full of water, stopping and screwing up the broken end, as
also the touch hole; and making a constant fire under it, within @4 hours
it burst, and made a great crack: so that having a way to make my vessels,
so that they are strengthened by the force within them, and the one to fill
after the other, I have seen the water run like a constant fountain stream
forty foot high. One vessel of water, rarefied by fire, driveth up forty of
cold water; and a man that tends the work is but to turn two cocks, that
one. vessel of water being consumed, another begins to force and refill with
cold water, and so successively, the fire being tended and kept constant,
which the self same person may likewise abundantly perform in the interim
between the necessity of turning the said cocks.” The machine was, how-
ever, not at that time practically introduced, and it was soon forgotten;
Savery’s engines were constructed in a manner precisely similar, some time _
before 1700; and it is uncertain whether he adopted the Marquis of
Worcester’s ideas, or reinvented a similar machine. — “About — the piston
4 {eae


ON THE HISTORY OF HYDRAULICS AND PNEUMATICS. 357


and cylinder were invented by Newcomen, and with Beighton’s apparatus for
turning the cocks by its own motion, the engine remained nearly stationary
for user years:
% ‘
naleiats as the year 1667, the pressure of fluids in motion, and the resist-
ance opposed by fluids:at rest to the motion of solid bodies, were experi-
mentally examined by Huygens, and some other members of the Parisian
Academy. Pardies, whose works were published in 1673, attempted to
determine, although upon some. inaccurate suppositions, the effects of the
wind on-a-ship’s sails, under different circumstances, His principles were
adopted by Renaud, who published a work on the subject in 1689; their im-
perfections were, however, soon after pointed out by Huygens, and by
James Bernoulli; and in 1714, John Bernoulli published an extensive
treatise on the manoeuvres of ships, which at last compelled Renaud to sub-
mit to so many united authorities.
brotened) apy. .ronteger a]
- It must be confessed, that the labours of Newton added fewer improve-
ments to the. ines of hydraulics and pneumatics, than to many other
departments of science; yet some praise is undeniably due both to his com-
putations and.to his experiments relating to these subjects. No person
before Newton had theoretically investigated the velocity with which fluids
are discharged, and although his~first attempt was unsuccessful, and the
- method which he substituted for it in his second edition is by no means free
from objections, yet either of the determinations may be considered in some
cases as a convenient approximation ; and the observation of the contrac-
- ~ tion of a stream. ‘passing through a simple orifice, which was then new,
Peden fm in some measure with each other. His modes
‘the resistance of fluids are far from being perfectly just,
ei ed to results which, with proper corrections, are tolerably
erence of the oscillations of fluids, in bent tubes,


ono ona the investigation of their alternate motions in
ed om oy wutle


. ave ts of Poleni were published in 1718: he has the
first distinctly observed that the quantity of water, discharg-
e, is greater than by a simple orifice of the same diameter;


358 LECTURE SXxX.


although there is some reason to suppose that Newton was before aeaapiehes
with the circumstance. sian . oh edocy se

In 1727, Mr. Bouguer received a prize from the academy of Paris for his
essay on the masts of ‘ships, which is said to be ingenious, but by no-meéans
practically useful. He was probably tempted by this encouragement to con-


tinue his application to similar studies, and about twenty years afterwards


he published ‘his valuable essay on the construction and manoeuyres of ships,
which appears to’ have superseded all that aes been. done ieee iy str
pa 2 ise of his investigation. bins’ 3 mn
+ fy ' rit tf

The first researches of Daniel Bernoulli, concerning the properties and mo-
tions of fluids, bear also the date of 1727. This justly celebrated man was as
happy in his application of mathematics to natural philosophy, as he was
ready and skilful in his calculations. The greatest ‘part of his hydraulic


’ theorems are founded on the principle first assumed by Huygens, and called


by Leibnitz the law of living or ascending force, which is confessedly only
trie where there is no loss of velocity, from the imperfection of the elasti-
city of thé bodies concerned ; for it is only with this limitation, that the mo-
tions of any system of bodies are always necessarily such, as to be capable of
carrying the common centre of gravity to the height, from which it has des~
cended, while the bodies have been acquiring their motions, This law of
ascending force is of: considerable utility in facilitating the solution ofa great
variety of problems; it is certain that mechanical power is always to be es-
timated ‘by the product of the mass of a body into the height to which it is
capable of ascending; and whatever objections may have been made to the
employment of this product as the measure of the force of a body in motion,
which is indeed an expression inconsistent with a correct definition of the term
force, yet it must be confessed, on the other hand, that some of the best
English mathematicians have fallen into material errors for want of paying
sufficient attention to the general principle. Bernoulli estimates very justly
in this manner the mechanical power of a variety of natural and artificial
agents, and among the rest, he examines that of gunpowder; but from an
accidental combination of errors, he states the force of a pound of gunpow-
der, as equivalent to the daily labour of 100 men, while in fact the effect
which is actually obtained from two tons of powder is no greater than that


—<_.- - a os I. ee Cat ee. ee. SO ST


——


ne


ON THE HISTORY OF HYDRAULICS AND PNEUMATICS. 359


which is»here attributed to a pound.’ His calculations of the motions of
fluids, in some very intricate cases, are very ingenious and satisfactory, and
they: are in'general sufficiently confirmed by well imagined experiments, He
examines the force’ of the wind acting on the sails of a windmill, but by
another mistake in calculation, which Maclaurin has detected, of two angles
which answer the conditions of the determination, he has, taken the wrong
one, and assigned that position of the sail as the most effectual, which pro-


_ duces absolutely no effect at all.


It may tia objected to Bernoulli’s calculations, that some of. the. circum-
stances which are necessarily neglected in them, produce a very material effect
in the results of all experiments; but it must be allowed that the corrections
required, on! account of this unavoidable omission, may easily be deduced
from simple experiments, and then ‘applied to the most complicated cases.
It is, however, a more material objection, that the fundamental law of the
preservation of ascending force can only be adopted with certain limitations;
thus, when‘ a small stream passes through a large reservoir, Bernoulli is
obliged ito suppose)the whole of its force consumed by the resistance which it
meets... The immediate mode, in which the accelerating forces must be sup-
posed to act,’ remaitis also’ wholly undetermined; and it was principally for
this reason, that John Bernoulli attempted to substitute, for his son’s calcula-
tions, a method of deducing the motions of fluids more immediately from the
gravitation ,of their different parts. The peculiarity of John Bernoulli’s
mode of investigation consists in his imagining the weight of each indi-
vidual particle to be transferred to the surface of the fluid, causing there a
pressure in the direction of gravity; and he examines the manner in which
‘this force must operate, in order to produce every acceleration which is re-
quired for the motion of fluids, in vessels of all imaginable forms.


Maclauirin, in. his treatise of fluxions, investigated several of the proper-
ties of fluids in his usual concise and elegant manner. His remarks on the
Positions of the sails of windmills and of ships are peculiarly interesting: he
added much to what had been done respecting the effects of the wind, and
showed the possibility of arranging the sails of aship in such a manner as to
make her advance with a greater velocity than that of the wind itself. At
that time, however, the science of hydraulics had been too little assisted by


PETE ey


360 : ~ \ LECTURE xxx:


éxperiments°to be capable of affording determinations of all questions which
are of yery frequent occurrence in practice. An application:was made to Mac-
laurin, and at the same time to Desaguliers, a man of considerable eminence
in the mechanical sciences, respecting the quantity of water that might be
brought, ‘by a train of pipes of certain dimensions, to the city of Edinburgh.
The project was executed with a confidence founded on their opinions, but
the quantity actually obtained was only about one sixth of Desaguliers’s cal-
culation, and one eleventh of Maclaurin’s. At a still later period, the
French Academicians were consulted respecting a great undertaking of a
similar nature; and their report was such as to dissuade the projectors.from
making the attempt, which was consequently at the point of being abandoned,
tilla celebrated practical architect insisted, froma rough estimation, deduced
from his general experience, that more than double the quantity assigned
by the Academicians might be obtained; and the event a -
assertion. in 4 j
The experiments and calculations of Robins, stig the resistance of
the air, and the operation of gunpowder, deserve to be mentioned with com-
mendation on account of their practical utility; but he appears to have been
less successful in his theoretical eres than en senses ne
been a few years before. i vein


Dalembert attempted, in his treatise on the motions of fluids, which was
published in 1744, to substitute, for the suppositions of John Bernoulli, a
more general law, relating to all changes produced in the motions of asystem
of bodies, by their mutual actions on each other; but his: calculations are
more intricate, and less easily understood, than some others, which “are
capable of an application equally extensive. The late Professor Kaestner of
Gottingen has defended Bernoulli against Dalembert’s.objections with some
success; and has in many instances facilitated and extended Bernoulli’s
theory; but there is often a singular ‘mixture of acuteness and prolixity in
this author’s works. By the side of an intricate and difficult fluxional calcu-
lation, he inserts a long string of logarithms. for performing a simple multi-
plication; and in a work which compréhends the whole range of ‘the mathe- ,
matical sciences, he does not'venture ry Hi 7 a ta of 10 with-
out quoting an authority. j SN saeowods -oeeskh mi


ON THE HISTORY OF HYDRAULICS AND PNEUMATICS. 36)


About the same time, the profound Leonard Euler applied himself, with
some success, to the examination of the motions of fluids, particularly as
they are connected with the subjects of seamanship and naval architecture;
but the investigations of Euler are in general more remarkable for mathe-
matical address, than for philosophical accuracy and practical application;


. although his calculation of the resistance of the air.to the motions of pro-


jectiles may be employed with considerable advantage by the gunner.


» The beginning of the modern experimental Se a in hydraulics
may perhaps be dated from the investigations of Smeaton respecting the
effects.of wind and water, which were published in the Philosophical Trans-
actions for 1759. His observations are of material importance, as far as they
are capable of immediate application to practice, but he has done little to il-
lustrate their connexion with the general principles of mechanics. It was
Mr. Borda that first derived from a just theory, about 10 years after, the
same results, respecting the effects of undershot water wheels, as Smeaton
had obtained from his experiments. Before this time, the best essay on the
subject of water wheels was that of Elvius, published in 1742; his calcula-
tions are accurate and extensive; but they are founded, in great measure,


"om the imperfect, suppositions respecting the impulse of a stream of water,


which were then generally adopted.


: 5

Our countryman Mr. Watt obtained, in 1769, a patent for his improve-
ments of the steam engine, which includes almost every essential change
that has been made since the time of Beighton. On a subject so important,
it cannot be superfluous to insert the words of the inventor, whose admirable
application of the sciences, to practical purposes, most justly entitles him to
a rank among philosophical mechanics, not inferior to that of Ctesibius aud
Dr. Hooke. '


““My method of lessening the consumption of steam, and consequently
fuel, in fire engines,” says Mr. Watt, in his specification of his patent, ‘‘ con-
sists of the following principles. First, that vessel in which the powers of
steam are to be employed, to work the engine, which is called the cylinder
in common fire engines, and which I call the steam vessel, must, during
the whole time the engine is at work, be kept as hot as the steam that

voli. - Sa


ees | eee.


362 LECTURE x¥X.


enters it; first, by inclosing it ina case of wood, or any other materials that
transmit heat slowly; secondly, by surrounding it with steam, or other heated
bodies; and thirdly, by suffering neither water, nor any other substance
colder than the steam, to enter or touch it during that time. Secondly, in
engines that are to be worked wholly or partially by condensation of steam,
the steam is to be condensed in vessels distinct from the steam vessels, or cy-
linders, although occasionally communicating -with them; these vessels I
call condensers; and, whilst the engines are working, these condensers
ought at least to be kept as cold as the air in the neighbourhood of the en-
gines, by application of water, or other cold bodies. ‘Thirdly, whatever air or
other elastic vapour is not condensed by the cold of the condenser, and may
impede the working of the engine, is to be drawn out of the steam vessels, or
‘condensers, by means. of pumps, wrought by the engines themselves, or
otherwise. Fourthly, I-intend, in many cases, to employ the expansive
force of steam to press on the pistons, or whatever may be used instead of
them, in the same manner as the pressure of the atmosphere is now employed
in common fire engines: in cases where cold water cannot be had in plenty,
the engines may be wrought by this force of steam only, by discharging the
steam into the open air after it has done its office. Fifthly, where motions
round an axis are required, I make the steam vessels in form‘of hollow
rings, or circular channels, with proper-inlets and outlets for the steam,
mounted on horizontal axles, like the wheels of a water mill; within them
are placed a number of valves, that suffer any body to go round the channel
in one direction only; in these steam vessels are placed weights, so fitted to
them as entirely to fill up a part or portion of their channels, yet capable
of moving freely in thém by the means herein after mentioned or specified.
When the steam is admitted in these engines, between the weights and the
valves, it acts equally on both, so as to raise the weight to one side of the
wheel, and, by the reaction of the valves, successively, to give a circular
motion to the wheel, the valves opening in the direction in which the
weights are pressed, but not in the contrary; as the steam vessel moves
round, it is supplied with steam from the boiler, and that which has per-
formed its office may either be discharged by means of condensers, or into
the open air. Sixthly, I intend, in some cases, to apply a degree of cold,
not capable of reducing the steam to water, but of contracting it considera-
bly, so that the engines may be worked by the alternate expansion and con-


ON THE HISTORY OF HYDRAULICS AND PNEUMATICS. 363


traction of the steam. Lastly, instead of using water to render the piston or
other parts of the engines air and steam tight, I employ oils, wax, resinous


_ bodies, fat of animals, quicksilver, and other metals, in their fluid state.”


_ It is probable that the rotatory engines described by Mr, Watt, although
they appear to produce some advantage in theory, will never be generally
introduced, on account of the difficulty of constructing steam vessels so
large, and of socomplicated a form, as would be necessary, in order to give
full effect to the machine. The term of this patent was» prolonged by act of
parliament until the year 1799 ; but although the legal privilege of the ori-
ginal manufacturers is expired, yet the superiority of their workmanship still ,
gives their engines a decided preference. Aly net
i ~ as ut
Much of the labour of the later writers on hydraulics has been employed
on the determination of the resistance of fluids to bodies of different forms,
which move through them; a subject which derives great importance from,
its immediate application to the manoeuvres of ships. The most  ex-
tensive experiments on these subjects were made by Bossut,. and
some other members of the Academy of Sciences. . About the same time Don
George Juan, a gentleman who had enjoyed the best possible opportunity: ,
for actual observation and practical study in serving with Ulloa, published
at Madrid his Examen Maritimo, which appears to be the most ingenious
and useful treatise on the theory and practice of seamanship that has yet
appeared. But unfortunately his deductions, however refined and diversi-
fied, are principally founded on a mistaken theory respecting the effects of
hydraulic pressure; since he tacitly assumes, in his fundamental proposition
on the,subject, that a double force, acting in a given small space, will pro-
duce a double velocity; while it is well known that in such circumstances
a quadruple force would be required. Hence he derives some conclusions
which indicate that the resistance must vary very materially at different
depths below the surface of the water, and alleges in support of the assertion
a few imperfect experiments of Mariotte and of his own, in which some acci-
dental circumstances not noticed may easily have caused great irregularities.
Mr. Prony, in his Architecture Hydraulique, appears to have followed Juan ;
and Professor Robison very justly observes, | in speaking of this work, that
if the pressure of the water alters the magnitude of the resistance at different


364 | LECTURE XXX.


depths, that of the atmosphere ought by no means to be omitted in the cal-
culation. But if a more correct mathematician and mechanic would take the
pains to model Juan’s book anew, to correct his errors, and to adapt his
modes of calculation to the laws of resistance previously deduced from ac-
curate experiments rather than from theory, there is no doubt but that the
work thus modified might essentially improve the science of seamanship.
He alleges indeed that the results of his calculations are in almost every in-
stance rigidly conformable to observation and experience, but it is probable
that where such a coincidence really exists, it must be owing to some com-
bination of errors compensating each other; and it is indeed very possible
that his calculations, with all their errors, may approach nearer to the truth
than the imperfect approximations which had been before employed. Juan
has generally made use of the English weights and measures, on account of

“their convenience in computations respecting the descent of falling bodies
and the a of water.


The werk of Chapman and of Romme, upon various departments of sea-
manship, possess also considerable merit. These authors appear to have
avoided the errors of Juan, but without entering so minutely into the detail
of nautical operations as he has done.


The accurate experiments of Dr, Hutton and of Count Rumford on the
force of fired gunpowder, and the’ resistance of the air, deserve to be men-
tioned as affording valuable materials to the speculative investigator, and
useful information to the practical gunner. Robins had very erroneously
supposed that the whole of the effects of gunpowder might be derived from the
expansive force of fluids permanently elastic; but Vandelli soon after main- »
tained a contrary opinion in the commentaries of Bologna, and Count Rum-
ford has very satisfactorily shown the insufficiency of the agents considered
by Robins, although he has been unsuccessful in attempting to deduce the
whole force from the elasticity of aqueous vapour alone.


The theory of practical hydraulics, as affected by friction, may be consi-
dered as having been begun and completed by the highly meritorious labours
of the Chevalier du Buat. He had some assistance in expressing the results
of his experiments by means of general rules or formulae, and these, al-

A °


eee ee ee - —s


oe


ON THE HISTORY OF HYDRAULICS AND PNEUMATICS, 865


though they agree sufficiently well with the experiments, have not.always
been reduced to the simplest and most convenient forms; nor have they been


much improved either by Langsdorf or Eytelwein in Germany, or by Robi- -


son in this country, who have gone over nearly the same ground with each
other, and have shown the way in which the results of Buat’s investigations
may be applied to avvariety of cases, which occur in hydraulic architec-
ture. ® ;


One of the latest inventions, which require to be mentioned in speaking of
the history of*pneumatics, is that of the aerostatic globe or air balloon.
The suggestions of Lohmeier, of Albertus, and of Wilkins, respecting the
various modes of passing through the air, had long remained disregarded as
idle speculations; and Rosnier, who, in the 17th century, descended ob-
liquely over some houses, by means of wings, was wholly unable to employ
them in ascending.; Dr. Black had exhibited in his lectures a bladder filled
with hydrogen. gas, and floating in the air by means of its smaller specific
gravity, many years before Montgolfier conceived the idea of applying a si-
milar machine to the elevation of human beings into the aerial regions. It
was in 1785 that this project was first executed, and persons of a warm ima-
gination were disposed to believe that the discovery would be of great import-
ance to the convenience of mankind. But if we coolly consider the magni-
tude of the force with which the wind unavoidably impels a surface so large
as that of a balloon, we shall be convinced of the absolute impossibility of
counteracting it, in such a manner, as to direct the balloon in any course,
materially different from that of the wind which happens to blow. With
this limitation, the invention may still in some cases be capable of utility,
wherever we are only desirous of ascending to a great height, without re-
garding the place in which we are to descend; or where we wish to attain
only a height so moderate that the machine may be kept by ropes in the
situation which is desired. In France the balloon has lately been employed
with considerable success as a meteorological observatory; Mr. Biot and Mr.
Gay Lussac having ascended to a height of above four miles, for the laudable
purpose of ascertaining some facts relating to the constitution of the atmosphere,
and to the magnetic properties of the earth.


owe


366


ts LECTURE XXX. ‘m9


~


CHRONOLOGY OF AUTHORS ON HYDRODYN


s oper A Ja ghee

so?

“Kr # tk

ee ehh) Seat
; “tr


?
$4}


gee eon Tagg
The eau = wt


; f


AMICS


367


<


LECTURE XXXI.
_ ON THE PROPAGATION OF SOUND.


Tue theory of sound, which constitutes the science of acustics, is on many
, accounts deserving of particular attention, for it not only involves many in-
Dh teresting properties of the motions of elastic substances, but it also affords
us considerable assistance in our physiological inquiries respecting the nature
_ and operation of thesenses. The subject has usually been considered as ex-
ceedingly abstruse and intricate, but the difficulty has in some measure ori-
ginated from the errors which were committed in the first inquiries respect-
_ ing it; and many of the phenomena belonging to it are so remarkable, and
80 amusing, as amply to repay the labour of examining them by the enter-
rt tainment that they afford. We shall consider first the nature and propaga-
tion of sound in general, secondly, the origin of particular sounds, and the
effects of single sounds; thirdly, the consequences of the combinations of
sounds variously related, constituting the doctrine of harmonics, and
fourthly, the construction of musical instruments, and the history of the
science of acustics.
. lb - BM ayte. post r ae!

: ‘capable of affecting the ear with the sensation peculiar
is not simply a vibration or undulation of the air, as it is
or there are many sounds in which the air is not concern-
ng fork or any other sounding body is held by the teeth:
ays a vibration or alternation of any kind; for every noise is
, dies, a froma continued sound, consists of asingle
ction only, sometimes without any alternation; while a
is beiiidbasian of such impulses, which, in the organ of
no t but be alternate. If these successive impulses form

following each other too rapidly to be separately distin-
tea continued sound, like that of the voice in speak-


’


pe ee ste et eae tr ss


368 . LECTURE XXXI.


ing; and if they are equal among themselves in duration, they produce a
musical or equable sound, as that of a vibrating chord or string, or of the
voice in singing. Thus, a quill striking against a piece of wood causes a


noise, but, striking against the teeth of a wheel or of a comb, a continued


sound; and if tle teeth of the wheel are at equal distances, and the ve-
locity of the motion is constant, a musical note.


Sounds of all kinds are most usually conveyed through the medium of the
air; and the necessity of the presence of this or of some other material
substance for its transmission is easily shown by means of the air pump; for
the sound of a bell struck in an exhausted receiver is scarcely perceptible.
The experiment is most conveniently performed in a moveable receiver or
transferrer, which may be shaken at pleasure, the frame which suspends the bell
being supported by some very soft substance, such as cork or wool. . As the air
is gradually admitted, the sound becomes stronger and stronger, although it
is still much weakened by the interposition of the glass: not that glass isin
itself a bad conductor of sound, but the change of the medium of communi-
cation from air to glass, and again from glass to air, occasions a great di-
minution of its intensity. It is perhaps on account of the apparent facility
with which sound is transmitted by air, that the doctrine of acustics has
been usually considered as immediately dependent on pneumatics, although
it belongs as much to the theory of the mechanics of solid bodies as to that
of hydrodynamics. ~


A certain time is always required for the transmission of an impulse through
a material substance, even through such substances as appear to be the hardest
and the least compressible. It isdemonstrable that all minute impulses are con-
veyed through any homogencous elastic medium, whether solid or fluid, with a
uniform velocity, which is always equal to that which a heavy body would
acquire by falling through half the height of the modulus of elasticity, that
is, in the case of the air, half the height of the atmosphere, supposed to be
Of equal density; so that the velocity of sound passing through an atmo-
sphere of auniform elastic fluid must be the same with that of a wave moving
on its surface. In‘order to form a distinct idea of the manner in which
sound is propagated through an elastic substance, we must first consider the
motion’ of a single particle, which, in the case of a noise, is pushed for-


ON THE PROPAGATION OF SOUND. 369


wards, and then either remains stationary, or returns back to its original
situation; but in the case of a musical sound, is continually moved back-
wards and forwards, with a velocity always varying, and varying by differ.
ent degrees, according to the nature or quality of the tone; for instance,
differently in the notes of a bell and of a trumpet. We may first suppose for
the sake of simplicity, asingle series of particles to be placed only in the same
line with the direction of the motion. It is obvious that if these particles were
absolutely incompressible, or infinitely elastic, and were also retained in
contact with each other by an infinite force of cohesion or of compression,
the whole series must move precisely at the same time, as well as in the same
manner. But in a substance which is both compressible and extensible or
expansible, the motion must occupy a certain time in being propagated to
the successive particles on either side, by means of the impulse of the first
particle on those which are before it, and by means of the diminution of
its pressure on those which are behind; so that when the sound consists of a
series of alternations, the motion of some of the particles will be always in a
less advanced state than that of others nearer to its source; while at a greater
distance forwards, the particles will be in the opposite stage of the undulation,
and still further on, they will again be moving in the same manner with the
first particle, in consequence of the effect of a former vibration.

The situation of a particle at any time may be represented by supposing it to
mark its path, on a surface sliding uniformly along in a transverse direction.
Thus, if we fix a small pencil in a vibrating rod,and draw a sheet of paper along,
against the point of the pencil,an undulated line will be marked on the paper,
and will correctly represent the progress of the vibration, Whatever the na-
ture of the sound transmitted through any medium may be, it may be shown that
the path thus described will also indicate the situation of the different particles
atany onetime. The simplest case of the motion of the particles is that in which
they observe the same law with the vibration of a pendulum, which is always

_ found opposite to a point supposed to move uniformly in a circle: in this case
the path described will be the figure denominated a harmonic curve; andit may
bedemonstrated that the force, impelling any particle backwards or forwards,
will always be represented by the distance of the particle before or behind its
natural place; the greatest condensation and the greatest direct velocity, as

VOL, 1, 3B


370 LECTURE XXXI.


well as the greatest rarefaction and retrograde velocity, happening at the
instant when it passes through its natural place.


We are ready to imagine that very hard bodies transmit motion instan-
taneously, because we have no easy means of measuring the interval of time
that elapses between the action of pushing the end of a rod, and the pro-
trusion of an obstacle at the other end, or between the instant of pulling a
bell rope, and that of the ringing of the bell. But it is demonstrable that
in order to transmit an impulse in a time infinitely small, the hardness of
the substance must be infinitely great, and it must be absolutely incom-
pressible and inextensible by any force, which is a property not discoverable
in.any natural bodies: the hardest steel and the most brittle glass oe “my
susceptible both of extension and compression. “


Theleast elastic, substance that'has been examined, is perhaps carbonic acid gas,
or fixed air, which is considerably denser than atmospheric air exposed to an
equal degree of pressure. The height of the atmosphere, supposed to be ho-
mogeneous, is in ordinary circumstances, and at the sea side, about 28000 _
feet, and in falling through half this height a heavy body would acquire a
velocity of 946 feet ina second. But from a comparison of the accurate ex-
periments of Derham, made in the day time, with those of the French Aca-
demicians, made chiefly at night, it appears that the true velocity of sound
is about 1130 feet in a second, which agrees very nearly with some observa-
tions made with great care by Professor Pictet.. This difference between
calculation and experiment has long occupied the attention of natural phi-
losophers, but the difficulty appears to have been in great measure removed
by the happy suggestion of Laplace, who has attributed the effect to the
elevation of temperature, which is always found to accompany the action of
condensation, and to the depression produced by rarefaction. It is true that
a greater change of temperature would be required than Mr. Dalton’s experi-
ments on the compression of air appear to indicate; but those experiments
do not perfectly agree among themselves; and the observation which has
been made in France, that a heat, sufficient to set tow on fire, may be pro-
duced by the operation of a condensing syringe, seems to show that Mr.


‘alton’s results are somewhat below the ‘truth. In this manner the theory
5


a ne er ee an ae . =


ON THE PROPAGATION OF SOUND. 371


may be completely reconciled with experiments; we may estimate the mo-
dulus of the air’s effective elasticity, which is the measure of its immediate force, ;
from the velocity which is thus observed, and its height will appear to be
39 800 feet, instead of 27800, which is the supposed height of the atmo-
sphere, This velocity remains unchanged by any alternation of pressure in-
' dicated by the barometer, but it may be affected by a change of temperature.
For when an elastic fluid is compressed, its elasticity is increased in the same
Tatio as_ its density; and the height of a homogeneous. atmosphere equiva-
lent to the pressure, remains the same, consequently the velocity calculated
from that height remains unaltered; but the identity of the acceleration,
from the effect of heat which has been mentioned, can’ only be inferred
from observation: this identity may, however, be satisfactorily shown, by
means of experiments on the sounds of organ pipes, which are intimately
connected with the velocity of the transmission of sound through the air,
and which are found to remain precisely the same, however the air may be
rarefied or condensed. The Academicians del Cimento inclosed an organ
pipe, with bellows worked by a spring, in the receiver of an air pump and
of a condenser, and they found’ that, as long as the sound was audible,
its pitch remained unchanged. Papin screwed a whistle on the orifice
which admits the air into the receiver of the air pump, and I have fixed an
organ pipe in the same manner; and the result agreed with the experiment
_ of the academicians. But if the density of the air is changed, while its elas-
ticity remains unaltered, which happens when it is expanded by heat, or con-
densed_by cold, the height of the column, and consequently the velocity,
~ will also be altered; so that for each degree of Fahrenheit’s thermometer the
2 velocity will vary about one part in a thousand. . Bianconi has actually ob-
difference of velocity according to the: different heights of the
_ thermometer, and it may be shown less directly by means of the sounds of
"pipes; but it has not been accurately determined whether or no the correc-
aio on. account of the effect of coinpression in causing heat, remains unal-
: Bianconi’s experiments agree very well with the supposition
material change takes place in this respect. . The velocity of sound
ome ‘measure influenced by the quantity of moisture con-
2 it must be a little diminished by cold a which


3872 LECTURE XXkxI.


states are probably often produced in succession in wind instruments blown
. by the mouth, the air within them being at first cold and damp, and after-
wards warm and moist.


In pure hydrogen gas, the velocity of sound ought, from calculation, to be
more than three times as great as in common air, but the difference does not
appear to have been so great in any experiment hitherto made on the sounds

_ of pipes in gases of different kinds. For such experiments, the comparative
specific gravity of the gas may be most conveniently ascertained by Mr.
Leslie’s method of observing the time employed in emptying a vessel through
a small orifice, by means of the pressure of an equal column of water; ac-
cording to the simple theory, the velocities of the gas thus discharged ought
to be in the same proportion as the respective velocities with which sounds
would be transmitted by them: and if any variation from this proportion
were discovered, it must be attributed to the different degrees of heat pro-
duced by condensation in the different fluids. Steam, at the temperature
of boiling water, is only one third as heavy as common air; consequently
the velocity of sound in steam must be nearly three fourths greater than
in air.


It does not appear that any direct experiments have been made on the
velocity with which an impulse is transmitted through a liquid, although
it is well known that liquids are capable of conveying sound without diffi-
culty; Professor Robison informs us, for example, that he heard the sound
of a bell transmitted by water at the distance of 1200 feet. It is, however,
easy to calculate the velocity with which sound must be propagated in any
liquid of which the compressibility has been measured. Mr. Canton has
ascertained that the elasticity of water is about 22000 times as great as that
of air; itis, therefore, measured by the height of a column which is in the
same proportion to 34 feet, that is 750 thousand feet, and the velocity cor-
responding to half this height is 4900 feet in a second. In mercury, also,
it appears from Mr. Canton’s experiments, that the velocity must be nearly
the same as in water, in spirit of wine a little smaller. These experiments
were nade by filling the bulb of a thermometer with water, and observing
the effects of placing it in an exhausted receiver, and in condensed air;
taking care to avoid changes of temperature, and other sources of error:


———


OWN THE PROPAGATION OF SOUND. 373


the fluid rose in the tube when the pressure was removed, and subsided
when it was increased. A slight correction is, however, required on ac-
count of the expansion and contraction of the glass, which must have tended
to make the elasticity of the fluids appear somewhat greater than it really
was.


It is also well known that solid bodies in general are good comductors of
sound: thus, any agitation communicated to one end of a beam is readily
conveyed to the ear applied to the other end of it. The motion of a troop
of cavalry is said to be perceived at a greater distance by listening with the
head in contact with the ground, than by attending to the sound conveyed.
through the air; and we may frequently observe that some parts of the furniture
of a house are a little agitated by the approach of a wagon, before we hear the
noise which it immediately occasions. The velocity, with which impulses
are transmitted by solids, is in general considerably greater than that with
which they are conveyed by the air: Mr. Wunsch has ascertained this by
direct observations on a series of deal rods closely united together, which ap-
peared to transmit a sound instantaneously, while a sensible interval was re-
quired for its passing through the air: I have also found that the blow of a
hammer on a wall, at the upper part ofa high house,is heard as if double by a
person standing nearit on the ground, the first sound descending through the
wall, the second through the air. It appears from experiments on the flexure
of solid bodies of all kinds, that their elasticity, compared with their density,
is much greater than that of the air: thus, the height of the modulus of elasti-
city of fir wood, is found, by means of such experiments, to be about
9 500 000 feet, whence the velocity of an impulse conveyed through it must be
17 400 feet, or more than three miles, in a second. It is obvious, therefore,
that in all common experiments such a transmission must appear perfectly
instantaneous. There are various methods of ascertaining this velocity from
the sounds produced under different circumstances by the substances to be
examined, and Professor Chladni has in this manner compared the proper-
ties of a variety of natural and artificial productions.


We have hitherto considered the propagation of sound in.a single right
line, or in parallel lines only; but it usually happens,. at least when. a sound
is transmitted through a fluid, that the impulse spreads in every direction, so


374 LECTURE XXKEV) yy vO


as to occupy at any one time nearly the whole of a spherical surface. But it)
is impossible that the whole of this surface should be affected in a similar man-
ner by any sound, originating from a vibration confined to a certain. direc-
tion, since the particles behind the sounding body must be moving towards
the centre, whenever the particles before it are retreating from the centre; so,
that in one half of the surface, the motions may be called retrograde or nega-
tive, while in the other they are direct or positive; consequently at the sides,
where these» portions join, the motions can be neither positive nor negative,
and the particles must remain at rest; the motions must also become gra-
dually less and less sensible as they approach to the limit between the two
hemispheres. And this statement may be confirmed by an experiment on
the vibration of a body of which the motion is limited to a certain direction,
the sound being scarcely audible when the ear is in a direction precisely. per-
pendicular to that of the vibration. :


The sound thus diverging must always be spread through a part of a
spherical ‘surface, because its velocity must be equal in every direction, so
that the impulse will always move forwards in a straight line passing through
the centre of the sphere, or the vibrating body... But when a hemispherical
pulse arrives at the surface of a plane solid obstacle, it is reflected, precisely
in the same manner as we have already seen that a wave of water is reflected,
and assumes the form of a pulse proceeding from a centre at an equal dis-
tance on the opposite side of the surface. ‘This reflection, when it returns
back perpendicularly, constitutes what is commonly called an echo: but in
order that the echo may be heard distinctly, it is necessary that the reflect-
ing object be at a distance moderately great, otherwise the returning sound
will be confused with the original one; and it must either have a smooth
surface, or consist of a number of surfaces arranged ina suitable form ; thus
there is an echo not only from a distant wall or rock, but i Ng
the trees in a wood, and Sometimes; as it is said, even from a ei

‘fi ib 4 te ne

Ifa sound or a wave be reflected from a cada surface, | the aes
which it will assume may be determined, either from the condition that ‘the
velocity with which the impulse is transmitted must remain unaltered, or
from the law of reflection, which requires that the direction of the reflected


pulse or wave be such as to form an sgl with he sur eqa eta |


ON THE PROPAGATION OF SOUND. 375


which the incident pulse before formed with it. Thus, if a sound or wave
proceed from one focus of an ellipsis, and be reflected at its circumference,
it will be directed from every part of the circumference towards the other
focus; since the distance which every portion of the pulse has to pass over in
thé same time, in following this path, is the same, the sum of the lines
drawn from the foci to any part of the curve being the same; and it may
also be demonstrated that these lines form always equal angles with the curve on
each side. The truth of this proposition may beeasily shown by means of the ap-
paratus already described for exhibiting the motions of the waves of water;
we may also confirm it by a simple experiment on a dish of tea: the eg
ture of a circle differs so little from that of an ellipsis of small eccentricity,
that if we let a drop fall into the cup near its centre, the little wave which is
excited will be made to converge to a point at an equal distance on the other
side of the centre. (Plate XXV. Fig. 340, 341.) ’ ;

If an ellipsis be prolonged without limit, it will become a parabola: hence
a parabola is the proper form of the section of a tube, calculated for colle ct-
ing asound which proceeds from a great distance, into a single point, or
for carrying a sound nearly in parallel directions to a very distant place.
It appears, therefore,that a parabolic conoid is the best form for a hearing
trumpet, and for aspeaking trumpet; but for both purposes the parabola
ought to be much elongated, and to consist of a portion of the conoid re-
mote from the vertex; for it is requisite, in order to avoid confusion, that
the sound should enter the ear in directions confined within certain limits:
the voice proceeds also from the mouth without any very considerable diverg-
ence, so that the parts of the curve behind the focus would in both cases be
wholly useless. A trumpet of sucha shape does not very materially differ from
a part_of a cone; and conical instruments are found to answer sufficiently
well for practice; it appears, however, unnecessary to suppose, as Mr.
Lambert has done, that -they differ essentially in principle from parabolic
trumpets. It is not yet perfectly decided whether or no a speaking trumpet
has any immediate effect in strengthening the voice, independently of the
reflection of sound. (Plate XXV. Fig. 342.)


An umbrella, held in a proper position over the head, may serve to collect


376 LECTURE XXXI.


the force of a distant sound by reflection, in the manner of a hearing
trumpet; but its substance is too slight to reflect any sound very perfectly,
unless the sound fall on it in a very oblique direction. The whispering gal-
lery at St. Paul’s produces an effect nearly similar, by a continued repetition
of reflections. Mr. Charles's paradoxical exhibition of the Invisible Girl has
also been said to depend on the reflection of sound; but the deception is
really performed by conveying the sound through pipes, artfully concealed,
and opening opposite to the mouth of the trumpet, from which it seems to
proceed.


When a portion of a pulse of sound is separated by any means from the
test of the spherical or hemispherical surface to which it belongs,and proceeds
through a wide space, without being supported on either side, there is a cer-
tain degree of divergence, by means of which it sometimes becomes audible
in every part of the medium transmitting it: but the sound thus diverging
is comparatively very faint; and more so indeed than the effect of a wave
of water, admitted under similar circumstances, into a wide reservoir, which
we have already examined. Hence, in order that a speaking trumpet may
produce its full effect, it must be directed in a right line towards the hearer:
and the sound collected into the focus of a concave mirror is far more
powerful than at a little distance from it, which could not happen if, as
some have erroneously supposed, sound in all cases tended to spread equally
in all directions. -The sounds that enter a room, in which there is an open
window, are generally heard by a mixture of this faint divergence with the
reflection from various parts of the window and of the room, and with the.
effect of the impulse transmitted through the walls. This diverging portion,
however faint, probably assists in preserving the rectilinear. motion of the
principal sound, and gradually gains a little additional strength at the ex-
pense of this pee. even, +6 "Laminate ah Meer

j foal het 4 net ate

The decay of sound is the natural ejoaeciiiad of i its diatibtion through
out a larger and larger quantity of matter, as it proceeds to
way from its centre. The actual velocity of
transmitting it appears to diminish simply
distance oom the centre increases; |


ON THE PROPAGATION OF SOUND. 377


be considered as the measure of the strength of sound, must vary as the

square of the distance; so that, at the distance of ten feet from the sounding

body, the velocity of the particles of the medium becomes one tenth as

great-as at the distance of one foot, and their energy, or the strength of the
sound, only one hundredth as great,


ae UOe YO CATORIIR Gun 42 80 0R
» tthe: wear
wy$mti : it tie ' pht imtitoae>. Tia
' i . J :
“6 49 riper ugg if ; Of - i ¢ SYST PUN a 01
bovis i ob Rite 5 oe | Oln 2) Yo Yasnt Wlzeipsg
Scestes? 5 rt , Sif w'iiite oerisaisy ond
ify reoitean “Sealy
‘ x }
18 in
Nha i ul
le :
st : 7
PRU AOD et a
mii t 3 f
ent ; 1Oage
mon av 3 :
) ‘ : &
: ‘ I
;
. mi £ b Le :
\
el ‘ rea
w1E , |


378


LECTURE XXX.) 9 home ets ot


ON THE SOURCES AND EFFECTS OF SOUND,


"THE examination of the origin of sound might naturally be deemed anterior
to the inquiry respecting its propagation; but~it will appear, that the pro-
perties of many of the most usual sources of sound depend immediately on
the velocity, with which an impulse of any kind is transmitted through an
elastic medium; it was therefore necessary to consider this velocity, before
the production of sound in general could be discussed.


The origin of a simple sound, without any alternation, requires very little
investigation: it appears that the only condition necessary for its production
is a sufficient degree of velocity in the motion or impulse which occasions it.
A very moderate velocity must be sufficient for producing an impression on : 5
the ear; there is reason to believe, that, when the sound is continued, it may
remain audible with a velocity of no more than one hundredth of an inch in
a second, and perhaps even with a velocity much smaller than this: but, at its
origin, it is probable that the velocity of the motion, ail a sound,
must always be considerably greater. bt


ics ales


A continued sound may be produced by a repetition of separate inugeu
independent of each other, as when a wheel strikes in :
teeth of a pinion, so as to force out a portion of air from
‘when a pipe, through which air is passing, is eighar
either wholly or partially, by the revolution of a stopcoc!
number of parallel surfaces is placed at
pendicular to them, and a noise of any
in succession; a circumstance wh
walking near an iron railing, an_ acute :
posed of such reflections from the surfaces.
ot 3


ON THE SOURCES AND EFFECTS OF SOUND. 379


» Musical sounds are, however, most frequently produced by the alternate
motions of substances naturally capable of isochronous vibrations, and thesé
substances may be either fluids or solids, or instruments composed of a com-
bination ‘of fluids with solids. The resonance of a room or passage is one of
the simplest sources of a musical sound; the walls being parallel, the impulse
is reflected backwards and forwards continually, at equal intervals of time,
so as to agree with’ the definition, and to produce the effect, of a musical
sound.» When we blow obliquely and uniformly into a cylindrical pipe
closed at one end, itis probable that the impulse or condensation must
travel to the bottom and back, before the resistance is increased; the cur-
rent of our breath will then be diverted from the mouth of the pipe, for
an equal time, which will be required for the diminution of the resistance
by the discharge of the condensed air, so that the whole time of a vibration
will be equal to the time occupied by an impulse of any kind in passing
through four times the length of the pipe. An open pipe may be considered
nearly as if'it consisted of two such pipes, united at their closed ends,
the portions of air contained by them being agitated by contrary motions,
so as always to afford each other a resistance similar to that which
the bottom of the stopped pipe would have furnished. It is probable
that when an open pipe is once filled with air a little condensed, the oblique
current is diverted, until the effect of the discharge, beginning at the remoter
end, has returned to the inflated orifice, and allowed the current to reenter the
pipe. Where the diameter of the pipe is different at different parts of its
length, the investigation of the sound becomes much more intricate; but it
has been pursued by Daniel Bernoulli with considerable success, although
upon suppositions not rei! consistent with the actual state of the motions
concerned.
© banda adap alter |+- f
| the sae manne a an ‘open ue ‘is divided by an imaginary basis,
$0 as @ the same sound with a stopped pipe of half the length, a
pipe of any kind is capable of being subdivided into any number of such
to meet each other's corresponding ends only; and in
ore violently the pipe is inflated, the greater is the number of
ich it subdivides itself, the frequency of the vibrations being
nal to that number. Thus, an open pipe may be divided not
0, but also into four, six, eight, or more portions, producing
ands as a pipe of one half, one third, one fourth, or any other


ees


330 aor LECTURE XXXII.


aliquot part of the length; but a stopped pipe cannot be divided into any
even number of similar parts; its. secondary sounds being only those of a
pipe of which,the proportion is determined by the odd numbers, its length
being, for, example, one third, one fifth, or, one seventh of the original
length. These secondary notes are sometimes called harmonics; they are
not only produced in succession from the same pipe, but they are also often
faintly heard together, while the fundamental note of the pipe continues to
sound. When the pipe has a large cavity connected with it, or consists
principally of such a cavity, with a small opening, its vibrations are usually
much _ less frequent, and it is generally incapable of eretueny: a regular
series of harmonics. ; :


It is obvious from, this statement of the analogy peal, the velocity of
sound and the vibrations of the air in pipes, that they must be affected in
a similar manner by all alterations of temperature. Thus, the frequency of
the vibrations of a pipe must be increased nearly in the ratio. of $3.to 34:by
an elevation of 30 degrees of Fahrenheit’s thermometer; and if this change
be accompanied by a transition from CEP D CH to simple moisture, : -the sound
will he still more altered, i. Sino’ age agin! ot to motied ol)

fone. ny teilt

Dr. Chladni has Haagen that solids of all Finflelisihens of ‘a proper form,
are capable of longitudinal vibrations, exactly resembling in their nature those
of the air in an organ pipe, having also their secondary or harmonic notes-
related to. ‘them in a similar manner. |. These vibrations are always far more
frequent than those of a column of air, of equal length, the velocity, with:
which an impulse. is transmitted by a solid of any kind, being usually pares
to 16 times as great as the velocity of sound in air; so that the lo
sounds are always extremely acute, when they are produced by
of moderate length. ‘These sounds afford perhaps th
of determining posure py abba
elastic substance, and of obtaining from that releaie
its elasticity : they may be easily exhibited, by
dron or brass in the middle, and striking it at on
ai she duneies Cie lene, post ithe ag
4 ain agile ose he ed
“i “The Titian ey, Vhich “solid ‘bodes

Bagrres not longitudinal, but sc


ON THE SOURCES AND EFFECTS OF SOUND. “381


tension, derived fromthe operation of a weight, or of some other external
force, or, by, the natural elasticity of the substance. -The vibrations of ex-
|tended , substances ,resemble. most in» their properties those of elastic fluids,
-and ; they, occur the most frequently in practice, although the vibrations
-ptoduced | by the elasticity of the substance may be considered as the most
vmatural. af yinc rel : ae a
ironies 5 : ‘
» Vibrations derived from tension are either those of chords or.musical
-strings, or those of membranes; but the vibrations of membranes afford
little:.variety, and have not hitherto been very accurately investigated,,. the
-drum being almost: the only instrument is which they are concerned ; they
do not however appear to differ materially in their properties from the vibra-
tions of strings., A musical string-or chord is supposed to be perfectly
flexible, and of uniform thickness, to be stretched between two fixed points
oby a force incomparably, greater than) its own weight, and to vibrate in a
single plane» through a ‘minute space on, each side of its natural position.
Its'motions may then’ be traced; through all their stages, by comparing the
chord to a portion: of an elastic medium of the same length, contained be-
tween two bodies capable of reflecting any impulse at each end; for example,
tola portion of air situated. between two walls, or inclosed in a pipe. stopped
at both \ends;:for the vibration of such a medium will be performed in the
‘time occupied) by any impulse in travelling through, twice its, length;
and the vibration of the chord will be performed in the same time, suppos-
ing the height or depth of the medium equal to the length of a portion of
the chord, of which the weight is equivalent to the force applied to stretch
it, and which may be called with propriety the modulus of the tension. If
the chord be’at first bent into a figure of any kind, and then setat liberty,
the place of any part of it atevery subsequent time will be such, that it will
‘always be in a right line between two points.moving along the figure each
‘way. with the appropriate velocity; but in order to pursue this determination,
We must repeatithe figure of the chord on each side of the fixed) points in an
inverted position, changing the ends as wellias the sides. Hence it appears:
that, at the end of asingle vibration, the whole chord will assume a similar
‘figure on the opposite side of its natural place, but in an inverted position,
and after a complete or double vibration, it will return precisely to the form
‘which it had in the beginning. The truth.of this result is easily shown by


re ti


382 LECTURE XXX1& cur we


inflecting any long chord near one of jits ends; having: first drawa!'a line
under its natural position, and it will then be evident that the chord returns
in each vibration nearly to the point of inflection, ‘and passes at'that end
but to a much shorter distance on the opposite side‘of the line) while’ at the
other end its excursions are greatest on the opposite side! of* the line: The
result of the calculation of the frequency of vibration agrees also perfectly _
with experiment, nor is the coincidence materially affected by the inflexi-
~ bility or elasticity of the string, by the resistance of the air, nor by the
slight increase of the tension occasioned by’ the elongation of the ‘string
when it is inflected: thus, if the'weight or force causing the tension of. a
string were equal or equivalent to the weight of 200 fect ‘of! the;same string,
that is, if the modulus of tension were 200 feet long, ‘the velocity corres-  -
ponding to half this height would be 80 feet in a second; and every impulse
would be conveyed with this velocity from one end of the string to the
other, so that if the string were 1 foot long, it would vibrate 40 times in a
second, if 6 inches, 80 times, and if it were 40 feet long; only once ina
second. Hence, it is obvious that the time of vibration of any chord is
simply proportional to the length; and this may be shown: either by means
of such vibrations as are slow enough to be reckoned, or by a’comparison with
the sounds of pipes, or with other musical sounds. But if the tension of a
chord of given length were changed, it would require to be quadrupled in
order to double the frequency of vibration; -and if the tension pee ccrsAe
remained’ unaltered, and the weight of the chord were caused to vary, it
would also be necessary to make the weight four times as “n in order to
reduce the frequency of vibration to one half.


It appears from the mode of tracing the progress of a vibration, which
has already been laid down, that every chord vibrates in the same manner
as if it were a part of a longer chord, composed of any number of such
chords, continually repeated in positions alternately inverted; consequently
if a long chord ‘be initially divided into any number of such equal portions,
its parts will continue to vibrate in the same manner as if they were sepa-
rate chords; the points of division only remaining always at rest. Such
subordinate sounds are called harmonics: they are often produced in violins
by lightly touching one of the points of division with the finger, when the
bow is applied, and in all such cases it may be shown, by putting sisal


ss nentemenmnnent aed iad 5 eve Ti


44


ON THE SOURCES AND EFFECTS OF SOUND. 383


feathers or pieces of paper on the string, that the remaining points of divi-
sion are —* while the i Sundae: portions are in motion. (Plate

RXV. Fig: 343.)

yw ex - gtenins u 6

These harmonic sounds are. also generally heard together with the funda-
mental sound. of the chord, and it is, therefore, necessary, in such cases, to
consider the subordinate vibrations as combined with a general one. It is
not, however, universally true that the fundamental sound must always be
accompanied ‘by: all the harmonics of which the chord is susceptible; for I
have found that by inflecting the chord exactly at any point in which the
chord might be’ divided into a number of equal parts, and then suffering
it to vibrate, we lose the effect of the corresponding harmonic. There is
some difficulty in explaining the reason of the distinct production of these
sounds, in cases where the theory appears to indicate a single and simple
vibration only; but it appears to be most probable that they usually become
audible im,consequence of some imperceptible irregularity in the form or
weight of the chord, which is just sufficient to derange the perfect coinci-
dence of the. actual motions with those which the theory indicates, without
producing a discordance capable of offending the ear. That a chord ir-
regularly loaded. may have the relations of its harmonics disturbed, may
easily be, understood’ by considering the effect of a small weight placed at
one of. the points of, division, which will obviously retard the principal
vibration,,. without materially affecting that of the portions terminat°d by it.
An abrupt and. irregular agitation appears also in many cases to make the
notes more audible, while a gradual and delicate impulse, like


that of the the strings of an Aeolian harp, produces a sound almost
nti » subordinate harmonica:
-anenyreit itty tin: te hex


‘usually happens that ‘the vibration of . a.chord deviates from the plane
of its first direction, and: becomes a rotation or revolution, which may be
das. composed of various vibrations in different planes, and which


manner similar to that which has been already ex-
g the vibrations of pendulums; and if the motion

ed to follow the same law as that of a pendulum, the
> vibrations thus united, may be eitlier a vibtation in an


ingly complicated. These vibrations may be combined in the’


te


384 : LECTURE XXXIt. °°)


intermediate direction, or a revolution, in a circle or ve eet er
besides these compound vibrations of ‘the whole chord) ‘it is/also'freq
agitated by subordinate vibrations, which constitute harmonic ‘notes’ Ke
different kinds, so that the whole effect becomes very intricate; as we
may observe by a microscopic inspection of any luthinous poit on thé sur-
face of the chord, . for instance the reflection of a candle in’the doiloef a fine’
wire wound round. it. The velocity of the motion is such that the path of
the luminous point is marked bya line of light, in the same tanner as when
a. burning’ coal ‘is: whirled round; and the figures, thus described, are not
only different at different parts of the'same chord,but they often’ pass ‘through
an amusing variety of forms during the’ progress of the vibration; they
also vary considerably according to the ‘mode in which that ‘vibration ‘is
excited. (Plate XXV. Fig. 344, eet yn ee
a 17 RISND Mae

‘The vibrations immediately tigtslser on elasticity are those’ of 0a’
plates, rings,and vessels. ‘These admit of much greater variety;‘and are of more’
difficulé investigation than the vibrations of chords.” A’ rod: may be either’
wholly loose, or fixed at one end only, or at’ both; and’ it)may either be’
loosely fixed, in situation only, or firmly fixed, in direction’ as well-as in:
situation ; and these conditions may: be variously combined with each other;’
the red may also have'a variety of secondary vibrations besides’ the principal”
or fundamental sound, All these cases have been’ examined) by’ various
mathematicians: the subject was begun by Daniel Bernoulli, and much €x-’
tended by Euler, some of whose conclusions have been corrected by Riccati;.
and Chladni has compared them all;with experiment. The “sounds produced
by the same rod, either under different circumstances, oras harmonies which’
may be heard at the same time, are scarcely ever related to’ eachother invany’
simple proportion,exceptthat when a rod is loosely fixed at both ends, the frequen-
cy of the vibtations of the subordinate notes is expressed by the series of the
squares of the natural numbers, as 1,4,9;and 16. But the times oceupied by any
similar vibrations of rods, similarly circumstanced, are always ‘directly’ as
the squares of their lengths, and inversely as their depths. When the rod
is wholly at liberty, two at least ofits’ points must be*at rest, and these’
are at the distance of about one fifth of its length from either end: in the
next sound of the same rod, the middle point is at rest; with two others near»
the ends, There is by no means the same regularity in the progress of the


+ i -
+ ~ ~ *


Se OE eS) eS eT ee


ON THE SOURCES AND EFFECTS OF SOUND. 385


vibrations of rods of different kinds as in those of chords; itcan only hap-
pen in) particular cases that the rod will return after a complete vibration
to, its. original state, and these cases are probably. such as seldom occur.in
nature. bas :

The vibrations of plates differ from those of rods in the same manner as
the vibrations of membranes differ from those of chords, the vibrations which
cause the plate to bend in different directions being combined: with each other,
and sometimes occasioning singular modifications. These vibrations may be
traced through wonderful varieties by Professor Chladni’s method of strewing
dry sand on the plates, which, when they are caused to vibrate by the operation
of a bow, is collected into such lines as indicate those parts, which remain
either perfectly or very nearly at rest during the vibrations. Dr. Hooke had
employed a similar method, for showing the nature of the vibrations of a bell,
and it has sometimes been usual, in military mining,| to strew sand on a drum,
and to judge, by the form in which it arranges itself, ‘of the quarter from
which the tremors produced by pAsEsereend ocned: (Plate XXV. - Fig.
346. - 948.) ‘Nib:

oan abt:

The vibrations of Hoge and of rom are nincasiy connected with those of
plates, but they are modified in a manner which has not yet been sufficiently
investigated. A. glass, or a bell, divides in general into four portions
vibrating separately, and sometimes into six or eight; they may readily be
«Senor by means of the agitations excited by them ina fluid contained in
enone att “6 almost unnecessary to observe, that the fluid thus applied,

: of matter to be ae makes the vibration slower,


In som e ca Sons the wibéasionsio€ fluids ‘kd eolhdn sae jointly pane in
prod: oni thus, in most of the pipes of an organ denominated
ii length of a tongue of metal is 20 adjusted, as to be capable of
ting in the same time with the air contained in the pipe. Sometimes,
‘the ai Lepely: serves to excite the motion of the solid, as in some
np which are usually much shorter than would be required
»proper note alone, and probably in the glottis, or organ

of animals. On the other hand, the alternate opening and shut-


me. Bei 3D


cs


$86 LECTURE XXXII.


ting of the lips, in blowing the trumpet or French horn, ean scarcely be
called a vibration, and the pitch of the sound is here determined by the
properties of theairin the pipe only. . The vibrations of a solid may: be excited


by an undulation propagated through a fluid; thus, when a loud sound strikes ~


against a chord, capable of vibrating, either accurately, or very nearly, with
the same frequency, it causes a sympathetic tone, resembling that from
which it originated; and the chord may produce sucha sound either by
vibrating as a whole, or by dividing itself into any number of equal parts.
Thus, if the damper be raised from any of the strings of a harpsichord, it
may be made to vibrate, by striking or singing any note, of which the sound
corresponds either to that of the whole string, or to that of any of its aliquot
parts. Sometimes also two chords that are very nearly alike, appear, when
sounding together, to produceprecisely the same note,which differsa little from
each of those which the chords would produce separately; and a similar
circumstance has been observed with respect to two organ pipes placed near
each other.» In. these cases the vibrating substances must affect each other
through the medium of the air; nearly in the same manner as two clocks,
which rest on the same support, have been found to modify each othér’s
motions, so as to exhibit a perfect coincidence in all of them.


It is uncertain whether any fibres in the ear are thus sympathetically agi-
tated in the process of hearing, but if there are any such vibrating fibres, their
motions must necessarily be of short duration, otherwise there would be a
perpetual ringing in our ears, and we should never be able to judge accu-
rately of the termination of asound. Besides, a sympathetic vibration may
be excited not only by a sound producing vibrations of equal frequency,
but also by a sound, of which every alternate, or every third or fourth vibration,
coincides with its motions: it would, therefore, be difficult to distinguish
such sounds from each other, if hearing depended simply on the excitation
of sympathetic vibrations. It is true that we generally distinguish, in listen-
ing to a loud and deep sound, precisely such notes as would be thus produced ;
but it is only when the sounding body is capable of affording them from the
nature of its vibrations; for we may listen for deatiaten espn! of a


bell or of a humming top. There is, Reh a at an


with which the different parts of the ear


modating the tension of some of them to the. better : 1s


i
ON THE SOURCES AND EFFECTS OF souND. 387


and ‘it is equally certain that their en is not pipers d ‘meceesaty in’


the process.”

“The external ear’ serves in some measure for dotiéclingy the daaaniticnd of
sounds transmitted ‘through the air, and reflecting them ‘into the auditory
passage, at the bottom of which théy ‘strike ‘against the membrane of the
tympanum’ or drum, which, being larger and more moveable than some of


the subsequent parts, is "capable of trarismitting a stronger impulse than ‘


they would immediately receive. In the same manner we may often feel’
the tremors produced in a sheet of thick paper, held in the’ hand, by the
agitation of the air, derived from a loud sound, which would not otherwise
have affected the organ of touch. The impulse received by the membrane
of the tympanum is conveyed by’ the*hammer and anvil, two small bones,”
which together constitute a kind of bent lever, through ‘a third minute flat-
tened bone, to a fourth called the stirrup, which serves merely asa handle’
to its basis, a plate covering the orifice’ of a cavity called the vestibule, and
communicating: the impulse to the mucous fluid which fills this cavity. The
fluid of the vestibule, thus agitated, acts immediately on the terminations
of the nerves, which form a loose membranous tissue, ‘almost floating in it,
while another’ portion of them is distributed on the surface of three semi-
circular tubes’ or canals; opening at both ends into the cavity, and a third
portion supplies the cochlea, a detached channel, which appears to be ar-
ranged with singular art asa micrometer of sound. It resembles the spiral’
conyolutions of a snail shell, and if uncoiled, would constitute two long
conical tubes connected at their summits, the base of one opening into”
the vestibule, that of the other being covered by a membrane only, which
separates the fluid from the air contained in the general cavity of the ear,
or the tympanum. It is evident from the properties of fluids moving in
conical pipes, that the velocity of any impulse affecting the fluid at the
base of the cone must be extremely increased at its vertex, while the flexi-
bility of the membrane at the base of the second channel allows this motion
to be effected without difficulty. It has also been supposed that a series
of fibres are arranged along the cochlea, which are susceptible of sympathetic
vibrations of different frequency according to the nature of the sound which
acts on them; and, with some limitations, the opinion does not appear to be
wholly improbable. We must, however, reason with great caution respect-


388 % LECTURE XXXII,


ing the functions of every part of the ear, since its structure varies so much
in different animals, that we cannot pronounce with certainty respecting the
indispensable necessity of any one arrangement for the perfection of the sense.
And even in the case of the human ear, many of these parts may be spared
without great inconvenience ; thus, we hear very perfectly, by means of im-
pressions communicated to the teeth, and through them to the large bones
of the head; and even when the membrane of the tympanum, and all the
small bones of the ear have been destroyed by disease, the undulations
of the air still continue to affect the organ in the usual manner. (Plate
XXV. Fig. 349. . 351.) :


Such is, the delicacy of the organs of hearing in their perfect state, that
we readily distinguish not only the frequency of the vibrations of a sound,
whether constant or variable, and its loudness or softness, but also the
quality of tone, depending on the law which governs each separate. vi-
bration, and which constitutes the difference between instruments of differ-
ent kinds, or different instruments of the same kind, or even the same instrument
differently employed, Thus, we can distinguish very accurately the voices of
our friends,even when they whisper,and those modifications of the same voice
which constitute the various vowels and semivowels, and which, with the
initial and final noises, denominated consonants, compose the words of a
language. We judge also; without an error of many degrees, of the exact

_ direction in which the sound approaches, us; but respecting the manner in
which the ear is enabled to make this discrimination, we cannot reason upon
any satisfactory grounds.


a


389 Qa


LECTURE XXXIil,


ON HARMONICS,


>
‘ }
Ul


THE philosophical theory of harmonics, or of the combinations of sounds,
was considered by the ancients as affording one of the most refined em-
ployments of mathematical speculation; nor has it been neglected in modern
times, but it has been in general either treated in a very abstruse and confused
manner, or connected entirely with the practice of music, and habitually
associated with ideas of mere amusement. We shall, however, find the
difficulties by no means insuperable, and the subject will appear to be
worthy of attention, not only on its own.account, but also for the sake of
its analogy with many other departments of science. -


It appears both from, theory and from axpecience, that the transmission
of one sound does not at all impede the passage of another through the same
medium. The ear too is. capable of distinguishing, without difficulty, not
only two sounds at once, but also a much greater number. The motions
produced by one series of undulations being wholly indifferent with respect
to the effect of another series, and each particle of the medium being neces-
sarily agitated by both sounds, its ultimate motion must always be the
result of the motions which would have been produced in it by the
separate sounds, combined according to the general laws of the composi-
tion of motion, which are the foundation of the principal doctrines of
mechanics. When the two sounds, thus propagated together, coincide
very nearly in direction, the motions belonging to each sound may
be résolved into. two parts, the one in the common or intermediate direction,
and the other transverse to it; the latter portions will obviously be very small ;
they will sometimes destroy each other, and may always be neglected in determin-
ing the effect of the combination, since the ear is incapable of distinguishing
a difference in the directions of sounds which amounts to a very few degrees


390 LECTURE XXXII. -


only. Thus, when two equal undulations, of equal frequency, coincide in
this manner, and when the particular motions are directed the same way
‘at the same time, the velocities in each direction are added together, and
the joint effect is doubled, or perhaps quadrupled, since it appears that the
strength of sound ought to be estimated from the squares of the veloci-
ties of the particles: but when the particular motions of the two sounds
counteract each other, both their effects are wholly destroyed. These com-
binations resemble the effects of the waves of water in similar circumstances,
which we have already examined, and they may be illustrated by drawing
two curved lines representing the motions which constitute the sounds, in
the same manner as we have already supposed them to be described, by a
Vibrating particle, on a surface moving uniformly in a transverse direction ;
these figures being placed side by side, the joint effect may be-represented
by a third curve drawn in such a direction as to be always in the middle
between the corresponding points. of the first two. A similar result, but
- still more strongly marked, may be obtained mechanically, by cutting two
boards or plates of any kind into the form of the curves, and then dividing
one of them into a number of thin pieces or sliders, by lines perpendicular
to the general direction of the curve, or to the termination of the plate
which is parallel to it: the bottom of these sliders being then placed on the
other curve, their general outline will represent the effect of the combination.

We may assume for this purpose the form of the harmonic curve, which
represents the motions of a body vibrating like a pendulum, and which


probably agrees very nearly with the oe and wissen sounds. ‘(Plate
XXV. Fig. yee: ;


If the two undulations differ a little from each other in tiple. “ay
alternately tend todestroy each other, and toacquire a double pe ode a
pleforce, and the sound gradually increases and diminishes in con
cession at equal intervals. This intension and remission is calleda. beat, and
furnishes us with a very accurate mode of determining the proportional

frequency of the vibrations, when the absolute frequency of one of them i is


known, or the absolute frequency of both, when their
since the beats are usually slow enough to be


tions themselves can never be distinguished. ‘Thus, if one sound ee bie
of 100 vibrations in a second, and aaa is apis


ON HARMONICS. - 391


beat in every second, it is obvious that the second sound must consist of
101. vibrations in asecond. Again, if we have two portions of a similar
chord equally stretched, or two simple pipes, of which the lengths are in
the proportion of 15 to 16, they will produce a beat in 15 vibrations of the
longer; and if we count the number of. beats in 15 seconds, we shall find
the number of vibrations in a single second. The easiest way of procuring
two such strings or pipes, in practice, is to tune them by a third, so that
they may be respectively $ and 2 of its length; the vibrations of the third ~
pipe in a second will also be equal to the number of beats of the first two in
12 seconds. (Plate XXV. Fig. 353.)


When the beats of two sounds are too frequent to be heard as distinct
augmentations of their force, they have the same effect as any other impulses


‘ which recur in regular succession, and produce a musical note, which has


been denominated a grave harmonic. Thus, two sounds in the proportion of
4 to 5, produce, when they are both very low or grave, an audible succes-
sion of beats; but when they are higher or more acute, a grave harmonic,
which may be separately distinguished as a third sound by an attentive ear.
Those combinations of sounds, which produce beats distinctly audible, have
in general a harsh and coarse effect, and‘are called discords; but those of
which the vibrations are so related, as to have a common period after a few
alternations, and which may be observed to produce a third sound, constitute
‘concords, which are in themselves the more perfect as the common periods
are shorter. (Plate XXV. Fig. 353.) -


The natural association of the secondary sounds, which generally ac-
company almost all musical notes, serves in some measure as a foundation
for the science of harmonics, the same sounds, as are thus frequently ‘con-
nected in nature, being found to be agreeable when united by art. But it
appears to depend still more immediately on a love of order, and 'a predilec
tion for a regular recurrence of sensations, primitively implanted in the
human mind. Hence, when two, sounds are heard together, those propor-
tions are the most satisfactory to the ear, which exhibit a recurrence of a
more or less perfect coincidence at the shortest intervals, expressed by the
Smallest numbers of the separate vibrations: for though we cannot im-
mediately estimate the magnitude of the vibrations, yet the general effect of


‘\


"


392 LECTURE XXXIII.


a regular or irregular succession necessarily produces theimpression of sweet-
ness or harshness. The same sounds, as form the best accompaniment for each
other, are also in, general the most agreeable for melodies, consisting of
a succession of single notes; their intervals are, however, too large to be
sufficient for the purposes of music,, and they require to be mixed with
other sounds which are related to them in a manner nearly a

The same constitution of the human mind, which fits it for the perception
of harmony, appears also to be the cause of the love of rhythm, or of a re-
gular succession of any impressions whatever, at equal intervals of time. Even
the attachment to the persons and places to which we are accustomed, and
to habits of every kind, bears a considerable resémblance to the same prin-
ciple. The most barbarous nations have a pleasure in dancing ; and in this case,a
great part of the amusement, as far as sentiment and grace are not concerned, is
derived from the recurrence of sensations and actions at regular periods of
time. Hence not only the elementary parts of music, or the single notes,
are more pleasing than any irregular noise, but the whole of a composition
is governed by a rhythm, or a recurrence of periods of greater or less extent,
generally distinguished by bars, which are also the constituent parts of larger
periods, and are themselves subdivided into smaller. An interruption of the
rhythm is indeed occasionally introduced, but merely for the sake of con-
trast; nearly in the same manner as, in all modern pieces of music, discords
are occasionally mixed with concords, in order to obtain an agreeable variety
of expression. :


In a simple composition, all the intervals are referred to a single funda-
mental or key note. Thus, any air which can be played on a trumpet or ona
bugle horn, must consist of the harmonics of a single sound only: andwhen an.
accompaniment is performed by a French horn, the length of the iistrument is
first adjusted to the principal note, and all the sounds which it jis to produce


are selected from this natural series. But pentane io ing the most
natural scale are not, without exception, comprehended ‘the har-


monics; they are, however, all immediately

A sound of which the vibrations are of. 1
is called a unison; if two vibrations
note, the sound is called ‘its shasta


So


"on HARMONICS. 593


whieh are commonly iiiidebatiek as filling up the scale; and on account of
its great resemblance to the fundamental note, it is described by the same
-letter of the alphabet, or by the same syllable; ‘so that all audible sounds are
considered as repetitions of a series. contained within the interval of an
octave. One third part of the string or pipe gives the fifth above the octave;
one fourth the double octave, and one fifth of the string its third. Thus
we obtain the common accord or chord, or the harmonic triad, consisting of
the fundamental note, with its third and fifth, which produces the most
perfect harmony, and which also contains the constituent parts of the most
simple and natural melodies. But we are still in want of intermediate steps
_ for the scale; these are supplied by completing first, the triad of the fifth,
which gives us the second, and the seventh, of which 9 and 15 vibrations
correspond respectively to 8 of the fundamental, and which may also be
found in the ascending series of natural harmonics; and in the second place,

_ by adding the fourth and sixth in such proportions as to make up another
perfect triad with the octave; the respective notes consisting of 4 and 5
vibrations, while the fundamental note makes 3, and being no where found
among the natural harmonics. The complete scale is, therefore, formed by
these harmonic triads contiguous to and connected with each other; the
middle one being the triad of the key note, the superior one that of its
fifth, which is sometimes called the dominant or governing note, and the
inferior one that of the fourth, or subdominant. ‘This scale is derived from
principles so simple, that it may properly be considered as a natural arrange-
ment, and it appears to be found with little variation in barbarous as well as
‘in civilised poumtties. (Plate XXYV. Fig. 354.)


A! tong piece Seoiald, however, be too monotonous, unless the fundamental
note were sometimes changed; we may, therefore, take at pleasure one of
‘the auxiliary triads for the principal harmony, and we may continue the
‘modulation. or progression, until every note of the scale becomes in succession a
key note, | But, in order to fill up the intervals of these several scales in just
ortion, it becomes necessary to add several new notes to the first series ,
e, if we take the seventh for a key note, we shall want five new

the octave, making twelve in the whole, which is the num-
employed in music The interval between any two adjoin-
of the twelve is called a semitone or half note, two semitones


VOL. I. . 3E


394 LECTURE XXXIII.


making a tone or note; these terms are, however, sometimes employed with
various subordinate distinctions and limitations. The five additional sounds
have no separate names, but they are denominated from sthe neigh-
bouring notes on either side, with the addition of the term sharp or flat,
accordingly as they are a semitone higher or lower than the notes of
which they bear the names.


For still further variety, we sometimes change the place of the middle
note of each triad, placing the minor third, or the interval expressed by the
ratio of 5 to.6, below the major, which is in the ratio of 4 to 5; and the
scale thus formed is called the scale of the minor mode, in contradistinction
to the major, the three principal thirds being depressed a semitone. Some-
times, however, the alteration is made in the third of the key note only,
especially in ascending, in order to retain the seventh of the major scale,.
which leads so naturally into the octave, as to be sometimes called the
characteristic semitone of the key; and it is for this reason, that the triad,
in which it is found, is called the accord of the dominant, which, in all regu-
lar compositions, immediately precedes the termination in the key note.


The major and minor triads, with the discord of the flat seventh, may be
considered as constituting the foundation of all essential harmonies. The
flat seventh is principally used with the major triad, in transitions from the
fundamental key into its fourth, to which that seventh naturally belongs as
aconcord; so that it serves to introduce the new key, by strongly marking
the particular note in which it differs from the old one; andin such cases the
flat seventh always descends into, or is followed by, the third of the new key,
and the third of the first triad ascends into the new key note. Other dis-
cords are also sometimes introduced, but they are in general either partial
continuations of a preceding, or anticipations of a following accord. Two
different parts of a harmony are never allowed, in regular and serious com-
positions, to accompany each other in successive octaves or fifths, since
such a succession is found to produce a disagreeable monoton, of effect,
except when a series of octaves is continue for s so as to be sive?
sidered as a repetition i same part, — bea oe Pee b MMi eo

not) Se at ‘he Lqiiiy, Gigs


' These aré’almpit the bail: sii it pou web the


OWN HARMONICS, $95


as well as the general theoryof practical music,is founded. Many prolix treatises
have been written on the subject, but they only contain particular illustra-
tions of the application of these principles, together with a few refinements
upon them. The art of composition, however, depends much more on a
good taste, formed by habitual attention to the best models, and aided,
perhaps, by some little natural predisposition, than upon all the precepts of
science, which teach us only how to avoid what is faulty, without in-
structing us in the mode of attaining what is beautiful or sublime.


It is impossible to assign any such’proportions for the twelve sounds thus
employed, that they may be perfectly appropriate to all the capacities in
which they are used; their number is, therefore, sometimes considerably
increased; and in some instruments they may be varied without limit, at the
performer's pleasure, as in the voice, in instruments with finger boards, and
in some wind instruments; but in many cases this is impracticable, nor
could any imaginable alteration make all the intervals perfect, unless
every note were varied, whenever we returned to it by steps different
from those by which we had left it. The simplest mode of arranging the
twelve sounds, is to divide the octave into twelve equal intervals,
all the notes being in the same proportion to those which immedi-
ately follow them: this is called the equal temperament, because the imper-
fection is equal in all keys. In this system of temperament, the fifths, which
consist of seven semitoneS,are a little too flat, that is, the interval is a little too
small; the minor thirds, consisting of three semitones, are also too flat,and the
major thirds too sharp. But it has generally been esteemed best to preserve
some keys more free from error; partly for variety, and partly because some
are more frequently used than others: this cannot, however, be done with-
out making some of the scales more imperfect than in the equal temperament.
A good practical mode of performing it, is to make six perfect fifths, in de-
scending from the key note of the natural scale, and six ascending fifths
equally imperfect among themselves. We thus retain a slight imperfection
in the scales most commonly used, and make the keys which are most
remote from them considerably less perfect. Another method, which is
perhaps somewhat more easily executed, is to make the fifth and third of
the natural scale perfectly correct, to interpose between their octaves, the
second and sixth, so as to make three fifths equally tempered, and to de-


396 LECTURE XXXIII.


scend from the key note by seven perfect fifths, which will complete the
scale. Any of these modes of temperament may be actually executed, either
by the estimation of a good ear, or, still more accurately, by counting the fre-
quency of the beats which the notes make with each other.


For denoting precisely the absolute as well as the relative frequency of the
sounds of the different octaves, we employ the first seven letters of the
alphabet; A being the key note of the minor mode, in the scale of natural
notes, and C of the major. The peculiar characters used in music are’ gene-
rally disposed onfive or more lines, with their intervening spaces, each im-
plying a separate step in the scale, setting out from any line at pleasure
which is marked with an ill formed G, aC, oran F; a sharp or a flat im-
plying that all the notes written on the line, or in the space, to which it
belongs, are to be raised or depressed a semitone, and a natural restoring the
note to its original value. ‘The actual frequency of the vibration of any note,
according to the pitch most usually employed, may be found, if we recollect


to calla noise, recurring every second, the first C, then the C denoted by the _
mark of the tenor cliff will be the ninth, consisting of. 256 vibrations i ina.


second. The fifth, consisting of sixteen vibrations, will be nearly the low-
est audible note, and the fourteenth the highest note ‘used i in music, but
the sixteenth, consisting of above 30 000 vibrations in a second, may perhaps
be an audible sound. The frequency of the vibrations of ‘the other notes
may easily be calculated from the known relations which sajluaws the
‘note thus determined, (Plate XXV. Fig. 355.)


I
AOE tit t
+ Rt Sins Sr okie rer


ceaiey ‘Pate
- wh


aif a! wi ms |


‘ I awe ig ita


397


LECTURE XXXIV.
ON MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS.


"THE application of the theory of harmonics to practice depends on the
construction of musical instruments of different. kinds: of these we shall
only be able to take a cursory view, and we shall afterwards attend to the
historical order of the most remarkable steps, by which both the theory and
practice of music have been advanced to a high degree of refinement.


Musical instruments may be most conveniently arranged, accordingly
as they are principally calculated for exciting sound by the vibrations
of chords, of membranes, of elastic plates, or of. the air; or by the
joint effects of the air and a solid body vibrating together. The es-
sential varieties of stringed instruments are found in the harp, the
harpsichord, the pianoforte, the clavichord, the guitar, the violin, the
vielle or monochord, and the aeolian harp. In all these, the immediate force
of the sound of the strings is increased by means of a sounding board, which
appears to be agitated by their motion, and to act more powerfully on the
air than the strings could do alone.


In the harp, the sound is produced by inflecting the string with the
finger, and suffering it to return to its place. The lyre of the ancients
differed from the harp only in its form and compass, except that the per-
former sometimes used a plectrum, which was a small instrument, made of
ivory, or some other substance, for striking the strings. Each note in the
harp has a separate string; and in the Welch harp there are two strings to
each note of the principal scale, with an intermediate row for the sem:tones;
but in the pedal harp, the half notes are formed by pressing pins against the
strings, so a& to shorten their effective length, Instead of this method, an
attempt has lately been made to produce the semitones by changing the


398 LECTURE XXXIV.


tension of the strings, which is said to have succeeded tolerably well
although it appears at first sight somewhat unpromising.


In the harpsichord, and in the spinet, which is a small harpsichord, the
quill acts like the finger in the harp,or the plectrum in thelyre, and it is fixed
to the jack by a joint with a spring, allowing it without difficulty to repass
the string, which is here of metal. Sometimes leather is used instead of
quills; and this serves to make the tone more mellow, but less powerful.
Besides two strings in unison, for each note, the harpsichord has generally a.
third which is an octave above them. Different modifications of the tone


are sometimes produced by striking the wire in different parts, by bringing


soft leather loosely into contact with its fixed extremity, and by some other
means. When the finger is removed from the key, a damper of cloth falls
on the string, and destroys its motion. In all instruments of this kind, the
perfection of the tone depends much on the construction and situation of
the sounding board: it is usually made of thin deal wood, eg at
different parts by thicker pieces fixed below it.


In the pianoforte, the sound is produced by a blow of a “ry raised
by alever, which is as much detached from it as possible. The dulcimer, or
hackbrett of the Germans, is also made to sound by the Aaphsye bam
mers, but they are simply yer in the hand of the performer.


The clavichord, the clavier of the Germans, differs from hdsies a


instruments in the manner in which the length of the string is determined;
it is attached at one end to a bridge, and at the other toa pin or screw as


usual; but the effective length is terminated on one side by the bridge,and on
the other by a flat wire projecting from the end of the key, ew strikes |


the string, and at the same time serves as a temporary bri as the
sound continues: the remaining portion of the string cmeadly | from
sounding by being in contact with a strip of cloth, which also stops the


whole vibration as soon as the hammer falls. The instrument is: rable of
great delicacy and neatness of expression, — but it is deficient in force. — The


guitar is generally played with the , like a harp; but each si
made to serve for several notes, by means. , or cross wires,
finger board, on which it is sii aka tila: Bi


ie - ON MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS, F 399


| , pianoforte guitar, hammers are interposed between the fingers and the strings,
acting like those of the pianoforte. The mandoline and lute are species of
the guitar: and the arch lute was a very powerful instrument of the same kind,
formerly much used in full pieces.


In the violin, and in other instruments resembling it, all the strings are
capable of having their length altered at pleasure, by being pressed down on
the finger board. The sound is produced by the friction of the bow, rubbed
with resin: the string is carried forwards by its adhesion to the bow, and
when its resistance has overcome this adhesion, it begins to return in oppo-
sition to the friction; for the friction of bodies in motion is generally less
than their adhesion when they are at rest with respect to each other, besides
that the contact of the string with the bow is usually in great measure in-
terrupted by subordinate vibrations, which may be distinguished, by the
assistance of a microscope, in the manner already described; but when the
string changes once more the direction of its motion, it adheres again to the
bow, and is accelerated by it as before. The original instrument appears to
have been the. viola or tenor, its diminutive the violino, its intensitive, ex-
pheege a greater bulk, the violone or double bass, and the diminutive of

_ this, the violoncello, or common bass, The viola di gamba had one or more
eee eee Seger board, serving as an occasional accom-
paniment. .


The vel or monochor, roe called the hurdy gurdy, has frets


r Giitas is made to vibrate by the motion of a wooden wheel:
string serving as a drone, producing always the same sound ;
ed with a bridge loosely fixed, which strikes continually against
board, and produces apeculiar nasal effect. The trumpet
ump: Marigni, was a string of the same kind, which was
d at proper points, so as to produce harmonic notes only ; it was
ee The aeolian harp, when agitated by the wind, affords
d delicate tone, frequently changing from one to another
of the string, seat th Sllge oe wind varies,


we


400 LECTURE XXxIy.


The human voice depends principally on the vibrations of the membranes
of the glottis, excited by a current of air, which they alternately intercept
and suffer to pass; the’ sounds being also modified in their subsequent
progress through the mouth. | Perhaps the interception of the air by these
membranes is only partial; or it may be more or less completely intercepted in
sounds of different kinds: the operation of the organs concerned is not
indeed perfectly understood, but from a knowledge of their structure, we
may judge in some measure of the manner in which they are employed.


The trachea, or windpipe, conveys the air from the chest, which serves for
bellows: hence, it enters the larynx, which is principally composed of five
elastic cartilages. The lowest of these is the cricoid cartilage, a strong ring,
which forms the basis of the rest: to this are fixed, before, the thyreoid car-
tilage, and behind, the two arytaenoid cartilages, composing together the


-cavity of the glottis, over which the epiglottis inclines backwards, as it


ascends from its origin at the upper part of the thyreoid cartilage. - Within
the glottis are extended its ligaments, contiguous to each other before,
where they are inserted into the thyreoid cartilage, but capable of diverging
considerably behind whenever the arytaenoid cartilages separate. These
ligaments, as they vary their tension, in consequence of the motions of the
arytaenoid cartilages, are susceptible of vibrations of various frequency, and
as they vibrate, produce a continuous sound. Properly speaking, there are.
two ligaments on each side; but itis not fully understood how they operate;
probably one pair only performs the vibrations, and the other assists, by
means of the little cavity interposed, in enabling the air to act readily on
them, and in communicating the vibrations again to the air. (Plate XXVL


Fig. 357, 358.)


The vowels and semivowels are continuous sounds, chiefly formed by this
apparatus in the glottis, and modified either in their origin or in their pro-
gress by the various arrangements of the different parts of the mouth. Of
simple vowels-sixteen or eighteen may be enumerated in different languages:
in the French nasal vowels the sound is in part transmitted through the
nostrils, by means of the depression of the soft palate: the perfect semivowels
differ from the vowels only in the greater resistance which the air undergoes
in jts passage through the mouth; there are also nasal and seminasal semi-


ON MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS, <A 401


vowels. The perfect consonants may be either explosive, susurrant, or
mute; the explosive consonants begin or end with a sound formed in the
larynx, the others are either whispers, or mere noises, without any vocal sound.
By attending to the various positions of the organ, and by making experi-


‘ments on the effects of pipes of different forms, it is possible to construct
a machine which shall imitate very accurately many of the sounds of the .
human voice; and this has indeed been actually perooee by Kratzenstein and F


by Kempelen. (Plate XXVI. Fig. 359.)


Although the vibrating ligaments of the glottis may be anatomically
denominated membranes, yet their tension is probably confined to the
direction of their length, and their action is, therefore, the same with
that of a simple string or chord. But in the case of a tambourine and
a drum, the membrane is stretched in every direction, and the force of
tension consequently acts in a different manner. The principal character
of such instruments is their loudness, derived from the magnitude of the sur-
face which strikes the air, and the short duration of the sound, on account of .
the great resistance necessarily produced by the air’s reaction.


Musical instruments. which produce sounds, by means of vibrations depend-
ing on the elasticity of solid bodies, are less frequently employed than
others; they have a peculiar character of tone, which is by no means”
unpleasant, but which renders them less fit to be mixed with other instru-
ments, since their secondary harmonics are in different proportions. Such is H
the stacada, a series of cylinders of glass, or of metal, struck either imme.
diately with hammers, or by means of keys; the tuning fork, the gong, the t
cymbal, and the bell. Bells and other similar instruments are usually made
of a mixture of copper, and tin, with a little brass or zinc, which is more highly
elastic than either of the component parts taken separately, The harmonica
consists of a series of vessels of glass, either placed side by side, or fixed on -
@ common axis, and made to sound by the friction of the fingers, and some-
times by that of rubbers of cork. The vibrations of an elastic plate, agi-
tated by acurrent of air, which it continually admits and excludes, con-
stitute the sound of the vox humana and regal organ pipes, resembling the
human voice as much in their effects as in the mechanism on which they de-
pend. (Plate XXVI. Fig 360.. 362.)
voL x, 3F


Lae


402 LECTURE XXXIV.


Of simple wind instruments, in which the quality of the sound is deter-


mined by the vibrations of the air, the principal are the syrinx, the flute,


the flageolet, the diapason organ pipe, whether open, stopped, or with a
chimney, the humming top, and the cavity of the mouth in whistling, or in
playing on the jew’s harp. ‘The pipes of the syrinx are adjusted to their
respective notes by cutting them, or filling them up, until they are reduced to
a proper length; and the effective length of the flute and flageolet is altered
at pleasure by opening or shutting the holes niade at proper distances i in them ;
the opening a hole at any part having the same effect as if the pipe were cut
off a little beyond it, and the elevation of the tone being somewhat greater as
the hole is larger. The instruments differ little except in the mechanism, by
which the breath is directed, in such a manner as to excite a sound; and
the flageolet, when furnished with bellows, becomes a bagpipe. The tongue
of the jew’s harp is an elastic plate, but the sound, which it immediately
produces, serves only as a drone; its vibration, however, appears to act like
the motion of the bow of a violin in exciting another sound: this sound,


_although faint, is still sufficiently musical, and appears to be determined by


the magnitude of the cavity of the mouth, nearly in the same manner as that
of the humming top, or as the sound of the same cavity produced in whist-
ling, by a current of air which is forced through it. (Plate XXVI. Fig.
363,. . 367.) b

In mixed wind instruments, the vibrations or alternations of solid bodies
are made to cooperate with the vibrations of a given portion of air. Thus,
in the trumpet, and in horns of various kinds, the force of inflation, and
perhaps the degree of tension of the lips, determines the number of parts
into which the tube is divided, and the harmonic which is produced. In the
serpent, the lips cooperate with a tube, of which the effective length may
be varied by opening or shutting holes, and the instrament which has been
called an organized trumpet appears to act in a similar manner; the trom-
bone has a tube which slides in and out at pleasure, and changes the actual
length of the whole instrument. The hautboy, and clarinet have mouth
pieces of different forms, made of reeds or canes, and the reed pipes of an
organ, of various constructions, are furnished with an elastic plate of metal,
which vibrates in unison with the column of air that they contain. An
organ generally consists of a number of different series of such pipes, so


°


anette,


ON MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS. 408


arranged, that by means of registers, the air proceeding from the bellows
may be admitted to supply each series, or excluded from it, at pleasure, and
a valve is opened, when the proper key is touched, which causes all the pipes
belonging to the note, in those series of which the registers are open, to
sound at once. These pipes are not only such as aré in unison, but fre-
quently also one or more octaves above and below the principal note, and
sometimes also twelfths and seventeenths, imitating the series of natural
harmonics. But these subordinate sounds ought to be comparatively faint,
otherwise their irregular interference would often occasion an intolerable dis-
cord, instead of the grand and sublime effect which this instrument is capa-
ble of producing, when it is judiciously constructed and skilfully employed.
(Plate XXVI. Fig. 368.)


The practice of music appears to be of earlier origin than either its theory,
or any attention to the nature and general phenomena of sound. The first
lyre, with three strings,. is said to have been invented in Egypt by Hermes,
under Osiris, between the years 1800 and 1500 before Christ; but a tradi-
tion so remote, concerning a personage so enveloped in fable, can scarcely be
considered as constituting historical evidence: we cannot, therefore, expect
to ascertain with any certainty the proportions of these strings to each other ;
some suppose that they were successive notes of the natural scale, others that
they contained the most perfect concords; perhaps in reality each performer
adjusted them in the manner which best suited his own fancy. The trumpet
is said to have been employed about the same time; its natural harmonies
might easily have furnished notes for the extension of the scale of the lyre, but

sit does not appear that the ancients ever adopted this method of regulating the
scale, The lyre with seven strings is attributed to Terpander, about 700
years before our era, and two centuries afterwards, either Pythagoras, or Si-
monides, completed the octave, which consisted of intervals differing very
little from the modern scale, the key note being nearly in the middle of the
series, In subsequent times the number of the strings was much inereased; the
modulations, and the relations of the intervals, became very intricate,and were


_ Steatly diversified in a variety of modes or scales, which must have afforded an


inexhaustible supply of original and striking melodies, but which could scarcely
admit so many pleasing combinations,as our more modern systems. Although
it is certain that the ancients had frequent accompaniments in perfect harmony


404 LECTURE XXXIV.


with the principal part, yet they had no regular art of counterpoint, or of
performing different melodies together; nor does it appear that they ever
employed discords. The tibia of the ancients resembled a hautboy or clari-
net, for it had a reed mouth piece, about three inches long; the same per-
former generally played on two of these instruments at once. There were,
however, several varieties of the tibia; and it is not improbable that séme of
them may | have had the simple mouth piece of the flageolet.


The first philosophical observer of the eSB of sound, after: Pytha-
goras, appears to have been Aristotle; he notices a great variety of curious
facts in harmonics among his mechanical problems; and he entertained a
very correct idea of the true nature of the motions of the air constituting
sound. He knew that a pipe or a chord of a double length produced a
sound of which the vibrations occupied a double time; and that the properties
of concords depended on the proportions of the times occupied by the vibra-
tions of the separate sounds, It is not indeed improbable that at least as much as
this was known to Pythagoras, since he established correctly the numerical
ratios between various sounds; but so little justice has been done to his dis-
coveries by the imperfect accounts of them which have been preserved, that
we cannot expect to be able to ascertain his nest ae on any aye with
accuracy.

beseliel eo exe

The invention of the organ, by Ctesibius of Alexandria, about 2000 years
ago, forms a remarkable epoch in harmonics. The larger instruments of this
kind were furnished with hydraulic bellows, the smaller with bellows of
leather only; and they had keys which were depressed, like those of thew
modern organs, by the fingers of the performer, and which ro valves
communicating with the pipes. a

The modern system of music is one of the few sciences, if such it can he
called, which owe their improvement to the middle ages. The old ecclesi-
astical music was probably founded in great measure on that of the Greeks; its
peculiar charaeter consisted in the adoption of any note of the scale at pleasure
for a key note, without altering materially the other intervals; and in this man=
ner they obtained a variety much resembling that of the modes or kinds of music
in use among the ancients. Pope Gregory, about the year 600, distinguished


74 ‘a,
erty enigph beeih cd%,


ON MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS. A405


the notes. } by literal characters; the rules of counterpoint were formed by
degrees from the experience of the ecclesiastical musicians; and early in the
eleventh ce: ; Guido of Arezzo, otherwise called Aretin the monk,
introduced, — er with some improvements in the theory and practice of
music, a new method of uaaee the notes by syllables.

Some curious experiments. on south may be found in the works of Bacon,
but they added very little to the true theory of acustics, and some of them are


- not perfectly accurate, Galileo rediscovered what was well known to Aris-


totle, ‘fespecting the nature of sound; for the words of Aristotle had been.


so much misunderstood and misinterpreted, that he could have profited but


little by them. ‘His cotemporaries Mersenne and Kircher made a variety of
very ingenious experiments and observations, on sound and on sounding
bodies, many of them unknown to authors of later date. The theory of
the ancient music was very accurately investigated, in the middle of the
17th century, by Meibomius: our countryman Wallis, also, besides employ-
ing much learning and penetration in the illustration of the ancient
music, observed some insulated facts in harmonics which were new and
piri sari ‘ei ’ .

Sir Teaae aN toa 's Soils respecting the velocity of the propagation
of sound were the beginning of all the more accurate investigations relating
to acustics. It must not be denied that these propositions contain some very
inconclusive reasoning respecting the nature of the motions constituting
sound, by which the determination of a particular case is erroneously extended


_ into a general solution of the problem. The velocity is, however, truly cal-


culated, because it is in fact independent of the particular nature of the vibra-
tion, and all that is wanting to generalise the proposition is the remark, that
if the velocity of sound is the same in all cases, it must be such as the calculation
indicates. An error nearly similar was committed by Brook Taylor, who in the
year 1714 investigated the time occupied ‘by ‘the vibration of a string or
chord upon a particular supposition, which he considered as a necessary
condition, but which in fact confined the inquiry to a limited case. It


 happeuis,however,that the same determination of the frequency of vibration is -


equally true im’ all possible cases. Sauveur obtained, about the same time


406 LECTURE XXXIV.


a similar conclusion from reasoning still less accurate: his merits with respect
to the theory of acustics in general are, however, by no means contemptible.
Lagrange and Euler have corrected and much extended the investigations
of Newton, and of Taylor; and Bernoulli and Dalembert have also materi-
ally contributed to the complete examination and. discussion of _ the
subject. sis

About the year 1750, Daniel Bernoulli succeeded in obtaining a solution
of a problem still more difficult than those which relate to the motions of
chords: he determined the frequency of the vibrations of an elastic rod
fixed at one end, as well as the relations of its subordinate sounds, Thesolution
is not indeed absolutely general, but it may perhaps be adapted to .all possible
cases, by considering the effect of a combination of various sounds produced
at the same time. Euler has alsogreat merit in extending and facilitating the
mathematical part of this investigation, although he has committed several
mistakes respecting the mechanical application of it, some of which he
has himself corrected, and others haye been noticed by Riccati and Chladni.


The grave harmonics produced by the combination of two acute sounds
were noticed about the same time by Romieu and by Tartini, but first by
Romieu: their existence is not only remarkable in itself, but particularly as
it leads tosome interesting consequences respecting the nature of sound and
hearing in general.


Bernoulli has also investigated, in a very ingenious manner, the sounds
produced by the air in pipes of various forms, although confessedly on
suppositions deviating in some measure from the truth: the results of his
computations haye, however, been amply confirmed by the experiments of
Lambert on the sounds of flutes.


Dr. Chladni’s method of examining the sounds of plates has afforded a
very interesting addition to our knowledge of the nature of vibrations; his
discovery of the longitudinal sounds of solids is of considerable importance,


and he is said to be engaged in an extensive work on the subject of acustics —


in general, Some remarks which I have made in the Philosophical Trans-


(U7 =


— +O


ON MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS. 407


actions may perhaps also be considered as tending to illustrate the vi-
brations of chords. The latest improyement which deserves to be mention-
ed, with respect to the theory-of sound, is Laplace’s explanation of the increase
of its velocity on account of the effect of heat, which appears to afford a
satisfactory explanation of a difficulty so much the more important, as it
tended to*lessen our confidence,in every part of a theory, which differed so
widely from the most accurate and established observations.


CHRONOLOGY OF ACUSTICS.


4 14000 ty: mS 16 1 17/00 \
2 & Buses) red ao 3: es «os cd eS 1 Seer
salar DEMS CAL Se co
‘ GALIL <TAY|LOR.
7 .M ERSENNE. RIOMIEU
K IR CH ER. |.D. BERNO
L i Sie SOL
Ww T)/O N..LAM


4100 = 4 joo ~ 200
ARISTOTLE, |


*
. 9
° ¢ .
» 2
—
2 ane
hey?


1800


I
ULLI
B


ree


ered
»


=
Gar


or


LECTURE XXXV. Ap


ON THE THEORY OF OPTICS.


oa


THE science of optics is one of the most elegant, and the most important
branches of natural and mechanical philosophy. It presents us with experi-
ments attractive by their beauty and variety, with investigations affording
an ample scope for mathematical refinements, and with instruments of exten-
sive utility both in the pursuit of other sciences, and in the common em-
ployments of life; nor is there any department of the study of nature in
which an unprejudiced observer is more convincingly impressed with the
characteristic marks of the perfect works of a supremely intelligent Artist.
»

We shall first consider the essential properties which we discover in light,
and which are the basis of our calculations, together with the conclusions
immediately deducible from those properties; and next, the application of
these laws to practical purposes, in the construction of optical instruments. ©
We shall afterwards proceed to examine the more complicated phenomena,
which are derived from the same laws, and which are observed as well in
natural as in artificial circumstances, constituting the subdivision of physical
optics. The description of the eye, and the explanation of the sense of
vision, by means of which all these effects are connected with the human
mind, is properly a continuation of the subject of physical optics: the intimate
nature of light will be the next subject of investigation, and a historical sketch
of the progress of the science of optics will conclude the fd Sa ead of this
course of lectures.


In order,to avoid all hypothesis in the beginning, it will be necessary to de-
fine light from its sensible qualities. The sensation of light is sometimes pro-
duced by external pressure on the eye; we must exclude this sensation from the


definitionof light, and must therefore call light an influence capable of entering
3


ON THE THEORY OF OPTICS. 409


eye, and of affecting it with a sense of vision. A body, from which this
influence appears to originate, is called a luminous body. We do not
include in this definition of the term light the invisible influences which
occasion heat only, or blacken the salts of silver, although they both appear
to differ from light in no other respects than as one kind of light differs
from another; and they might probably have served the purpose of light, if
our organs had been differently constituted.


A ray of light is considered as an infinitely narrow portion of a stream of
light, and a pencil as a small detached stream, composed of a collection of such
rays accompanying each other. As a mathematical line is sometimes conceiv-
ed to be described by the motion of a mathematical point, soa ray of light may
be imagined to be described by the motion of a point of light. We cannot exhi-
bit to the senses a single mathematical line, except as the boundary of two
surfaces; in the same manner, we cannot exhibit.a single ray of light, except
as the confine between light and darkness, or as the lateral limit of a pencil
of light.


When light passes through a space free from all material substances, it
moves, with great velocity, in a direction perfectly rectilinear; when also
it passes through a matetial substance perfectly uniform in its structure, it
probably always moves in a similar manner. But in many cases its motions
are much interrupted. Those substances through which light passes the
most freely, and in straight lines, are called homogeneous transparent
mediums. Perhaps no medium is, strictly speaking, absolutely transparent;
for even in the air, a considerable portion of light is intercepted. It has
been estimated that of the horizontal sunbeams, passing through about 200
miles of air, one two thousandth part only reaches us; and that no sensible
light can penetrate more than 700 feet deep into the sea ; a length of seven
feet of water having been found to intercept one half of the light which
enters it. ‘


“It is possible that mediums, not in other respects identical, may be homo-
' Seneous with respect to the transmission of light; for example, a glass may-
be filled,with a fluid of such a density, that the light may pass uninterruptedly
through their common surface; but it generally happens, that whenever the
vol. L 3G


Me . ¢ 4
Ee Stl ct at ee


410 LECTURE XXX¥.


nature of the medium is changed, the path of light deviates from a carer
line: thus, the apparent places of the sun and stars are changed by the effect of
the atmosphere, because the light, by which we judge of their situations, is
deflected, in its passage out of the empty space’ beyond the atmosphere,
first into the rarer and then into the denser air. In the same manner,: when
we view a distant object over a fire or a chimney, it appears to dance and
quiver, because the rays of light, by which it is seen, are perpetually thrown
into new situations, by the different changes of the density of the air in con-
sequence of the action of heat.


When rays of light arrive at a surface, which is the boundary of two me-
diums not homogeneous, they continue their progress without deviating —
from those planes, in which their former paths lay, and which are perpen-
dicular to the surface of the mediums; but they no longer retain the same
direction, a part of them, and sometimes nearly the whole, is reflected back
from the’ surface, while the remaining part is transmitted and refracted, or
bent. The name refraction is derived from the distortion which it o¢casions
in the appearance of an object viewed in part only by refracted light: thus
an oar, partially immersed in water, appears to be bent, on account of tlie re-
fraction of the light by which its lower part is seen, in its passage out of the
Water into the air.


There is no instance of an abrupt change of the density of a medium,
without a partial reflection of the light, passing either into the denser or into
the rarer medium; and the more obliquely the light falls on’ the
surface, the greater, in general, is the reflected portion. No body
is so black as to reflect no light at all, and to be perfectly invisible
ina strong light; although at the surface separating two very rare bodies,
as two kinds of gas, the reflection is too faint to be perceptible; but in this
case the separation is seldom perfectly abrupt. ‘


.

The angles of incidence and reflection are the angles made by a ray of
light, before and after its reflection, with a line perpendicular to the reflecting
surface; and these angles are always equal to each other; ‘consequently
the inclination of the rays to the surface remains also the same. The
quantity of light reflected, when other circumstances are equal, appears to


ON THE THEORY OF OPTICs. : 411


be always greatest when the difference of the optical or refractive density of
‘the two substances is greatest. Thus the reflection from the common sur-
face of glass and water is much weaker, than from a surface of glass ex-
‘posed to the air. Metals in general reflect a great proportion of the light
falling on them, and even the reflection from the common surface of glass
and mercury appears to be ,but little weaker than the reflection from the
surface of mercury immediately exposed to the air, so that the optical den-.
sity of the metals must be exceedingly great.


It appears also that a portion of the light falling on a reflecting surface
is always transmitted, at least to a certain depth, notwithstanding the appa-
rent opacity of any large masses of the substance. Thus, if we cover a small
hole of a window shutter with the thinnest leaf gold, we shall find that it
transmits a greenish light, which must have passed the reflecting surface,
but which, if the gold had been but one ten thousandth of an inch in thick-
ness, would have been wholly intercepted, and probably almost in the same
manner as by passing through 700 feet of water. In transparent substances,
however, the greater part of the light penetrates to all distances with little
interruption, and all rays of the same kind, thus transmitted by the same
surface,form with the perpendicular an angle of refraction which is ultimately
in a certain constant proportion to the angle of incidence ; thatis, for instance,
one half, three fourths, or two thirds, according to the nature of the sur-
face. Thus, if the refractive properties of the substance were such, that an
incident ray, making an angle of one degree with the perpendicular, would
be ‘so refracted as to make an angle of only half a degree with the same line,
another ray, incident at an angle of two degrees, would be re-
fracted, without sensible error, into an angle of one degree. But when the
angles are larger, they vary from this ratio, their sines only preserving the
proportion with accuracy: for example, if the angle of incidence at the sup-
posed surface were increased to 90°, the angle of refraction would be 30°
only, instead of 45°. Rays of the same kind are in general distinguished
‘by the same colour, although some rays, which differ from each other in
‘refrangibility, have scarcely a discernible difference of colour; and it is
possible, on the other hand, to find a surface at which the ratio of the angles
is the same for rays of all-kinds. (Plate XXVI. Fig. 369, 370.)


/
;
P


412 LECTURE XXXV. f


In order to obtain the effects of regular reflection and transmission, we
must have perfectly smooth and polished substances ; for all rough bodies, and
sometimes even such as to the touch seem tolerably smooth, have their surfaces
divided into innumerable eminences and depressions, constituting, in reality, as
many separate surfaces, disposed in all imaginable directions, so that from
the equality of the angles of incidence and reflection, with respect to each of
these surfaces, the light must be scattered every way, and no regularity can
be observed in its direction. It is true that by continuing the mechanical
operation of polishing, we only render these surfaces more minute and more
numerous; but when they are so much.reduced in magnitude as not to be
elevated or depressed more than about the millionth part of an inch, they
appear to become, for some physical reason, incapable of acting separately,
and only to conspire in the general effect.


In all cases of refraction, as well as of reflection, if the ray of light re-
turned directly backwards in the same line to the surface, it would proceed,
after a second refraction or reflection, in the direction precisely opposite
to that in which it first was incident, so that the same lines would mark its
path in both cases. Thus, if we stand before a looking glass, with one eye
shut, and cover its place on the glass with a finger, the same finger will hide
the other eye as soon as it is shut, and the first is opened in its place; anda
similar effect might be observed, if the glass were under water, or behind any
other refracting substance. (Plate XXVI. Fig. 371.)


The medium, in which the rays of light are caused to approach nearest to
the line perpendicular to its surface, is said to have the greatest refractive
density. In general there is a considerable analogy between this refractive
density and the specific gravity of the substance: thus water is more refrac-
tive than air, and glass than water. But inflammable bodies are usually
more refractive than bodies of the same specific gravity, which are not in-
flammable; and it is well known that from the high refractive power of the
diamond, in proportion to its actual density, Sir Isaac Newton most ingeniously


" conjectured that it was combustible,as more modern experiments have actually


shown it to be. It is ‘still more singular that he also imagined, from the
same analogy, that water consists of a combination of oily or inflammable
particles, with. others earthy or not inflammable. In the order of refractive


ON THE THEORY OF OPTICS. 418


density, beginning from the lowest, or a vacuum, we have airs and gases
of different rarities, water, which is the least refractive of all liquids, and
which is still less refractive when frozen into ice: alcohol, oils, glass, and
lastly the diamond; but probably some metallic substances are much more
refractive than even the diamond. :


The refractive powers of different substances, are usually estimated by a
comparison of the refractions produced at their surfaces in contact with the
air, which, in all common experiments, has the same sensible effect as a
vacuum or an empty space; the ratio of the angles of refraction and inci-
dence, when small, and that of their sines, in all cases, being expressed by
the ratio of 1 to a certain number, which is called the index of the refrac-
tive density of the medium. Thus, when a ray of light {passes out of air
into water, the sines of the angles are in the ratio of 3 to 4, or of 1 to4,
which is, therefore, the index of the refractive density of water. In the
same manner, for crown glass, the ratio is that of 2 to 3, and the index 1};
but for flint glass it is somewhat greater, the ratio being nearly that of 5 to 8.


It may easily be shown that a refractive substance, limited by parallel sur-
faces, must transmit a ray of light, after a second refraction at its posterior
surface, in a direction parallel to that in which it first passed through the
air. It is also found by experiment that such a substance, interposed between
any two mediums of different kinds, produces no alteration in the whole an-
gular deviation of a ray passing from one of them into the other. Hence
it may be inferred, that the index of refraction at the common surface of any
two mediums is the quotient of their respective indices. [or instance, a
plate of crown glass being interposed between water on one side and air ou
the other, it produces no change in the direction of a ray of light entering
the water; and the index of refraction at the common surface of glass and
water is 5. (Plate XXVI. Fig. 372, 373.)


There is one remarkable consequence of the general law, by which the angles
of incidence and refraction are related,that whentheangle of incidence exceeds
a certain magnitude, the refraction maybecome impossible; and in this case the
ray of light is wholly reflected, in an angle equal to the angle of incidence.


- >
- - ae
- to-y t : ,
} a ‘ ;
3 —
“ a


a te


414 : LECTURE XXXV.


Thus, if the law of refraction required the sine of the angle of refraction to
be twice as great as that of incidence, this condition could not take’ place if
the angle of incidence were greater than 30°, so that when a ray passing
within a dense medium falls very obliquely on ‘its surface, it must be wholly
reflected; and the greater the density of the medium, the more frequently
will the light be totally reflected. This reflection is more perfect than any
other; the diamond owes much of its brilliancy to it: the great refractive
density of this substance not only giving a lustre to its anterior surface,
but also facilitating the total reflection of such rays as fall obliquely on ‘its
posterior surface. If we hold a prism, near a window, in a proper position,
we may observe that its lower surface appears to be divided into two parts,
the one much brighter than the other; the common partial reflection taking
place in one, and the total reflection in the other. The two surfaces are
separated by a coloured arch: it is coloured, because the total reflection
commences at different angles for the rays of different colours; and it is
curved, because the points, at which the light passing to the eye
forms a given angle with the surface, do not lie in a straight line;
and if we throw a light on a wall by a reflection of this kind, we may easily
observe, as we turn the prism, the point at which the brightness of the
image is very conspicuously increased. (Plate XXVI. Fig. 874.)


Such are the principal properties which we discover in light. Before we
consider their immediate application to optical instruments, we must exa
mine the general theory of refraction and reflection, at sarfaces of emieRereiee
kinds, or the doctrines of dioptrics and catoptrics. ° RSI AS


The rays, which constitute a pencil of light, are sometimes parallel to each
other, sometimes divergent from a point, and sometimes convergent to a
point. The intersection of the directions of any two or more rays of light
%s called their focus; and the focus is either actual or virtual, accordingly as
they either meet in it, or only tend to or from it. Thus, a small luminous
vbject may represent an actual focus of diverging rays, since the light
spreads from it in all directions; and the small surface, into which the image
of such an object, or of the sun, is collected by a lens or mirror, may re-
present the actual focus of converging rays. It was to such an image of the


ON THE THEORY OF OPTICS. 415


sun that the term focus, meaning a fire place, was first applied. But if the
rays tending to this focus be intercepted, and made to diverge, the point will
then be their virtual focus, since they will never actually arrive at it, being
made to diverge as if they proceeded from a new point, which will also bea
virtual focus. When the divergence or convergence of rays of light is altered
by refraction or reflection at any surface, the foci of the incident and re-
fracted or reflected rays are called conjugate to each other: the new focus
is also called the image of the former focus. Thus, in the case already
mentioned, where the convergence of the rays to ove focus is converted
into divergence from another, the two virtual foci are conjugate to each -
other; and the original focus of the lens ‘or mirror is conjugate to the place
of the sun, or of the luminous object. If the object had been put in the
place of its image, the image would then have occupied that of the object; a pro-
perty which follows from the direct return of every ray of light through the
path by which it has arrived, and which may easily be illustrated by experi-
mental confirmation. (Plate XXVII. Fig. 375.)


Whenever light is reflected by a plane surface, the conjugate foci are at
equal distances from it, and in the same perpendicular, Thus, every point
of an image in a looking glass is perpendicularly opposite to the correspond-
ing point of the object, and is at the same distance behind the looking glass,


as the point of the object is before it. (Plate XXVII. in 376.)


The focus into which parallel rays are collected, or from which they are
made to diverge, is called the principal focus of a surface or substance. The
sun is so distant, that the rays, proceeding from any point of his surface,
affect our senses as if they were perfectly parallel, and the principal focal
distance of a surface or substance may often be practically determined by
measuring the distance of the image of the sun, or of any other remote
object, which is formed by it.


In order that the rays of light, proceeding from or towards any one point,
may bemade to converge by reflection towards another, the form of the surface
must be elliptical, parabolic, or hyperbolic; there are also curves of still more
intricate forms, which possess the same property with respect to refrac-


416 LECTURE XXXV.


tion. A small. portion, however, of any of these curves, differs very
- little from a circle; and a spherical surface is almost universally substituted
in practice for all of them, except that the mirrors of eit reflecting tele-
s2opes are sometimes made parabolical.


The principal focus of aspherical reflecting surface, whether convex or
concave, is half way between the surface and its centre. If a luminous point
be placed in the centre of a concave mirror, the rays will all return to the same
point; if the point be beyond the centre, the image will be between the centre
and the principal focus, its distance from that focus being always inversely as
that of the radiant point. Such a focus is never absolutely perfect, for the
Yays are, never collected from the whole surface of the mirror into the same
point, except when both the point and its image are in the centre: but,
provided that the surface be only a small portion of that of the whole sphere,
the aberration will be too small to be easily observed: and the same is true _
of the foci produced by refracting surfaces. (Plate XXVII. Fig, 377,
378.) j


When a ray of light passes through two surfaces forming an angle with
each other, including a denser medium, as in the case of a ptism of glass,
it is always deflected from the angle in which the two surfaces meet. A
_ greater number of surfaces, placed in different directions, constitute what is Wey
sometimes called a multiplying glass, each of them bending the rays of light
into a different direction. (Plate XXVII. Fig. 379, 380.) ait gil


A lens is‘a detached portion of a transparent substance, of which the op-
posite sides are regular polished surfaces, of such forms as may be described
by lines revolving round a, common axis. These lines may be portions of
circles, of ellipses, hyperbolas, or of any other curves, or they may be right
lines, But in general, one of the sides is a portion of aspherical surface, and
the other either a portion of a spherical surface or a plane; w we have Z
double convex, double concave, planoconvex, planoconcave, a d meniscus he
lenses. The figures of all these are sufficiently described _ bnpiseerga . ie ‘3


except that the term meniscus, which properly implies a moon or


crescent, is applied in. general to all lenses which are convex on the one ae
i <*


Peete ec CH ce eer oetpegi at 22:


ON THE THEORY OF OPTICS. A417


mt con the other, although they may be thicker at the edges than
Sometimes, however, a lens of this kind is distinguished | by

the tern =. etaaedaa ‘A lens is generally supposed, in simple cal-

' _ culations, to be infinitely thin, and to bedemer than the surrounding medium.
> eng! XXVIL. Fi ig. 381. )


} ; : “The psecde effect of a lens may be understood, “from conceiving its surface
to coincide at any given point with that of a prism; for if the angle of the
prism be external, as it must be when the lens is conyex, the rays will be
inflected towards the axis; but if the base of the prism be external, and the
lens concave, the rays will be deflected from the axis: so that a convex lens

. either causes all rays to converge, or lessens their divergence, and a concave

ar lens causes them ‘to diverge, or lessens their AE: uo“

XXVIL. Fig. ,)


‘The inal focus of a double convex or double | concave lies, of crown
glass, is at the distance of the common radius of its surfaces; and the focal
length of -lens is equal to the diameter of the convex surface.
If the radii of the surfaces are unequal, their effect will be the same as if
= they were each equal to the harmonic mean between them, which is found by

"dividing the product by half the sum; or, in the meniscus, by half the dif-
ference. Thus, if one of the radii were] two inches, and the other six, the
effect would be the same as that of a lens of three inches radius; and if it
were a meniscus, the same as that of a lens of six inches. (Plate XXVII,-


}.
'


of a lens of fine glass of water, Dass other substance,
; idin; that of an equal lens of crown glass by twice
x of refraction above unity. Thus, the index for
divide the radius by 3, or increase it one half, for
nce of a double re phoma acetic’


A eet oe ep
at an equal distance on the other side; -when the
bh Yee


418 LECTURE XXXY. -


radiant point is nearer than this, the image is more remote, the distance of
the image from the principal focus nearest to it being always inversely as the
distance of the object from the principal focus on the opposite side. (Plate
XXVII. Fig. 385.)


.


The joint focus of two lenses, in contact with each other, is also found by
multiplying together their separate focal lengths, and dividing the product
by their sum or difference, accordingly as they agree or differ with respect
to convexity and concavity. f Here

We have hitherto considered the placeof the focus only in relation toa
single point, placed in the axis of the lens or mirror; but it is equally neces-
sary’ to attend to other points, out of the principal axis; for, in order to- _
form a picture, the rays from a great number of such points must be col-
lected into as many distinct points of the image. Some of the rays proceed-
ing from every radiant point must be considerably bent, in order to be col-
lected into a common focus; others remain nearly straight; and if we can
discover which of the rays are ultimately either in the same line with their
original direction, or in a direction parallel to it, we may determine the line
‘in which the image of the point in question is to be found. For this purpose,
we employ the property of the optical centre, which isa point so situated, |
that all rays which pass through it, or tend towards it, while they are within
the lens, must ultimately acquire a direction parallel to their original direction.
In some cases, the optical centre may be without the lens, but no practical
inconvenience results from supposing it to be always situated within the
lens, especially when its thickness is inconsiderable; so that all rays which
pass through the middle point of the tens must proceed, without sensible
error, in the. same straight line, and the image of any radiant point must
consequently be found somewhere in this line: but in the case of a mirror,
the centre of its figure is also the optical centre. Now when any radiant point
is removed a little from the axis of a lens or mirror, the distance of its image
is in general a little diminished, but the difference is too small to be ob-
servable in common cases. We may, therefore, suppose it to be at
the same distance as if the point remained in the axis, or even to be in
a plane crossing the axis perpendicularly at that distance, so as’to form


a rr


ON THE THEORY OF OPTICS. - 419


part of a flat | image, of which the magnitude is determined by straight lines
drawn from the extremities of the object through the centre of the
lens. This is, however, an approximation which is only admitted for
the greater convenience of computation and representation, the image
being almost always in reality aonpiclarelly curved, (Plate XXVII. Fig.
386.) -


420


LECTURE XXXVI. ~


ON OPTICAL INSTRUMENTS.


AMONG the great variety of instruments depending on optical principles,
it is more consistent with our plan to attend first to those which may be


denominated optical measures, which are calculated either for the determina-


tion of the quantity or intensity of light itself, or for the examination of the
properties of various material substances with respect to light. Reflecting


quadrants and circles, which are often used in astronomical and nautical ©


observations, although they derive their utility in some measure from optical
laws, may most properly be considered &s belonging to the subject of practical
astronomy. 5

It is a problem of frequent occurrence in economical investigations, to
compare the intensity of the light afforded by any two luminous objects.
For this purpose, it is necessary” to assume as a principle, that the same
quantity of light, diverging in all directions from a luminous body, remains
undiminished at all distances from the centre of divergence. Thus, we must
suppose that the quantity of light falling on every body is the same as would
have fallen on the place occupied by its shadow: and if there were any
doubt of the truth of the supposition, it might be confirmed by some simple


experiments. It follows that since the shadow of a square inch of any sur- _


face, occupies, at twice the distance of the surface from the luminous point,
the space of four square inches, the intensity of the light diminishes as the
square of the distance increases. We can judge with tolerable accuracy of
the equality of two lights by the estimation of the eye, but we cannot form
any idea of the Proportions of lights of different intensities: if, however,
we remove two sources of light to such distances from an object, that they
may illuminate it in equal degrees, we may conclude that their original


ON OPTICAL INSTRUMENTS. : 421


intensities are inversely as the squares of their distances. Count Rumford’s
photometer performs this very conveniently, by casting two shadows of a
- given object near each other, on the same surface, the lights being removed
to such distances that the shadows appear equally dark. (Plate XXVII
Fig. 387, 388.)


: For determining the refractive density of solids, it has been usual to form
them into a prism, and to measure the angular deviations which they
produce ; and for fluids, to inclose them either in a hollow prism, or between
two meniscus lénses, and to measure the angular deviations produced by the
prisms, and the focal distances of the lenses. But in most cases, Dr. Wol-
Jaston’s apparatus is far preferable to both these methods: it is arranged for
ascertaining the angle at which light, moving within a certain dense trans-
parent substance, begins to be totally reflected from the common surface of
‘that substance and the solid or fluid which is to be examined. Thus, if we
first measure the angle, at which light begins to be totally reflected from the
posterior surface of a prism of glass, in contact with air, we may readily
determine its refractive power; and then, having caused a drop of a fluid
to adhere to that surface, or fixed a solid to it by asmall portion of some
fluid denser than itself, we may observe, as we turn the prism round its
-axis, at what angle the drop or spot begins to disappear, and may thence
calculate the refractive density of the substance; and even without actual
measurement of the angle, we may readily compare the disappearance of the
drop or spot with that of others placed near it, of which the properties are
known. Dr. Wollaston has, however, rendered ‘the process still easier and
‘more'simple, by employing a rectangular prism of glass, with sights fixed to
a jointed frame, of such a construction as to enable him to read off, by a
vernier, without any calculation, the index of the refractive power of
any substance less dense than glass. (Plate XXVII. Fig. 389.)


All instruments strictly optical are employed for forming an image of an
external object: the simplest are mirrors and lenses, which form a single
image only, either actual or virtual, and sometimes depict it on a surface
calculated for receiving and exhibiting it. Other instruments repeat the
image once or more under several forms, in general enlarging it continu-


3


A422 “LECTURE XXXVI.


ally; and these are either microscopes or telescopes, which present us with
great diversity in their arrangements, and in the fig ae 900 subservient to
their uses.


oR is a’ general rule, that when an image of an actual object is formed by
any lens or speculum, if the rays converge to an actual focus, the image
is inverted; but erect, if they diverge from a virtual focus, and’the object and’
image subtend equal angles at the centre of the lens or speculum. Hence,
a convex Jens and a concave mirror form an inverted image, smaller than the
object, whenever the object is ata greater distance than twice the principal
focal length; but larger, when the object is within this distance; and when
it. is within,the principal focal distance, the magnified image is virtual and - :
erect, and may be seen by looking into the concave mirror, or by looking g
through the lens towards the object. But a concave lens and a convex
mirror always form a virtual image of a real object, which is erect, and
smaller than’ the object. (Plate XXVII. Fig. 390.. aoe surest Sant

_ When the object is precisely in the eins focus» of a convex lens ora
concave mitror, the virtual image becomes infinitely distant; so that from
whatever point in the neighbourhood of the lens it may be viewed, it must
subtend the same angle, which is always equal to that which the object sub-
tends at the centre of the lens: and since this angle may easily be much 2
greater than that under which the object can be conveniently viewed by the
naked eye, such a lens or mirror is often used as a simple microscope; and
its magnifying power may be ascertamed from a comparison of the angles
which the object and image subtend. Thus, if a person cannot see aminute 4
object with the naked eye at a distance less'than eight inches, wit re “a
an inch focal length will represent it to him in an angle 16 times i
but if he can see it without the lens atthe distance of four inches,
will magnify it to his eye but eight times. Supposing, however, the oh £5
be applied close to the lens, the object may be viewed -a li ¢ within
the focal distance, and its apparent angular
ed 17 times instead of 16, and 9 times’ ns |
Fig. 995, $96.) 0 si Gotieeagea sii wh .

+ ake tpigna bye! tbe Fy on

- Since the magnifying! power of a teat is the sen - smaller ing

* Dats e


ON OPTICAL INSTRUMENTS. 423


it is usual ot employ the minutest lenses that can be ground, and sometimes

a small ‘globule is formed by fusion ina lamp. Even a drop of water, placed .
in the perforation of a plate, makes a tolerable magnifier; and it has been pro-

posed to substitute for water a nee varnish, yo is less liable t?

evaporate. : ;


» Supposing the whole light that proceeds from a Sulnii object, and falls on
Weiisti or speculum, to be collected in the image, its intensity must be increased
in the ratio of the surface of the lens or speculum to that of the image. The i image
is greater in proportion as the object is greater; consequently the degree of
condensation produced by any lens is the greater as the object is smaller, thus
if the diameter of a lens were an inch, and the image of the sun formed by it
were also an inch in diameter, the density of the light would be unaltered;
but the image of a star would be infinitely brighter than the direct light of
the star falling on the lens. The illumination of any image formed by a
lens or mirror, supposing no light to be lost, is always the same as would
be produced by the direct light of the surface of the lens or mirror, if it were
equally luminous: with the surface of the object which emits the light. It
may also be shown, that “when two lenses are of similar forms, their focal
lengths being proportional to their diameters, they must produce the same
degree of illumination in the image: but as far as. the heat excited may be
supposed to be a measyre of the quantity of light, this conclusion is not
confirmed by experiment: it is probable, however, that the greater heat.
produced by a larger lens, is onlysderived from the greater extent of surface
exposed at once to the solar rays.


Lenses are most commonly made of glass, but sometimes of rock crystal,
or of other transparent substances, It is difficult to find”glass, especially
flint glass, for large lenses, sufficiently free from veins: it has been proposed
to suffer the melted glass to cool without agitation, and to cut the lens out
of any of its strata taken-in a horizontal direction; but this method appears
to be liable to-several practical objections. Mirrors are made either of glass,
coated with an amalgam of mercury and tin, or of metal, as of platina, of
silver, or of an alloy of copper and tin, to which a little arsenic and silver
are sometimes added. Mirrors of metal are more perfect than those of glass,
because they are free from the inconvenience of a double reflection; but they


Saletan


424 LECTURE XXXVI.


are more expensive, and are liable to tarnish. Where a large mirror is re-.
quired, with a weak reflection only, we may employ a single surface of
glass, the back of the piece being covered with a black coating of some
substance differing little from glass in its refractive density, by means of
which the second reflection is avoided.


_ When the image formed by a lens or mirror is received on a smooth but
unpolished surface, which is capable of irregular reflection, it is visible in
every direction. Such an image is exhibited in the camera obscura, the
solar microscope, and the magic lantern, or lucernal microscope. ;

The general effect of the camera obscura is the same as may often be
observed in a dark room, where there is a small hole in the window shutter:
the great masses of light and shade, before the windows, being represented
in an inverted position, in the parts of the room diametrically opposite to
them, which are illuminated in different degrees, according to the quantity
of light which can reach them in straight lines from the external objects.
A lens, of a focal length somewhat smaller than the distance of the surface.
on which the picture is projected, renders the images much more distinct;
but some of them are unavoidably imperfect and ill defined, unless the
objects happen to be situated at the same distance from the aperture; for
the focus of the lens can never be adjusted at once to nearer and more re-
mote objects; nor would the picture be rendered more natural by such an
adjustment, for it would present to the eye at one view, with equal distinct-
ness, objects which never can be seen at once without some degree of con-
fusion. Sometimes the picture is intercepted, by a speculum placed obliquely,
and is thrown upwards on the surface of a plate of ground glass, upon which
its outline may be traced with a black lead pencil, and an impression may
be taken from it on moist paper, which will represent the natural situation
of the objects without inversion. Another arrangement is, to place the
lens horizontally, with the speculum above it, which throws the image
through the lens, upon a flat surface placed below, on which the objects
may be delineated in their natural position, but not without some impedi-
ment from the interception of the light by the hand and the instrument
employed. Such a surface, however, ought not to be perfectly flat, in
order to afford the most distinct image, although by means of a meniscus


7


ON OPTICAL INSTRUMENTS. 425


lens, with a cover admitting the light only through a small aperture near its
centre, on the principle of Dr. Wollaston’s periscopic spectacles, an image
nearly flat might be obtained ; but in this case too much of the light would
be excluded. It has been usual to consider the image of a very distant
object, formed by a convex lens, as a portion of aspherical surface, of which
every part is equally distant from the centre of the lens; but this estimate is ex-
tremely erroncous, for the effectof the obliquity of thedifferent pencils of rays
materially increases the curvature of the image. In fact no pencil of rays,
falling obliquely on a spherical surface, can be collected any where toa perfect
focus: the image of a circle would become most distinct at one distance,
and that of its diameter at another; but for both these images, the surface
ought to be much more curved than that which has been usually considered,
and the mean of the curvatures required for them, which must be the best
form for the ground or bottom of a camera obscura, is equal to that of a
sphere of which the radius is three eighths of the focal distance, when a
double convex lens of crown glass. is employed. (Plate XXVII. Fig.
397 . . 399.)


In the solar microscope, an image is formed on a wallor screen, by means
of a lens of small focal length, near to which the object is placed, so that
the image is very much magnified. For this purpose the room must be
darkened, and the object strongly illuminated by the sun’s light, which is
condensed by means of a large lens, and sometimes oy two or more lenses
placed at a distance from each other; but care must be taken to avoid burn
ing the object by bringing it exactly into the focus; and, on the other hand,
if it be much beyond the focus, the light will be thrown upon a small {part
of the image only; the best arrangement appears to be, to bring the focus
of the condensing lenses very near to the small lens; and in order to adjust
the instrument in the most convenient manner, the distances of all the
lenses ought to be moveable at pleasure: the want of this precaution is a
material defect in the usual construction of the instrument. The speculum
which first receives the light must be capable of motion in all angular direc-
tions, in order to ajlow us to accommodate its position to the changeable
place of the sun; and the adjustment has sometimes been performed by
means of a heliostate, an instrument calculated for turning the speculum

VOL. 31


426 LECTURE XXXVI.


by clockwork, into such a position as always to reflect the sun’s light in the
required direction. An easier method would he to employ two speculums,
the one moveable round an axis parallel to that of the earth, and reflecting
the sun’s light into the direction of its axis, the other fixed, and changing
this direction into any other that might be required. When an opaque object
is to be examined, the light may be thrown on it either by a plane mirror
placed obliquely, or by a perforated concave mirror; and if the object is
small, the concave mirror appears to be the more eligible. (Plate XXVIII.
Fig. 400.)


By night, a Jamp, with a large lens before it, may supply the place of the
sun’s light, and the instrument will become a lucernal microscope, which,
when painted glass sliders are employed as objects for the amusement of
children, is called a magic lantern: and this, exhibited on a larger scale, and
projecting an image on a semitransparent screen of taffetas, instead of a wall, has
of late been the source of much entertainment under the name of the phan-
tasmagoria, a term which implies the raising of spectres. In order to
favour the deception, the sliders are made perfectly opaque, except where
the figures are introduced, the glass being covered, in the light parts, with
a more or less transparent tint, according to the effect required. Several
pieces of glass may also be occasionally placed behind each other, and may
be made capable of such motions as will nearly imitate the natural motions
of the objects which they represent. The figures may also be drawn with
water colours on thin paper, and afterwards varnished. By removing
the lantern to different distances, and altering at the same time more or less
the position of the lens, the image may be made to increase or di-
minish, and to become more or less distinct at pleasure, so that to a person
unaccustomed ,to the effects of optical instruments, the figures may appear
actually to advance and retire. In reality, however, these figures become
much brighter as they are rendered smaller, while in nature the imperfect
transparency of the air causes them to appear fainter when they are remote
than when they are near: this imperfection might be easily remedied by the
interposition of some semiopaque substance, which might gradually be
caused to admit more light as the figure became larger, or by uncovering a
larger or a smaller portion of the lamp, or of its lens. Sometimes, by throw-


ON OPTICAL INSTRUMENTS. "487


ing a strong light upon an actual opaque object, or on a living person, its
image is formed on the curtain, retaining its natural motions: but in this
case the object must be considerably distant, otherwise the images of its
nearer and remoter parts will never be sufficiently distinct at once, the re-
fraction being either too great for the remoter, or too small for the nearer
parts: and there must also be a second lens, placed at a sufficient distance
from the first to allow an inverted image to be formed between them, and
to-throw a second picture of this image on the screen, in its natural erect


_ position, unless the object be of such a nature that it can be inverted with-


out inconvenience. This effect was very well exhibited at Paris by Robert-
son; he also combined with his pictures the shadows of living objects,
which imitate tolerably well the appearance of such objects ina dark night, or
by moonshine: and while the room was in complete darkness, concealed
screens were probably let down in various parts of it, on which some of the
images were projected; for they were sometimes actually situated over the
heads of the audience. (Plate XXVIII. Fig. 401.) |

In almost all telescopes and compound microscopes, the image formed. by
one lens or mirror stands in the place of a new object for another. The
operation of such instruments may be illustrated by placing a screen of fine
gauze at the place of the image, which receives enough light to make the
image visible in all directions, and yet transmits enough to form the sub-
sequent image. The simplest of such instruments is the astronomical tele-
scope. Here the object glass first forms an actual inverted image, nearly in
“the principal focus of the eye glass, through which this image is viewed as
by a simple microscope, and therefore still remains apparently inverted,
In order to find the angular magnifying power, we must divide the focal
length of the object glass by that of the eye glass: this quotient is -conse-
quently the greater as the focal length of the object glass is greater, and as
that of the eye glass is smaller; but the power of the instrument cannot be
increased at pleasure by lessening the focal length of the eye glass, because
the object glass would not furnish light enough to render the view distinct,
if the magnifying power were too great. (Plate XXVIII. Fig. 409.)


The double or compound microscope resembles in its construction the as-


’ = ; ag
‘

428 LECTURE XXXVI. .
tronomical telescope, except that the distance of thelensesmuch exceeds their
joint focal length; and the angular magnitude is greater than when the. :
same object is viewed through the eye glass atone, in proportion as the first $)
image is further from the object glass than the object itself. (Plate XXVIII.
Fig. 403.) shui Se it


In the Galilean telescope, or opera glass, a concave eye glass is placed so
near the object glass, that the first image would be formed beyond it, and
near its principal focus; and the second image, formed by the eye glass,
which is the virtual image viewed by the eye, being on the opposite side of the
centre, is inverted with respect to the first image, and erect with respect to
the object. In this case also the magnifying power is indicated by the
quotient of the numbers expressing the focal lengths of the glasses. (Plate |
XXVIII. Fig. 404.)


The inverted image of the astronomical telescope may be made erect by "
means of an additional eye glass. In the common day telescope of Rheita,
two such eye glasses are employed, of nearly equal focus, which have the ad-
vantage of procuring a greater extent in the field of view; they are usually
so placed as to have little or no effect on the magnifying power. (Plate
XXVIII. Fig. 405.)


Dr. Herschel’s reflecting telescopes resemble, in their effects, the simple
astronomical telescope; a concave speculum, or mirror, being substituted
for the object glass, and the eye glass being so placed as to magnify the x
image formed by the speculum.. But since the speculum, if it received the
principal rays perpendicularly, would send them back in the same direction,
it is necessary, in this construction, to have them reflected somewhat ob-
liquely, the speculum being a little inclined to the axis of the telescope, in
order that the light may have free access to it. An arrangement of this kind
’ was proposed long ago by Maire, but it has been very little employed before
Dr. Herschel’s time. This excellent philosopher and mechanic has carried
the perfection of his telescopes to a degree far exceeding all that could have
been expected from the labours of former opticians. His instruments allow
him to extend the linear dimensions of his objects several thousand times :


5


. ON OPTICAL INSTRUMENTS. 429


but he commonly finds it more eligible to employ only powers of 5 or 600,
which afford a much stronger illumination. (Plate XXVIII. Fig. 406.)


The Newtonian reflector has a plane speculum placed in its axis, at the
inclination of half a right angle, which intercepts the rays about to form the
image, and throws them into the focus of an eye glass fixed in the side of the
tube. The plane speculum which he employed was the posterior surface of

“a rectangular prism of glass, which produces a total reflection: but Dr,
Herschel has found that the sources of error are diminished by wholly omit
ting thisspeculum, (Plate XXVIII. Fig. 407.)


In the Gregorian telescope, the object speculum is perforated, and the
image formed by it is received into the focus of a smaller concave speculum,
which returns it to be viewed through the aperture by the eye glasses. It has
been objected to this form of the reflecting telescope, which is the first that
was invented, that the best part of the speculum is sacrificed by the perfora-
tion. But Dr. Herschel has found that the image formed by the external
part of a speculum is in general more perfect than that which is formed by
the central part. (Plate XXVIII. Fig. 408.)


For the smaller concave speculum of Gregory, Mr. Cassegrain substituted
a convex one, placing it within the focal distance of the large speculum, so as
to form the first actual image nearly in the same place as the second image
of the Gregorian telescope; but this image is inverted. The instrument has
some advantage in theory, with respect to the perfection of the focus; but
it is little used. (Plate XXVIII. Fig. 409.)


Dr. Smith’s reflecting microscope resembles Cassegrain’s telescope, but the
rays of light are first admitted through a perforation in the small speculum,
that part of them which tends to fall immediately on the eye being inter-
cepted by a screen. . The convexity of the one mirror is nearly equal to the
concavity of the other; and the instrument, although seldom employed, is
said to succeed extremely well. (Plate XXVIII. Fig. 410.)


The image of a very distant object, formed by a speculum of any kind, is


450 LECTURE XXXVI. : ‘


considerably less curved than that which is depicted by a lens of equal focal’


length. There is a similar imperfection in the nature of the focus of oblique
pencils, but it is confined within narrower limits, the remotest part of the
image in which any radiating lines would be most distinctly represented,
being a flat surface, and the nearest, in which circles would become most
distinct, being a part of a sphere touching the speculum: so that the radius
of the mean curvature is equal to the focal distance. (Plate XXVIII. Fig.
411.) a


The magnifying power of a refracting telescope may often be measured, by
comparing the diameter of the object glass with that of the narrowest space,
into which the beam of light is contracted beyond the eye glass, provided
that none of the light has been intercepted in its passage through the’ tele-


scope: for the object will be viewed through the telescope inan angle as —


much greater than that which it naturally subtends, as the diameter of the


object glass is greater than that of this contracted pencil, which may be con-


sidered as an image of the object glass. But in the Galilean telescope, this
method cannot be employed, since no such image is formed. The field of
view, in a simple telescope, or the angular magnitude of that part of an
object which can be seen through it at once, is nearly equal to the magnitude
of the eye glass as seen from the object glass. |


If a lens be added to any refracting telescope at the place of the first
image, it will have no effect cither on the place or on the magnitude of any
subsequent image, but it will enlargé the field of view, by throwing more —
pencils of light on the original eye glass. If, however, the image fell
exactly on such a lens, it would be liable to be impaired by any accidental
impurities of its substance or on its surface, every opaque particle inter-
cepting the whole of the light belonging to one of its points, which would not
happen if the image were at a small distance from the lens. A field glass
is, therefore, usually placed, both in telescopes, and in ‘the | common com-
pound microscope, ‘a little nearer to the object glass than the place of the
first image. The best places for the various lenses, in aneye piece, are partly


’


‘


determined from similar considerations, but they require also in general to bead. :


justed by experiment, for several circumstances ; are concerned i in seare 2


ON OPTICAL INSTRUMENTS. 481


although some assistance may certainly be obtained from theory with regard
to the most important of them. The curvature of the image produced by
. any lens has already been mentioned: it may bein some measure remedied by
Mr. Ramsden’s method of placing a planoconvex lens a little beyond the
image, with its flat side turned towards it. Mr. Ramsden also employs
an eye piece constructed on this principle instead of a simple microscope,
under the name of a double magnifier. The aberration of the different
parts of | any single pencil of rays, from the corresponding point of ~

image, requires also to be considered in the construction of telescopes: i
magnitude is such, in the case of a double convex lens of crown pre
a that those parts of a pencil of parallel rays which fall on it near the cir-
, cumference meet each other in a point, which is within the true focus, by a
distance a little more than half as great again.as the thickness of the lens.
In an image formed by a concave speculum, of equal focal length, this
aberration would be only ,‘, as great; it may, however, be almost entirely
corrected, in refracting telescopes, by employing proper.proportions in the

* dimensions of the various lenses. (Plate XXVIII. Fig, 412, 413.)


ance of a telescope, which are almost too intricate for practical calculation,


A still more important aberration, from which reflecting telescopes are
also wholly free, is that which arises from the different refrangibilities of
the rays of light of different colours, which form an infinite number of
images, neither agreeing perfectly in situation nor in magnitude, so that
the ep con are rendered indistinct by an appearance of colours at their edges:

this imperfection, however, Mr. Dollond has in great measure obviated,

by his achromatic object glasses: the construction of which depends on

AE e ‘important discovery, that some kinds of glass separate the rays of differ-

I, ent colours from each other much more than others, while the whole deviation
\ __ produced in the pencil of light is the same. Mr. Dollond combined, therefore,
_ aconcave lens of flint glass with a convex lens of.crown glass, and sometimes
two such lenses; the concave lens of flint glass being sufficiently power-
correct the whole dispersion of coloured light produced by the crown
E enough to destroy the effect of its refraction, which was still
ct the rays of light into a distant focus. For this purpose,
t the focal lengths of the two lenses should be in the same


a


432 LECTURE XxXxVI.


proportion as the dispersive powers of the respective substances, when the
mean deviations of the pencils are equal; that is, in the case of the kinds
of glass commonly used, nearly in the ratio of 7 to 10. Sometimes also
the chromatic aberration, that is, the error arising from the different re-
frangibilities of the different rays, is partially corrected in an eye piece, by
placing a field glass in such a manner, as considerably to contract the di-
mensions of the image formed by the least refrangible rays, which is nearest
to the eye glass, and to cause it to subtend an equal angle with the image
formed by the most refrangible rays, this image being little affected by the
glass. (Plate XXVIII. Fig. 414, 415.)


The apparent magnitude of an object, viewed through a telescope, may
be measured, with great accuracy, by ascale or by wires, introduced at the
place of the last image, reducing afterwards the angle thus ascertained
according to the magnifying power. Care must, however, be taken to
avoid as much as possible the distortion which usually accompanies any
curvature of the image; and the wires, one of which is sometimes made
moveable by means of a micrometer screw, must be sufficiently illuminated -
to be distinctly visible. Sometimes a scale is introduced, which, from the
apparent magnitude of a known object, such as that of a man of ordinary
height, or of a portion of a wall built with bricks of the usual size, enables
us at once to read off its actual distance, which is expressed on the scale in
hundreds of yards. The angular magnitude of an object, seen through a
telescope, may also be found, by viewing at the same time, with the other eye,
either a scale, or any other object of known dimensions, placed at a given dis-
tance: the lucid dise micrometer of Dr. Herschel is employed in this man-
ner for judging ef the magnitude of the celestial bodies. The divided
object’ glass micrometer affords another mode of measurement: the object
glass being divided into two semicircular portions, one of which slides on
the other; each portion acts as a separate lens, and two images of every
part of the object being formed, the angular distance of any two points
is determined by bringing their images together, and measuring the dis-
placement of the moveable portion of the object glass, which is required
for procuring. the coincidence. Sometimes also a similar purpose is answered
by inserting a divided glass in the eye piece, which acts nearly on the same


ON OPTICAL INSTRUMENTS. 433


principle, and which seems to be somewhat less liable to error. In a reflect-
ing telescope of Cassegrain’s construction, Mr. Ramsden has also pro-
duced the same effect by dividing the convex speculum, and. causing a
‘part of it to turn round an axis. All these arrangements particularly
deserve the attention of those who are .employed in practical astro-
nomy and in geography, since the advancement of these sciences much
depends on the accuracy of the telescopic and microscopic measures, which
are performed by means . of Stine instruments. (Plate XXVIII. Fig.
AMG, 417.)


VoL, 1. 3K


A434


*
ON PHYSICAL OPTICS,


Maxis
'


eeee a
HLAVING examined the general theory of optics, and the construction
of optical instruments, we are now to Consider those properties and affectiots
of light, which rather belong to its natural history, than to its mechanical
effects; to trace its relations to the particular phenomena of nature; to’in-
vestigate the manner in which it is connected with our sensations, and to ~
inquire on what intimate mode of action the various effects of light depend.
All these subjects may be properly comprehended under the denomination
of physical optics, but we shall find it convenient to reserve each of the
two last for a separate examination. The sources of light, the velocity of
its motion, its interception and extinction, its dispersion into different ~- aa
colours; the manner in which it is affected |, by the variable density of the at-
mosphere, the meteorological appearances in which it is concerned, and the
singular properties of particular substances with regard to it, will be the first
subjects of our investigation.


|
'
|
LECTURE XXXVI. lg ae


The sources, from which light is commonly derived, are either the sun or “2
stars, orsuch terrestrial bodies as are undergoing those changes which consti-
tute combustion. The process of combustion implies a change in which
considerable emission of light and heat is produced ; but it is not cap + ,
a very correct definition: in general it requires an absorption, or
transfer, of a portion of oxygen; but there "appear wo besane
to the universality of this distinction; and it has. bag o od
heat and light are often produced where a
and sometimes by a effect of a mixtu
‘tion.


ON PHYSICAL OPTICS. 435


and animal substances, which appear to be undergoing a slow decomposition,
not wholly unlike combustion. Thus decayed wood, and animal substances
slightly salted, often afford spontaneously a faint light, without any elevation
of temperature ; and it is not improbable that the light of the ignis. fatuus
may proceed from a vapour of a similar nature.


«The effects, which are commonly attributed to the motions of the electrical
fluid, are often attended by the production of light; and violent or rapid
friction frequently seems to be the immediate cause of its appearance. But
it is difficult to ascertain whether friction may not be partly concerned in
the luminous phenomena attributedto electricity, or electricity in the apparent
effects of friction. Light is sometimes produced by friction with a much lower
degree of heat than is required for combustion, and even when it is accom-
panied by combustion, the heat produced by the union of these causes may be
very moderate: thus it is usual in some coal mines, to obtaina train of light by
the continual collision of flint and steel, effected by. the machine called a
fire wheel, in order to avoid: setting fire to the inflammable gas emitted by the
coal, which would be made to explode if it came near the flame of a candle,
: - .


' There is a remarkable property, which some substances possess in an
eminent degree, and of which few, except metals and water, are entirely
destitute. These substances are denominated solar phosphori; besides the
light which they reflect and refract, they appear to retain a certain portion,
and to emit it again by degrees till it is exhausted, or till its emission is in-
terrupted by cold, The Bolognan phosphorus was one ef, the first of thésg.
substances that attracted notice ; it is a sulfate of bagyte% found.in the state
of a stone; itis prepared by exposure to heat, and igafterwards made up.into
cakes: these, when first placed in a beam of the sunlight, and viewed afteft
‘wards in a dark room, have nearly the appearance of a burning coal,or a red hot
iron, Burnt oyster shells,and muriate of lime haye also the same property, and
some specimens of the diamond possess it in aconsiderable degree. From the
different results of experiments apparently accurate, made by different
persons, there is reason to conclude that some of these phosphori emit only
‘the same kind of light as they have received, while others exhibit the same ap-
pearances, to whatever kind of light they may have been exposed. Sometimes
it has even been found that light of a particular colour has been most effica~


436 LECTURE XXXVII.


cious in exciting in a diamond the appearance of another kind of light, which.

it was naturally most disposed to exhibit. The application of heat to.

solar phosphori in general expedites the extrication of the light which they

have borrowed, and hastens its exhaustion; it also produces, in many sub-

stances, which are not remarkable for their power of imbibing light, a tem-

porary scintillation, or flashing, at a heat much below ignition: the most re-

markable of these are fluor spar in powder, and some other crystallized

substances. It appears that luminous bodies in general emit light equally in {
~ every direction, not from each point of any of their surfaces,assomehave =~ =

supposed, but from the whole surface taken together, so that the surface, : :

when viewed obliquely, appears neither more nor less bright than when viewed

directly.


However light of any kind may have at first originated, there is reason
to believe that the velocity with which it passes through a given medium
is always the same. It has been ascertained by the astronomical ob-
servations of Roemer and of Bradley, that each ray of light, emitted by the
sun, arrives at the earth in eight minutes and one eighth, when the
earth is at its mean distance of about 95 millions of miles. Roemer deduced
this velocity from observations on the eclipses of the satellites of Jupiter,
and Bradley confirmed it by his discovery of the cause of the mpgerent aber-
ration of the fixed stars.


i


This aberration is produced by the effect of the revolution of the earth in its _
,frbit, combined with that of the progressive motion of light. Since light .
proceeds always in right lines, when its motion is perfectly undisturbed, if
a fine tube were p so as to receive a ray of light, passing exactly
through its axis when af rest, and then, remaining in the same direction,
were moved transversely with great velocity, it is evident that the side
of the tube would strike against the ray of light in its passage, and that i in
order to retain it in the axis, the tube must be inclined, in the
as if the light, instead of coming in its actual direction, had
motion in a contrary direction to that of the tube. The axis
or even of the eye, may be considered as resembling such a
of the light through the refracting substances not altering
clination of the axis. In various parts of ‘the earth’s orbi


SS
——= ~ —


Saute cd dines Sn eek Seleeanaatatines ated


- ON PHYSICAL OPTICS. 437


of any one star must be different in quantity and in direction; it never exceeds.
20 seconds each way, and must, therefore, in common observations, be
wholly insensible. (Plate XXIX. Fig. 418.)


The quantity of light, which is reflected by a substance of any kind,
depends not only on the nature of the substance, but also on the ob-
liquity of its incidence: and it sometimes happens, that a surface, which
reflects a smaller portion of direct light ‘than another, reflects a greater
portion when the light falls very obliquely on its surface. Bouguer found
that the surface of water reflected only one fifty fifth part of the light fall-
ing perpendicularly on it, that of glass one fortieth, and that of quicksilver
more than two thirds: but when the obliquity was as great as possible, the
water reflected nearly three fourths of the incident light, and the glass about
two thirds. only.


Of the light which passes by a dense'substance of any kind, the greatest
part pursues its course undisturbed, but there is always a certain divergence,
which has been called by Grimaldi diffraction, and by Newton inflection.
This effect is usually ‘attended by the production of colours, and will
therefore Neier to be more piercer considered hereafter.


The separation of ealein by refraction is one of the most striking of all
optical phenomena. It was discovered by Newton that white light is a com-
pound of rays of different kinds, mixed in a certain proportion, that these
rays differ in colour and in refrangibility, that they constitute a series, which
proceeds by gradual changes from red to violet, and that those substances
which appear coloured when placed in white light, derive their colours only
from the property of reflecting some kind of rays most abundantly, and of
transmitting or extinguishing the rest. Dr. Herschel has added_to this series
rays of heat less refrangible than the red, and Ritter and Dr. Wollaston have
discovered, beyond the violet, other still more refrangible rays, which blacken
the salts of silver.


Tt has generally beén supposed, since the time of Newton, that when the
rays of light are separated as completely as possible by means, of
refraction, they exhibit seven varieties of colour, related to each


4388 LECTURE XXXVII.


other with respect to the extent that they occupy, in ratios nearly analo-
gous to those of the ascending scale of the minor mode in music, The
observations were, however, imperfect, and the analogy was wholly imagin-
ary. Dr. Wollaston has determined the division of the coloured image or
spectrum, ina much more accurate manner than had been done before: by
looking through a prism, at a narrow line of light, -he produces a more effec-
tual separation of the colours, than can be obtained by the common method
of throwing the sun’s image on a wall. The spectrum formed in this manner
consists of four colours only, red, green, blue, and violet, which occupy
spaces in the proportion of 16, 23, 36, and 25, respectively, making together
100 for the whole length; the red being nearly one sixth, the green and the
violet each about one fourth, and the blue more than one third of the length.
The colours differ scarcely at: all-in» quality. within. their, respective. limits.
but they vary in brightness; the greatest intensity of light being in that
part of the green which is nearest to the red. A narrow line of yellow is
generally visible at the limit of ‘the red'and green, but its breadth scarcely
exceeds that of the aperture by which the lightis admitted, and Dr. Wollaston
_attributes it to the mixture of the red with the green light, There are also
several dark lines crossing the spectrum within the blue portion and in its
neighbourhood, in which the continuity. of the light seems to be interrupted,
This distribution of the spectrum Dr. Wollaston has found to be the same,
whatever refracting substance may have been employed+for its formation ;
and he attributes the difference, which) has sometimes been observed in the
proportions, to accidental variations of the obliquity of the rays. The angu-
lar extent of the spectrum formed by a prism of crown glass is one 27th of
the deviation of the red rays; by a prism of flint glass, one 19th. (Plate
XXIX. Fig. 419.)


In light produced by the combustion of terrestrial substances, the spectrum
is sometimes still more interrupted; thus, the bluish light of the lower part
of the flame of a candle isiseparated by refraction into five parcels of various
colours; the light of burning spirits, which appears perfectly blue, is chiefly
composed of green and violet rays; and the light of a candle into which salt —

-is thrown abounds with a pure yellow, inélining to green, but not separable
by refraction, The electrical spark furnishes also a light which is differently
divided in different circumstances, (Plate XXIX. Fig. 420.)


2


ON PHYSICAL OPTI¢s. 439


If the breadth of the aperture viewed through a prism is somewhat in-
creased, the space occupied by each variety of light in the spectrum is aug-
mented in the same proportion, and each portion encroaches on the neigh-
bouring colours, and is mixed with them: so that the red is succeeded by
orange, yellow, and yellowish green, and the blue is mixed on the one
side with the green, and on the other with the violet; and it is in this state,
that the prismatic spectrum is commonly exhibited, (Plate XXLX. —
421.) : ;


When the beam of light is so exe enlarged as to exceed the angular mag),
nitude of'the spectrum, it retains its whiteness:i in the centre, and is termi-)
nated by twodifferent series of colours at the different ends. These series are’
still divided by well marked lines: on the one hand the red remains unmixed;,
the space bélonging® to the’ green and blue becomes a greenish yellow, nearly
uniform throughout, and here the appearance of colour ends, the place of
the violet being scarcely distinguishable from the neighbouring white light:,
on the other hand, the space belonging to the red, green, and blue, of the
simple spectrum appears of a bluish green, becoming more and more blue till
it meets' the violet, which retains its place without alteration. This second
series is also the same that accompanies the limit of total reflection at the pos-
terior emapine of a prism. puree ioe Fig. 422.)


Sir Isaac Newton observed that the effect of white light on the sense
of sight might be imitated by a mixture of colours taken from different parts
of the spectrum, notwithstanding 'the omission of some of the rays naturally
belonging to white light: Thus, if we intercept one half of each of the four
principal portions into which the spectrum is)divided, the remaining halves
will ‘still preserve, when mixed: together, the appearance of whiteness; so
that it is'probable, that the different parts of those portions of the spectrum,
which appear of one colour, have precisely the same effect on the eye. It is
certain that the perfect sensations of yellow and of blue are produced respec-
tively, by mixtures of red and green, and of greensand violetlight, and there

is reason to suspect that those sensations are always:compounded of the separate
sensations combined: at least this supposition simplifies the theory of colours:
it may, therefore, be! iadopted» with advantage, until it be found inconsistent
with any of the phenomena; ‘and we may consider white light as composed of


440 LECTURE XXXVII.


a mixture of red, green, and violet, only, in the proportion of about two
parts red, four green, and one violet, with respect to the quantity or intens-
ity of the sensations produced.


If we mix together, in proper proportions, any substances exhibiting these
colours in their greatest purity, and place the mixture in a light sufficiently
strong, we obtain the appearance of perfect whiteness; but in a fainter light
the mixture is grey, or of that hue which arises from a combination of white
and black ; black bodies_being such as reflect white light but in a very
seanty proportion. For the same reason, green and red substances mixed to-
gether usually make rather a brown than a yellow colour, and many yel-
low colours,when laid on very thickly, or mixed with black, become brown. The
sensations of various kinds of light may also be combined in a still more satisfac-
tory manner by painting the surface of a circle with different colours, in any way
that may be desired, and causing it to revolve with such rapidity, that the whole
may assume tlie appearance of a single tint, or of a combination of tints,
resulting from the mixture of the colours. (Plate XXIX. Fig. 423. . 496.) .


From three simple sensations, with their combinations, we obtain seven
primitive distinctions of colours; but the different proportions, in which. they
may be combined, afford a variety of tints beyond all calculation. . The three
_ simple sensations being red, green, and violet, the three binary. combina-
tions are yellow, consisting of red and green; crimson, of red and violet;
and blue, of green and violet; and the seventh in order is white light, composed
by all the three united. But the blue thus produced, by combining the whole of
the green and violet rays, is not the blue of the spectrum, for four parts of green
and one of violet make a blue differing very little from green; while the blue
of the spectrum appears to contain as much violet as green: and it is for this
reason that red and blue usually make: ‘a purple, deriving its hue from the pre-
dominance of the violet.


It would be possible to exhibit at once to the eye the deiabeoutiond of any
three colours in all imaginable varieties. ‘Two of them might be laid down
on a revolving surface, in the form of triangles placed in opposite directions,
and the third on projections’ perpendicular tothe surface, which,
while the eye remained at rest im» any one point, obliquely situated, would

2


ON PHYSICAL OPTICs. AAL


exhibit more or less of their painted sides, as they passed through their dif-
ferent angular positions: and. the only further alteration, that could be pro-
duced in any of the tints, would be derived from the different degrees of light
only. The same effect may also be exhibited by mixing the colours in differ-
ent proportions, by means of the pencil, beginning from three equidistant
points as the centres of the respective colonrs, (Plate XXIX. Fig. 497.)

The ordinary atmospherical refraction cannot be determined in the usual
manner from the knowledge of its density, and of the angular direction of the
incident or’ refracted light, since the constitution of the atmosphere is such,
that its density varies every where with its height, and the curvature of the
earth’s surface causes the inclination of thestrata through which the ray
passes to be perpetually changed; the difference of temperature at different
elevations increases also the difficulty of an ¢xact calculation, and it is only
very lately that Mr. Laplace, bya comparison of astronomical with metcorologi-
al observations, has given a satisfactory solution of the problem in all its extent.
But for practical: uses,’ the refraction may be»determined with sufficient
accuracy by an approximation which is easily remembered; the deviation
being .atall altitudes one sixth part as great as the refracted ray would
undergo, at the horizontal surface of a medium six times as dense as the air,
When a celestial object appears exactly in the horizon, it is actually more
than half a degree below it, since the refraction amounts to 33 minutes,
when the barometer stands at 29,5 inches, and Fahrenheit’s thermometer
at 50°. :


_ The accidental variations of the temperature of the air, at different parts,
produce, however, great irregularities in its refraction, especially near the
horizon. The most remarkable of these is occasioned by the rarefac-
tion of the air in the neighbourhood of the surface of water, ofa building,
or of the earth itself, in consequence of which a distant object appears to be
depressed instead of being elevated, and is sometimes: seen at once both de-
pressed and elevated, ‘so as to appear double, one of the images being gene-
Tally in an inverted position, as if the surface possessed a: reflective power;
and there seems indeed to be a considerable analogy between this kind of refrac-
tion and the total reflection. which happens within a denser medium. These
effects are known by the appellations looming, mirage, and Fata Morgana:
voL. 1 3L


A442 LECTURE XXXVIT.


-they may be very completely imitated, as Dr. Wollaston has. shown, by
looking at:a distant object along a red hot poker, or through a saline or
saccharine solution with water and spirit of wine floating on it. The effect
-of refraction on the apparent places of terrestrial objects must be frequently
disturbed by circumstances of this kind; but its magnitude is usually about


one tenth of the angular distance of the object, considered as a part of the


earth’s circumference. (Plate XXIX. Fig. 428, 429.)


The atmospherical phenomena of rainbows and halos present us with ex-
amples of the spontaneous separation of colours by refraction. The rainbow
is universally attributed to the refraction and reflection of the sun’s rays in
the minute drops of falling rain»or dew, and the halos, usually appearing in
frosty atmospheres, are’ in all probability produced by the refraction of small
triangular or hexagonal crystals of snow. It is only necessary, for the for-
-mation of a rainbow,that the sun should shine on a dense cloud, or a shower of
rain, in a proper situation, or even/on.anumber of minute drops of water, scat-
tered by a brush or by a’syringe,:so that the light may reach the eye after
having undergone'a certain angular deviation, by means’ of various refractions
‘and reflections; and the drops so situated must necessarily be found some-
-where in a conical surface, of which the eye is the vertex, and must present
the appearance of an arch. The light, which is reflected by the external sur-
face of a sphere, is'scattered almost equally in all directions, setting aside the dif-
ference arising from the greater efficacy of oblique reflection; but when it first
enters the drop, and is there reflected by its posterior surface, its deviation never
exceeds a certain angle; which depends on the degree of refrangibility, and is,
therefore, different for light of different colours: and the density of the light
- being the greatest at the angle of greatest deviation, the appearance of a lumi-
nous arch is produced by the rays of each colour at its appropriate distance.
The rays which never enter the drops produce noother effect, than to cause a
bright ness, or haziness round the sun, where the reflection is the most oblique:
those which are once reflected within the drop exhibit the common internal
or primary rainbow, at the distance of about 41 degrees from the point op-
posite to the’sun: those which are twice!reflected, the external or secondary
rainbow, of 52°: and if the effect of ‘the light, three times reflected, were
sufficiently powerful, it would appear atthe distance of about 42 degrees
trom the sun. The colours of both rainbows encroach considerably on each


ON PHYSICAL OPTICS. 443


other ; for each point of the sun may be considered as affording a distinct
arch of each colour, and the whole disc.as producing an arch about half a
degree in’ breadth for each kind of light; so that the arrangement nearly re-
sembles that of the common mixed spectrum. There is, however, another
cause of a further mixture of thecolours: the arch of any single colour, which
belongs to any point of the sun, is accurately defined on one side only; while
on the other.it becomes gradually fainter, the breadth of the first minute con-
taining about five times as much light as a minute at the distance of a quarter
of a degree: the abrupt termination is on the side of the red, that is, without
the inner bow, and within the outer, so that, for this reason, the order of colours’
. partakes, in some degree, of the nature of the red termination of a broad beam
of light seen through a prism ; but it is more or less affected by this cause, on
account of some circumstances, which will be explained when we examine
the supernumerary rainbows, which sometimes accompany the bows more com- -
monly observed. A lunar rainbow is much more rarely seen than a solar one,
but its colours. differ: little; except in 6 from those of the common
rainbow. © opens XXIX. Fig. 430. ) :


In the highest insaciove latitudes, coke the air. is commonly loaded with
frozen particles, the sun and moon usually appear surrounded by halos or
coloured circles, at the distances of about 22 and 46 degrees from their
centres; this appearance is also frequently observed in other climates, espe-
cially in the colder months, and in the light clouds which float in the highest
regions of the air. The halos are usually attended by a horizontal white
circle, with brighter spots, or parhelia, near their intersections with this circle,
and. with portions of inverted arches of various curvatures: the horizontal
circle has also sometimes anthelia, or bright spots nearly opposite to the sun.
These phenomena have usually been attributed to the effect’ of spherical
Particles of hail, each having a central opaque portion of a certain magnitude,
mixed with oblong particles, of a determinate form, and floating with a
Certain constant obliquity to the horizon. But all these arbitrary supposi-
tions, which were imagined by Huygens, are in themselves extremely com-
Plicated and improbable, and are wholly unauthorised by observation: A
much simpler, and more natural, as well as more accurate explanation, which
Was suggested at an earlier period by Mariotte, had long been wholly for-
gotten, until the same idea occurred to. me, without any. previous knowledge
of what Mariotte had done. ‘The natural tendency of water to crystallize, in


444 LECTURE XXXVII.


freezing, at an angle of 60 degrees, is sufficiently established, to allow us
to assume this as the constant angle of the elementary crystals of snow,
which are probably either triangular or hexagonal prisms: the deviation
produced by such a prism differs very little from the observed angle at which
the first circle is usually seen; and all- the principal phenomena, which attend
this circle, may be explained, by supposing the axis of the crystals to assume
a vertical or a horizontal position, in consequence of the operation of gravity :
thus the parhelia, which are sometimes a little more distant from the sun
than the halo, are attributed by Mariotte to the refraction of the prisms
which are situated vertically, and produce a greater deviation, on account of
the obliquity of the rays of light with respect to their axes. The horizontal
circle may be deduced from the reflection, or even the repeated refractions
of the vertical facets ; the anthelia from two refractions with an intermediate
reflection, and the inverted arch from the increase of the deviation, in the
light passing obliquely, through prisms lying in a horizontal position. . The
external circle may be attributed either to two successive refractions through
different prisms, or with greater probability, as Mr. Cavendish has suggested
to me, to the effect of the rectangular terminations of the single crystals.
The appéarance of colours, in halos, is nearly the same as in rainbows, but
less distinct; the red being nearest to the luminary, and the vines -~ —
externally very ill defined, (Plate XXIX. Fig, 431, Py iSyease


From the observed magnitude of these halos, I had a er that the
refractive power of ice must be materially less than that of water, although
some authors had asserted that it was greater: and Dr. Wollaston afterwards
fully confirmed this conclusion by means of the very accurate instrument
which has already been described: his measurement agreeing precisely with
the mean of the best observations on these halos; so that ice must be con-
sidered as the least refractive of any known substances not aeriform.


Sometimes the figures of halos ae pasta are pein Hae instsiplitind3
as to defy all attempts to account for the formation of their different parts:
but if we examine the representations which have been given,by various authors,
of the multiplicity of capricious forms’ frequently assumed by the flakes of
snow, we shall see no reason to think eee r herent”
all these appearances. (Plate XXIX. Fig. ae ~~ Au apg

GB trot itor pai Yo


ON PHYSICAL OPTICS. a AAS


The most singular of all the phenomena of refraction is perhaps the property
of some natural substances, which have a double effect on the light transmitted
through them, as if two mediums of different densities freely pervaded eacl:
other, the one only acting on some of the rays of light, the other on the remain-
ing portion, These substances are usually crystallized stones, and their refrac-
tions have sometimes no further peculiarity; but the rhomboidal crystals of
calcarious spar, commonly called Iceland crystals, possess the remarkable
property of sepafating such pencils of light, as fall perpendicularly on them,
into two parts, one of them‘only being transmitted in the usual manner,
the other being deflected towards the greater angle of the crystal. It appears.
from the experiments of Huygens, confirmed and extended by Dr. Wollas-
ton, that the medium, which causes the unusual refraction, has a different
refractive power, according to the direction in which the light passes through
it, and that if an oblate or flattened spheroid be described within a crystal,
its axis being in the middle of one of the obtuse solid angles, and its princi-
pal diameters in the proportion of 9 to 10, the refractive power, with respect
to light passing in any direction, will always be inversely as the diameter
of the spheroid which is parallel to it; and where it is greatest, will be equal
to that-of the medium which produces the usual refraction, of which the
index is }., A ray of light, falling perpendicularly on any surface of the spar,
its point of incidence being considered as the centre of the spheroid, will
meet the surface of the spheroid at the point where it is parallel to that of
the spar; and a ray incident on the same surface in any other direction, will _
preserve a relation to the perpendicular ray, which is nearly the same as in —


ordinary refraction. (Plate XXIX. Fig. 435.)
a)


It is also remarkable, that the two portions of light, thus separated, will not
be further subdivided by a transmission through a second piece, provided
that this piece be in a position parallel to that of the first; but if it be placed
ina transverse direction, each of the two pencils will be divided into


BA two others; a circumstance which appears to be the most unintelligible


Nee has been discovered respecting the Lacgrecmine of double re-


A446 LECTURE XXXVII.


different thicknesses, and of those which are seen in light variously diffracted or -


inflected, will be more conveniently examined, when we investigate the inti-
mate nature of light, since the general explanation of these colours, which
will then be given, will enable us to follow them through all their varieties,
with much more ease than could be done at seen eve the help —
theory respecting their origin. tt


447


LECTURE XXXVIII.


ON VISION.


THE medium of communication, by which we become acquainted with alt
the objects that we have been lately considering, is the eye; an organ that
exhibits, to an attentive observer, an arrangement of various substances, so
correctly and delicately adapted to the purposes of the sense of vision, that
‘we cannot help admiring, at every step, the wisdom by which each part is
adjusted to the rest, and made to conspire in effects, so remote from what
_the mere external appearance promises, that we have only been able to un-
derstand, by means of a laborious investigation, the nature and operations
of this wonderful structure, while its whole mechanism still remains far be-
yond all rivalship of human art.


» The eye is an irregular spheroid, not very widely differing from a sphere; _
it is principally composed of transparent substances, of various refractive
densities, calculated to collect the rays of light, which diverge from each


" point of an object, to a focus on its posterior surface, which is capable of


transmitting to the mind the impression of the colour and intensity of the
light, together with a distinction of the situation of the focal point, as de-
termined by the angular place of the object. (Plate XXX. Fig. 436.)


The first refraction happens at the surface of the cornea, or that transparent
coat which projects forwards from the ball of the eye; but the cornea,
being very nearly of equable thickness, has little effect by its own refractive
power, and serves only to give a proper form to the aqueous humour, which -
fills its concavity, and distends it.. This humour is partially divided by the
uvea or iris, which is of different colours in different persons, having a perfora-
tion in its centre, called the pupil. Immediately behind the uvea, and closely
connected to its base, are the ciliary processes, the summits of which hang,


448 LECTURE XXXVIII.


like a short fringe, before the crystalline lens, a substance much more re-
fractive than the aqueous humour, and increasing in density towards its
centre. The remaining cavity is filled by an aqueous fluid, lodged in a cel-
lular~texture of extremely fine membrane, and called the vitreous humour.
The retina lines the whole posterior part of this cavity; it is semitransparent,

and is supported by the choroid or chorioid coat, a very opaque black or
brown membrane, continued from the uvea and ciliary processes: but imme-
diately where the retina is connected with the optic nerve, thechoroid is

necessarily perforated; and at this part a small portion of the retina is nearly
insensible. The whole is surrounded by an opaque continuation of the cor-
nea, called the sclerotica. :


The rays of light, which have entered the cornea, and passed through the
pupil, being rendered still more convergent by the crystalline lens, are col-
lected into foci on the retina, and form there an image, which, according to
the common laws of refraction, is inverted, since the central rays of each
pencil cross each other a little behind the pupil; and the image may easily
be seen in a dead eye, by laying bare the posterior surface of the retina,
(Plate XXX. Fig. 437.)


*

By means of this arrangement of the various refracting substances, many
peculiar advantages are procured. The surface of the cornea only, if it had
been more convex, could not have collected the lateral rays of a direct pen-
cil to a perfect focus, without a different curvature near its edges; and then
the oblique pencils would have been subjected to greater aberration, nor
could they have been made to converge to any focus on the retina. A second
refraction performs both these offices much more completely, and has also
the advantage of admitting a greater quantity of light. If also the surfaces
of the crystalline lens, thus interposed, had been abrupt, there would have been


a reflection at each, and an apparent haziness would have interfered with |


the distinct view of every luminous object; but this inconvenience is avoided by
the gradual increase of density in’ approaching ‘the centre, which also
makes the crystalline equivalent to a much more refractive substance of _
equal magnitude ; ; while, at the same time, the


‘smaller density of the lateral
parts prevents the usual aberration of spherical surfaces, cecasioned by the


too great refraction of the lateral rays of direct pencils, and causes” eos


“= War?


ee a


4
ON VISION. 449


focus of each oblique pencil to fall either accurately or very nea on the
concave surface of the retina, throughout its extent.


Opticians have often puzzled themselves, without the least necessity, in
order to account for our seeing objects in their natural erect position, while
the image on the retina is in reality inverted: but surely the situation of a
focal point at the upper part of the eye could be no reason for supposing the
_ object corresponding to it to be actually elevated. We call that the lower

end of an object which is next the ground; and the image of the trunk of a
tree being in contact with the image of the ground on the retina, we may
naturally suppose the trunk itself to be in contact with the actual ground:
the image of the branches being more remote from that of the ground, we
necessarily infer that the branches are higher and the trunk lower: and
itis much simpler that we should compare the image of the floor with the
image of our feet, with which it is in contact, than with the actual situation
of our forehead, to which the image of the floor on the retina is only acci-
dentally near, and with which indeed it would perhaps be impossible to com-
pare it, as far as we judge by the immediate sensations only.


We might indeed callin experience to our assistance, andhabitually correct
the errors of one sense by a comparison with the perceptions. of another,
But it appears that some philosophers have been too hasty in supposing, that
the use of all our senses is derived from experience alone, and in disbelieving
the existence of instinct independent of it. Without any other authority
than that of their own imaginations, they have denied the observation re-
‘corded by Galen, on the instincts of a kid, which is sufficiently credible to
counterbalance much more than bare:assertion. The instant after its birth,
accompanied by the loss of its mother, the little animal ran to some green
vegetables, and having first smelt them, chewed and swallowed them. The
kid could have been taught by no experience to be tempted by the sight,
to act with the proper muscles of locomotion, to go near and smell, and to
be induced by the smell to masticate, and by the taste to swallow and digest
its food, had it not been provided with some fundamental instinct, by the
same intelligence, which so calculated the adjustments of the eye, that the
lens should be able to produce a perfect image of every object, and that the

VoL. 1 3m


450 LECTURE XXXVIII.


retina should be of that precise form, which is exactly suited to the reception
of the image to be depicted on it.


The whole surface of the retina appears to be usually occupied by such an
image, but it is not all of equal sensibility; a certain portion only, near the
axis, is capable of conveying distinct impressions of minute objects. But
the perfection of this limited distinctness is a far greater advantage to us,
than a more extensive field of moderately accurate vision would have been;
for by means of the external muscles, we can easily so change the position:
of the eye, that the image of any object before us may be made to fall on


the most sensible part of the retina. We may readily observe the want of
sensation at the entrance of the optic nerve, by placing two candles so that —
the distance of each from the eye may be about four times their distance ©


from each other: then if we direct our right eye to to the left hand candle,
the right hand candle will be lost in a confused mass of faint light, its image
on the retina falling on the point at which its sensibility is peri eeiaga :


When the attention is not directed to any particular object of sight; "th
refractive powers of the eye are adapted to the formation of an image of
objects at a certain distance only, which is different in different individuals,
and also generally increases with increasing age. Thus, if we open’ our
eyelids suddenly, without particular preparation, we find that distant objects
only appear as distinct as we are able to make them; but by an exertion of
the will, the eye may be accommodated to the distinct perception of nearer.

‘objects, yet not of objects within certain limits, Between the ages of 40
and and 50, the refractive powers of the eye usually begin to diminish, but


it sometimes happens that where they are already too great, the defect con- —


tinues unaltered to an advanced age. It’ appears also that after 50 or 60,


the power of changing the focus a the eye is ppciach- much impaired, and


sometimes wholly lost. Hosise dese oud hee f:.|

Scr) gehen MMP Hey 9

The mode, in which the accommodation of pee to different distances is

effected, has long been a subject of investigation and dispute f
cians and physiologists, but I apprehend that at present there

room for doubting, that: the: shapes is pot by sno


'


ON VISION. ° 45)


vexity of the crystalline lens, arising from an internal cause. The argu-
ments in favour of this conclusion are of two kinds; some of them are nega-
tive, derived from the impossibility of imagining any other mode of perform-
ing the accommodation, without exceeding the limits of the actual dimen-
sions of the eye, and from the examination of the eye in its different states
by several tests, capable of detecting any other changes if they had existed:
for example, by the application of water to the cornea, which completely re-
moves the effect of its convexity, without impairing the power of altering the
focus, and by holding the whole eye, when turned inwards, in such a
manner as to render any material alteration of its length utterly impossible.
Other arguments are deduced from positive evidence of the change of form
of the crystalline, furnished by the particular effects of refraction and aber-
ration which are observable in the different states of the eye; effects which
furnish a direct proof thatthe figure of the lens must vary; its surfaces, which
are nearly spherical in the quiescent form of the lens, assuming a different
determinable curvature when it is called into exertion. The objections
which have been made to this conclusion are founded only on the appearance
of a slight alteration of focal length in an eye from which the crystalline
had been extracted; but the fact is neither sufficiently ascertained, nor was
the apparent change at all considerable: and even if it were proved that an
eye without the lens is capable of a certain small alteration, it would by no
means follow that it ‘could undergo a change five times or ten times as great.


The iris serves, by its variable magnitude, to exclude more or less-of the
light falling on the cornea, when its intensity would otherwise be too great;
hence the pupil is usually smallest by day, and its increased magnitude at
night sometimes gives the eye a greater apparent lustre. The iris also in-
tercepts such rays as would fall on parts incapable of refracting them regu-
larly; and by its contraction when a nearer object is viewed, it lessens the
confusion which would arise, in such eyes as cannot accommodate them-
Selves sufficiently, from the magnitude of the imperfect focal points on the
Tetina. Such a contraction almost always accompanies the diminution of
the focal length, even in a perfect eye, and it may easily be rendered visible
by walking gradually up to a looking glass, and observing the magnitude
of the pupil as we approach nearer and nearer to our image. It would be
difficult to assign a reason for this change of the state of the pupil within the


=_


452 LECTURE XXXVIII.


limits of perfect vision, unless we allowed the irregularity of the form as-
sumed by the marginal parts of the crystalline lens. The iris is also pecu-
liarly useful in excluding such parts of lateral pencils of light as fall yery
obliquely on the cornea, and are too much refracted, while a smaller pencil
only, which enters the eye more directly, is admitted into the pupil.


The refractive powers and properties of the eye may be very conveniently
ascertained by meansof an instrument to which I have given the name
optometer, a term first employed in a sense nearly similar by Dr. Porterfield.
If two or more separate parcels of the rays.of the same pencil be admitted
at distant parts of the pupil, they will only be reunited on the retina when
the focus is perfect, so that if we look through two small perforations, or slits,
ata minute object, to the distance of which the eye is not accommodated, it
will appear as if double; and when the object is a line directed nearly towards
the eye, each point of it will appear double, except that which is at the
distance of perfect vision, and an image of two lines will be seen,
crossing each other in this point; so that the measurement of the focal
length of the eye is immediately performed by inspection of the optometer
only. The scale may be extended by the addition of a lens, which enables
us to produce the effect of a longer line, while the instrument still remains
portable. r


When the eye is possessed of too great a refractive power for the distinct
perception of distant objects, the pupil is generally large, so that the con-
fusion of the image is somewhat lessened by partially closing the eyelids; ©
and from this habit an eye so formed is called myopic. In such cases; by
the help of a concave lens, the divergence of the rays of light may be
increased, and a virtual image may be formed, at a distance so much smaller
than that of the object as to afford perfect vision. For a long sighted or
presbyopic eye, on the contrary, a convex lens is required, in order to
obtain a virtual image at a greater distance than the object; and it often
happens that the rays must be made not only to diverge less than before, but
even to converge towards a focus behind such an eye, in order to make
its vision distinct. Presbyopic persons have in general a small pupil, and,
therefore, seldom acquire the habit of covering any part of it with their
eyelids.


~ ; ON VISION, ~~ _ ASS


When the images of the same object fall on certain corresponding points
of the retina in each eye, they appear to the sense only as one; but if they
fall on parts. not ‘corresponding, the object appears double;. and in general,
all objects at the same distance, in any one position of the eyes, appear alike
either double or single. The optical axes, or the directions of the rays falling on
the points of! most perfect vision, naturally meet ata great distance; that is,
they are nearly parallel to each other, and in looking at a nearer object we make
them converge towards it, wherever it may be situated, by means of the external
muscles of the eye; while in perfect eyes the refractive powers are altered, at
the same time, by an involuntary sympathy, so as to form a distinct image
of an object at the given distance. This correspondence of the situation of
the axes with the focal length is in most cases unalterable; but some have
perhaps a power of deranging it in a slight degree, and in others the adjust-
ment is imperfect: but the eyes seem to:be in most persons inseparably con-
nected together with respect to the changes that their refractive powers
undergo, although it sometimes happens that those powers are originally very
different in the opposite eyes.


These motions enable.us to judge pretty accurately, within certain limits,
of the distance of an object; and beyond these limits, the degree of distinct-
ness or confusion of the image still continues. to assist the judgment. We
estimate distances much less accurately with one eye than with both, since
we are deprived of the assistance usually afforded by the relative situation of
the optical axes; thus we seldom succeed at once in attempting to pass a
finger or a hooked rod sideways through a ring, with one eye shut. Our
idea of distance is also usually regulated by a knowledge of the real magni-
tude of an object, while we observe its angular magnitude; and on the other
hand a knowledge of the real or imaginary distance of the object often directs
our judgment of its actual magnitude. , The quantity of light intercepted by
the air interposed, and the intensity of the blue tint which it occasions, are
also elements of our involuntary calculation: hence, ina mist, the obscurity
increases the apparent distance, and consequently the supposed magnitude,
of an unknown object. We naturally observe, in estimating a distance,
the number and extent of the intervening objects ; so that a distant church
in a woody and hilly country appears more remote than if it were situated
im a plain; and for a similar reason, the apparent distance of an object seen


1464 - LECTURE XXXVIII.


‘at sea, is smaller than its true distance: ‘The city of London issunquestion-
ably Jarger than Paris; but the difference appears at first sight’ much greater
than it really is; and the smoke, produced by the coal fires of ee proba-
bly the 4 agora cause Boi the seacpton)}: f po dpe ts

1 ; new ty BF “ne
The sun, moon, “is tants are much a luminous when they ‘are near
the horizon, than when ‘they are more elevated, on account of the greater

‘quantity of their light that is intercepted, in its longer passage through the
atmosphere: we also observe a much greater variety of nearer objects almost
in the same direction: we cannot, therefore, help imagining’ them to be
more distant, when they rise or set, than at other-times; and since they sub-
tehd the same angle, ‘they appear to be actually larger. For similar reasons
the apparent figure of the starry heavens, even when free from clouds, is
that of a flattened vault, its summit appearing to be much nearer to us than
its horizontal parts, and any of the constellations seems /tovbe |
larger when it is near the horizon than when in’ the: zenith, (Plate XXX,
Fig. 438.) TaES oNeoqa wy HE abs


The faculty of judging of the actual distance of objects is an’ impediment
to the deception, which it is partly the business of a painter to produce. Some
of the effects of objects at different distances may, however, be imitated in
painting on aplane surface. Thus, supposing the eye to be accommodated to
a given distance, objects at all other distances may be represented with a
certain indistinctness of outline, which would accompany the images of the
objects themselves on the retina: and this indistinctness’is so generally
necessary, that its absence has the‘ disagreeable effect 'called hardness.. The —_
apparent magnitude of the subjects of our design,” and the rehab: 2
of the intervening objects, may be so imitated by: bevchigeay geome ee
perspective as to agree perfectly with nature, ‘and’
prove the representation of distance by attending to th
tive, which consists in a due observation of t ;
tinge, occasioned by the interposition of ag
i itpenigerh vee 8 = of the scene:

: sal ne esses 6 ‘Be 8
We aces inidbadiet
the eye, or the poston fhe pi


ON VISION. 455


by: the actual objects: but we may place the picture at such a distance that
neither of these criterions can have: much power in detecting the fallacy ;
or, by the interposition of a large lens, we may produce nearly the same

_-effects,in the rays of light, as,if they proceeded from a picture at any requir-
ed distance., In the panorama, which has lately been exhibited in many
parts of Europe, the effects of natural scenery are very closely imitated: the
deception is favoured by the absence of all other visible objects, and by the
faintness of the light, which assists in concealing the defects of the repre-
sentation, and for which the eye is usually prepared, by being long detained
in the dark winding passages, which lead to the place of exhibition.


E u ; ;
fs The impressions of light on the retina appear to be always in a certain
degree permanent, and the more so as the light is stronger; but it is uncer-
tain whether the retina possesses this property merely as a solar phosphorus,
or in consequence of its peculiar organization. The duration of the impres-
‘ sion is generally from, one hundredth of a second to half a second, or more;
| hence a luminous object revolving in a circle makes a lucid ring; and a
shooting star leaves a train of light behind it, which is not always real. If
: the object is painfully bright, it generally produces a permanent spot, which
continues to pass through various changes of colour for some time, without
much regularity, and gradually vanishes: this may, however, be considered

as a morbid effect.


"When dulce has been fixed on a small object of a bright colour, and is
then turned away to a white surface, a faint spot, resembling in form and
ie object first viewed, appears on the surface, of a colour oppo-

_ that is, Ee such a colour as would be produced by with-


sl | green object a tea spot. The reason of this appearance is pro-
cen portion of the retina, or of the sensorium, that is affected, has
vat sensibility to the light of that colour, with which it has been
nd is more strongly affected by the other constituent parts of

A similar effect is also often produced, when a white, or grey
n a coloured ground, even without altering the position
ole retina being affected by sympathy nearly in the same
of it was affected in the former case. These appearances


sie


Pi,


>


456 LECTURE /XXXVIIL


are most conveniently exhibited by ‘aati ‘the shadows of objects placed
in coloured light: the shadow: appearing of a colour opposite to that of the —
stronger light, even when itis in reality illuminated | by a fainter light of
the same colour. It seems that the) eye cannot perfectly distinguish: the Y
intensity of a colour, either when ‘the: light is extremely faint, as’ that of
many of the fixed stars, which Dr. Herschel has found. to ‘be strongly
coloured, or when the light is excessively vivid; and that when a consider-
"able part of the field of vision is occupied by coloured light, it appears to
the eye either white, or less coloured than it is in reality: so that when a
room is illuminated either by the yellow light of a candle, or by the red
light of a fire, a sheet of writing paper still appears to retain its whiteness;
_-and if from the light of the candle we take away some of the abundant
. yellow light, and leave or substitute a portion actually white, the effect is \
nearly the same as if we took away the yellow light from white, and: sub-
stituted the indico which would be left: and we observe accordingly, that


] in comparison with the light of a candle, baPeryawcrabicas 10s" eh
a purplish hue, (Plate XXX. Fig. 439.. 441.) 0
; ' : : se doc difan lot aley vol rade walrocae nT

nog al apbbteduelhiehatis he La


ehmas eoubuind anondt bed wet ‘unin


J , Lani eatin yibarg he pe ut Yee 4
Dom. tae


ae
: . ey ce 4 ey rs .


“ik pada, well ee ot wn! yy


sa hal sat LECTURE XXXIX. at a
2.44 te epee 4 - ‘


; ss ON THE NATURE OF LIGHT AND COLOURS. 4


Tue nature of light is a subject of no material importance to the concerns of
= life or to the practice of the arts, but it isin many other respects extremely in- ee
| * 1 teresting, especially z as it tends to assist our views both of the nature,of our sen- — “> ¥
fae 4! sations, and of the constitution of the universe at large. - The examination of :
_. the, production of colours, i in a variety of circumstances, is intimately con- Ws
: nected with the theory of their essential properties, and their causes; and we “
pie shall find that | many of these phenomena will afford us considerable assistance
in forming our opinion respecting the nature and origin of light in general. : ‘


oe A - ae

ids sail is, allowed 0 ‘on all ‘sides, that” light either consists in the emission ; oi 4

% of very minute particles from luminous substances, which are actually pro-

4 jected, and continue to move, with the velocity commonly attribut-

light, _or in the excitation of an undulatory motion, analogous to

4 ich constitutes sound, in a highly light and elastic medium pervading

the. mniverse;_ but, the judgments of philosophers of all ages have been

ry divided with respect to the preference of one or the other of these opi-

> phere are also some circumstances which induce those, who entertain

sis, either to believe, with Newton, that the emanation of é

ight is always: attended by the undulations of an etherial ‘ 6 4
panying it in its passage, or to suppose, with Boscovich,

; minute particles of Tight themselves receive, at the time of their ae

D, certai rotatory ¢ and vibratory motions, which they retain as long _

p motion continues. These additional suppositions, how- — .

: may, have, been’ ‘thought for explaining some particular .
ver been very generally 1 sete or admitted, although ;

1 made re Anson ee eory i Bey other ee to '


Lit bre Ne tal 2 Sone se ey ss
Kf -


ee


458 LECTURE XXXIX. |


We shall proceed to examine in detail the manner in which the two principal
hypotheses respecting light may be applied to its various properties and
affections; and in the first place to the simple propagation of light in right
lines through a vacuum, or a very rare homogeneous medium. In_ this
circumstance there is nothing inconsistent with either hypothesis; but it
undergoes some modifications, which require to be noticed, when ayportion
of light is admitted through an aperture, and spreads itself in a slight


‘degree in every direction. In this case it is maintained by Newton that the


margin of the aperture possesses an attractive force, which is capable of in-
flecting the rays: but there is some improbability in supposing that bodies
of different forms and of various refractive powers should possess an equal force
of inflection, as they appear to do in the production of these effects; and there
is reason to conclude from experiments, that such a force, if it existed, must
extend to a very considerable distance from the surfaces concerned, at least
a quarter of an inch, and perhaps much more, which is a condition not easily
reconciled with other phenomena. In the Huygenian system of undulation,
this divergence or diffraction is illustrated by a comparison with the motions
of waves of water and of sound, both of which diverge when they are ad-
mitted into a wide space through an aperture, so much indeed that it has
usually been considered as an objection to this opinion, that the rays of light
do not diverge in the degree that would be expected if they were analogous
to the waves of water. But as it has been remarked by Newton, that the
pulses of sound diverge less than the waves of water, so it may fairly be in-
ferred, that ina still more highly elastic medium, the undulations, constituting
light, must diverge much less considerably than either. (Plate XX. Fig. 266:)


%,,

With respect, however, to the transmission of light through perfectly
transparent mediums of considerable density, the system of emanation labours
under some difficulties.. It is not to be supposed that the particles of ligh
can perforate with freedom the ultimate atoms of matter, which compose a
substance of any kind; they must, therefore, be admitted in all directions
through the pores or interstices of those atoms: for if we allow such suppo-
sitions as Boscovich’s, that matter itself is penetrable, that is, immaterial, it is
almost useless to argue the question further. It is certain that some substances


retain all their properties when they are reduced to the thickness of the ten _
- millionth of an inch at most, and we cannot therefore suppose the distances


cL


¥
o,


ON THE NATURE OF LIGHT AND COLOURS. _ 459


of the atoms of matter in general to be so great as the hundred millionth of


an inch. Now if ten feet of the most transparent water transmits, without*


interruption, one half of the light that enters it, each section or stratum of


the thickness of one of these pores of matter must intercept only about
one twenty thousand millionth, and so much must the space or area occupied —


by the particles be smaller than the interstices between them, and the dia-
meter of each atom must be less than the hundred and forty thousandth part
of its distance from the neighbouring particles: so that the whole space oc-
cupied by the substance must be as little filled, as the whole of England
would be filled by a hundred men, placed at the distance of about thirty
miles from each other. This astonishing degree of porosity is not indeed
absolutely inadmissible, and there are many reasons for believing the state-
ment to agree in some measure with the actual constitution of material sub-
stances; but the Huygenian hypothesis does not require the disproportion. to
be by any means so great, since the general direction and even the intensity
of an undulation would be very little affected by the interposition of the
atoms of matter, while these atoms may at the same time be. supposed
to assist in the transmission of the impulse, by propagating it through ‘their
own substance, Euler indeed imagined that the undulations of light might
be transmitted through the gross substance of material bodies alone, precisely
in the same manner as sound is propagated; but this supposition is for many
reasons inadmissible.


A very striking circumstance, respecting the propagation of light, is the
uniformity of its velocity in the same medium. According to the projectile
hypothesis, the force employed in the free emission of light must be about a
million million times as great as the force of gravity at the earth’s surface;
and it must either act with equal intensity on all the particles of light, or
must impel some of them through a greater space than others, if its action
be less powerful, since the velocity is the same in all cases; for example, if
the projectile force is weaker with respect to red light than with
respect to violet light, it must continue its action on the red rays to a
greater distance than on the violet rays. There is no instance in
natare besides of a simple projectile moving with a velocity uniform in
all cases, whatever may be its cause, and it is extremely difficult to imagine
that so immense a force of repulsion can reside in all substances capable of


-


w te


ra.


-~


6 +


- £60 ; 195 G@ LECTURE! ©XxITx.


becoming inihincny so that the light of decaying wood, or of two siiaine
rubbed together, may be projected precisely with the same velocity, as the light
emitted by iron burning in oxygen’ gas, or by the reservoir of liquid fire on


_the surface of the sun. Another cause would also naturally interfere with
the uniformity of the velocity of light, if it consisted merely in the motion


of projected corpuscles of matter; Mr. Laplace has calculated, that if any of
the stars were 250 times as great in diameter as the sun, its attraction
would be so strong as to destroy the whole momentum of the corpuscles of
light proceeding from it, and to render the star invisible at a great distance ;
and although there is no reason to imagine that any of the stars are actually
of this magnitude, yet some of them are probably many times greater than
our sun, and therefore large enough to produce such a retardation in the
motion of their light as would materially alter its effects. It is almost unneces-


sary to observe that the uniformity of the velocity oflight,in those spaces which


are free from all material substances, is a necessary consequence of the Huy-


genian hypothesis, since the undulations ‘of every homogeneous elastic -


medium are always propagated, like those of sound, with - same melanins
as. long as the ERR remains unaltered, Hb Ait
Yoni tedhe Ave
On either cippetitibs there i is no difficulty in  daplaitng the: equality of
the angles of incidence and reflection; for these angles are equal as well in
the collision of common elastic bodies with others incomparably larger, as in
the reflections of the waves of water and of the undulations of sound. And
it is equally casy to demonstrate, that the sines of the angles of incidence and
refraction must be always in the same proportion at the same. surface,
whether it be supposed to possess an attractive force, capable of acting on
the particles of light, or to, be the limit,of a medium through which the
undulations are propagated with a diminished velocity. There are, , however,
some cases of the production of colours, which lead us to suppose that, the
velocity of light must be smaller in a denser than in @ rarer, medium; and
supposing this fact to be fully established, the existence of such an attractive
force could no longer be allowed, nor could the system of emanation be
maintained by any ones. t c ipouo srcustetly ,
The partial reflection from. all refracting surfaces is supposed by Newton
to arise from certain periodical retardations of the particles of light, caused


Teak eet aad ep Is LS
“ee © id *


i
j
i
i
4


y ~— rs . so “ ee ha ae va. ee
o> > 2 “By. ¢ >
5 tis ah or  %
* : Rog ee, eels Sy
4 i
- ve a
5 2
4
.
ON THE NATURE OF LIGHT AND COLOURS. 46!


_by undulations, propagated in all cases through an ethereal iasdinote The
mechanism of these supposed undulations is so complicated, and attended. by
so many difficulties, that the few who have examined them. haye been,in
general entirely dissatisfied with them: and the internal. vibrations of the
particles of light themselves, which Boscovich has imagined, appear scarcely
to require a serious discussion. It may, therefore, safely be asserted, that
in the projectile hypothesis this separation of the rays of light of the same
kind by a partial reflection at every refracting surface, remains wholly unex-
plained. In the undulatory system, on the contrary, this separation follows
5 as a necessary consequence. It is simplest to consider the ethereal medium .
which pervades any trausparent substance, together with the material atoms
of the substance, as constituting together a compound medium denser than ~ .

_ the pure ether, but not more elastic; and by comparing the contiguous
be particles of the rarer and the denser medium with common. elastic bodies of
different dimensions, we may easily determine not only in what manner,
| but almost in what degree, ‘this reflection must take place in different circum-
stances. Thus, if one of two equal bodies strikes the other, it communi-
cates to it its whole motion without any reflection; but a smaller body
striking a larger one is reflected, with the more force as the difference of
their magnitude is greater; and a larger body, striking a smaller one, still
proceeds with a diminished velocity ; the remaining’ motion constituting, in
the case of an undulation falling on a rarer, medium, a part of a new series =
of motions which necessarily returns backwards with, the appropriate velocity : .
and we may observe a circumstance nearly similar to this last in a portion
of mercury spread out on a horizontal table; if a wave be excited at any
part, it will be reflected from the termination of the mercury almost in the
same manner as from.a solid obstacle.


The total reflection of light, falling, with a certain obliquity, on the
surface of a rarer medium, becomes, on both suppositions, a particular case
of refraction. In the undulatory system, it is convenient to suppose the
two mediums to be separated by a short space in which their densities ap-
-proach by degrees to each other, in order that the undulation may be turned
is gradually round, so as to be reflected in an equal angle:, but this supposition

is not absolutely necessary, and the same effects may be expected at the
surface of two mediums separated by an abrupt termination. e


Ales


462 a LECTURE XXXIX.


The chemical process of combustion may easily be imagined either to dis-
engage the particles of light from their various combinations, or to agitate
the elastic medium by the intestine motions attending it: but the operation
of friction upon substances incapable of undergoing: chemical changes, as
well as the motions of the electric fluid through imperfect conductors, afford
instances of the production of light in which there seems to be no easy way
of supposing a decomposition of any kind. The phenomena of solar phos-


phori appear to resemble greatly the sympathetic sounds of. musical instru-’


ments, which are agitated by other sounds conveyed to them through the
air: it is difficult to understand in what state the corpuscles of light could
be retained by these substances so as to be reemitted after a short space or
time; and if it is true that diamonds are often found, which exhibit a red
light after having received a violet light only, it seems impossible to explain
this property, on the supposition of the retention and subsequent emission
of the same corpuscles.


The phenomena of the aberration of light agree perfectly well with the —


system of emanation; and if the ethereal medium, supposed to pervade the
earth and its atmosphere, were carried along before it, and partook materially
in its motions, these phenomena could not easily be reconciled with the
theory of undulation. But there is no kind of necessity for such a supposi-
tion: it will not be denied by the advocates of the Newtonian opinion that
all material bodies are sufti iciently porous to leave a medium pervading them
almost absolutely at rest; and if this be granted, the effects of aberration
will appear to be precisely the same in either hypothesis.


The unusual refraction of the Iceland spar has been most accurately and
+satisfactorily explained by Huygens, on the simple supposition that this
crystal possesses the property of transmitting an impulse more rapidly in one


direction than in another; whence he infers that the undulations constitdting


light must assume a spheroidical instead of a spherical form,and lays down such
laws for the direction of its motion, as are incomparably more consistent
with experiment than any attempts which have been made to accommodate
the phenomena to other principles. It is true that nothing has yet been
done to assist us in understanding the effects of a subsequent refraction by
a second crystal, unless any person can be satisfied with the name of polarity


“


, “ ON THE NATURE “OF LIGHT ane conouns. : 463 \ Ko


assigned by Newton to a clipart which he attributes to the particles of
light, and which he supposes to direct them in the species of refraction
which they are to undergo: but on any hypothesis, until we discoyer the reason
why a part of the light is at first refracted in the usual manner, and another ip
part in the unusual manner, we have no right to expect that we should un- —
‘ derstand how these dispositions are continued or modified, when the process is
i... repeated:


" oot In order to explain, in the system of emanation, the dispersion of the rays
of different colours by means of refraction, it is necessary to suppose that all i" ~
‘ . refractive mediums have an elective attraction, acting more powerfully on the
violet rays, in proportion to their mass, than on the red. But an elective at-
traction of this kind is a property foreign to mechanical philosophy, and when
_ Weusethe term inchemistry,we only confess our incapacity toassign a mechani- ie
-cal cause for the effect, and refer to an analogy with other facts, of which the
intimate nature is perfectly unkuown tous, Itis not indeed very easy to givea
~ demonstrative theory of the dispersion of coloured light upon the supposition of
undulatory motion; but we may derive a very satisfactory illustration from the
well known effects of waves of different breadths. The simple calculation of the :
yelocity of waves, propagated in a liquid perfectly elastic, or incompressible,
_and free from friction, assigns to them all precisely the same velocity, what-
ever their breadth may be: the compressibility of the fluids actually existing
introduces, ‘however, a necessity for a correction according to the breadth
4 wave, and it is very easy to observe, in a river or a pond of consider- }
_able depth, that the wider waves: proceed much more rapidly than the nar- ra
“rower. “may, therefore, consider the pure ethereal medium as analogous
y “vert fluid, in which undalations of all kinds move with
material transparent substances, on the contrary, as
uids, i in which we see the large waves advance beyond the
f gate by stpposing the red light to consist of larger or wider undu-
ns and violet of smaller, we may ees, elucidate the “12% =
ility sedi than. of i violet Ls gaia tt,
Xs Bs i
Hise ci sada panda bai ghaevsncig- be :
he undulations constituting red light to be larger y


9%.


F a 464 LECTURE XXxIXx._


more directly to the same conclusion; they consist chiefly of the production
of colours by means of transparent plates, and by diffraction or inflection,
none of which have been explained, upon the supposition of emanation, in
=— _ a manner sufliciently minuteor comprehensive to satisfy the most candid .~
even of the advocates for the projectile system; while on the other hand allof ©
them may be at once understood, from the effect of the interference of
double lights, in a manner nearly similar to that which constitutes in sound
: the sensation of a beat, when two strings, forming-an imperfect bude Bie. 3% oat
_ : heard to vibrate together.
. ¥ : } 1-4 :
Bappiedinig the light of any given colour to consist of undulations, of a
given breadth, or of a given frequency, it follows that these undulations
must be liable to those effects which we have already examined in the case
= F of the:waves of water, and the pulses of sound. It has been shown that
two'equal series of waves, proceeding from centres near each other, may be —
seen to destroy each other's effects at certain points, and other points at to re-
: ‘ double them; and the beating of two sounds has been explained from a similar
interference, We are now to apply the sameprinciples:to thealternate union —
and extinction of colours. (Plate XX. Fig. 267.) ti» ea


In order that the effects of two portions of light may be thuscombined, , =
it is necessary that they be derived’ from the same origin, and that they }
arrive at‘the same point by different paths, in directions not, much deviating
from each other. This deviation may be produced in one or both of the dg ll
portions by diffraction, by reflection, by refraction, or-by any of these effects:
combined ; but: ‘the:simplest case appears to be, when a “homogeneous
light falls‘on-a screen in which there are two very small holes ight diac
may be considered as centres of divergence, ‘from whence the
ediinvevery direction. » In this case, when re
received on a surface placed so as to intercept
dark ‘stripes into portions nearly equal, betdeoleha '
more remote from the apertures, so as tai wohtnnt

_ fromthe apertures at all distances, and wider alsc
theapertures are closer: to each other.
always light, and. the bright stripeson |

light, coming to them from one of the ape


y uc ar ;
ep wan ae


ON THE NATURE OF LIGHT AND COLOURS. 465


longer space than that which comes from the other,’ by an interval which is
equal to the breadth of one, two, three, or more of the supposed undulations,
while the intervening dark -spaces correspond to a difference of half a sup-
Lares 1 aa of one and a alt, of two aud a half, or more.


Fidih a Balt caste oft various RENE it appears ' that the breadth of
the undulations constituting the extreme red light must be supposed to be,
in air, about one 36 thousandth of an inch, and those of the extreme violet
- about one 60 thousandth; the mean of the whole'spectrum, with respect to

the intensity of light, being about one 45 thousandth. From these dimen-

sions it follows, calculating upon the known velocity of light, that almost 500

millions of millions of the slowest of such ‘undulations must enter the eye in

a single second. The combination of two portions: of white or mixed light,
| when viewed at a great distance, exhibits a few white and black stripes, cor-
‘ responding to this interval; although, upon closer inspection, the distinct
effects of an infinite number of stripes of different breadths appear to be com- mi
pounded together, so as to produce a beautiful diversity of tints, passing by
degrees into each other. The central whiteness is first changed to a yellow-
ish, and then ‘toa tawny colour, succeeded by crimson, and by violet and
blue, which together appear, when seen at a distance; ’as a dark stripe; after
this a green light appears, and-thé dark space beyond it has a crimson hue;
the subsequent lights areall more or less green, the dark spaces purple and
reddish; and the red light appears so far to predominate in all these effects,
that the red or purple stripes occupy nearly the same place in the mixed
yr 78 their light were received eruere
tikes ft lo Misys Siwinttaos +
‘The comparison of the results of iin tases with SA fully esta-

neral coincidence ;_ it indicates, however, a slight correction

€ measures, on account of some unknown cause, perhaps con-
re nature of diffraction, which uniformly occasions the
ceeding in a direction very nearly rectilinear, to be divided
2 oa little wider than the external stripes, formed by the
nore bent. trite: Fig. sd beets : ;
; Beast om Ls git Feary ; =
‘slit ny enlarged, and aires Sit iii aepaeae at:
\ eas from its opposite margins still con-


s ~~ ee Oe es


TAGE ae et OO ae ee ees. = we NE. SPEDE RS Te St
' >


466 \) © LECTURE XXXIx; ;


tinues to produce the same fringes as before, but they are not easily visible,
except within the extent of its shadow, being overpowered in other parts by
a stronger light; but if the light thus diffracted be allowed to fall on the
eye, either within the shadow, or in its neighbourhood, the stripes will still
appear; and in this manner the colours of small fibres are probably formed.
Hence if a collection of equal fibres, for example alock of wool, be held before
the eye when we look at a luminous object, the series of stripes belonging


» to each fibre combine their effects, in such a manner, as to*be converted into


circular fringes or coronae. This is probably the otigin of the coloured
circles or coronae sometimes seen round the sun and moon, two or three of
them appearing together, nearly at equal distances from each other and from
the luminary, the internal ones being, however, like the stripes, a little
dilated. It is only necessary that the air should be loaded with globules of
moisture, nearly of equal size among themselves, not much exceeding one
two thousandth of an inch in diameter, in order that a'series of such coronae,
at the distance of two or three degrees from sai other, may beexhibited.
(Plate XXX. Fig. 444.)


If, on the other hand, we remove the portion of the screen which separates
the parallel slits from each other, their external margins will still continue to ex-
hibit the effects of diffracted light in the shadow on) each side; and the
experiment will assume the form of those which were made by Newton on
the light passing between the edges of two knives, brought very nearly into
contact; although some of these experiments appear to show the influence of


‘a portion of light reflected by a remoter part of the polished edge of the


knives, which indeed must unavoidably constitute a part of the light con-
cerned in the appearance: of fringes, wherever their whole breadth exceeds
that of the aperture, or of the shadow of the fibre. ;

The edges of two knives, placed very near r each other, may represent the
opposite margins of a minute furrow, cut in the surface of a polished sub-
stance of any kind, which, when viewed with different degrees of obli-
quity, present a series of colours neatly resembling those which are exhibited
within the shadows of the knives: in this case, however, the paths of the
two portions of light before their incidence are also to be considered, and
the whole difference of these paths will be found to determine the appearance of


2


ON THE NATURE OF LI€HT AND COLOURS. * 467


colour in the usual manner; thus when the surface is so situated, that the
image of the luminous point would be seen in it by regular reflection, the
difference will vanish, and the light will remain perfectly white, but in other
cases various colours will appear, according to the degree of obliquity.
These colours may easily be seen, in an irregular form, by looking at any
metal, coarsely polished, in the sunshine; but they become more distinct
and conspicuous, when a number of fine lines of equal strength are drawn
parallel to each other, so as to conspire in their effects.


It sometimes happens that an object, of which a shadow is formed in abeam
of light, admitted through a small aperture, is not terminated by parallel sides;
thus the two portions of light, which are. diffracted from two sides of an
object, at right angles with each other, frequently form a short series of cury-
ed fringes within the shadow, situated on each side of the diagonal, which
were first observed by Grimaldi, and which are completely explicable from
the general principle, of the interference of the two portions encroaching
perpendicularly on the shadow. (Plate XXX. Fig. 445.)


But the most obvious of all the appearances of this kind is that of the
fringes, which are usually seen beyond the termination of any shadow, formed
in a beam of light, admitted through a small aperture: in white light three
of these fringes are usually visible, and sometimes four; but in light of one
colour only, their number is greater; and they are always much narrower as
they are remoter from the shadow. Their origin is easily deduced from the
interference of the direct light with a portion of light reflected from the
margin of the object which produces them, the obliquity of its incidence
causing a reflection so copious as to exhibit a visible effect, however nar-
row that margin may be; the fringes are, however, rendered more obvious
as the quantity of this reflected light is greater. Upon this theory it follows

‘that the distance of the first dark fringe fromthe shadow should be half as
great as that of the fourth, the difference of the lengths of the different paths
of the light being as the squares of those distances; and the experiment
Precisely confirms this calculation, with the same slight correction only as
is required in all other cases; the distances of the first fringes being always a
little increased. It may also be observed, that the extent of the shadow itself
is always augmented, and nearly in an equal degree with that of the fringes: the


|
:
|
|
|
b


468 : LECTURE XXXIX. nite we


reason of this circumstance appears to be the gradual loss of light at the

edges of every separate beam, which is so strongly analogous to the phenomena
visible in waves of water. The same cause may also perhaps have some effect
in producing the general modification or correction of the place of the first

fringes,. although it appears to be scarcely sufficient for aiid the *ild

of it. (Plate XXX. Fig. 446.) | q' “sen. ;


A still more common and convenient method, of exhibiting the ‘effects of
the mutual interference of light, is afforded us by the colours of the thin
plates of transparent substances. The lights are here derived from the suc-
cessive partial reflections produced by the upper and under surface of the plate,
or when the plate is viewed by transmitted light, from the direct ‘beam
which-is simply refracted, and that portion of it which is twice reflected
within the plate. The appearance in the latter case is much less striking
than in the former, because the light thus affected is only a small portion of
the whole beam, with which it ismixed; while in the former the two reflected _
portions are nearly of equal intensity, and may be separated from all other
light tending to overpower them, In both cases, when the plate is gradually
reduced in thickness to an extremely thin edge, the order of colours may
be precisely the same as in the stripes and coronae already described; their
distance only varying when the surfaces of the plate, instead of being plane,
are concave, as it frequently happens in such experiments. The scale of an
oxid, which is often formed by. the effect of heat on the surface of a metal,
in particular of iron, affords us an example of such a series formed in reflect-
ed light: this scale is at first inconceivably thin, and destroys none of the
light, reflected, it. soon, however, begins to be of a dull ; » which Rm:
changes to red,,and then to crimson and_blue, | after w ich s effect is de-
stroyed by the opacity which the oxid acquires. - _ Usually, pomeve ‘the
series of colours produced in reflected light follows an order s it
ferent: the scale of oxid is denser than the air, and the iron
oxid; but where the mediums. above. anh below, 3
rarer or both denser than, i the different, x
different surfaces, appear to. roduce a, odific i
lations, and the infinitely
white, one of the portions of bs Ty
meee ah it. Thus when a film of |


i ON THE NATURE OF LIGHT AND COLOURS. ; 469


wine glass, and placed in a vertical position, its upper edge becomes ex-
tremely thin, and appears nearly black, while the parts below are divided by
horizontal lines into a series of coloured bands; and when two glasses, one
of which is slightly convex, are pressed together with some force, the plate
“of air between them exhibits the appearance of coloured rings, beginning


from a black spot at the centre, and becoming narrower and narrower, as the ©


curved figure of the glass causes the thickness of the plate of air to increase
more and more rapidly. The black is succeeded by a violet, so faint as to
be scarcely perceptible; next to this is an orange yellow, and then crimson
and blue. When water, or any other fluid, is substituted for the air between
the glasses, the rings appear where the thickness is .as much less than that
of the plate of air, as the refractive density of the fluid is greater; a circum-
stance which necessarily follows from the proportion of the velocities with
which light must, upon the Huygenian hypothesis, be supposed to move in
different mediums. It is also a consequence equally necessary in this theory,
and equally inconsistent with all others, that when the direction of the light
is oblique, the effect of a thicker plate must be the same as that of a thinner
plate, when the light falls perpendicularly upon it; the difference of the
paths described by the different.portions of light precisely corresponding
* with the observed phenomena. (Plate XXX. Fig. 447. . 449.)


Sir Isaac Newton supposes the colours of natural bodies in general to be
similar to these colours of thin plates, and to be governed by the magnitude
of their particles. If this opinion were universally true, we might always
separate the colours of natural bodies by refraction into a number of differént
portions, with dark spaces intervening; for every part of a thin plate, which
exhibits the appearance of colour, affords such a divided spectrum, when
viewed through a prism.. There are accordingly ,many natural colours in
which such a separation may be observed; one of the most remark-
able of them is that of blue glass, probably coloured with cobalt, which


becomes divided into seven distinct portions. It seems, however, im- _


possible to suppose the production of natural colours perfectly identical
with those of thin plates, on account of the known minuteness of the
particles of colouring bodies, unless the refractive density of these par-
ticles be at least 20 or 30 times as great as that of glass or water; which is
indeed not at all improbable with respect to the ultimate atoms of bodies,


470 LECTURE XXXIx.


but difficult to believe with respect to any of their arrangements constituting
the diversities of material substances.


The colours of mixed plates constitute a distinct variety of the colours of


thin plates, which has not been commonly observed. They appear when the |


interstice between two glasses, nearly in contact, is filled with a great num-
ber of minute portions of two different substances, as water and air, oil and
air, or oil and water: the light, which passes through one of the mediums,
moving with a greater velocity, anticipates the light passing through the
other; and their effects on the eye being confounded and combined, their
interference produces ah appearance of colours nearly similar to those of the
colours of simple thin plates,seen by transmission; but at much greater thick-
nesses, depending on the difference of the refractive densities of the sub-
stances employed. The effect is observed by holding the glasses between the
eye and the termination of a bright object, and it ismost conspicuous in the
portion whichis seen on the dagk part beyond the object, being produced by the
light scattered irregularly from the surfaces of the fluid. Here, however, the
effects are inverted, the colours resembling those of the common thin plates, |
seen by reflection ; and the same considerations on the nature of the reflec-
tions are applicable to both cases, (Plate X‘KX. Fig. 450.)


The sewiiinliok of the supernumerary rainbows, which are sometimes seen
within the primary and without the secondary bow, appears to be intimately
connected with that of the colours of thin plates. We have already seen
that the light producing the ordinary rainbow is double, its intensity being
only greatest at its termination, where the common bow appears, while the
whole light is extended much more widely. The two portions concerned in
its production must divide this light into fringes; but unless almost all the
drops of a shower happen to be of the same magnitude, the effects of these
fringes must be confounded and destroyed: in general, however, they must
at least cooperate more or less in producing one dark fringe, which must
‘cut off the common rainbow much more abruptly than it would otherwise
have been terminated, and consequently assist the distinctness of its colours.
The magnitude of the drops of rain, required for producing such of these rain-
bows as are usually observed, is between the 50th and the 100th of an inch:
they become gradually narrower as they are more remote from the common


“—


Pa ee ee ee eS as es eee


ON THE NATURE OF LIGHT AND COLOURS. ‘ 471


rainbows, nearly in the same proportions as the external fringes of a shadow,
or the rings seen in a concave plate. (Plate XXX. Fig. 451.)


The last species of the colours of double lights, which it will be necessary
to notice, constitutes those which have been denominated, from Newton’s


experiments, the colours of thick plates, but which may be called, with _


more propriety, the colours of concave mirrors. The anterior surface of a
mirror of glass, or any other transparent surface placed before a speculum of
metal, dissipates irregularly in every direction two portions of light, one
before, and the other after its reflection. When the light falls obliquely on
the mirror, being admitted through an aperture near the centre of its curvature, it
is easy to show, from the laws of reflection, that the two portions, thus dissipated»
will conspire in their effects, throughout the circumference of a circle, passing
through the aperture; this circle will consequently be white, and it will be
surrounded with circles of colours very nearly at equal distances, resembling
the stripes produced by diffraction. The analogy between these colours
and those of thin plates is by no means so close as Newton supposed it ;
since the effect of a plate of any considerable thickness must be absolutely
lost in white light, after ten or twelve alternations of colours at most, while
these effects would require the whole process to remain unaltered, or rather to
be renewed, after many thousands or millions of changes. (Plate XXX. Fig.
452.) °
' ‘

It is presumed, that the accuracy, with which the general law of the inter-
ference of light has been shown to be applicable to so great a variety of facts,
in circumstances the most dissimilar, will be allowed to establish its validity
in the most satisfactory manner. The full confirmation of decided rejection
of the theory, by which this law was first suggested, can be expected from
time and experience alone; if it be confuted, our prospects will again
be confined within their ancient limits, - but if it be fully established, we may
expect an ample extension of our views of the operations of nature, by
means of our acquaintance with a medium, so powerful and so universal, as
that to which the propagation of light must be attributed.


472


LECTURE XL
ON THE HISTORY OF OPTICS,


THE science of optics is not one of those which had been cultivated with
the greatest diligence and success by. the philosophers of antiquity: almost
every refinement relating to it has originated in the course of about two
centuries; and some of its greatest improvements have been made within these
fifly years. The reflection of the rays of light is indeed an occurrence. too
frequent and too obvious to have escaped the notice even of the earliest
observers: a river or a fountain was the first mirror; its effect was easily
imitated by speculums of metal; and as soon as any philosophical attention
was paid to the phenomenon, it was easy to collect the equality of the angles
of incidence and reflection; but although it was well known that,an oar, partial-
ly immeised in water, no longer appeared straight, it was long before any
attempts were made to ascertain the relation between the angles of incidence
and refraction. The Greeks were, however, acquainted with the properties
of the burning glass, which was sold as a curiosity in the toy shops; for it
is well known, that one of the personages, introduced by Aristophanes,
proposes to destroy the papers of his adversary by the assistance of this in-
strument. The magnifying powers of lenses were, however, but little
understood, although it is scarcely credible that they could have escaped the
notice of a person in possession of a burning glass; it appears from Seneca
that the Romans at least were informed of the effects of spherical refracting
substances, and it is not improbable that some use was occasionally made of
them in the arts, )


Empedocles is perhaps the first person.on record that wrote systematically
on light. He maintained that it consisted of particles projected from
luminous bodies, and that vision was performed both by the effect of these
particles on the eye, and by means of a visual influence, emitted by the eye


‘
ON THE HISTORY OF OPTICS. 473


itself. Both of these doctrines were combated by Aristotle, who thought it ab-
surd to suppose that a visual influence should be emitted by the eye, and that
it should not enable us to see in the dark; and who considered it as ‘more pro-
bable that light consisted in an impulse, propagated through a continuous
medium, than in an emanation of distinct particles. Light, he says, is the
action of a transparent substance; and if there were absolutely no medium
between the eye and any visible object, it would be absolutely impossible
that we should see it. :


It is said that Archimedes made a compound burning mirror, of sufficient
power to set on fire the Roman ships:-in this form the story is scarcely pro-
bable, although the possibility of burning an object at a great distance by a
collection of plane mirrors has been sufficiently shown by the experiments
of Buffon. It is, however, not unlikely that Archimedes was acquainted
with the properties of reflecting surfaces, and that he confirmed his theories
by some experimental investigations. The work on catoptrics, attributed
to Euclid, contains the determination of the effects of reflecting surfaces of
different forms; but it is not supposed to be genuine. The existence and
the magnitude of the atmospheric refraction were well known to Ptolemy,
and a treatise of this astronomer on the subject is still extant in manu-
script.


The mathematical theory of optics, or the science of dioptrics and cat-
‘optrics, made some advances in the middle ages from the labours of Alhazen
and Vitellio. Alhazen was mistaken in some of his propositions respecting
refraction; Vitellio, a native of Poland, gave a more correct theory of this
subject, and constructed a table of refractive densities, showing the supposed
proportions of the angles of incidence and refraction in the respective
mediums.


The invention of the magic lantern is attributed to Roger Bacon, and
the lens was soon afterwards commonly applied to the assistance of defective
sight. It has been much disputed*whether or no Bacon was acquainted with
telescopes; the prevalent opinion is, that the passages, which have been alleged
to prove it, are insufficient for the purpose; but there is reason to suspect,
from the testimony of Recorde, who wrote in 1551, not only that Bacon had

voL. I. 3P


ATA LECTURE XL.
»


actually invented a telescope, but that Recorde ‘himself knew something of

-its construction. Digges also, in a work published in 1571, has a passage
of a similar nature, and from Bacon’s own words it has been conjectured that
an instrument resembling a telescope was even of much higher antiquity.
But the first person, who is certainly known to have made a telescope, is
Janson, a Dutchman, whose son, by accident, placing a concave and a convex
spectacle glass at a little distance from each other, observed the increased
apparent magnitude of an object seen through them; the father upon
this fixed two such glasses in a tube a few. inches long, and sold the
instrument in this form. He also made some telescopes of greater powers,
and one of his family discovered a satellite of Jupiter with them. Galileo
had héard of the instrument, but had not been informed of the particulars of
its construction, he reinvented it in 1609, and the following year redis-
covered also the satellite which Janson had seen a little before.


It was, however, Kepler that first reduced the theory of the telescope to
its true principles; he laid down the common rules for finding the focal
lengths of simple lenses of glass; he showed how to determine the magnify-
ing power of the telescope, and pointed out the construction of the simple
astronomical telescope, which is more convenient for accurate observations
than the Galilean telescope,since the micrometer may be more easily applied to
it; a third glass, for recovering the erect position of the object, was after-
wards added by Scheiner, and a fourth, for increasing the field of view, by
Rheita. Kepler made also some good experiments on the nature of coloured |
bodies, and showed the inverted situation of the image formed on the retina |
of the eye. Maurolycus of Messina had demonstrated, in 1575, that the
pencils of light are brought to focal points on the retina; Brel secotaptesiacy
tions were thirty or forty years later. wise 9 Toor) ELON gaas
{) ppeacttle’ itt
The next great step in optics was made by De Dominis, ue in 1611 first ¥)
explained the cause of the interior or primary | peri Abncu 5 y
followed by a still more important discovery respecti on,
tion, first made by Snellius, who ascertained, ab
the angles of incidence and refraction are alway
each other at the same surface; he died,
‘made his discovery public. |


ON THE HISTORY OF OPTICS. 475


seen Snellius’s papers, although he published the law of refraction without
acknowledging to whom he was indebted for it. Descartes also explained
the formation of the secondary rainbow, and truly determined the angular
magnitude of both the bows from mathematical principles; he did not, how-
ever, give a sufficient reason for the production of colours in either case.
Descartes imagined light to consist in motion, or rather pressure, transmit-
ted instantaneously through a medium infinitely elastic, and colours he at-
tributed to a rotatory motion of the particles of this medium. He supposed
that light passed more rapidly through a denser medium than through a rarer;
other philosophers about the same time maintained a contrary opinion, with-
out deciding with respect to any general theory of light: thus Fermat and
Leibnitz deduced, on this supposition, the path of refracted light from the
natural tendency of every body to attain its end by the shortest possible way;
and Barrow derived the same law, in a more geometrical manner, from a simi-
lar hypothesis respecting the velocity of light, by considering a pencil of
light as a collection of collateral rays influencing each other's motions.
We are indebted to this learned mathematician for the first accurate inves-
tigation of the properties of refracting and reflecting surfaces, and for the
most general determination of the situations of focal points.


The industrious Mr. Boyle had noticed with attention the phosphorescence of
diamonds, the colours produced by the effect of scratches on the surfaces of
polished metals, and the diversified tints which a bubble or a film of soapy
water usually assumes. His assistant, Dr. Hooke, investigated these and
other similar appearances with still greater accuracy, and proposed, in his
Micrographia, which was published in 1665, a theory of light considerably
resembling that of Descartes: he supposes that light is an impulse propagated
through a medium highly, but not infinitely, elastic; that refraction is pro-
duced by the readier transmission of light through the denser medium, and
that difference of colour consists in the different law of the particular im-
pulse constituting coloured light, so that red and blue differ from each other
in the same manner as the sound of a viokin and of a flute. He explained
the colours of thin plates from the interference of two such pulses partially
reflected from the upper and under surface; but the hypothesis which he
assumed, respecting the nature of colours, renders this explanation wholly


- treatise on optics: had been coininsjontedl


"


— a eee
7 Bee.


476 LECTURE XL.


inadequate, nor were the phenomena at that time sufficiently investigated
for a complete solution of the difficulties attending them.


Tt was still believed that every refraction actually produces colour, instead
of separating the colours already existing in white light; but in the year 1666,
Newton first made the important discovery of the actual existence of colours
of all kinds in white light, which he showed to be no other than a compound
of all possible colours, mixed in certain proportions with each ssisige and ca-
pable of being separated by refraction of any kind. , I


About the same time that Newton was making his earliest experiments on
refraction, Grimaldi’s treatise on light appeared; it contained many inte-
resting experiments and ingenious remarks on the effects of diffraction, —
which is the name that he gave to the spreading of light in every direction
upon its admission into a dark chamber, and on the colours which usually ac-
company these effects. He had even observed that in some instances the
light of one pencil tended to extinguish that of another, but he-had not.
inquired in what cases and according to what laws such an interference
must be expected. Suge Dp sets


The discoveries of Newton were not received without some controversy
either at home or abroad; the essential points of his theory were, however, ;
soon established, but Dr. Hooke very warmly opposed the hypothesis which
Newton had suggested respecting the nature and propagation of light.” On ' 7
this subject’ Newton professed himself by no means tenacious ; he was’ not,
however, convinced by Dr. Hooke, and disliked the dispute so much, thathe
deferred the publication of his treatise on optics till after Hoo death
in 1703. Very soon after his first communication to the hare
1672, he had sent them a description of his reflecting: tel
perhaps the first that had been constructed with success, alt
had invented his instrument some years ene BPS tate
had been suggested by Eskinard as early as


Society; besides the experiments on fracti
bow, they consist of an elegant iis of


= ~


=


ON THE HISTORY OF OPTICS. 477


substances, in which the phenomena are reduced to their simplest forms,
and of a collection of miscellaneous experiments on the colours produced in
cases of inflection or diffraction.


With respect to the nature of light, the theory which Newton adopted
was materially different from the opinions of most of his predecessors. He
considered indeed the operation of an ethereal medium as absolutely neces-
sary to the production of the most remarkable effects of light, but he denied
that the motions of such a medium actually constituted light; he asserted, on
‘the contrary, that the essence of light consisted in the projection of minute
particles of matter from the luminous body, and maintained that this pro-
jection was only accompanied by the vibration of a medium as an accidental
circumstance, which was also renewed at the surface of every refractive or
reflective substance.


In the mean time Bartholin had called the attention of naturalists and
opticians to the singular properties of the Iceland crystal, and had hastily
examined the laws of its unusual refraction. On this subject Huygens had
been much more successful: his analysis of the phenomena of the double re-
fraction is a happy combination of accurate experiment with elegant theory ;
it was published in 1690, making a part of his treatise on light, the funda-
mental doctrines of which he had communicated to the Academy of Paris in
1678. They scarcely differ in their essential parts from those of our country-
man Dr. Hooke, but the subject of colours Huygens has left wholly un-
touched. Roemer had then lately made the discovery of the immense velo-
city with which light passes through the celestial regions, by observing the
apparent irregularities of the eclipses of Jupiter's satellites; and Huygens
readily admitted this property into his system; although Hooke, by a
singular caprice, professed himself more ready to believe that the propagation
of light might be absolutely instantaneous, than that its motion could be
Successive, and yet so inconceivably rapid. The merits of Huygens in the
mathematical theory of optics were no less considerable than in the investi-
gation of the nature of light; his determinations of the aberrations of lenses
were the first refinement on the construction of telescopes.


In the year 1720 Dr. Bradley had the good fortune to discover both the


A478 p LECTURE XL.


existence and the cause of the aberration of the fixed stars. He had for
. some time observed an irregularity in the places of the stars, which he was
wholly unable to explain, and the idea of attributing it to a combination of
the effect of the earth’s motion in its orbit, with the progressive motion of
light, occurred to him first as he happened to observe the apparent direction
of the wind on board of a boat which was moving in a transverse direction.
He also determined with accuracy the magnitude of the atmospherical refrac-
~ tion, which had been theoretically investigated by Newton and by Taylor,
but never before practically ascertained with sufficient precision. The for-
mula, which Bradley appears to have deduced from observation only, agrees
precisely with an approximation which was obtained by Simpson from calcu-
lation; but it cannot be considered as rigidly accurate.


The optics of Bouguer were first published in 1729, and an improved
edition appeared thirty years afterwards; the merits of this author in the exmai-
nation of the properties of a variety of substances, with respect to the trans-
mission and reflection of light in different circumstances, and in the comparison
of lights of different kinds, require to be mentioned with the highest commen-
dation. Dr. Porterfield’s investigations of the functions of the eye tended
greatly to illustrate the economy of this admirable organ, and some valuable
remarks of Dr. Jurin on the same subject were soon after published in Dr.
Smith’s elaborate treatise on optics, which contains all that had been done
at that. time with respect to the mathematical part of the science.


The invention of achromatic telescopes is with justice universally attri-
buted to our countryman Mr. Dollond, but there is reason to'believe that he
was not abselutely the first author of the improvement. Mr. Hall, a gen-
tleman of Worcestershire, is said to have discovered, about the year 1729, Sir
Isaac Newton’s mistake, in supposing that the rays of different colours must

ecessity be equally separated by all surfaces which produce an equal
mean refraction; and by combining the different dispersive properties of
different kinds of glass, he constructed, in 1733, several compound object
glasses, which were calculated not only for avoiding all appearance of colour,
but also for correcting the imperfect refractions of the spherical surfaces of
the separate lenses. He did not, however, make known the particulars of


his investigations, and his invention was soon wholly forgotten. It was in
: ;


a


ON THE HISTORY OF OPTICS. 479


consequence of a discussion with Euler, Klingenstierna, and some other
mathematicians, that Mr. Dollond was led to make experiments on the re-
fraction of different kinds of glass; these gentlemen had not questioned the

general truth of Newton's opinion respecting the dispersion of the different

colours, but Euler had asserted that the eye itself produced a refraction free

from the appearance of colour, and Klingenstierna had shown the possibility

of producing a deviation by refraction, without a separation of colour, ac-

cording to the laws of refraction laid down by Newton himself. When

Dollond had once discovered the material difference which exists between

the dispersive properties of flint glass and of crown glass, it was easy to

produce the combination required; but this ingenious artist was not satis-

fied with the advantage of freedom from colours only; he adjusted the

forms and apertures of his lenses in the most skilful manner to the correction

of aberrations of various kinds, and he was also particularly fortunate in being
able to cbtain, about the time of his discovery, a glass of a quality superior -
to any that has been since manufactured.


This opinion of Euler respecting the eye was, however, by no means well
founded, for the eye acts very differently on rays of different colours,as we may
easily observe by viewing a minute object in different parts of a beam of light,
transmitted through a prism. It must be allowed that this great mathema-
tician was less fortunate in his optical theories than in many other depart- *
ments of science; his mathematical investigations of the effects of lenses are
much more intricate and prolix than the subject actually requires, and with
respect to the nature and propagation of light, he adopted several paradoxical
opinions. Assuming the theory of Huygens, with the additional hypothesis
respecting the nature of colours, which had been suggested by Newton, and
maintained by Pardies and Malebranche, that is, that the difference of co-
lours, like that of tones in music, depends on the different frequency of the
vibrations constituting light; he imagined that opaque bodies are not seen
by reflected light, but that their particles are agitated by the impulse of the
light which falls on them, and that the vibrations of these particles render
the bodies again visible in every direction; he,also conceived that the undin
lations of light are simply propagated through the solid substances of trans-
parent mediums, in the same manner as sound travels through the air. But
on these suppositions, all bodies would have the properties of solar phos-


‘


480 LECTURE XL.


phori, and the refraction of the rarest of natural bodies would be incompa-
rably greater than that of the densest is actually found to be: and on the
whole, although the.character of Euler has been so highly and so deservedly
respected as to attach a certain degree of authority to all his opinions, so that
in this instance the name of Huygens has been almost superseded by that of
Euler, yet in fact he has added no argumentative evidence whatever to the
theory, but, by inaccurate and injudicious reasoning, has donea real injury
to the cause which he endeavoured to support.


The researches of Lambert may be considered as a continuation of those of
Bouguer; they present us with many interesting observations on. the natural
history of light, and the properties of various bodies with regard to it. Mr.
Lambert first ascertained that a luminous surface emits its light very nearly »
with equal intensity in all directions, so that any part of it appears almost
equally brilliant to an eye placed in any direction, while the light thrown
by each square inch or square foot of the surface in any direction differs ac-
cording to the obliquity of that direction. The mathematical theory’ of
optics is considerably indebted to the labours of Clairaut, Dalembert, and
Boscovich ; Jeaurat, Beguelin, Redern, and Kliigel have also continued the
investigation; their calculations may be of considerable utility to the prac-
tical optician, but it requires the ingenuity of a Dollond or a Ramsden to
apply the whole of the results to any useful purposes. Pees. i

The experiments of Mazéas on the colours of thin plates are mere repeti-
tions of those of Newton under disadvantageous circumstances; Mr. Dutour —
has, however, considerably diversified and extended these experiments, as
well as those on the colours which are produced in diffracted light, yet without
obtaining any general results of importance. Comparetti’s experiments on
inflection have every appearance of accuracy, but they are much too in-


tricate to be easily compared with each other, or with those of former
observers.


The late Dr. Priestley rendered an essential service to_the science of optics,
considered as a subject for the amusement of the general reader, by an
elegant and wellwritten account of the-principal experiments and theories,
which had been published before the year 1770. But this work is very defi-


ON THE HISTORY OF OPTICs. ¢ 481


cient in mathematical accuracy, and the author was not sufficiently master of _


the science to distinguish the good from the indifferent.


Mr. Delaval’s experiments on colours appear to show very satisfactorily,
that all the colouring substances, in common use, owe their tints to rays,
which are separated from white light, during its passage through them, and
not, as Newton supposed, to the reflection of a particular colour from the first
surface. It has been observed that Kepler and Zucchius had long ago made
experiments nearly similar to those, of Mr. Delaval. Dr. Robert. Darwin's
investigation of the effects of strong lights on the eye appears to comprehend
almost all possible varieties of these ocular spectra, but it does not lead to
any fundamental analogy, capable of explaining the most intricate of them.


The phenomena of the unusual atmospheric refraction, which frequently
produces double or triple images of objects seen near a heated surface, have
been successively illustrated by Mr. Huddart, Mr. Vince,and Dr. Wollaston,
so that at present there appears to be little doubt remaining with respect to
their origin. Dr. Wollaston’s instrument, for the measurement of refractive
densities, very much facilitates the examination of the optical properties of sub-
stances of various kinds: he has applied it very successfully to the confirmation
of Huygens’s theory of double refraction; he has corrected the common
opinion respecting the division of the prismatic spectrum ; he discovered,
without being acquainted with the observations of Ritter, the dark rays which
blacken the salts of silver ; and he has remarked a singular property in some
natural as welLas artificial crystals, which appear of one.colour when viewed in
the direction of the axis, and of another when in a transverse direction.


To Dr. Herschel the sciences of optics and astronomy are equally indebted.
He has carried the construction of the reflecting telescope to a degree of per-
fection, far exceeding all that had been before attempted, and the well known
improvements, which astronomy has derived from his observations, are nume-
rous and important. In the course of his researches for the attainment of
his more immediate objects, he has also had the good fortune to discover the
Separation of the rays of heat from those of light by means of refraction; a
fact which has been sufficiently established by the experiments of several
other persons,

VoL. I. Se


Lr


482 3 LECTURE Xt.


The investigations of Mr. Laplace, relating to atmospherical refraction, may
be considered as the latest application of refined mathematics to the purposes
of optics and of astronomy. I have myself attempted to attain a degree of
certainty, in attributing the changes of the refractive powers of the eye
to a variation in the form of the crystalline lens; I have discovered a general
law of the mutual action of two portions of light interfering with each other,
to which no exception has yet been shown; and by reviving a theory of
light similar to that of Hooke and Huygens, with an improvement originally
suggested by Newton, respecting the nature of colours, I have endeavoured
to obtaina satisfactory explanation of many circumstances, which appear, upon
a minute examination, to be in every other hypothesis difficulties absolutely
insuperable, It cannot be expected that all objections to such a system will
at once be silenced, but if a full and candid discussion only of the facts, which
I have advanced, should be excited, I trust that the science of optics will be
essentially benefited, even if the theory should be ultimately confuted. -


?.


ON THE HISTORY OF OPTICS.’


CHRONOLOGY OF OPTICAL AUTHORS.


Ac ON. |
VITELLIO|
B OSCOVICII

PRIESTLE


cS 2°08 A Tt
-DOLLOND.


\PORTERFIELD.


a .
ial ae
ay
a)
213] *
H.:
18


[
500


BIRTH OF


ei eugene ey


bs


at 7


ee eee
WHeI205.> .
i a ae


iL? i


5  t
“nr ee 9 ¥


ta
“hoo T


4


Pa


= are
nS a Deere


ie Te Westetatonss Sep cece


Seo
ie
z: i zk e —
COURSE OF LECTURES f ;
NTRS EC! Saati , : :
F| Sride 2) : aK ; ‘ r
ed NATURAL PHILOSOPHY
fie a ‘ Jaa a ; i
, + i rat ; ; oe TRE a
_ MECHANICAL ARTS, _
é a n — Zs . ae :
hed i : eis iy mits hed 4 s
enka te rs Bi PA: iu. %)
poem ee | :
PMU RM MINIM Eer ie Bim 3
ae ¥ Se : .< be <I
at MN BEOR Si ie ol: fie Fe 24


*


: 2 ~
* a
cia
t
+ ’
. i ‘
v4 e.
‘> + ‘ wT tine Pyrat
i WG BeEeAFOoD
‘ ‘. ba “
‘ ,
' '
UTOeCOLLAS: 3
. ? /


~

cy Vek . 7
= } Ob

ee ae m2

i. f

*, r
=).
Te ohh,"
x


ee ¥ OM


OR


oe
COURSE OF LECTURES
NATURAL PHILOSOPHY
AND THE the


MECHANICAL ARTS.


: &
_. LECTURE XLI.


ON THE FIXED STARS.


_ "THE departments of natural philosophy, Whidlf ro\t to te witjactont
the third and last division of these lectures, are included in .the description
Moe ia gael or the history of the particular phenomena of
saw b ¢ account, which will be given of these phenomena, will be:
mpanied ee een Satin and analogical ‘venseningy os


488 LECTURE XLI.


to enter completely into a mathematical examination of all the motions of
the heavenly bodies, although we shall be able to pursue the detail of the
most remarkable appearances which they exhibit, we may for this reason
more properly consider such a view of astronomy as belonging to descriptive
than to theoretical philosophy. This method of treating the subject is some-
times denominated plain astronomy, in contradistinction to the mechanical
theory of the science, which is called physical astronomy; but’ it is obvious
that in the sense which we are at present annexing to the word physics, that
which is commonly called plain astronomy must be termed physical or de--
scriptive, and what is usually called physical, must be denominated mathe- _
matical astronomy. We shall, therefore, confine ourselves in great measure
to descriptive astronomy, and shall take only a general view of the laws of.
gravitation, as an illustration of the phenomena previously described. After -
having considered the magnificent objects of astronomy, which are scattered
throughout the universe, we descend to geography, or the particular history
of the terraqueous globe, and to the tides, produced by the influence of the
celestial bodies on the ocean: and then, quitting the affections of the larger
features of the matter, that constitutes the earth, we come naturally to the
properties and powers of its individual particles, and to the phenomena
of heat, electricity and magnetism, which are either qualities of matter, or
dependent on substances differing in some respects from common matter; -
and in the next place, to the combination of all these substances and. actions

in meteorology, and in the phenomena of vegetable and animal life, a general —

view of which will complete our discussions on the subject of physics. The

science of chemistry, or the doctrine of the qualities of particular kinds of | ms"
matter, might be said to belong to the investigation of, the properties of —
matter in general; but this science is of too great extent and importance to a
occupy a subordinate place in a system of natural philosophy, and Must,
therefore, be considered as requiring a separate course of cae ‘a 3


In our astronomical inquiries, we shall first exasnine: the,
heavens and earth in their simplest form, not as they imm
our observation, but as they are shown by t ona
turally arranged. ‘The stars and sun, she, planess ip
Ee the comets, will be severally described;


- ON THE FIXED STARs. ' 489


' these bodies will be superficially indicated; their sensible effects with respect
to the inhabitants of the earth will be shown, and the practical modes of
determining their situations and orbits will be explained.


When we begin to cansider,on a large scale,the affections of matter and of
space, we are impressed, at the first sight, with the inconceivable disproportion
‘between the magnitude of space and of sensible matter: and we are naturally
led to inquire if the apparently void expanse of the universe is wholly with-
out all matter or all substance. The atmospheres of the planets cannot
indeed be said absolutely to terminate at any given point, but they must become
rare beyond all imagination at a very moderate distance. The substance which
| » produces the sensation of light must, however, be every where found, at
; least without any sensible interval: for if an eye were placed in any point of
the regions of unbounded space, wherever human investigation ‘or -fancy
can penetrate them, some luminous object would at each instant be visible to

it, and, in general, objects without number might be seen in every direction.

' 14 Light, therefore, must be every where present, whether we suppose it to -

' consist of “separate projected corpuscles, or to be an affection of-a highly
clastic. ether,. pervading the universe in a state so rare, that although it

constitutes a continuous ROME it suffers all bodies to move through it .


fect freedom; 3) cand if we follow Newton’ ’s opinion of the nature of light, we
we suppose both such an ethereal medium, nearly at rest, and the particles
light | also, moving swiftly through it, to exist together in all places: to
of the possibility of the coexistence of a thousand other unseen
ubstances, essences, and influences, in the same. individual
ay for ever set at defiance the pride of a presumptuous phi-
vould aspire to comprehend, within its own contracted sphere,
tent of the mighty work of the creation.


pe


mn se of the universe is strewed, at immense distances, wi ith detached
f a substance, which we suppose to be matter, constituting stars,
ets, and comets; bodies which certainly agree with each other

ting or ‘reflecting light, and which, in all probability, have
- in common. Such of these, as rae fhe own light, are


siie.y SR


— i ee


que fitch ie e


> er
- :


ar


490 LECTURE XII.


called fixed stars; and this appears to be the only criterion that we can apply
to a star: for the word fixed is only to be understood’ in a comparative
sense. A


The stars must necessarily shine by their own light; for if we grant that they
consist of gravitating matter, it must be allowed that no star could be near
esough to another to be seen by reflected light, without a very sensible
change of the places of both in consequence of their mutual gravitation, nor
would it be possible, on account of their immense distance from us, to distin-
guish two such bodies from each other. It follows also, on the same sup-
position of the universality of the force of gravity, that the vie of the stars
must be nearly ss koma


The light of the stars appears to the naked eye to be generally white;
being too faint to excite the idea of a particular colour ; but when it is con-
centrated by Dr. Herschel’s large speculums, it becomes in various stars of
various hues; and indeed to the naked eye some of the stars appear a little _
redder and others a little bluer. The cause of the twinkling of the stars is
not fully ascertained, but it is referred, with some probability, to changes
which are perpetually taking place in the atmosphere, and which affect its
refractive density. It is said that in some climates, where the ‘air is re-
markably serene, the stars have scarcely any appearance of twinkling. —


Above two thousand stars are visible to the naked eye; and when a tele- seg


-scope is employed, their number appears to increase without any other limit
than the imperfection ‘of the instrument. Dr. Herschel has observed in the
milky way above ten thousand stars in the space of a square degree. Lucre-
tius and Dr. Halley have argued that their number must be absolutely infi-
nite, in order that all of them may remain at rest by the opposition of attrac-
tions acting in every possible direction; but we are by no sree certain that


they do remain in perfect equilibrium. ‘ in ma
hit Rot AN


they are divided into seven or more orders, a
their apparent brightness. There is, however,


ON THE FIXED STARS. 491


larger than the sun. Those stars which are below the sixth magnitude are
scarcely visible without the help of telescopes. The distances of all the stars

from us and from one another are so great, as not to be capable of being im-

mediately compared with their diameters; for no star subtends an angle large

enough to be ascertained by direct observation. The more perfect the instru-

ments that we employ, the smaller are the apparent diameters of the fixed
stars. Dr. Herschel found that one of the stars of the first magnitude, when

viewed in his best telescopes, appeared to be about one third of a second in

diameter. But there is always a limit to the perfection of the focus of the
telescope and of the eye, and, however accurate both may be, the image of
every radiant point will occupy on the retina a space of a certain magnitude,

not depending on that of the object: so that it will perhaps be for ever im:

possible to meashre any angle, which is only a very small fraction of a second:

(Plate XXXL. Fig. 453, 454.)


There is, however, reason to suppose, that the angle subtended by the
nearest stars is in reality more than a hundred times less than the angle
measured by Dr. Herschel, for it may be conjectured that our distance from
the nearest stars is about a hundred million million miles ; taking about one
third of a second for the annual parallax of the earth, that is, for the change
of the apparent places of some of the fixed stars in consequence of the earth’s
annual motion. This seems to be nearly the utmost amount of an annual
parallax that could wholly have escaped observation; for Dr. Herschel
supposes that, by means of double stars, a parallax of one tenth of a second
only might become sensible, and even this has never yet been discovered;
on the other hand, if the parallax were really much smaller than this, it
would be necessary to suppose the actual magnitude or splendour of the bright-
est stars to be incomparably greater than that of the sun; for at the distance
of a hundred million million miles, our sun would appear, according to
Lambert’s calculations, but about one fourth as bright as Saturn, or like
a star of the second or thitd magnitude only. Perhaps, indeed, the stars
may differ as: much from each other in magnitude as the planetary bodies,
but it is somewhat more natural to imagine them more nearly equal, until we
have some reason for supposing any material inequality in their dimensions. ‘At °
any rate there is little doubt, that the diversity of their apparent magnitudes
is principally owing: to their different distances; perhaps none of them are


A92 LECTURE XLI.


much nearer to each other than the nearest to us; and there may still bea
very great variety in their actual dimensions. There can be only twelve
points on the surface of a sphere as far from each other ‘as from the


centre; in a sphere of twice the radius, there may be about 50 points at —


the same distance; in a sphere of three times the radius, more than 100: and
it has been observed that these numbers do not greatly differ from the actual
numbers of the stars of the first, second, and third magnitudes; although it
is true that. they are not by any means placed at equal angular distances
from each other. But, from a comparison of the light of different stars, we
may infer, that if their real magnitudes are nearly equal their distances
must increase much faster than in this arithmetical progression; that is,
that the stars of the second magnitude are more than twice as remote as those
of the first, and those of the third more than three times as remote. Mr.
Michell found the light of Sirius between 400 and 1000 times as great as that
of a star of the sixth magnitude; consequently, supposing these stars actually
equal, their distances must differ in the ratio of 1 to 20 or 30; since light
always diminishes in proportion to the square of the distance of the luminous
object. The light of stars of different magnitudes, situated near each’ other,
may be compared by viewing them through two apertures of different sizes,
cut in cards, one held before each eye, the apertures being reduced to such
magnitudes, that the stars may appear equally bright; and the com-


parison may be extended to the light of the sun, by finding a star


and a planet of equal brightness, and calculating what proportion of the
sun’s light must be reflected by the planet, upon the most probable sup-


position respecting the disposition of its surface to reflect more or less of the
light which falls on it.


The stars are in general dispersed without any regular order, but we may
observe in many parts of the heavens that a number of them are so much nearer
together than to the rest,as to form a cluster or nebula. The ancients had notic-
ed some of the most conspicuous nebulae, but Huygens first directed the atten-
tion of modern astronomers to the large one situated in the constellation Orion.
Herschel has now given us catalogues of 2500 nebulae: many of them can be
resolved by very high magnifying powers into separate stars; but others appear
to consist of a luminous matter, spread uniformly in the neighbourhood of the


several stars to which they seem to belong. (Plate XXI. Fig. 455. . 463.)


3


™


ON THE FIXED STARS. 493


It has been conjectured that all stars are disposed in nebulae, and that
those, which appear to us to be more widely separated, are individual stars of
that particular nebula in which we are placed, and of which the marginal
parts may: be observed, in the form of a lucid zone, which is called the
milky «way, being too distant to allow the single stars to be perceived by
the naked\eye. | This opinion was first suggested by Professor Kant, the
author of the system of metaphysics called the critical philosophy. The idea
was: adopted by Lambert, who considers the largest stars as constituting a
distinct nebula placed among a multitude of others, which together produce
the:appearance of a continued zone; and Dr. Herschel has investigated very
particularly the figure of a single nebula, which would be capable of being
projected into the form of the milky way. We-must not, however, suppose
that. each; of Dr. Herschel’s 2500 nebulae can be at all comparable in mag-
nitude to this supposed nebula, since many of them are almost as much re-
solved by the telescope into single stars as the milky way itself; which
would be utterly impossible, if the stars which they contain were equally
numerous with those of the nebula to which the milky way belongs. Sup-
posing.all the stars of this nebula to be as remote from each other as the
nearest of them are from the sun, it may be calculated that the most distant
are-about 500 times .as far from us as the nearest, and that light, which is


probably 15 or 20. years in travelling to us from Sirius, would be nearly’


twenty thousand in) passing through the whole diameter of the milky way.
A nebula of the same size as this, appearing like a diffused light of a degree
in diameter, must be at such a distance, that its light would require a
million years to reach us, (Plate XXXI. Fig. 464.)


The stars are not, properly speaking, absolutely fixed with respect to each
other, for several of them have particular motions, which have been dis-
covered by a comparison of accurate observations, made at very distant times.
Arcturus, for instance, has a progressive motion, amounting to more than
two seconds annually, Dr. Maskelyne found, that out of 36 stars, of which
he ascertained the places with great precision, 35 had a proper motion, Mr.
Michell and Dr. Herschel have conjectured, that some of the stars revolve round
others which are apparently situated very near them; and perhaps even all
the stars may in reality change their places more or less, although their re-


———


“494 LECTURE XL.


relative situations, and the directions of their paths may often render their
motions imperceptible to us.


Respecting all these arrangements of stars into different systems, Dr
Herschel has lately entered into a very extensive field of observation and
speculation, and has divided them into a number of classes, to each of which
he has assigned a distinct character. Some he supposes, like our sun, to be
insulated stars, beyond the reach of any sensible action of the gravitation of
others; and around these alone he conceives that planets and comets revolve.
Double stars, in general, he imagines to be much nearer to each other, so as
to be materially affected by their mutual gravitation, and only to preserve
their distance by means of the centrifugal force derived from a revolution
round their common centre of inertia; an opinion which, he thinks, is
strongly supported by his own observations of some changes in the positions
of double stars. Others again he supposes to be united in triple, quadruple,
and still more compound systems. A fourth class consists of nebulae like
the milky way, the clusters of stars being rounded, and appearing brightest
in the middle. Groups of stars Dr. Herschel distinguishes from these by a
want of apparent condensation about a centre of attraction; and clusters by
a still greater central compression. A seventh class includes such nebulae as
have not yet been resolved into stars, some of which Dr. Herschel supposes
to be so remote, that the light emitted by them must actually have been two
millions of years in travelling to our system. The nebulae of another de-
scription resemble stars surrounded by abur, ora faint disc of light: a diffused
milky nebulosity, apparently produced by some cause distinet from the


_mmediate light of any stars, is the next in order: and Dr. Herschel has


distinguished other more contracted nebulous appearances, in different states
of condensation, into the classes of nebulous stars, and planetary nebulae,
with and without bright central points. Many of these distinctions are
perhaps too refined to be verified by common observers ; but the discovery
of the existence of double and triple stars, revolving round a common centre,
will, if it be confirmed, add one more to the catalogue of Dr. Herschel’s
important improvements.


It is however fully ascertained, that some of the stars haye periodical


ON THE FIXED STARS. . 495.


changes of brightness, which are supposed to arise eithet from the temporary
interposition of opaque bodies revolving round them, or, still more probably
from 4 rotatory motion of their own, which brings at certain periodical times
a less luminous part of the surface into our view. Thus, the star Algol,
which is usually of the second magnitude, becomes, at intervals of 2 days
and 21 hours each, of the fourth only, and occupies 7 hours in the gradual
diminution and recovery of its light. A less probable conjecture respecting
this change of brightness was advanced by Maupertuis, who imagined that
the disc of the star might be greatly flattened by a rapid rotation, and its
edge occasionally presented to us, in consequence of the disturbances produc~
ed by the attraction of planets revolving round the luminary. Otherirregular
variations may possibly be occasioned by the appearance and disappearance of
spots, occurring, like the spots of the sun, without any determinate order
or assignable cause; and many stars have in the course of ages wholly disap-
: peared, and sometimes have been again recovered; others have made their ap-
pearance fora short time, where no star had before been seen. Such a temporary
star was observed by Hipparchus, 120° years before our era, and the cireum-
stance suggested to him the propriety of making an accurate catalogue of all
the stars, with their respective situations, which is still extant, having been
preserved by Ptolemy, who added 4 stars to the 1022 that it contained. In
1572, Cornelius Gemma discovered a new star in Cassiopeia, which was so
bright as to be seen in the day time, and gradually disappeared in sixteen
months. Kepler, in 1604, observed a new star in Serpentarius, more bril-
liant than any other star or planet, and changing perpetually into all the
colours of: the rainbow, except when it was near the horizon; it remained
wien for about ayear. Many other new stars have also been observed at
f


SHENTON


il ing the particular'fixed stars according to their relative situa-
on is necessary to consider them as they are visible to the inhabitants

he earth, an have been divided, for the sake of convenience, into
, ing p imaginary forms, denominated constellations: This
Piste antiquity, and though it may be useless, and
even B etavedtent for the purposes of minute observation, yet for

ollection of the great features of the heavens, these arbitrary
jations cannot but greatly assist the memory. It is also


496 LECTURE XLI.


usual to siaeiisihe particular stars by their situation with respect to the i imagi-
nary figure to which they belong, or, more commonly, at present, by the
letters of the Greek alphabet, which were first applied by Bayer i in, 1603, and.


in addition to these, by ach Roman sisiie andl ai the mae, of particular
sill | sehaDa


8
reeions 49 avenue Pit


same manner’ as a uate appears reversed | when “seen fom th bint ; “ir :
paper: the other mode is by charts, which are generally so so. arra
represent the stars in positions similar to their natural ones, ee as to wou ia
appear on the internal concave surface of the globe. Sometimes also
stars have been delineated ‘as they would be praierted on imagin ne
without any reference to a globe ; for i instance, on the st


cones or cylinders. The art of HEAR all such poten belong:
the subject of PeTspee oa


Li ede? Dens fem i


In describing the paiticulas stare, it will be most eonrealnbi te rin
such as never set in our climates, and we may then refer the
others to their positions with respect to these.


acer sit


ot Ar nase podicte ip ina


The great Gearsbviche most,conspicuous ‘of the con sstellations Ww h
set; it consists of seven stars, placed like. the four. wheels of a

its three horses, except that the horses are fixed I to ‘one of
two hind wheels are the pointers, which direct us to the pe
extremity of the tail of the little bear: and further « on, to
Cassiopeia, which is situated in the milky way,
and which consists of several stars, nearly in
northernmost wheels of the, great bear, 0
Capella, the goat, in, Auriga... Descending
siopoia, if we go towards Capella, we com

find. gol,


little further from the pole \
the opposite direction, we arrive at
little out of the milky way, -is the b: ri ght, sta


ON THE FIXED STARS. 497


a chain of stars partly surrounding the little bear; and between tegacs a
val the swan is the constellation Cepheus.


Near Algenib, and pointing directly towards it, are two stars of Andro-
meda, and a third is a little beyond them. A line drawn through the
great bear and Capella passes to the Pleiades, and then, turning at aright
angle towards the milky way, reaches Aldebaran, or the bull’s eye, and the
shoulders of Orion, who is known by his belt, consisting of three stars,
placed in the middle of a quadrangle. Aldebaran, the Pleiades, and Algol,
make the upper, and Menkar, or the whale’s jaw, with Aries, the lower
points of a W. In Aries we observe two principal stars, one of them with a


smaller attendant.


A line drawn from the pole, midway between the great bear and Capella,
passes to the twins and to Procyon; and then, in order to reach Sirius, it
must bend across the milky way. Algol and the twins point at Regulus, the
lion’s heart, which is situated at one end of an arch, with Denebola at the
other end.


The pole star and the middle horse of the wain direct us to Spica Vir-
ginis, considerably distant: the pole and the first horse nearly to Arcturus,
in the waggoner, or Bootes. Much further southwards, and near the milky
way, is Antares, in the scorpion, forming, with Arcturus and Spica, a
triangle, within which are the two stars of Libra. The Northern crown
is nearly in a line between Lyra and Arcturus, and the heads of Hercules
and Serpentarius are between Lyra and Scorpio.


In the milky way, below the part nearest to Lyra, and on a line drawa
from Arcturus through the head of Hercules, is Aquila, making with Lyraand
Cygnus a conspicuous triangle. The last of the three principal stars in An-
dromeda makes, with three of Pegasus, a square, of which one of the sides
points to Fomalhaut, situated at a considerable distance in the southern fish,
and in the neighbourhood of the whale, which has already been mentioned.


By means of these allineations, all the principal stars that are ever visible
VoL. I. 3s


498 “ LECTURE XLI ’


ini: BrStaiey may be essily recognised: OF tse sis ast vrins above our ei)
horizon, there are several of the first magnitude; Canopus, in the ship’ Argo, za :
and Achernar, in the river Eridanus, are the most brilliant of them; the feet of ;
the centaur, and the crosier are the next; and according to Humboldt’s
observations, perhaps some others may ae to be — into the — :
same class. ee says. presen sat : Resta) Teter ?


ux
“dp hme e3r9 ; Mea 3. 3) Eesti,


A *
. sta i J , ¥ by
Gulley he ent ne t tty i!
J >
rol x | ; silerts
} { j , ( 4 { % 78 aldigg
bi tet! Nie |
‘ . a!
wot a ) itt awh Shite, :
‘ nl ¥ ‘ area
asvHia fans) ol shio nt oesdtl HayoeT Tc i estived Sel} OY. age) 1)
* , bi dae
1 wey: 3K 4 P copwieer fbiritfowlh, a 5 3d Holne hese fai Ber i
: os ne i
i incsion i ’ * Sicastd: ¢ gem 5)
: free) va
tyihi
'y ~ 6 r ’ . ' < '
{ goicd 3 lostih tine di 1d Colbeapene seg’ Been aka ait niles Path
PUTLotA oF sedi dato Sati onl? Hay olay ode teat Hudtabhkes jj
Va coetuse bas elimifoet Site eile > abel Fe omen eer iia: ie!
Rte oot ee enantaesd — : : 4
- £ Sige rE TNI SSIs : “Eten EE ea arinta & < i
im atina Heit ; s ; as
twos mmol sky Jd tnceiga aii un atoite 8 isha es
ssiaaih tt: 9a igi cé c : +8
eshugig tl - Yo ehnod Saute, eve dy et stogard ME i 1d
ig 2 ah ,
° -


ewrth 9468 Ho, ire cette Oh, rerteezil Neamt
up LTTA Gi: el }
sho asmle logiyaivy some ote


rive 4 a 36a Rady


h >
hs


LECTURE XLil.
ON THE SOLAR SYSTEM.


Tue most conspicuous of all the celestial bodies, which we haye been
examining, is the sun, that magnificent luminary which occupies the centre
of the system that comprehends our earth, together with a variety of other
primary and secondary planets, and a still greater number of comets. .


- The sun agrees with the fixed stars.in the property of emitting light con-
tinually, and in.retaining constantly, its relative situation with very little
variation ;, it is probable also that these bodies have many other, properties
in common. The sun is, therefore, considered as a fixed star comparatively
near us; and the stars as. suns at. immense distances. from us: and we infer
from the same analogy, that the stars are possessed of gravitation, and of
the other general properties of matter; they are supposed to emit heat as
well as light; and it has with reason been conjectured that they serve. to
cherish the inhabitants of a multitude of planetary bodies revolying round
them.


- The sun, like many other stars, has probably a progressive,motion, which
is supposed, from a comparison of the apparent motions of « great number
of the stars, to be directed towards the constellation Hergules, .. It is beyond
all question that many of the stars have motions peculiar to themselves,
and it is not certain that any of them.are without such motions: it is, there-
fore, in itself highly probable that the sun may. have such,a-motion, -But
Dr. Herschel has. confirmed. this. conjecture by arguments almost demon-
strative. He observes that the apparent proper. motions of 44 stars out.of
56 are very nearly in the direction which would be the. result.of such a real
motion of the solar system:.and that the bright stars Arcturus and Sirius,
which, are probably. the nearest to us, have, as, they, ought, to have, the


|
|
|
|
|
|
|
{
;
|


500 » LECTURE XLII.


" greatest apparent motions. Besides, the star Castor appears, when viewed


with a telescope, to. consist of two stars, of nearly equal magnitude; and
though they have both a considerable apparent motion, they have never been
found to change their distance a single second; a circumstance which is
easily understood if both their apparent motions are supposed to arise from a
real motion of the sun, but which is much less probable on the supposition
of two separate and independent motions.


Besides this progressive motion, the sun is subjected to some small change
of place, dependent on the situations of the planetary bodies, which was
long inferred from theory only, but which has been actually demonstrated by.
modern observations, Supposing all the planets to be in conjunction, or
nearly in the same direction from the sun, the common centre of inertia of
the system is at the distance of about a diameter-of the sun from his centre:
and since the centre of inertia of the whole system must be undisturbed by
any reciprocal actions or revolutions of the bodies composing it, the sun
must describe an irregular orbit round this centre, his greatest distance from
it being equal to his own diameter. We may form an idea of the magnitude
of this orbit by a comparison with the orbit of the moon: a body reyolving
round the sun, in contact with his surface, must be nearly twice as remote
from his centre as the moon is from the earth, and the sun’s revolution round
the common centre of gravity of the system must therefore be, where it is
most remote, at four times the distance of the moon from the earth.


The sun revolves on his axis in 25 days 10 hours, with respect to the
fixed stars: this axis is directed towards a point about halfway between the
pole star and Lyra, the plane of the rotation being inclined a little more than
7° to that in which the earth revolves. The direction of this motion is from
west to east, terms which we can only define from our presupposed know-
ledge of the stars, by saying that the motion is such, that a point of the
sun’s surface at first opposite Aries, moves towards Taurus. Nor have we any
better mode of describing north and south, or right and left: we can only say
comparatively, that if we are placed with our heads northwards, and looking to-
wards the centre, our right hands will be eastwards, and our left westwards.
All the rotations of the different bodies which compose the solar system, as
far as they have been ascertained, are in the same direction, and all their

3


ON THE SOLAR SYSTEM. 501


revolutions, excepting those of some of the comets, of which the motions
are ‘Tetrograde, and those of some of the satellites of the Georgian planet,
which revolve in planes so distant from those of the other planetary motions,
that the directions of their revolutions can scarcely be called either direct
or retrograde.


The time and direction of the sun’s rotation is ascertained by the change
of the situation of the spots, which are usually visible on his disc, and which
some astronomers suppose to be elevations, but others, apparently on
better foundations, to be excavations or deficiencies in the luminous matter
covering the sun’s surface. These spots are frequently observed to appear
and disappear, and they are in the mean time liable to great variations,
but they are generally found about the same points of the sun’s surface.
Lalande imagines that they are parts of the solid body of the sun, which,
by some agitations of the luminous ocean, with which he conceives the sun
to be surrounded, are left nearly or entirely bare. Dr. Wilson and Dr.
Herschel are disposed to consider this ocean as consisting rather of a flame
than of a liquid substance, and Dr. Herschel attributes the spots to the
emission of an aeriform fluid, not yet in combustion, which displaces the
general Iuminous atmosphere, and which is afterwards to serve as fuel for
supporting the process; hence he supposes the appearance of copious
spots to be indicative of the approach of warm seasons on the surface of the
earth, and he has attempted to maintain this opinion by historical evidence.
The exterior luminous atmosphere has an appearance somewhat mottled,
some parts of it, appearing brighter than others, have generally been called
faculae; but Dr. Herschel distinguishes them by the names of ridges and
nodules. The spots are usually surrounded by margins less dark than them-
selves, which Dr. Herschel calls shallows, and which he ‘considers as parts
of an inferior stratum consisting of opaque clouds, capable of protecting the
immediate surface of the sun from the excessive heat produced by combus-
tion in the superior stratum, and perhaps of rendering it habitable to ani-
mated beings. (Plate XXXI. Fig. 465. . 469.)


But if we inquire into the intensity of the heat which must necessarily
exist wherever this combustion is performed, we shall soon be convinced
that no clouds, however dense, could impede its rapid transmission to the


50¢ : LECTURE XLII:


parts below. ‘ Besides; the diameter of the sun is 111 times.as great as that
of the earth; and at its surface, a heavy body would fall through no less
than 450 feet in a single second: so that if every other circumstance per-
mitted human beings to reside on it, their own weight would present: an
insuperable difficulty, since it would. become nearly thirty times as great as
upon the surface of the earth, and a man of moderate size would weigh
above two tons. Some of the miost celebrated astronomers have imagined,
from the comparative light of different parts of the sun’s disc, or apparent
surface, that he is surrounded by a considerably dense and extensive. at-
mosphere, imperfectly transparent; conceiving that, without such an atmospheres
the marginal parts, which are seen most obliquely, must appear consider-
ably the brightest; but this opinion is wholly erroneous, and the inferences
which have been drawn from: it, respentiny the sun’s atmosphere, are con-
scqueruly without foundation.


We are, however; assured, by direct observation, of the existence of some
aerial substance in the neighbourhood of the sun, producing the appearance
called the zodiacal’ light,’ which is sometimes seen, nearly in the plane
of the sun’s rotation on its axis, extending beyond the orbit of Mer-
cury. It is said to have been first distinctly described in Childrey’s Bri-
tannia Baconica, a work published in 1661, and it was afterwards more par-
ticularly observed by Cassini, Mairan, and others. In the torrid zone it is
almost constantly visible; and: in these climates, it may often be distin-
guished in the beginning of March, after the termination of twilight, ex-
hibiting the appearance of a narrow triangle, somewhat rounded off, of a
whiteness resembling the milky way, ascending from the sun‘as a base, like
the projection or section of a very: flat spheroidj' and extending to a distance
of more than 50° from the'sun. The whole orbit of Venus never subtends
so great an angle from the earth as 96°, consequently this, substance must
occasionally involve both Mereury and Venus; and if it were not extremely
rare, it would produce some disturbance in their motions ; while in fact it
does not appear to impede the progress even of the-tails of the comets, which
are probably themselves of very inconsiderable density. It cannot be a
continuous fluid atmosphere, revolving with the same velocity as the sun;
for the gravitation of such an atmosphere: would cause it to assume a form
more nearly spherical; and the only. probable manner ‘in which it, can be

4


ON THE SOLAR SYSTEM. : 5038


supposed to retain its figure, is by means of a revolution much more rapid
than. the ‘sun’s rotation. Some persons have attributed the appearance to
the refraction of the earth’s atmosphere only; but if it arose from any such
cause as this, its direction could scarcely be oblique with respect to the
horizon, and itis highly improbable that-it should always happen to coincide
ion the ae of the sun’s rotation. (Plate XXXI.Fig..470.)


The - sun is accompanied in his'j progressive motion ‘among the fixed stars
by ten planetary bodies, of different magnitudes, revolving round him, from
west to east, in orbits approaching to circles, and visible to us. by means of
the light which they receive from him. These are Mercury, Venus, the Earth,
Mars, Juno, Pallas, Ceres, Jupiter, Saturn, and the Georgian planet. It
is unnecessary to adduce at present any arguments to prove the actual
existence or direction of any of these motions; their complete agreement with
the visible phenomena of the heavens, and with the laws of gravitation, will
hereafter appear to afford sufficient evidence of the accuracy of the received
theory of the arrangement of the solar system. The motion of the earth is
the most unanswerably proved by the apparent aberration of the fixed stars,
derived from the different directions of this motion at different times, and
corresponding precisely with the known velocity of light, deduced from
-observations of a very different kind. That the planets receive their light
from the sun, is undeniably shown by the appearance of the discs of
many of them, when viewed through a telescope, those parts of their surfaces
only being luminous, on which the sun shines at the time of observation.


These planets are-neither all in one plane, nor does any one of them remain
precisely in the same plane at all times; but their deviations from their
respective planes are inconsiderable, and they are commonly represented by
supposing each planet to revolve in a plane passing through the sun, and
the situation of this plane to be liable to slight variations. There is, however,
a certain imaginary plane, determinable from the situations, the velocities,
and the masses of the planets, which, like the centre of inertia, never changes
its position on account of any mutual actions of the bodies of the system,
and this plane of inertia is called the fixed ecliptic. Its situation is nearly
half way between the orbits of Jupiter and of Saturn; and it is inclined in a
small angle only to the plane of the earth’s orbit, which is called the earth’s
ecliptic, or simply the ecliptic.


504 LECTURE XLII.


The ecliptic passes through the constellations denominated the signs of
the zodiac, between Aries, the Pleiades, the twins, and Regulus, to the north,
and Aldebaran, Spica; and Antares, to the south. Its position has varied
slowly in the course of many ages, so that its northmost point is now more
than one third of a degree more remote from the pole star than it was in
the time of Eratosthenes, who observed its place 230 years before the birth of
Christ. Itappears from Lagrange’s calculations, that the limit of its great-
est possible variation is about 10 or 11 degrees. The ecliptic is supposed
to be divided into twelve angular parts, or signs, each containing thirty
degrees: they are named Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo,
_Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricornus, Aquarius, Pisces. Those who
prefer the cadence of a Latin distich, in order to assist the memory, met
repeat them thus,

Sunt Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo,
Libraque, Scorpius, Arcitenens, Caper, Amphora, Pisces.


’ The planes of the orbits of the other primary planets, excepting the three
- minute planets lately discovered, intersect the ecliptic in small angles, and
the lines of intersection are called lines of the nodes. The nodes of all the
planets move very slowly, but not quite uniformly, from east to west, that
is, with respect to the fixed stars. At present the inclinations of all the
orbits appear to be somewhat diminishing: that of the orbit of Jupiter is less
by 6 minutes than it was in the time of Ptolemy.


The orbit of each planet is very nearly an ellipsis, one of the foci of which
coincides with the sun, or rather with the common centre of inertia of the
sun and planet. The extremities of the greater axis, where the orbit is
furthest from the sun and nearest to it, are called the upper and the lower
apsis, or the aphelion and perihelion; the mean distance being at either
end of the lesser axis; and the distance of the centre of the ellipsis from the
sun is called the eccentricity. The slight deviations of the planets from
these elliptic paths are expressed by considering the apsides as moveable,


and this motion is direct, that is, from west towards east, in the case of
all the planets except Venus, of which the invert _ a cola if


motion, with respect to the — stars. «(i psi abit ip
Sky sat oF ed egal
The elliptic motion of the planets was first. discovered by Kepler; and _ '


ON THE SOLAR SYSTEM. 505


he found that a right line, joining the sun and any planet, describes always
equal areas in equal times, The observations, on which Kepler founded these
important laws, were made principally on the planet. Mars, He determined
by calculation, upon the supposition which was then generally adopted, of a
motion in an eccentric circle, what must be nearly the situation of the
planet, with respect to the sun, that is, its heliocentric place, and observing
its geocentric place, with respect to the earth, he was thus able to construct
a triangle representing the situation of the three bodies; repeating this
operation in various parts of the orbit, he discovered its form; and having
done this, the velocity of the motion in different parts of the orbit was easily
determined from the apparent change of place in a given time. (Plate


__ XXXII Fig. 471.)


The same astronomer also ascertained, that the squares of the times of re-
volution of the different planets are in proportion to the cubes of their mean
distances from the sun. For example, if one planet were four times as distant
as another, it would revolve in a period eight times as long, since the cube of
4 is equal to the square of 8; thus Mars is nearly four times as remote from
the sun as Mercury, and the Georgian planet four times as remote as Jupiter,
and their periods are nearly eight times as long respectively.


It is probable that all the planets have a rotatory motion from west to east,
either perfectly or very nearly equable. This motion has been observed in
Venus, the Earth, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn; and from some phenomena
of the satellites of the Georgian planet, Mr. Laplace thinks that it may also
be assumed as nearly certain that this planet has also a rotatory motion.


“The figure of the planets is spheroidical; they are more or less flattened


at the poles, as they revolve more or less rapidly on their axes. These
axes retain, with a very slight deviation, a situation always parallel, in


every part of the orbits.


‘in the course of time, the gradual change of the position of the axis
a sensible effect. In the case of the earth, this effect is denomi-
precession of the equinoxes. The equinoctial points are the in-
1s of the apparent ecliptic, or the path of the sun in the heavens,
: ; ; 3T . ‘


506 LECTURE XLII.


with the plane of the equinoctial, which is perpendicular to the eathraveiie
and which passes through the equator on the earth’s surface; ‘these points of
imtersection have a retrograde motion, from east to west, on the ecliptic.
This motion was discovered by Hipparchus, in the year 128 before Christ, from
a comparison of his own observations with those of ‘Timocharis, made 155°
years before; and since the time of Hipparchus, the equinoctial points have
_ receded about 264°. Hence it happens that the constellations,called the signs
_ of the zodiac, are now ata considerable distance from those divisions of the
* ecliptic which bear the same names. i ali
The earth’s axis has also a small periodical change of inelin&tioin; ora
nutation, performed in about 19 years, and amounting in the whole’ to“18
seconds only. Its existence was determined by Newton from theory, al-
though he failed in the attempt to ascertain its quantity with accuracy ; it
was first actually observed by Dr. Bradley, about the year 1747. The abso-
lute direction of the axis in the heavens is also liable to some variation, in the
course of many ages, but this change has not, always been sufficiently dis-


tinguished from the change of the position of the ecliptic. The phism .


of the equator to the ecliptic is now very nearly $8" 28.
+. baie
In order to retain in memory a general idea of the proportional distances
of the primary planets from the sun, we may call that of the earth 10 and
that of Saturn 100; the distance of Mercury will then be 4, to whicli’ we
must.add 3 for Venus, making 7; twice 3.or 6" for the earth, making’ 10;
twice 6 or 12 for Mars, making 16; twice 12 or 24, making 28, for the
three small planets, Juno, Pallas, and Ceres; twice 24 or 48, making 52, for


Jupiter’; ; twice 48 or 96 for Saturn, making 100; and twice 96 or 162,


making. 196, for the Georgian planet; and these sums ‘will represent


the, distances, without any material) exception, in the nearest integer num-
bers.


The planet Mercury is little more than one third as large as the earth in
diameter. He performs his revolution in somewhat less than three months;
at about two fifths of the distance of the earth. — His orbit is more eccentric;
and more inclined to the ecliptic, than those of any of ‘the planets ex+


oF


= ON THE SOLAR SYSTEM. 507


cépt the three small ones lately discovered; the eccentricity being one fifth
of the, mean distance, and the inclination 7°. Of his density and his rota-
tion we know nothing but from conjecture. ‘

Venus is very nearly as large as the earth; Dr. Herschel thinks her even
alittle larger. Her revolution occupies about 7 mon ths, her distance from the
sun being about seven tenths of that of the-earth, and h orbit nearly cir-
cular, inclined in an angle of 3° 24' to the ecliptic. Mr. Schroeter attributes

_ to, her mountains much higher than those of the earth, he has observed
strong indications of an atmosphere surrounding her, and he assigns for her
rotation on her axis the period of 23 hours 21 minutes. Her density has been
estimated from the perturbations, occasioned:by her attraction, in the motions
of the other planets, and it has been supposed to be a little less than that of
the earth,

The distance of the earth from the sun is about 95 million English miles;
and this determination is. generally supposed to be so far accurate, that
there is no probability of an error of more than a million or two, at most,
although some authors are still disposed to believe that the distance may be even
greater than a hundred millions, The period of its revolution, with respect to the
equinoctial points, which are. the usual standard of comparison, since their
situation determines the annual return of the seasons, is 365 days, 5 hours,

48 minutes, and 48 seconds; and this is called its tropical revolution; that -of

its absolute or sidereal revolution is 365 days,6 hours,9 minutes, and 8 seconds ;
the difference, which is 20 minutes and 20 seconds, being the time occupied
in passing over the space, through which the equinoctial points have retreated
in the course of the tropical year. By a day, we always understand the time

which elapses during the rotation of the earth with respect to the sun; a’

sidereal day is about four minutes shorter.


At a distance from the sun exceeding that of the earth by one half, the’
planet Mars revolves, in about a year and seven eighths. He is of,half
the earth’s linear dimensions: he has spots which change their form, and,
therefore, probably, an atmosphere. Dr. Herschel found his rotation per-
formed in 39 minutes more than a day; his equator inclined 28° 49',to the
plane of his orbit, and his figure so much flattened at the poles, that his axis


508° LECTURE XLII.


is .{,th shorter than his equatorial diameter. From this form, compared with
the time of his rotation, it may be inferred that his density must be very
unequal in different parts: Laplace supposes it from calculation to be on the
whole about three fourths as great as that of the earth.


In the interval between Mars and Jupiter, and nearly at the distance
where, from a dependance on the regularity of the progression already men-


tioned, a number of astronomers had for some years been seeking for a pri- _
mary planet, the observations of Mr. Piazzi, Dr. Olbers, and Mr, Harding ©


have placed three very small bodies, differing but littie in their mean distance
and their periodical time. They have named them Ceres, Pallas, and Juno:
none of them subtends an angle large enough to be measured by our best
instruments; and all the circumstances of their motions are yet but imper-
fectly established. Juno, however, appears to be somewhat less remote than
the other two; all their orbits are considerably inclined to the ecliptic, espe-
cially that of Pallas, which is also extremely eccentric. Dr. Herschel does
not admit that they deserve the name of planets, and chooses to call them
asteroids.


Jupiter is the largest of all the planets, his diameter being 11 times as great
as that of the earth, and the force of gravitation at his surface being triple
the terrestrial gravitation. He revolves in about 12 years, at a little more
than five times the earth’s distance from the sun, His rotation is performed
in less than ten hours, his equator being inclined about three degrees to his
ecliptic, which makes an angle of 1° 19’ with ours. His belts are supposed
- by many to be clouds in his atmosphere; they seem to have a rotation some-
what slower than that of the planet. ,


The diameter of Saturn is ten times as great as that of the earth, but, on
account of the smaller density of his substance, the force of gravity at his
surface scarcely exceeds its force at the surface of the earth. He revolves
in 29 years and a half, in an orbit inclined 24° to the ecliptic, at the distance
of 9: semidiameters of the earth’s orbit: his rotation occupies only 103 hours,
and his equator is inclined about 50° to our ecliptic. The most remarkable
circumstance attending him is the appearance of a double ring, which is
suspended over his equator, and revolves with a rapidity almost as great as


ON THE SOLAR SYSTEM. 509


that of the planet. His figure appears also, according to Dr. Herschel’s
observations, to be extremely singular; deviating very considerably from that
of an elliptical spheroid, which is the form assumed by all the other planets
that appear flattened, and approaching in some degree to a cylinder with its
~ angles rounded off. Such-a form can only be derived from some very great
irregularities in the density of the internal parts of his substance,


The Georgian planet, discovered by Dr. Herschel in 1780, sometimes also
called Herschel, and sometimes Uranus, revolves in 833 years, at a distance
from the sun equal to 19 times that of the earth. Its diameter is a little
more than 4 times that of the earth, and the weight of bodies at its surface a
little less than here. Notwithstanding its dimensions are by no means compara-
tively small, it appears to us as a star of the sixth or seventh magnitude,
and is seldom seen by the naked eye. Its orbit approaches very near to the
- ecliptic; its disc is said to be somewhat flattened, and it is supposed to re-
” volye with considerable rapidity.

» ine : -

_ These ten planetary bodies are the only ones hitherto discovered which
have any title to be considered as primary planets, that is, as bodies revolving
round the sun, in orbits so nearly circular, as to remain always within the

reach of our observation. It has been conjectured that the number of
planets may in reality be much greater, that not only many small and perhaps
invisible bodies may be revolving in the intervals of the planets with

' which we are acquainted, but that larger bodies also may belong to our

system, ‘which never approach within such a distance as to be seen by us.


Some have even bestowed names, borrowed from the ancient mythology, on


these imaginar, planets; but the idea of such an appropriation of terms is
t as belonging to the regions of pectical: fiction than to


n ARES and moving, at the same time, in subordinate ~


the primary. planets. The earth is attended by the moon,
i moons or satellites, Saturn by seven, besides his ring, and,
planet by six moons. All these satellites move in the’ direct


Bs hed de ae Oe


ES eels
ee a ot oe


—_——— +


—


a ar LECTURE) XLIWT «¢


order of the signs, and in planes not very remote from the’ ecliptic, except.
ing those of the Georgian planet, which revolve in planes nearly perpendi-
cular to the ecliptic., Each of these planets thus| becomes the central, lumi-


_ nary of alittle system of its own,in which the motionsand the periods observe


the same general laws as prevail in the, solar system at large!/ Of the 28
primary and. secondary planets,,.we, are), indebted. to,,Dr.., Herschel. for the


knowledge of 9; the Georgian ae with its six preelliten and the two ;


innermost moon: of Saturn. ° riven 48 trina
Tid4mee tess gle bi Aestin
The motions of some of ay sétellitens in iparticulansd those of Jupiter
and of the moon, are of considerable importance. for, theassistance.they, afford
us in determinations of time, and of the relative situations of places. . They
are subjected to considerable irregularities, but the united labours of various
astronomers have enabled us. to calculate all theie motions with the greatest
benpioens , , to biatd asiguilne
mo Aste xd
The moon-performs a complete sidereal revolution in a7 siduys 7% hours,
anda synodical revolution, during which she returns to the same position
with respect to the earth and sun, in 29 days 123 hours; a period-which
constitutes a lunation, or a lunar month. Her. orbit is inclined to the
ecliptic in an angle of a little more than five degrees, but this inclination is
liable to great variations: the place of its nodes is also continually changing,
their motion being sometimes retrograde, and sometimes direct, but on the
. whole the retrograde motion prevails. The form of the moon's. orbit. is
irregularly elliptic, and the velocity of its motion deviates considerably from.
the Keplerian law of the description of equal areas in equal times; the ap-—
sides, or the extremities of the greater axis of the ellipsis, which are called
the apogee and perigee, have on the whole a‘direct motion. From) a com-


parison of modern observations with the most ancient, the- mean motion of


the moon is found to be somewhat accelerated.


.


The moon revolves on her own axis with a very equable motion, and the
period of her rotation is precisely equal to the mean period of her revolution
round the earth; so that she always presents to us the same portion of her
surface, excepting the apparent librations produced by her unequal velocities —
in her orbit, and by the position of her axis, which is inclined 1° 49° to the


ON THE SOLAR wesTE: S511


eesiptiay and soniétimes as'tnich as 7° to her own orbit. Her distance from
the earth is about 240000 miles; ‘her diameter‘y! of that: of the earth, or
2160 miles; and the.weight of bodies at her surface is supposed to be about
one fifth of their reg ed the. surface of the earth. ©
ior? sbuloaas yitm S30 Qu
wT he stirfuce of the moon presents tous, when viewed with a lato, a
great diversity of. light ‘and shade, the principal features of which are visible
even to the naked eye. Many of these inequalities resemble very strongly
the effects of voleanos; several astronomers have imagined that they have
seen’ voleanos’ actually’ *burning® inthe unenlightened’ part of “the planet ;
and Dr. Hersthel’s instftiments have enabled him to ‘obtain satisfactory evi-
dence of the'truthedf the*conjectureli'The appearance of a perforation, which
Ulloa supposed that‘he observed near the margin of the Moon’s disc, in a’ solar
eclipse, has ‘been attributed by sonié to a'/volcano actually burning. Dr.
Halley:and Mt) Weidlet have also observed flashes of light om the dark’ part
of the ‘moon; tonsiderably resembling’ the effect of lightning. The:height
of the lunar‘mountains has been cominortily supposed to exceed very consider-
ably that: of *the mountains of the earthly; but Dri Herschel is of opiniott
that none of *thent/are'so'much astwomilesshigh. The names, which have
been given by ‘astronomers to various parts of the moon’s surface, are of's some
utility in the crintare hed the idee. of an eclipse.
+yoNE if st 10 a er (MDiIGE
Of the satellites of : upiter, some are alittle! ‘larger, and others smaller than
the moon: «they ‘all revolve in planes inclined between 2t° and 34° to the
orbit of the planet, and they are therefore always seen nearly in the same
line.” It is inferred; from some periodical changes of light which they under-
go, ‘that, like our weir hey rae acca a same fier: tortheir primary
planet. (°) otra! Sitti t
: an j4nod 2
The. ting of Secure is inclined 31 degrees to our ecliptic; » of oe seven
_ Satellites, “six are nearly in the same plane with theyring; but the plane of
the’ seventh or outermost satellite is bat balf'as much inclined'to the ecliptic:
The ring has been observed by Dr.>Herschel to revolve in 10¢ hours, which»
is “considerably less than the time that would be occupied by the revolution
of a satellite at the same distance.’ The planes of ‘the six satellites of the


“


— Ser emee-erennee __— oe


lw See


—


<=


Eee
: : . oa


sig ° ; LECTURE XLII.


Georgian planet are nearly perpendicular to the ecliptic; and some bi ives
Satie gird are supposed to be rather retrograde than direct,


Besides the bodies which revolve Spanley round jie sun, - iia ms le
mits of our observation, there are others, of which we only conclude from
analogy, that they perform such revolutions.. These are: the comets; they
generally appear attended by a nebulous light, either surrounding them as a
coma, or stretched out to a considerable length as a tail; and they sometimes
seem to consist of such light only. Their orbits are. so, eccentric, that in


their remoter situations the comets are‘ no longer visible to us, although. at


other times they approach much nearer to the sun than any of. the planets:
for the comet of 1680, when in its perihelion, was.at the distance of only
one sixth of the sun’s diameter from his surface. Their tails are often of
great extent, appearing as a faint light, directed always ‘towards a point
nearly opposite to the sun: it is quite uncertain of what substance they con-
sist; and it is difficult to determine which of the conjectures respecting them
can be considered as the least improbable; it is possible that; on account of
the intense cold, to which the coniets are subjected in the greatest. part of


their revolutions, some substances; morelight than-any thing we can imagine —


on the earth, may be retained by them in a liquid, or even in a solid form,
until they are disengaged by the effect.of the sun’s: heat: but we are still
equally at a loss to explain the rapidity of their ascent: for the buoyancy of the
sun’s atmosphere cannot possibly be supposed to be adequate.to the effect; and


on the whole there is, perhaps, reason to believe that the appearances arederived _


from some cause, bearing a considerable analogy to the fluid, supposed to be
concerned in the effects of electricity..| It is probable that the density of the
nucleus, or the body of the comet itself, »is| comparatively small, and its at-
traction for the tail consequently weak, so that it has little tendency. to re-
duce the tail, even if it consists of a material substance, to a spherical form:
for since some comets have no visible. nucleus at all, there is no difficulty in
supposing the nucleus, when present, to be of very moderate density, and
perhaps to consist of the:same kind of | substance as constitutes the tail or
coma, in a state of somewhat gréater condensation. If, therefore, it should
ever happen to a planet to fall exactly in the way of a comet, of which there
is but very little probability, it is to be supposed that the inconvenience
4


ON THE SOLAR’ SYSTEM. 513


suffered by the inhabitants of the planet might be merely temporary and lo-
cal: the chances are, however, much greater, that a comet might interfere in
such a manner with a planet, as to deflect it a little from its course, and retire
again without coming actuaily into-contact with it.


Nearly 500 comets are recorded to have been seen at different times, and
the orbits of about a hundred have been correctly ascertained: but we have
no opportunity of observing a sufficient portion of the orbit of any comet, to
determine with accuracy the whole of its form as an ellipsis, since the part
which is within the limits of our observation does not sensibly differ from the °
parabola, which would be the result of an ellipsis prolonged without end.


Two comets at least, or perhaps three, have been recognised in their re-
turn. A comet appeared in 1770, which Prosperin suspected to move in an
orbit materially different from a parabola: Mr. Lexell determined its period
to be 5 years and 7 months, and its extreme distances to be between the
orbits of Jupiter and of Mercury; but it does not appear that any sub-
sequent observations have confirmed his theory. It has, however, been cal-
culated, that supposing the theory correct, it must afterwards have approach-
ed so near to Jupiter as to have the form of its orbit entirely changed.


Dr. Halley foretold the return of a comet about 1758, which had appeared
in 1531, in 1607, and in 1682, at intervals of about 75 years; and with
Clairaut’s further correction for the perturbations of Jupiter and Saturn, the
time agreed within about a month. The mean distance of this comet from
the sun must be less than that of the Georgian planet; so that by improving
our telescopes still more highly, we may, perhaps, hereafter be able to con-
vert some of the comets into planets, so far as their remaining always visible
would entitle them to the appellation. Dr. Halley also supposed the comet
of 1680 to have been seen in 1106, in 531, and in the year 44 before Christ,
having a period of 575 years; and it has been suspected that the comets of
1556 and 1264 were the same, the interval being 292 years ; aconjecture which
will either be confirmed or confuted in the year 1848. Some persons have
even doubted of the perfect coincidence of the orbits of any comets, seen at
different times, with each other, and have been disposed to consider them as

vol. 1, . 3u


514 « = LECTURE XLII.


messengers forming a communication between the neighbouring systems of
the sidereal world, and visiting-a variety of stars in succession, so as to have
their courses altered continually, by the attraction towards many different
centres; but considering the coincidence of the calculation of Halley and

. Clairaut with the subsequent appearance of the comet of 1759, this

" opinion can scarcely be admitted to be in any degree probable with ‘respect _
to the comets in general, however possible the supposition may be in some
particular cases. (Plate XXXII. Fig. 472..475. Plate XXXIII. Fig.
476... 485.) £4


s


. eeg efIOTI TH - Soy) dsiction Io “igchean
cis ie CORE KE;


oe


_ ON. THE LAWS OF GRAVITATION.
g . d 4 .


Ir was first systematically demonstrated by Sir Isaac Newton, that all the
motions of the heavenly bodies, which have been described, may be deduced
_ from the effects of the same force of gravitation-which causes a heavy body
to fall to the earth ; he has shown that in) consequence of this universal
property of matter, all bodies attract each other with forces decreasing as the
squares of the distances increase ;\and of later years the same theory has been
still more accurately applied to the most complicated phenomena. Weare at
present to take a general view of the operation of this law, in the same order
in which the affections of the celestial bodies have been enumerated. It will
not be possible to investigate mathematically the effects of gravity in each
particular motion, but we may in some measure illustrate the subject, by
considering in what manner astronomers have proceeded in their explanations
and calculations, and we may enter sufficiently into the principles of the
theory, to understand the possibility.of its applications., ~

The bodies which exist in nature are never single gravitating points; and
in order to determine the effects of their attraction; we must suppose the ac-
tions of an infinite number of such points to be combined. It was shown by
Newton, that all the matter of aspherical body, or of a spherical surface,
may be considered, in estimating its attractive force on other matter, as
collected in the centre of the sphere. The steps of the demonstration are
these: a particle of matter, placed at the summit of a given cone or pyramid,
is attracted by a thin surface, composed also of attractive matter, occupying
the base of the cone, with equal force, whatevér may be the length of the
cone, provided that its angular position remain unaltered ; hence it is easily
inferred that if a gravitating \point be placed» any where within a hollow
sphere, it will remain in equilibrium, in consequence ot the opposite and


;


516 LECTURE XLII.


equal actions of the infinite number of minute surfaces, terminating the oppo-
site pyramids into which the sphere may be divided: it is also demonstrable,
by the assistance of a fluxional calculation, that a point, placed without the ~
surface, is attracted by it, precisely in the same manner, as if the whole
matter which it contains were collected in the centre; consequently the
same is true of a solid sphere, which may be supposed to consist of an in-
finite number of such hollow spheres. If, however, the point were placed
within a solid sphere, it would be urged towards the centre, by a force
which is simply proportional to its distance from that centre. This propo-
sition tends very much to facilitate all calculations of the attractions of the
celestial bodies, since all of them are so nearly spherical, that their action on
any distant bodies is the same, as if the whole of ‘the matter of which they
consist were condensed into their respective centres; but if the force of gra-
vity varied according to any other law than that which is found: to prevail,

this simplification would no longer be admissible, even with ve toa
sphere. © j


It can scarcely be doubted that the power of gravitation ecthensl from one
fixed star to another, although its effects may in this-case be much too in-
considerable to be perceived by us. It may possibly influence the progres-
sive motions of some of the stars; and if, as Dr. Herschel supposes, there
are double and triple stars revolving round a common centre, they must be
retained in their orbits by the force of gravity. Dr. Herschel also imagines —
that the motion of our sun is in some measure derived from the same cause,
being directed nearly towards a point in which two strata of the milky way
meet; the attraction of the stars, other things being equal, must, however,
be proportional to their brightness, and that part of the heavens, to which
the sun is probably moving, appears to afford less light than almost any _
other part, nor does the hemisphere, of which it is the centre, abound so
much in bright stars as the opposite hemisphere. If Sirius is a million times
as far from the sun as the earth, and if he should descend towards the sun”
by means of their mutual gravitation only, he would move, on a rough esti-
mate, but about 40 feet in the first year, and in 1000 years only 8000 miles.
It has been conjectured that-the mutual gravitation of the stars of a nebula
is sometimes the cause of the peculiar form of the aggregate, which some-
what resembles that of a drop of a liquid, held together by its cohesion: but


ON THE LAWS OF GRAVITATION, 517


unless the form of the nebula was originally spherical, it could scarcely have

acquired that form from the operation of gravity, since the spherical form of
a drop is owing as much to the elasticity as to the attractive force of the par-
ticles of water, and it would be necessary, in order to preserve the analogy,
that the stars should also be floating in an incompressible uid.


The sun’s change of place, dependent on the relative situation of the pla-
nets, is so inconsiderable, that it escaped observation until its existence had
been deduced from theory. Not but that this change would be sufficiently
conspicuous if we had any means of detecting it, since it may amount in the
whole to a distance equal to twice the sun’s diameter, or seven times the dis-
tance of the moon from the earth ; and this change is readily deducible from
the general and unquestionable law of mechanics, that the place of the cen-
tre of inertia of a system cannot be changed by any reciprocal or mutual ac-
tion of the bodies composing it, the action of gravity being found to be per-
fectly reciprocal. But the earth accompanies the sun in great measure in this
aberration, and the other planets are also more or less affected by similar
motions ; so that the relative situations are much less disturbed than if the
sun described this irregular orbit by the operation of a cause foreign to the
rest of the system.


The simple revolution of a body, in a given plane, indicates, at first sight,
the existence of an attractive force directed to some point within the orbit;
and the Keplerian law of the equality of the areas described in equal times,
by a line drawn from each planet to the sun, agrees precisely with what is
demonstrable of the effects of central forces, and points at once to the sun
as the centre of attraction of the system. And since the orbits of the planets
are elliptical, and the sun is placed in one of the foci of each, it may be ma-
thematically pfoved that the force directed to the sun must increase in pro-
portion as-the square of the distance decreases.


pr


The times of the revolutions of the planets are also in perfect conformity
with the laws of gravitation, that is, the squares of the times are proportional
to the cubes of the distaices from the sun. It was easy to infer, from what
Huygens had already demonstrated of centrifugal forces, that this Keplerian
jaw must be true of bodies revolving in circles by the force of gravitation;


Oe eee : ll a


518 : LECTURE XLIII.


but Newton first demonstrated the same proportion with respect to elliptic


orbits, and showed that the time of revolution in an ellipsis is equal to the.


time of revolution in a circle, of which the diameter is equal to the greater


axis of the ellipsis, or the semidiameter to the mean distance of the planet. .


arJa'acdkt 6];


The universality of the iwi of gravitation, as applied to the different


planets, ‘shows also that the matter, of which they: are composed, is equally
subjected:to its power; for if any of the planets contained a portion of: an


inert substance, requiring a force'to put it in motion, and yet not liable to


the force of gravitation, the motion of the planet would be atintetialty difs
ferent from that of any other planet similarly situated. iovlwr


T the deviations of each planet from the plane of its orbit, and the motions
of its nodes, or the points in which the orbit intersects the plane of the
ecliptic, as well as the motions of the aphelion, or the point where the orbit
is remotest from the sun, have also been deduced from the attractions of the
other planetary bodies; but the calculations of the exact quantities of these
perturbations are extremely intricate. In general, each of the disturbing
forces causes the nodes to have a slight degree of retrograde motion; but on
account of the peculiar situation of the orbits of Jupiter and Saturn, it hap-
pens that the retrograde motion of Jupiter’s node, on the plane of the orbit
of Saturn, produces a direct motion on the ecliptic, so that the action of
Saturn tends to lessen the effect of the other planets in causing a meee
motion of Jupiter’s nodes on the ecliptic. nee


The secular diminution of the obliquity of the ecliptic, or that slow vari-
ation of its position, which is only discovered by a comparison of very dis-
tant observations, is occasioned by the change of position of the earth’s orbit,.
in consequence of the attractions of the other planets, especially of Jupiter.
It has been calculated that this change may amount, in the course of many
ages, to 10° or 11°, with respect to the fixed stars; but the obliquity of the
ecliptic to the equator can never vary more than two or three degrees, since
the equator will follow, in some measure, the motion of the ecliptic.

The mutual attraction of the particles of matter, composing the bulk of
each planet, would naturally dispose them, if they were either wholly or


ON THE LAWS OF GRAVITATION. . 519


partially fluid, to assume a spherical form: but their rotatory motion would
require, for the preservation of this form, an excess.of attraction in the
equatorial in order to balance the greater centrifugal force arising
from the Ha velocity of their motion: but since the attractive force of
the sphere on the particles at an equal distance from its centre is every where.
equal, the equatorial parts would necessarily recede from the axis, until the
greater number of particles, acting in the same column, compensated for the
greater effect of the centrifugal force.. The form would thus be changed
from a sphere to an oblate or flattened spheroid ; and the surface of a fluid,
either wholly or partially covering a solid body, must assume the same
figure, in order that it may remain at rest. . The surface of the sea is there-
fore spheroidical, and that of the earth deviates so far only from a spheroi-
dical figure, as it is above or below the general level of the sea. (Plate
XXXIV. Fig. 486.) ?


' The actions of the sun and moon, on the prominent parts about the earth’s
equator, produce a slight change-of the situation of its axis, in the same
manner as the attractions of the other planets occasion a deviation from the
plane of its orbit. » Hence arises the precession of the equinoxes, or the re-
trograde motion of the equinoctial points, amounting annually to about 50
seconds. ~ The nutation of the earth’s orbit is a small periodical change of
the same’kind, depending on the position of the moon’s nodes; in conse-
quence of which, according to Dr. Bradley’s original observations, the pole
of the equator describes in the heavens. a little ellipsis,of which the diameters
are 16 and 20 seconds. The same cause is also concerned in modifying the
secular variation of the obliquity of the ecliptic; and on the other hand, this
variation has a considerable effect on the apparent precession of the equi-
noxes. .On account of »the different quantity of the precession at different
times, the actual length of the tropical year is subjected to a slight varia-
tion; it is now 4 or 5 seconds shorter than it was in the time of Hipparchus,
The utmost change, that can happen from this cause, amounts to 43 seconds.


The exact computation of the moon’s motion is one of the most difficult, as
well as the most important problems in astronomy; but it is easy to under-
stand, in general, how the difference in the quantity and direction of. the
sun’s actions on the moon and earth, may cause such a derangement of the


520 LECTURE XLIII.


moon’s gravitation towards the earth, that the inclination of the orbit must
be variable, that the nodes must have a retrograde, and the apsides a direct
motion; and that the velocity of the moon must often be different from that
which she would have, -according to the Keplerian law, in a simple elliptic
orbit.


For, the sun’s attraction as far as it acts equally on the earth and the moon,
can have no effect in disturbing their relative position, being always employed
in modifying their cominon annual revolution; but the difference of the forces,
occasioned by the difference of distances, always tends to diminish the effect
of their mutual attraction; since the sun acts more powerfully on the nearer
than on the remoter of the two bodies.. The difference of the directions, in
which the sun acts on the earth and the moon, produces also a force, which
tends, in some degree, to bring them nearer together; but this force is, on the
whole, much smaller than the former; and the result of both these disturbing
forces is always directed to some point in the line which joins the earth and the
sun, on the same side of the earth with the moon. It is obvious that when
the nodes are also in this line, the disturbing force can have no effect, either
on their position, or on the inclination of the orbit, since it acts wholly in
the plane of that orbit; but when they are in any other situation, the dis-
turbing force must cause a deviation from the plane, towards the side on
which the sun is situated, so that the inclination of the orbit increases and
decreases continually and equally; but whatever may be the position of the
nodes, it will appear that they must recede during the greater part of the
moon’s revolution, and advance during the smaller. (Plate XXXIV.
Fig. 487.) ;


When the disturbing force tends to separate the earth and moon, it de-
ducts from the gravitation of the moon towards the earth a portion which
increases with the distance, and therefore causes the remaining force to de-
crease more rapidly than the square of the distance increases; and the re-
verse happens when the disturbing force tends to bring the earth and moon
nearer together ; but the former effect is considerably greater than the latter.
Now in the simple ellipsis, when the body descends from the mean distance,
the velocity continually prevails over the attractive force, so as to turn away
the direction of the orbit more and more from the revolving radius, until, at


ON THE LAWS OF GRAVITATION. 521:


ci: a certain point, which is called the lower apsis, it becomes perpendicular to

it: but if the central force increase in a greater proportion than is necessary

for the description of the ellipsis, the point where the velocity prevails over

it will be more remote than in the ellipsis; and this is expressed by saying

that the apsis moves forwards. When, on the contrary, the force varies

more slowly, the apsis has a retrograde motion. Since, therefore, the force

_ attracting the moon towards the earth, increases, on the whole, a little more

4 rapidly than the square of the distance decreases, the apsides must have, on

the whole, adirect motion. And a similar theory is applicable to the mutual
perturbations of the primary planets. (Plate XXXIV. Fig. 488.)

©. "Phe secular acceleration of the moon’s mean motion, which had long pre-

sented a difficulty amounting almost to an exception, against the sufficiency

of the theory of gravitation, has at last been satisfactorily deduced by Mr.

Laplace from the effect of the gradual change of the eccentricity of the earth’s

orbit, which is subject to a very slow periodical variation, and which causes

a difference in the magnitude of the sun’s action on the lunar revolution. :


The perfect coincidence of the period of the moon’s rotation, with that of
a mean revolution, has been supposed to be in some degree an effect of the
attraction exerted by the earth on a prominent part of her surface; there are t
however, many reasons to doubt of the sufficiency of the explanation. If
the periods had originally been very néatly equal, we might imagine that
the motion of the earth would have produced a libration or oscillation in the
position of the moon, retaining it always within certain limits with respect
to the earth: no libration is, however, observed, that can be derived from
any ‘inequality in the moon’s rotation; and it has very properly been sug-
gested that the same attraction towards the earth ought to have made the
moon’s axis precisely perpendicular to the plane of her orbit, instead of
pov A little inclined to it. At the same time the appearance of a similar

in the periods of the rotation and revolution of many other .
akes it probable that some general cause must have existed, which ; ;
fem sffoct in to many difierent cases i.


s f the coinets afford no very remarkable singularity in the applica- ~
of gravity, excepting the modifications which depend on ; S
‘ 3x.


=


ST TS


528 LECTURE XLIil,


their near approach to the parabolic form, and the great disturbance which
their motions occasionally suffer, when they happen to pass through the
neighbourhood of any of the larger planets. The velocity of a comet in its
perihelion is such, that its square is twice as great as the square of the velocity
of a body revolving in a circle at the same distance. It was determined by
Halley and Clairaut, that the attractions of Jupiter and Saturn would. delay —
the return of the comet of 1759 about 618 days; and the prediction was ac-
complished within the probable limits that they had assigned for the error of
the calculation. The labours of Clairaut have indeed in many respects im-


_ proved the science of mathematical astronomy ; he was the first that ob-


tained a complete determination of the effects of the mutual actions of three,
gravitating bodies, disturbing each other’s motions; and his investigations,
which were founded on those of Newton, led the way to still farther improve-
ments and refinements, which have been since made in succession by Euler,


Lagrange, and Laplace.


598


LECTURE XLIV.
ON THE APPEARANCES OF THE CELESTIAL BODIES,


"WE are next to proceed to examine the sensible effects produced by those
motions which we have first considered in their simplest state, and after-


_ wards with regard to their causes and their laws. Many authors have


chosen rather to pursue a contrary method, and have attempted to imitate the
original and gradual developement of the primitive motions from their apparent
effects. But no conception is sufficiently clear, and no memory sufticiently
strong, tocomprehend and retain all these diversified appearances with accuracy
and facility, unless assisted by some previous idea of the real changes which
produce them, or by some temporary hypothesis respecting them, which may
have been of use in its day for the better connexion of the phenomena,
although it does not at present deserve to be employed for a similar purpose,
in preference to simpler and better theories, which happen to be historically
of a later date.


The proper motions of the fixed stars, as they are subjected to our obser-
vation, undergo two modifications; the one from the relative direction of
the motion, by which it may be more or less concealed from our view; the
other from the proper motion of the sun, and the planets attending him.
This motion has indeed only been inferred from the apparent motions of a
great number of stars, which are either partly or totully referable to it, and
which could scarcely have agreed so correctly as they do, if they had arisen
from the real and separate motion of each star. -


Among the motions of the. primary planets, that of the earth itself requires
@ principal share of our attention. The apparent places of the fixed stars are
not sensibly affected by the earth’s annual revolution: if any of them had been
considerably less remote than they are, it is probable that this motion would


ae oe |


524 LECTURE XLIy¥.


have occasioned a sensible annual parallax, or a change of their relative
situation, according to the earth’s place in its orbit round the sun; for if this
orbit, viewed from any of the stars, subtended an angle even of a single
second, the place of that star might be observed to vary a second at different
times of the year. Dr. Hooke supposed at one time that he had discovered
such a parallax, but later observations have not confirmed those of Dr.
Hooke. ‘The stars have, however, a small aberration, in consequence of the
progressive motion of the earth in its orbit, combined with the limited
velocity of light; and the standard of comparison being the earth’s axis, its
nutation must also in some degree affect the apparent places of the stars. It
was in endeavouring to ascertain the annual parallax, that Dr. Bradley
discovered both the aberration of light and the nutation of the earth’s
axis.

The revolution of the earth, in its orbit round the sun, produces the ap-
parent motion of the sun among the stars, by which he describes his annual
path in the ecliptic, with an apparent angular velocity equal to the angular
velocity of the earth, which varies considerably at various times. It required
some investigation of the magnitudes and distances of the heavenly bodies,
to be convinced that the sun and stars had not in reality the motion which
a superficial inspection of the heavens would naturally lead a spectator to”
attribute to them; but it is at present perfectly unnecessary to enter into
arguments to prove that the true cause of these apparent motions is the real
motion of the earth. The effect of the earth’s annual revolution is the
change of place of the sun among the fixed. stars: it is obvious that the
sun will always appear, when viewed from the earth, in a place diametrically
opposite to that in which the earth would appear, if seen from the sun: con-
sequently, since the earth and sun remain in the same plane, the apparent
path of the sun will mark the same circle among the stars as the earth would
appear to describe, if viewed from the sun, that is, the ecliptic. If the light
of the stars were much stronger, or that of the sun much weaker, we might
see him pass by the stars in each part of the ecliptic, as we do the moon; but
we are now obliged to observe what stars are in turn diametrically opposite


to the sun, or at certain distances from him, and thus we obtain a correct
knowledge of his path.


ON THE APPEARANCES OF THE CELESTIAL BODIES. 525


The sun’s apparent diameter is larger by one thirtieth in January than in
June; of course the earth is so much nearer to the sun in winter than in
summer; and since the revolving radius of the earth’s orbit describes equal
areas in equal times, the angular motion must increase as the square of the
distance diminishes, or about twice as fast as the distance itself diminishes ;.
so that the whole variation of the apparent diurnal motion of the sun is one
fifteenth of his mean motion: hence, the sun passes through the winter half
of the ecliptic in a time 7 or 8 days shorter than the.summer half. . Accord-
ing to the different situations of the earth, with respect to the plane of the
sun's equator, his rotation on his axis causes the paths of his spots to assume
different forms; when the earth is in that plane, the paths appear straight,
but in all other situations, elliptical,


The rotation of the earth on its axis produces the still more obvious vicis-
situdes of day and night; and, in combination with its annual motion, oc-
casions the change of seasons. Since the axis remains always parallel to
itself, and is inclined to the plane of the ecliptic in an angle of about 664°,
the plane of the equator, which is perpendicular to the axis, must pass twice
in the year through the sun. When this happens, the limit of illumination,
or the circle which separates the dark portion of the earth from the enlightened
part, will then pass through the poles; and as the earth turns on its axis,
each point of its surface must remain for an equal length of time in light and
in darkness. Hence the points of the ecliptic, in which the sun is situated at
such times, are called the equinoctial points. At all other times, one pole of
the earth is in the light, and the other in the shadow; and all the points of
the earth nearest to the illuminated pole have their day longer than their
night, while the parts on the opposite side of the equator, which are conse-
quently nearer to the unenlightened pole, have their day shorter. The parts
nearest to the poles have also one of their days and one of their nights pro-
tracted to a period of several common days, or even months, whenever they
revolve entirely within the limit of illumination. (Plate XXXIV. Fig. 489.)


The sun appears to describe every day a.circle in the heavens, more or less
distant fiom the plane of the equator, according to the actual situation of the
earth’s axis; this distance being always the same as that of the poles from the
limit of illumination, and never exceeding 231°; so that by determining the


.
596 LECTURE XLIV.


sun’s path at the time of the equinoxes, or the apparent place of the equinoctial
in the heavens, for any given point on the earth’s surface, we may represent the
sun’s path at any other time by a smaller circle’ parallel to it. Speaking
however, more correctly, the sun’s apparent path i isa spiral, formed by the
continuation of these supposed circles into each other.


The effect of the centrifugal force, derived from the earth's rotation, is
perceptible, at the equator, in the retardation of the vibrations of pendu-
lums. The whole centrifugal force at the equator is found, by computation,
to be =, of the force of gravity; but the diminution of the force of gravi-
tation appears, by experiments on pendulums, to be +}5; this diminution
being the sum of the centrifugal force, and of the decrease of gravity on
account of the oblate figure of the earth, the equatorial parts being further
removed from its centre, and the force of gravity being less powerful there.
The changes of inclination in the earth’s axis are observable in the places of
the eyuinoctial points, and in the situation of the plane of the earth’s equator
with respect to the fixed stars; and the secular diminution of the obliquity
of the ecliptic is discoverable by a comparison of distant observations
on the sun’s apparent motion, and on the places of the fixed stars with
respect to the ecliptic. ‘

For the phenomena of twilight, we are principally indebted to the light
reflected by the atmosphere: when the sun is at a certain distance only below
the horizon, he shines on some part of the air immediately visible to us,
which affords us a portion of reflected light. The distance, at which this
may happen, has been variously estimated, and it is perhaps actually dif-
ferent in different climates, being a little greater in countries near the poles
than in those which are nearer the equator: there is also sometimes a second-
ary twilight, when the parts of the atmosphere, which reflect a faint light on
the earth, are themselves indebted for this light to an earlier reflection,
Some have assigned 18° as the limit of twilight,and on this supposition, allow-
ing for refraction, the atmosphere must be capable of reflecting sensible
light at the height of about 40 miles. Mr. Lambert, on the contrary, makes
the limit only about 65°. The duration of twilight is greater or less as the
sun moves more or less obliquely with respect to the horizon ; it is, therefore,
shortest near the time of the equinoxes, since the equinoctial intersects the


ON THE APPEARANCES OF THE CELESTIAL BODIES. 527


horizon less obliquely than any lesser circle parallel to it. (Plate XXXIV.
Fig. 490, 491.)


“The revolutions of the primary planets, combined with that of the earth,
necessarily produce the various relations, in which they are either in opposi-
tion or conjunction, with respect to each other or to the sun, and in which the
apparent motion is direct or retrograde, or the planet is stationary, accord-
ing to the directions and the comparative velocities of the real motions. If
the earth were at rest, the inferior planets would appear to be stationary when
they are at the greatest elongation or angular distance from the sun; ‘but,
on account of the effect of the earth’s motion, Venus is stationary at an
_ elongation of about 29°, while her greatest elongation is between 45° and

48°. The greatest elongation of Mercury, in each revolution, is from 284°
to 174°, according to the position of his orbit, which is very eccentric. All |
these appearances are precisely the same as if the sun actually revolved round
the earth, and the planets accompanied him in his orbit, performing at the
same time their several revolutions round him; and the path which would
thus be described in the heavens, and which is of a cycloidal nature, re-
presents correctly the true positions of the planets with respect to the earth.
The apparent angular deviation from the ecliptic, or the latitude of the planet,
is also greater or less,accordingly as the earth is nearer or remoter to the planet,
as well as according to the inclination of its orbit and its distance from the
node. (Plate XXXIV. Fig.'492 .. 494.)


The various appearances of the illuminated dises, especially of the inferior
planets, and the transits of these planets over the sun, depend on their
positions in their orbits, and on the places of the nodes, with respect to the
earth. Jupiter, Saturn, and the Georgian planet, are so remote in com-
parison of the earth’s distance from the sun, that they appear always fully
illuminated. Venus is brightest at an elongation of about 40° from:the sun,
in that part of her orbit which is nearest to the earth; she then appears like
the moon when 5 days old, one fourth of her disc being illuminated; she
easts a shadow,and may even be seen in the day, time in our climates, if she
happens to be far enough north: a circumstance, which occurs once in about
‘8 years. In order that there may be a transit of Venus over the sun, she
must be within the distance of 14° of her node at the time of conjunction,


c penumbra. ‘The true shadow, where the moon ‘crosses it is


_


528 : LECTURE XLIV.


~ otherwise she will pass either to the north or to the south of the sun, instead’


of being immediately interposed between him and the earth.


The phases and eclipses of the moon are very obviously owing to the
same causes; that part of the moon only, on which the sun shines, being .
strongly illuminated, although the remaining part is faintly visible, by —
means of the light reflected on it from the earth; itis, therefore, most easily
seen near the time of the new moon, when the greatest part of the earth’s
surface turned towards the moon is illuminated. The parts of the moon
which are immeaditely opposed to the earth, appear to undergo a libration,
or change of situation, of two kinds, each amounting to about 7 degrees: the
one arising from the inequality of the moon’s velocity in her orbit at different |
times, the other fromthe inclination of the axis of her rotation to her orbit;
besides these changes, the diurnal rotation ofithe earth may produce, to a De
spectator situated on some:parts of it, a third kiid of libration, ora change of “a
almost two degrees in the appearance of the moon at her bie; ane setting.
vee XXXIV..Fig. 495.)


7 iJ


When the moon passes the conjunction,or becomes new, near to the node, —
she eclipses the sun, and when she is full, or in opposition, in similar circum-


stances, she herself enters the earth’s shadow. The earth’s shadow consists
of two parts, the true shadow, within which none of the sun’s surface is q
visible, and the penumbra, which is deprived of a part only of the sun’s light;
the true shadow forms a cone terminating in a point at a little more than 3¢ mt sald
times the mean distance ot the moon; the penumbra, on the contrary, consti- . :
tutes, together with the shadow, a portion of a cone diverging from the earth


without limit; but the only effect of this imperfect shadow is, that it eis
the beginning of ‘a lunar eclipse to be incapable of very ey,

tion; for-the limit of the darkened part of the moon, p
progress of the eclipse, is that of the true shadow, very li


in diameter, as seen from the earth, while the moon herself i is
shadow is not, however, wholly deprived of the

spheric refraction inflects the light passing nearest
of 66 minutes, and causes ’a great part
of a ruddy aed by means of whieh the n


= c 3


i
2
|


4


ON THE APPEARANCES OF THE! CELESTIAL BODIES, 529


cone. of total darkness extending to somewhat less than two thirds of the
mioon’s distance. But it has sometimes happened, probably from the effect
of clouds occupying the greatest part of our ant Randal ‘that -_ moon has
totally bor ai tr (Plate cag oe Fig. 496. )


“When the sun is eclipsed, it deyiecidé on the situations of the earth and moon.
in their orbits, whether the sun or moon subtends the greatest angle as seen
from the earth; since at their mean distances their apparent diameters are
‘eich about half a degree. If the sun’s apparent diameter is'the greater, the
eclipse, when the centres coincide, must be annular, the yn of ‘the
sun’s disc being still visible in the form of a ring: when the moon’s appar-
ent diameter is greater than the sun’s, the eclipse, if central, becomes total;
but still a ring of pale light is seen round the disc, which has’ been attri-
buted to the effect of the sun’s atmosphere, since that of the moon is pro-

ably too inconsiderable to produce the appearance: a red streak is also:
‘sometimes observed at the margin, before the actual emersion of the sun.
The degree of darkness depends on the situation of the place of observation’
within’ the shadow, on account of the greater or less illumination of the
atmosphere within view: sometimes a considerable number of stars may be
re total ne of te sun.” : ‘


a NS ilh


~ It is obvious that, since the seaieh is inuch baded ¢ than the sido tie whole -
ahbadtw! ‘of the moon will only pass: over a part of the éarth’s surface: and
that no solar eclipse can be visible in the whole of the hemisphere turned
to the sun: while lunar eclipses, on the contrary, present the same appearance
‘wherever the moon is visible. In thesame manner, toa spectator on the moon,
‘earth, or'a transit of the moon's shadow over: the earth’s
nearly the same‘appearance wherever he might'be stationed;
of the sun by the earth would be total to that part of the
ce only, which tous appears dark at the same time. (Plate
. 497... 499.) mote gu, teieqiloa sq .09 oda ¢3aoup
fii Meraupsc? el esiilfotas, S23 dHigilos ant ional ;
mn ih 8 arrive vey apa, at’ the same. ifehatiott with rebpect'#
223 lunations, or revolutions of the mooi, which are per-
‘years of 365 days each, 15 days,7 hours, ind Dh Intute a0 thet
¢ iggy 18 years, UAE Gy tic nici ‘nearly in


\530 : LECTURE XLIv,


mentioned by Ptolemy and by Pliny. When siedulhnoen, neni |
72° of the node, there must be-a lunar eclipse and there may bean eclipse
at the distance of 13° from the node. An eclipse, of the sun may happen
when the moon changes, or comes into conj unction with the sun, at any dis-
tance within 174° of the node. The mean number of eclipses which occuy
in a year is about 4; and there are sometimes as many as 7: there must ;
necessarily be two solar eclipses, but it is possible that there may not be .
even one lunar. kn speaking of the magnitude of the part of the sun or ’
moon eclipsed, it is usual to consider the whole diameter as divided into ~
12 parts, called digits, each of which contains 30 minutes: thus if one
fifth part of the diameter were dark, the extent of the eclipse would Re
called 2 digits 12 min utes.


;


The moon travels through the heavens with a motion contrary to their
apparent diurnal revolution. Hence she rises and sets, on an average, about
three quarters of an hour later every day. The least possible difference
between the time sof the moon’s rising on two successive days, is, in London,
17 minutes; and this circumstance occurs-once in about 19 years, which is
nearly the period of the moon’s nodes with respect to the heavens: the great-
est possible difference is 1 hour 17 minutes, But it happens every month that
the difference becomes greater and less by turns, and when the least differ-
ence is at the time of the full moon, it is usually called the harvest moon.
In parts nearer to the poles, the moon often rises at the same hour on two
succeeding days.


—_
‘


¢ 7 -CLh Sai? 0a)

The eclipses of the satellites of Jupiter exhibit appearances extremely in-
teresting for, their utility in identifying the same instant of time in different
places. On account of the small inclination of their orbits to resi
Jupiter's orbit, the first three never pass the shadow without be
into it, and the fourth but seldom; while those of ‘Saturn are.
quently liable to be eclipsed, on account of their greater |
plane of his ecliptic. ‘These satellites are ees cults ‘id
body of the planet, and this circumstance ¢ bute: he
it happens that we can never see both the immersion of the hep
‘the shadow of Jupiter, and its emersion from it; k


ON THE APPEARANCES OF ‘THE CELESTIAL BODIES, $31


Saturn exhibits a variety of forms according to its angular position: it dis-
appears to common observation when either its edge or its dark side is pre-
sented to us:-but'to Dr. Herschel’s telescopes it never becomes invisible; the
light reflected from the planet being probably sufficient for illuminating in
some measure the side not exposed to the sun’s direct rays,"


The comets are seen for a short time, and are again lost to our view; their

tails are in general situated in the planes of their orbits, following them in

their descent towards the sun, and preceding them in their ascent, with a

slight degree of curvature in their forms; they must also appear to us more

or less arched, and of different extent, according to their distances, and’ to
the angular position of the orbits with respect to the ecliptic.


__ The proportion of the light afforded by the different heavenly bodies has
been variously. estimated by various authors; but there is little reason to call
_in question the accuracy of the experiments and calculations of Mr. Bou-
y guer. He states the intensity of the moon’s light as only one three hundred
thousandth of that of the sun. These calculations have been extended by Euler
and by Lambert; Euler considers the direct light of the sun as equal to that
of 6560 candles of a moderate size, supposed to be placed at the distance of 1
foot from the object: that of the moon to the effect of 1 candle, at the distance
of 72 feet; the light of Venus to a candle at 421 feet, and of Jupiter to a
candle at 1620 feet; so that the sun would appear as bright only as Jupiter
. if he were removed to a distance 131 thousand times as went as his present
distance, — ies XXXIV. ie 500.) | rh ' :
aj a89
When we reflect on the magnificence of the iad picture of the universe,
the outlines of which we have been considering, we are lost in the contem-
plation of the immensity of the prospect, and returning to the comparatively
diminutive proportions of our individual persons, and of all the objects with
which we are most immediately connected, we cannot help feeling our own
; in the material world. The mind, notwithstanding, endea- Te \ }
urs ‘to raise: itself above: the restraints which nature has imposed on the *u4
uly, and to penetrate the abyss of space in search of congenial existences. _
ulations of this kind, reason and argument must give way to con-


532 LECTURE XLIv.


jecture and imagination ; and thus, from natural philosophy, our imaginations
wander into the regions of poetry; and it must be confessed that the union of
poetical embellishment with natural philosophy is seldom very happy. A
poet has few facts to communicate, and these he wishes to expand and diver-
sify; he dwells on a favourite idea, and repeats it in a thousand emblemati-
cal forms; his object is, to say a little, very elegantly, in very circuitous, and
somewhat obscure terms. But the information, which the natural philoso-
pher has to impart, is too copious to allow of prolixity in its detail; his sub-
jects are too intricate to be compatible with digressions after amusement,
which, besides interrupting, are too likely to enervate the mind; and if he is
ever fortunate enough to entertain, it must be by gratifying the love of truth,
and satisfying the thirst after knowledge. We have, however, a favourable
specimen of highly ornamented philosophy in Fontenelle’s Plurality of
Worlds; a work which must be allowed to convey much information in
a very interesting form, although somewhat tinctured with a certain frivolity
which is not always agreeable. We need not attempt to accompany all the
flights of Fontenelle’s imagination ; it will be sufficient for our purpose to
pursue his ideas in a simple enumeration of the most remarkable phenomena,
that would occur to a spectator placed on each of the planets.


Of Mercury we know little except the length of his year, which is shorter
than three of our months, Supposing all our heat to come from the sun, it
is probable that the mean heat on Mercury is above that of boiling quick-
silver; and it is scarcely possible that there should be any point about his
poles where water would not boil. The sun’s diameter would appear, if
viewed from Mercury, more than twice as great as to us on the earth,


Venus must have a climate far more temperate than Mercury, yet much


too torrid for the existence of animals or vegetables, except in some circum-
polar parts; her magnitude and diurnal rotation differ but little from those.
of the earth, and her year is only one third shorter; so that her seasons, and
her day and night, must greatly resemble ours.’ The earth, when in oppo-
sition to the sun, must be about four times as bright as Venus ever appears to
us, and must, therefore, always cast a shadow; it must be frequently, and
perhaps generally, visible in the day; and together with the moon, must ex-


SS ————


ON THE APPEARANCES OF \PHE)CELESTIAL BODIES. 558


hibit:a very inteyesting object.:. The atmosphere of: mieauted is miguppneed: to be
acs ads like our own, or somewhat more rare, » “ ;
The inhabitants of the moon, pit the moon is inhabited, must be oaks of
living with very little air, and less water: there. is:reason to think their at-
mosphere less than.a mile high, and it is never clouded: so that the sun must
shine without intermission for a whole fortnight, on the same spot, without


having his heat moderated by the interposition of air, or by the evaporation *
_ of moisture. The want of water in the moon is not, as some haye supposed,


the necessary: consequence of the want of an atmosphere; but it is inferred
partly from the total absence. of | clouds, and jpartly from the irregular ap-
pearance of |the margin) of the moon, as seen in a solar eclipse ; no part of it


being terminated by-a line sufficiently regular to allow us to suppose it the


surface of a fluid.. ‘The earth must always appear to occupy nearly the same


_Part of the sky, cor:rather to describe a small joval orbit round a particular


point, exposing a surface 13 times\as great.as that of the moon appears to us.
This large surface, suspended, with phases continually changing, like those
of the moon, must afford, especially when viewed with a telescope, an ex-
cellent timepiece; the’continents and)seas coming gradually and regularly
into view, and affording a variety equally pleasing and useful. To us such
a timepiece would be of inestimable value; as it would afford us an easy me-
thod of discovering the longitude of a place, by comparing its motion with
the solar time: but iti the moon, the relative position of the earth and sun,
orof the earth and stars only, would, be sufficient for determining the situation
of any place i in sight of the earth; if, however, there are no seas and no na-


‘ wigation, astronomical observations of this kind would be of very little


utility. |The assistance of the earth’s phases in the measurement of time
might, however, still be very useful, for many. purposes, to the inhabitants
of the nearer half of the moon; and probably the remoter part is much de-
serted, for in their long night of half a month, they must be extremely in
want of the light reflected from the earth, unless the inhabitants haye the


faculty of sleeping through the whole of their dark fortnight. The surface


of the moon appears to be very rocky and barren, and liable to frequent dis-
turbances from yolcanos.. These have been supposed to project some of theit
contents within the reach of the earth’s attraction, which they might easily
do, if they-could throw them out with a velocity of about eight thousand feet


;
;
|


a


4


534 : LECTURE KLIY. <


in a second, which is only four times as great as thatyof a cannon ball:) and


these stones, falling through the atmosphere, might very possibly. generate so
much heat, by compressing the air, as to cause the appearance of fiery me-
teors, and to fall ina state of ignition. The appearance of the'moon, as
viewed through a good ‘telescope, is extremely well imitated by Mr. Russel’s
lunar globe, which is also capable of exhibiting, with great’ weer the
changes produced by its librations.

The climate of Mars is as much ‘colder chine dure as that of Venus is
warmer; in other respects there is'no very’ striking difference: the inclina+
tion of his axis to his ecliptic being tiearly the samésas that of the’ earth’s
axis, the changes of seasons must be nearly like'our own. Dr. Herschel has
observed a constant appearance of two bright spots or scircles near the poles
of Mars, which he attributes to the ice and snow petpetually sutrounding
them. It is not, however, probable that: water couldremain fluid in any
part of Mars, ‘and even quieksilver and alcohol ‘would, perhaps, be frozen
in his temperate climates. Tt is pretty certain that Mars has an atmosphere,
and his dark spots seem to be occasioned by clouds: this alias 38351 ‘may,
perhaps, also be tne cause of the ruddy hue of = wer

a rt

Tt appears to be doubtful, whether either of the: ‘three! little saad ineelly
discovered can be sufficiently solid, to give a firm’ footing. tovany material
beings: we should probably weigh only a few pounds: each: if transported
there. According to Dr. Herschel’s opinion, neither Ceres nor Pallasis much
larger than a good Scotch ¢state, although they must, sometimes, appear to
each other as planets of a most respectable size. The light reflected from
Ceres is of a more ruddy hue than that of Pallas; both of these planets are
attended by more or less ofa nebulosity, proceeding, perhaps, from copious
atmospheres; and in this respect, as well as in the great inclination of their
orbits, they appear to have some affinity to comets. It is tolerably certain
that neither of them is 200 tniles in diameter; and Juno is also probably
about the same size.


Itis obvious that the most striking features of the heavens, when contem-
plated from Jupiter, would be the diversified positions and combinations of
his satellites: their light must be faint, but yet of service; and to a traveller


ON THE APPEARANCES OF. THE CELESTIAL BODIES, 355.


on the surface of this vast globe they must afford useful information, as well
with respect to time as to place. Our little earth must probably be always
invisible to a spectator situated on Jupiter, on account of its apparent proxi-
mity to the sun, in the same manner as a planet at half the distance of Mer-
cury would be invisible to us. The year of Jupiter must contain nearly ten
thousand of his days, and that of Saturn almost thirty thousand Saturnian
days. Besides the vicissitudes of the seven satellites reyolving round Saturn,
his ring must afford, in different parts of his surface, very diversified appear-
ances of magnificent luminous arches, stretched across the heavens, especi-
ally in that hemisphere which is on the same side of the ring with the sun.»


From the Georgian planet the sun must be seen but as a little star, not
one hundred and fiftieth part as bright as he appears to us. The axis of this
planet being probably near to the. plane of its ecliptic, it must be directed
twice in the year towards the sun, and the limit of illumination must ap-
proach to the equator, so that almost every place on_ his surface must some-
times remain, for a great number of diurnal revolutions, in light and in dark-*
ness ; the most moderate climates having one night, in theirlong year, equal
in duration at least to several of our years: and it must be confessed that
this planet would afford but a comfortless habitation to those accustomed to
our summer sunshine, even if it were possible to colonise it. (Plate XXXIV.
Fig. 501.)


On the whole,“we are tempted, from an almost irresistible analogy, to con-
clude that the planets are all in some manner or other inhabited; but at the
same time we can scarcely suppose that a single ecipses of terrestrial animals or
even vegetables could exist in any of them; their minerals may, perhaps, re-
semble ours, and if the stones which Mr. Howard has analysed are really lu-

- Nar productions, we have proofs that the moon at least contains some sub-
stances resembling those which compose the earth; but the seas and rivers of
the other planets must consist of some fluid unknown to us, since almost all
Our liquids would either be frozen, or conyerted into vapour, in any of them.


fe wicissqe @ ofS tehte


LECTURE XLV. es
z itt Lo7% : a6 DUO VITUS
Ti ‘ S ba Btu (4 Fo Nieto ode
ON PRACTICAL ASTRONOMY. ;
g yt ite writ at
t! OIC io evi
; 7 init pal > sb e712 St: 31 si Mollie ibldsined JF i +
TT is generally most convenient in practical astronomy to neglect the real,
and to consider only the apparent motions of the sun the stars, and planets,
for the visible effects must be precisely the same, whether the sun or the
earth perform a revolution in the plane of the ecliptic, and whether the earth
actually move on its axis, or the whole of the celestial bodies move round it~
in aday. We may, therefore, suppose the sun to move, as he appears to do,
from west to east in the ecliptic, so as to advance almost a degree in ay
_ hours, and from east to west, together with all the stars and planets, so as '
to perform a whole revolution in a day. ‘Speaking more correctly, the sun
appears to describe, in every sidereal day, a spiral, which differs a little froma
circle, and is also about a degree shorter, so that about four minutes more are
| required for the return of the sun to the same part of the heavens, -and the. i
completion of a solar day. : hy


In order to determine the place of any point in the heavens, it is usual to
: eompare its situation either with the plane of the earth’s equator, or with the
r ecliptic ; its angular distance from the equator being called its declination,
and from the ecliptic, its latitude; these distances must be measured in .
planes perpendicular to those of the equator or ecliptic, and the distances of
these planes from their intersection, or from the equinoctial point in Aries,
are called respectively the right ascension and the longitude of the point to
be described. For the stars, the declination and right ascension are most
usually laid down; but with respect to the sun and the planets, performing
their revolutions in or near the ecliptic, it is most convenient to calculate .
their latitude and longitude.


The plane passing through the earth’s axis and the place of a spectator is


ON PRACTICAL ASTRONOMY. 537,


the plane of the meridian of that place; and a plane touching the earth in any.
point is its horizon. With respect to the, appearances of the fixed stars,
this plane may be considered «as passing through, the earth’s centre in the
same direction: and the difference is scarcely sensible with respect to the sun
and the primary planets; but in observations of the moon’s place, these
planes must be carefully distinguished. (Plate XX XV. Fig. 502.)


The instruments requisite for astronomical observations are principally
referable to geometrical or to optical apparatus, or to the measurement of
time. Particular constructions and combinations are, however, necessary
for the accommodation of quadrants, graduated circles, telescopes, and


- transit instruments, to the uses of observatories; and astronomical, obserya-


tions are as necessary to the correct determination of time, as artificial time-
keepers are useful for other astronomical purposes.


The most accurate standard of time is the diurnal rotation of the earth on
its axis, as ascertained by its situation with respect to the fixed stars. The
time elapsing between two successive passages of any star over the same
meridian, which constitutes a sidereal day, may be measured with great
precision; and the star may for this purpose be observed, with almost. equal
accuracy, in any other situation, and sometimes with greater convenience.
The length of the sidereal day may be considered as perfectly constant, the
inequalities arising from the aberration of light, and from the nutation. of
the earth’s axis, being too small to. be easily discovered; but the correction
for the aberration may be applied when it is necessary.. For observations of
this kind, it is usual to have a clock adjusted to sidereal time, which not only
admits of a more ready comparison with the transits or passages of any one
star over the meridian, but, by the difference of the times of any two transits,
shows at once the difference of right ascension of the. stars or planets, ex-
pressed in time instead of degrees. ;


The solar days are not only about four minutes longer than the sidereal
days, but they are also unequal among themselves; and this inequality
arises from two causes; the one, that even if the sun’s motion in the ecliptic
were uniform, his diurnal changes of right ascension would be different at
different times, and the difference between his path in every sidereal day, and


VOL. I. $z


538 Y LECTURE XLy.


a whole circle; depending on this change, would also vary; the other that the
sun’s motion in the ecliptic is actually variable, consequently the. diurnal
change’ of right- ascension. is liable to adouble inequality. Hence it happens
that the solar time agrees at four instants in the year only with the mean
time, derived from supposing the whole 365 days to be divided intoas manyequal
parts; the difference is called the equation of time, and amounts sometimes to as
much as 16 minutes. The term equation is commonly applied in astronomy
to any small’quantity, which is to be added to, or subtracted from, another, ~
quantity; thus it is usual, in calculating the place of a planet, to find from the
tables of: its motion, the mean place, in which it would be found if its orbit
were circular, and thence ‘to derive the true place, by means of various cor-
rections called equations. In France the solar time is. considered as the
true time, and is used for all civil purposes, so that the clocks are sometimes
embarrassed with a complicated apparatus, calculated forimitating the inequali-


ties of the actual apparent motion of the sun. (Plate XXXV. Fig. 503.)


The art of dialling consists principally in projecting, on a given surface,
such lines as will coincide with the shadow of an index or gnomon parallel
to the’ earth’sxis, at intervals corresponding to the. different® hours of the
day: so that nothing more is necessary for the construction of a-dial, than
to determine the intersections of the surface on which the dial is to becon-
structed, with planes passing through the edge of the gnomon, and situated
at equal angular distances from each other: thus, siipposing the plane of the
dial perpendicular to the gnomon, and parallel to the equinoctial, the hour
lines of the dial will be at equal distances from each other; but in other cases
their distances will be unequal, and must be determined either by calcula-
tion or by construction. A point may also be used as a gnomon, as well as
a line; but in this case the hour lines must cover a langer portion of the
surface, in order that the shadow of the point may always fall among them.
(Plate XXXV. Fig. 504. . 506.)


The changes of the seasons depend on the return of the sun to the same
position with respect to the equator, or on the length of the tropical year, so

‘ called from the tropics, which are circles supposed to be parallel to the
equator, and between which the sun travels continually backwards and
forwards, appearing to remain for some time, when he is: near them, with


ON PRACTICAL ASTRONOMY. , i 5389


very little change of declination; whence the time when the sun touches
-either tropic is called the solstice. _The vicissitudes of light and darkness
depending:also on the solar day, it is necessary, for jthe regulation of the
civil/calendar,. to establish the proportion, between the periods of the solar
day and:the tropical year; and since the tropical year exceeds the time of
365 days, by 5 hours, 48 minutes and 48 seconds, it is usual to add to the
common year an intercalary day once in about four years. The ancient
Egyptians reckoned only 365 days in a year; and_ their nominal new. year
arrived continually earlier and, earlier, \s0, that, after, 1507 of their years, it
' would: have happeried successively on each of the 365 days, and returned to
the original place: the same mode of computation was also adopted by
the Greek astronomers. The Romans inserted intercalary days, at first with-
out much regularity, according to the direction of their augurs, until the
time of Julius Caesar; who, observing that the year was almost 6 hours
longer than 365 days, added a day every fourth year to the calendar, by
reckoning twice the day in February called sexto calendas Martias, whence
this year of 366 days: was: denominated a bissextile year. The new moon
immediately following the winter solstice, in the 707th year of Rome, was
made the first of January of the first year of Caesar; the 25th of December
in his 45th year is considered as the date of, the Nativity, of Christ, and
Caesar’s' 46th year is reckoned the first of our era, The preceding year is
commonly called by astronomers the year 0, but by chronologists the year !
before Christ. ‘The correetion introduced by Caesar was, however, too
great, the error being exactly 7 days in 900 years; so that in 1582 it amount-
ed to about 12 days. This error was not wholly removed by Pope Gregory,
who reformed the calendar; he omitted 10 days only of the usual reckoning,
in order to bring back the course of the moveable feasts to the same state, in
which they had been established by the Nicene council, in the fourth cen-
tury. He determined at the same time that the last year of every century
should be passed without an intercalary day, excepting that of every fourth
century, which was still to be bissextile. Thus every year divisible by four,
without a remainder, is in general a bissextile or leap year, but the last
year of every century must be a common year, anless the number of the
century be divisible by 4; the year 1800 being a common year, and 2000 a
bissextile.. In this manner 27 Julian bissextiles are omitted in 3600 years,


while the true length of the year would require the omission of 28; but so


remainder will be the golden number; thus, for


540 OF REOTURE RLIVET >.


small a difference can be of no » thaterial consequence, The Persians had in-

troduced into their calendar, in the 11th century, an intercalation still more »
accurate} they make 8 bissextiles only.every 33 years, reckoning four common

years together instead of three, at the end of this period, so that in 132 years

they have $2 leap years instead of $3; and the error is’only aday inabout five

thousand years. If any change in the Gregorian calendar were thought
necessary, it would be easy to make the last year of every fourth and fifth f
century alternately a bissextile, and this correction would be quite as accu-
rate as it is possible for’ our calculations to render it. ‘The adoption of the
Gregorian calendar i in this country was for some time delayed by religious
prejudices; one of the best founded objections to it was, that 2 days of the
real error was still uncorrected; but better arguments at last overcame these
difficulties, and the new stile was introduced on the:14 September 1754,
which would have been called, according to the old stile, the third. ;


i

Any tolerable approximation of this kind, when once generally established, Ry
appears to be more eligible than the mode which was lately adopted in France,
where the republican year began at the instant of the midnight preceding
the sun’s arrival at the autumnal equinox. Mr. Lalande’ very judiciously ‘a


observes, that there are several years, in which the sun will pass the equinox
so near to midnight, that it isnot at present in the power of caleulation to
determine on what day the republican year ought-to begin; and perhaps
these arguments have cooperated with others in facilitating the restoration of
the ancient calendar. ° :


“


ba x
The revolutions of the sun and moon are not very obviously commen-
surable, the solar year containing 12 lunations and almost 11 days; but
Meto discovered, more than 2000 years ago, that 19 solar years contain
exactly 235 lunations; and this determination is so accurate, that it makes
the lunar month only about half a minute too long. Hence it happens, that __
in every period of 19 years, the moon’s age is the same on the same day of a
the year. The number of the year, in the pe ier:

number, the calendar of Meto having been -

the Olympic games, to be engraved in letters
At present, if we add 1 to the number of the


ON PRACTICAL ASTRONOMY. | 541


If we subtract 1 from the golden number, then multiply by 11, and
divide by 30, the remainder will be the epact, which is the moon’s age on.
the first of January, without any material error; thus, for 1806, the epact.
is 11, and the moon is actually 11 days old on the first of January.


From a combination of chronological periods of various kinds, Scaliger
imagined the Julian period, as an epoch to which all past events might with
convenience be referred, beginning 4713 years. before the birth of Christ.
Laplace proposes, as a universal epoch, the time when the earth’s apogee was
at right angles with its nodes, in the year 1250, calling the vernal equinox
of that year the first day of the first year. But the fewer changes of this
kind that we make, the less confusion we introduce into our chronology.
The astronomical year begins at noon on the 31st of December, and the date of
an observation expresses the days and hours actually elapsed from that. time.
Thus, the first of January 1806, at 10 in the morning, would be called, in as-
tronomical language, 1805 December 31 days 22 hours, or more properly
1806 January 0 day 22 hours.


For ascertaining, by immediate.measurement, the position of any of the
heavenly bodies, it is usual to determine its meridian altitude by quadrants,
and the time of its passing the meridian by transit instruments. The large qua-
drants, generally used for this purpose in observatories, are fixed to vertical walls,
in order to give them greater stability, and are thence called mural quadrants ;
sometimes a smaller portion of an arc only is adapted for observations near
the zenith, under the name of a zenith sector. A transit instrument is a
telescope so fixed on an axis as to remain alwaysin the plane of the meridian ;
the axis being perpendicular to this plane, and consequently in a horizontal
position, and directed east and west. ‘Those who are in the constant habit of
observing with attention, can estimate, in this manner, the precise time of the
passage of a celestial object over the meridian; without an error of the tenth
of a second, so that its angular right ascension may be thus determined
within about a second of the truth. A very convenient mode of adjusting a
transit instrument is to direct it to the north polar star, at the same time that
the last of the three horses in the wain is perpendicularly above or below it:
this process, in 1751, gave precisely the true meridian; but. since that time,


p>
|


542 ;
the precession of the equinoxes, which produces a slight change in the places
of the stars, has made it necessary to wait 1 minute 132 seconds for every
ten years that have elapsed. Thus, in 1806, if we wait 6} minutes, the
pole star will then be precisely in the meridian, and will’ serve for’ the
correct adjustment of the instrument. (Plate XXXV. Fig. 507. . 510.)


LECTURE XLv.


‘
The quadrant immost common use, especially for nautical observations,

was first proposed by Newton, but improved, or perhaps reinvented, by
Hadley. Its operation depends on the effect of two mirrors which bring
both the objects, of which the angular distance is to be measured, at once
into the field of view; and the inclination of the speculums by which this is pers
formed serves to determine the angle. The ray proceeding from one of the
objects is made to coincide, after two reflections, with the ray coming immedi-
ately from the other,and since the inclination of the reflecting surfaces is then


‘half the angular distance of the objects, this inclinatoin is.read off on a scale


in which every actual degree represents two degrees of angular distance, and
is marked accordingly. There is also a second fixed speculum, placed


\


-right angles to the moveable one, when in its remotest situation, which then


produces a deviation of two right angles in the apparent place of one of the


objects, and which enables us, by moving the index, to measure any angle |
* between 180° and 90°. This operation is called the back observation; it is


however seldom employed, on account of the difficulty of adjusting the spe-


culum for it with accuracy. The reflecting instrument originally invented by .


Hooke was arranged in a mannersomewhat different. (Plate XX XV. Fig. 511.)


From the meridian altitude of any point, it is.easy, when the elevation of
the pole is known, to deduce its declination; and its right ascension may be
found from the time of its passage over the meridian after that of the eéqui-
noctial point, allowing 15 degrees for each sidereal hour. (Plate XXXV.
Fig. 512.) ,


In all astronomical observations it is necessary to make propér corrections,
according to the rules of optics, for the effects of atmospherical refrac-
tion; and also, in observations on the mvon more especially, for those of
parallax, or the difference of the apparent place of the luminary with

i f


* »~


.


SS as Se es O—=EEeEEE ee


ow PRACTICAL ASTRONOMY. 543


respect to the earth’s’ obits and-to the place of the spettatin which is
equal to. the angle subtended at the centre of the luminary by the semidia-
meter of the earth passing through the place of observation; since all) cal-
culations of the geocentric places of the heavenly bodies are referred to, the
earth’s centre. This angle, whichis to. be added,.to. the apparent altitude,
amounts sometimes, in the case of the moon, when near the horizon, to more
than.a degree; the refraction, which is in a contrary direction, and is to be
subtracted from the altitude, being at the horizon about 33 minutes. , (Plate
XXXV, Figs 51s) ’ 03 ; eagtils


The most important applications of practical astronomy are in. the. de-
termination of the latitudes and longitudes of places on the earth’s surface.
The latitude, which is the angular distance of the place from the equator, or
the angle formed by the plane of its horizon with the earth’s axis, is easily
ascertained by finding the meridian altitude of a body, of whichthe decli-
nation is known; since, by deducting or adding the declination, we have at
once the elevation of the equinoctial, or of the plane of the equator, above the
horizon, and subtracting this from a right angle, we find the elevation of the
pole, or the latitude. (Plate XX XV. Fig. 512.) :


It is also common to determine the latitude of a-place by means of two
altitudes observed at different times in the same day, noticing accurately the
interval of time that elapses between the observations. This method has
a great advantage in cloudy, weather, when it is not possible to insure an
observation of a meridian altitude.


The longitude of a place, or the relative position of its meridian, is by no
means so readily determined. For this purpose it becomes necessary to as-
certain the time that elapses between the passages of a given point in the
heavens over its meridian and some other meridian which serves as a standard
of comparison. Thus, if the sun arrives three hours later at_the meridian of
any place than at the meridian of London, that place must necessarily be
45 degrees west of London, or in 45° west longitude: and if we know, when
it is noon at the given place, that it is three o’clock in the afternoon at
Greenwich, we may be certain that we are in some part of a meridian 45° west
of that of Greenwich. Had we perfect timekeepers, we might easily adjust them


7


*


: 544 LECTURE XLy,


to the time of our first meridian, and then, by comparison with the usual
determinations of time in any other place, to which they might’ be carried}
the longitude of this place might be found with perfect accuracy.’ “Such
timekeepers as we have are indeed sufficiently correct, to be of considerable
utility, but it is necessary to compare them frequently with astronomical
observations of phenomena, which occur at times capable of a correct calcu-
lation. Sometimes the transits of Mercury and Venus, or the eclipses of
the moon, are employed for this purpose, but more usually the eclipses of the
satellites of Jupiter; these, however, cannot be well observed without a
more obese telescope than can be employed at sea; and the theory of the ;
moon's motion, has of late years been so'much improved, that her distance - .
from the sun or from a fixed star can be calculated, with sufficient accuracy,
| for determining the time in London or at Paris without an error of one third

of a minute; so that supposing the observation could be rendered perfectly

correct, the longitude might be thus ascertained pha pases one twelfth of
f a revise or at most five nautical miles. f 34


ELIT TL ET


is


) poite ns hea


The observed parallax of the sun and moon may be silptopiea for the ;
determination of their distances from the earth ; butin the case of the sun,the
simple comparison of his calculated with his apparent altitude is insufficient for _ .
ascertaining the magnitude of the parallax with accuracy. Sometimes the
parallax of Mars, which is considerably greater than the sun’s, has been
directly measured; but the mést correct mode of ascertaining the actual
dimensions of the solar system is, to observe a transit of Venus over the sun’s
disc, at two places situated in opposite parts of the earth's surface. For,
since the diurnal motion of some parts of the earth is.directed the same way
with the motion of Venus in her orbit, and that of others the contrary way,
the different effects of these motions must furnish a mode of comparing the
rotatory velocity of the earth, with the progressive velocity of Venus, and
‘consequently of inferring, from the known velocity bt age the earth’s :
surface revolves, the actual velocity of Venus, and her ‘distance from the

sun; whence the distances of all the other planets eadil ‘be readily deduced. P
(Plate XXXV. Fig. 514.) MYT eect peeae te ‘e


kf seat (wee
Our countryman Horrox was the first
‘nomena of a transit of Venus over the s


ON PRACTICAL ASTRONOMY. 565


observed a transit of Mercury at St. Helena, thought that he could ascertain
the ties of immersion and emersion without an error of a single second;
and hence he concluded, that by means of\a transit of Venus, the sun’s dis-
tance might be determined within a ‘five hundredth part. The most advan-
tageous places for the experiment being such as differ most in longitude,
and are most remote from each other, Captain Cook was sent by the British
government to the South Seas, in the years 1761 and 1769, in order to ob-
serve the transits of Venus in the island of Otaheite. These observations
‘were compared with those which were made at Wardhufs, in Danish Lapland ;


the difference of the times occupied by the transit at these places was found °


to be 23 minutes 10 seconds, and from this comparison, corrected by a num-
ber of collateral observations, the sun’s mean parallax was found to be 8 se-
eonds and two thirds, or perhaps 8}; for it does not appear that we’ are
sure of having avoided even an error of one fortieth part of the whole; al-
though Mr. Laplace’s determination of the sun’s distance, from the lunar mo-

' tions, agrees very well with that which is usually considered as the result of
the observations of the transit of Venus. .


The comparative densities of the sun, and of such planets as have satellites,
may be calculated from the periods and distances of the bodies revolving
round them; the densities of the other planets have sometimes been assigned
from conjecture only, but of late years the mathematical theory of the planet-
ary perturbations has been rendered so perfect, that some dependence may
perhaps be placed on the’density assigned to them from calculations of this
kind. It was formerly supposed that the densities of the planets were re-
gularly greater as they were nearer to the sun; but it is now certain that ‘the
Georgian ‘planet is more dense than Saturn, and it is probable that Venus is
somewhat less dense than the earth. The mass of the moon is deduced from
a comparison of the effects of her attraction on the earth and sea with those
of the sun’s attraction.


The artificial globe serves as a useful instrument for determining, in a rough

manner, without calculation, the affections of the heavenly bodies at par-

. ticular times; their places being first ascertained from tables, or, in the case
of the sun, merely from a scale on the globe’s horizon, or on its surface. We


have only to adjust the elevation of the pole of the globe in such a manner,
von. I, AA


.


566 LECTURE XLY.


that its axis may form the same angle with its horizon as the axis of the earth
does with the real horizon of the place; then finding a point on its surface
corresponding to the place of the sun or planet, we may represent its apparent
motion by the motion of this point, and the time occupied by that motion
will be shown by the index of the globe; thus we may find the length of the
day and night, and the time and place of rising and setting; and by means of
a graduated circle, perpendicular to the horizon, we may measure the al-
titude of the sun or planet at any other time, and also itsazimuth, or the
distance of this circle from the north or south point of the horizon, If we
have a ring of any kind parallel to the horizon, and 33 minutes below it, we
may consider this ringas the apparent horizon, allowing for the effects of re-
fraction; if it be still 15 or 16 minutes lower, it will represent the rising or
setting of the extreme margin of the sun or moon: we might also have a circle
about a degree above either of these, which might represent the sensible or
apparent horizon with regard to the moon, inctuding the correction for her
parallax ; and a similar ring, placed still lower, would show the duration of
twilight, on any supposition that might be formed respecting the depression
of the sun required for producing total darkness, By means of the celestial
globe, the apparent motions of the fixed stars may be represented in a man-
ner nearly similar, proper attention being paid to the situation of the sun in
the ecliptic, as determining the time corresponding.


Many of these operations may also be performed with equal convenience
with a planisphere, which is a stereographical projection of the globe on a
plane surface. Professor Bode’s planisphere comprehends in one view all the
stars that are ever visible at Berlin: he has added to it a moveable circle, re-
presenting the horigon of that place, carrying with it the circles of altitude
and azimuth, delineated on a transparent paper, whichis adjusted, by gradu-
ations at the margin of the chart, to the day and hour for which we wish to
ascertain the apparent places of the heavenly bodies. Any other chart of
the stars, having the pole in its centre, may be applied to a similar use, by
cutting out a circle, or a part of a circle, to represent the horizon of a place
of which the latitude is given ; and if the stars are projected, as is usual, on
two equal charts, they must have two equal arcs to represent the respective
parts of the horizon belonging to them. A simple construction may also
often be made to serve for solving many problems of a similar nature. (Plate


ON PRACTICAL ASTRONOMY. - 567


XXXV. Fig. 515, 516. Plate XXXVI. Fig. 517. Plate XXXVII.
Fig. 518.)


For representing the real as well as the apparent motions of the different
parts of the solar system, planetariums or orreries have sometimes been em-
ployed, in which the comparative periods of the revolutions have been ex-
pressed by various combinations of wheelwork. Of these instruments Ar-
chimedes was the original inventor, and Huygens revived them, with many
improvements, in modern times. The construction of the large planetarium,
which has been made in the house of the Royal Institution, was principally
directed by Mr. Pearson. I suggested to him, that the instrument might be
placed in’a vertical position, and that the eccentricities of the planetary
orbits might be shown by the revolution of short arms, retained in their
situation by weights, and their deviation from the plane of the ecliptic by
inclining the axes of these arms,in a proper angle, to the plane of the instru-
ment. The other parts of the arrangement, which have any claim to novelty,
were entirely of Mr. Pearson’s invention, and he appears to have rendered the
instrument in many.respects more accurate than any other planetarium that
has ever been constructed.


f &%


568


LECTURE XLVI.


ON GEOGRAPHY.


- F Rom the consideration of the stars, the sun, and the planets in general,
we are now to descend to that of the earth, the particular planet which we
“jnhabit, and which we can examine more minutely than the other parts of
the solar system. Its external form, its divisions, whether astronomical or
natural, its most remarkable features, and its internal structure, will require
to be separately investigated.


The general curvature of the earth’s surface is easily observable in the dis-
appearance of distant objects, and in particular, when the view is limited by.
the sea, the surface of which, from the common property of a fluid, becomes
naturally smooth and horizontal: for it is well known that the sails and rig-
ging of a ship come into view long before her hull, and that each part is the
sooner seen as the eye is more elevated. On shore, the frequent inequalities
of the solid parts of the earth usually cause the prospect to be bounded by.
some irregular prominence, as a hill, a tree, or a building, so that the
general curvature is the less observable.


The surface of a lake or sea must be always perpendicular to the direction
of a plumb line, which may be considered as the direction of the force of
gravity; and by means either of a plumb line or of a spirit level, we may as-
certain the angular situation of any part of the earth’s surface with respect to
a fixed star passing the meridian; by going a little further north or south,
and repeating the observation on the star, we may find the difference of the
inclination of the surfaces at both points; of course, supposing the earth a
sphere, this difference in latitude will be the angle subtended at its centre by
the given portion of the surface, whence the whole circumference may be
determined; and on these principles the earliest measurements of the earth


*


"Qi o GEOGRAPHY. : 585


were conducted. The-first of these, which can be considered as accurate, was


+


‘executed by Picart in France, towards the end of the seventeenth century.


But the spherical form is only an approximation to the trutli; it was cal-
culated by Newton, and ascertained experimentally by the French Acade-
micians, sént to the equator and to the polar circle, that, in order to represent
the eatth, the sphere must be flattened at the poles; and prominent at the
equator. We may thetefore consider the earth as an oblate elliptic spheroid;
the curvature being greater, and consequently every degree shorter, at the
equator, than nearer the poles. If the density of the earth were uniform
throughout, its ellipticity, or the difference of the length of its diaméters,
would be =, of the whole; on the other hand, if it consisted of matter of
inconsiderable density, attracted by an infinite force in the centre, the el-
lipticity would be only +;;; and whatever may be the internal structure of
the earth, its form must be between these limits, since its internal parts
must necessatily be denser than those parts which are nearer the surface. If
indeed the éatth Gonsisted: of water or ice, equally compressible with! comniom
water or i¢e, and following the same laws of compression with elastic fluids,
its density would be several thousand times greater at the centre than at the
surface; andeven steél would be compressed into one fourth-of its bulk, and
stone into one eighth, if it were continued to the earth’s centre; so that there


_¢ah be no doubt but that the central parts of the earth must be muth more


dense than the superficial’. Whatever this difference may be, it has been de-
indnsttited by Clairaut, ‘that the fractions expressing the ellipticity and the
apparent dimination of gravity at the equator must always make together +5,
and it has been fownd, by the most accurate observations on the lengths of
pendulums in different latitiides, that the force of gravity is less powerful by
Pe /at the equator thaw at the pole, whience the ellipticity is found: to be ++.
of the equatorial diameter, the form being the same as would be produced, if
about three eighths of the whole force of gravity were directed towards a
CoeaE particle, the density of the rest of the carth being uniform.


This method of determining the general form of the earth is mach in
liable to error and irregularity, thaw the measurement of the lengths of de-
grees in various parts, since the accidental variations of curvature produced
by local differences of density; and even by superficial elevations, may often


=


fs
2°) os
- <


570, ' LECTURE XLVI.


produce considerable errors in the inferences which might be deduced from
these measurements. For example, a degree measured at the Cape of Good
Hope, in latitude 33° south, was found to be longer than a degree in France,
in latitude 46° north, and the measurements in Austria, in North America,
and in England, have all exhibited signs of similar irregularities. There ap-
pears also to be some difference in the length of dégrees under the same la-


titude, and in different longitudes. We may, however, imagine a regular


elliptic spheroid to coincide very nearly with any small portion of the earth’s
surface, although its form must be somewhat different for different parts :
thus, for the greater part of Europe, that is, for England, France, Italy,
and Austria, if the measurements have been correct, this osculating spheroid
must have an ellipticity of :4..


The earth is astronomically divided into zones, and into climates. The
torrid zone is limited by the tropics, at the distance of 23° 28' on each side
of the equator, containing all such places as have the sun sometimes vertical,
or immediately over them; the frigid zones are within the polar circles, at
the same distance from the poles, including all places which remain annually
within the limit of light and darkness, for a whole diurnal rotation of the
earth, or longer; the temperate zones, between these, have an uninterrupted
alternation of day and night, but are never subjected to the sun's vertical
rays. At the equator, therefore, the sun is vertical at the equinoxes, his
least meridian altitude is at the solstices, when it is 66° $@’, that is, more
than with us at midsummer, and this happens once on the north and once
on the south side of the hemisphere. Between the equator and the tropics,
he is vertical twice in the year, when his declination is equal to the latitude
of the place, and his least meridian altitudes, which are unequal between
themselves, are at the solstices. At the tropics, the meridian sun is vertical
orice only in the year, and at the opposite solstice, or the time of midwinter,
his meridian altitude is 43° 4/, as with us in April, and the beginning of Sep-
tember. At the polar circles, the sun describes on-midsummer day a com-
plete circle, touching the north or south point of the horizon; and in mid-
winter he shows only half his disc above it for a few minutes in the opposite
point; that is, neglecting the elevation produced by refraction, which, in
these climates especially, is by no means inconsiderable. At either pole,
the corresponding pole of the heaven being vertical, the sun must annually


a i a i i Bis


ON GEOGRAPHY. 571


describe a pion of which each coil is nearly horizontal, half of the spiral
being above the horizon, and half below: the coils being much opener in the
middle than near either end.


The climates, in the astronomical sense of the word, are determined by
the duration of the longest day in different parts of the earth’s surface; but
this division is of no practical utility, nor does it furnish my. criterion for
judging of the climate in a meteorological sense.


The natural division of the surface of the globe is into sea and land: about
three fourths of the whole being occupied by water, although probably no
where to a depth comparatively very considerable, at most of a few miles on
an average. The remaining fourth consists of land, elevated more or less
above the level of the sea, interspersed, in some parts, with smaller collec-

: tions of water, at various heights, and, in a few instances, somewhat lower
than the general surface of the main ocean... Thus the Caspian sea is said to
be about 300 feet lower than the ocean, and in the interior Tait of Africa
there is probably a lake equally depressed.


We cannot iiheres any general symmetry in this distribution of the earth’s
surface, | excepting that the two large continents, of Africa and South
America, have some slight resemblance in their forms, and that each of them _

_ is terminated to the eastward by a collection of numerous islands. The large

; based Projecting to the southward have also a similarity with respect to their
» and th ¢ islands near them: to the west the continents are excavated

ar , and the islands are to the east: thus Cape Horn has the

3, the Cape of Good Hope Madagascar, and Cape Comorin

! sine XLII, XLIIL)


$04


ieedkignsed “of Europe, hike Alt Africa, constitutes
‘the whole surface of the earth, America about a sixteenth,
* New South Wales about a fiftieth; or, in hundredth
e, Europe contains 2, Asia 7, Africa 6, America 6, and

ing 77 being sea; although some authors assign 72
> the sea, and 28 to the land. These proportions may
ed with tolerable accuracy by weighing the men made for covers


i
5,


572 LECTURE XLVI. /


ing a globe, first entire, and then cut out according to the terminations of
the different countries: or, if still greater precision were required, the greater
part of the continents might be divided into known partions of the wliole —
pense ener and the * Sima irregular portions only ean.
3 iy vr . tr i) *y reso} t r t
The general inelivasicu aiid levels of the continents areiiibalyerisd by the
course of their rivers. Of these the principal are, the River of Amazons, the
Senegal, the Nile, the River St. Laurence, the Hoangho, the River La-
plata, the Jenisei, the Mississippi, the Volga, the Oby, the Amur, the Oro-
nooko, the Ganges, the Euphrates, the Danube, the: Don, the Indus, the
Dnieper, andthe Dwinva; and this is) said to be nearly the order of their
magnitudes. But if-we class them according to the length ef country through |
which they run, the order will, according to Major Rennel’s calculation, be :
somewhat different: taking the length of the Thames for unity, he estimates
that of the River of Amazons at 153, the Kian Kew, in China, 154, the hi
Hoangho 131, the Nile ‘12, the Lena 113) the) Amur 11, the Oby 104, the sy
Jenisei 10, the Ganges, its companion the Buirampooter, the river of Ava,
and the Volga, each 93, the Euphrates 84," the Mississippi 8, the Danube. h Beh,
it Indus 54, and the Rhine 54. f
it teeihy evil aietenye i iuac ate Finely SY 7
We may fate a tolerably:accurate idea ofthe fotete of the ancient continent, —
by tracing a line across it in such'a direction: as to pass no river, which will
obviously indicate a tract of :country higher than most of the neighbouring —
parts. ' Beginning at Cape Finisterre,» we soon arrive at the Pyrenees, keep-
ing to the south of the Garonne and the Loire. After taking a long turn
northwards, to avoid the Rhine, we ‘come to Swisserland, and. we may ap- :
. proach very near to the Mediterranean in the state of Genoa, pres!
not to cross the branches of the Po. We make a circuit in
pass between the sources of the Danube and of the branches of the Mine in
Swabia. Crossing Franconia, we leave Bohemia tod 1e to
avoid the Elbe, ‘and coming near to the borders: of 1 ! ec of —
Hungary, to the south of the Vistla. ‘The Dnieper t :
wards through Lithuania, leaving the Don w
to pass still further north, between P
sero. We may then go eastwards to the bow
to Nova Zembla: Hence we descend to


ON GEOGRAPHY. ? 573


east of the branches of the Volga, and the other inland rivers flowing into
the lake Aral and the Caspian sea. - Here we are situated on the widely ex-
tended elevation of India, in the neighbourhood of the sources of the Indus:
and, lastly, in our way from hence towards Kamschatka, we leave the Jenisei
and Lena on the'left, and the Ganges, the Kiang Kew, the Hoangho, and
the Amur to the right.


The direction of the most conspicuous mountains is, howéver, a little dif-
ferent from this, the principal chain first constitutes the Pyrenees, and divides
Spain from France, then passes through Vivarais and Auvergne, to join the
Alps, and through the south of Germany to Dalmatia, Albania, and Mace-
donia; it is found again beyond the Euxine, under the names of Taurus,
Caucasus, and Imaus, and goes on to Tartary and to Kamschatka, The
peninsula of India is divided from north to south by the mountains of Gate,
extending from the extremity of Caucasus to Cape Comorin. In ‘Africa,
Mount Atlas stretches from Fez to Egypt, and the mountains of the moon
run nearly in the same direction: there is also a considerable elevation be-
tween the Nile and the Red Sea. In the new world, the neighbourhood of
the western coast is in general the most elevated; in North America the
Blue mountains, or Stony mountains, are the most considerable; and the _
mountains of Mexico join the Andes or Cordeliers, which are continued along
the whole of the west coast of South America.


There are several points in both hemispheres from which we may observe
rivers separating to run to different seas; such are Swisserland, Bjtlosero
Tartary, Little Tibet, Nigritia or Guinea, and Quito. The highest moun-
tains are Chimboracao and some others of the Cordeliers in Peru, or perhaps
Descabesado in Chili, Mont Blanc, and the Peak of Teneriffe. Chimboragao
is about 7000 yards, or nearly 4 miles, above the level of the sea; Mont
Blanc 5000, or nearly 3 miles; the Peak of Teneriffe about 4000, or 2 miles
and 4 quarter: Ophir, in Sumatra, is said to be’5 or 6 hundred feet higher.
It has, however, been, asserted that some of the snowy mountains, to the
north of Bengal, are higher than any of those of South America. The
plains of Quito, in Peru, are so much elevated, that the barometer stands at
the height of 15 inches only, and the air is reduced to half its usual density.
But none of these heights is equal to a thousandth part of the earth's semi- -

VOL, I. 4B


‘
S74 : LECTURE XLVI.


diameter, and the greatest of them might be represented on a six inch globe
by a single additional thickness of the paper with which it is covered.


Mount Sinai in Japan, Mount Caucasus, Etna, the Southern Pyrenees, St. 1


George among the Azores, Mount Adam in Ceylon, Atlas, Olympus, and
Taurus are also high mountains: and there are some very considerable eleva-
tions in the island Owhyhee. Ben Nevis, in Scotland, is the loftiest of the
British hills, but its height is considerably less than a mile. (Plate
XXXVIIL. Fig. 519.) iy


“ The most elevated mountains, excepting the summits of volcanos, con-
sist of rocks, more or less mixed, without regular order, and commonly of
granite or porphyry. These are called primary mountains; they run ge-
nerally from east to west in the old world, and from north to south in the
new; and many of them are observed to be of easier ascent on the east than
on the west side. The secondary mountains accompany them.in the same
direction, they consist of strata, mostly calcarious and argillaceous, that is,
of the nature of limestone and clay, with a few animal and vegetable re-
mains, in an obscure form, together with salt, coals, and sulphur. The ter-
tiary mountains are still smaller; and in these, animal and vegetable remains
are very abundant; they consist. chiefly of limestone, marble, alabaster,
building stone, mill stone, and chalk, with beds of flint. Where the se-
condary and tertiary mountains are intersected by vallies, the opposite strata
often correspond at equal heights, as if the vallies had been cut or washed
from between them, byt sometimes the mountains have their strata disposed
as if they had been elevated by an internal force, and- their en had
afterwards crumbled away, the strata which are lowest in the plains being
highest in the mountains. The strata of these mountains are often inter-


mixed with veins of metal, running in all possible directions, and occupying —


vacuities which appear to be of somewhat Jater date than the original forma-
tion of the mountains. .The volcanic mountains interrupt those of every


other description without any regularity, as if their sieeiieauensnd ‘al =


dependent of that of all the rest. vetad “yeast aie NOULTS iat
t* ¢aebie » ti Fists
_ The internal constitution of the earth is si eal digi ra
tion, for the depths to which we have penetrated are ¢ tively oe
considerable, the deepest mine acareely nana Biahinbibieif| +


ON GEOGRAPHY. 575


It appears that the strata are more commonly in a direction nearly horizontal
than in any other; and their thickness is usually almost equable for some
little distance; but they are not disposed in the order of their specific gravity,
and the opinion of their following each other in a similar series, throughout
the greater part of the globe, appears to rest on very slight foundations.

From observations on the attraction of the mountain Shehallion, Dr.
Maskelyne inferred the actual mean density of the earth to be to that of
water as 4} to 1, judging from the probable density of the internal substance
of the mountain, which he supposed to be a solid rock. Mr. Cavendish has
concluded more directly, from experiments on a mass of lead, that the mean
denisity of the earth is to that of water as 5; to 1. Mr. Cavendish’s experi-
ments, which were performed with the apparatus invented and procured’ by
the late Mr. Michell, appear to have been conducted with all possible ac-
curacy, and must undoubtedly be preferred to conclusions drawn from the
attraction of a mountain, of which the internal parts are perfectly unknown
to us, except by conjectures founded on its external appearance. Supposing
both series of experiments and calculations free from error, it willonly follow
that the internal parts of Shehallion are denser, and perhaps more metallic,
than was before imagined. The density assigned by Mr. Cavendish is not
at all greater than might be conjectured from observations on the vibrations of
pendulums; Newton had long ago advanced it as a probable supposition that
the mean density of the earth might be about 5 or 6 times as great as that of
water, and the perfect agreement of the result of many modern experiments
with this conjecture affords us a new proof, in addition to many others, of
thé accuracy and penetration of that illustrious philosopher.


- : a at <= |


576


LECTURE XLVII.


ON THE TIDES. a


"THE form and structure of the solid parts of the globe have afforded but
few remarkable features capable of arresting our attention, except the general
distribution of land and water, and the permanent differences of elevation of ai
different parts of the earth, But the sea exhibits a series of phenomena far why
more interesting to the mathematical philosopher, because they admit of a
“methodical investigation, and of a deduction from general causes, the action
of which may be traced in detail. For the height of the surface of the sea
at any given place is observed to be liable to periodical variations, which, are

found to depend on the relative position of the moon, combined in some
measure with that of the sun. These variations are called tides; they were
too obvious to escape the observation even of the ancients, who inhabited
countries where they are least conspicuous: for Aristotle mentions the tides
of the northern seas, and remarks that they vary with the moon, and are less
conspicuous in small seas than in the ocean ; Caesar, Strabo, : Pliny, Seneca, -
and Macrobius give also tolerably nsautplepornyat of them. a ;


nh Hin
There are in the tides thoee orders” of phenomena. which, ae,

distinguishable: the first kind occurs twice a day, the second twice a pues
and the third twice a year. Every day, about the time of t » moon’s ag
passing over the meridian, or a certain number of hours later, a becomes
elevated above its mean height, and at this time it is said to be sh water.
The elevation subsides by degrees, and in about six hours it is low water,
the sea having attained its greatest depression; after this it rises again. when
the moon passes the meridian below the aes ebb and
occur twice a day, but, become daily later and ate r by 50}
which is the excess of a lunar day aboye a 0 Fone, § :
sent een Ss aT Stl te


ON THE TIDES, 577


The second phenomenon is, that the tides are sensibly increased at the time
of the new and full moon; this increase and diminution constitute the spring
and neap tides; the augmentation becomes also still more observable when
the moon is in its perigee, or nearest the earth. The lowest as well as-the
highest water is at the time of the spring tides; the neap tides neither rise so
high nor fall so low.

The third phenomenon of the tides is the augmentation which occurs at the
time of the equinoxes: so that the greatest tides are when a new or full moon
happens near the equinox, while the moon is in its perigee. The effects of
these tides are often still more increased by the equinoctial winds, which
are sometimes so powerful as to produce a greater tide before or after the
equinox, than that which happens in the usual course, at the time of the
equinox itself,


These simple facts are amply sufficient to establish the dependence of the
tides on the moon; they were first correctly explained by Newton as the
necessary consequences of the laws of gravitation, but the theory has been
still*further improved by the labours of later mathematicians. The whole of
the investigations has been considered as the most difficult of all astronomical
problems ; some of the circumstances depend on causes which must probably
remain for ever unknown to us; and unless we could every where measure
the depth of the sea, it would be impossible to apply a theory, even if abso-
lutely perfect, to the solution of every difficulty that might occur. A very in-
judicious attempt has been made to refer the phenomena of the tides to causes
totally different from these, and depending on the annual melting of the
polar ice: the respectability of its author is the only claim which it possesses
even to be mentioned; and a serious confutation of so groundless an opinion
would be perfectly superfluous.


A detached portion of a fluid would naturally assume, by its mutual gra-
Vitation, a spherical form, but if it gravitate towards another body at a
distance, it will become an oblong spheroid of which the axis will point to
the attracting body: for the difference of the attraction of this body on its
different parts will tend to separate them from each other in the greatest part
of the sphere, that is, at all places within the angular distance of 793° from


378 ' LECTURE XLYII.


the line passing through the attracting body, either in the nearer, or in the re-
moter hemisphere; but to urge them towards the centre, although with a smaller
force, in the remaining part. Hence, in order that there may be an equi-
librium, the depth of the fluid must be greatest where its gravitation, .thus
composed, is least; that is, in the line directed towards the attracting body, ©
and it may be shown that it must assume the form of an oblong elliptic spheroid.


If the earth were wholly fluid, and the same part of its surface were
always turned towards the moon, the pole of the spheroid being immediately
under the moon, the lunar tide would remain stationary, the greatest eleva-
tion being at the points nearest to the moon and furthest from her, and the
greatest depression in the circle equally distant from these points; the eleva-
tion being, however, on account of the smaller surface to which it is confined
twice as great as the depression. ‘The actual height of this elevation would
probably be about 40 inches, and the depression 20, making together a tide
of 5 feet. If also the waters were capable of assuming instantly such a form
as the equilibrium would require, the summit of a spheroid equally elevated
would still be directed towards the moon, notwithstanding the earth’s rota-
tion. This may be called the primitive tide of the ocean: but on account of
the perpetual change of place which is required for the accommodation of the
surface to a similar position with respect to the moon, as the earth revolves, —
the form must be materially different from that of such a spheroid of equili-
brium, The force. employed in producing this accommodation may be esti-
mated by considering the actual surface of the sea as that of a wave moving
on the spheroid of equilibrium, and producing in the water a sufficient
velocity to preserve the actual form. We may deduce, from this mode of consi-
dering the subject, a theory of the tides which appears to be more simple and
satisfactory than any which has yet been published: and by comparing the:
tides of narrower seas and lakes with the motions of pendulums suspended on
vibrating centres, we may extend the theory to all possible cases.


If the centre ofa pendulum be made to vibrate, the vibrations of the pen-
dulum itself,when they have arrived at a state of permanence, will be perform-
edin the same time with those of the centre; but the motion of the pendulum
will be either in the same direction with that of the centre, or in a contrary
direction, accordingly as the time of this forced vibration is longer or shorter


ON THE TIDES. 579


than that of the natural vibration of the pendulum; and in the same:manner
it may be shown that the tides either of an open ocean or of a confined lake
may be either direct or inverted with respect to the primitive tide, which
would be produced if the waters always assumed the form of the spheroid of
equilibrium, according to the depth of the ocean, and to the breadth as well
as the depth of the lake. In the case of a direct tide, the time of the passage

tf of the luminary over the meridian must coincide with that of high water, and
in the case of an inverted tide with that of low water.


In order that the lunar tides of an open ocean may be direct, or synchro-
nous, its depth must be greater than 13 miles, and for the solar tides than
14. The less the depth exceeded these limits, the greater the tides would be,
and in all cases they would be greater than the primitive tides. But in fact the
f height of the tides in the open ocean is always far short of that which would

be produced in this manner; it is therefore improbable that the tides are ever
direct in the open ocean, and that the depth of the sea is so great as 13
\ miles. -


In,order that the height of the inverted or remote lunar tides may he five
feet, or equal to that of the primitive tides, the depth of the open sea must
be 6} miles; and if the height is only two feet, which i is perhaps not far from
the truth, the depth must be 3 miles and five sevenths.


The tides of alake or narrow sea differ materially from those of the open
ocean, since the height of the water scarcely undergoes any variation in the
middle of the lake; it must always be high water at the eastern extremity
when it is low water at the western: and this must happen at the time when
‘the places of high and low water, with respect to the primitive tides,
are eapeally: distant from the middle of the lake. Pate XXXVIIL.. Fig.


a cs ah dnc in a lake 100 fathoms deep and less than 8 degrees
; but if it be much wider, they must be inverted. Supposing the depth
ll be direct when the breadth is less than 25°; but if a sea,

, wer 60 or 60 degrees wide, it it must be at least four miles


ae iit: 7 ‘
ta be eee ;


7
'


580 LECTURE XLVIL.


deep, i in order that the time of high water might coincide with that of the
‘moon’s southing,'


Hitherto we have considered the motion of the water as free from all resist-
ance; but where the tides are direct, they must be retarded by the effect of
a resistance of any kind; and where they are inverted, they must be accele-
rated; a small resistance producing, in both cases, a considerable difference in
the time of high water.


Where a considerable tide is observed in the middle of a limited portion of
the sea, it must be derived from the effect of the elevation or depression of
the ocean in its neighbourhood ; and such derivative tides are probably combined
in almost all cases with the oscillations belonging to each particular branch of
the sea. Mr. Laplace supposes that the tides, which are observed in the most |
exposed European harbours, are produced almost entirely by the transmission of ‘
the effect of the main ocean, in about a day and a half; but this opinion does
not appear to be justified by observation; for the interval between the times of-
the high water belonging to the same tide, in any two places between Brestand ©
the Cape of Good Hope, has not been observed to exceed about twelve hours
at most; nor can we trace a greater difference by comparing the state of the
tides at the more exposed situations of St. Helena, the Cape Verd Islands,
the Canaries, the Madeiras, and the Azores, which constitute such a suc-
cession as might be expected to have indicated the progress of the principal
tide, if it had been such as Mr. Laplace supposes. The only part of the
ocean, which we can consider as completely open, lies to the south of the two
great continents, chiefly between the latitudes 30° and 70° south, and the ori-
ginal tide, which happens in this widely extended ocean, where its depth is suffi-
ciently uniform, must take place, according to the theory which has been ad-
vanced, at some time before the sixth lunar hour. It sends a wave into the At-
lantic, which is perhaps 12 or 13 hours in its passage to the coast of France, but
certainly not more. This tide, which would happen at the sixth lunar hour
\ after the moon’s transit, if there were no resistance, is probably sochecked by
the resistance, that the water begins to subside about the fourth, and in some
seas even somewhat earlier, although in others it may follow more nearly
its natural course. There is scarcely a sipgle instance which favours the


ON THE 1 penns. 581


shppotstion of the time of high water in the open sea being within an hour
of the moon’s southing, as it must be if the depth were very great: so that
neither the height of the tides nor the time of high water will allow us to
suppose the sea any where quite so deep as 4 miles.


The tide entering the Atlantic appears to advance northwards at the rate of
about 500 miles an hour, corresponding to a depth of about 3 miles, so as to
reach Sierra Leone at the. 8th hour after. the moon’s southing; this part of
Africa being not very remote from the meridian of the middle of the south
Atlantic ocean, and having little share in the primitive tides of that ocean.
‘The southern tide seems then to pass by Cape Blanco and Cape Bojador, to
arrive at Gibraltar at the 13th hour, and to unite its effects with those of other
tides at various parts of the coast of Europe.


We may therefore consider the Atlantic as a detached sea about 3500 miles
broad and 3 miles deep; ‘and a sea of these dimensions is susceptible of tides
considerably larger than those of the ocean, but how much larger we
cannot determine without more accurate measures. These tides would happen
on the European coasts, if there were no resistance, alittle less than 5 hours
after the moon’s southing, and on the coast of America, a little more than
seven hours after; but the resistance opposed to the motion of the sea may
easily accelerate the time of high water in both cases about two hours, so
“that it may be a little before the third hour on the western coasts of Europe
and of Africa, and before the fifth on the most exposed parts of the eastern
coastof America; apd in the whole of the Atlantic, this tide may be com-
bined more or less both with the general southern tide, and with the par-
tial effects of local elevations or depressions of the bottom of the sea, which
may cause irregularities of various kinds. The southern tide is, however,
probably less considerable than has sometimes been supposed, for, in the
latitudes in which it must originate, the extent of the elevation can only
be half as great as at the equator; and the Islands of Kergulen’s Land
and South Georgia, in the latitudes of about 50° and 55°, have their
tides delayed till the 10th and 11th hours, apparently because they receive
them principally from distant parts of the ocean, which are nearer to the
equator,

Ac


582 LECTURE XLVII.
“<—e aaer : 4


On the western coasts of Europe, from Ireland to Cadiz, on those of Africa, — |
from Cape Coast to the Cape of Good Hope, and on the Coast of America, y |
California to the streights of Magellan,as well as in the neighbouring islands, ‘
it is usually high water at some time between two and four hours after the
moon’s southing; on the eastern coast of South America between four and six,
on that of North America between seven and eleven; and on the eastern coasts
of Asia and New Holland between four and eight. The Society islands are
perhaps too near the middle of the Pacific ocean to partake of the effects of
its primitive tide, and their tide, being secondary, is probably for this
reason a few hours later. At the Almirantes,near the eastern coast of Africa,
the tide is at the sixth hour; but there seem to be some irregularities in the
tides of the neighbouring islands. ‘

The progress of a tide may be very distinctly traced from its source in
the ocean into the narrow and shallow branches of the sea which constitute '
our channels. ‘hus the tide is an hour or two later at the Scilly Islands ay
than in the Atlantic, at Plymouth three, at Cork, Bristol, and Weymouth
four, at Caen and Havre six, at Dublin and Brighthelmstone seven, at
Boulogne and Liverpool eight, at Dover near nine, at the Nore eleven, and
at London bridge twelve and a half. Another portion appears to proceed
round Ireland and Scotland into the North Sea; it arrives from the Atlantic
at Londonderry in about three hours, at the Orkneys in six, at Aberdeen in
eleven, at Leith in fourteen, at Leostoffe in twenty, and at the Nore in
about twenty four, so as to meet there the subsequent tide coming from the
south. From the time occupied by the tide in travelling from the mouth of
the English channel to Boulogne, at the rate of about 50 miles an hour, 3
may calculate that the mean depth of the channel is about 28 fathoms, in-
dependently of the magnitude of the resistances of various kinds to be over-
come, which require us to suppose the depth from 30 to 40 fathoms. In
the great river of Amazons, the effects of the tides are still sensible at the
streights of Pauxis, 500 miles from the sea, after an interval of several days
spent in their passage up: for the slower progressive motion of the water no
more impedes the progress of a wave against the stream; than the velocity
of the wind prevents the transmission of sound in a contrary direction.

(Plate XXXVIII. Fig. 521.)


ON THE TIDEs. $83


Such are the general outlines of the lunar tides; they are, however, liable
to a great variety of modifications, besides their combination with the tides
produced by the sun. When the moon is exactly. over the equator, the
highest part of the remoter, or inferior, as well as of the nearer or superior
tides, passes also over the equator, and the effect of the tide in various lati-
tudes decreases gradually from the equator to the pole, where it vanishes;
but when the moon has north or south declination, the two opposite summits
of the spheroid describe parallels of latitude, remaining always diametr ically
opposite to each other. Hence the two successive tides must be unequal at
every place except the equator, the greater tide happening when the nearer
elevation passes its meridian : and the mean between both is somewhat smaller
than the equal tides which happen when the moon passes the equator. This
inequality is, however, much less considerable than it would be if the sea
assumed at once the form of the spheroid of equilibrium ; and the most
probable reasons for this circumstance, are, first, that our tides are partly de-
rived from the equatorial seas; secondly, that the effects of a preceding tide
are in some measure continued so as to influence the height of a succeeding
one; and, thirdly, that the tides of a narrow sea are less affected by its lati-
tude than those of a wide ocean. The height of the sea at low water is the
same whatever the moon’s declination may be. There is also a slight differ-
ence in the tides, according to the place of the moon’s nodes, which allows
her declination to be greater or less, and this difference is most observable in
high latitudes, for instance, in Iceland ; since, in the neighbourhood of the
poles, the tides depend almost entirely on the declination. —


Tn all these cases, the law of the elevation and depression of each tide may
be derived, like that of the vibrations of a pendulum and ofa balance, from
the uniform motion ofa point ina circle. ‘Thus, if we conceive a circle to be
placed in a vertical plane, having its diameter equal to the whole magnitude
of the tide, and touching the surface of the sea at low water, the point, in
which the surface meets the circumference of the circle, will advance with a
uniform motion, so that if the circle be divided into 12 parts, the point. will
pass over each of these parts in alunar hour, It sometimes happens, how-
ever, in confined situations, that the rise and fall of the water deviates con-
siderably. from this law, and the tide rises somewhat more rapidly than it
falls; and in rivers, for example in the Severn, the tide frequently advances


584 ; EECTURE XLVII.


‘suddenly with a head of several feet in height. These deviations probably
depend on the magnitude of the actual displacement of the water, which in
such cases bears a considerable proportion to the velocity of the tide, while
in the open ocean a very minute «progressive motion ‘is sufficient to produce
the. whole elevation.. The actual progress of the tides: may be most con-
veniently observed, by means of a pipe descending to some distance below the
surface, so as to be beyond the reach of superficial: agitations, and having
_ within it afloat, carrying a wire, and indicating the height of the water on a
scale properly divided. ip


We have hitherto considered the tides so far only as they are occasioned
by the moon; but in fact the tides, as-they actually exist, depend also on
the action of the sun, which produces a'series of effects precisely similar to
those of the moon, although much less conspicuous, on account of the
greater distance of the sun, the solar tide being only about two fifths of the
lunar. These tides take place independently of. each other, nearly in the
same degree as if both were single; and the combination resulting from


them is alternately increased and diminished, accordingly as they agree, or ~


disagree, with respect to the time of high water at a given place; in the


same manner as if two series of waves, equal among themselves, of which -


the breadths are as 29 to 30, be supposed to pass in the same direction over
the surface of a fluid, or if two sounds similarly related be heard at the same
time, a periodical increase and diminution of the joint effect will in either
case be produced. Hence are derived the spring and neap tides, the effects
of the sun and moon being united at the times of conjunction and opposition,
er of the new and full moon, and opposed at the quadratures, or first and
last quarters. The high tides at the times of the equinoxes are produced by
the joint operation of the sun and moon, when both of them are so situated
as to act more powerfully than elsewhere.


The lunar tide being much larger than the solar tide, it must always de-
termine the time of high and low water, which, in the spring and neap tides,
remains unaltered by the effect of the sun; so that in the neap tides, the
actual time of low water is that of the solar high water; but at the inter-
mediate times, the lunar high water is more or less accelerated or retarded.
The progress of this alteration may easily be traced by means of a simple


$ ON THE TIDES. 585


construction. If we make a triangle of. which two of the sides are two feet
and five feet in length, the external angle which they form being equal to
twice the distance of the luminaries, the third side will show precisely the
magnitude of the compound tide, and the halves of the two angles opposite
to the first two sides the acceleration, or retardation, of the times of high
water belonging to the separate tides respectively. Hence it appears that
’ the greatest deviation of the joint tide from the lunar tide amounts to 11°
48’ in longitude, and the time corresponding, to 47 minutes, supposing the
proportion of the forces to remain: always the same; but in fact the forces
increase in proportion as the cubes of the -distances of their respective lu-
-minaries diminish, as well as from other causes; and in order to determine
their joint effects, the lengths of the sides of the triangle must be varied ac-
cordingly. In some ports, from a combination of circumstances in the chan-
nel, by which the tides reach them, or in the seas, in which they originate,
the influence of the sun and moon may acquire a proportion somewhat dif-
ferent from that which naturally belongs to them: thus at Brest, the in-
fluence of the moon appears ‘to be three times as great as that of the sun;
when it is usually only twice and a half as ‘great. (Plate XXXVIII.
Fig. 522.) ;


The greatest and least tides do not happen immediately at the times of the
new and full moon, but at least two, and commonly three tides after, even
at those places which are most immediately exposed to the effects of the
general tide of the ocean. The theory which has been advanced will afford
us a very satisfactory reason for this circumstance; the resistance of fluids
in general is as the square of the velocity, consequently it must be much
greater for the lunar than for the solar tide, in proportion to the magnitude
of the force, atid the acceleration of the lunar tide produced by this cause
must be greater than that of the solar; hence it may happen that when the
lunar tide occurs two or three hours efter the transit of the moon, the solar
tide may be three or four hours after that of the sun, so as to be about an
hour later, at the times of conjunction and opposition, and the tides will
be highest when the moon passes the meridian about an hour after the sun;
while at the precise time of the new and full moon, the lunar tide will be
retarded about a quarter of an hour by the effect of the solar tide.


536 LECTURE XLvIr.


The particular forms of the channels, through which the tides arrive at dif- ~
ferent places, produce in them a great variety of local modifications; of
which the most usual is, that from the convergence of the shores of the chan-
nels, the tides rise to a much greater height than in the open sea. Thus at
Brest the height of the tides is about 20 feet, at Bristol 30, at Chepstow 40,
at St. Maloes 50; and at Annapolis Royal, in the Bay of Fundy, as much
sometimes as 100 feet; although perhaps in some of these cases a partial


oscillation of a limited portion of the sea may be an immediate effect of the


attraction of the luminary. In the Mediterranean the tides are generally
inconsiderable, but they are still perceptible; at Naples they sometimes
amount to a foot, at Venice to more than two feet, and in the Euripus, for-
acertain number of days in each lunation, they are very distinctly obsery- (
able, from the currents which they occasion. In the West Indies,also,andin the — :
gulfof Mexico, the tides are less marked than in the neighbouring seas, perhaps
on account of some combinations derived from the variations of the depth ag hh,
of the ocean, and from the different channels by which they are propagated.
» ey neil

In order to understand the more readily the effects of such combinations,
we may imagine a canal, as large as the river of Amazons, to communicate
at both its extremities with the ocean, so as to receive at each an equal series —
of tides, passing towards the opposite extremity. If we suppose the tides to.
enter at the same instant at both ends, they will meet in the middle, and
“continue their-progress without interruption: precisely in the middle the —
times of high and low water belonging to each series will always coincide, —
and the effects will be doubled; and the same will happen at the points,
where a tide arrives from one extremity at the same instant that an earlier —
or a later tide comes from the other; but at the intermediate points the —
effects will be diminished, and at some of them completely destroyed, where —
the high water of one tide coincides with the low water of another. The
tides at the port of Batsha in Tonkin have been explained by ae
considerations of this nature. In this port there is only one tide in a
itis high water at the sixth lunar hour, or at the moon's setti
has north declination, and at her rising, when’ hie
and when the moon has no declination there st 10 |
this circumstance, we may represent the two uneq
succession every day, by combining with two oes “ides


ON THE TIDES. 587


dependent of them, and happening only once a day; then, if'a point be so
situated in the canal which we have been considering, that the effects of the
two equal semidiurnal tides may be destroyed, those of the daily tides only
will remain to be combined with each other ; and their joint result will
be a tide as much greater than either, as the diagonal of a square is
greater than its side; the times of high and low water being intermediate


‘between those which belong to the diurnal tides considered separately.


Thus, in the port of Batsha, the greater tide probably arrives at the third
lunar hour directly from the Pacific ocean, and at the ninth from the gulf of
Siam, having passed between Sumatra and Borneo; so shat the actual time
of high water is at the sixth lunarhour. The magnitude of this compound
tide is by no means inconsiderable; it sometimes amounts to'as much as
13 feet. (Plate XXXVIII. Fig. 5¢3, 524.) F

Besides the variations in the height of the sea, which constitute the tides,
the attractions of the sun and moon are also supposed to occasion a retardation
in its rotatory motion, in consequence of which it is left a little behind the
solid parts of the earth ; and a current is produced, of which the general
direction is from east to west. This current comes from, the Pacific and
Indian oceans, round the Cape of Good Hope, along the coast of Africa,
then crosses to America, and is there divided and reflected southwards to-
wards the Brazils, and northwards into the Gulf stream, which travels round
the gulf of Mexico, and proceeds north eastwards into the neighbourhood
of Newfoundland, and then probably eastwards and south eastwards once
more across the Atlantic. It is perhaps on account of these currents that
the Red Sea is found to be about 25 feet higher than the Mediterranean:
their direction may possibly have been somewhat changed in the course of
many ages, and with it the level of the Mediterranean also; since the floor
of the cathedral at Ravenna is now several feet lower with respect to the sea
than it is supposed to have been formerly, and some steps have been found
in the rock of Malta, apparently intended for ascending it, which are at
present under water.


The atmosphere is also liable to elevations and depressions analogous to
those of the sea, and perhaps these changes may have some little effect on
the winds and on the weather; but their influence must be very inconsider


588 LECTURE XLVII. ,


able, since the addition of two or three feet to the height of the atmosphere


at any part can scarcely be expected to be perceptible. The height of an
aerial tide must be very nearly the same with the observed height of the


principal tides of the sea; and the variation of atmospherical pressure, which


is measured by the difference between the actual form and the spheroid of
equilibrium, must be equivalent to the weight of a column of about 10 feet.
of air, or only +4. of an inch of mercury. A periodical variation five times.
as great as this has indeed been observed near the equator, where the state of
the atmosphere is the least liable to accidental disturbances; but this change
cannot in any degree be referred to the effect of the moon’s action, since it
happens always about the same hour of the day or night. The atmosphere is
also affected by a general current from east to west, like that of the sea, and
there is reason, from astronomical observations, to suppose that a similar
circumstance happens in the atmosphere of Jupiter, on account of the actions
of his satellites, which must be considerably more powerful than that of sas


moon. 5


589


LECTURE XLVIII.


ON THE HISTORY OF ASTRONOMY.


WE have now taken a general view of the most striking phenomena of the
‘universe at large, of the great features of the solar system, and of the pecu-
_liarities of the planet which we inhabit, with respect both to its solid and to
"its fluid parts, All these are departments of astronomy, and we shall con-
“elude, our examination of the subject with a summary of the history of the
science, principally extracted and abridged from Laplace’s Exposition du
systéme du monte,


Tn all probability the astronomy of the earliest ages was confined to ob-
servations of the obvious motions and eclipses of the sun and moon, the
rising, setting, and occultations of the principal stars; and the apparent mo-
tions of the planets. The progress of the sun was followed, by remarking
the stars as they were lost in the twilight, and perhaps also by the variation
of the length of the shadow ofa detached object, observed at the time of the
day when it was shortest. In order to recognise the fixed stars, and their
different m tions, the heavens were divided into constellations; and twelve
of these upied the zone denominated the zodiac, within the limits of
which thes and planets were always found.


. ithe gatrance of the sun into the constellation aries, or the ram, denoted»
in the time of Hipparchus, the beginning of the spring; and as the season
the sun continued his progress through the bull, the twins, and
in order; some of which appear to have been denominated from
to the agriculture and to the climates of the countries in which
ned, and others from the celestial phenomena attending the sun’s
them; the crab, for example, denoting his retrograde motion
ae of the solstice, and the balance the equality of day and
4D ‘


590 LECTURE XLVIIT.


night at the autumnal equinox. But the motion of the equinoctial points
having changed in some degree the course of the seasons with regard to the
stars, the signs of the ecliptic, by which the places of the sun and planets
are described, no longer coincide precisely with the constellations of the
zodiac from which they derive their names.


ciently accurate to be employed in astro omical calculations, are those made
at Babylon in the years 719 and 720 before the Christian era, of three
eclipses of the moon, Ptolemy, who has’ transmitted them to us, employed
them for determining the period of the moon’s mean motion, and, therefore,
had probably none more ancient on which he could depend, The Chaldeans,
however, must have made a long series of observations before they could
discover their.Saros or lunar period of 6585} days, or about 18 years, in
which, as they had learnt at a very early time, the place of the moon, her node,
and apogee, return nearly to the same situation with respect to the earth and
sun, and of course a series of nearly similar eclipses recurs. The observations
attributed to Hermes indicate a date seven hundred years earlier than those of
the Babylonians, but their authenticity appears to be extremely doubtful.


The most-ancient observations of oxen are in possession, that are suffi-


The Egyptians were very early acquainted with the length of the year, as
consisting nearly of 365 days and a quarter, and they derived from it their
Sothic period of 1460 years, containing 365 days each. The accurate corres- _
pondence of the faces of their pyramids with the points of the compass is con-
sidered as a proof of the precision of their observations: but their greatest ‘
merit was the discovery that Mercury and Venus revolve round the sun,and not
round the earth, as it had probably been before believed: they did not, however,
suppose the same of the superior planets. (Plate XX XVIII. Fig. by 526.)


In Persia and in India, the origin of astronomy is lost in the darkness
which envelopes the early history of those countries. We find the annals of |
no country so ancient and so well authenticated as those of China, which are
confirmed by an incontestable series of historical monuments. The regula-
tion of the calendar, and the prediction of eclipses, were regarded in this
country as important objects, for which a mathematical tribunal was esta~
blished at a very carly period. But the scrupulous attachment of the Chinese


ON THE HISTORY OF ASTRONOMY. 591


to their ancient customs, extending itself even to their astronomy, has im-
peded its progress, and retained it in a state of infancy. The Indian tables
indicate a much higher degree of perfection in the early state of the science,
than it had attained in China; but we have every reason to believe that they
are not of very remote antiquity. ‘* Here”, says Mr. Laplace, who must be
allowed to be free from prejudices in favour of established opinions, ‘* I am
sorry to be obliged to differ from an illustrious philosopher, Mr. Bailly, who,
after having distinguished his career by a variety of labours useful to the
sciences, and to mankind at large, fell a victim to the most sanguinary ty-
ranny that ever disgraced a civilised nation. The Indian tables are referred
to two principal epochs, which are placed the one 3102 years before Christ,
' _ the other 1491. These are connected by the mean motions, and not the
ie true motions, of the sun, the moon, and the planets; so that one of the
- epochs must necessarily be fabulous. The celebrated author, who has been
mentioned, has sought to establish, in his treatise on Indian astronomy, that
the former of these epochs is founded on observation. But if we calculate
from our own improved tables, we shall find that the general conjunction of
the sun, moon, and planets, which the Indian tables suppose, in reality never
happened, although it may be deduced, according to those tables, by ascend-
ing from the later series. The equation of the sun’s centre, depending on
the eccentricity of the earth’s orbit, appears indeed to indicate a still higher
antiquity; but its magnitude, as deduced from eclipses, must have been
Ei affected by a contrary error with respect to the moon’s place: and the de-
termination of the mean motion of the moon seems to make it probable that
_ these tables are even of a later date than Ptolemy.”

agp 7h, ta ;
_ In astronomy, aa arenas in other sciences, the Greeks were the disciples of
_ the Egyptians; they appear to have divided the stars into constellations 13 or
___- 1400 years before Christ. Newton attributes this arrangement to Chiron, and
~ __ hesupposes that he made the middle of the constellations correspond to the
anes ‘the respective signs. But until the time of the foundation of
the schoo | of Alexandria, the Greeks treated astronomy as a science purely
ve, arid indulged themselves in the most frivolous conjectures respect-
is singular that amidst the confusion of systems heaped up on each
out “sca the least information to the mind, it should never have


592 LECTURE XLVIII.


occurred to men of so great talents, that the only way to become accurately ace


quainted with nature, is to institute experimental inquiries throughout her works.


Thales of Miletus, who was born in the year 640 before Christ, having
travelled and studied in Egypt, founded, on his return, the Ionian school of
philosophy, in which he taught the sphericity of the earth, and the obliquity


of the ecliptic with respect to the equator. He also explained the true causes"
of eclipses, which he was even able to foretel, unquestionably by means of


the information that he had obtained from the Egyptian priests. —


Pythagoras of Samos was born 590 years before Christ; he probably profited


by the information which Thales had acquired, and travelled also into Egypt
for his further improvement. It is conjectured that he was acquainted with
the diurnal and annual motions of the earth, but he did not publicly profess
the true system of the world. It was taught after his death, by his disciple
Philolaus, about the year 450, as well as by Nicetas, and by others of the
school. They considered all the planets as revdlving round the sun, and as
inbabited globes; and they understood that the comets were only eccentric
planets. Some time after this, the lunar period of Meto was. publicly made
known at the Olympic games, and was universally adopted as the basis of
the calendar. (Plate XXXVIII. Fig. 597.) _
‘ ae y
The next occurrence which deseryes to be noticed, with respect to astronomy

is the foundation of the school of Alexandria, which was the first source of
accurate and continued observations. Upon the death of Alexander, and the


subsequent division of his empire, the province of Egypt fell to the lot of |


Ptolemy Soter; a prince whose love of science, and whose munificence towards


its professors, attracted to his capital a great number of learned men from


various parts of Greece. His son, Ptolemy Philadelphus, continued and in-
creased the benefits conferred on them by his father, and built the magnificent


edifice which contained, together with the celebrated library, collected by


Demetrius Phalereus, an observatory, furnished with the necessary books
and instruments. The first astronomers, who were appointed to occupy this


building, were Aristyllus and Timocharis; they flourished about S00 years —


before Christ, and observed with accuracy the places of the principal stars of


«<2


ON THE HISTORY OF ASTRONOMY. 593


the zodiac. Aristarchus of Samos was the next: he imagined a method of
finding the sun’s distance, by observing the portion of the moon’s disc-that is
enlightened, when she is precisely in the quadrature, or 90° distant from the
sun; and although he failed in his attempt to determine the sun’s distance
with accuracy, yet he showed that it was much greater than could at that
time have been otherwise imagined; and he asserted that the earth was but
as a point in comparison with the magnitude of the universe. His estimation
of the distance of the sun is made by Archimedes the basis of a calculation
of the number of grains of sand that would be contained in the whole
heavenly sphere, intended as an illustration of the powers of numerical
reckoning, and of the utility of a decimal system of notation, which was the
foundation of the modern arithmetic.


Eratosthenes, the successor of Aristarchus, is known by his observation
of the obliquity of the ecliptic, and his measurement of a certain portion
of the earth’s circumference; the whole of which he determined to
be 250000 stadia; but the length of his stadium is uncertain. Pto-
lemy, calculating perhaps from the same measures, or from some others —
still more ancient, calls it 180000; which, if the stadium is determined from
the Nilometer at Cairo, and from the base of the pyramid, is within one
thousandth part of the truth, the length of the base of the pyramid being equal
to 400 Egyptian cubits, or to 729 feet 10 inches English.


Hipparchus of Bithynia flourished at Alexandria about the year 140 before
Christ. Employing the observations of Timocharis, and comparing them
with his own, he discovered the precession of the equinoxes. He also
observed that the summer was 9 days longer than the winter, and that the
solstices divided each of these seasons a little unequally. _In order to explain
this, Hipparchus supposed the sun to move uniformly in an eccentric circle,
the distance of its centre from that of the earth being ., of the radius, and
placed the apogee in the sixth degree of gemini, Probably the annual equa-
tion of the moon, which has some influence on the time of eclipses, was the
cause of his making the eccentricity too great; had he assumed it but one
fifth. part less, the supposition would have represented the sun’s place with
tolerable accuracy. Hipparchus appears to have been the first that employed


‘594 LECTURE XLVITt.


‘astronomical observations for determining the latitudes and long eeenee
places. ; ‘


The interval of three centuries, which elapsed between Hipparchus and
Ptolemy, offers us little that is remarkable in the progress of astronomy,
“except the reformation of the calendar, by Julius Caesar, who was assisted in
making the arrangement by Sosigenes, an astronomer of the same school that
gave birth to all the preceding discoveries, as well as to the improvements of
Ptolemy. This great astronomer was born at Ptolemais in Egypt, and
flourished about the year 140 of our era, He continued the vast ‘project,


begun by Hipparchus, of reforming the whole science which he studied. He d
discovered the evection of the moon, or the change of her velocity, occasion- {9


ed by the position of the apogee with respect to the sun; he determined the
quantity of this equation with great precision ; and in order to represent it,
he supposed the moon to performa subordinate revolution in an epicyele, or a
smaller circle, of which the centre was carried round in the line of the general
orbit, which he considered as an eccentric circle. This mode of approxima-
tion is exceedingly ingenious; it is said to have been the invention of Apol-
lonius of Perga, the mathematician, and although it sometimes becomes com-
plicated, yet it is very convenient for calculation; and it may be employed
with advantage in the representation of the planetary motions’ by machinery.
Ptolemy adopted the most ancient opinion with respect to the solar system,
supposing all the heavenly bodies to revolve round the earth; the moon
being nearest, then Mercury, Venus, the Sun, Mars, Jupiter, and

This opinion had long been the most general, although some astronomers ha
placed Mercury and Venus at greater distances than the sun, and: es .
tributed to the earth a diurnal motion only; but the doctrine of the Pytha- —
goreans appears to have been wholly exploded or forgotten. Ptolemy deter-
mined the quantity of the precession of the equinoxes from a comparison of —
his own observations with those of Hipparchus; but he made it smaller than
the truth; and he probably formed his table og the places of the stars by
applying this erroneous correction to the tables of Hipparehus, in order to
accommodate theth to his own time. Both these errors may, however, be
otherwise explained, by supposing him to have followed Hipparchus ia the
length of the tropical year, which being somewhat too great, caused an error


ON THE HISTORY OF ASTRONOMY. 595


f in the calculation of the sun’s place, to which that of the stars was referred ;
__ but upon this supposition, he must also have been mistaken in three obser-

; vations of the place of the equinoctial. points. Ptolemy's principal work is
his mathematical system of astronomy, which was afterwards called the great
| syntax or body of astronomy, and is at present frequently quoted by the
neta Arabic name Almagest. He also wrote a treatise on optics, ‘in which the
phenomena of atmospherical iefraction are described, and which is extant
in manuscript in the National library at Paris, (Plate XXXVILL Fig.


528.
: eli | :
Let Ptolemy was the last as well as the greatest of the Alexandrian astronomers»
i and the science made no further progress till the time of the Arabians, The .
Bia, first of these was Almamoun, was the son of the celebrated Aaron Reschid;
ei he reigned at Bagdad in $14, and having conquered the Greek emperor, |


Michael the Third, he made it a condition of peace, that a copy of the works
oft each of the best Greek authors should be delivered to him; and among
y them were the works of Ptolemy, of which he procured an Arabic transla~
tion. Almamoun also observed the obliquity of the ecliptic, and measured
the length of a degree in the plains of Mesopotamia. © 1 6. u
£7 > ERagpyg > a3! . i Gn j il
Among the astronomers protected by this prince and his successors, Al-
bategni was the most eminent. He ascertained with great accuracy, in-880,
the eccentricity of the solar motion, and discovered the change of the place of
the sun’s apogee, or of the earth’s aphelion. © is
44 Re > 4 9 (44 Fe ee ;
‘ unis made his observations at Cairo, about the: year 1000; he was a
us astronomer, and determined the length of the year within
truth. At this time the Arabians were in the habit of em-
ir observations, the vibrations of a pendulum.
Mite ds ; ed kad yd Wiis & iy
sians, soon, after applied themselves to astronomy; and. in the
ry they invented the approximation of reckoning § bissextiles
which was afterwards proposed: by Dominie Cassini as. an im-
egorian calendar. The most illustrious of this nation
, who observed in ship .oapital ‘Samarcand, about the year
y ¢laborate instruments. In the mean time Cocheouking had


hi {90 if


im a of .
acon ak Atal
; ae gel = Ve


$96 LECTURE XLVIII.


made in China, some very accurate observations, which are valuable for the |
precision with which they ascertain the obliquity of the ecliptic: serie date is
about 1978. '


It was not long after the time of Ulugh Beigh, that Copernicus laid the -
foundation of the more accurate theories which modern improvements have
introduced into astronomy. Dissatisfied with the complicated hypotheses of
the Ptolemaean system, he examined the works of the ancients, in quest of
more probable opinions. He found from Cicero that Nicetas and other
Pythagoreans had maintained, that ‘the sun is placed in the centre of the
system, and that the earth moves round him in common with the other
planets. He applied this idea to the numerous observations which the dili- i
gence of astronomers had accumulated, and he had the satisfaction to find ie
them all in perfect conformity with this theory. He quickly discarded the j
Ptolemaean epicycles, imagined in order to explain the alternations of the
direct and retrograde motions of the planets; in these remarkable phenomena, —
Copernicus saw nothing but the consequences necessarily produced by the” \, ,
combination of the motions of the earth and planets round the sun; and from — |
a minute examination of these circumstances he calculated the relative dis-
tances of the planets from the sun, which till then had remained unknown. .
In this system, every thing had the marks of’ that beautiful simplicity which : >
pervades all the works of nature, and which, when once understood, carries with
itself sufficient evidence of its truth, Copernicus was born at Thorn, in Polish
Prussia, in the year 1475; he studied in Italy; he taught mathematics at
Rome, and afterwards settled on a canonicate at Frauenberg, where, in
36 years of retirement and meditation, he completed his work on the celes-
tial revolutions, which was scarcely published when he died.


About this time, William the Fourth, Landgrave of Hesse Cassel, not only
enriched astronomy by his own observations, but also exerted his influence —
with Frederic, King of Denmark, to obtain his patronage for the celebrated
Tycho Brahe. Frederic agreed to give him the little island Huen, at the
entrance of the Baltic, where Tycho built his observatory of Uraniburg;
and, in a period of 21 years, made a prodigious collection of accurate obser-
vations. After the death of his patron, his progress was impeded, and he
sought an establishment at Prague, under the emperor Rudolph, Here he


o


ON THE HISTORY OF ASTRONOMY. 507


died soon after, at the age of 55. Struck with the objections made to the
system of Copernicus, principally such as were deduced from a misinterpre-


tation of the scriptures, he imagined a new theory, which, although mechani-’


cally absurd, is still astronomically correct; for he supposed the earth to
remain at rest in the centre, the stars to revolve round it, together with the
sun and all the planets, in a sidereal day, and the sun ‘to have, besides, an
annual motion, carrying with him the planets in their orbits. Here the
apparent or relative motions are precisely the same as in the Copernican
system; the argument that Tycho Brahe drew from the scriptures in favour
of his theory was, therefore, every way injudicious; for it is not to be
imagined that any thing but relative motion or rest could be intended in the
scriptures, when the sun is said to move, or to stand still. But in the Copernican
system, there was an evident regularity in the periods of all the planets, that
of the earth being longer than that of Venus, and shorter than that of Mars,
which were the neighbouring planets on each side; and when Tycho imagined
the sun to move round the earth, this analogy was entirely lost. Tycho
Brahe was the discoverer of the variation and of the annual equation of the
moon, the one being an irregularity in its velocity, dependent on its position
with respect to the sun, the other a change in the magnitude of all the per-
turbations produced by the sun, dependent on his distance frorh the earth.
(Plate XX XVIII. Fig. 529.)


Kepler was the pupil and assistant of Tycho, whose observations were the
basis of his important discoveries: he succeeded him in his appoittments at
Prague, and enjoyed the title of Imperial Mathematician. Adopting the


Copernican system, which was then becoming popular, he proceeded to


examine the distances of the celestial bodies from each other at various times;


and after many fruitless attempts to reconcile thé places of the planets with
the supposition of revolutions in eccentric circles, at last discovered that


their orbits are ‘ellipses, and demonstrated, chiefly ftom. his observations on


the planet Mars, that the revolving radius, or the line drawn from the sun to
‘the planet, always describes equal areas in equal times. By comparing the


‘ioe bd Sie es camsenns of the different — with each other, he


pe 4 ee po ae


598 .)) LECTURE XLVII.


Kepler died in 1630: before his death he had the satisfaction of applying
‘his theory to the motions of the satellites of Jupiter, which, as well as the
phases of Venus, and the spots of the sun, had lately been discovered in Italy
by the telescopic observations of Galileo. This great man, celebrated as
well for his theory of projectiles, as for his zealous defence of the Copernican
system, was born at Pisa in 1564, and lived to the age of 78, full of that
enthusiasm which made him despise the threats of the Inquisition, and submit
patiently to its persecutions. He died in 1642, the year in which Newton
was born.


The invention of logarithms, by Baron Napier, requires to be noticed for


‘ its importance to practical astronomy, and the laborious observations of
Hevelius deserve also to be mentioned with commendation. The discoveries
of the form of the ring of Saturn, and of one of his satellites, by Huygens,
and of four more, together with the belts and rotation of Jupiter,by Dominic
Cassini, were among the early improvements derived from the introduction
of the telescope. But, without dwelling on any of these subjects, we hasten
to the establishment of the system of gravitation, which has immortalised
the name of Newton, and done unrivalled honour to the country that gaye
him birth. ; outs


The mutual attraction of all matter seems to have been suspected by the


Epicureans, but Lucretius never speaks of it in such terms as are sufficient .


to convey by any means a distinct idea of a reciprocal force. Gregory, in
the preface of his Astronomy, has endeavoured to prove that Pythagoras must
have been acquainted even with the law of the decrease of gravitation; and
Lalande appears to assent to his arguments; but they rest only on the bare
possibility that Pythagoras might have deduced an analogy from the tension of


chords,which we have no reason to suppose that he even completely understood: —


and this merely because he fancifully imagined, that there was a correspon-
dence between the planets and the strings of alyre. But the nature of gra-


vitation had long been in some measure suspected ; Plutarch had asserted that —
the moon is retained by it in her orbit, like a stone in a sling; and Bacon, 7


Copernicus, Kepler, Fermat, and Roberval were aware of its efficacy.


Bacon, in his Novum organum, calls the descent of heavy bodies the motion —


‘ON THE HISTORY OF ASTRONOMY. 599


of ‘general congregation”, and attributes the tides to the attraction of the
moon. Kepler mentions also the perfect reciprocality of the action of gravita~
tion, and considers the lunar irregularities as produced by the attraction of the
sun. But our most ingenious countryman, Dr. Hooke, was still more decided
in attributing the revolutions of the planets to the combination of a pro-
jectile i motion with a centripetal force ; he expresses his sentiments on the
subject very clearly in his Attempt to prove the motion of the earth, pub-
j lished in 1674, and had his skill in mathematics been equal to his practical
sagacity, he would probably have completed, or at rs have published,
the discovery before his great cotemporary. ~


‘ is


i
; It must be confessed that Newton’s good fortune was equal to his talents
and his application ; for had he lived earlier, he might probably have con-
fined his genius to speculations purely mathematical; had he been later,
his discoveries in natural philosophy might have been anticipated by others;
and yet Newton would perhaps have improved still more on their labours than
they have done on his. It was in 1676, when he was 34 years old, that he first
demonstrated the necessary connexion of the planetary revolutions in elliptic
i. ‘ orbits, with an attractive force varying inversely as the square of the distance.
But he had collected the law of the force, from the discoveries of Kepler respect-
ing the periods of the different planets, some time before 1671, as he asserts to
Dr. Halley, and, to the best of his recollection, about 1668, although in his
bar he allows, with the most laudable candour, to Wren, Hooke, and Halley,
it of haying made the same discovery, without any connexion with each
"s investigations, or with hisown. The manner, in which Newton was
led to attend particularly to the subject, is thus related by Pemberton, in the
preface to his View of Sir Isaac rs er agi
tals < 4 ht ri} *
The first thoughts,” says Pemberton, ‘ which gave rise to his Principia,
kes when he retired from Cambridge in 1666, on account of the plague.
ne alone _in a garden, he fell into a speculation on the power of gra-
iat as this power is not found sensibly diminished at the remotest
avec rales to which. we can si neither at the


le to conclude, that: ‘Hits power must
Ui hoe! a cipahamlatagal


bal:


600 a ts XLVIII.


said he to himself; and if so, her piven suist be influenced by it; perhaps
she is retained in her orbit thereby. However, though the power of gravity
is not sensibly weakened in the little change of distance, at which we can
place ourselves from the centre of the earth; yet it is very possible that so
high as the moon this power may: differ much in strength from what it is
here. To make an estimate, what might be the degree of this diminution,
he considered with himself, that if the moon be retained in her orbit by the
force of gravity, no doubt the primary planets are carried round the sun by
the like power. And by comparing the periods of the several planets with
their distances from the sun, he found, that if any power like gravity held
them in their courses, its strength must decrease in the duplicate proportion
of the increase of distance. This he concluded by supposing them to move
in perfect circles concentrical to the sun, from which the orbits of the great-
est part of them do not much differ, Supposing, therefore, the power of
gravity, when extended to the moon, to decrease in the same manner, he
computed whether that force would be sufficient to keep the moon in her
orbit. In this computation, being absent from books, he took the common
estimate in use among geographers and our seamen, before Norwood had
measured the earth, that 60 English miles were contained in one degree of
latitude on the surface of the earth. But as this is avery faulty supposition,
‘each degree containing about 69+ of our miles, his computation did not
answer expectation; whence he concluded that some other cause must at least
join with the action of the power of gravity on the moon, On this account
hé laid aside for that time any further thoughts upon this matter, But some
years after, a letter, which he received from Dr. Hooke, put him on inquiring
what was the real figure, in which a body let fall from any high place
descends, taking the motion of the earth round its axis into consideration.
Such a body, having the same motion, which by the revolution of the earth
the place has from whence it falls, is to be considered as projected forwards,
and at the same time drawn down to the centre of the earth, This gave
occasion to his resuming his former thoughts concerning the moon; and
Picart, ‘in France, having lately measured the earth, by using his measures, the
moon appeared to be kept in her orbit purely by the power of gravity; and
consequently, that this power decreases as you recede from the centre of the
earth, in the manner our author had formerly conjectured. Upon this prin-
ciple he found the line described by a falling body to be an ellipsis, the centre


ON THE HISTORY OF ASTRONOMY. é 601


of the earth being one focus, And the primary planets moving in such
orbits round the sun, he had the satisfaction to see, that this inquiry, which


"he had undertaken merely out of curiosity, could be applied to the greatest


purposes, Hereupon he composed near a dozen propositions relating to the
motion of the primary planets about the sun. Several years after this, some
discourse he had with Dr. Halley, who at Cambridge made him a visit,
engaged Sir Isaac. Newton to resume again the consideration of this subject;
and gave occasion to his writing the treatise which he published under the
title of Mathematical principles of natural philosophy. This treatise, full of
such variety of profound inventions, was composed by him, from scarce any
other materials than the few propositions before mentioned, in the space of
one year and a half.” ;


The astronomers of Great Britain have not been less diligent in the practi-
cal, than successful in the theoretical part of the science. The foundation of
the observatory at Greenwich was laid in 1675, some years before the com-_
pletion and publication of the discoveries of Newton. It is with the erection
of this edifice that the modern refinements in practical astronomy may be
said to have commenced; its immediate object was to assist in the perfection
of the science of navigation, and the series of observations, which haye been
made in it, has afforded an invaluable fund of materials to astronomers of
every country. A reward had been proposed, more than half a century
before, by Philip the Third, of Spain, for the discovery of a mode of determin-
ing. the longitude of a ship at sea; and the sfates of Holland had followed
his example: a large reward was also offered by the French government in
the minority of Louis the Fifteenth. In 1674, Mr. St. Pierre, a Frenchman,
had undertaken to determine the longitude of a place from observations of
the moon’s altitude, and King Charles the Second had been induced to.
appoint a commission to examine his proposals. Mr. Flamsteed was con-
sulted by the commissioners, and was added to their number: he showed the
disadvantages of the method proposed by Mr. St. Pierre, and the inaccuracy
of the existing tables of the lunar motions, as wellas of the catalogues of the
places of the stars, but expressed his opinion, that, if the tables were improved,
it would be possible to determine the longitudes of places with suflicient ac-
curaey by lunar observations. The king, being informed of Flamsteed’s repre-


602 LECTURE XLVIII.


sentations, is said to have replied with earnestness, that he ‘‘ must have the
places of the stars anew observed, examined, and corrected, for the use of his sea-
men”; upon this Flamsteed was appointed Astronomer Royal, with a salary of
£100 a year, and it was proposed to have an observatory built either in Hyde
Park, or at Chelsea college; but, upon Sir Christopher Wren’s recommendation,
the situation of Greenwich Park was preferred.


In the year 1714, the British Parliament offered £20 000 for a determina-
tion of the longitude of a ship at sea, without an error of 30 miles, and a
smaller sum for a less accurate method, appointing at the same time a Board
of Longitude for the examination of the methods which might be proposed.
Under this act several rewards were assigned, and in 1774, it was superseded


by another, which offers £5000 for the invention of any timekeeper, or other


method, capable of determining the longitude of a place within 1 degree,
and £10000 if within 30 miles ; and a reward of £5000 to the author of any
lunar tables, which should be found within 15 seconds of the truth; allowing
the Board also the power of granting smaller sums at their discretion. Time-
keepers are at present very commonly employed in the British navy, and some
of them have been capable of determining the longitude within half a degree,
after having been two or three months at sea. The lunar tables, which have
been employed for the Nautical Almanacs, are those of Professor Mayer,
who adopted the methods of calculation invented by Leonard Euler; but
the tables of Mr. Burg, of Vienna, are still more accurate, and are said to
be always within about ten seconds of the truth.


The progress of astronomy, since the death of Newton, in 1727, has been
fully adequate to what its most sanguine votaries could have hoped. The
great discoveries of the aberration of the fixed stars, and of the nutation of
the earth’s axis, were made by our countryman Bradley, with the assistance of
the instruments for which he was indebted to the delicate workmanship: of
our artists. Among these the names of Bird, Short, Sisson, Graham, Dol-
lond, Harrison, and Ramsden have long been celebrated throughout Europe.
The geographical operations, which have been performed in every ‘part of the
globe, have been chiefly conducted by the liberality of the French and English
governments, although other countries haye not been deficient in taking


,


-


——-


er A ie * > «> =e


ON THE HISTORY OF ASTRONOMY. 603


their share of the labour. The observations of the transit of Venus were
twice made in the south seas by British navigators, whom the munificence of
our present sovereign enabled to undertake so arduous a voyage for this
express purpose; and we are indebted to the fund which was granted on the
occasion, as well as to the zeal of the Astronomer Royal, for the experiments
on the attraction of mountains, which were instituted after ‘their return. In
this country also, Dr. Herschel, besides many other important additions to
our astronomical knowledge, has discovered a primary planet, and eight
secondary ones, unknown before. The astronomers of Sicily and Germany
have, however, the honour of the first discovery of the three humbler mem-
bers’ of the solar system which have been last introduced to our acquaintance,


' Ceres by Piazzi, Pallas by Olbers, and Juno by Harding; and the mathe-—


maticians of France have excelled all their predecessors in the elaborate and
refined application of the theory of gravitation, to the investigation of the
most minute and intricate details of the celestial motions.


as A


a


G04 ON THE HISTORY OF ASTRONOMY.


~ HERMES 1450. B.C, CHIRON _ 950. OBSERVATIONS 719. ;


4\00


200 B.C,


HIPPARCHUS.


ALBATEGNI


- Se St | ogee oe Sac we . +
U L|UGH BEIGH -COPIERNIC US.
‘WILLIAM H.


605


a _ LECTURE XLIX.


ON THE ESSENTIAL PROPERTIES OF MATTER.


,


THE objects, which have lately occcupied our inquiries, are .the most
sublime and magnificent that nature any where exhibits to us, and the con-
templation of them naturally excites, éven in an uncultivated mind, an
admiration of their dignity and grandeur. But all magnitude is relative,
and if we examine with more calm attention, ‘we shall find still greater
scope for our investigation and curiosity, in the microscopic, than in. the
telescopic world. . Pliny has very justly observed, that nature no_ where
displays all her powers with greater activity, than in the minutest objects
perceptible to our senses; and we may judge how wide a field of research the
corpuscular affections of matter afford, from the comparatively small progress
that has hitherto been made in cultivating it. For while the motions of the
vast bodies, which roll through the heavens, have been completely subjected
to the most rigorous calculations, we know nothing, but from experience only,
‘Of the analogies by which the minute actions of the particles of matter are
regulated. Itis probable, however, that they all depend ultimately on the same
mechanical principles. We have seen, for example, that the widely extended
elevations and depressions of the ocean, which are raised by the attractive
powers of the two great luminaries, and cover at once a half of the globe, are
governed and combined according to the same laws, which determine the
motions of the smaller waves excited by different causes in a canal, the rapid
tremors of a medium transmitting sound, or the inconceivably diminutive
undulations which are capable of accounting for the phenomena of light, and
which must be exerted in spaces as much smaller than those of sound, as a
grain of sand is smaller than a mountain. Thus the annihilation of the effects
of the semidiurnal changes of the tide, and the preservation of the diurnal
change, in the harbour of Batsha, may be explained precisely in the same
‘manner as the reflection of red light from a transparent substance, of such a
Vou. 1 AF


606 LECTURE XLIX.


Ss he


thickness, as to be capable of destroying a portion of violet light under the
same circumstances. 7


We are at present to descend from the affections of the large masses of matter,
which form the great features of the universe, to the particular properties of
the matter which constitutes them, as far as they are common to all matter
in general; but those properties which are peculiar to certain kinds of matter
only,. being the subjects of chemical science, are not to be included im the —
discussion. If we are asked for a definition of matter, it will be somewhat
difficult to avoid all circuitous expressions. We may make gravitation a test of
matter, but then we must say, that whatever is attracted by other matter, is
also to be denominated matter, and this supposes the subject of our definition
already known; besides that the property of attraction may also possibly
belong to substances not simply material; for the electrical fluid, if such a
fluid exists, is probably attracted by matter, and yet it seems to be different
in most respects from any modification of common matter. A similar diffi-
culty would occur if we attempted to define matter by its impenetrability or
mutual repulsion, or if we considered every thing as material that is capable
of affecting the senses. We must, therefore, take it for granted that matter
is known without a definition, and we may describe it as a substance Reise i
ing space, or as a gravitating or ponderable substance. :


|


It cannot be positively determined whether matter is originally of bis
kind, owing its different appearances only to the form and arrangement of
its parts; or whether there are various kinds of simple matter, essentially
distinct from each other; but the probability appears to be in favour of the
former supposition. However this may be, the properties of matter are by |
no means so simple in their nature, nor so easily redticible to | h
the more mathematical doctrines of space and motion; and since our know-
ledge of them depends more on experience than on abstract. principles, they
may properly be considered as belonging to particular physics. Wehavefound
no inconvenience from the omission of the oe
the subject of mechanics ; although, in treating of the streng i
as subservient to practical mechanics, it was the eff
of some of these properties as deduced from “experiment; but it will

that it was impossible to examine oe origin and mutual connexion, a


ON THE ESSENTIAL PROPERTIES OF MATTER. - 607


supposing @ previous knowledge of many other departments of natural phi-
pee


We may distinguish the piste properties of matter into two principal
classes, those which appear to be inseparable from its constitution, and those
which are only accidental, or which are not always attached to matter of
all kinds. The essential properties are_chiefly extension and divisibility,
density, repulsion, or impenetrability, imertia, and gravitation; the acci-
dental properties are in great measure dependent on cohesion, as_ liquidity,
solidity, symmetry of arrangement, cohesive elasticity, stiffness, toughness,


strength, and resilience.


The extension of matter can scarcely be considered as a property separate
from its impenetrability, unless we conceive that it can occupy space, without
excluding other bodies from it. ‘This opinion has indeed been maintained
by some philosophers, who have imagined that the minute particles which
they suppose to constitute light, may penetrate the ultimate atoms of other
matter without annihilating or displacing them; and if this hypothesis were
admitted, it would be necessary to consider each particle of matter as a sphere
of repulsion, extended without being impenetrable.


The divisibility of matter is great beyond the power of imagination, but
we have no reason for asserting that it is infinite; for the demonstrations,
which have sometimes been adduced in favour of this opinion, are obviously
applicable to space only. The infinite divisibility of space seems to be essen-
tial to the conception that we have of its nature; and it may be strictly de-
monstrated, that it is mathematically possible, to draw an infinite number of
circles between any given circle and its tangent, none of which shall touch


either of them, except at the general point of contact; and that a ship, following


always the same oblique course with respect to the meridian, for example, sailing
north eastwards, would continue perpetually to approach the pole without
pei reaching it. But when we inquire into the truth of the
he schools, that all matter is infinitely divisible, we are by no

ted decide so positively. Newton observes, that it is doubtful

in pac tadgtadinces aadiauanecenceeag? the ees of mat-


By


sbeed


&


608 LECTURE XLIx. © sae \


constitution of atoms, or single corpuscles, on which their properties, as _
matter, depend, and which would be destroyed if the units were further
divided; but it appears to be more probable that there are no such atoms;
and even if there are, it is almost certain that matter is never reared annihi-
lated in the common course of nature.


It remains‘to be examined how far we have any experience of the actual extent
of the divisibility of matter; and we shall find no appearance of any thing like
a limit to this property. The smallest spherical object, visible to a good eye, is
about... of an inch in diameter; by the assistance of a pe, we may
perhaps distinguish a body one hundredth part as large, orsee'see Of an inch
in diameter. The thickness of gold leaf is less than this, and ,the gilding of
lace is still thinner, probably i in some cases not above one ten millionth of an
inch; so that.,5 of a grain would cover a square inch, and a portion, barely
large enough to be'visible by a microscope, might weigh only the 80 million
millionth part of a grain. A grain of musk is said to be divisible into 320
quadrillions of parts, each of which is capable of affecting the olfactory
nerves. There are even living beings, visible to the microscope, of whicha’ —s_
million million would not make up the bulk of a common grain’ of sand.
But it is still more remarkable, that, as far as we can discover, many of
these animalcules are as complicated in their structure as an elephant or a
whale. It is true that the physiology of the various classes of animals is
somewhat more simple as they deviate more from the form of : quadrupeds,
and from that of the human species; the solid particles of the blood'do not
by any means vary in their magnitude in the same ratio with the bulk of the
animal; and-some of the lower classes appear to approximate very muchto
the nature of the vegetable world. But there are single instances thatseem =
wholly to destroy this gradation: Lyonnet has discovered a far greater variety
of parts in the caterpillar of the willow butterfly, than we can observe inmany
animals of the largest dimensions; and among the microscopic insects in par- '
ticular, we see a prodigality of machinery, subservient to the ) "a
of the contracted life of the little animal, in the structure of which nature ap- s
pears to be ostentatious of her power of giving perfection 1 ks.


If Newton’ 8 opinion, respecting the origin of, the.
in general, were sufficiently established, it would |


ON THE ESSENTIAL “PROPERTIES OF MATTER. 609


visibility: of matter with respect to coloured substances; for the colours of
thin transparent ‘substances, which he considers as resembling those of most
other substances, are no longer observable, in any known medium, when the
thickness. is Jess than about sss'yes of an inch, But we have positive evi-
dence that coloured substances may be reduced to dimensions far below this
limit; besides the instance (of the gilt wire, which has already been mentioned,
a particle of carmine may still retain its colour, when its. thickness is no more
than one thirty millionth of an inch, orone sixtieth part of the limit deduced
from the supposition of Newton; and itis therefore scarcely possible that the
colours of such ‘substances can precisely resemble those of thin plates, although
tes may perhaps still be in some measure analogous to them.
leapiaaeshility,: is ‘aati attributed to Saerieg ) Sin the common observa~
tion that two bodies cannot occupy the same place at once. And it is thus
that we distinguish matter) from space; for example, when we dip an ‘in-
yerted jar into mercury, the air contained in the jar depresses the surface of
the mercury, and: prevents its occupying the space within the jar: but if the
jar had been void of matter, like the space above the mercury of a barometer,
nothing would have prevented its being filled by the mercury, as soon as
either its )weight, or.the, pressure’ of the eel Bias ty to enter
ayes taginiiteeidsin sonus09 sn ; begogs(ig.2i


‘But ‘adbete not appear that our senses are fully competent to se this


proposition to all substances, whether material or not. We ‘cannot prove


experimentally that the influence of gravitation is incapable of pervading even
the ultimate particles of solid matter, for, this power appears to suffer no di-
minution nor modification, when a third body i is interposed between the two
gravitating masses. In the same manner, a magnet operates as rapidly on a


needle, through a plate. of glass or of gold, whatever its thickness may be, as


‘if a vacuum enly intervened. It may, however, be inquired if the gold or
the gla s has not certain passages or pores, through which the influence may
ismitted : and it may be shown, in many instances, tliat substances, ap-

d, have abundant orifices into,which other substances may enter ;

ay easily be made to pass through’leather, or through wood,

‘ ure of - the atmosphere, or by any other equal force: and, how-
fe may suppose the proportion of the pores to the solid matter, it "


'


cree ee ean Ee Fass 1 Ld i


610 : i ‘LECTURE !XLix.


may be observed, that it requires only.a more or less minute division of the
matter, to reduce the magnitude of the interstices between the neighbouring
particles within any given dimensions. - Thus platina contains, in a cubic -
inch, above 200'thousand times asi'many gravitating atoms as pure hydrogen
gas, yet both of these mediums are free from sensible interstices, and appear
to be equally continuous} and there may’ possibly be other substances in na-
ture that contain in a given space 200 thousand times as many atoms as pla
tina; although this supposition is ‘not positively probable in all its extent;
for the earth is the densest of any of the celestial bodies-with which we are
fully acquainted, and the earth is only one fourth as dense as if it were com-
posed entirely of platina ;.so that we have no reason to! believe that ‘there
exists in the solar system any considerable quantity of a substance even so
dense as platina. uA ui 1


Besides this porosity, there’is still room for the supposition, that even the
ultimate particles of matter may be permeable to the causes of attractions of
various kinds, especially’ if those ‘causes are immaterial: nor is there any
thing in the unprejudiced study of physical philosophy that can induce us to
doubt the existence of immaterial substances; on the) contrary we see ana-
logies that/lead us almost directly to such an opinion. The‘electrical fluid
is supposed to be essentially different from common matter; the general me-
dium of light and heat, according to some, or the principle of caloric, ac-
cording to others, is equally distinct from it. We see forms of matter dif-
fering in subtility and mobility, under the names of: solids, liquids, and
gases; above these are the semimaterial existences which’ produce the pheno-
mena of electricity and magnetism, and either ‘caloric or a universal ether ;
higher still perhaps are the causes of gravitation, and the immediate agents
in attractions of all kinds, which exhibit some phenomena apparently still
more remote from all that is compatible with material bodies; and. of these
different orders of beings, the more refined and immaterial appear to pervade
freely the grosser. It seems therefore natural to believe that the analogy
may be continued still further, until it ‘rises into’ existences absolutely im-
material and spiritual. We know not but that thousands of spiritual worlds
may exist unseen for ever by human eyes; nor have we any reason to sup-
pose that even the presence of matter, in a given spot, necessarily excludes
these existences from it. Those who maintain that nature always teems witlr


ON THE ESSENTIAL PROPERTIES OF MATTER. 611


life; wherever living beings can be placed, may therefore speculate with free-
dom on the possibility of independent worlds ; some existing in different parts
of space, others pervading each other, unseen and unknown, in the same
space, and others again to which) space may not be a necessary mode of
existence, ' ih it this if

. i ju ; ; W:

Whatever opinion we may entertain with respect to the ultimate impene-
trability of matter in this sense,,it is probable, that the-particles of matter are
absolutely impenetrable to each other, This impenetrability. is not however
commonly called into effect in cases of apparent contact. If the particles of
matter constituting water, and steam, or any other gas, are of the same na-
ture, those of the gas cannot'be,in perfect contact; and when water is con-
tracted by the effect of cold, or when two fluids have their joint bulk di-
minished by mixture, as in the case of. alcohol, or sulfuric acid, and water,
the particles cannot have been, in absolute contact before, although they
would have resisted with great force any attempt to compress them, Metals
too, of all kinds, which have been melted, become permanently more dense
when they are hammered and laminated. A still’ more striking and elegant
illustration of the nature of repulsive force is exhibited in the contact of two
pieces of polished glass, ‘The colours of thin plates afford, us, by comparison
with the observations of Newton, the most delicate micrometer that can be
desired, for measuring any distances less than the ten thousandth of an inch:
it was remarked by Newton himself, that when two plates of glass are within
about this distance of each other, or somewhat nearer, they support each
other’s weight in the same manner as if they were in actual contact, and
that some additional force is required, in order to make them approach still
nearer ; nor does it appear probable that the contact is ever perfect, other-
wise they might be expected;to cohere in such a manner as to become one
mass. Professor Robison has ascertained by experiment the force necessary
to produce the greatest possible degree of contact, and finds it equivalent to
a pressure of about a thousand pounds for every square inch of glass. It is
therefore obyious that in all common cases of the contact of two distinct
bodies, it must be this repulsive force that retains them in their situation.
I have found that glass, placed on a surface of metal, exhibits this force nearly
in the same degree as if placed on another piece of glass; it is also inde~
pendent of the presence of air; but under water it disappears.


iimmntinmthdiis i 8 <<<  %


a


612 t A LECTURE XLIx. ae)


- . The existence of a repulsive force, extending beyond the actual surface
ofa material substance, being ‘proved, it has been conjectured by some that
such a force, unconnected with any central atom, may be sufficient for pro-

i ducing all the phenomena of matter. ‘This representation may be admitted —

f

|


without much difficulty, provided that it be allowed that the force becomes
infinite at or near the centre; but it has been sometimes supposed that it is -
every where less than infinite, and consequently that’ matter is not abso-
lutely impenetrable; such a supposition- appears however to lead to the ne-
j j _ cessity of believing thatthe particles of matter must t sometimes me anpibitated,
. which is not a very probable opis Oe inaih
- The magnitude of the repulsive foitve, em which the particles of any single
body are enabled to resist compression, increases nearly in proportion to the
degree of compression,’ or to the decrease of the distances between the part-
icles. This is almost a necessary consequence of any primary law that
. can be imagined, for the immediate actions of the particles: for instance, if
f the repulsion increased either as the square or'as the cube of ‘the distance di-
minished, the effect of a double change of dimensions would always be
} nearly a double change of the repulsive force; that is, if an elastic substance
were compressed one thousandth part of its bulk; it would in either case re=
sist twice as much as if it were only compressed one two thousandth.


It is obvious that if the particles of matter are possessed of a repulsive
force decreasing in any regular proportion ‘with the increase’ of distance,
they can never remain at-rest without the operation of some external pres-
sure, but will always retain a tendency to expand. | This “is ‘the case of all
elastic fluids, the density of which is found to vary exactly as the compress-
ing force, whence it may be demonstrated, that the primary repulsive force.
of the particles must increase in the same proportion as the distance de-
creases. It follows also that this force can only be exerted between such
particles as are either actually or very nearly in contact with each other;
since it requires no greater pressure, acting on ‘a given surface, to retain a
gallon of air in the space of half a gallon, than to retain a pint in the space
of half a pint; which could not be, if the particles exercised a mutual re-
pulsion at all possible distances,


ON THE ESSENTIAL PROPERTIES OF MATTER. . 613


Mr. Dalton has proposed a singular theory respecting the’constitution and
mutual repulsion of elastic fluids; he imagines that when any two gases of
different kinds are mixed, the particles of each gas repel only the similar
particles of the same gas, without exerting any action on those of the other
gas, except when the ultimate solid atoms chance to interfere. The idea is
ingenious and original, and may perhaps be of use in connecting some facts
together, or in leading to some other less improbable suppositions; but it
may easily be shown, that Mr. Dalton’s hypothesis cannot possibly be true
in all its extent, since it would follow from it, that two portions of gases, of
different kinds, could not exist, for a sensible time, in the same vessel, without
being uniformly diffused throughout it, while the fact is clearly otherwise ;
for hydrogen gas remains, when left completely at rest, a very considerable
time above, and carbonic acid gas below, a portion of common air with
which it is in contact; nor is there any circumstance, attending the mixture
of gases, which may not be explained without adopting so paradoxical an
opinion. Mr. Dalton thinks that, from the laws of hydrostatics, no two gases,
not chemically united, could remain mixed, if their particles acted mutually on-
each other: but the laws of hydrostatics do not apply to the mixture of
single particles of fluids of different kinds; since they are only derived from
the supposition of a collection of particles of the same kind.


In liquids and in solids, this repulsive force appears at first sight to be want-
ing; but when we consider that the particles both of liquids and of solids are
actuated by the attractive force of cohesion, we shall see the necessity of the
presence of a repulsive force, in order to balance it; it is, therefore, probable
that'the particles of aeriform fluids still retain their original repulsive powers,
when they are reduced to a state of liquidity or of solidity, by being subjected
to the action of a second force, which causes them to cohere.


The mutual repulsion of the particles of matter is a reciprocal force, acting
equally, in opposite directions, on each of the bodies concerned. It scarcely
requires either experiment or argument to show, that if two bodies repel each
other, neither of them will remain at rest, but both of them will move, with
€qual quantities of motion. Thus, if a portion of condensed air be made to
act upon the bullet of an air gun, it will force the gum backwards with as
much momentum as it impels the bullet forwards,

VoL, I. AG


614 LECTURE XLIX.


Inertia is that property of matter, by which it retains its state of rest/or
of uniform motion, with regard to a quiescent space, as long as -no foreign:
cause occurs to change that state. This property depends on the intimate
constitution of matter; it is generally exhibited by means of, the force of -
repulsion, which enables a body in motion to displace. another, in order to A
continue its motion, or by means of some attractive force, which causes two
bodies to approach their common centre of inertia with equal momenta...


Another universal property of matter is reciprocal gravitation, of, which

the force is directly in the joint proportion of the quantities of matter attract-

ing each other, and inversely as the square of their distance. In order, to

prove that the gravitation towards a given substance, for instance, the

weight of a body, or its gravitation towards the earth, is precisely in pro- -
portion to the mass or inertia of the moveable matter of which it consists,

Sir Isaac Newton made two equal pendulums, with hollow balls.of equal size: }
in order that the resistance of the air might be the same with respect to both,

he placed successively within the balls a variety of different substances, and

found that the time of vibration remained always the same; whence heinferred

that the attraction was proportional in all cases to the, quantity of, matter _
possessing inertia, . For if any of these substances had contained. particles,
capable of receiving and communicating motion, yet without being liable to
gravitation, they would have retarded the vibrations of the pendulum, by __
adding to the quantity of matter, to, be-moyed, without increasing the moving RY ols =
force. The law of gravitation, which indicates, the ra-io,of i increase with. 4,
the diminution of the distance, is. principally rile Wt sstragomicl |
observations and computations: it is the simplest. that can be conceived for
any influence, that either spreads from a centre,or converges towards z

for it supposes the force acting on the same substance to ipl hg
tional to the angujar space that it occupies. ps thine seal
' iuitiee seit 4 inp nat:

“Newton appears to have pape, these ee "Sedat

first discovered, rather as derivative than
and although it has often been asserted. th
them to pressure or to impulse, yet it is unc
explanation of natural _phenomena, to lessen 1
and if it were possible to refer either all at


.
ON THE ESSENTIAL. PROPERTIES OF MATTER. 615


: pulsion, | of ‘all repulsion to a modification of attraction, we should make an
“improvement of the same kind, as’ Newton made, when he reduced all the
diversified motions of the heavenly bodies to the universal laws of gravitation
only. We have, however, at present, little prospect of such a > 9 a

‘ “ones

sh ‘Tt has been of late very customary to consider all the phenomena of nature
as derived from the motions of the corpuscles of matter, agitated by forces

_ varying according~ to certain intricate laws, which are supposed to be pri-
‘mary qualities, and for which it isa kind of sacrilege to attempt to assign

. any ulterior cause. This theory was ch iefly introduced by Boscovich, and it has
prevailed very widely among algebraical philosophers, who have been in the
habit of deducing all their quantities from each other by mathe matical rela-
tions, making, for example, the force a certain function or power of the dis.
tance, and then imagining that its origin is sufficiently explained ; and when
a geometrician has translated this language into his own, and converted the

; formula into a | curve, with as many flexures and reflections as the labyrinth

of Daedalus, he imagines that he has depicted to ‘the senses the whole pro-

\ _ cedure of nature. Such methods may often be of temporary advantage, as long

j "as we are contented to consider them as- approximations, or as classifica-

f _ tions of pheypmena only; but the grand scheme of the universe must surely*
amidst all the stupendous diversity of parts, preserve a more dignified -sim-

: plicity of plan and cogmannes Mapes is compatible with these Seen


& -suppositions.


Tpapaong! ito 2
Loree Tor show”, says Newton, in the preface to the second edition of
his “Optics, “« that I do not take gravity for an essential property of
bodi ies; I have added one question concerning its cause, choosing to
. RS propose it by way of a question, because I am not yet satisfied about
; it, for want of experiments.” In the query here mentioned, he pro-
1 the ‘supposition of an elastic medium, pervading ail space ;
» which he advances with considerable confidence, and which
s by very strong arguments, deduced as well from the phe-
‘light and heat, as from the analogy of the electrical and mag-
ences. This medium he supposes to be much rarer within the
es of the sun, ‘the — the pee and the a, than in


Ne
h


°


616 LECTURE XLIX,


the empty celestial spaces between them, and to grow more ond. more fis
at greater distances from them, so that all these bodies are naturally. forced
towards each other by the excess of pressure,


The effects of gravitation might be produced by a medium thus constituted,
if its particles were repelled by all material substances with a force decreasing,
like other repulsive forces, simply as the distances increase; its density would
then be every where such as to produce the appearance of an attraction vary-
ing like that of gravitation. Such an ethereal medium would therefore have
the advantage of simplicity, in the original law of its action, since the re-
pulsive force which is known to belong to all matter, would be sufficient,
when thus modified, to account for the principal phenomena of attraction.


It may be questioned whether a medium, capable of producing the effects of
gravitation in this manner, would also be equally susceptible of those modifi-
cations which we have supposed to be necessary for the transmission of light,

In either case it must be supposed to pass through the apparent substance

of all material bodies with the most perfect freedom, and there would, there-

fore, be no occasion to apprehend any difficulty from a retardation of the
celestial motions ; the ultimate impenetrable particles of matter being perhaps
scattered as thinly through its external form, as the stars are scattered in a
nebula, which has still the distant appearance of a uniform light and of a con-
tinuous surface: and there seems no reason to doubt the possibility of the
propagation of an-undulation through the Newtonian medium with the actual
velocity of light. It must be remembered that the difference of its pressure

is not to be estimated from the actual bulk of the earth or any other planet
alone, but from the effect of the sphere of repulsion of which that planet is
the centre; and we may then deduce the force of gravitation froma medium .
of no very, enormaus elasticity. ae ere a Ri cy Sat


We shall hereafter find that a similar combination of a siuiple buena, with
a variable repulsion is also observable in the force of cohesion ; =
ing two particles of matter, floating in such an elastic dium, ca
ducing gravitation, to approach each other, their mutual attra

once be changed from gravitation to cohesion, upon the ¢
portion of the medium intervening between them, _ This


ON THE ESSENTIAL PROPERTIES OF MATTER. 617


however, directly opposite to that which assigns to the elastic medium the
power of passing freely through all the interstices of the ultimate atoms of
matter, since it could never,pass between two atoms cohering in this manner;
we cannot therefore, at present, attempt to assert the identity of the forces of
gravitation and cohesion so strongly, as this theory would allow us to do, if
it could be established. In short, the whole of our inquiries, respecting the
intimate nature of forces of any kind, must be considered merely as specula-
tive amusements, which are of no further utility than as they make our views
more general, and assist our experimental investigations.


* 618


LECTURE L. 0?"


ON COHESION. |


ot lo susan Staal:


"THOSE properties of matter, which we have lately examined, if they are not
absolutely inseparable from its constitution, are,at least, always found attached
to such matter as we are able to submit to our experiments. There are, however,
many other general affections, to which all matter appears to be liable,
although none is perpetually subjected to them, and these are principally, if
not entirely, dependent on the force of cohesion.
In order that any two particles of matter may cohere, it is necessary that
they be within a very small distance of each other, and the density of any
substance, composed of cohesive particles, must probably always be more than
half as great as that of water. There are indeed some solids apparently a
little lighter than this, but they appear to be extremely porous; and perhaps
the solid substances of some of the celestial bodies may also be a little more
rare. It frequently happens, that the compression of an elastic fluid alone is
sufficient to cause the force of cohesion to take place between its particles;
thus, if common steam be exposed,” in a close vessel, to a pressure greater
than that of the atmosphere, it will be wholly condensed into water, pro-
vided that no elevation of temperature be allowed; and the same has been
experimentally shown of many other aeriform fluids, which may be reduced
to liquids by pressure; but others of these fluids retain their elasticity, not-
withstanding any force which human art can apply to them.


It is probable that as soon as the particles of any elastic fluid are brought
within the reach of the force of cohesion, it commences at once in its full _
extent, so as to cause them to rush together, until it is balanced by that of
repulsion, which continually increases as the particles approach nearer to each
other; they must then remain, perhaps after some vibrations, in a state of


ON COHESION. 619


equilibrium; and if any cause should tend to separate them, or to bring them
nearer together, they would resist it, in either case, with a force proportional
tothe degree of extension or compression. The distance, at which the force
of cohesion commences, is not the same for all kinds of matter, nor even for
the same substance at different temperatures; it is smaller for vapours of all
kinds, in proportion: as their temperature is higher, the cohesion itself being
also smaller. If the experiments on the density of steam haye been correct,
it follows that.the force of repulsion must, increase more rapidly than the
distances diminish, for the elasticity of water is nearly ten times as great as
that which would be inferred from the compression of steam into a substance
of equal density: this supposition agrees also with the experiments on the
mean. density of the:earth, which is probably not so great as it would be if
\the force of repulsion; increased in the simple ratio of the density. The law
of repulsion appears also to he in same degree modified by the effect of heat,
which increases its force at greater distances more considerably than at smaller.
It appears. indeed, from, the’ diminution of the elasticity of a spring by heat-
ing, it, that the repulsive. force of the particles of bodies at very smalk dis-
tances is even diminished by heat, unless, the force be again supposed to
decrease. much. more rapidly. than the distance diminishes: thus the diminu-
tion of the elasticity of iron by heat is about thirty times.as great as the increase
of the distance of its particles; so that the original repulsive force must
probably be somewhat diminished, although less than the cohesive force,
At greater distances, however, the force of repulsion is certainly increased ; for
the elasticity of vapours and gases of all kinds is evidently greater as the tem-
perature is higher. (Plate XX XIX. Fig. 530.)

The cohesion of two or more particles of matter to each other does not
interfere with their power of repelling other particles situated in a different
direction; thus, two pieces of glass require to be brought together with con-
siderable force, and generally with some friction, before they can begin to
cohere; anda small drop of water, falling lightly on the surface of a pond, may
remain for some instants without coming into perfect contact with it; the same
circumstance is also still more observable in spirit of wine a little warmed.


The first and simplest effect of cohesion is to produce liquidity. That
all; liquids possess some cohesion, is yery obvious, from their tendency to
assume a spherical form when they are sufficiently detached from other sub-


620 - LECTURE L.


stances, and from the suspension of a drop from any solid, to which its upper
surface adheres with suflicient force. Without cohesion, indeed, a liquid
would be only a very fine powder, éxcept that the particles of powders have
not the power of moving with perfect freedom on each other, which consti-
tutes fluidity. ‘The apparent weakness of the cohesion of liquids is entirely


‘ owing to this mobility, since their form may be changed in ‘any degree with-


out considerably increasing the distances of their particles, and it is only
under particular circumstances that the effects of their cohesion can become
sensible. , mi ae wae ’

When a liquid is considered as unlimited in its ‘extent, the a iephietols of its
particles, situated in all possible directions with regard to each other, may
be supposed in all cases precisely to balance the cohésion, which is derived
from the actions of particles similarly situated; and’ this ‘must also be the
state of the internal parts of every detached portion of a liquid. where they
ate so remote from the surface as to be beyond the ‘mitiute ‘distance which is
the limit of the action of these forces.” But the external parts of the drop
will not remain in the same kind of equilibrium: they may be considered as
a thin coating of a liquid surrounding a substance which” resistsonly” ina
direction perpendicular to its surface, and does not interfere with the mutual
actions of the particles of the liquid. Now since-the repulsive force increases
as the distance diminishes, it must be exerted more powerfully by the nearest
particles, while the cohesion is directed equally towards all the particles within a
certain distance, and wherever the surface is curved, the joint cohesive force .
will be directed to a remoter part of the curve’ than the repulsive force
opposed to it, so that each particle will be urged, by the combination of these
forces, towards the concave side of the curve, and the more as-the curvature
is greater; hence the coating of the liquid, thus constituted, must exert a force
on the parts in contact with it, precisely similar to that of a flexible surface,
which is every where stretched by an equal force; and from this simple prin-
ciple we may derive all the effects produced by a cohesion of this kind, which,
from its being most commonly observed in the ascent of ‘water in capillary
tubes, has been denominated capillary attraction. (Plate XXXIX. Fig.
531.)


It is, therefore, a general law, that the surface of every detached portion
of a fluid must every where have such a curvature, as to be able to withstand


ON COHESION. 621


the hydrostatical pressure which acts against it; and hence we may calculate
in many cases the properties of the curve which it must form; ‘but in other cases
the exact calculation becomes extremely intricate, and perhaps impracticable. ,


- A drop descending in a vacuum would be perfectly spherical; and if its mag-


nitude were inconsiderable, it would be of the same form when descending
through the air; a small bubble rising in a liquid must also be spherical; but
where the drop or the bubble is larger, its curvature will be’ greatest where
the internal pressure is greatest, or where the external pressure is least, and
in different cases this pressure may be differently distributed. Where a drop
is suspended froma solid, its length may be such that the pressure at its
upper-part may become negative, and its surface will then be concave instead
of convex: and when a bubble rises to the surface of a liquid, it often carries
with ita film of the liquid, of which the weight is probably smaller than the con-
tractile force with which the surface resists the escape of the air, so that, from
the magnitude of the contractile force, we may determine the greatest possible
weight of a bubble of given dimensions. A slight imperfection of fluidity
probably favours the formation of detached bubbles, by retarding the ascent
of the air, but it has a still greater effect in prolonging their duration when
formed. (Plate XX XIX. Fig. 532.)


In order to determine the forms of the surfaces of liquids in the cases which most
commonly occur, it is necessary to examine how they are affected by the action of
other liquids, and of solids of different descriptions. Supposing the horizontal sur-
face of aliquid to be in contact with a vertical plane surface of a solid of half the
attractive power, it will remain at rest in consequence of the equilibrium of at-
tractions; for the particles situated exactly at the junction of the surfaces may be
considered as actuated by three forces; one deduced from the effect of the liquid,
the other two from that of the two equal portions of the solid above and below the
surface of the fluid; and itmay be shown that the combination of these three forces
will produce a joint result in the direction of gravity; consequently the direction
of the surface must rentain the same as when it is subjected to the force of gravity
alone, since the surface of every fluid at rest must be perpendicular to the joint
direction of all the forces acting on it. But if the attractive power of the solid
be more than half as great as that of the liquid, the result of the forces will be
inclined towards the solid, and the surface of the liquid, in order to be per-
pendicular to it, must be more elevated at the side of the vessel than else-


VOL. I. AH


622 LECTURE L.,


where; and therefore concave; consequently the. fluid. must, ascend. until it
arrives at a position capable of, affording an equilibrium in. this manner; if,
onthe contrary, the attractive power of, the solid be weaker, the liquid, will
descend, and, its surface will be CORK aie XXXIX. Fig. $38), 44), he =
LDS HOA LV" Or eee ol plan
Ri may ,also be. date, that if, the stemntias ace of the solid be «
that of the liquid, or still greater, it will be wetted, by the liquid, hich wil
rise until its surface, acquires the same direction, with that of the solid; and
in other cases the angle of contact will be greater in, proportion as pct
is|less attractive,, These conclusions are obtained by comparing the cc
surface of, the liquid and solid with the surface of a single liquid, 0: whi
the attractive power is equal only to the difference of the respective powers of
the substances concerned; and the comparison is ann applicable a the
contact of two liquids of different densities... =, Lite, wp wpb. biit-sys hiya
y Hives, Sod hy ot tieded ehh
The Seisitnah of the quperficial cohesion or r contractility of a liquid may
be expressed, for a certainextent, by a certain weight; thus every. inch. of
the surface of water is stretched each way by a force equal to the, weight
of the hundredth part of a cubic inch of water, or to two, grains anda "
half: and for each inch of the surface of mercury, the force i Fah ;
valent. to 17 grains, which is the weight of +t» of a cubic inch
‘eury. » Thus. if a, solid, of any. form, .of .which the surfaces.
and which is capable of ,being wetted. by either of these fluids, Ane ih
into a reservoir containing it, the fluid willbe eleyated around it it to sucha F
height, that 24 or 17 grains, for each inch of the circumfe f the solid,
will remain above the general level of the reseryoir, the. surface «
nearly the same form as a very long and slender elastic rod, niet 0
at one end, and heasing a mae wei be the bison Plate


534.) ; diate isd), tit
“The nletentibuh of, the summit of an osteadlagmiany wate #
with the flat and upright surface of a sol ich is


seventh of an inch: but when two such surfac
glass, are brought near to each other, the elev
must be greater, than this, in order that each
support its proper weight: thus, if Abe distance.


ON COHESION. : 645


the elevation would bea whole inch; and if the distance were smaller than
this, the elevation would be greater in the same proportion; so that when two
plates are placed «in such a manner as to touch each other at one of their
upright edges, the outline of the water raised between them assumes the form
of a hyperbola. (Plate XXXIX. Fig. 535.)

ioe. ay or sine ti ; } ; ante selo porte
~The weight supported by the cohesion of the water ina tube may be de-
termmed,in’a similar manner, from the extent of the circumference ; the-height
being 4ninch ima tube one twenty: fifth of am inch in diameter, oras much
greater ‘as the diameter of the tube is;smaller: and ,in a tube wetted with
mercury the height would behalf as: great. It is obvious that if the lower
part of the tube be either contracted: or dilated, the height of the fluid. will
‘yemainy unaltered; while its weight may be varied without limit; forthe
hydrostatical pressure on the surface is the same, ‘in both these cases, as if the
diameter of the tube were equal: throughout its length. (Plate XXXIX.
Fig. 536.) : : ; ; i


is on hing a 1‘


- Phevattractive force of glass. to mercury is less than half as great as the
mutual attraction’ of :the particles of mercury, and the surface of mercury in
a dense glass vessel becomes, therefore, convex aud depressed ; the angle of
contact being about 140°, and the depression one 17th of an inch. Between
two plates of glass, the depression of mercury is an inch when their distance
is 444, and in a'tube, when its diameter is, of an inch, (Plate XXXIX.
Fig. 537, 588.)° ’


A liquid may also adhere to a horizontal surface which is gradually raised
from ‘it, until the hydrostatical pressure becomes sufficient to overpower the
cohesion of its Superficial parts; the internal part of the fluid being usually
raised, not immediately by the’force of cohesion, but by the pressure of the
atmosphere. The solid bears the whole weight of the liquid which is elevated
above the surface; ‘and when the surface is perfectly wetted, this weight is
equal, at the moment of separation, to the hydrostatical pressure, or rather
suction, corresponding to the height; but in otlier cases the weight may be
somewhat greater than the hydrostatical pressure on the surfuce of the
Solid, on ‘account of the elevation which surrounds the body, and which
is not compensated by the excavation immediately under it. A surface thus


624 ; LECTURE L,


raised from water will elevate it to the height of one fifth of an inchy and


will require a force of 504 grains for each square inch, in order to overcome

the apparent attraction of the water; and for mercury the utmost height is

about one seventh Wars an inch. + XXXIX. ty $89,540) 385 Fite wg
ek

A detached portion of a liquid may stand on any surface, which it is not

capable of wetting, at a height which is different according to its ‘magnitude,


and to the attraction of the surface. If the drop is very small, its form may’


be nearly spherical; but when its extent becomes considerable, its height
must always be less than that at which the liquid would separate from a hori-
zontal surface; and it will approach the nearer to this limit, as its attraction
to the surface on which it stands is weaker. ‘Thus a wide portion of mercury
stands on glass at the height of 4, of an inch, and on paper nearly at +

and a portion of water will stand on a cabbage leaf, or on a table strewed
with the seeds of lycopodium, nearly at ve height of one: oo of an: inet
(Plate XXXIX. Fig. 541.) !


For the operation of a powder like lycopodium, it appears to be only necessary, —


that it should possess a weaker power of attraction than water, and should,
therefore, be incapable of being readily wetted by it: cach particle of the
powder, being then but partially in contact with the water, will project
beyond its surface, and prevent its coming into contact with any of the
surrounding bodies, while the surface assumes such a curvature as is suffi-
cient to withstand the pressure of the internal aa (Plate XXXIX. Fig.
542.)


When a dry and light substance of any kind is placed on the surface of
water, its weight is not sufficient to bring it within the distance at which
cohesion commences, and it floats, surrounded by aslight depression. Any
substance of this kind, or any other substance surrounded by a depression,
as a ball of glass or iron floating on mercury, appears to be attracted by another
similar substance in its neighbourhood; for the depression between the iwo
substances is increased,and the pressure of the fluid on that side is consequently
lessened, so that they are urged together, by a force which varies inversely
as the square of the distance. And in the same manner, when two bodies,
surrounded by an elevation, approach each other, they exhibit an attractive


‘


ON COHESION. 625


force of a similar nature, the pressure of the atmosphere being diminished
by the weight of the water, whichis raised between them to a greater height
than on the opposite sides. But when a body, surrounded by a depression,
~ approaches another, which is surrounded by an elevation, they seem to repel
each other, the pressure of the water urging the one, and that of the atmo-
sphere the other, in opposite directions. (Plate XXXIX. Fig. 543.)


If. two smooth plates. of any kind ‘are perfectly wetted by a fluid, and
' brought into contact, they exhibit an appearance of cohesion, which is so
much the greater as the quantity of fluid is ‘smaller: if we attempt to separate
them, |the fluid is drawn inwards, so-as to have its surface made. concave,
and it resists the separation of the plates with a certain force, which acts with
a. hydrostatic advantage so much the greater, as their distance is smaller, and
é hence produces the appearance of a cohesion varying in proportion to the
distance, (Plate XX XIX. Fig. 544.)
uw IR Sh 9ts i" ’

Supposing the two plates to be separated at one end, and the fluid between
them to assume the form of a drop, one of the marginal surfaces of the drop,
being narrower than the other, will act with a greater advantage, like a tube
of smaller diameter, and will tend to draw the drop towards it; and the ap-
parent attraction towards the line of contact of the glasses will increase in
proportion as the square of the distance decreases. This result was experi-
mentally observed almost a century ago, but it has been usually explained
on mistaken grounds. (Plate XXXIX. Fig. 545.)


The attractive power of water being greater than that of oils, a small
portion of oil thrown on water is caused to spread on it with great rapidity
by means of the force of cohesion; for \it does !not appear that any want'of
chemical affinity, between the substances:concerned, diminishes their cohe-
sive power; water readily adheres to tallow when solid, and probably essen-
tial oils would adhere still more readily to ice. There is, however, some
difficulty in’ understanding how these’ oils can so stiddenly come within the
limit’ of the cohesive force of water; while the drops of water themselves some-
times remain for a few seconds beyond it.


A sponge affords us a familiar instance of the application of capillary at-
I


er


oe ee rs ? ———————— CS”


=


626 - OLECTURE @


traction‘to useful purposes: it is well-known, thatriniorder to its'speedy


operation, it requires to be previously moistened, by the assistance’ ofa little
pressure, otherwise it exhibits the same appearance of repulsion that is ob-
servable in many other cases where the: contact is imperfect.) The: absorp=.
tion of moisture ‘by sugar depends:on ‘the same principle, and here the tubes:
are so minute, that the height of ascent appears to be almost, unlimiteds oi


The magnitude of: the cohesion between fluids and solids, »as:-well’ as of —


the particles, of “fluids with each other; is more directly: shown by: aw ex-
periment. on ithe continuanceof a ‘column’ of mercuty, insthe :tube ofa
barometer, atiia height considerably greater! than: ‘that. at which it usually
stands, on accountiof the pressureof the atmosphere. \: If the mercury has
been well boiled:in:the tube, it may be made to remain in contact iwith;the


closed end,at:the height: of 70 inches or more; and byagitation only itmay be —


made to cohere so strongly, as to occupy the whole length of: the tube: of. a
common barometer, which is several inches more than the height at which
the pressure of the atmosphere sustains» iti: »A small:siphon may also convey
mercury from one vessel-into another in the vacuum of an‘air pump: and in
both these cases it is obvious that no other, force than cohesion can retain
the upper surface of the mercury in contact with the ese ‘its, internal
08 in contaet arith each others i ht aba olathe Gapey
“enw sev Ly dz MALTON

The force of cohesion pines ale be exerted by salbd substances on other
solids, either of the same kind, or of different Kinds..)\ Thus two masses of
lead, when once united by pressure, assisted by a little friction, require a
very considerable force: to separate «them, ‘and: itomay’ be ‘shown: either! by
measuring this force, or by suspending the lead ini the vacuum of the air
pump, that the’ pressure of ithe atmosphere is not: materially concerned in
producing this appearancesof cohesion, since its magnitude mitch exceeds
that of the atmospherical pressure. | A cohesion of this kind is sometimes of
practical utility in. the arts; little ornaments of laminated silver remaining
attached to iron or steel;- with: which:they have been made to cohere by _
powerful pressure of a blow, so as to form:one mass with ite © 9 9" i


; to aN
The contact of two pieces of lead, although initiate Siotat to d prod a
considerable ‘cohesion, is by no means so complete as to unite the parts into


ON. COHESION. 627


one mass; the union, however, appears to be nearly of the same kind as the
common, cohesion of aggregation; and if the lead were softened into an
amalgam by the addition of mercury, the cohesion of the two masses would
become precisely the, same as the internal cohesion of each mass, . Harder
substances,, suchas marble or glass, cohere, but weakly, perhaps, because
their surfaces are never so, perfectly, adjusted to. each other as to touch
throughout. The interposition of a fluid usually increases the apparent at-
traction of such substances, but this circumstance has already been explained
from, the stent. of, the, capillary | contraction, of its pais: and when the


abs aeCTt


creased, it ti : au ‘ ' aD Fi 77) Wi


The immediate cause of solidity, as distinguished from liquidity, is the
lateral adhesion of the particles to each other, to which the degree of hard~
ness or solidity is always proportional. ‘This adhesion prevents any change
of the relative situation of the particles, so ‘that they cannot be withdrawn
from their places, without experiencing a considerable resistance from the
force of cohesion, while those of liquids may remain equally in contact
with the neighbouring particles, notwithstanding their change of “form, When,
a perfect solid is extended or compressed, the particles, being. retained in,
their situations by the force of lateral, adhesion, can only approach directly
to each other, or be withdrawn further from, each, other, and the resist-
ance is nearly the same,as if the same substance, in a fluid state, were inclosed,
in an unalterable vessel, and forcibly compressed or dilated. Thus the resist-
ance of ice to extension or compression is found by experiment to differ
very, little from that, of water contained in a vessel; and the same effect may
be produced even when the solidity is not the most perfect which the sub-
stance admits; for the immediate resistance of iron or steel to flexure is the
same whether it may be harder or softer. It often happens, however, that
the magnitude of the lateral adhesion is so much limited as to allow a greater
facility of extension or compression, and it may yet retain a power of restor-
ing the bodies to their original form by its reaction. ‘This force may even be
the principal or perbaps the only source of the body’s elasticity: thus when
a piece of elastic gum is extended, the mean distance of its particles is not
materially increased, for it is said to become rather more than less dense’
during its extension ; consequently the change of form is rather to be attributed
to a displacement of the particles, than to their separation to a greatet


Cd


623” LECTURE L. ”


distance from each’ other, and the resistance must be derived from the lateral

adhesion only: some other substances also, approaching 1 more nearly to the

nature of liquids, may be extended to many times their original length, with ¥’

resistance continually increasing ; and in such cases there can scarcely be any

material change of the specific gravity of these substatices. Professor

has mentioned the juice of bryony as affording a remarkable instanice of such’
a viscidity.

It is probable that the immediate cause of the lateral adhesion of solids i is

a symmetrical arrangement of their constituent parts: it is certain that

almost all bodies are disposed, in becoming solid, to assume the form of

crystals, which evidently indicates the existence of such an arrangement ;

and all the hardest bodies in nature are of -a crystalline form. It appears,

therefore, consistent both with reason and with experience to suppose that a
crystallization more or less perfect is the universal cause of solidity. We

may imagine that when the particles of matter ate disposed without any

order, they can afford no strong resistance to a motion in any direction, .
but when they are regularly placed in certain situations with respect to each

other,any change of form must displace them in such manner, as to increase

the distance of a whole rank at once; and hence they may be enabled to coope-

rate in resisting such a change. Any inequality of tension ina particular part

of a solid is also probably so far the cause of hardness, as it tends to increase

the strength of union of any part of a series of particles which must be dis-

placed by a change of form. aint

“The immediate resistance of a solid to extension or peasant

properly called its elasticity ; although this term has sometimes been to Ved
denote a facility of extension or compression, arising from the
this resistance. A practical mode of estimating the force of
already been explained, and according to the simplest st
of cohesion and repulsion, the weight of* the modulus
measure of the actual magnitude of each of
an additional pressure, equal to that of the m
cohesion,and require the particles,to be reduced to
that the repulsion might balance it; and in he
force equal to the weight of half the modulus wou
sion to one half,and extend the’ substance to twice it


ON COHESION, r 629


there isssotne reason to suppose, ‘the mutual repulsion of the particles of
solids varies a little'more rapidly than their distance, the modulus of elas-
ticity will be a little greater than the true measure of the whole cohesive and
repulsive force: this difference will not, however, affect the truth of our
‘calculations respecting the properties of elastic bodies, founded on the mags
nitude of the modulus as sine determined.

2: ‘toretosiie ad : § rod

The stiffness: of a solidis. aida by its Sntnadilat resistance to any force
tending to change ‘its form; in this sense, if the force be applied so as to
extend orto: compress it; or to overcome jits lateral adhesion by the effect
which we have formerly:called detrusion, the primitive elasticity and rigid-
ity of the substance, together with its. magnitude, will determine its stiffness >
bat:ifthe force be otherwise applied, so as to produce flexute or torsion,
the form of the body must also‘be taken into the calculation, in the manner
whichihas.already been explained’ in the lecture’on passive strength. ‘The
stiffness of a body with respect: to any longitudinal force is directly as its
transverse. section, and inversely as its length; for the same:force will com-
press,or extend a rod 100 yards long so as to change its length an. inch;
that will produce a change of only half an/inch in a rod 50 yards long. We
have seen that thespace through which a body may? be extended or com-
pressed, without any permanent alteration of form, constitutes its toughness:
that its strength, or the ultimate resistance which it affords, depends on the
joint magnitude of its toughness and elasticity or stiffness; and that its
resilience, or the power of overcoming the energy or impetus of a body in
motion, is proportional to the strength and toughness conjointly.

Softness, or want of solidity, is in general accompanied by a proportional
susceptibility of permanert alteration of form without fracture; sometimes,
however, from a want of cohesion, a soft body is at the same time brittle.
Soft substances which are capable of direct extension to a considerable degree
are called viscous or tenacious; of these, birdlime, sealing wax, and glass
sufficiently heated, are some of the most remarkable,’ Harder substances
which have the same property are called ductile, and when the alteration is
made by percussion and compression, they are termed malleable. Of all
substances gold is perhaps the most ductile; the thinness of leaf gold and
of the gilding of silver wire has already been mentioned; and it is said that

VoL. I, AL


630 4 LECTURE L.


a single grain of gold has been drawn into a wire 500 yards in length, and
consequently little more than <<. of an inch in-diameter. ©The ductility
- or tenacity of a spider’s web is of a different kind, it is particularly shown
by its capability of being twisted, almost without limit, and of accommodat-
ing itself to its new position without any effort to untwistis, « -coisolny
choos es ealthour ould ty abistine
With respect to the ultimate agent a, which the effects of cohesion are
produced, if it is allowable to seek for any other agent than a fundamental
property of matter, it has already been observed, that appearances extremely
similar might be derived from the pressure of a universal mediumof great
elasticity; and we see some effects, so nearly ‘resembling: them, whichiare
unquestionably produced by the pressure of the atmosphere, that. oné can
scarcely avoid suspecting that there must be some analogy in the causes,
Two plates of metal, which cohere ehough to support each other in the
- open air, will often separate ina yacuum: whena boy draws dlongasténe.bya
piece of wet leather, the pressure of the atmosphere appears. to be materially —
concerned. The well known experiment, of the twoexhausted. hemispheres
of Magdeburg, affords a still more striking instance of apparent.cohesion
derived from atmospherical pressure; and if we place between, them a thick
ring of elastic gum, we may represent the natural equilibrium between: the
forces of cohesion and of repulsion; for the. ring would resist any small
additional pressure with the same force as would be required for svavee
the hemispheres so far, as to allow it to expand in: an equal degree: ¢ ;
a certain point the ring would expand no more; the air would be *
and the cohesion destroyed,.in-the same manner pre al ae
kind is torn asunder. But all suppositions founded on these anale te
be considered as merely conjectural; and our knowledge of
which relates to the intimate constitution of .m,
tricacy of the subject, and partly for want of sufficient
present in a state of great uncertainty and imperfection, |
powerful agents, in changing and modifying the :
operation of heat, by which the states of\ s
fluidity are often produced in succession ; and
and effects of heat will constitute the subject:


: ad ij paiidoud) €0u1


f-augd ylsotlts Same


fe eet


631


hi 2 1


.
| ota Sains) “<PECTURE IDE Hit.’
ON THE SOURCES AND EFFECTS OF HEAT.


IT may appear doubtful to some whether the subject of heat belongs most
properly to mechanical or to chemical philosophy. Its influence in chemistry
is unquestionable and indispensable; but its mechanical effects are no less
remarkable: it could not therefore with propriety be omitted either in a
course of chemical or of physical lectures, especially by those who are per-
suaded that what we call heat jis, in its intimate nature, rather’ a mecha-
nical affection of matter than a peculiar substance. . We shall first inquire
jnto the nature of the principal sources of heat, and next into the mode of
its communication, and its most common effects, whether temporary or per-
matient: ‘the measures of heat, and the most probable opinions respecting its
‘nature; will afterwards be separately considered.

O poeyite a lita Hind Bea sf) ‘ists , ye &
Heat is an influence capable of affecting our nerves in general with the
peculiar sensation which bears its name, and of which the diminution produces
the sensation denominated cold: . Any considerable increase of heat gives us.
the idea of positive warmth or hotness, and its diminution excites the idea of

‘positive cold. Both these ideas are simple, and, each of them might be de-

rived either from an increase or from a diminution of a positive quality: but
there are many reasons for supposing heat to be the positive quality, and cold

- the diminution or absence of that quality; although we have no more expe-

rience of the total absence of heat, of its greatest possible accumulation,
whi might be called the total absence of cold. Our organs furnish us, in
ases, with very delicate tests of any increase or diminution of heat;
ore usually recognised by the enlargement of bulk, generally pro-
ose bodies to which heat is attached in an increased quantity, and
hose from which it is subtracted. eeh?


632 LECTURE LI.


The simplest modes of exciting heat appear to be the compression of elas-
tic fluids, and the collision or friction of solid bodies; although a more usual
and a more powerful source of heat is found in various chemical combinations
and decompositions, which arejproduced by the peculiar elective attractions
of different substances for each other, or from the influence of the solar rays,
which are probably emitted in consequence of the chemical tee that
continually take’ place at the surface of the sun. :


The effects of the condensation and rarefaction of elastic fluids are shown
by the cendenser and the air pump; when an exhaustion is made with rapid-
ity, the thermometer, placed in the receiver of the air pump, usually sinks a
degree or two; and when the air is readmitted abruptly into a partial va-
cuum, the sudden condensation of the rarefied air raises the mereury: and a
similar elevation of temperature. is produced by the operation of the con-
denser. Much of this heat is soon dissipated, but by observing the velocity with
which the thermometer rises, Mr. Dalton has estimated that air, compressed
to half its dimensions, has its temperature elevated about 50 degrees of Fah-
renheit; and some of his experiments indicate, when accurately examined, a
still greater change. For the present we may define the sense of the term —
degree, in Fahrenheit’s scale, as corresponding to an expansion of a portion of -
mercury amounting to one ten thousandth part of its bulk; and a degree of
Réaumur originally corresponded to an expansion of a weak spirit of wine,
amounting to one thousandth part of its bulk. It may be inferred from the
velocity of sound, supposing that theexcess of its velocity, above the common
calculation, is wholly derived from the heat and cold: produced by; condensa-
tion and expansion, that a condensation amounting! to .-f. of the bulk of
any portion of air will raise its temperature one degree of Fahrenheit.
When air is very rapidly compressed in the condenser of an air gun, it is
sometimes so much heated as actually to set on fire a. small portion of tow,
placed near the end of the barrel. e

The production of heat by friction is too well known to require an experi-
mental proof; but Count Rumford has taken particular pains to ascertain
every circumstance which can be supposed to be concerned‘in the operation
of this cause; and the results of his experiments are so striking, that they de-


ON THE SOURCES AND EFFECTS OF HEAT. 633


serve to be briefly related. He took a cannon, not yet bored, having a pro-
jection of two feet beyond its muzzle, a part which is usually cast with the
piece, in order to insure the solidity of the metal throughout, by the pressure
which its weight occasions. This piece was reduced to the form of a cylin-
der, joined to the cannon by a smaller neck, and a large hole was bored in it:
the whole cannon was then made to revolve on its axis by means of the force
of horses, while a blunt steel borer was pressed against the bottom of the hol-
low cylinder, by a force equal to about 10 000 pounds avoirdupois; the sur-
face of contact of the borer with the bottom of the cylinder being about 2
square inches. This apparatus was wrapped up in flannel, when its temperature
was about 60°. In half an hour, when the cylinder had made 960 turns, the
horses being stopped, a mercurial thermometer was introduced into a perfora-
tion in the bottom of the cylinder, extending from the side to the axis, and
it stood at 130°, which Count Rumford considers as expressing very nearly
the mean temperature of the cylinder, The dust or scales, abraded by the
borer, weighed only 837 grains, or about >}, of the whole weight of the cy~
linder. In another experiment, the cylinder was surrounded by a tight deal box,
fitted with collars of leather, so as to allow it to revolve freely, and the in-
terval between the cylinder and the box was filled-with 19 pounds of cold
water, which was excluded from the bore of the cylinder by oiled leathers
fixed on the borer; and after two hours and a half, the water was made to
boil. Hence Count Rumford calculates that the heat produced in this man-
ner, by the operation of friction, was equal to that of 9 wax candles, each
three quarters of an inch in diameter, continuing to burn for the same
time.

A still more rapid increase of temperature may be obtained, where the rela~
tive velocity of the bodies is more considerable, or where they strike each
other with violence. Thus a soft nail) may be so heated, by three or four
blows of a hammer, that we may light a match with it; and by continuing
the operation, it may be made red’ hot: two pieces of wood may also be set
on fire by means of a lathe. When a waggon takes fire, for want of having
its wheels properly greased, the friction is probably increased by the tenacity
of the hardened tar, which perhaps becomes the more combustible as it
dries,


634 LECTURE LI.


« One of the most remarkable circumstances, attending the production of
heat by friction, is the discovery of Professor Pictet, that it is often much
more powerfully excited by soft substances than by harder ones. Tn making
some experiments in a vacuum, in order to examine how far the presence. of
air might be concerned in the effects of friction, he accidentally interposed ©
some cotton between the bulb of his thermometer and the cup, which was sub-
jected to the friction of various substances as it revolved; and he found that ~
the soft filaments of the cotton excited much more heat, than any other of the
substances employed.


The chemical production of heat is of greater practical importance than its
mechanical excitation; but by what means chemical changes operate in excit-
ing heat, we cannot attempt to determine. There is certainly no general law
of composition or decomposition that can be applied to all such cases: most
commonly heat is produced when oxygen exchanges an aeriform for a solid
state, or enters into a new combination, and still remains elastic; but in the
case of gunpowder, heat is disengaged while an elastic fluid. is produced from
a solid; and in some other cases the oxygenous principle is wholly uncon-
cerned. It appears on the whole, that however heat may be excited, the corpus-
cular powers of cohesion and repulsion are always disturbed and called into
action, their equilibrium being destroyed and again restored, whether by me-
chanical or by chemical means. A wax candle, } of an inch in diameter, loses
a grain of its weight in 37 seconds, and consumes about three grains, or 9
cubic inches, of oxygen gas, producing heat enough to raise the temperature
of about 15 000 grains of water a single degree. According to the experi-
ments of Mr. Lavoisier and Mr. Laplace, the combustion of ten grains of
phosphorus requires the consumption of 15 grains of oxygen, the combustion
of ten grains of charcoal 26, and of hydrogen gas 56; and by the heat pro-
duced during the combustion of a pound of phosphorus, 100 pounds of ice
may be melted, during that of a pound of charcoal 963, of hydrogen gas
2951, of wax 133, and of olive oil 149; and during the deflagration of a
pound of nitre with about one sixth part of its weight of charcoal, twelve _
pounds of ice may be melted.


The manner in which heat, when excited or extricated by any of these
means, passes from one body to another, requires to be very particularly exa-


ON THE SOURCES AND EFFECTS OF HEAT. 635


mined. We shall find that this communication happens in one or both of two
ways, by contact, or by radiation; and that it may also differ both with re-
spect to the quantity of heat concerned, and to the time occupied by the pro-
cess. Whatever heat maybe, we may safely conclude that in substances of
the same kind, at the same temperature or-apparent degree of warmth or
coldness, its quantity must be proportional to the mass or weight; for instance,
that a quart of the water of a given cistern-contains twice as much heat as a
. pint; and where this'is true of the different parts of any substance, they must
remain in equilibrium with respect to heat. But if two equal portions of the
same substance, ‘containing different quantities of heat, be in contact, they will
affect each other in such a manner as to have their temperatures equalised,
and the more rapidly as the contact is more perfect. Thus, if two portions
of a fluid at different temperatures be mixed together, they will acquire imme-
diately an intermediate temperature; and when two solids are in contact, the
quantity of heat, communicated by the hotter to the colder in a given time, is
nearly proportional to the difference of the temperatures. Hence it would
follow, that they could never become precisely of the same temperature in
any finite time; but in fact the difference of temperature is rendered, in a mo-
derate time, too small to’ be perceptible. » The nature of the substances con-
cerned has also a material effect on the velocity with which heat is commu-
nicated through their internal parts; metallic bodies in general conduct it
the most readily, earthy and vitreous bodies, the least; but the various metals
possess this power in different degrees; silver and copper conduct heat more
fapidly than iron, and platina transmits it but very slowly. Professor
Pictet stipposes that heat ascends within solid bodies more readily than it de-
scends; but the effect of the air remaining in the imperfect vacuum of the
air pump may be sufficient-to explain his experiments; the difference of tem-
perature producing an ascending current in the neighbourhood of the heated
body, by means of which the cold air continually approaches its lower parts,
and carries the heat upwards: and it has been found that the rarefaction of air
does not by any means diminish its power of conducting heat, in proportion
_to the diminution of its density.


Count Rumford’s experiments have shown that all fluids are very imperfect
conductors of heat by immediate contact, although it is scarcely credible that
they can be absolutely nonconductors; but heat is usually communicated


Ce eek


636 LECTURE LI.


between different portions of the same fluid, almost entirely by the mixture
of their particles: hence a fluid heated on its surface transmits the heat very
slowly downwards, since the parts which are first heated, being rendered spe-
cifically lighter, retain their situation aboye the colder and heavier parts;
while, on the contrary, any cause of heat, applied at the bottom of a vessel,
very soon reduces all its contents to a uniform temperature, It appears also,
from some late experiments, that the immediate transmission of cheat within
the internal parts of solids is much slower than has commonly been supposed; —
and it has been found almost impossible to keep a thermometer, at the centre
of a large and solid globe of metal, at the same arte with ee of its
superficial parts. ey ) i%


Besides the communication of heat by contact, it is usually, if not always,
emitted from the surfaces of bodies in the form of radiant heat, which is
thrown off in all directions, wherever it meets no obstacle from a substance
impervious to it, and is propagated nearly in the same manner as light, and
probably with the same velocity, without producing any permanent effect on
the temperature of the medium transmitting it. Thus, a, thermometer, sus-
pended by a fine thread under the receiver of an air pump; or in the Torricel-
lian vacuum, will continue to vary.its temperature with that of the surround-
ing bodies: and in this case the whole of the heat must be communicated by
radiation. Mr. Leslie has discovered that the quantity of heat thus emitted
depends not only on the temperature, but also on the nature of the surface
concerned, a polished surface of tin emitting only 4%, or less than, one
eighth part as much, as the same surface blackened. A surface of tin scraped
with a file in one direction has its powers of radiation more than doubled;
but by crossing the scratches, they are reduced nearly to their original state;
and a coating of isinglass, resin, or writing papers, or a glossy surface of any
kind, produces an effect nearly approaching to that of black paint. This radia-
tion from a heated surface, like that of light, takes place in almost equal degrees
in every direction; and its magnitude is nearly independent of the nature of
the fluid in contact with the surface, provided however that it be an-elastic
fluid; for water does not seem to transmit every kind of radiant heat with
freedom. It appears that the radiant heat emitted by a surface of glass, or of
black paint, is about one third greater than that which is at the same time
carried off by the atmospheric air; but that the radiation from a metallic sur-


“a


ON THE SOURCES AND EFFECTS OF HEAT. 637


face is only one sixth of that which the air receives. Mr. Leslie has also
found that the same surfaces which emit heat the most freely, are also the
readiest to receive it from the radiation of other bodies.


The solar heat radiates freely through air, glass, water, ice, and many
other transparent mediums, without producing any sensible effect on their
temperatures, and even when it is concentrated by the effect of a burning
mirror, it scarcely affects the air through which it passes, and other transpa-
rent mediums but little. But the heat of a fire warms’a piece of common
glass very rapidly, and its further progress is almost entirely interrupted by
the glass, although probably a certain portion still continues’ to accompany
the light in all cases. Hence a screen of glass is sometimes practically con-
venient for allowing us the sight of a fire, and protecting us at the same
time from its too great heat. Mr. Lambert showed that culinary heat was’
much more strongly reflected by mirrors of metal than of glass, ‘although lit-
tle difference was observable in the quantity of light, ‘and he very justly at-
tributed this difference to the interception of a part of the heat by the glass,
which operated with respect to it like an opaque substance, although it trans
mitted the light with freedom.“ Opaque substances in general appear to be
wholly impervious to radiating heat of all kinds; but Dr. Herschel has found
that dark red glass, which transmits a very small portion of light only, suffers
some kinds of radiant heat to pass through it with very little interruption.


w


In other respects, radiating heat is subject, in all cases, to the optical laws


’ which govern the reflection and refraction of light. Dr. Hoffmann appears


to have been the first that collected the invisible heat of a stove into a focus
by the reflection of one or more concave mirrors. Buffon, Saussure, Pictet,
and Mr. King, made afterwards similar experiments on the heat of a plate of


thi: iron and of a vessel of boiling water. Mr. Pictet, as well as Hoffmann, em-


ployed two mirrors facing each other; and by means of this arrangement the
experiment may be performed when the thermometer is placed at a considera-


ple distance from the heated body. |


; AME vat on + + s


ture of the air, not being affected by the radiation of heat, is
all respects indifferent to its emission-in this manner; and as the
ross each other freely in all possible directions, so it appears


VOL. 1 - 4x


638 : LECTURE LI.


that heat may flow in different directions through the same medium without
heing interrupted; nor does there seem to be any more reason that a hot ~
body should cease to emit heat while it is receiving heat from another body,
than that a luminous body should cease to afford light when another bod y
shines on it. This continual interchange of heat, constituting in common
cases a kind of equilibrium of motion, appears t ohave been first suggested by
Mr. Prévost, as an explanation of an experiment on the reflection of cold, re-
vived by Mr. Pictet, but originally made some centuries before, by Plempius,
and by the Academicians del Cimento. A thermometer, for example, must be
supposed, to retain its temperature by means of the continual accession of ra-
diant heat from the surrounding bodies, supplying the place of that which is
continually thrown off in all directions towards those’ bodies. Supposing the
thermometer to be placed near the focus of a metallic speculum, not much less
than a hemisphere, about one half of the heat, which the thermometer would
'- otherwise have received from the surrounding bodies, must be intercepted by
the mirror, which, being metallic, emits itself but little radiant heat, but
reflects, notwithstanding, an equal quantity of heat from the objects on the
op posite side, so that the temperature of the thermometer remains unaltered.
But all the heat, which falls on the thermometer from the mirror, must haye
passed through the conjugate or corresponding focus; ‘and if a body at the,
same temperature be placed in that focus, the radiation will still be the same:
but if a substance absolutely cold were placed there, the whole of the heat be-
fore reflected by the mirror would be intercepted, that is, almost half of that
which was received by the thermometer from the surrounding bodies; and if
a piece of ice be put in the conjugate focus, a delicate thermometer will ins
stantly show its effect in depressing the temperature; as if the cold were ab-
solutely reflected in the same manner as heatorlight.
1st) sik ee it ‘all
Dr. Herschel’s experiments have shown that radiant heat consists
parts, which are differently refrangible, and that in general, invisible h
less refrangible than light. This discovery must be allowed wits ;
greatest that has been made since the days.of Newton, although the |
of some speculative philosophers might have led to it afew ears
Herschel was occupied in determining the properties of various:
loured glass, which rendered them more or less fit for
the sun through a telescope; and for this purpose it


ON THE SOURCES AND EFFECTS OF HEAT. ‘ 689


which of the rays would furnish the greatest quantity of light, without sub-
jecting the eye to the inconvenience of unnecessary heat. He first observed
that the heat became more and more considerable as the thermometer ap-
proached the extreme red rays in the prismatic spectrum; and pursuing the
experiment, he found not only that the heat continued beyond the’ visible
spectrum, but that it was even more intense when the thermometer was at a
little distance without the limits of the spectrum, than in any point within
it. (Plate XXXIX. Fig. 546, 547. )
oo ¥

Sir Heung) Englefield has repeated’these experiments with many additional
precautions, and Mr. Davy wasa witness of their perfect accuracy: the excess
of heat beyond the spectrum was even considerable enough to be ascertained
by the sense of warmth occasioned by throwing it on the hand. The skin
appears, when compared with a thermometer, to have its sensibility more
adapted to the perception of radiant heat than to that of heat imparted 'by
contact, perhaps because a much smaller quantity of heat is sufficient to raise
the temperature of the thin cuticle yery considerably, than would be required
in order to affect any thermometer in the same degree.


It was first observed in Germany by Ritter, and soon afterwards in
England by Dr. Wollaston, that the muriate of silver is blackened by invisible
rays, which extend beyond the prismatic spectrum, on the violet side. It is
therefore probable that these black or invisible rays, the violet, blue, green,
perhaps the yellow, and the red rays of light, and the rays of invisible heat,
constitute seven different degrees of the same scale, distinguished from each
other into this limited number, not by natural divisions, but by their effects
on our senses: and we may also conclude that there is some similar relation
between heated and luminous bodies of different kinds.


~ The effects of heat, thus originating, and thus communicated, may be
divided into those which are temporary only, and those which are permanent.
The permanent effects are principally confined to solids, but the temporary
effects are different with respect to substances in different states of aggrega-
tion, and they also frequently comprehend a change from one of these states
to another. The effect of heat on an elastic fluid is the simplest of all these,
being merely an expansion of about one five hundredth of its bulk for each
degree of Fahrenheit that the temperature is’ raised ; or an equivalent aug~


hab yeaa
1a~


640 LECTURE LISS)


mentation of the-elastictty when the fluid is confined to a.certain space. This i
CXPAUSON is very nearly the same for all gases and vapours, amounting to
iy for each.degree, at the common Aomori of 56° of Fahrenheit, but
at Aahidees temperatures it is less than +35 of the bulk of the gas, and at lower
temperatures, somewhat more, being nearly; the same in am for the same
portion of the fluid at all temperatures. ‘ y
When an elastic fluid is contracted by cold within certain limits, determined
by the degree of pressure to which it is exposed, as well as by the nature of the
fluid, its particles become subjected to the force of cohesion; they rush still
nearer together, and forma liquid. Thus, when steam, under the: common
atmospheric pressure, is cooled below the heat of boiling water, it isinstantly
condensed, and becomes water: but with a pressure of two atmospheres, it would
be condensed at a temperature 36° higher, and with the pressure of half our
atmosphere only, it might be cooled without condensation 33° lower than the
common temperature of boiling water. And similar effects take place in
vapours of other kinds at higher or lower temperatures, a double pressure pro-
ducing, in all cases an equal disposition to condensation, with a depression of
temperature of between 20 and 40 degrees, and most commonly of about 35°,
of Fahrenheit. Thus, the vapour of spirit of wine is: usually condensed at
175° of Fahrenheit; but with a double pressure it is condensed ata temperature
39° higher; and with the pressure of half an atmosphere, at a temperature 35°
lower|; and the vapour of ether, which is commonly condensed at 102°,
requires a temperature 38° higher, with a double pressure, or as much lower,
with half the usual pressure. If the temperature be below the freezing point
_ of the liquid, the pressure being sufficiently lessened, the vapour may still
retain its elasticity, but a further reduction of | temperature or increase SU Bi
pressure will convert it immediately into a solid. _ ns ditignl a A ;


The expansion of liquids by the effect of heat is much less ‘uated
regular than that of elastic fluids, since it varies. crocs :
different liquids, but also in the same liquid at me pera
in general greater as the temperature is more

in proportion to the excess of the temperature above
it begins. This variation appears to be the least conside:
altheugh even this fluid expands a little more rapidly as )
heated ; but the expansion is always very nearly one ten thous


ON THE SOURCES AND EFFECTS OF HEAT. 641


degree: that of water is equal to this at the temperature 64°, and is greater
or less nearly in proportion to the distance from 39°, where it begins, but
in high temperatures it varies less, since it is not quite four times as great at
the heat of boiling waters The expansion of spirit of wine at, 70° is six. times
as great as that of mercury :.its ,utmost variation is much less than that of
water, aithough it is at least twice as great in some parts,of) the scale as in
others, :


It has already been observed that. an elevation of temperature consider-
ably diminishes the powers of cohesion and of repulsion in solid bodies: the
same is also true of liquids; for the height to which a liquid rises in a capil-
lary tube is diminished somewhat less than 7,5 for each degree of Fahren-
heit,,that. the temperature is raised, the force of superficial cohesion being
diminished both by the diminution of the immediate actions of the particles
and by that of the distances to which nd extend. 4


When. the temperature of a Miguid i is so much elevated as to become equal
to that of its vapour in a state capable of sustaining the atmospherical pres-
sure, or any other pressure which may be substituted for it, a certain por-
tion of the liquid .is ‘converted, into. vapour, and the heat being generally
applied at the bottom,of.the vessel, the vapour rises up in bubbles, and the
effect is called boiling. ‘The whole liquid is not converted at once into
vapour, because a certain quantity of heat appears.to be consumed by the
change, and a constant supply of heat is necessary, in order that the opera-
tion may be continued.


It is not, however, only at the boiling point that a fluid begins to be con-
verted into vapour: the pressure of the atmosphere is not sufficient wholly to
prevent the detachment of a certain quantity of vapour from its surface, at
a temperature which is incapable of supporting it separately in the form of
steam in the open air, and it may be thus suspended, when mixed either with
common air, or with any other elastic fluid, at the ordinary temperature of the
atmosphere. And it appears that the quantity, which is thus suspended, bears
very nearly some. constant proportion to the density of which the steam is
capable at the given temperature in a separate state, the interposition of the
air either not affecting the distance at which the cohesion would take place,


“


6° a r ‘LECTURE LI.


or altering it equally in all cases. It seems to be most probable that the


density of vapour, suspended in this manner in the atmosphere, is always.
about twice as great, or at least half as great again, as that of steam existing.


independently at’ the same temperature. There is perhaps no liquid absolutely
free from a disposition to evaporate : even mercury rises’in the vacuum of the
barometer, aud lines the cavity with small globules; and it is said that the
effect of light is favourable to this slow evaporation. At whatever tempera-


ture evaporation takes place it is always accompanied by the production of -


cold; hence it is usual in warm climates,*to employ various methods of pro-
moting evaporation, in order to lower the temperature of the air, to cool
liquids for drinking, or even to procure ice for domestic uses.


It appears that all aqueous fluids are contracted by cold, until we arrive at
a certain point, which is generally about 7 or 8 degrees higher than their
freezing point: they then-expand agam almost in an equal degree as they
are still more cooled; and provided that they be free from agitation, they may
remain liquid at a temperature considerably below the point, at which they
usually freeze, and at which their ice always melts. Water may be cooled
in this manner to about 10% of Fahrenheit, and if it be then agitated, or
especially if a’small particle of ice or snow’ be thrown into it, a certain part


of it will instantly congeal, and its’ temperature ‘will be raised at once~


to 32°, in consequence of the heat which is always produced or extri-


cated in the act of freezing. In most cases, although not in all, the solid


occupies more space than the fluid; thus, it is probable that ice, when per-


feetly free from air bubbles, is at least one 16th lighter than water at the same —


temperature. A saturated solution of Glauber’s salts, or sulfate of soda,in hot
water, may be cooled slowly to the temperature of the atmosphere, when the
pressure of the air is excluded, and may be made to erystallize by admitting
jt suddenly, the liquor becoming at the same time’ warm in consequence of
the heat*which is extricated; and there is no doubt but that the congelation
of water, ‘and perhaps Of all other substances, is a pacha pei ap of we same
kind.


The expansions of solid bodies appéar to be more regular’ than those of
liquids or even ‘of elastic fluids; they vary little at any temperature, although


it is said that they do not always take place'in their full’ extent at'the instant
2


ON THE SOURCES AND EFFECTS OF HEAT. 643


that the substance has become heated, and that a\ blow, or the agitation
produced when they are made to sound by the friction of the bow of violin,
may sometimes be observed to cause them to assume the state of equilibriuni
‘with greater rapidity. » Brass expatids about one hundred thousandth ‘of its
length for each degree of Fahrenheit, copper and gold a little less; silvet
somewhat’ more; glass and platina less than half as much; iron and steelabout
two thirds as much; tin one third more, and lead and zinc about half as
much more. Wood and earthenware'are the least expansible of all known
solids. “The diminution of the elasticity of iron and steel by the elevation of
their temperature amounts to about +4, 0f the whole*for each degree: but
probably various substances are variously affected in this respect.

The liquefaction. of solids, and'their conversion into fluids by the operation
of heat, is liable to fewer irregularities than any other of its effects; the
change depending only on the temperature,and not being accelerated or retard-
ed by any accidental ‘circumstances. When’ the temperature is too low, or
the pressure toosmall,’ forthe existence of the substance ia a liquid form, it
may still be converted into vapour, ‘either mixed with air, or in a separate
state: thus ice loses weight when it is exposed to a dry frosty wind; and
camphor, betizoin; and’ ammonia are subliméd by heat without being melted,
although it is probable, that a‘pressute sufficiently strong might enable them
to exist as liquids in’ elevated temperatures. ‘Inall changes from solidity to
liquidity or to elastic fluidity, a certain quantity of heat disappears, except
some case in which # ¢hémical decomposition has accompanied the “change;
thus, in the’ detonation of ‘gunpowder, a large quantity of gas acquires
the state of elasticity, but at the same dine a — ee of vc nglh is —
duced.


The effects of the expansion of bodies by heat, and of their contraction by
cold, are observed in the frequent accidents which happen to glass and to
porcelain from a sudden change of temperature. Glass conducts. heat so
slowly, that one side of a vessel may beconie niuch heated, and consequently
expanded, while the other remains much colder, ‘and if the vessel cannot

“readily accommodate its form to this change of proportions, it will most com-
monly crack, the colder parts dividing, in consequence of their being too -
much stretched by the adjoining hotter parts. Hence the thinner the glass js,


644 ; LECTURE LI.)


the less liable it is to crack from any sudden expansion; and if it be very
thick, however simple its form may be, it will still crack; for no flexure,
which it can assume, can be sufficient for the equilibrium of the external
parts without being too great for that of the parts near the middle.


When glass in fusion is very suddenly cooled, its external parts become
solid first, and determine the magnitude of the whole piece; while it stil
remains fluid within. The internal part, as it cools, is disposed to contract
still further, but its contraction is prevented by the resistance of the external
parts, which form an arch or vault round it, so that the whole is left in a state ,
of constraint; and.as soon as the equilibrium is disturbed in any one part, the
whole aggregate is destroyed. Hence it becomes necessary to anneal all
glass, by placing it in an oven, where it is left to.cool slowly,; for, without this
precaution, a yery slight cause would destroy it. The Bologna jars, some-
- times called proofs, are small thick ‘vessels,made for the purpose of exhibiting
this effect; they are usually destroyed by. the impulse of a small,and_ sharp.
body, for instance a single grain of sand, dropped into, them; and a small
body appears to be often more effectual than a larger one;. perhaps because
the larger one is more liable to strike the glass with an obtuse part of its
surface. In the same manner the glass drops, sometimes, called Prince
Rupert’s. drops, which are formed by suffering a portion of green glass in ~
fusion to fall into water, remain in equilibrium while, they, are entire; but
when the small projecting part is broken. off, the whole tushes together with
great force,and rebounding by its elasticity,exhibits the effect of an explosion,
The ends of these drops may, sometimes, but not. always, be gradually —
ground off without destroying them, so that the concussion produced by
breaking the drop seems to be conqerned i enlere =e ‘yan
brium. ie ~Saee


~y


» kr COVER "
The tempering of metals appears ‘tes Ieepn a wane aicaae
annealing of glass; when they are made red hot, and suddenly


acquire a great degree of hardness, which renders 1
purposes, while the brittleness which accompanies it w
for others. By heating them again to a c
suffering them to cool more gradually, they are
and the more as the heat which is thus applied


ON THE SOURCES AND EFFECTS OF HEAT. 645


which forms itself on the surface of polished iron or steel, serves as a test of
the degree of heat which is applied to it, the yellowish colour which it assume$
indicating the first stage of tempering, the violet the second, and the blue
the last; and if the heat be raised till the surface becomes grey, the steel
will be rendered perfectly soft. The density of metals is alsoa little increased
by tempering them, probably for the same reason as water is more dense than
ice. In what manner the unequal distribution of the mutual actions of -
the particles of bodies contributes to increase their hardness, cannot be very
positively ascertained, although some conjectures might be formed which
would, perhaps, be in some measure explanatory of the facts; but it is safer,
in the present state of our knowledge, to be contentéd’with tracing the
analogy between these effects in substances of different kinds, and under
different circumstances, without attempting to understand completely the
immediate operation of the forces which are concerned. b


> ¥e ' P :
a heh iid % : wi e mv ’ : ‘ *


Sefiat adm tee


LECTURE LII.


ON THE MEASURES AND THE NATURE OF HEAT.


THE principal particulars concerning the origin, the progress, and the effects .
of heat, having been noticed in the last lecture, we now proceed to examine
the most usual modes of measuring its degrees and its quantity,and to inquire
into the most probable opinions respecting its intimate nature and its imme-
diate operation. ‘ : ge

The expansion of solids is measured by a pyrometer, which is calculated
for rendering the smallest change of dimensions perceptible either by me-
chanical or by optical means. ‘The first of these methods was adopted by
those who first investigated these effects; a bar of metal being placed ina
vessel of water, or of oil, which was heated by lamps, while the extremities
of the bar were in contact with a fixed point on one side, and on the other
with a series of levers, which multiplied the expansions, so as. to render them
easily observable by means of the end of the last lever, serving as an index.”
But it is obvious that the expansion of the fixed part of the instrument, and —
the irregular changes of temperature of the levers themselves, must very
much interfere with the accuracy of such an instrument. A much more cor-
rect mode of determination is to employ two microscopes, fixed to an appara-
tus, which is always kept, by means of ice, at a constant temperature, and to
observe with a micrometer the change of place of either end of the heated
bar.

For such purposes, the degrees of heat may be ascertained by the natural
measures of the freezing and boiling points of certain liquids, and of water in.
particular; but for subdividing the intervals. between these points, other
means must be employed. The most natural.mode of determining the inter-
mediate degrees of beat, which must be considered as the standard for the


ON THE MEASURES AND' THE NATURE OP HEAT. 647


comparison of all others, is too laborious and complicated for common use.
If we mix together equal quantities of the same liquid at two different tem-
peratures, they will obviously acquire an intermediate temperature, which is
the natural mean between the separate temperatures, provided that no heat
be lost or gained during the process; and provided that no irregularity be
produced from the approach of the liquid to a state of congelation, the exist-
ence of which might be detected by a comparison of experiments on various
liquids at the same temperatures. By repeating the operation, we may subdi-
vide the intervals as often as we please, or we may mix the liquids in any
“other proportion, so as to obtain at once any other point of the scale, which
“may afterwards be identified by a thermometer of any description.


_ ‘Phere is also another method of comparing the divisions of a thermometer
with those of the natural scale, but it is not wholly free from objections; the
instrument being placed in a cone of the sun’s rays, made to converge by
means of a lens or mirror, the quantity of heat falling on it must be nearly
in the inverse proportion of the square of its distance from the focus; and
the elevation of a common thermometer appears to be nearly proportional to
the heat which is thrown on it in this manner.


~ The expansion of solids probably approaches the nearest to the steps of the
natural scale, although even in this there seems to be some inequality; but
that of mercury is scarcely less regular, and a portion of mercury inclosed
in a bulb of glass, having a fine tube connected with it, forms a thermometer
the most convenient, and most probably the most accurate, of any, for common
use; the degrees corresponding very nearly with those of the natural scale,
although, according to the most accurate experiments, they appear to indi-
cate, towards the middle of the common scale of Fahrenheit, a temperature
2.or 3 degrees too low. There'is an inequality of the same kind, but still
greater, in the degrees of the spirit thermometer; and this instrument has
also the disadvantage of being liable to burst in a heat below that of boiling
water; although it is well calculated for the measurement of very low tem~
peratures, since pure alcohol has never yet been frozen, while mercury has
been reduced to a solid by the cold of Siberia and of Hudson's Bay: but both
mercury and linseed oil support a heat of between 5 and 600° without ebul-
lition. For higher temperatures than this, a thermometer has been made of
1 :


648 LECTURE LIt.


semitransparent porcelain, containing a fusible metal, which may be com-
pared with the upper part of the mercurial scale, and then continued further ;
and the expansion of such of the metals, as are difficult of fusion, affords an-
other mode of determining the highest degrees of heat.'! Mr. Wedgwood’s i
thermometer derives its properties from the contraction of a small brick-of
prepared clay, which contracts the more, as the heat to which it is exposed is
higher: it may be extremely useful for identifying the degree of heat which
is required for a particular purpose: but for the comparison of temperatures
by an extension of the numerical scale, we have not sufficient evidence ofiits
accuracy to allow us to depend on its indications; and it is scarcely credible
that the operation of furnaces, of any kind, can produce a heat of so many
thousand degrees of a natural scale, as Mr. Wedgwood’s experiments have led
him to suppose; noris the supposition consistent with the observation’ of
other philosophers, , ‘ 4 ;
Niwa. Jee teu

Mercurial thermometers are in general hermetically sealed, the tube being —
perfectly closed at theend, inordertoexclude dust, and topreventthe dissipation.
of the mercury. When a standard thermometer is to be adjusted, its freezing
point is readily fixed by immersing it wholly inmelting snow orpounded ice; but
for the boiling point,some further precautions are required ; the easiest method
appears to be, to immerse its bulb inan open vessel of boiling water, to cover it _
with several folds of cloth, and to pour hot water continually over it ; for if it
were immersed toa considerable depth, the pressure would raise the temperature
of the boiling point,and if it were not covered, the mercury in the tube would
be too cold. Attention must also be paid to the state of the. barometer; it must
either stand at 30 inches, or the place of the boiling point must be raised, when
the barometer is lower than 30, and lowered when it is higher; the difference
of nine tenths of an inch either way requiring an alteration amounting to yes
of the interval between freezing and boiling. This interval is subdivided, in
Fahrenheit’s thermometer, into 180 degrees; in Réaumur’s, into 80, and in
the centigrade thermometer of Celsius and of the French, into 100; and in
making the subdivision, care’must be taken to examine the equality of the
bore throughout, by observing the length occupied by a detached portion of
mercury, and to allow for any irregularities which may “have been thus de-
tected. The scales of Réaumur and of Celsius begin at the freezing point ~
of water; but in that of Fahrenheit the freezing point stands at 32°, the


ON THE MEASURES AND THE NATURE OF HEAT. 649


scale beginning from the cold produced by a freezing mixture, which was
supposed by Fahrenheit to be the greatest that would ever occur in nature.
] #2
The expansion, which is observed in a mercurial shtnometes! | is in. reality
only the difference of the expansions Sof mercury and of glass; but this cir-
cumstance produces no difference in the accuracy of the results. The
separate effects of the expansion of glass are, however, sometimes perceptible;
thus, when a thermometer is plunged suddenly into hot water, the glass,
being first heated, expands more rapidly than the mercury, and, ‘fora
moment, the thermometer falls. This circumstance would perhaps be still
more observable in a thermometer of spirit or of water; for an equal bulk of
these liquids would be much longer in acquiring the temperature of, the sur-
reaeing medium than a mercurial thermometer. t
ie
‘The expansion of elastic fluids affords in some cases a test of heat, which is
very convenient from its great delicacy, and because a very small quantity of
heat is sufficient to raise their temperature very considerably. The thermo-
meter first invented by Drebel was an air thermometer; but instruments of
this kind, when they are subject to the variations of the pressure of the
atmosphere as well as to those of its temperature, are’ properly. called
manometers, and require, for enabling us to employ them as thermo-
‘meters, a comparison with the barometer; while on the other hand, they may
be used ‘as barometers, if the temperature be otherwise »ascertained, * They
are however, very useful even without this comparison, in delicate experi-
ments of short duration, since the changes of the barometer are seldom very
rapid; and they may also be wholly freed from the effects of the pressure of
the atmosphere, in various ways. Bernoulli’s method consists in closing
the bulb of a common barometer, so as to leave the column of mercury in equili-
brium with the air contained in the bulb at its actual temperature, and capable
of indicating, by the changes of* its height and of its pressure, any’ subse-
quent changes in the temperature of the air, which must affect both its bulk
and its elasticity. Mr. Leslie’s photometer, or differential thermometer, has
some advantages over this instrument, but it can only be employed where the
changes of temperature can be confined to a part only of the instrument. The
elasticity of the air contained in the bulb is here counteracted, not by the pres-
sure of a column of mercury, but by the clasticity of another portion of aiz


650 ; LECTURE LIf. ;


in a second bulb, which is not to be exposed to the heat or cold sist
be examined: and the difference between the temperatures of the two bi
is indicated by the place of a drop of a liquid, moving freely i in the tube :


y


which joins them. (Plate XXX IX. Fig. 548..550.)0 0


ra ¢
ut


‘The degree of heat, as ascertained by a thermometer, is only:te-be considered
asa relation to the surrounding bodies, in virtue of which a body supports
the equilibrium of temperature when it is in the neighbourhood of bodies
equally heated: thus, if a thermometer stands at 60°, both in a vessel of
water, and in another of mercury, we may infer that the water and the
mercury may be mixed without any change of their temperature: but the
absolute quantity of heat, contained in equal weights, or in equal bulks, of any
two bodies at the same temperature, is by nomeans the same. Thus, in order
to raise the temperature of a pound of water from 50° to 60°, we need only to
add to it another pound of water at 70°, which, while it loses 10° of its own heat,
will communicate 10° to the first pound; but the temperature of a pound of
mercury at 50° may be raised 10°, by means of the heat imparted to it, by
mixing with it one thirtieth part of a pound of water, at the same tem:
perature of 70°. Hence we derive the idea of the capacities of different bodies
for heat, which was first suggested by Dr. Irvine, the capacity of mercury
being only about one thirtieth part as great as that of water. And by similar
experiments it has been ascertained, that the capacity of iron is one eighth of
that of water, the capacity of silver one twelfth, and that of lead one twenty
fourth. But for equal bulks of these different substances, the disproportion
is not quite so great; thus, copper contains nearly the same quantity of heat
in a given bulk as water; iron, brass, and gold, a little less, silver $ as
much, but lead and glass each about one half only. ;


It is obvious that if the capacity of a body for heat, in this sense of die ‘word,
were suddenly changed, it would immediately become hotter orcolder, according
to the nature of the change,adiminution of the capacity producing heat, and an
augmentation cold. Such a change of capacity is often aconvenient mode of re«
presentation for some of thesources of heat and cold: thus, when heat is produc-
ed by the condensation ofa vapour, or by the congelation of a liquid, we may ima-
gine that the capacity of the substance is diminished; and that it overflows,asa
wessel would doif its dimensions were contracted. It appearsalso from directex-


ON THE MEASURES AND THE NATURE OF HEAT. 631


periments, in some such cases, that the capacity of the same substance is actually
greater in a liquid than in a solid state,and in a state of vapour, than in either;
and both Dr. Irvine and Ds. Crawford have attempted to deduce, from a
comparison of the proportional capacities of water and ice, with the quantity
of heat extricated during congelation, a measure of the whole heat which is
contained in these substances, and an estimation of the place which the
absolute privation of heat, or the natural zero, ought to occupy in the scale
of the thermometer. Thus, when a pound of ice, at 32°, is mixed witha
pound of water at 172° of Fahrenheit, the whole excess of 140° is absorbed
in the conversion of the ice into water, and the mixture is reduced to the
temperature of 32°; and, on the other hand, ‘when a pound of ice freezes, a
certain quantity of heat is evolved which is probably capable of raising the tem-
perature of a pound of water 140°, or that of 140 pounds a single degree.
Dr. Crawford found, by means of other experiments, that a quantity of heat
capable of raising the temperature of water 9° would raise that of ice as much
as 10°; hence he inferred that the capacity of ice was .% as great as that of
water, and that if this capacity, instead of being reduced to 2%, had been
wholly destroyed, the quantity of heat extricated would have been 10 times
as great, or about 1400°, which has, therefore, been considered as the whole
quantity of heat contained ina pound of water at 32°, and the beginning of
the natural scale has been placed about 1368° below the zero of Fahren-
heit.. Dr. Irvine makes the capacity of ice still less considerable, and: places
the natural zero about 900: degrees below that of Fabrenheit.


If direct experiments on the quantities.of heat, required for producing
certain elevations.of temperature, in different states of the same substance,
compared in this manner with the emission or absorption of heat which takes
place while those changes are performed, agreed with similar experiments
made on different substances, there could be no objection to the mode of
representation. Butif itshould appear that such comparisons. frequently
present us with contradictory results, we could. no longer consider the theory.
of capacities for heat as sufficient to.explain.the phenomena. Withrespect to the
simple changes constituting congelation and liquefaction, condensationand eva-
poration, and compression and rarefaction, there appears to be at present no-evi-
dence of theinsufficiency’of this theory ; ithasnotperhapsyet beenshown thatthe
heat absorbed in any one change is always precisely equaltothat which is emitted.


652 ‘tame a ‘ _* LECTURE Lit.) | any fo


fn the return of the substancé to its former state, but nothing has yet:been .
advanced which renders this opinion improbable; and the estimation of the
natural zero, which is deduced from this doctrine, may at least be considered
as a tolerable ea aa 1 (td tp aeaitanigit
* > HOA $29 42 ree

if, Setievin we atten to deduce the heat produced by friction and by
combustion from changes of the capacities of bodies, thus'estimated, we shall
find that the comparison of a very few facts is sufficient to demonstrate the
imperfection of sucha theory. Count Rumford found no sensible difference |
between the capacities of solid iron and of its chips; but if we even suppose, ‘
for the sake of the argument, that the pressure and friction of the borerhad


‘lessened the capacity of the iron one twelfth, so as to make it no greater than


that of copper; we shall then find that one twelfth of the absolute heat of

the chips, thus abraded, must have amounted to above 60000 degrees of
Fahrenheit, and consequently that the natural zero ought to.be placed above :
700000 degrees below the freezing point, instead of 14 or 1500 only. 4 Tesh ie 9% ey
therefore, impossible to suppose thatany alteration of capacities can account _

for the production of heat by friction: nor is it at all easier to apply this

theory correctly to the phenomena of combustion. A pound of nitre contains
about half its weight of dry acid,and the capacity of the acid, when diluted, is

little more than half as great as that of water ; the acid of apound of nitre —
must therefore contain less heat than a quarter of a pound of water: but —
Lavoisier and Laplace have found, that the deflagration of a pound of nitre ~
produces a quantity of heat sufficient to melt twelve pounds of ice, conse-
quently the heat extricated by the decomposition of a pound of dry nitrous —
acid must be sufficient to melt 24 pounds of ice; and) even’ “supposing he
gases, extricated during the deflagration, to absorb no more heat than
coal contained, which is for several reasons’ highly improbable, ©
that a pound of water ought to contain at least as muth heat, as w
sufficient to melt. 48 sateen of ice, that is, ‘about 6720 «
heit. 4 ¢ elu Bs la AT


bree


In short, the further we pursue ach cil
convinced of the impossibility: of applying
acaseas that of the nitrous acid, Dr.
be thought applicable,’ the heat being


ON THE MEASURIIS AND THE NATURE OF HEAT. 653


substance, without being comprehended in the quantity required for main-
taining its actual temperature. But even this hypothesis’ is wholly inap-
plicable to the extrication of heat by friction, where all the qualities of the
substances concerned remain precisely the same after the operation, as before
it. Ifany further argument were required in confutation of the opinion, that
the heat excited by friction is derived from a change of capacity, it might
be obtained from Mr. Davy’s experiment on the mutual friction of two
pieces ‘of ice, which converted them into water, in a room at the tempera-
ture of the freezing point: for in this case it is undeniable that the capacity
of the water must have been increased during the operation ; and the heat
produced could not, therefore, have been occasioned by the diminution of
the capacity of the ice.


This dmeion naturally leads us to an examination of the various theories
which have been formed respecting the intimate nature of heat; a subject
upon which the popular opinion seems to have been lately led away by very
superficial considerations. ‘The facility with which the mind conceives the
existence of an independent substance, liable to no material variations, except
“those of its quantity and distribution, especially when an appropriate name,
and aplace in the order of the simplest elements has been bestowed on it,
appears to have caused the most eminent chemical philosophers to overlook
some insuperable difficulties attending the hypothesis of caloric. Caloric has
been considered as a peculiar elastic or ethereal fluid, pervading the substance
or the pores of all bodies, in different quantities, according to their different
capacities for heat, and according to their actual temperatures; and being
transferred from one body to another upon any change of capacity, or upon
-any/ other disturbance of the-equilibrium of temperature: it has also been
to be the general principle or cause of repulsion ; and in
, its passage from one body to another, by radiation, it has been imagined by
‘some to flow in a continued stream, and by others in the form of separate
— ‘moying, with icpalstesil velocity, ne great distances from each
; pr) MOP oto


‘ahiiols law i Et SESE OO
ion, ican oa  ateleaca omcaman Dal the


a


O54 ~ LECTURE LIL.»


whole of this doctrine. If the heat is neither received from the surrounding
bodies, which it cannot be without a depression of their temperature, nor
derived from the quantity already accumulated in the bodies themselves,
which it could not be, even if their capacities were diminished in any imagin-
able degree, there is no alternative but to allow that heat must be actually
generated by friction; and if it, is generated out of nothing, it cannot be
matter, nor even an immaterial or semimaterial substance. The collateral
parts of the theory have also their separate difficulties: thus, if heat were
the general principle of repulsion, its augmentation could not diminish
the elasticity of solids and of fluids; if it constituted a continued fluid, it
could not radiate freely through the same space in, different directions; and
if its repulsive particles followed each other at a distance, they would still
approach near enough to each other, in the focus of a burning glass, to have -


their motions deflected from a rectilinear direction. sy %:4 enivos gehts celal rs
aot ibe gopher
If heat is not a substance; it, must be sapsliiet ; and, thin quality-en Bag
be motion. It was Newton’s opinion, that heat consists in| sient af:
tory motion of the particles of bodies, and that this motion is comm! ’
through an apparent vacuum, by the undulations of an. ¢lastic medium, which’ ’


is also concerned in the phenomena of light. If the arguments which | have
been lately advanced, in favour of the undulatory nature of light, be deemed
valid, there will be still stronger reasons for admitting this doctrine respect- ~
ing heat, and it will only be necessary to suppose the vibrations and undula-—
tions, principally constituting it, to be larger and stronger than those of light,
while at the same time the smaller vibrations of light,and even the blackening —
rays, derived from still. more minute vibrations,may, perhaps,
condensed, concur in producing the effects of heat. ‘These effects, baaninay Fy
from the. blackening rays, which are invisible, area little more pe “ ,
in the violet, which still possess but a. faint power of illuming

yellow green afford the most light; the red give less light, iC
heat, while the still larger and less frequent vibrations, which have 1
on the sense of sight, may be supposed to give cee We ea
rays, and to constitute invisible heat.


wt -aii
. It is easy to imagine. that. such vibrations 1


ON THE MEASURES AND THE NATURE OF HEAT. : 655


parts of bodies; by percussion, by « friction, or by the destruction of the
equilibrium of cohesion and repulsion, and by a change of the conditions on
which it may be restored, in consequence of combustion, or of any other
chemical change. It is remarkable that the particles of fluids, which are
incapable of any material: change of temperature from mutual friction, -have
also very little power of communicating heat to each other by their imme-
diate action, so that there’ may be some analogy, in: this respect, between
the communication of heat and its*mechanical Ser iegtecn . "

The effects) of, este: on ihc colatiig am sealed’ powers of bodies have
sometimes been referred to the centrifugal forces and mutual collisions of the
revolving and vibrating particles ; and the increase of the elasticity of aeri-
form fluids has been very minutely compared with the force which would be
detived from an acceleration of these internal motions. In solids and in
liquids, however, this:increase of elasticity:ismot observable, and the imme-
diate effect-of /heat. diminishes not only the force of cohesion, but also in
some degree, that of repulsion, so that these vibrations, if they exist, must
derive their effect on the corpuscular forces from the alterations which they
produce on the situation of the particles, with respect to the causes of these


ian 17 un & : vik


The different dibatcily effects of heat and light are far from furnishing any
objection to this system; it is’ extremely easy to imagine the attraction
between two or three bodies to be modified by the agitations, into which their
particles are thrown. If certain undulations be capable of affecting one of the
three bodies only, its cohesion with both the others may be weakened, and
hence their mutual attraction may be comparatively increased; and from
various combinations of such differences, in the operation of different kinds
of heat and light, a great diversity of effects of a similar kind may be
derived.


’


If heat, when attached to any substance, be supposed to consist in minute
vibrations, and when propagated from one body to another, to depend on
the undulations of a medium highly elastic, its effects must strongly resem-
ble those of sound, since every sounding body is in a state of vibration, and


656 LECTURE fit.


the air, or any other medium, which transmits sound, conveys its undulation »


to distant parts by means of its elasticity. And we shall find that the prin-
cipal phenomena of heat may actually be illustrated by a comparison with
those of sound. The excitation of heat and sound are not only similar, but
often identical; as in the operations of friction and percussion: they are
both communicated sometimes by contact and sometimes by radiation; for

besides the common radiation of sound through the air, its effects are com-

municated by contact, when the end of a tuning fork is placed on a table, or
on the sounding board of an instrument, which receives from the fork an
impression that is afterwards propagated as a distinct sound. And the
effect of radiant heat, in raising the temperature of a body upon which it
falls, resembles the sympathetic agitation of a string, when the sound of
another string, which is in unison with it, is transmitted to it through the air.

The water, which is dashed about by the vibrating extremities of a tuning fork
dipped intoit, may represent the manner in which the particles at the surface
of a liquid are thrown out of the reach of the force of cohesion, and convert-

ed into vapour; and the extrication of heat, in consequence of condensation,

may be compared with the increase of sound produced by lightly touching
a long chord which is slowly vibrating, or revolving in such a manner as to
emit little or no audible sound; while the diminution of heat by expansion,

and the increase of the capacity of a substance for heat, may be attributed to

the greater space afforded to each particle, allowing it to be equally agitated
with a less perceptible effect on the neighbouring particles. In some cases,

indeed, heat and ‘sound not only resemble each other in their operations, but
produce precisely the same effects; thus, an artificial magnet, the force of
which is quickly destroyed by heat, is affected more slowly in a similar
manner, when made to ring for a. considerable: time; and an electrical jar
may be discharged, either by ae it, or by a it to sound by the
friction of the finger. »


All these analogies are certainly favourable to the opinion of the vibratory
nature of heat, which has been sufficiently sanctioned by the authority of
the greatest philosophers of past times, and of the most sober reasoners of
the present. Those, however, who look up with unqualified reverence to
the dogmas of the modern schools of chemistry, will probably long retain a


nib dior de GRODURE LEB sicir dyioty
ety wa ant Ge wy ins o 7 a : wo


4 9 hs 70


ON ELECTRICITY IN EQUILIBRIUM.


Tue phenomena of electricity are as amusing and popular in their external form
as they are intricate and abstruse in their intimate nature. In examining these
phenomena, a philosophical observer will not be content with such exhibitions as
dazzle the eye for a moment, without leaving any impression that can be instruct-
ive to the mind, but he will be anxious to trace the connexion of the facts with
their general causes,and to compare them with the theories which have been
proposed concerning them: and although the doctrine of electricity is in
many respects yet in its infancy, we shall find that some hypotheses may be
assumed, which are capable of explaining the principal circumstances ina
simple and satisfactory manner, and which are extremely useful in connect-
ing a multitude of detached facts into an intelligible system. These hypo-


‘theses, founded on the discoveries of Franklin, have been gradually formed


into a theory, by the investigations of Aepinus and Mr. Cavendish, combined
with the experiments and inferences of Lord Stanhope, Coulomb, and
Robison.


We shall first consider the fundamental hypotheses on which this
system depends, and secondly the conditions of equilibrium of the
substances concerned in it; determining the mode of distribution
of the electric fluid, and the forces or pressures derived from its action
when at rest; all which will be found to be deduced from the theory
precisely as they are experimentally observable. The motions of the
electric fluid will next be noticed, as far as we can form any general con-
clusions. respecting them; and the manner in which the equilibrium of elec-
tricity is disturbed, or the excitation of electricity, will also be considered;
and, in the last place, it will be necessary to take a view of the mechanism or the

8 '


on ELECTRIQUEY IN EQUILIBRIUM. 659


practical part of electricity, and to examine the natural and artificial appara-
tus concerned in electrical phenomena, as well as in shoes effects, which
have been sai wile galvanic.

It is supposed ses a peculiar Pahetdl ‘fluid pervades the pores, if not the
actual substance, of the earth and of all other material bodies, passing through
them with more of less facility, according to their different, powers of conduct-
ing it:, that the particles of this fluid repel each other, and are attracted by
the particles of common matter: that the particles of common matter also
repel each other: and that these attractions and repulsions are equal among
themselves, and vary inversely as the squares of the distances of the particles,

The effects of this fluid are distinguished from those of all other substances
by an attractive or repulsive quality, which it appears to communicate to
different bodies, and which differs in general from other attractions and
repulsions, by its immediate diminution or cessation, when the bodies, acting on
each other, come into. contact, or when they are touched by other bodies.
The name electricity is derived from electrum, amber; for it was long ago
observed that amber, when rubbed, continues for some time to attract small
bodies; but at present electricity is usually excited by other means. In
general a body is said to be electrified, when it contains, either as a whole, or
in any of its parts, more Or less of the electric fluid than is natural to it; and it is
supposed that what is called positive electricity depends, on a redundancy,
and negative electricity on a deficiency of the fluid. ,


These repulsions and attractions are supposed to act, not only between two
particles which are either perfectly or very nearly in contact with each other,
but also between all other particles at all distances, whatever obstacles may
be interposed between them. Thus, if two electrified balls repel each other,
the effect is not impeded by the interposition of .a plate of glass: and if any
other substance interposed appears to interfere with their mutual. action, it
is.in consequence of its own electrical affections. | In these respects, as; well
as in the law of their variation, the electrical forces differ from theicommon
repulsion which operates between the particles of elastic fluids, and resemble
more nearly that of gravitation, Their intensity, when separately consider-
ed, is much greater than that of gravitation, and they might be supposed


ier os


- 660 LECTURE LITE.


—


_simplicity of nature’s works, to be admitted as primary consequences of the f 4


to be materially concerned in the great phenomena of the universe; but in
the common neutral state of all bodies, the electrical fluid, which is every
where present, is so distributed, that the various forces hold each other
exactly in equilibrium,and the separate results are destroyed ; unless we choose
to consider gravitation itself as arising from a comparatively esti inequality
between the electrical attractions and repulsions. :


The attraction of the electric fluid to common matter is sisi by its com-
munication, from one body to, another, which is less copiously supplied
with it, as well as by many other phenomena; and this attraction of the
fluid of the first body, to the matter of the second, is precisely equal to its
repulsion for the quantity of the fluid, which naturally belongs to the second, :
so as to saturate the matter. For the excess or deficiency of the fluid in the —__
first body does not immediately produce either attraction or repulsion,
so long as the natural distribution of the fluid ( reiioe body remains id
waaltered. - a RENO 78

te ‘tubs

Since also two neutral bodies, the matter which chosen neon vausilil ae
by the electric fluid, exhibit no attraction for each other, the matter in
the first must be repelled by the matter in the second; for’ its attraction for :
the fluid of the second would otherwise remain uncompensated. We are, —
however, scarcely justified in classing this mutual repulsion among the —__
fundamental properties of matter; for useful as these laws are in explaining ?
electrical appearances, they seem to deviate too far from the “magnificent


constitution of matter: they may, however, be considered
tions of some other more general laws, which are yet wh i
to us. z 3G tet bE HE Aa me Te
By jageP2iiad £ Sotsaly ons ata 4
‘When the equilibrium of these forces is d jr
in motion; those bodies, which allow the fluid a
perfect conductors; but those which imped I
nonconductors, or imperfect conductors.
fluid is received into the metallic Keo


= ee €
ON ELECTRICITY IN EQUILIBRIUM. 661


the ground; hence the human body is called a conductor. But when the
metallic cylinder, or conductor, of the machine is surrounded only by dry
air, and supported by glass, the electric fluid 1s retained, and its density
increased, until it becomes capable of procuring itself ‘a passage, some inches
in length, through the air, which 1s a very imperfect conductor. If a person,
connected with the conductor, be placed on a stool with glass legs, the
electricity will no longer pass through him to the earth, but may be so ac-
cumulated, as to make its way to any neighbouring substance, which is capable
of receiving it, exhibiting a luminous appearance, called a spark; and a
person ora substance, so placed as to be in contact with nonconductors only,
is said to be insulated. When electricity is subtracted from the substance
thus insulated, it is said to be negatively electrified, but the sensible effects
are nearly the same, except that in some cases the form of the spark is a little
different.


_ Perfect conductors, when electrified, are in general either overcharged. or
undercharged with electricity in their most distant parts at the same time; but
nonconductors, although they. have an equal attraction for the electric fluid,
are often differently affected in different parts of their substance, even when
those parts are similarly situated in every respect, except that some of them have
had their electricity increased or diminished by a foreign cause. This property
of nonconductors may be illustrated by means of a cake of resin, or a plate


‘of glass, to which a local electricity may be communicated in any part of


its surface, by the contact of an electrified body; and the parts thus electri-
fied may afterwards be distinguished from the rest, by the attraction which -
they exert on any small particles of dust or powder projected near them; the
manner, in which the particles arrange themselves on the surface, indicating
also in some cases the species of electricity, whether positive or negative,
that has been employed ; positive electricity producing an appearance some-
what resembling feathers; and negative electricity an arrangement more like
spots. ‘The inequality in the distribution of the electric fluid in a noncon-


; ductor may remain for some hours, or even some days, continually di-


ig till it becomes imperceptible, -
.


che fundamental properties of the electric-duid, and of the dif-
‘matter as counccted with that fluid, We are uext to examine
iia «


662 LECTURE LIII.


its distribution, and the attractive and repulsive effects exhibited by it, under
different forms. Supposing a quantity of redundant fluid to exist in a
spherical conducting body, it will be almost wholly collected into a minute
space contiguous to the surface, while the internal parts remain but little
overcharged. For we may neglect the actions of the portion of fluid which


is only occupied in saturating the matter, and also the effect of the matter-


thus neutralised, since the redundant fluid is repelled as much by the one
as it is attracted by the ather; and we need only to consider the mutual
actions of the particles of this superfluous fluid on each other. It may then
be shown, in the same manner as it is demonstrated of the force of gravita+
tion, that all the spherical strata which are remoter from the centre than any
given particle, will have the whole of their action on it annihilated by the
balance of their forces, and that the effective repulsion of the interior strata
will be the same, as if they were all collected in the centre. This repulsion
will, therefore, impel the particles of the fluid towards the surface, as long
as it exists, and nothing will impede the condensation of the redundant fluid
there, until it is exhausted from the neighbourhood of the centre. In the same
manner it may be shown, that if there be a deficiency of fluid, it will be only
in the external parts, the central parts remaining always in’a state of neu-
trality: and since the quantity of electric fluid taken away from a body, in
any common experiment, bears but a very small proportion to the whole
that it contains, the deficiency will also be found in a very small portion of the
sphere, next toits surface. And if, instead of being spherical, tle body be
of any other form, the effects of electricity will still be principally confined
to its surface. This proposition was very satisfactorily investigated by Mr.
Cavendish; and it was afterwards more fully shown, by Dr. Gray’s experi-
ments, that the capacities of different bodies, for receiving electricity, depend
much more on the quantity of their surfaces, than on their solid’ contents:
thus, the conductor of an electrical machine will contain very nearly or quite
as much electricity if hollow as if solid.


If two spheres be united by a‘cylindrical conducting substance of small di-
mensions, there will be an equilibrium, when the actions of the redundant
fluid in the spheres,on the whole fluid in the cylinder,are equal; thatis, when
both the spheres have their surfaces electrified in an equal degree: « but if the
length of the cylinder is considerable, the fluid within it can only remain at


ee, Eee 2 he ae ott - = ‘
7 SRE ae oc tn ORT Sa: ete 2
- i 4 mo % % : -


ON ELECTRICITY IN EQUILIBRIUM. 663


rest when the quantities of redundant fluid are nearly equal in both spheres,
and consequently when the density is greater in the smaller, And for a simi-
lar reason, in bodies of irregular forms, the fluid is always most accumulated
-in the smallest parts; and when a conducting substance is pointed, the fluid
becomes so dense at its extremity, as easily to overcome the forces which
tend to retain it in its situation. AFdate XXXIX. Fig. 551 ) rai W

ia this Gistaibution we find a very characteristic difference between the
pressure of the electric fluid and the common hydrostatic pressure of liquids
or of simple elastic fluids;, for these exert on every surface similarly situated a
pressure proportionate to its magnitude; but the electric fluid exerts a pres-
sure on small and angular surfaces greater, in proportion to their magnitudes,
than the pressure on larger parts: so that if the electric fluid were in general
confined to its situation by the pressure of the atmosphere, that pressure
might easily be too weak to oppose its escape from any prominent points. _ It
does not appear, however, that this pressure is the only cause which prevents
the escape of the electric fluid; nor is it certain that this fluid can pass
through a perfect vacuum, although it has not yet been proved, that a body
placed in a vacuum is perfectly insulated. Whatever the resistance may be,
which prevents the dissipation of electricity, it is always the more easily over-
come, as the electrified substance is more pointed, and as the, point is more
prominent; and even the presence of dust is often unfavourable to the suc-
cess of electrical experiments, on account of the great number of pointed ter-
minations which it affords,


The general effect of electrified bodies on each other, if their bulk is small
in comparison with their distance, is, that they are mutually repelled when in
similar states of electricity,and attracted when in dissimilar states. This is a
consequence immediately deducible from the mutual attraction of redundant
matter and redundant fluid, and from the repulsion supposed to exist between
any two portions either of matter or of- fluid, and it may also easily be con-
_ firmed: by experimental proof. A neutral body, if it were a perfect noncon-
ductor, would not be affected either way by the neighbourhood of an electri-
fied body: for while the whole matter contained in it remains barely saturated
with the electric fluid, the attractions and repulsions balance each other. But
in general, a: neutral body appears to, be attracted by an electrified body, om


.


664 LECTURE: Litt.


account of a change of the disposition of the fluid which it contains, upon
the approach of a body either positively or negatively electrified. The elec-
trical affection produced in this manner, without any actual transfer of the
fluid, is called induced electricity.


When a body positively electrified approaches to a neutral body, the re-
dundancy of the flaid expels a portion of the natural quantity from the near-
est parts of the neutral body, so that it is accumulated at the opposite extre-
mity; while the matter, which is left deficient, attracts the redundant fluid
of the first body, in such a manner as to cause it to be more condensed in the
neighbourhood of the second than elsewhere; and hence the fluid of this body
is driven still further off, and all the effects are redoubled. The attraction of
the redundant fluid of the eleetrified body, for the redundant matter of the neu-
tral body, is stronger than its repulsion for the fluid which has been expelled
from it, in proportion as the square of the mean distance of the matter is
smaller than that of the mean distance of the fluid: so that in all such cases
of induced electricity, an attraction is produced between the bodies concerned.
And a similar attraction will happen, under contrary circumstances, when 2


-neutral body and a body negatively electrified, approach each other,


The state of induced electricity may be illustrated by placing a long con-
ductor at a little distance from an electrified substance, and directed towards it ;
and by suspending pith balls or other light bodies from it, in pairs, at different
parts of its length: these will repel each other, from being similarly electrified, at
the two ends, which are in contrary states of electricity, while at acertain point


towards the middle, they will remain at rest, the conductor being here perfectly


neutral. It was from the situation of this point that Lord Stanhope first inferred


the true law of the electric attractions and repulsions,although Mr. Cavendish


had before suggested the same law as the most probable supposition.


The attraction, thus exerted by an electrified body upon neutral substances,
is strong enough, if they are sufficiently light, to overcome their gravitation,
and to draw them up from a table at some little distance: upon touching
the electrified body, if it is a conductor, they receive a quantity of electricity
from it, and are again repelled, until they are deprived of their electricity by
contact with some other substance, which, if sufficiently near to the first, is

a


; |
- ; ae
BS ea <> << = tint ane ai


to produce a given tension, or tendency to escape: but if it be made too thin,


¥ ON ELECTRICITY IN EQUILIBRIUM. 665
usually in a contrary state, and therefore renders them still more capable of
returning, when they have touched it, to the first substance, in consequence
of an increased attraction, assisted also by a new repulsion. This alternation
has been applied to the construction of severalelectrical toys ; a little hammer,
for example, has been made to play between two bells; and this instrument has
been employed for giving notice of any change of the electrical state of the
atmosphere. The repulsion, which takes*place between two bodies, in a similar
state of electricity, is the cause of the currents of air which always accompany
the discharge of electricity, whether negative or positive, from pointed sub-
stances; each particle of air, as soon as it has received its electricity from the
point, being immediately repelled by it ; and this current has also been supposed
to facilitate the escape of the electricity, by bringing a continual succession of
particles not already overcharged.


If two bodies approach each other, electrified either positively or negatively
in different degrees, they willeither repel or attract each other, according to
their distance: when they are very remote, they exhibit a repulsive force,
but when they are within a certain distance, the effects of induced electricity
overcome the repulsion, which would necessarily take place, if the distribution
of the fluid remained unaltered’ by their mutual influence.


When a quantity of the electric fluid is accumulated on one side of a non-_
conducting substance, it tends to drive off the fluid from the other side; and
if this fluid is suffered to escape, the remaining matter exerts its attrac-
tion on the fluid which has been imparted to the first side, and allows it to be
accumulated in a much greater quantity than could have existed in an equal
surface of a conducting substance. In this state, the body is said to
be charged; and for producing it the more readily, each surface is usually
coated with a conducting substance, which serves to convey the fluid to and
from its different parts with convenience. The thinner any substance is, the
greater quantity of the fluid is required for charging it in this manner, so.as


to break, the attractive force of the fluid, for the matter on the
© sid Spee rearieera of the substance, and perhaps-forcing


666 LECTURE LUI. .


‘When a communication is made in any manner by a conducting substance


_ between. the two coatings of a charged plate or vessel, the equilibrium is re-


stored, and the effect, is, called a shock. If the coatings be removed, the
plate will ‘still remain charged, and it may be. gradually, discharged by mak-

ing a communication between its several parts in. succession, but it cannot be

discharged at once, for want of a common connexion: so that the presence

of the coating is not absolutely essential to the charge and discharge of the

opposite surfaces. Such a coated substance is most usually employed in the

form of a jar. Jars were formerly filled with water, or with iron filings; the
instrument. having been. principally; made, known, fromthe experiments of
Musschenbroek and others at Leyden, it was called, the Leyden phial; but
at present a coating of tin foil is;commonly applied on both sides of the jar,

leaving a suflicient space at its upper part, to avoid the spontaneous discharge,

which would often take place between the coatings, if they approached too.
near to each other; and a ball is fixed. to.the cover, which has a communication
with the internal coating, and by. means of which the jar is charged, while.
the external coating is allowed to communicate with the ground. A collect-
ion of such jars is called 4 battery, and an apparatus of this kind may be made
so powerful, by increasing the number of Jars, as to exhibit many striking
effects by the motion of the electric fluid, ‘in its passage from one to the
other of the surfaces,


The conducting powers of different substances. are concerned, not only in
the facility with which the motions of the electric fluid are directed into a
particular channel, but also in.many cases of its equilibrium, and particularly
in the properties of charged substances, which depend.on the resistance op-
posed by nonconductors to the ready transmission of the fluid. , These powr
ers may be compared, by-ascertaining the greatest length of each of the sub-
stances to be examined, through which,aspark or a.shock will take it course,
in preference toa giyen length of-air, or.of any other,standard of, comparison.
The substances, which conduct electricity the most; readily, are, metals, well
burnt charcoal, animal bodies, acids, saline liquors,.water, and very rare air,
The principal nonconductors are glass, ice, gems, dry salts, sulfur, amber,
resins, silk, dry wood, oils, dry air of the usual density, and the barometrical
vacuum. Heat commonly increases, the conducting powers of bodies; a jar of


ON ELECTRICITY IN EQUILIBRIUM. 667


glass may be discharged by a moderate heat, and liquid resins are capable of
transmitting shocks, although they are by no means good conductors: it is
remarkable also that a jar may be discharged by minute agitation, when it is
caused to ring by the friction of the finger. It has peen observed that, in a
. great variety of cases, those substances, which are the best conductors of heat,
afford also the readiest passage to electricity; thus, copper conducts heat
mere rapidly, and electricity more readily, than iron, and platina less than
alamost any other metal; glass also presents a considerable resistance to the
transmission of both these influences. The analogy is, however, in many re-
. spects imperfect, and it affords us but little light, with regard either to the
nature of heat, or to that of the electric fluid.


af yn dr. enoty


ra ruthy watilgiteeiag


LECTURE, BLN, Js
® = i ; YY
ON ELECTRICITY IN MOTION. — ri


- THE manner in which the electric fluid is transferred from one body to au--
other, the immediate effects of such a transfer, the causes which originally —
disturb the equilibrium of electricity, and the practical methods, by which all
these circumstances are regulated and measured, require to be considered as
belonging to the subject of electricityin motion. Among the modes of ex-
citation by which the equilibrium is originally disturbed,one of the most inter-
esting is the galvanic apparatus, which has been of late years a very favourite
subject of popular curiosity, and of which the theory and operation will be
briefly examined, although the subject appears rather to belong to the che-
mical than to the mechanical doctrine of electricity.


The progressive motion of the electric fluid through conducting substances
is so rapid, as to be performed in all cases without a sensible interval of time. li
It has indeed been said, that when very weakly excited, and obliged to pass
to a very great distance, a perceptible portion of time is actually occupied in *
its passage; but this fact is somewhat doubtful, and attempts have beenmade
in vain, to estimate. the interval, employed in the transmission of a shock
through several miles of wire. We are not to imagine that the same
of the fluid, which enter at one part, pass through the whole condt
stance, any more than that the same portion of blood, which i thr
the heart,in each pulsation, arrives at the wrist, at pres


the ctu velocity. of each particle, in the same
wave exceeds that of the particles of water concern
this velocity must depend both on the elasticity f
force with which it is confined to the conducti


[ > ON ELECTRICITY IN MOTION. — 669


density of the fluid from the velocity of a spark or shock, compared witli that

; of sound; or we might deduce its velocity from a determination of its density. —
; It has been supposed, although perhaps somewhat hastily, ane the actual ve-
locity is nearly equal to that of light.


When a conducting) substance aeiiemncti another, which is electrified,
i ~ the distribution of the electric fluid within it is necessarily altered by
\ induction, before it receives a spark, so. that ‘its remoter extremity is
| brought into a state similar to that of the first body: hence it happens that
| when the spark passes, it/produces less effect at the remoter end of the sub.
stance, while the part presented to the electrified body is most affected, on account
of its sudden change to an. opposite state. But if both ends: approach
bodies in opposite states of electricity, they will both be strongly affected
when the shock takes place, while the amide of the circuit wpdergoes but
little change. ’ tt
8 Pe ?

The manner in ee the electric fluid makes its way, through a more or less
perfect nonconductor, is not completely understood: it is doubtful whether
the substance is forced away on each side, so as to leave a vacuum for the
passage of the fluid, or whether the newly formed surface helps to.guide
it in its way; and in some cases it has been supposed that the gradual com-
munication of electricity has rendered the substance more capable of conduct-
ing it, either immediately, or, in the case of the air, by first rarefying it.

However this may be, the perforation of a jar of glass by an overcharge, and
that of a plate of air by a Spark, appear to be effects of the same kind,
although the charge of the jar is principally contained in the glass, while
the plate of air is perhaps little concerned in the distribution of tlie elec-
Reet rei ; ‘ 3
=i res ada Lal bple Hote ». : ) 4
al direction of the bacthia: current ba not in any instance ceo


t elaine dicen, oa otamst from, the
re spn hal ong puny ve :


670. LECTURE. LIV.


between them, is found to heat the negativé ball much more than the posi-
tive. We cannot, however, place much dependence on any circumstance
of this kind, for it is doubtful whether any current of the fluid, which we
can produce, possesses sufficient momentum to carry with it a body of sensible
magnitude, Itisin fact of little consequence to the theory, whether the terms
positive and negative be correctly applied, provided that their sense remain
determined; and that, like positive and negative quantities in mathematics,
they be always understood of states which neutralise each other. The
original opinion of Dufay, of the existence of two distinct fluids, a vitreous
and a resinous electricity, has at present few advocates, although some have
thought such a supposition favoured by the — of the galvanic de-
composition of water.


When electricity is simply accumulated without motion, it does not appear
to have any effect, either mechanical, chemical, or physiological, by which
its presence can be discovered; the acceleration of the pulse, and the ad-
vancement of the growth of plants, which have been sometimes attributed
to it, have not been confirmed by the most accurate experiments. An un-
interrupted current of electricity, through a perfect conductor, would perhaps
be also in every respect imperceptible, since the best conductors appear to
be the least affected by it. Thus, if we place our hand on the conductor of
an electrical machine, the electricity will pass off continually through the
body, without exciting any sensation. A constant stream of galvanic elec-
tricity, passing through an iron wire is, however, capable of exciting a
considerable degree of heat, and-if it be transmitted through the hands of
the operator, it will produce a slight numbness, although in general some in-
terruption of the current,is necessary in order to furnish an accumulation
sufficient to produce sensible effects; and such an interruption may even
increase the effect of a single spark or shock; thus, gunpowder is more readily
fired by the discharge of a battery passing ee interrupted circuit,
than through a series of perfect conductors.


The most.common effect of the motion of the electric fluid is the production
of light. Light is probably never occasioned by the passage of the fluid
through a perfect conductor; forwhen the discharge of a large battery renders


a small wire luminous, the fluid is not wholly confined to the-wire, but
é ;


A),


ON ELECTRICITY IN MOTION. 671


overflows a little into the neighbouring space. There is always an appearance
of light whenever the path.of the fluid is interrupted by an imperfect con-
ductor; nor is the apparent contact of conducting substances sufficient to
prevent it, unless they are held together by a considerable force; thus, a
chain, conveying a spark or shock, appears luminous at each link, and the
rapidity of the motion is so great, that we can never observe any difference
im the times of the appearance of the light in its different parts; so that
a series of luminous points, formed by the passage of the electric fluid,
between a string of conducting bodies, represents at once a brilliant delinea-
tion of the whole figure in which they are arranged. A lump of sugar, a
piece of wood, or an egg, may easily be made luminous in this manner; and
many substances, by means of their properties as solar phosphori, retain for
some seconds the luminous appearance thus acquired. Even water is so im-
perfect a conductor, that a strong shock may be seen in its passage through
it; and when the air is sufficiently moistened or rarefied to become a con-
ductor, the track of the fluid through it is indicated by streams of light,
which are perhaps derived from a series of minute sparks passing between
the particles of water or of rarefied air. When the air is extremely rare, the
light is greenish; as it becomes more dense, the light becomes blue, and
then violet, until it no longer conducts. The appearance of the electrical
light of a point enables us to distinguish the nature of the electricity with which
it is charged; a pencil of light, streaming from the point, indicating that
its electricity is positive, while a luminous star, with few diverging rays,
shows that it is negative. The sparks, exhibited by small balls, differently
electrified, have also similar varieties in their forms, according to the nature
of their charges. (Plate XL. Fig. 552.)


The production of heat by electricity frequently accompanies that of light,
and appears to'depend in some measure on the same circumstances. A fine
wire may be fused and dissipated by the discharge of a battery; and without
being perfectly melted, it may sometimes be shortened or lengthened, accordingly
as it is loose or stretched during the experiment. The more readily a metal con-
ducts,the shorter is the portion of it which the same shock can destroy; and it
has sometimes been found that a double charge of a battery has been capable
of melting a quadruple length of wire of the same kind.


The mechanical effects of electricity are probably in many cases the conse-


..
vane
i 4


672 y LECTURE Liv.


4


quences of the rarefaction produced by the heat which is excited; stile
explosion, attending the transmission of a ‘shock or spark through the air,
may easily be.supposed to be derived from the expansion caused. by heat; and-
the destruction of a glass tube, which contains a fluid in a capillary bore,
when a spark is caused to pass through it, is the natural consequence of the
conversion of some particles of the fluid into vapour. . But when a glass jac
is perforated, this rarefaction cannot be supposed to be adequate to the effect. f
It is remarkable that such a perforation may be made by a very moderate
discharge, wher the glass is in contact with oil or with. ‘sealing pan jawins
sufficient See of this circumstance has yet been givens) ‘etna
sted VEret R Ee LS ba) shat my

ae strong current of electricity, or a succession of shocks or. pena cce
malted through a substance, by means of fine wires, is capable of producing
many chemical combinations and decompositions, ‘some of which may be ie
attributed merely to the heat which it occasions, but others are wholly differ- ;
ent. Of these the most remarkable is the produetion of. oxpeenitagdisbyy
drogen gas from common water, which are usually. extrieated at once, in |
such quantities, as, when again combined, will reproduce the. water which
has disappeared; but in some eases the oxygen appears to be disengaged
_ most ts, Pe at the oar phasis and the hydrogen at the negative.)


x HTehesew * BURGHEAD, —


and an explosion of any kind is usually secon by asmell s
that of sulfur, or rather of fired gunpowder. |The peculiar set
the electric fluid occasions in the human frame, “appears: in:
_ derived from the spasmodic contractions of the muscles |
passes; although in some cases it produces we of.

thus, the spark of a conductor occasions a disdgreéable s

and when an excoriated surface is placed in| ie gal
_smarting, mixed with burning, is. experienced.
a shock is felt most powerfully at the join
which the fluid finds in passing the articulating
of the joints. The sudden death of an animal,in ¢
is probably owing to the immediate ex m1
nervous system. It is remarkable that a
the most elastic parts of the body, in pat
tion of the. DEITCH, which is not rn unlil


ON ELECTRICITY IN MOTION. 675


| The principal modes, in which: the electric equilibrium is primarily de-
stroyed, are simple contact, friction, a change of the form of aggregation,
and chemical combinations and decompositions. The electricity produced
by the simple contact of any two substances is extremely weak, and can ouly


be detected by very delicate experiments : in general it appears that thesubstance, _ :


which conducts the more readily, acquires a slight degree of negative elec-
tricity, while the other substance is positively electrified in an. equal degree.
The same disposition of the fluid is also usually produced by friction, the
one substance always losing as much ‘as the other gains; and commonly


although not always, the worst conductor becomes positive: At the instant °


in which the friction is applied, the capacities or attractions of the bodies for
electricity appear to be altered, and a greater or less quantity is required for
saturating them; and upon the cessation of the temporary change, this re-
dundancy or deficiency is rendered sensible. When two substances of the
same kind are rubbed together, the smaller or the rougher becomes nega-
tively electrified; perhaps because the smaller surface is more heated; in con-


sequence of its undergoing more friction than an equal portion of the larger, »


and hence becomes a better conductor; and because the rougher is in itself
a better conductor than the smoother, and may possibly have its conducting


‘powers increased by the greater agitation of its parts which the friction pro-


duces. The back of a live'cat becomes positively electrified, with whatever
substance it is rubbed; glass.is positive in most cases, but not when rubbed
with mercury in a vacuum, although sealing wax, which is generally nega-
tive, is rendered positive by immersion ina trough of mercury. When a
white and a black silk stocking are rubbed together, the white stocking


acquires positive electricity,and the black negative, perhaps because the black .


dye renders the silk both rougher and a better conductor:


hose substances, which have very little conducting power, are some-
times called electrics, since they are capable of exhibiting readily the
electricity which friction excites on their surfaces, where it remains
accumulated, so that it may be collected into a conductor; while the
surfaces of such substances, as have greater conducting powers, do not
so readily imbibe the fluid from others with which they are rubbed, since
they may be supplied from the internal parts of the substances themselves,
when their altered capacity requires it; thus, glass, when heated to 110° of
Pahrenheit, can with difficulty be excited, becoming an imperfect conductor:


‘oo


oT eae


” 674 LECTURE Liv.


but a thin plate of a conducting substance, when insulated, tay be excited
almost as easily as an electric, commonly so called. _ bs 4


Vapours are generally ina negative state, but if they rise from metallic
substances, or even from some kinds of heated glass, the effect is uncertain,
probably on account of some chemical actions which interfere with it. Sul-
fur becomes electrical in cooling, and wax candles are said to be sometimes found
ina state so electrical, when they are taken out of their moulds, as to attract
the particles of dust which are floating near them. The tourmalin, and
several other crystallized stones, become electrical when heated or cooled,and
it is found that the disposition, assumed by the fluid, bears a certain relation
to the direction in which the stone transmits the light most readily; some ‘
parts of the crystal being rendered always positively and bse emer ,
electtical, by a an increase of temperature.

The most remarkable of the phenomena, attending the excitation ‘of elec-
tricity by chemical changes, are those which have lately received the appella- 4
tion of galvanic. Some of the effects which have been considered as belong- =
ing to galvanism are probably derived from the electrical powers of the animal
body, and the rest have been referred by Mr. Volta, and many other philo- —
sophers on the continent, to the mere mechanical actions of bodies possessed Ji:
of different properties with regard to electricity. Thus, they have supposed :
that when a circulation of the electric fluid is produced through a long series —
of substances in a certain direction, the differences of their attractions and of
their conducting powers, which must remain the same throughout the process,
keep up this perpetual motion, in defiance of the general laws of ‘mechanical | hie
forces. In this country it has been generally maintained, that no e
founded on such principles could be admissible, even if it peri era
respects sufficient and satisfactory, which the masa: y
certainly is not.


The phenomena of galvanism appear to be princi
equality in the distribution of the electric fluid,
changes, and maintained by means of the re
a continued alternation of substances of dit
much stronger obstacle to its transmission than ai
would have done. The substances employed m


ON ELECTRICITY IN MOTION. 675


solids nor of fluids, and they must be of three different kinds, possessed of


different powers of conducting electricity; but whether the difference of
their conducting powers is of any other consequence than as it accompanies
different chemical properties, is hitherto undetermined. Of these three
substances, two must possess a power of acting mutually on each other, while
the other appears to serve principally for making a separate connexion between
them: and this action may be of twokinds, or perhaps of more ; the one is
oxidation, or the combination of a metal or an inflammable substance with a
portion of oxygen derived from water or from an acid, the other sulfuration,
or a combination with the sulfur contained in asolution of an alkaline sulfuret.


We may represent the effects of all galvanic combinations, by considering the
oxidation as producing positive electricity in the acting liquid, and the sulfuration
as producing negative electricity, and by imagining that this electricity is always
communicated to the best conductor of the other substances concerned, so as
to produce a circulation in the direction thus determined. For example, when .
two wires of zinc and silver,touching each other,are separately immersed in an
acid, the acid, becoming positively electrical ,imparts its electricity to the silver,
and hence it flows back into the zinc: when the ends of a piece of charcoal
are dipped into water and into an acid, connected together by a small tube,
the acid, becoming positive, sends its superfluous fluid through the charcoal
into the water; and if a wire of copper be dipped into water and a solution
of alkaline sulfuret, connected with each other, the sulfuret, becoming nega-
tive, will draw the fluid from the copper on which it acts; and in all these
cases the direction of the current is truly determined, as it may be shown
by composing a battery of ‘a number of alternations of this kind, and either
examining the state of its different parts by electrical tests, or connecting
wires with its extremities, which, when immersed into a portion of water,
will exhibit the production of oxygen gas where they emit the electric fluid,
and of hydrogen where they receive it. These processes of oxidation and
of sulfuration may be opposed to each other, or they may be combined in


various ways, the sum or difference of the separate actions being obtained by


“tends to impede the whole effect, perliaps by impeding


; the usage of the Hid though the ue The most oxidable of the


676 LECTURE LIV.


metals, and probably the worst conductor, is zinc; the next is iron; then -
-come tin, lead, copper, silver, gold, and platina. (Plate XL: Fig. 553. .3555.)


‘In the same manner as a wire charged with .positive electricity causes an


extrication of oxygen gas, so the supply of electricity through the more con-
ducting metal promotes the oxidation of the zinc of a galvanic battery ; and


the effect of this circulation:may be readily exhibited, by fixing a wire of zinc,


_and another of silver or platina,in an acid, while one end of each is loose, and


may be brought together or separated at pleasure: for at the moment that, the
contact takes place, a stream of bubbles rising from the platina, and a white
cloud of oxid falling from the zinc, indicate both the circulation of the fluid
and the increase of the chemical action. But when, on the other hand, a
plate of zinc is made negative by the action of an acid on the greater part of
its surface, adetached drop of water has less effect on it, than in the natural
state: while aplate of iron, which touches the zinc, and forms a part of the
circle with it, is very readily oxidated at a distant point: such a plate must
therefore be considered, with regard to this effect, as being made positive by
the electricity which it receives from the acid or the water; unless something
like a compensation be supposed to take place, from the effects of
induced €électricity. Instead of the extrication of hydrogen, the same
causes will sometimes occasion a deposition of a metal which has been dis-
solved, will prevent the solution of a metal which would otherwise have been
corroded, or produce some effects which appear to indicate the presence of an
alkali, either volatile or fixed. ‘All these operations may, however, be very
much impeded by the interposition of any considerable length of water, or of
any other imperfect conductor. (Plate XL. Fig. 556.)


It is obvious, that since the current of electricity, produced by a
galvanic circle, facilitates those actions from which its powers are derived, the
effect of a double series must be more than twice as great as that of a single
one: and hence arises the activity of the pile of Volta, the discovery of which
forms the most important. era in the history of this department of natural
knowledge. The intensity. of the electrical charge, and the chemical and
physiological effects of a pile or battery, seem to depend principally on the
number of alternations of substances; the light and heat more on the joint mag-
nitude of the surfaces employed. In-common electricity, the greatest heat


ON ELECTRICITY IN) MOTION. 677


‘appears to be occasioned by a long continuation of a slow motion of the fluid;
and this is perhaps best furnished in galvanism by a surface of. large extent,
while some other effects: may very naturally be expected to depend om the in-
tensity of the charge, independently of the quantity of charged surface... It
‘may easily’ be imagined, that the tension of the fluid must be nearly. propor-
‘tional to thenumber of surfaces, imperfectly conducting, which are interposed
‘between the ends of a pile or battery, the density of the fluid becoming
greater and greater by a limited’ quantity at each step; and it is easily un-
‘derstood, that any point of the pile may be rendered neutral, by a connexion
with the earth, while those parts, whichare aboveit or below it, will still preserve
their relations unaltered with respect to each other: the opposite extremi-
ties being, like the opposite surface of a charged jar, in contrary states, and a
partial. discharge being produced, as often as they are connected by a con-
ducting substance. The various forms, in which the piles or troughs are con-
Sstructed,: are of little consequence to the theory of their operation: the most
convenient are the varnished troughs, in which plates of silvered zinc are ar-
ranged side by side, with intervening spaces for the reception of water,:or of
an acid. (Plate XL. Fig. 557.) + pit “in


It is unquestionable that the torpedo, the gymnotus electricus, and some
other fishes, have organs appropriated to the excitation of electricity, and that
they have a power of communicating this electricity at pleasure to conduct-
ing substances in‘ their neighbourhood. These organs somewhat.resemble in
their appearance the plates’ of the galvanic pile, although we know nothing
of the immediate arrangement, from which their electrical properties are de-
rived; but the effect of the shock, which they produce, resembles in all re-
spects that of the weak charge of a very large battery. It has also been shown
by the experiments of Galvani, Volta, and Aldini, that the nerves and muscles
of the human body possess some electrical powers, although they are so, much
' less concerned in the phenomena which were at first attributed, to them, by
Galvani, than he originally ‘supposed, that many philosophers haye been in-
clined to consider the excitation of electricity as always occasioned. by the
inanimate substances employed, and the spasmodic contractions of the muscles
as merely very delicate tests of the influence of foreign electricity on the nerves.


*’ Such‘ is the general’ outline oF the principal experiments and conclusions
AP


678 LECTURE LIV,


which the subject of galvanism afforded before Mr. Dayy’s late ingenious and
interesting researches, which have thrown much light, not only on the foun-


dation of the whole of this class of phenomena, but also on the nature of >


chemical actions and affinities in general. Mr. Davy is inclined to infer from
his experiments, that all the attractions, which are the causes, of chemical com-
binations, depend on the opposite natural electricities of the bodies concerned;
since such bodies are always found, by delicate tests, to exhibit, when in con-
tact, marks of different species of electricity; and their mutual actions may
be either augmented or destroyed, by increasing their natural charges of elec-
tricity, or by electrifying them in a contrary way. Thus, an acid anda metal


"are found to be negatively and positively electrical with respect to,each other;


and by further electrifying the acid negatively, and the metal positively, their


combination is accelerated; but when the acid is positively electrified, or the


metal negatively, they have no effect whatever on each other... The acid is
also attracted, as a negative body, by another positively electrified, \and the
metal by a body negatively electrified, so that a metallic salt may be decom-
posed in the circuit of Volta, the positive point attracting the acid, and the
negative point the metal: and these attractions are so strong, as to carry the
particles of the respective bodies through any intervening medium, which is in
a fluid state, or even through a moist solid; nor are they intercepted in their
passage, by substances which, in other cases, have the strongest elective attrac-
tions for them, Alkali, sulfur, and alkaline sulfurets, are positive with respect
to the metals, and much more with respect to the acids: hence they have a
very strong natural tendency to combine with the acids and with oxygen:
and hydrogen must also be considered as belonging to the same class with the


alkalis.


Supposing now a plate of zine to decompose a portion of water: the oxy-
gen, which has a negative property, unites with the zinc, and probably. tends
to neutralise it, and to weaken its attractive force; the hydrogen jis repelled
by the zinc, and carries to the opposite plate of silyer its natural positive elec-
tricity; and if the two plates be made to touch, the energy of the plate of
zinc is restored, by the electricity which it receives from the silver; and it re-
ceives it the more readily, as the two metals, in any case of their contact,
have a tendency to become electrical, the zinc positively, and the silver ne-
gatively. Mr. Davy therefore considers this chemical action as destroying, or


ON ELECTRICITY IN MOTION. 679


at least counteracting, the natural tendency of the electric fluid to pass from
the water to the zinc, and: from modifications of this counteraction he explains
the effects of galvanic combinations in all cases. Thus, in a circle composed
of copper, sulfuret, and iron, the fluid tends to’ pass from the iron towards
the sulfuret,’ and from the copper to the iron, in one direction, and in the
opposite: direction from the copper to the sulfuret, with a force which must be
equal. to both the others; since there would otherwise be a continual motion
without ‘any mechanical cause, and without any chemical change; but the
action of the sulfuret on the'copper tends to destroy its electromotive, or rather
electrophoric, power, of directing the current towards the sulfuret, and its
combinatiom with the sulfur makes it either positively electrical, or negatively
electrical in a less considerable degree; consequently the fluid passes; accord-
ing’ to its natural tendency, from the copper to the iron, and from the iron
to the sulfaret: In a third case, when copper, an acid, and water, form
a circle, the: natural tendency is from the acid to the copper ow one side,
-andi from the acid to the water, and from the water tothe copper on the other;
here we must suppose the first force to. be only a little weakened by the che-
mical a¢tion, while the third is destroyed, so that the first overcomes the se
cond, aud the’ circulation isdetermined, although very feebly, im sucha direcs
tion, that the fluid passes from the acid to the copper. When, in‘ the fourth
place, the combination: consists of copper, sulfuret, and water, the tendenciés
are, first, from the copper to the sulfuret, and from the water to'the copper;
and secondly, from the water to the sulfuret: in this instance a chemical ac-
tion must be supposed between the oxygen of the water and! the sulfuret,
which lessens the electromotive tendency, more than the action that takes
place between the sulfuret and the copper, so that the fluid passes from the
copper to the sulfuret; and the current has even force enougl: to prevent |
~ any chemical action between the water and the copper, which would tend to
rosa arpeenabend if it took place.


ti Mn Davy leleabinteed: that the decomposition of the substances, employed
‘in the battery of Volta, is of much more consequence to their activity than
either their conducting power, or their simple action on the other elements of the
series: - the sulfuric acid, which conducts electricity better, and dissolves
the readily, than’ a neutral solution, is, notwithstanding, less
active im the battery, because it is not easily decomposed. Mr. Davy has also


SS"


‘eso vo) LECTURE LIV. ue


“extended his researches, and. the» application of his discoveries; to a vari-
ety of natural as well as artificial phenomena, and there can be no'doubt but
that he will still make such additions to his ronan as es be m1 the
poe importance to this branch of science.


The operation of the most usual electrical machines epne dias on the
excitation of electricity by the friction of glass ana cushion: of Jeather;
covered with a metallic amalgam, usually made of mercury, zine, and tin,
which probably, besides being of use in supplying electricity readily to
different parts of the glass, undergoes in general a chemical change, by means of
which some electricity is extricated. The fluid, thus excited, is received intoan
insulated conductor by means of points, placed at a small distance from
the surface which has lately undergone the effects of friction, and from this


conductor it is conveyed by wires or chains to any other parts at pleasure.


Sometimes also the cushion, instead of being connected with the earth, is itself
fixed to a second conductor, which becomes negatively electrified; and either
conductor may contain within it a jar, which may be charged.at once by the
operation of the machine, when its internal surface, is connected either with the
earth, or with that of the jar contained in the opposite conductor. The
glass may be either in the form of a circular plate or of a cylinder, and it is
uncertain which of the arrangements affords the greatest quantity of electri-
city fromthe same surface; but the cylinder is cheaper than.the plate, and
less liable ‘to’ accidents, and appears to be at least equally sigh et (Plate
XL, Fig. 558) 559.)


The olebe machine ‘in the Teylerian museum, employed by Van Marum,
when worked by two men, excited an electricity, of which the attraction was
sensible at the distance of 38-feet, and which made a point luminous at 27
feet, and afforded sparks nearly 24 inches long. | A battery charged by it,
melted at once twenty five feet of fine iron wire. Mr. Wilson had also a few
years ago, in the Pantheon in London, an apparatus of singular extent; the
principal conductor was 150 feet long, ‘and 16 inches in diameter, and he
employed a circuit of 4800 feet of wire.


The electrophorus derives its operation from the properties of induced elec-
tricity. A cake of a nonconducting substance, commonly of resin or of


‘


ue ON ELEOTRICITY raiuenien: 681


it

puttin; is first excited by friction, and becomes" negatively electric: an) in-
sulated plate of a\conducting substance, being placed on it, does not come
sufficiently into contact with it to receive its electricity, but acquires by
induction an opposite state at its lower surface, and ‘a similar state at its
upper; so that when this upper and negative surface is touched by a sub-
stance communicating with the earth, it receives enough of the electric fluid
to restore the equilibrium. The plate then being raised, the action of the
cake no longer continues, and the electricity, which the plate has received from
‘the earth, is imparted to a conductor or to a jar;*and the operation may be
continually repeated, until the jar has received a charge, of an intensity equal
to that of the plate when raised. Although the quantity of electricity, re-
ceived by the plate, is exactly equal to that which is emitted from it at each
alternation, yet the spark is far less sensible; since the effect of the neighbour-
hood of the cake is to increase the capacity of the plate, while the tension or
force impelling the fluid is but weak; and at the same time the quantity re-
ceived is sufficient, when the capacity of the plate is again diminished, to pro-
duce a much greater sR at a distance from the cake. (Plate XL.
Fig. 560.)


The condenser acts in some measure on the same principles with the elec-
trophorus, both instruments deriving their properties from the effects of induc-
tion. The use of the condenser is to collect a weak electricity from a large
substance intw a smaller one, so as to make its density or tension sufficient to
be examined. A small plate, connected with the substance, is brought nearly
into contact with another plate communicating with the earth; in gene-
ral a thin stratum of air only is interposed; but sometimes a nonconducting
varnish is employed; this method is, however, liable to some uncertainty,
from the permanent-electricity which the varnish sometimes contracts by fric-
tion. The electricity is accumulated by the attraction of the plate communi-
cating with the earth, into the plate of the condenser; and when this plate
is first separated from the substance to be examined, and then rémoyed from
the opposite plate, its electricity is always of the same kind with that which
originally existed ‘in the substance, but its tension is so much increased as to
render it more easily discoverable. This principle has been variously applied
by different electricians, and the employment of the instrument has been fa-
cilitated by several subordinate arrangements. (Plate XL. Fig. 561.)


63a » LECTURE Liv. |


Mr. Cavallo’s multiplier is a combination of two condensers; the second
or auxiliary plate of the first, like the plate of the electrophorus, is moveable,
and carries. a charge of electricity, contrary to that of the substance to be ex:
amined, to the first or insulated plate of the second condenser, which reeeives
it repeatedly, until it has acquired an equal degree of tension ; and when the
two plates of this condenser are separated, they both exhibit an clectricity
much more powerful than that of the first condenser. The force is, however, -
still more rapidly augmented by. the instruments: of Mr. Bennet and Mr.
Nicholson, although it has. been supposed that these instruments are more
liable to inconvenience from the attachment of a greater portion of electri-
city to the first plate of the instrument, which leaves, for a very considerable —
time, a certain quantity of the charge, not easily separable from it. Mr; Ben-
net employs three varnished plates laid on each other, but Mr. Nicholson has
substituted simple metallic plates, approaching only very near together, so that
there can be no error from any accidental friction. _In both of these instru-
ments, the second plate of a condenser acquires an electricity contrary and
nearly equal to that of the first, by means of whicl it brings a third plate
very nearly into the same state with the first; and when the first and third
plates are connected and insulated, they produce a charge nearly twice as _
great in the second’ plate, while the: first: plate becomes at the same time
doubly charged; so that by each repetition of this process, the intensity of <
the electricity is nearly doubled: it is therefore scarcely possible that any
quantity should be so small as to escape detection by vsaiiby ai ARIE
XL. Fig. 562, 563.) Asa ide rer


The immediate intensity: of the electricity: may be measure,
racter distinguished, by electrical balances, and by elect
constructions. The electrical balance measures the a
exerted by two balls ata given distance, by themag
quired to counteract it; and the most convenient 1
force is by the torsion of a wire, which has: been e
Mr. Coulomb. The quadrant electrometer of E
repulsion of’ a moveable ball and a panera
to which the ball rises. These divisions do note
tional strength of the action, but they are still of ui
identity of any two charges, and in “eines aN


ON ELECTRICITY IN MOTION. 683


proceed in out experiments with safety; and the same purpose is answered, in
a manner somewhat less accurate, by the electrometer, consisting of two pith
balls, or of, two- straws, which are made to diverge by a smaller degree of
electricity, Mr. Bennet’s electrometer i is still more delicate; it consists of
two small portions of gold leaf, suspended from a plate, to which the electri-
city of any substance is communicated by contact: a very weak electricity is
sufficient to make them diverge, and it may easily be ascertained whether it
is positive or negative, by bringing an excited stick of sealing wax near the
plate, since its approach tends to produce by induction a state of negative
electricity i in the remoter extremities of the leaves, so that their divergence is
either increased or diminished, accordingly as it was derived from negative or
from positive electricity: a strip of gold leaf or tin foil, fixed within the glass


which covers the electrometer, opposite to the extremities of the leaves, pre- _


vents, the communication of any electricity to the glass, which might interfere
with, the actiou of the instrament. When the balls of an electrometer stand
at the distance of 4 degrees, they appear to indicate a charge nearly 8 times
as great as when they stand at one degree: a charge 8 times as great in each
ball producing a mutual action 64 times as great at any given distance, and
at a quadruple distance a quadruple force; in the same manner a separation of
9 degrees is probably derived from an intensity 27 times as great as at 1, In
Lane’s electrometer the magnitude of a shock is determined by the quantity
of air through whieh it is obliged to pass, between two balls, of which the
distance may be varied at pleasure; and the power of the machine may be
estimated by the frequency of the sparks which pass at any given distance.
It appears from Mr. Lane’s experiments, that the quantity of electricity re-
quired for a discharge is simply as the distance of the surfaces of the balls,
the shocks being twice as frequent when this distance is only ~, of an inch
as when it is ~; Mr. Volta says, that the indications of Lane’s and
Henley’s electrometer agree immediately with each other; but it seems diffi-
cult to reconcile this result with the general theory. Sometimes the force of
repulsion between two balls in contact is opposed by a counterpoise of given
magnitude, and as soon as this is overcome, they separate and form a circuit
which discharges a battery; whence the instrument is called a discharger.


(Plate XL. Fig. 564. . 568.)


It must be confessed that the whole science of electricity is yet in a very


684 : LECTURE Liv.


imperfect state: we know little or nothing of the intimate nature of the
substances and actions concerned in it: and we can never foresee, without
previous experiment, where or how it will be excited. We are wholly igno-
rant of the constitution of bodies, by which they become possessed of differ-
ent conducting powers; and we have only been able to draw some general
conclusions respecting the distribution and equilibrium of the supposed electric
fluid, from the laws of the attractions and repulsions that it appears to exert.
There ‘seems to be some reason to suspect, from the phenomena of cohesion
and repulsion, that the pressure of an elastic medium is concerned in the ori-
gin of these forces; and if such a medium really exists, it is perhaps nearly
related to the electric fluid. ‘The identity of the general causes of electrical
and of galvanic effects is now doubted by few; and in this country the prin-
cipal phenomena of galvanism are universally considered as depending on che- .
mical changes; perhaps, also, time may show, that electricity is very materi-
ally concerned in the essential properties, which distinguish the different kinds
of natural bodies, as well as in those minute mechanical actions and affections
which are probably the foundation of all chemical operations; but at present
it is scarcely safe to hazard a conjecture on a subject so obscure, although
Mr. Davy’s experiments have already in some measure justified the boldness
of the suggestion. : t pee


oo s e 3 5 , ,
WON) Dads O92291 too od Jewitt TT


685


LECTURE LV.


ON MAGNETISM,


Tue theory of magnetism bears a very strong resemblance to that of elec-
tricity, and it must therefore be placed near it in a system of natural philoso-
phy. We have seen the electric fluid not only exerting attractions and re-
pulsions, and causing a peculiar distribution of neighbouring portions of a fluid
similar to itself, but also excited in one body, and transferred to another, in
such a manner as to be perceptible to the senses, or at least to cause sensible
| effects, in its passage. The attraction and repulsion, and the peculiar distri-
bution of the neighbouring fluid, are found in the phenomena of magnetism;
but we do not perceive that there is ever any actual excitation, or any per-

4 ceptible transfer of the magnetic fluid from one body to another distinct body ;
and it has also this striking peculiarity, that metallic iron is very nearly, if not

absolutely, the only substance capable of exhibiting any. indications of its
presence or nehiyity: if)


- For Explaining the phenomena of nadection, We suppose the particles < of “
peculiar fluid to repel each other, and to attract the particles of metallic iron
with equal forces, diminishing as the square of the distance increases; and
a particles ¢ of such iron must also be imagined to repel each other, in a si-
«Senate and steel, when soft, are conductors of the “Magnetic
3h 1 become less and less pervious to it as their hardness increases,

Roce of this theory is due to Mr. Aepinus, but the forces have
_ been icularly investigated by Coulomb and others. There are the
these hypotheses as to those which constitute ia ved
red as original and fundamental oR
difficult to imagine, wh


6386 YECTURE LY.


are still of great utility in assisting us to ‘ieeatiids and to retain in memory,
a number of particular facts which would otherwise be insulated. The doc-
trine of the circulation of streams of the magnetic fluid has been justly and —
universally abandoned, and some other theories, much more ingenious and
more probable, for instance that of Mr. Prévost, appear to be too compli-
cated, and too little supported by facts, to require much of our attention.
. " “7 = ¢ 4
The distinction eines Shartacene and nonconductors i is, with 1 respect to”
the electric fluid, irregular and intricate: but in magnetism, the softness or
hardness of the iron or stecl constitutes the only difference. Heat, as. soft-
ening iron, must consequently render it a conductor; even the heat of boil-
ing water affects it in a certain degree, although it can scarcely be supposed ~
to alter its temper; but the effect of a moderate heat is not so considerablein =
magnetism as in electricity. A strong degree of heat appears, from the expe- ‘— i ar
riments of Gilbert, and of Mr. ane to destroy. oie: all n
action. State Salt ay se
4 ¢ Ob eye ttict


It is steal certain that magnetic effects are prided iy eg Ht
y incapable of being detected either by their weight or by any chemical tests. He)
Mr. Cavallo found that a few particles of steel, adhering to’a oe nl ae
the point of a needle was slightly rubbed, imparted to it magneti vrs
and Mr. Coulomb has observed that there are scarcely any bodi
which do not exhibit some marks of being subjected ‘to the influ
netism, although its force is always proportional to the qu )
they contain, as far as that quantity can be ascertained; a
sufficient to make 20 pounds of. another metal sensibly r
nation with a large proportion of oxygen deprives it
greater part of its magnetic properties; finery cinder i:
} magnetic, but the more perfect oxids and the ah Se
| . gree; it is also'said that antimony renders iron incapable of
by the magnet. Nickel, when freed from peti:
edly magnetic, and the more so as it contains less
| : chemists supposed nickel to be a compound metal ¢
/ still venture to assume this opinion as a magi
f deed no way of demonstrating that it is im
united as to be incapable of separation by the art of


SY ee er
SIR eo Ti


We


ON MAGNETISM. 687


been as dense as platina, or as light as cork, we could not have supposed
that it contained any considerable quantity of iron, but in fact the specific
gravity of these metals is very nearly the same, and nickel is never found in
nature but in the neighbourhood of iron; we may therefore suspect, with
some reason, that the hypothesis of the existence of iron in nickel may be
even chemically true. The aurora borealis is certainly in some measure a
magnetical phenomenon, and if ‘iron were the only substance capaple of
exhibiting magnetic effects, it would follow that some ferruginous particles
must exist in the upper regions of theatmosphere. ‘The light usually attend-
ing this magnetical meteor may possibly be derived from electricity, which
may be the immediate cause of a change of the distribution of the magnetic
fluid, contained in the ferruginous vapours, that are imagined to float in
the air.

We are still less capable of distinguishing with certainty in magnetism,
than in electricity, a positive from a negative state, or a real redundancy of
the fluid from a deficiency. The north pole of a magnet may be considered
as the part in which the magnetic fluid is either redundant or deficient, pro-
vided that the south pole be understood in a contrary sense: thus, if the
north pole of a magnet be supposed to be positively charged, the south pole
must be imagined to be negative; and in hard ‘i iron’ or ‘steel these poles may
he considered as unchangeable. —

A siete pole, therefore, always repels a north pole, and attracts’ a sich
pole. Andina neutral piece of soft iron, near to the north pole of a
smagnet, the fluid becomes so distributed by induction, as to form a
temporary south pole next to the magnet, and the whole piece is of course
attracted, from the greater proximity of the attracting pole. If the bar is
sufficiently soft, and not too long, the remoter end becomes a north pole,
and the whole bar a perfect temporary magnet. But when the bar is of ~


% rd site ‘the state of induction is imperfect, from the resistance opposed


notion of the fluid; hence the attraction is less powerful, and an
te pc e is formed, ata certain distance, within the bar; and beyond
her pole, similar to the first; the alternation being sometimes re- -
han once. The eieeot saint gers within the magnet is


> &


6388 : LECTURE LY.


becommg more powerful by the vicinity of the new south pole, and the
south pole being consequently strengthened in a certain degree; so that the
attractive power of the whole magnet is increased by the proximity of the
iron. A weak magnet is capable of receiving a temporary induction of a
contrary magnetism from the action of a more powerful one, its north pole
becoming a south pole on the approach of a stronger north pole; but the
original south pole still retains its situation at the opposite end, and
restores the magnet nearly toits original condition, after the removal of the
disturbing cause, ;


The polarity of magnets, or their disposition to assume a certain direction,
is of still greater importance than their attractive, power. If a small magnet,
or simply a soft wire, be poised on a centre, it will arrange itself in such a
direction, as will produce’an equilibrium of the attractions and repulsions of
the poles of a larger magnét; being a tangent to a certain oval figure, pass-
ing through those poles, of which the properties have been calculated by.
various mathematicians. This polarity may easily be imitated by electricity ;
a suspended wire being brought near to the ends of a positive and: negative
conductor, which are placed parallel toeach other, as in Nairne’s électrical
machine, its position is perfectly similar to that of a needle attracted by a
magnet, of which those conductors represent the poles. (Plate XLI. Fig. 569. ).


’ The same effect is observable in iron filings placed near a magnet, and they
adhere to each other in curved lines, by virtue of their induced magnetism,
the north pole of each particle being attached to the south pole of the par-
ticle next,it. This arrangement may be seen by placing the filings either on
clean mercury,or on any surface that can be agitated; and it may be imitated
by strewing powder ona plate of glass, supported by two balls, which are
contrarily electrified. (Plate XLI. Fig. 570.)


The polarity of a needle may often be observed when it exhibits no sen-
sible attraction or repulsion as a whole; and this may easily be understood
by considering that when one end of a needle is repelled from a given point,,


and the other is attracted towards it, the two forces, if equal, will tend to”


turn it round its centre, but will wholly destroy each other’s effects with
respect to.any. progressive motion of the,whole needle, Thus, when the end


dads


.


ON MAGNETISM. - 689


of a magnet is placed under a surface on which iron filings are spread, and
the surface is shaken, so as to leave the particles for a moment in the air,
they are not drawn sensibly towards the magnet, but their ends, which are
nearest to the point over the magnet, are turned a little downwards, so that
they strike the paper further and further from the magnet, and then fall out-
wards, as if they were repelled by it. (Plate XLI. Fig. 571.) I


The magnets, which we have hitherto considered, are such as have a simple
and well determined form; but the great compound magnet, which directs
the mariner’s compass, and which appears to consist principally of the me-
’ tallic and slightly oxidated iron, contained in the internal parts of the earth,
is probably of a far more intricate structure, and we can only judge of its
nature from the various phenomena derived from its influence.


The accumulation and the deficiency of the magnetic fluid, which deter-
mine the place of the poles of this magnet, are probably in fact considerably
diffused, but they may generally be imagined, without much error in the —
result, to centre in two points, one of them nearer to the north pole of the
earth, the other to the south pole. In consequence of their attractions
and repulsions, a needle, whether previously magnetic or not, assumes always,
if freely poised, the direction necessary for its equilibrium; which, in
various parts of the globe, is variously inclined to the meridian and to the
horizon. Hence arises the use of the compass in navigation and in survey-
ing: a needle, which is poised with a liberty of horizontal motion, assuming
the direction of the magnetic meridian, which for a certain time remains
almost invariable for the same place; and a similar property is also observa-
ble in the dipping needle, which is moveable only in a vertical plane; for
when this plane is placed in the magnetic meridian, the needle acquires
an inclination to the horizon, which varies according to the situation of the
place with respect to the magnetic poles. (Plate XLI. Fig. 572, 573.)


The natural polarity of the needle may be in some measure illustrated by
inclosing an artificial magnet in a globe; the direction of a small needle,
Suspended over any part of its surface, being determined by the position of
the poles of the magnet, in the same manner as the direction of the compass
is determined by the magnetical poles of the earth, although with much

, more regularity. In either case the whole needle is scarcely more or less


699 LECTURE Lv.


attracted towards the globe than if the influence of magnetism were removed; .
except when the small needle is placed very near to one of the poles of the
artificial magnet, or, on the other hand, when the dipping needle is employed
in the neighbourhood of some strata of ferruginous substances, which, in
particular parts of the earth, interfere materially with the more general effects,
and alter the direction of the magnetic meridian.


A bar of soft iron, placed in the situation of the dipping needle, acquires
from the earth, by induction, a temporary state of magnetism, which may
be reversed at pleasure by reversing its direction; but bars of iron, which
have remained long in or near this direction, assume a permanent polarity;
for iron, even when it has been at first quite soft, becomes in time a little
harder. A natural magnet is no more than a heavy iron ore, which, in the
course of ages, has acquired a strong polarity from the great primitive mag-
net. It must have lain in some degree detached, and must possess but
little conducting power, inorder to have received and to retain its hee
netism.


We cannot, from any assumed situation of two or more magnetic poles,
calculate the true position of the needle for all places; and even in the same
place, its direction is observed to change in the course of years, according
to a law which has never yet been generally determined, although the varia-
tion which has been observed, at any one place, since the discovery of the
compass, may perhaps be comprehended in some very intricate expressions;
but the less dependence can be placed on any calculations of this kind, as
there is reason to think that the change depends rather on chemical than on
physical causes. Dr. Halley indeed conjectured that the: earth contained a
nucleus, or separate sphere, revolving freely within it, or rather floating in
a fluid contained in the intermediate space, and causing the variation of the
magnetic meridian ; and others have attributed the effect to the motions of
the celestial bodies: but in either case the changes produced would have
been much more regular and universal than those which have been actually
observed. Temporary changes of the terrestrial magnetism have certainly
been sometimes occasioned by other causes; such causes are, therefore,
most likely to be concerned in the more permanent effects.. Thus, the erup-
tion of Mount Hecla was found to derange the position of the needle consi-
derably; the aurora borealis has been observed to cause its north pole to moye _


oe


ON MAGNETISM. ‘691


6 or 7 degrees to the westward of its usual position; and a still more remark-
able change occurs continually in the diurnal variation, In these climates
the north pole of the needle moves slowly westwards from about 8 in the morn-
ing till 2, and in the evening returns again; a change which has with great
probability been attributed to the temporary elevation of the temperature of
the earth, eastwards of the place of observation, where the sun’s action takes
place at an earlier hour in the morning, and to the diminution of the mag-
netic attraction in consequence of the heat thus communicated. In winter this
variation amounts to about 7 minutes, in summer to 13 or 14.


Important as the use of the compass is at present to navigation, it would be
still more valuable if its declination from the true meridian were constant for
the same place, or even if it varied according to any discoverable law; since
it would afford a ready mode of determining the longitude of a place by a
compatison of an astronomical observation of its latitude with another of the
magnitude of the declination. And in some cases it may even now be applied
to this purpose, where we have a collection of late and numerous observations.
Such observations have from time to time been arranged in charts, furnished
with lines indicating the magnitude of the declination or variation at the
places through which they pass, beginning from the line of no variation,
and proceeding on the opposite sides of this line to show the magnitude of the
variation east or west. It is obvious that the intersection of a given parallel °
of latitude, with the line showing the magnitude of the variation, will indicate
the precise sititation of the place at which the observations have been made.


The line of no variation passed in 1657 through London, and in 1666 through
Paris: its northern extremity appears to have moved continually eastwards,
and its southern parts westwards ; and itnow passes through the middle of
Asia.’ The opposite portion seems to have moved more uniformly westwards;
it now runs from North America to the middle of the South Atlantic, On
the European side of these lines, the declination is westerly; on the South
American side, it is easterly. The variation in London has been for several]
years a little more than 24°. In the West Indies it changes but slowly; for
instance it was 5° near the island of Barbadoes, from 1700 to 756, (Plate
XLI. Fig. 574). 576. Plate XLUL XLII.)


692 LECTURE ‘Lv.


The.dip of the north pole of the needle in-the neighbourhood of London
is 72°. Hence the lower end of a bar standing upright, as a poker, or a lamp
iron, becomes always a north pole, and the temporary south pole of a piece
of soft iron being uppermost, it is somewhat more strongly attracted by the


north pole of a magnet placed over it, than by its south pole; the distribution -


‘of the fluid in the magnet itself being also a little more favourable to the at-


traction, while its north pole is downwards. It is obvious that the magnetism
of the northern magnetic pole of the earth must resemble that of the south
pole of a magnet, since it attracts the north pole ; so that if we considered the
nature of the distribution of the fluid, rather than its situation in the earth,
we should call it a south pole. Although it is impossible to find any places
for two, or even for a greater number of magnetic poles, which will correctly
explain the direction of the needle in every part of the earth’s surface, yet the
dip may be determined with tolerable accuracy, from the supposition of a
small magnet placed at the centre of the earth,and directed towards a point in


Baftin’s Bay, about 75° north latitude, and 70° longitude west of London; and '
the variation of the dip is so inconsiderable, that a very slow change of the po-


sition of this supposed magnet would probably be sufficient to produce it;
but the operation of such a magnet, according to the general laws of the forces
concerned, could not possibly account for the very irregular disposition of the
curves indicating the degree of variation or declination; a general idea of


“these might perhaps be obtained from the supposition of two magnetic poles


situated in a line considerably distant from the centre of the earth; but this
hypothesis is’ by no means sufficiently accurate to allow us to place any de-
pendence on it. (Plate XLI. Fig. 577, 578.)

‘ &

The art of making magnets consists in a proper application of the attractions
and repulsions of the magnetic flutd, by means of the different conducting
powers of different kinds of iron and steel, to the production and preservation
of such a distribution of the fluid in a magnet, as is the best fitted to the ex-
hibition of its peculiar properties.


We may begin with any bar of iron that has long stood in a rehitieal posi-
tion; but it is more common to employ ‘an artificial magnet of greater
strength. When one pole of such a magnet touches the end of a bar of hard


ON MAGNETISM. 698


iron or steel; that end assumes in some degree the opposite character, and
the opposite end the same character: but in drawing the pole along the bar,
the first end becomes neutral, and afterwards has the opposite polarity; while
the second end has its force at first a little increased, then becomes neutral,
and afterwards is opposite to what it first was. When the operation is re-
peated, the effect is at first in some measure destroyed, and it is difficult to
understand why the repetition adds materially to the inequality of the distri-
_ bution of the fluid; but the fact is certain, and the strength of the new mag-
net is for some time increased at each stroke, until it has acquired all that it
-is capable of receiving. Several magnets, made in this manner, may be placed
“side by side, and each of them being nearly equal in strength to the first,
the whole collection will produce together a much stronger effect; and in this
manner we may obtain from a weak magnet others continually stronger, until
we arrive at the greatest degree of polarity of which the metal is capable. It is,
hope: more usual to employ the process called the double touch: placing
two magnets, with their opposite poles near to each other, or the opposite poles
of a single magnet, bent into the form of a horseshoe, in contact with the
middle of the bar: the opposite actions of these two poles then conspire in
their effort to displace the magnetic fluid, and the magnets having been
‘drawn backwards and forwards repeatedly, an equal number of times to and
from each end of the bar, with a considerable pressure, they are at last with-
drawn in the middle, i in order to keep the poles at equal distances.


ron filings, or the scoriae from a smith’s forge, when finely levigated,

1 ned into a paste with linseed oil, are also capable of being made col-
lectively magnetic. A bar of steel, placed red hot between two magnets, and
suddenly quenched by cold water, becomes in some degree magnetic, but not
‘so powerfully as it may be rendered by other means. For preserving mag-
s, usual to place their poles in contact with the opposite poles of other
; , of with pieces of soft iron, which, in consequence of their own in-
d magnetism, tend to favour the accumulation of the magnetic power in
er quantity than the metal can retain after they are removed, Hence

jen Beepieee it She tignet fet oe seoe. ;


et may be made of two. bars of steel, with their ends pressed


4R


694 | oP ESTUBE WY:


?


into Close c contact ; and, it anight b be expected that when these bars are sepa-
“rate, “Or. when a a common. smagnet, has, been. divided in the, middje,,the por-


“tions should p ossess, the properties, pf, f, the respective .Peles.only. »But.in- fact
he ends ‘which ‘have been in “contact are, found to acquire the properties of
“Ee” poles ‘opposite, to those ¢ f their respective Pieces, and a certain, point in
“ach | piece’ is neutral, wehie | is “at fi first, nearer, to, the, newly. formed, pole, than.
“to the other end,” but is “removed by, dlegrees, toa more central situation. ;In


‘this ‘case we “ust s suppose, contrarily, to the general, ‘pringiples of, the, theory,
pon “magnetic fluid has actually , escaped, aby, degrees sfrgm one of , the


pieces, and ha§ been received fcom th the atmosphere, by the, other.


wed
ba gearers, and Tic ¢ Seaeaee & " 3


pie eas?)


‘iron ‘or ‘steel for Magnetism, i in ‘the s same, manner, as, s heat, or, agitation. Ji, some
‘Cases a “blow, a an increase of temperature, or a shock of slectricity, may .expe-
‘dite a a little the acquisition of polarity ; : ‘but n more commonly any. one of, these
7)

causes impairs. the magnetic power. Professor ‘Robison , found, that when a
‘good magnet was ‘struck for three quarters of an jhour, and allowed in the
‘mean time to ring, its ‘eflicacy was destroyed ; although .the same operation _
had little effect when the ringing y was impeded ; ; so that the continued exer-
‘tion of the ‘cohesive and repulsive | powers appears to favour the transmission
‘of ‘the magnetic as well as of the electric fluid. The internal agitation, pro-
duced in bending a magnetic wire round a cylinder, also destroys its polarity,
and the operation of a file has the same effect. Mr. ‘Cayallo has found that
brass becomes i in general | much more capable ¢ of being attracted when it has
been hammered, even between two flints; and that this property is again di:
minished ‘by fire: in this case it may | be conjectured that hammering i increases
the conducting power of the i iron contained i in the brass, and thus renders it
miore susceptible of magnetic : action. Mr. Cavallo also observed that a mag-
netic needle was more powerfully attracted by i iron filings during their solu-
tion in acids, especially i in the sulfuric acid, than either before or after. the
operation: others have not always s succeeded i in the experiment; but there is
nothing improbable i in the circumstance, and there may haye been some actual


difference in the results, dependent on causes too minute for observation. In ‘


subjects so little understood as the theory of magnetism, we arg obliged to ad-


ON MAGNETISM. — 695 |


mit some paradoxical propositions, which are only surprising on account of the
imperfect state of our knowledge. Yet, little as we can understand the intimate
nature of magnetical actions, they exhibit to us a number of extremely amus-
ing as well as interesting phenomena; and the principles of crystallization,
and even of vital growth and reproduction, are no where so closely imitated,

as in the arrangement « of the small particles of iron in the neighbourhood of
a magnet, and in the production of a multitude of complete magnets, from
the influence of a parent of the same kind.


ew wae


35 jor Isstzohayeg moe n
ae te of JSateiqan Wale,


LECTURE EVI.) 2) ooaggen eae

: ny Leet ek eb amas oe. ALL

cl tye igh) Bae eee A. b
ON CLIMATES AND WINDS. aaditigpaits sis, ‘94-78 a
if St (ad ae Sagi 4 *
oth ied to siusyie:


"THE science of meteorology relates principally to the natural iano theair, =
and to such temporary changes in the earth and sea as are produced by causes _ ee
not mechanical only. The subject is of a very complicated and intricatena-
ture; it comprehends many effects derived from such causes, artist a.
rately to every department of physics which we have hitherto examined; and —
although it has occupied the attention of several philosophers of ‘ccmiliegtiane
eminence, we cannot yet boast of having made any great advancement i init.
Whether we shall ever be able to carry our theories to so high a degree
perfection, as to furnish us with much information applicable to the

of common life, to agriculture, or to medicine, is at present uncert:


teorological instruments; and the philosophy of the science is in ma
spects much more advanced than has commonly been supposed. We
vide this extensive subject into two parts, the first relating princip
effects of heat on the atmosphere, including the phenomena of
‘second to the nature and consequences of evaporation, comprehen
spherical electricity, and to the effects of subterraneous a
meteors,


The variations of temnanaiane in different parts of the
quire to be examined in the first place; since they are not «
ble importance in themselves, but are also among the princi
changes in the state of the winds and weather. These
by thermometers, of various kinds, which have
but, for meteorological purposes, some additions a1
simple thermometer. In Six’s thermometer, he
return ina parallel direction: the bulb is in the fo


ON CLIMATES AND WINDs. 697


is usually filled with spirit of wine, which is in contact with a portion of mer-


portion of spirit. The mercury carries on each of its surfaces an index, which

. is retained in its remotest situation by means of a weak spring; and conse-

quently shows the greatest degree of heat or of cold that has happened since

the last observation. The indexes are of iron or steel, and may be brought

back to the surface at pleasure by means of a magnet; they,are carried up by

the mercury, more by its capillary action, than by the difference of the specific

gravities. A similar effect is obtained in Rutherford’s arrangement of a pair

of thermometers, one with mercury, the other with spirit of wine, placed in a
horizontal position; one index being without the surface of the mercury, the
other within that of the spirit: the thermometers being in contrary direc-


cury occupying the lower part of the tube; and this is succeeded by a second
|


tions, both indexes may be brought back to their places, by merely raising the .


if end of the instrument. Self registering thermometers have also sometimes
. been constructed, for keeping a still more accurate account of all the varia-
"tions of temperature that have occurred, by describing a line on a revolving
barrel, which shows the height for every instant during the whole time of
_their operation. (Plate XLI. Fig. 579, 580.) E


The climates of different parts of the earth’s surface are unquestionably
owing in great'measure to their position with respect to the sun. At the equa-
tor, where the sun is always nearly vertical, any given part of the surface re-"
ceives a much greater quantity of light and heat, than an equal portion near
the poles; and it is also still more affected by the sun’s vertical rays, because
their passage through the atmosphere is shorter than that of the oblique rays.
a ‘far as the sun’ s mean altitude only is concerned, it appears from Simpson's

lations, that the heat received at ‘the equator in the whole year, is nearly
and a half as great as at the poles; this proportion being nearly the
same as that of the meridian heat of a vertical sun, to the heat derived, at the


ren bel ~ Sagi still ree by the effect of the atmosphere, which in-


ed spo the suposton of ihidlatcaitacity of the stniatoa of heat
2 Aetna *, 80 parts out of 100 are transmitted at noon —


ber. ee sas ae merenbiere


altitude 233°, i in the middle of the long annual day at the poles. But the —


OR eee ee ee


%
Ne
f


698 y6 _ LEQTUR EL Vite.


nejghbouring, places, ,Jt is obvious thatyat anyiindividashplstey thelcliniatein ee
summer must approach in somedegreeito the equatorial-climate,:ehersun’s al»
titude, being, greater, and.in winter-to essen ma regionsi: - I


While the.carth.is becoming: warmen.at icippgiliatetialigs para oie
off by, radiation.into the\atmosphere, andsthenceintosthe emptyrspace beyond!
it, together with that.which.is transmitted:to the internal parts ofthe earth? *
must be,less than, the.heat received fromthessunjsandywhenvtherearthtis )
growing colder, more,beat must pass off than is received :\bub.whenever the?
heat.of the, surfage i is statiqnary,: neitherincreasing nor diminishing; as at the 1
times of the greatest,and.least heat,.it is obvious:that the/heatweceived frome"
the.sun, must, be, precisely, equal.to the:heat: whichis thrownsoffi s Now thisiio  .
quantity, may -be estimated by the degreeiof irefrigeration:in the might; ando!


heage,.MnoPrévost, has yery. ingeniously:deduced the proportiowof the sun’s® >


heat arriving.at the surface.of the: earth in the latitude of Geneva; in Sulyyo moe
and in December ;,. which he finds to be as Z:or 8 to 1; andrthisiresult dgreesos
very, well with,a. calculation. deduced.from.the dengthof the dayy the'sun’ss!
altitude, and the interception of hisways by the atmospheres)


In London, the temperature generally 'varies, in the:courseiof the«day and
night, somewhat more-than 5°, and.less than 20°):>In Januaryy:the mean ai-«
urnal yariation.of temperature is 6°,':in March 20°yin July 10°, candsin Sep-10+
tember, ,.18°:.» Hence,..says. Mro:Kirwan,.,we may! understand tthesraseur uf 99 +4
the great frequency,of colds in spring and in autumn s ALR RE FE G ORY eat el! a
Ot ity irl? rit
Some. philosophers. have supposed. the carl dcobeviekic ugg ultiaeiglinaiia
in the course of ages,: while others, have imagined. thatsits heatiis:
Both, these. opinions appear.in -general:improbablen “The ppb
earth receives by day, the morecit thraws.off, penton! ni
that.in the course, of a few,ages the heat must probab
mum, . Loeal, changes, may, indeed. arise from loca
climate of America. is.said to have:become consid
part.of its surface. has been cleared fromiits der
and to judge from, the:deseriptions of, the ancients, -
Europe the winters were formerly much colden‘
however, Dr..Herschel’s. opinion of thie yariati


SS


risa ict
ee


y iB Are: iilinks it, it is naturally coldér than the’ earth's surfice;


ON CLYMATES*AYD WINDS. “699


confirmed,» it swill intréduce’ ae great sinhcertainty’ Thto" lf thédries' tipdn ‘the
vsubject: .sincesiw these’ calculations® the original heat'of” yeti has “ulways
been supposediunalterable.


‘Whe sewis less heated: thathe land, partly “béeduse a prénter "quahtity'of
; watersenaporates from/lit, cartd partly beedwse the’ stn’s ‘rays"petetrate to a
considerable ‘depth,:and shave ess dffectOn ‘the ‘surface, While’ the ‘Water’ is


also mixed, iby:thesagitation of itswwavesiatid carrénts, ‘with’ the’ cofdérwater
 pbelow. Ibis alsotmoreistowly* cooled than ‘the ‘Jani, ’ since, When ' the ‘temn-


:pexature fof: theisuperficial particles is depressed, ‘they “bécoitie “Héaviér, ‘ahd
isinksto: :thelbottom. “Forisimilar reasénis, ' the’Séa’is ¢oldér' than‘ the ‘and ‘in
shot .climates, amd sby <day, and Avarmer ‘in ‘cold ‘elitatés, “and ‘By ‘night.
These.cireumstances, ‘however, neatly'balance “each other, so'that the niéan
«temperatures « Jof ‘both ‘are equal, that of ‘the ‘sea Being ‘only ‘Tess ‘variable,
Although :the:process of evaporation invwst 6dl'tHe'sea, ‘yét when ‘the vapours
pipers without reaching’ the ‘land, 'their condetisdtin mist comperisate
for this elfectsby an-equalextrication of heat.


Dhere.is another cause ‘which perhaps ‘contributes in ‘site Uegrée, in 'tém-
,perate climates, to'the ;production of cold ; ‘that is, 'the alternation of fieezing
and thawing. Mr. Prévost observes that congélition ‘takes place uch iidre


suddenly than the opposite process of liquefaction; and that of course the


same quantity of heat must be more rapidly ‘extritated ih freezing than it is
inboarbed in chewing: that the heat, thus extticated, being disposed to fly off in
ions, and little of it being retained by the neighbouring bod ies,

heat is lost than is gained by the alternation: so that where ict has once

been formed, its production is in this manner tedvubled. This circumstance
_must occur wherever it freezes, that is, on shore, in latitudes above 35°; and


‘it appears that from about 30° to the pole, the land is somewhat colder than
the sea, and the more as it is further distant from it; and nearer the equator
; po sa is warmer than the sea: but the process of cdngelation cannot. by


means be the principal cause of the difference, and it is probable that the
t capacity of eee for heat is eee concerned init. ©


a TPES TD ub “ig


atmosphere. is ‘very little bead ‘a the passage of the


/


700 LECTURE LVI.


and for this reason, the most elevated tracts of land, which are the most
prominent, and the most exposed to the effects of the atmosphere, are always
colder than situations nearer the level of the sea. The northern hemisphere
is somewhat warmer than the southern, perhaps because of the greater pro-
portion of land that it contains, and also in some measure on account of the
greater length of its summer than that of the southern; for although, as it
was long ago observed by Simpson, the different distance of the sun com-
pensates precisely for the different velocity of the earth in its orbit, with
respect to the whole quantity of heat received on either side of the equinoctial
points, yet Mr. Prévost has shown, that in all probability the same quantity
of heat must produce a greater effect when it is more slowly applied; because
the portion lost by radiation from the heated body is greater, as the tempera-
ture is higher. Since, therefore, on account of the eccentricity of the earth’s
orbit, the north pole is turned towards the sun 7 or 8 days longer than the
south pole, the northern winters must be milder than the southern : yet the
‘southern summers, though shorter, ought to be somewhat warmer than the
northern: but in fact they are colder, partly perhaps from the much greater
proportion of sea, which in some degree equalises the temperature, and
_ partly for other reasons. The comparative intensity of the southern summer —
and winter is not exactly known; but in the island of New Georgia the
summer is said to be extremely cold.


The northern ice gatende about 9° from the pole: the southern 18° or
20°; in some parts even 30°; and floating ice has occasionally been found
in both hemispheres as far as 40° from the poles, and sometimes, as it has been
said, even in latitude 41° or 42°. Between 54° and 60° south latitude, the
snow lies-on the ground, at the sea side, throughout the summer. The line of
perpetual congelation is three miles above the surface at the equator, where the
mean heat is 84°; at Teneriffe, in latitude 8°, two-miles; in the latitude of
London, a little more than.a mile; and in latitude 80° north; only 1200 feet.
At the pole, according to the analogy deduced by Mr. Kirwan, from a com-
parison of various observations, the mean temperature should be 31°. In
London the. mean temperature is 50°; at Rome and at Montpelier, a little
more than 60°; in the island of Madeira, 70°; and in Jamaica, 80°.


There are frequently some local causes of heat and cold which are independ-


ON CLIMATES AND WINDS. : 701


ent of the sun’s immediate action. Thus, it has been observed, that when


the weather has been clear,and a cloud passes over the place of observation, the
thermometer frequently rises a degree or two almost instantaneously. This
has been partly explained by considering the cloud as a vesture, preventing
the escape of the heat which is always radiating from the earth, and reflecting:
it back to the surface: the cloud may also have been lately condensed, and:
may itself be of ahigher temperature than the earth. Mr.Six has observed that in:
clear weather, the air is usually some degrees colder at night,and warmer by day,

close to the ground, than a few feet above it; but that in cloudy weather there:
is less difference: and it is possible that this circumstance may be derived
from the difference of the quantity of evaporation from the earth’s surface,

which occasions a different degree of cold in different states of the atmosphere.


The motions of the air, which constitute winds, are in general dependent,
in the first instance, on variations of temperature. They are so accidental and


‘uncertain, as to be subjected to no universal laws ; as far however as any re- ~


gularity can be observed in their recurrence, it may in most cases be sutli-
ciently explained.


The principal phenomena of the periodical winds may be reduced to six
distinct heads: first the general tendency from north east and south east
towards the equator, in latitudes below 30°; secondly, the deviation of this
tendency from the precise situation of the equator; thirdly, the prevalence
of westerly winds between 30° and 40° or more, especially in the southern
hemisphere ;. fourthly, the local modifications to which these general effects

ubjected; fifthly the monsoons, which vary every half weeks and lastly
fe diurnal changes of land and sea breezes.


With respect to the general tendency of the trade winds to the west, it
may be sufficiently explained by Hadley’s theory of the difference of. the
rotatory motion of different parts of the atmosphere, combined with the
currents occasioned by the greater heat at the equator. For the sun’s rays,
expanding the air in the neighbourhood of the equator, and causing it to
ascend, produce a current in the lower parts of the atmosphere, which rush
southwards and northwards towards the equator, in order to occupy the place
of the heated air as it rises: and since the rotatory motion of the earth is

VoL. I. 4s


ak Ss em i es


TOs. : LECTURE: CVE


greatest at the: equator. and: is directed castwards;. the:air coming from the

pelts: has of course x relative: motiom westwardsi;. aud hence the: jot motiow

of tlie current: is:direvted;.im the northermhemisphere; from north: east. trsouthe

west}, anc in: the:southern;. from soutli east: to wortl: west. Dr. Halley supe

posetb that the air was: made im some measure to follow the:sun‘round theearth,

simply’ by: means ofithe expansion:of the atmosphere; which takes placeims =
mediately under: him; and accompanies: him round: the globe ; bat it: does: !
not seenr evident thatthe air could have amy: greater: tendency: to follow the
sani tham toomeet.hiin.. Astronomers have, however, dedueed: an additionab
cause for an easterly wind from the attractions of the moon and of the sun
whicl: appear. from. the lawsiofi gravitation; to: have slight: tendency: to
retard: the: rotatory motion of the: atmosphere: and: » similar instance: has
been observed in the motions of the atmosphere of the planet Jupiter, by
means: of: tlieappearances of spots of different: kindsow liis dise, some of
which seem: to revolve: less. rapidly than the bouy of the planet. Av so
great:a distance, the influence of the-sun’s heat:must-be comparatively incon» — :
siderable,. and the wantofia. tendency im the spots towards'theequator appeur®
to show, that the atmosphere, in which they float, is not put im motion by the {
same causes, which we have supposed to be most concerned in the production
offour owm trade winds: It has beem remarited: that the frictiow of the atiho- oi
sphere,. thus retarded by the-attraction of thesum and. moon; must iw the ==
eourse of ages have: impaired: the uniformity of the earth’ssdiurnalimotiony -
and it has been observed, ow the other hand,. that evew this effect would be =
partially counteracted» by: the: gradual filling: up of valleys, by” means of-tlie 1a
descent.of the superficial! parts of mountains, which, at a: greater distance
from the:centre,, were revolving with a rapidity somewhat
valleys in which they aredeposited; but probably: please

~-would become sensible in millions of years. :


ped: bit ny
‘Thesecond circumstanceis easily explained by the gents t

than of the southern hemisphere;;, so that instead of eoi
. the neutral portion of the atmosphere lies-be
the-north east wind not reaching the eestor
about 3° beyond it. But the situation:of t
sun's; declination, accordingly, as different
succession somewhat. hotter: than the 1


ON CLIMATES AND WINDS. 7os


northern and.southern currents meet, their joint effect must naturally be to
producea due.east wind; but iin some parts of :thecoceau, temporary calms
and inregular squalls have ‘been observed to take place of this easterly wind,
which aero hea RTH mae Es yg be )


whe! third yer? that i is, othe - igs ‘of westerly winds sbetween the
datitudes 30° and 40°, hes not yet heen sufficiently explained. The most
probable cause of this circumstance is, that the current of heated air; which
ave thave' hitherto meglected, and ‘which ipasses,-:in the upper yparts of the
atmosphere, from the equator each way towards -the poles, and which, being
the converse of the trade sind, must be a.south west and worth west wind, —
in the different hemispheres, becomes here sutiiciently cool to descend and mix
with the lower pavts.of the atmosphere, orto carry them along by its lateral fric- -
tion; and while it descends to complete the circle, necessary for supplying the
current to theequator, its motion with respect to the horizon must become at a
certain time due west, since ithecause which stops its progress northwards, has
no tendency to impede its motion eastwards. ‘Dbe outward bound East India
ships generally make their easting in about 36° south latitude. It is probably
also on account of the rotatory motion of the earth, that south west winds are
more common in our latitudes than south east, and north east than north west.


ici local avodiécations ts iivcmiaidiaell im the Fett place, we

may reckon ‘the greater indistinctmess of the third effect in the worthera than

ém the southern hemisphere, a circumstance which is explained from the more

pit ne distribution of sea and. fland: for between 30° and 40° south
de the ocean is scarcely any where interrupted. In lower latitudes also,
‘the west coast of Africa, the winds are so much deflected towards re

land, as to een a oom See ee een

rrdprtt, (0h) ‘Lier até te il

The a menlidhede a fh nemankable jabeiccmeaie are

80 called from a Malay word, denoting season. They ane occasioned by the


x cigeseanbicmesoeeerenc the north side of the equator,


ril to September, the sun having north declination, the heat on.this
4 little nonth of ithe tropic, is mery imtense, and the general
resneaaed apron anges ‘The ais, thenefore, coming

the equator, ce eas a the defi-


704 LECTURE Lvi.


ciency of rotatory motion, a south éast’ wind, as:usual, which is found to
prevail between Madagascar and New Holland, as far as the equator. In
consequence perhaps of friction in its passage, it gradually loses its impetus
towards the west, and at the equator is nearly a south wind: but in proceed-
ing north from the equator, it becomes, from an excess of rotatory motion, a
south west wind, which blows into the Arabian gulf, and the bay of Bengal.

Both these winds are however variously modified by the particular situations
of the islands and continents. From October to March, on the contrary,
the sun having south declination, the south east trade wind stops at 10° south
latitude; the trade winds on the north side of the equator are as usual north
east; and beyond the equator they become for some degrees north west, the
circumstances being the reverse of those which happen in the summer months,


’ at greater distances, on the other-side of the equator. (Plate XLII. XLIII.)


The last fact is the simplest of all. ‘The land and sea breezes are produced
by the ascent of the air over the land in the day time, while the land is
hotter than the sea; and {its descent. at night, when the land is become
colder: hence the breeze comes from the sea by day, and from the land by
night.


The violent agitations,of the air, which constitute hurricanes and whirl-
winds, occur more commonly in tropical climates than in others. The
causes of these storms are little understood; their course is said to be
generally opposite to that of the trade-winds; but tornados, which are less
regular hurricanes, originate indifferently from every quarter.


The variations of the weight of the air, which occasion the winds, x
other changes in its density, which are the effects of the winds themselves,
are indicated by the height of the barometer, which is in general the more
variable as the winds are more liable to: sudden changes. Hence in the
neighbourhood of the equator the height of the barometer is scarcely ever a
quarter of an inch more or less than 30 inches, which is very nearly its mean
height on the level of the sea in every part of the globe: in Great Britain
it is sometimes as low as 28 inches; but never higher than 31. We have
already seen that the elevation of any place above the sea reduces the height
of the barometer according to a law which is determined by the general


ON CLIMATES AND WINDS. 705


properties of elastic fluids: thus, at an elevation of 1 mile above the sea, the

: mean height of the barometer is 24; inches, and at 2 miles, 20 inches only.
The use of the barometer, in foretelling variations of weather, is perhaps more
limited than has sometimes been supposed; but by a careful observation, con-
clusions may be drawn from it, which may in many cases be of considerable
utility : and it has even been applied with success, by some late navigators, to
the prediction of changes of wind, at times when they could not have been
suspected from any other circumstances,


A


LECTURE LVII.


_ ON AQUEOUS AND IGNEOUS METEORS.


>


Tue phenomena originating from the evaporation of water constitute a
large proportion of the subjects of meteorology: they are materially influenced
by the diversities of climates and winds, which we have lately considered; and
they appear to contribute to the electrical changes, which form a principal
part of luminous or igneous meteors: nor is the action of water wholly un-
concerned in many of the effects of subterraneous fires, which have also a
slight connexion with atmospherical electricity; and it has been conjectured
that the only igneous meteors, which appear wholly independent of any of
these phenomena, may originate from volcanic commotions in other worlds.


The action of heat appears to detach continually from the surface of water,
and perhaps of every other liquid, and even solid, a certain quantity of va-
pour, in the form of an invisible gas; but when the space above the liquid is
already charged with as much vapour as can exist in it at the actual tempe-
rature, the vapour, thus continually thrown off, either remains suspended in
the form of visible particles, or falls back immediately into the liquid. This
is the simplest mode of explaining the continuance of evaporation, under the
pressure of any dry gas, however dense, and its apparent suppression in the
presence of moist air, however rare. Sometimes also, when the temperature of
the liquid is elevated, so that minute globules either of steam or of air rise
through it, some visible particles are projected upwards by each globule, and
continue to float in the air; this appears, however, to be an irregularity un-
connected with the principal process of slow evaporation.


The quantity of vapour, which can exist in the space above any portion of
water, has been supposed by Deluc, Volta, and Dalton, to be wholly inde-
pendent of the nature, the.density, or even the presence of the air or gas


ON AQUEOUS AND IGNEOUS METEORS. 707


whiely that spaeé contains: and’ we: may easily imagine. that the smallest dis-
tance, at! which tle particles of water, constituting vapour, can exist, with-
out coming: withi tlie redeh of their ntutual cohesion, is the same, whatever
other particles may be seattered through the intervening space. It appears,
however; nivre cdnsistent’ with some experiments;to' suppose,that the presence
of air of the usual density allows: the particles of water to approach a little
nearer together without cohering, so- tliat. the utmost quantity of moisture,
that ean be contained-in-a cubic foot of air at a given’ temperature, is not ex-
actly the same as would! make a cubic foot of pure’ vapour, but always in a
certain proportion to it; and it seems to: follow, from: the experiments of
Saussure, compared with those of Pictet, that the weight of the vapour
contained: in a cubic foot of air is about one half greater than that of @ cubic
foot of pure vapour at the sathe temperature.


Wher the air, im the neighbourhood of the surface of the water, has become
thus’ saturated: with moisture, ‘the evaporation proceeds very slowly,, the va-
pour being precipitated as soon. as it rises: but if the air be continually
ellangeds. so that the moistened portion may be removed, and dry air substi-
tuted‘for it, the process: will be greatly expedited ; and such a change may be
effeeted:cither by wind, or by the natural circulation, occasioned by. any eleva-
tiow of temperature communicated by the water to the neighbouring air; but
wher this! cirvalation is‘ prevented; the evaporation is much diminished, al-
though the temperature may be considerably elevated. In moderate exposures,
the'depth-of the quantity of water, evaporating in 24 hours from any surface, is
expressed, according to Mr. Dalton’s experiments, by the height of the column
of mercury equivalent to the force of steam at the given temperature, deduct-
ing, however, the effect of the elasticity of the moisture already existing in the
ain


Since the quantity of moisture, which the air is capable of receiving, is
greater’ as its’ temperature is greater, we may obtain a natural measure of the
qaaitity which it contains, by reducing, it to the temperature at which the
Moistiire: begins to be deposited: Thus), if we take a glass of cold water, and
add torit! some common salt, or some muriate of lime, we may cool the air
Wear’ itso much,. as to cause it to deposit’ a part of its moisture on the glass:
aud*by measuring the temperature of the water when-the precipitation begins,


a


708 LECTURE LVII.


Mr. Daltonestimates the true state of the’air with respecttomoisture. Thus, if the

glass begins to be moistened when the water is at 40°, heinfersfromtheknown

elasticity of steam at that temperature, that the quantity of moisture contained in

the air is equivalent to the pressure of a column of mercury about a quarter of

an inch in height; and if the actual temperature of the air be-50°, the corre-

sponding elasticity of steam being a little more than one third of an inch,

the daily evaporation in such air will amount to about one ninth of an inch, —
making 40 inches in the whole year. In fact, however, the air is usually

moister than this, and the mean evaporation of all England is, arid to

Mr. Dalton, about 23 inches only. 7


In hotter climates, and in particular situations, the evento pea a
considerably greater. The Mediterranean Sea, being surrounded by land, is
more heated than the ocean, and the winds which blow over it are drier; con- —
sequently its evaporation is greater than that of the Atlantic, and its specific _
gravity is increased by the increased proportion of salt; so that at the straights _
of Gibraltar, a current runs inwards at the surface and outwards near the bot-—
tom, for the same reason as the air, when it is denser in a passage than in the —
adjoining room, blows a candle towards the room at the lower part of the —
door, and draws it towards the passage at the upper. Had there been. acon-—
tinual current inwards through the Straights, at all parts, the Mediterranean
must in the course of ages have become a rock of salt. It is indeed remarkas
ble that all lakes, into which rivers run without any further discharge, are ,
more or less salt, as well as lakes in general near the sea: but where a river
runs through a lake into the sea, it must necessarily, in the comnteagt time, hay
carried the salt of the lake with it, if it had ever papier: +) Yagi


oi
Experiments on the deposition of moisture, like aa of Mr
liable to a slight inaccuracy, on account of the effects of ana
attraction, by means of which, some substances seem to attract
temperature a little higher than others. Thus, a surface of me
mains dry, in the neighbourhood of a piece of glass which is
moisture. It iscertain that some substances
even when the quantity which it contains
which would saturate it, since it is on this ¢
tion of hygrometers depends; and it is nie aon


‘a
ON AQUEOUS AND IGNEOUS METEORS. 709


milar, that even surfaces of different kinds possess different attractive yovers
for moisture nearly ready to be deposited. . Itvis, however, only necess&ry to
employ, for Mr. Dalton’s experiment, a substance which has a very weak attrac-
tion for moisture; and any kind of metal will perhaps be found sufficiently
correct in its indications. ;


It has been observed, that a piece of metal, placed on glass, usually protects
also the opposite side of the glass from the deposition of dew ; and Mr. Bene-
dict Prévost has shown, that in general, whenever the metal is placed on the
warmer side of the glass, the humidity is deposited more copiously either on
itself, or on the glass near it; that when it is on the colder side, it neither re-
ceives the humidity, nor permits its deposition on the glass; but that the ad-
dition of a second piece of glass, over the metal, destroys the effect, and a se-
cond piece of metal restores it. It appears that, from its properties with


~ respect to radiant heat, the metallic surface produces: these effects, by pre-


venting the ready communication either of heat or of cold to the glass.


.. The quantity of invisible moisture,contained in air,may be,in some degree,
estimated from the indications of hygrometers, although these instruments
have hitherto remained in a state of great imperfection. A sponge, a quan-
tity 6f caustic potash, or of sulfuric acid, or a stone of a peculiar nature, has
sometimes been employed for determining the degree of moisture of the air,
from which it acquires a certain augmentation of its weight. - A cord dipped
_in brine, or the beard of an oat, is also often used for the same purpose: the
ee in which it untwists, from the effect of moisture, being shown by an in-
ex. But the extension of a hair, or ofa slip of whalebone, which have been employ-
ed by Saussure and Deluc, appear to be more certain and accurate in their indi-
cations. The hair hygrometer acquires more speedily the degree correspond-
ing to any given state of the air, but it seems to reach the utmost extent. of
its scale before it arrives at perfect humidity; while the whalebone hygrome-
years to express a greater change upon immersion in water than from the
‘of the moistest transparent air, which has alsb been considered by some -
‘smperfection. Both these instruments are impaired by time, and ac-
y errors, so that a mean between both is more likely to be cor-
sither separately. ‘Their indications are at all times widely different
‘her, and the mean appears to approach much nearer to a natural
AT .


Wad


710° LECTURE LVII.


scale than either of them. Mr. Leslie employs a very delicate thermometer, of
which the bulb is moistened, for measuring the dryness of the air, by the cold
produced during evaporation, when the thermometer is exposed to it; but this
mode of estimating the quantity of moisture appears to be liable to consider-
able uncertainty. (Plate XLI. Fig. 581.)


In order that the scale of a hygrometer should be perfectly natural, it ought ,
to express, ‘at all temperatures, the proportion of the quantity of moisture in
the air to that which is required for its. saturation; thus, at 100. degrees,
it should imply that-the slightest depression of temperature would produce a
deposition; at 50 degrees, that the air contains only half as much water as
would saturate it, or, supposing the thermometer at 52°, that a deposition
would be produced in it by a depression of 17°.. And if we know the actual
temperature, and the temperature at which the deposition takes place, we
may find the height of the natural hygrometer, by the proportion of the
corresponding elasticities of steam. The mean height of the natural hygro-
meter in London is probably about 80°; that of Deluc’s hygrometer, with
proper corrections, being nearly 70°: so that a depression of 6° must usually
be papinan to cause a deposition of moisture.


The quantity of water actually contained in a cubic foot of air, saturated
with moisture, appears to be about 2 grains at the freezing point, 4 grains
at 48°, 6 at 60°, and 8 at 68°; and the density of the vapour, thus mixed
with air, is, according to Saussure’s experiments, about three fourths as great as
that of the’ air itself; so that moist air is always a little lighter than dry ai
and the’ more'so as the air is warmer, provided that it be saturated with mo
ture by means of the presence of water. It follows from tlie properties of mois-
ture thus determined, that if any two portions of perfectly humid air, at differ-
ent temperatures, be mixed together, there must bea precipitation: thus, a cubic
foot of air at 32° being mixed with another at 60°, their common tempera-
ture must be 46°; if they are saturated with moisture, they must contain 8
grains of water when separate; but when mixed they will be too cold by 2° to
contain the same quantity; since air. at 48° can only contain 4 grains for each
foot; and it has been supposed that such mixtures frequently occasion a pre-
cipitation in nature. Thus, it often happens that the breath .of an animal,
which is in itself transparent, becomes visible when mixed with a cold atmo-


ON AQUEOUS AND IGNEOUS METEORS. 711


sphere; and in such cases the deposition may perhaps be facilitated by the
cooling of the warmer air toa certain degree, even before a. perfect mixture
has taken pee 2 v4


When visible vapour has been thus deposited from transparent jair, by means
either of cold or of mixture, it generally remains for some time suspended, in
the form of a mist-or of a cloud: sometimes, however, it appears to be at once
deposited on the surface of a solid, in the form of dew or of hoar frost; for
it is not probable that the crystallized form, in which hoar frost is arranged,
can be derived from the union of the particles already existing in the air as
distinct aggregates. ;


The dew, which is commonly deposited on vegetables, is partly derived, in
the evening, from the vapours ascending from the heated earth, since it is then
found on the internal surface of a bell glass; and towards the morning, from
the moisture descending from the air above, as it begins to cool. Sometimes,
however, in warmer weather, the dew begins to descend in the evening; this
the French, call serein; the humidity deposited by mists on trees, and by
moist air on windows, generally within, but sometimes without, they call givre.

fi ti i r -

Mists are said to consist sometimes of other particles than pure water:
these are called dry mists, and they have been supposed to blight vegetables.
Such mists are sometimes attended by.asmell, resembling that which is occa-
sioned by an electric spark. Rain falling after a dry season deposits, when it
has been suffered to stand, some particles of foreign matter which. it has
brought down from the atmosphere. There must indeed frequently be a
multiplicity of substances of various kinds floating in the air; the wind has
been found to carry the farina of, plants as far as $0 or 40 miles, and the
ashes of a volcano more than 200. It only requires that the magnitude of the
particles of any substance be sufficiently reduced in size, in order to render
them incapable of falling with any given velocity; and when this velocity
is yery small, it may easily be overpowered by any accidental motions of the
air. The diameter of a sphere of water, falling at the rate of one inch only in
a second,, ought to be.one six hundred thousandth of an inch, which is about
the thickness of the upper, part of a soap bubble at the instant when it bursts ;
but the particles of mists are incomparably larger than this, since they would
otherwise be perfectly invisible as separate drops: the least particle, that could


712 LECTURE LVII,


be discovered by the naked eye, being such as would fall witha velocity of about
a foot in asecond, if the air were perfectly at rest. But itis very probable that
the resistance, opposed to the motion of particles so small, may be considerably
greater, than would be expected from a calculation, derived from experiments
made on a much larger scale, and their descent consequently much slower.


When the particles of a mist are united into drops capable of descending
with a considerable velocity, they constitute rain; if they are frozen during
their deposition, they exhibit the appearance of a perfect crystallization, and
become snow: but if the drops already formed are frozen, either by means of
external cold, or on account of the great evaporation produced by a rapid de-
scent through very dry air, they acquire the character of hail, which is
often observed in weather much too hot for the formation of snow. :


It cannot be doubted but that there is a connexion’ between the descent of
the barometer and the fall of rain; but no satisfactory reason has-yet been as-
signed for the circumstance; nor is it possible to foretel, with certainty, that
rain will follow any changes in the height of the bardmeter that have been ob-
served. The immediate dependence of rain, or of any other atmospherical
phenomena, on the influence of the moon, appears to be rendered highly im-
probable, not only by mathematical calculations of the effects of the moon’s
attraction, but also by the irregularity of the very observations, which have
been adduced in favour of such a connexion. But however uncertain the
ultimate causes of rain may be in general, their effects in some places are suf.
ficiently constant, to be attributed to permanent local circumstances, and i in
particular to the periodical recurrence of similar winds.


In low and level countries, clouds may often begin to descend from the up-
per regions of the atmosphere, and may be redissolved by the warmer air be-
low; but when they descend in an equal degree among mountains, they fall
on the earth; and besides the quantity of water which they furnish for vege-
tation, and that which is carried off by evaporation, they afford, by means of
springs and rivers, a constant supply for the use of man and of other animals
in distant parts. The upper regions of the atmosphere are however by no
means the principal sources of rain in ordinary climates, since a gage placed
on a very high building seldom collects more than two thirds as much rain
as another standing on the ground below: and the effects of mountains in


ON AQUEOUS AND IGNEOUS METEORS. 713


collecting rain are perhaps chiefly derived from the ascending currents which


» they occasion, and by which the air saturated with moisture is carried to a


higher and a colder region.

The Abyssinian rains are the causes of the inundation of the Nile; they last from
April to September ; but for the first three months the rain is only in the night:
The inundation, in Egypt, begins at present about the 17th of June; it increases
for 40 days, and subsides in the same time; but the ancient accounts, as well
as some modern ones, assign a longer duration to it. The river Laplata rises
and falls at thesame times as the Nile. The Ganges, the Indus, the Euphrates,
the river of Ava or Pegu, and many other large rivers, have also considerable
inundations at regular periods. In many other countries there are seasons at
which the rains seldom fail to recur; and sometimes the periodical rains are
different in different parts of the same country. Thus the coast of Malabar, .
which is to the west of the Gate mountains, or Gauts, enjoys summer
weather, without rain, from September to April, while that of Coromandel,
which is on the eastern side, experiences all the rigours of its winter; being at
this time exposed to the influence of the north east trade wind. Vicissitudes
of asimilar natureare also observed on the north and south sides of the island
of Jamaica. The mean fall of rain in London is about 23 inches; at Exeter,
which is nearer to the Atlantic, $3; the average of England and Wales is 31.


The evaporations and precipitations, and probably also the condensations
and expansions, which take place on a large scale in the atmosphere and in
the clouds, cannot fail of producing changes in their electrical qualities;
and these changes appear to be the principal sources of the phenomena of


‘thunder and lightning. The clouds, when electrified, being more or less


insulated by the interposition of the air, exhibit attractive and repulsive
effects, and are discharged by explosions, either among themselves, or com-
municating with the earth, in the same manner as bodies which have been
electrified by artificial means; they also sometimes produce, in the neighbour-
ing parts of the earth, and in the animals on its surface, a state of induced
electricity ; and in this case the returning stroke, or the sudden restoration
of the equilibrium, when the electricity of the nearest clouds is imparted to
the more remote, may be’ fatal, without any appearance of an immediate
discharge, at the place where the animal stands,


Bib Sti baie ia ats Pt re ———————— YF


= “ES


a RS


714 LECTURE LYII.


We can, however, by no means precisely ascertain in what manner all the


“electrical phenomena of the atmosphere are produced. It appears from the


experiments of Beccaria and Cavallo that the air is in general positively
electrical, and most so in cold and clear weather; in cloudy weather more slight-
ly: and that during rain, the air is generally in a negative state. Mr. Read
has found that air charged with putrid vapours of any kind, and in particular
the air of close rooms, is almost always negatively electrified. The electri-
city is more readily communicated to an electrometer in an elevated situation,
and in damp weather, than in other circumstances; a candle is also very
useful in collecting it. When a wire is connected with a kite, being con-
tinued along the string, we may frequently obtain from it sparks a quarter
of an inch long. af


We find a complete and interesting description of the effects of a violent
thunder storm in a paper by Mr. Brereton, eect in the Philosophical
Transactions. The circumstance happened in September 1780, at East
Bourn, in a house occupied by Mr. Adair: it was built of stone, and stood
facing thesea. About nine o'clock, in a very stormy morning, a black cloud
‘approached the house; several balls of fire were secn to drop from it succes-
sively into the sea, and one in particular, appearing like an immense sky
rocket, broke against the front of the house in different directions. Mr.
Adair was standing at a window on the first floor, with his hands clasped
together, and extended against the middle of the frame: his hands were
forced asunder, he was thrown’several yards off on the floor, and remained
for some time speechless and motionless, although not insensible: his clothes
were much torn; several articles of metal about his person were partially
melted, while others, apparently in similar circumstances, and in particular
a silver buckle, escaped; and his skin was in many parts much scorched and
lacerated. The whole of the glass in the window, and a pier glass near it,
were completely destroyed, and scattered about the room; most of the fur-
niture was broken to pieces, and all the bell wires were melted. In the
room above this, a lady and her maid were driven to'a distant part, and
rendered insensible for some time, but not hurt; in the room below, two
servants, who were near the windows, were struck dead: both the bodies were
turned black; one of them had a wound near the heart; and neither of them


became stiff after death; a third servant, who was a little behind one of them,
; 4


ON AQUEOUS AND IGNEOUS METEORS. 715


escaped with the loss of a telescope, which he held in his hand, and with
the sensation of a violent pressure on his head and on his back. A large stone
was forced out of the wall near them, and thrown into the room, and some
other similar effects were observed, which marked the progress of the explosion.


For guarding against accidents so dreadful, Dr. Franklin’s great invention
of metallic conductors may be very advantageously employed: for, when pro-
perly fixed, they afford a degree of security which leaves very little room for
apprehension. A conductor ought to be continued deep into the earth, or con-
nected with some well or drain; it should be of ample dimensions, and where
smallest, of copper, since copper conducts electricity more readily than iron,
In one instance a conductor of iron, four inches wide,and half an inch thick,
appears to have been made red hot by a stroke of lightning. It seems to be.
of some advantage that a conductor should be pointed, but the circumstance
is of less consequence than has often been supposed. Mr. Wilson exhibited
some experiments in which a point was struck at a greater distance than a
ball, and therefore argued against the employment of pointed conductors.
Mr. Nairne, on the contrary, showed that a ball is often struck in preference
toa point. Butithas been observed, that if a poist attracts the lightning from
a greater distance, it must protect a ree cata of building. It is easy
to show, by hanging cotton or wool on a conductor, that a point repels light
electrical bodies, and that a pointed conductor may, therefore, drive away
some fleecy clouds; but this effect is principally derived from a current of
air repelled by the point; and such a current could scarcely be supposed to
have any perceptible effect on clouds so distant as those which are concerned
in thunder storms. In order to escape personal danger in a thunder storm,
the best precautions are, to avoid eminences, and all exposed situations, as-
well as a near approach to conductors. The neighbourhood of windows, look-
ing glasses, fire places, and trees, must always be considered as hazardous.


It has been supposed that a sudden condensation of the air, arising from
cold, accompanied by a deposition of moisture, and propagated by a con-
tinuation of the cause, by means of the cold occasioned by expansion, pro-
duces frequently the noise of thunder, without any lightning, and without
any electrical agitation: but it does not appear that the opinion is well
established.


Ty


=)
> ~


716 “LECTURE LVII.


The phenomena of waterspouts, if not of electrical origin, appear to have
some connexion with electrical causes. A waterspout generally consists of large
drops, like a dense rain, much agitated, and descending or ascending with a
spiral motion, at the same time that the whole spout is carried along horizon-
tally, accompanied in general by a sound like that of the dashing of waves.
Spouts are sometimes, although rarely, observed on shore, but generally in
the neighbourhood of water. ‘They are commonly largest above ; sometimes
two cones project, the one from a cloud, the other from the sea below it, to meet
each other, the junction being accompanied by a flash of lightning: and
when the whole spout has exhibited aluminous appearance, it has perhaps
served to conduct electricity slowly from the clouds to the earth. Some of
these circumstances may be explained by considering the spout as a whirlwind)
carrying up drops of water, which it has separated from the surface of the
waves; and the remainder may perhaps be deduced from the cooperation of
electricity, already existing in a neighbouring cloud.


It is doubtful whether the light of the aurora borealis may not be of an elec-
trical nature: the phenomenon is certainly connected with the general cause


_ of magnetism ; the primitive beams of light are supposed to be at an eleva-


tion of at least 50 or 100 miles above the earth, and every where in a direc-
tion parallel to that of the dipping needle; but perhaps, although the sub-
stance is magnetical, the illumination, which renders it visible, may still be
derived from the passage of electricity, at too great a distance to be dis-
covered by any other test.


Earthquakes and volcanos appear to originate in chemical changes, which
take place within the substance of the earth: they have probably little
further connexion with electricity, than as causes which occasionally destroy
the electrical equilibrium ; for although some authors have inferred, from the
great velocity with which the shock of an earthquake is transmitted from
place to place, that its nature must be electrical, yet others have, with
greater probability, attributed the rapid succession of the effects to the
operation of a single cause, acting at a great distance below the earth’s sur-
face. There are however some circumstances, which indicate such acon-
nexion between the state of the atmosphere and the approach of an earthquake,
as cannot easily be explained by any hypothesis. :


oe


ON AQUEOUS AND IGNEOUS METEORS. 717


The shocks of. earthquakes, and the eruptions of volcanos, are in all pro-
bability modifications of the effects of one common cause; the same countries
' are liable to both of them; and where the agitation produced by an earth=

quake extends further than there is any reason tosuspectasubterraneovs commo-
tion, itis probably propagated through the earth nearly in the same manner asa
noise is conveyed through the air. Volcanos are found in almost all parts of
the world, but most commonly in the neighbourhood of the sea; and espe-
cially in small islands; for instance, in Italy, Sicily, Iceland, Japan, the
Caribbees, the Cape Verd islands, the Canaries, and the Azores; there are
also numerous volcanos in Mexico and Peru, especially Pichincha and Coto-
’ paxi. The subterraneous fires, which are continually kept up in an open
’ yolcano, depend perhaps in general on sulfureous combinations and decom-
positions, like the heating of a heap of wet pyrites, or the union of sul-
far and’ iron filings: but in other cases they may perhaps approach more
neatly to the nature of common fires, A mountain of coal has been burning
in Siberia for almost a century, and must probably have undermined in some
degree the neighbouring country. The immediate cause of an eruption
appears to be very frequently an admission of water from the sea, or from
subterraneous reservoirs; it has often happened that boiling water has been
discharged in great quantities from a volcano; and the force of steam is
perhaps more adequate to, the production of violent explosions, than any
other power in nature. The consequence of such an admission of water, into
an immense collection of ignited materials, may in some measure be under-
stood, from the accidents which occasionally happen in founderics: thus a
whole furnace of melted iron was lately dissipated into the air in Colebrook
Dalesghy: the effect of a flood, which suddenly overflowed it.
<hoodind igetp. >\! at } ‘
_ The phenomena of earthquakes and volcanos are amply illustrated by
the particular accounts, transmitted to the Royal Society by Sir William
_ Hamilton, of those which have happened at different times ‘in Italy. The

earthquake, which desolated Calabria, in 1783, was fatal to about 40000

persons, continuing its ravages for more than three months; it destroyed


1 3


Th estern to the eastern coast of the southernmost point of Italy,


ee


718 LECTURE LyII.


of Oppido, in the centre of this circle; or under some part of the sea, be-
tween the west of Italy, and the volcanic island of Stromboli. This island,
as well as Mount Etna, had smoked less than usual before the earthquake,
but they both exhibited appearances of an eruption during its continuance;
Etna towards the beginning, and Stromboli at the end.” Before each shock
the clouds were usually motionless for a certain time, and it rained violently ;
frequently also lightning and sudden gusts of wind accompanied the rain.


_The principal shocks appeared to consist in a sudden elevation of the ground


to a considerable height, which was propagated somewhat like a waye, from —
west to east: besides this, the ground had also a horizontal motion backwards
and forwards, and in‘some measure in a circular direction. This motion was
accompanied by a loud noise; it continued in one instance for ten seconds
without intermission: and it shook the trees so violently that their heads
nearly reached the ground. It affected the plains more strongly than the
hills. In some places luminous exhalations, which Sir William Hamilton
thinks rather electrical than igneous, were emitted by the earth: the sea
boiled up near Messina, and was agitated as if by a copious discharge of
vapours from its bottom; and in several places water, mixed with sand, was.


- thrown up to a considerable height. The most general effect of these violent


commotions was the destruction of buildings of all kinds, except the light
barracks of wood or of reeds, into which the inhabitants retreated as soon as
they were aware of their danger: the beds of rivers were often left dry, while
the shock lasted, and the water on its return overflowed their banks: springs
were sométimes dried up, and new ones broke out in other places. The hills
which formed the sides of steep vallies were often divided by deep chasms
parallel to the vallies; andin many cases large portions of them were separated,
and removed by the temporary deluge to places half a mile or a mile off;
with the buildings and trees still standing on them; and in this manner hills
were levelled, and vallies were filled up. But the most fatal accident of this
kind happened at Scilla, where so large a portion of a cliff was thrown into
the sea, that it raised an immense wave, which carried off more than 2000
inhabitants who were collected on the beach, and even extended its formi-


dable eflects to the opposite coast of Sicily, where several persons perished by
it in a similar manner.


The eruptions of volcanos are usually attended by some shocks like those
of earthquakes, although commonly less violent. Open volcanos continually


ON AQUEOUS AND IGNEOUS METEORS. 719


throw out, in more or less abundance, smoke, ashes, and pumice stones, or
light cinders; but their most formidable effects are produced by a torrent of
ignited lava, which, like a vast deluge:of liquid or semiliquid fire, lays
waste the country over which it runs, and buries all the works of human art.
In March, 1767, Vesuvius began to throw out a considerable quantity of ashes
and stones, which raised its summit in the course of the year no less than 200 feet,

forming first a little mountain of pumice stones within the crater, which by
degrees became visible above its margin. The smoke, which was continually
emitted, was rendered luminous at night, by the light derived from the fire


- burning below it. In August some lava had broken through this mountain,


and in September it had filled the space left between it and the former crater,

On the 13th and 14th of October there were heavy rains, which perhaps

supplied the water concerned in the efuption that shortly followed. On the
morning of the 19th, clouds of smoke were forced, in continual succession,

out of the mouth of the volcano, forming a mass like a large pine tree, which
was lengthened into an arch, and extended to the island of Caprea, 28 miles

off: it was accompanied by much lightning, and by an appearance of meteors

like shooting stars. A mouth then opened below the crater, and discharged
a stream of lava, which Sir William Hamilton ventured to approach within a
short distance, imagining that the violence of the confined materials must
have been exhausted; but on a sudden the mountain opened with a great
noise at a much lower point, about a quarter of a mile from the place where
he stood, and threw outa torrent of lava, which advanced straight towards
him, while he was involved in’ a shower of small pumice stones and ashes, and
_in a cloud of smoke. The force of the explosions was so great, that doors
and windows were thrown open by them at the distance of several miles: the
stream of lava was in some places two miles broad, and 60 or 70 feet deep; it
extended about six miles from the summit of the mountain, and remained hot
for several weeks. In 1794 a still more violent eruption occurred: it was
expected by the inhabitants of the neighbourhood, the crater being nearly
filled, and the water in the wells having subsided. Showers of immense
stones were projected to a great height; and ashes were thrown out so co-
piously, that they were very thick at Taranto, 250 miles off; some of them
ere wet with salt water. A heavy noxious vapour, supposed to be
cid, ‘issued in many places from the earth, and destroyed the vine-
it was suffered to remain stagnant. A part of the town of


yar
‘Torte aa Grech was overwhelmed by a stream: of lava, which ran through it


720 LECTURE LVII.


into the sea; yet notwithstanding the frequency of such accidents, the in-
habitants had so strong a predilection for their native spot, that they refused
the offer of a safer situation for rebuilding their houses, ‘


Convulsions of these kinds must have very materially influenced the dis™
position of the strata of the earth, as well as the form of its surface; but it
is by no means fully determined how far such causes have been concerned,
or how far the effects are to be attributed to the intermediation of water only.
Mineralogists and geologists have been principally divided into two classes
with respect to their theories of the earth, some maintaining the Vulcanian,
and some the Neptunian hypothesis. It appears to be impossible to decide
with any certainty between these opposite opinions; nor is it perhaps of
much consequence for any purpose of practice, or even of science. The
Neptunians are certainly able to establish their own theory positively, and
to prove that the fluid parts of the earth and sea must have been very materi-
ally concerned in producing the changes which have happened to the solid
parts; bat jt may be difficult for them to confute the assertion, that heat,
whether caused by volcanos or otherwise, has also been a very powerful
agent in these operations, and in some cases the joint effects of heat and of
increased pressure appear to have been concerned, in giving to minerals of dif-
ferent kinds their actual form; although on the whole it seems probable that
the operation of heat has been much more limited than that of aqueous solu-
tions and precipitations. Mr. Davy has also very justly inferred, from his
experiments with the battery of Volta, that the effects of the electricity ex-
cited by means of chemical changes within the earth, have probably been
very materially concerned in the gradual formation of a variety of mineral
productions.


The arguments for establishing the general fact, that great convul
sions have actually happened to the earth, are too well known to require
minute examination: the variety of fossil substances, many of them ma-
rine productions, and some almost preserving a recent appearance, that are
found in mountains remote from the sea, are undeniable proofs that the
levels of the earth’s surface must have undergone considerable changes; al-
though some philosophers are of opinion, that such of the primary mountains as
are above 6 or 700 feet high, have never been wholly covered by the sea, It
is not at all easy to explain the change of climate, which some of these cit-

1 9


ON AQUEOUS AND IGNEOUS METEORS, 731


cumstances appear to indicate; the remains of animals inhabiting hot countries,
and the marine productions*of hot climates, which are frequently found in
high northern latitudes, would induce us to suspect, that the position of the
earth’s axis was at a former time very different: from its present position :
and we can scarcely assign, any other probable cause for this change, than
the casual interference, and perhaps incorporation, of a comet’ with the
earth. The probabilities of such an event, in the whole course of time, are
however so small, that we have no reason to be apprehensive of the chance
of its occurring in future, for it is not enough that a comet should approach
so near to the earth as to be very powerfully attracted by it, its motion must
also be directed almost in a straight line towards the earth ;- otherwise it might
only be inflected into a new orbit, and go off again, without having caused
any other disturbance than a partial overflow of the sea.


The face of the globe has also been very materially changed in the course
of ages, by the gradual operation of the sea and of rivers. The sea has in-
croached in particular parts, and retired from others; and the mouths of
large rivers, runningythrough low countries, have often been variously modi-
fied, by a deposition and transfer of the matter washed down from the land.
At Havre the sea undermines the steep coast, and recedes at Dunkirk, where
the shore is flat: in Holland the Zuyder Zee was probably formed in the
middle ages by continual irruptions of the sea, where only the small lake
Flevo had before existed; and the mouths of the Rhine have been consider-
ably altered, both in their dimensions and in their directions. The

mud, deposited by large rivers, generally causes a Delta, or triangular
“piece of land, to grow out into the sea; thus the mouth of the Missis-
sippi is said to have advanced above 50 miles since the discovery of
America; and the sea has retired from Rosetta above a mile in 40 years.
The mouths of the Arno and of the Rhone consist also in great measure of
new land.


The meteors denominated shooting stars are observed to move in all direc-
tions, as well upwards as downwards, although they frequently seem to
have a tendency towards a particular quarter in the course of the same
evening. Their height is seldom less than 20 miles, and sometimes as
much as 100 or 200, but usually about 50; their velocity is commonly
about 20 miles in a second, which differs very little from that of the earth


:
q
'


722 LECTURE LVII.


in its orbit. The rapidity of their motion, as:well as its occasional deviation
from a right line, has generally been considered as a reason for supposing
that they depend on electricity; but the opinion is by no means fully esta-
blished.

Other igneous meteors, which seat resemble in their appearance the
largest of these, are sometimes observed to fall on the earth, either entire or
divided; and after their fall, certain stones have been found, which have
been supposed to have descended in an ignited state. Mr. Howard has ascer-
tained that almost all these stones agree in their general characters, and in
their chemical analysis, especially in the circumstance of containing nickel.
It has been conjectured, both in this country and on the continent, that they
have been emitted by lunar volcanos, and it has been observed, that since they
would find little or no resistance from the very rare atmosphere of the moon,
they would require a velocity of projection only four times as great as that
which a cannon ball sometimes receives, in order to rise into the sphere of
the earth’s attraction. Their heat and combustion may not improbably be
derived from the great condensation which they must occasion in the air im-
mediately before them, and even their friction might easily produce enough
of electric light, to render them visible in the dark. Among many such sub-
stances projected from the moon, it is probable that a few only would be di-
rected towards the earth, and many more would be made to revolve in ellipses
round it, and become little satellites, too small for human observation, ex-
cept when they enter far enough into the atmosphere to produce an appear-
ance of light, resembling that of a shooting star; but it is scarcely probable
that their velocity could ever be at all:comparable with that which has been
attributed to these meteors. There is, however, no difficulty in supposing, on
the other hand, that the wandering substances, which may be moving through
empty space, with a velocity equal to that of the shooting stars, may be so
much retarded, when they penetrate deep into our atmosphere, as/to make
but a moderate impression by their fall on the ground; and if we suppose
the meteors to be of one kind only, they must be referred rather to the de-
scription of shooting stars than to that of the productions of lunar volcanos;
although the undulatory motion, sometimes observed in these meteors seems to
be in some measure inconsistent with the progress of a heavy body, moving by
means of its natural inertia in a straight line.


: , 728


LECTURE LVIII.
ON VEGETATION.


Ir may appear idle to some persons, to attempt to reduce the outlines of na~
tural history into so small a compass, as is required for their becoming a part
of this course of lectures; and it would indeed be a fruitless undertaking to
endeavour to communicate a knowledge of the particular subjects of this sci-
t . ence, even in a much longer time than we shall bestow on it.. But many na-
i turalists have spent a great portion of their lives in learning the names of
plants and animals, and have known at last less of the philosophy of the sci-
ence, than might have been told them in a few hours, by persons who had ob-
served with more enlarged views, and who had reasoned on general principles,
And we shall perhaps find. it possible to collect into a small compass the most
useful information, that has hitherto been obtained, respecting the laws of
animal and vegetable life, as well as the foundations of the methods, by which
the most meee systematical classifications have. been sequlaied.


eR rae


The alithee, of the pe tg _as well sea as land, is occupied by t Gcseribls
individuals, constitating an immense variety of distinct species of animated
ii Them beings, comprehendetl in the three grand divisions of natural

mineral kingdom consists of such substances, as are composed of

rp septal without any regular form, or collected together by ac-

a or external growth only, When mineral substances crystallize, they
SA Feta Gat form, and almost assume the externalappearance of vegetables:
bog aeir particles are never extended to admit others between them, and to


d in all their dimensions ; their growth is only performed by
‘sin Beegurtoes of thoes fl et bare | been al-


be Wie ai ik ely bas or oe halt : jo % . 2


Sef fssury ht t eayetoe stlerei re Y oedeee
derive ine isten sy stor otherwise fom spt


724 LECTURE LVIII.


stock, their parts are extended and evolved from within, and they imbibe their
nutriment by superficial absorption only. There is indeed in the crystalliza-
tion of minerals a slight resemblance to a reproduction or generation, when a
‘small portion of the substance serves as a basis for the formation of subse-
quent crystals: but this portion becomes a constituent part of the crystal,
while it preserves its original form; a seed, on the contrary, is a substance
naturally and completely detached ftom the plant, and containing within it-
self the simplest rudiments of a new individual, which is afterwards evolved
and enlarged. Sometimes, however, vegetables are propagated by means of
dulbs, or by spreading roots, by slips, or by ingrafted scions, without a seed de-
tached in the regular manner; but in these cases the new plant-is,much more
identical with the old one, than when it is raised from a seed, being as it were a
continuation of the same existence. Plants are nourished in great measure by
means of their roots; and sometimes, where they are without’ gute pines nu-
triment is probably’ absorbed by all parts of their surface.


Animals are distinguished from vegetables by the reception of their food,
for digestion and assimilation, into an internal cavity constituting a stomach.
The existence of a stomach, calculated for the digestion of food, appears to
be the best, if not the only criterion of an animal. Some vegetables, indeed,
have a power of catching and detaining animals, by curling up their leaves so
as to cover them, as the drosera or sundew, and the dionaea muscipula, or
catchfly; but this mechanism can scarcely be intended for their immediate
nutriment, at least the leaf can scarcely be supposed to assume the character
ofastomach. It is true that we imagine all animals to have sensation, and
all plants to be without it; and if it were possible to discriminate decisively
between sensation and irritation, the distinction would supersede every other:
but in many cases it is extremely difficult to say where sensation is present,
and where irritation only produces the same apparent effects. We cannot be
sure that the hydra, or fresh water polypus, or the trichurus sol, an animal-
cule described by Dr. Shaw, suffers any sensation of pain when it is divided
into two parts; at least the pain seems to agree remarkably well with its con-
stitution, for it lives and thrives with increased vigour, as two distinct animals.
On the other hand, many plants are easily stimulated to perform motions,
which have the appearance of muscular actions, influenced by sensation: the
sensitive plants close or depress their leaves, in consequence of agitation or of


ON VEGETATION. 725


electricity; the stamina of the barberry and of the pellitory are thrown into
motion, when touched with a needle, and those of rue, and of the grass of
parnassus, have at times alternate motions without any apparent cause. A
zoophyte is an animal absolutely fixed to one place; and the vallisneria is a
vegetable possessed of a certain limited power of locomotion. A plant
chooses in preference to turn towards the light; and it has been known that
an ash tree on a wall, when incapable of being any longer supported by the
wall only, has concentrated all its force in the production of one large root,
descending to the ground. Some of these circumstances may be explained
without recurring to any thing like volition; but, as far as we know, the
same explanations might be applied to some animal motions: and although it
is very possible that there may be a certain limit, where the influence of mind
and sensation terminates, and the laws of vegetable life only prevail; yet the
place of the division is not strongly enough marked, to allow it to forma
characteristic in an artificial system. It has been asserted that some worms
are nourished by absorption only, without the assistance of a stomach; thus
hydatids, which are supposed to be of an animal nature, appear to be simply
bags of a fluid without any visible opening; but a few doubtful cases of this
kind can scarcely be sufficient, to invalidate the general position, that all bodies
decidedly animal have a cavity for the reception of food. There are usually
also some chemical distinctions in the component parts of animals and vege-
tables; animal substances commonly containing greater proportions of azote
or nitrogen, and of phosphoric acid; but there are some exceptions to this ob-
servation; thus the carica papaya, or papaw, contains nearly the same prin-
ciples as are usually found in substances of animal origin. In general we may
readily distinguish a small portion of an animal from a vegetable substance, |
by the smell produced in burning it.; According to common language, we
say, that minerals have growth only, but not always; that vegetables grow
and live also; and that animals haye sensation, as well as a and increase of
magnitude.


Mineralogy i is ‘a branch of natural. history so nearly allied to chemistry, |
that it cannot be completely understood without a previous knowledge of that”
science. It may therefore be more properly considered as belonging to a
course of chemical than of physical lectures.

VOL. I. Ax


796 LECTURE LYIIE.


The vegetable kingdom presents to us a spectacle highly interesting by its
variety and by its.elegance; but the economy of vegetation appears to be lit-
tle diversified, although little understood. With respect to the apparent per-
fection of their functions, and the complication of their structure, we may
consider all vegetables as belonging to two principal divisions, in one of
which the seed is prepared with the assistance of a flower, having its stamina
and its pistils, with petals or a calyx; while in the other, the preparation -
of the seed is less regular and conspicuous, and hence such plants are called
cryptogamous. In some of these there is a slight resemblance to the flowers of
other vegetables, but on the whole, the class appears to form one of the con-
necting links between the threé kingdoms of nature; its physiology is proba-
bly simple, but it has been little examined. The herbs, palms, shrubs, and
trees, which constitute the numerous genera of flowering vegetables, exhibit
the greatest diversity in the forms and dispositions of the organs of fructifica-
tion, while they have all a general resemblance in their internal economy.


Every vegetable may be considered as a congeries of vessels, in which, by
some unknown means, the aqueous fluids, imbibed by its roots, are subjected
to peculiar chemical and yital actions, and exposed in the leaves to the in-
fluence of the light and air; so as to be rendered fit for becoming constituent
parts of the plant, or of the peculiar substances contained within ‘it.


The first process in the germination of a seed is its imbibing moisttire, and
undergoing a chemical fermentation, in which oxygen is absorbed, and a part
of the mucilage contained in the seed is converted into sugar; a substance
probably more nutritive to the young plant. The radicle shoots downwards,
and the seed leaves, or cotyledons, which are generally two, although some-
times more or less numerous, raise themselves above the ground, till in a
short time they die and drop ‘off, being succeeded by the regular and more
adult leaves.


In every transyerse section of a vegetable, we commonly discover at least
four different substances. The parts next to the axis of the tree or branch
consist of medulla or pith, which is supposed by some to be the residence of
the vegetable life of the plant; but a tree may live for many years after be-


3


ON VEGETATION. 727


ing in great measure deprived of its medulla. The pith is of a loose and
light spongy texture ;_ it sends a ramification into each branch and each leaf,
where it appears to serve also as a reservoir of moisture. The pith is sur-
rounded by the woody part, composed of fibres more or less strongly com-
pacted together, but not actually ramifying into each other in any great
degree, although there is reason to suspect'some lateral communications be- -
tween them. They are interrupted, at certain intervals, in many trees, by
fibres, ina radiating direction, forming what is called the silver grain. Like
the bones in animals, the wood constitutes the strongest part of the vege-
table; and like them too it is in a certain degree furnished with vessels. It
has even been supposed by some, that the fibres themselves are distinct
tubes, and by others, that the interstices between them serve the purpose
of vessels, but neither of these opinions is at present generally received, The
wood consists of a number of concentric layers or strata, formed in succes-
sive years; the.external part, which is last formed, is called the,alburnum, or
white wood, and.this part is the most vascular. The bark encompasses the
wood; and this also consists, in trees, of several layers, which,are produced in
as many different years; the external parts usually cracking,.and allowing us
at their divisions to observe:their number, the inner Jayer only being of
immediate use. This layer is called the liber, and since this material was
once used instead of paper, the Romans called-a.book also liber. ‘The bark
consists of fibres of the same kind,as the wood, ,but more loosely connected,
It is covered by the cuticle, which extends itself in a very great degree, as
the growth of the vegetable advances, but at last cracks, and has its office
supplied by the outer layers of bark. Between the bark and the cuticle a
green pulpy substance, or. parenchyma, is found, which seems to be analogous
to the rete. mucosum, interposed between the true skin and the cuticle in
animals. Mr. Desfontaines has observed, that in, palms, and in several other
natural orders of plants, the annual deposition of new matter is not confined to
the external surface, but that it takes place in various parts of the plant,
as if it were composed of a number of ordinary stems united together.


There are three principal kinds of vessels.in the different parts of vegeta-
bles: the sap vessels, which are found both in the wood and in. the bark,
although their nature/appears to require furtherexamination: secondly, the
air vessels, or tracheae, which are composed of single threads, wound into a


728 LECTURE LvVIII. 4


spiral tube, like the spring of a bell, and capable of being easily uncoiled;
these, though they have been called air vessels, and supposed by some to
‘serve the purposes of respiration, are described by others as containing, during
the life of the plant, an aqueous fluid: and they are probably little more than
‘sap vessels, with an additional spiral coat: they are not found in the bark,
nor in all species of plants; and it has thence been inferred that they are
not immediately necessary to the growth of the plant. The third kind are
the’ proper véssels of the plant, which are generally disposed i in concentric
circles, and appear to be unconnected ith the sap vessels, and to contain
the milky, resinous, and other peculiar j juices, which are found in different
kinds of plants; for the sap is nearly the same in all, at least it is independ-
‘ent of the gums and resin, which often distinguish particular plants; it con-
j tains a certain portion of mucilage, and probably in some plants, as the
sugar maple, a considerable quantity of sugar. Mr. Mirbel has also made a
number of still more accurate distinctions respecting the structure of the dif-
ferent kinds of vessels. The circulation of the sap is not completely. under-
stood; when an orifice is made near the root of a tree, it flows most copiously
from above: when near the summit, from below. Dr. Hope actually reverted
the natural course of the juices of a tree, without changing its position; by
‘moculating a willow with two others, he completely united i its existence with
theirs, and then, removing its roots, he found that its vegetation was sup-—
"ported by the juices of the two others. A tree may also be actually inverted;
and the upper part will strike root, the lower putting out branches ad teach, Pie


,


Plants perspire very considerably, and also emit a quantity of gases of —
‘different kinds; they generate a slight degree of heat, which may be observed —
by means of the thermometer, and by the melting of snow in contact with
them. The growth of every tree takes place at the internal | surf he
. ‘bark, not only the bark itself being formed there, but the woox
deposited by the bark; for Dr. Hope separated the ‘whole of th
branch of willow from the wood, leaving | it coe pasar


layers were formed within the bark; and in anche
wood, deprived of the bark, although protected
‘covered with new bark as it grew over from the old bar
The layers of wood, which are added in successiy


ON VEGETATION. ; : 799


register of the age of the tree, are very easily observed when it is cut across ;
sometimes as many as 400 have been found in firs, and oaks are said to have


lived 1000 years.


Mr. Knight has inferred, from a great variety of experiments, that the sap,
either usually or universally, ascends through the wood into theleaves,and then
descends through the bark to nourish the plant. The leaves seem to be some-
what analogous to lyngs, or rather to the gills of fishes: for plants have need
of air,and it has been found, that even seeds will not germinate in a vacuum.
As the lungs of animals appear to be concerned in forming the blood, so it
may be inferred from Mr. Knight’s experiments, that the sap first ascends
to the leaves through the external fresh wood or alburnum, and through the
central vessels of the young leaves and branches, derived from the alburnum,
and accompanied by the-spiral tubes; and after being perfected by exposure
to light and air in the leaves, it descends in the bark, and serves for the secre-
tion of the alburnum, and of the internal layers of the bark, being conveyed
probably by two distinct sets of vessels. The sap, thus prepared by the leaves
in the summer and autumn, is supposed to leave its extractive matter in the
tree throughout the winter, in such a state as to be ready to unite with the
aqueous juices, which ascend from the root, in the succeeding spring. The in-
ternal parts of the wood, having served the purposes of vegetation, are hard-
ened, and. perhaps dried up, so as to be afterwards principally subservient to
strength alone. Dy subsequent experiments, Mr. Knight has also found, that
“when a branch hangs downwards, the sap still appears to proceed from the
.part.of the bark which is uppermost; so that the direction of the force of gra-
vity seems to be concerned in determining that of the motion of the Sap.
_ There appears also to be some reason to suppose that mechanical means assist
in the protrusion of the sap, and the consequent growth of the tree; for ifa
tree be more agitated by, the wind in one direction than in another, its dia-
~ meter will be greatest in that directioa. 4 .


: Ba att hi ka toy)


The process of grafting depends ona remarkable eee of the ae, :
etables ; if the | cut surface of the inner ‘bark of a small branch, or
be placed in contact with that of the branch of another tree, they
ficiently for the nourishment of the cutting; provided, however,

¢ nature of the plants be not Je different. Rorpatnins of the same
Sie alge 5 Ongiths Soy. ‘ Bore « vee bape ee


* ‘ence of botany. Of the 24 classes’ iito which ‘Lin


: eee
i x
= ‘
. "Ny + eee
~ tite


730 LECTURE tyrrt J

kind ‘occurs in animal life, where a tdoth has been transplanted into the
’gocket of another, or where the: ‘spur of a cock aetna a

teste APC begat

Plants have their natural periods of life, either of a few days, as in the case

‘of some of the fungi, of'a year, of a few years, ‘or of many ‘centuries. They

have also their ‘diseases; they are oftén infested by insects, us in the gall of


the oak, dnd the Woodruff of the rose, di’ by ati tmalcules of a still lower'order,


which are either the catises of the smut of corn, or cofistant attendants on it. '
From unnatural and too luxuriant culture, they become sterile, and ‘produce
double flowers instead of fruits and seeds. Whén deprived of sufficient mois-
tute, or nipped by frost, their leaves and branches often die; atid if the


plants recover théir Vigour, a separation ‘is ‘affected 'by ‘a natural process, re-
_Sembling the sloughing of decayed parts ‘of animals: but when the whole


plant sinks, the dead leaves continue to adhere ‘to it. ‘The annual fall of
Jeaves in autumn appears to be a ‘natural separation nearly of the sanie kind,
‘which takes place when the leaves are no longer wanted; the growth of the
plant being’ discontinued, and their functions being no Serene! bia BPE 40 Ek :
by a “eb
Succulent plants geneially die when the cuticle js tebe but ‘ot all ce }
other plants. The air appears to be injurious to vegetables where it is not ae
natural; hence arises the benefit of Mr. Forsyth’s method of comipletely ex- j
cludiig the air from the wounded parts of trees, by means of which their =
losses are often in gteat measure repaired, and they acquire new strength and ,
vigour. Sometimés a diminution of the magnitude of a tree immediately in-
creases its fertility; its force being more concentrated, by lopping off its use-
‘less branches and leaves, it produces a larger quantity of fruit, with the.
which would have been se Stags in their’ ier od age


The Linnean system of vegetables is confetsedly rather an.
natural one; but it is extremely well adapted for! pi
adoption has been productive of the most important in


ble kingdom, 23 are distinguished by'the orms of th
the 24th by the want of 'a regular florescence. “The°fi
monandria, in order, to decandria; then follow
polyandria; the names expressing the number 6
surrounding the seed vessel; and the odes are dedu


ON VEGETATION, - 731


from the number of pistils, or little columns immediately connected with the
seed vessel; and denominated monogynia, digynia, and so forth, as far as po-
lygynia. These classes differ little in general with respect to their natural habits,
except the twelfth, icosandria, which is characterized by the attachment of the
filaments to the green cup, surrounding the flower, and which comprehends
the most common fruit trees: this class has, however, ‘been incorporated by
some later botanists with the next. In the third class we find most of the
natural order of grasses; the fifth, pentandria, is by far the most numerous
of any: the sixth contains the lilies, and many other bulbous plants. The
14th class, didynamia, is known by two longer and two shorter filaments;
it is perfectly natural, and comprehends flowers similar in their structure to,
the foxglove and the deadnettle.. The 15th also, tetradynamia, is a class
of plants strongly. characterized even by chemical properties; two of the fila-
ments are here shorter than the other four: cresses, radishes, and many other
acrid and ammoniacal vegetables belong to this class, as well as the turnip
and cabbage, which, when cultivated, become mild and nutritious. The class
monadelphia contains a few plants similar to the mallow; they are known by
the union of the filaments at their bases into a cylinder: those of the next
class have generally: nine, united, and one separate, whence the class is named
diadelphia; it contains the papilionaceous flowers, somewhat resembling a
butterfly in their form, like the pea, and other leguminous plants, the broom,
the furze, and the acacia. ~The 18th class, polyadelphia, has the filaments of
‘its flowers united into several masses or bundles, as the hypericum or tutsan.
The next class is perfectly natural, and contains the composite flowers, which
‘have a peculiar union of the summits of the filaments; itis named syngenesia:
sunflowers, daisies, and artichokes, are familiar examples of the plants of this
class. The 20th class,- gynandria, though it contains the natural family of
the orchides, has been omitted by some late botanists; here the filaments are
fixed on tlie pistil; or more properly, in the arums, within the pistils. The


~ three following classes, monoecia, dioecia, and polygamia, differ from the :


‘rest in having some flowers with filaments or chives, and some with pistils
be ea on the same plant, or on different plants, or mixed with flowers of
‘the more common construction. Most of the forest trees belong to these
yb it the distinctions which separate them from other classes are not
‘uniformly preserved, and, for this reason, many later botanists
. The plants of the last class, cryptogamia, are exceedingly


{Bumerous; the faatilics of ferns, mosses, algae, or membranous weeds, and


: 732 LECTURE LVIIt.


fungi or mushrooms, fill up its extensive departments; some have also sepa-
rated a part of the algae under the name of hepaticae, or gelatinous weeds,
In this class the fructifications are extremely various; some of the fuci and
confervae approach so much in their general appearance and mode of growth
to corallines and zoophytes, that they seem to form an obvious connexion
between the lowest ranks of the vegetable and animal kingdoms; while other
plants of the class are scarcely distinguishable by their pore from some
of the productions of the mineral kingdom. ‘


The French have introduced into very general use the botaiical: system of
Jussieu. The most prominent feature in this system is the division of all the
genera into a hundred natural orders, which are also arranged in: fifteen
classes. Jussieu begins, like Linné, with the separation of cryptogamic from
phanerogamic plants; the seeds of the cryptogamic plants, which form the
first class, being without cotyledons or seed leaves, and all other plants being
distinguished into such as have seeds with one and with two cotyledons.
Accordingly as the stamina or filaments are inserted below the pistil, on the
calyx, or on the seed vessel, the first description’ of seeds affords three dis-
tinct classes. The plants which have two cotyledons follow, and are divided
into apetalous, monopetalous, and polypetalous, from distinctions respect-
e ing the corolla or flower leaves, which are somewhat arbitrarily understood; ~
[ and lastly diclinous, from the separation of the stamina and pistils. The
three first of these divisions are subdivided according to the insertion of the
stamina, and the union or separation of the antherae, which they support, into
ten classes, making, with the four already mentioned, fourteen, to which the
diclinous plants add a fifteenth. The orders are determined without any
particular limitation of the parts from which the characters are taken. This
system is of acknowledged merit as a philosophical classification of the natu-
ral orders of plants; such vegetables as nearly agree in their habits and ap-
pearances being brought more uniformly together than in the system of
Linné. Hence, in the arrangement of a botanical garden, or in a treatise on the
chemical or medical properties of plants, it might be employed with advan-
tage: but for the practical purposes of botanical investigation it appears to be
utterly unfit, since its author has sacrificed ‘all logical-and systematical Jaws
to the attempt to follow nature, in analogies, which are often discoverable only
with great difficulty, and which are seldom reducible to methodical defini-
tions.


So 1 + ee — eee


eae ee


783


Sie get hos ALRCBURE: LEX.


“ON ANIMAL LIFE.


"THE functions of animal life are not only more complicated in the,same
individual than those of vegetation, but also more diversified in the different
classes into which animals are divided; so that the physiology. of each class
has its peculiar laws. We are indebted to Linné for. the first. enlargement. of
our views of the different classes of animals, and perhaps for the most. conve-
nient arrangement, of the animal kingdom ; although. his method has never
been Praia pene a our entaapea on ia ponsingnt


‘aan which originate ina heart ; the heart pin through the arteries,
with the assistance of their own muscular powers, either a colourless transpar-
ent fluid, or a red blood, into the extremities of the veins; through which, it
again returns to the origin of its motion, Both insects,and yermes,or worms,
have their circulating fluids a little warmer than the ‘surrounding. medium, and


_ generally colourless; but insects have legs furnished with joints, and worms


have nothing but simple tentacula at most in the place of legs. Fishes have


- coldred blood, which is exposed to the influence of the air contained in water,


by means of their gills. The amphibia receive the air into their lungs, but

their blood is cold, like that of fishes, and in both these classes the heart has _

only two regular cavities, while that of animals with warm blood has four; the

whole contents of one pair being obliged to pass through. the lungs, in order

SRamicn ge te other pair. Of animals with warm blood, the oviparous are

, and are generally covered with feathers, the viviparous are either

ds or -cetaceous animals, seh pan Seeeeerd ek sion hee semen
IMA Rays arcu nia fp ta etl nbs ach! cade : Sugita: RS

a Ba th wil: pF VR Tt ay pay a hoa si digtlyr i ay 3


e


y oye Pee
ry +
* P ‘
SPeee Pear te. Vy yh


734 LECTURE LIX.


orders, of which we shall only be able to take a wey cursory view. — ‘The

first class, denominated mammalia, from the female’s suckling, its
comprehends all viviparous animals with warm blood. These, with

few exceptions, have. teeth fixed in their jaw bones; and from the form and
number of these teeth, the orders are distinguished, except that of cetaceous
fishes, which is known by the fins that are found in the place of | feet. The |
distinctions of the teeth are somewhat minute, but they appear to be con-
nected with the mode of life of the animal, and they are tolerably natural.


~The first order, primates, contains man, monkeys, and bats; ‘the. second,


bruta, among others, the elephant, the rhinoceros, the ant eater, and the ._
ornithorhynchus, an. extraordinary quadruped, lately’ discovered in’ New ;
Holland, with a bill like a duck; and sometimes teeth inserted behind it; Mie
but there are some suspicions that the animal is oviparous. “The ‘order
ferae contains the seal, the dog, the cat, the lion, ’ ‘the tiger, the weasel,
and the mole, most of them beasts of prey; the opossum and the kan-
garoo also belong to this order, and the kangaroo feeds on vegetables, —
although its teeth are like those’ of carnivorous: animals, The fourth order,
glires, comprehends beavers, mice, ‘squirrels, and ‘hares, the fifth,” cora,
camels, goats, sheep, and horned ’cattle. The sixth order, belluae, contains .
the horse, the hippopotamus, and the hog. The cetaceous fishes, piiipnte :
form the seventh and last order: they reside in ‘the water, envelop

thick clothing of fat, that is, of oily matter, deposited in cells, wh 1

their blood to retain its’ temperature, notwithivtandingy there te
of a dense medium COILS HAERS. colder. :


" Birds are distinguished from quadrupeds, by yi
generally feathered, although some féw.are’ rele
or fore legs they have: wings.' Their eggs ‘ate co
and they consist of a white, or albumen, which +
incubation, and a yolk, which is so suspended ¥
side on which the little rudiment of a’chicken”
permost, and next’ to the mother that! is sitting
measure received into the abdomen. of the chic
its being hatched, and serves for its support, li
and like the cotyledons of: youog plants uni :
tora pat


“


ON ANIMAL LIFE. 735


ciently strong for aad its own font out of the ordinary nutriment of
the species.


Birds-are divided, “according to the form of their bills, into six orders:
accipitres, as eagles, vultures, and hawks; picae, as crows, jackdaws, hum-
ming birds, and parrots; anseres, as ducks, swans, and gulls; grallae, as
‘herons, woodcocks, and ostriches; gallinae, as peacocks, pheasants, turkies,
and common fowls; and, lastly, passeres, comprehending sparrows, larks,
swallows, thrushes, and doves.


The amphibia ia are in some respects very nearly allied to birds: but their
blood is little warmer than the surrounding medium. Their respiration is
not necessarily performed in a continual succession of alternations, since
the whole of their blood does not pass through the lungs, and the circulation
may continue withouginterruption in other parts, although it may be im~
peded in these organs, for want of the motion of respiration. They are very
tenacious of life; it has been asserted on good authority that some of them
have lived many years without food, inclosed in hollow trees, and even in
the middle of stones: and they often retain vestiges of life some days after
the loss of their hearts. Their eggs are generally covered with a membrane
only. They have sometimes an intermediate stage of existence, in which all
their parts are not yet developed, as we observe in the tadpole; and in this
respect they resemble the class of insects. They. are now universally consider-
ed as divided into two orders only; reptilia, as the tortoise, the dragon, or
flying lizard, the frog and the toad; all these have four feet: but the animals
which belong to the order serpentes are without feet. Most of the serpentes
are perfectly innocent, but others have fangs, by which they instila poisonous
fluid into the wounds that they make. In England the viper is the odly
venomous serpent; it is known by its dark brown colour, and by a stripe of
whitish spots running along its back ; but to mankind its bite is seldom, if
ever, fatal.


The first three classes of animals have lungs, as we have already seen, for
respiration, and receive air by the mouth; those which have gills, and
ted blood, are fishes, residing either in fresh or in salt water, or indifferently


ard


736; _ BECTURE -LIX.-


in both: ‘their eggs’ are involved in a membrane, and have ‘aaa
Of the six orders of fishes, four have regular gills, supported by little bones;
and they are distinguished, according to the place of their ventral fins, , into
apodes, as the eel and ‘lamprey; jugularis, as’ the: cod; ‘thoraciei, as the
sole and) perch, and: abdominales, a$,the salmon and pikes - st ne
which appear to be perfectly artificial, although useful in a. systematic
arrangement. The two remaining orders are without bones in the gills,
those! of the one being soft, and of the other cartilaginous or  gristlys —
These are the branchiostegi and chondropterygii of | Artedi, which Linné,
from a mistake, classed among the amphibia. ‘The sun fish, the lump fish,
the fishing frog,'and thé sea’horse, are of the former,. pertinence
skate, and the shark, of the latter order. iD ithe Shit ef Iie


Tolubetsi-Getive theie-senbe:thee being almost aly
thorax, and abdomen, with very slender interve
these divisions do not exist in all insects. They are r oviparous:
respire, but not by the mouth; they have a number of little orifices on ed
side of the abdomen, by which the air is received into their ramified tracheaes
and if these are stopped with oil, they are’ suffocated. Instead of bones, they
have a hard integument or shell. ‘Their mouths are formed on construction
extremely various,’ but generally very complicated? Fabricius has made the
ate the basis of his classification; but’ from|theit-mhauben eerie most spec


employed in thé subdivision’ of the’ ities i -derbeat
spicuous distinctions. Insects have most frequent
several pairs, but they are always so placed as to’ op
tally. Sometimes, instead of jaws, they have a tran
general, they pass through four stages of existence, t
stage'of growth; the pupa, or chrysalis, which’ is us
or complete inactivity, and the imago, or perfect
capacity. After the last tenet the insect mee

till its death. > 3 eee


Tile Sirean' oretie Shaedied alle


| ON ANIMAL LIFE. . 77"


wings, generally called beetles; the hemiptera, of which the sheaths are of
a softer nature, and cross each other, as grasshoppers, bugs, and plant lice;

the lepidoptera, with dusty scales on their wings, as butterflies. and moths;

the neuroptera, as the libellula, or dragon fly, the may fly, and other insects

with four transparent wings, but without stings; the hymenoptera, which’
have stings, either poisonous or not, as bees, wasps, and ichneumons; the:
diptera, with two wings, as common flies and gnats, which have halteres,

or balancing rods, instead of the second pair of wings; and lastly the aptera,

without any wings, which form the seventh order, comprehending crabs,

lobsters; ‘shrimps and prawns, for these are properly insects; spiders, scor-!
pions, millepeds, centipeds, mites, and monoculi. ‘The monoculus is a genus
including the little active insects found in pond water, which are scarcely
visible to the naked eye, as well as the Molucca crab, which is the largest
of all insects, being sometimes six feet long. Besides these there are several
genera-of apterous insects which are: parasitical, and infest. the human race
as well as other. animals.


The vermes are the last and lowest of animated beings, yet some of them
are not deficient either in magnitude or in beauty. The most natural divi-
sion of vermes is into five orders; the intestina, as earthworms and ascarides,
which are distinguished by the want of moveable appendages, or tentacula,
from the mollusca; such as the dew snail, the cuttle fish, the sea anemone,
and the hydra} or fresh water polype. The testacea have shells of one or
more pieces; and most of them inhabit the sea, and are called shell fish, as
the limpet, the -periwinkle, the snail, the muscle, the oyster, and the
barnacle. The order zoophyta contains corallines, sponges, and other com-
pound animals, ,united'by a common habitation, which has the general ap-
pearance of a vegetable, although of animal origin; each of the little inhabit-
ants, resembling a hydra, or polype,imitating by its extended arms the appear-
ance of-an imperfect flower. The last order, infusoria, is scarcely distinguished
from the-intestina and: mollusca by any other character than the minuteness
of; the individuals belonging toit, and their spontaneous appearance in
animal and vegetable infusions, where we can discover no traces of the man-
ner in-which' they are produced. The process, by which their numbers. are
sometimes increased, is no less astonishing than their first production; for
seyeral of the genera often appear to divide spontaneously, into two or more


_ the process for supporting life by nutrition begins with the


733° LECTURE LIX. © i +


parts, which ‘become new and distinct animals, so that in carina
question respecting the identity of an individual would be very difficult,
to determine. The volvox, and some of the vorticellae are remarkable for
their continual rotatory motion, probably intended for the purpose of ‘strain-
ing their food out of the water: while some other ie the vorticella.

resemble fungi or -corallines i in miniature.


_ Among the animals of ‘inks different classes, the share peta
of the qualities of external objects by the senses of touch, taste,
ing, and vision. A few quadrupeds are incapable of seeing: the
eye so small as to be with difficulty distinguishable; and the mus ty]
supposed to be the aspalax of Aristotle, has its eye completely covered es !


skin and integuments, without any perforation. _ Birds have hearing, | but no } o x
external ears, or auriculae. Insects appear to want the organs of : smell; but: a

it is not impossible that their antennae may answer the purpose of ] *
Many of the vermes are totally destitute of sight, and some of all the Spe §
of sense: none of them have either ears or nostrils. The external senses of ae *
animals with warm blood are usually liable to a periodical state of in = unos


in the night time, denominated sleep. ‘Iti is said that poeta ;
ice de


In animals which approach, i in their mt tiie that of the Unions eet


food, which has been received by the mouth. ‘The food |
veyed into the stomach by the operation of swallowing;
cattle, it is first lodged in a temporary seceptacle Gan
ticated at leisure. In the stomach, it mer ig
terwards mixed with the bile:and other ‘fluids, p
neighbouring glands, it becomes fit for affording
which is separated from it by the absorbents of
through the convolutions of a canal nearly forty f
the chyle, all the aqueous fluids, which are
and pass through the thoracic duct-into the lai
thence into the general circulation, before they.can arr
which the superfluous parts are nie The hy


ON ANIMAL LIFE, ‘ _ 739


the blood, through the right auricle and ventricle of the heart, and enters the
lungs, to be there more intimately mixed with it, and perhaps to be rendered
animal and vital; while the blood receives from the air, in the same place, a
supply of oxygen, with a small portion of nitrogen, and emits some superflu-
ous carbonic matter, in the form of carbonic acid. The blood, thus rendered
arterial, returning to the left side of the heart, is distributed thence to every
part of the system, supplying nutriment throughout, while the glands and ar-
teries secrete from it such fluids,as are become redundant, and such as arerequired
for particular purposes subservient to the animal functions. It is probably in
these processes tliat heat is evolved; for by experiments on living animals, it has
been found, that the blood, returning from the lungs, is not warmer than be-
fore its entrance into them: we must therefore suppose, that when the florid
arterial blood is, by some unknown means, converted, in the extreme ramifica-

, tions of the arteries, into the purple venous blood, to return to the heart by
the cony verging branches of the veins, “there i is a much more considerable ex-
trication of heat, than in ‘the conversion of venous into arterial blood, by the
absorption of oxygen and nitrogen in the lungs. If the chyle is actually con-
verted into blood in the lungs, it is here that we must look for the formation
of the red globules, those singular corpuscles, to which the blood owes its
colour, as it does its power of coagulation to a glutinous lymph, mixed with
a less coagulable serum, The red particles in the human blood are about
‘vee of an inch in diameter, somewhat oblong, and flattened; they have
usually the appearance of a dark point in the centre; but there is tome .
reason to stispect that this is merely an optical deception. In a few animals
they are a little smaller, but'in most of the amphibia, much larger and flatter
than in man. While the lymph remains fluid, after the blood: has been with-
drawn from the vessels,' these globules tend to subside, and to leave it semi-
transparent: hence arises the appearance of a buff coat on blood left to co-
agulate, which ‘is thinner or thicker, rps gil as the globules are sooner or
later arrested 4 in their descent.


The muscles are pigbably furnished by the blood with-a store'of that unknown
principle, by which they are rendered capable of contracting, for producing
locomotion; or for other purposes, in obedience to the influence transmitted by
the nerves from the sensorium; the brain and nervous system in general are
also sustained, by means ‘of the ‘vascular circulation, ‘in a fitstate for trans-
mitting’ the impréssions;' made by €xternal objects on the senses, to the im-


740 LECTURE LIX. iat


_ mediate seat of thought and memory, in the, sensorium; 3 and for conveying’
the dictates of the will, and the habitual. impulses almost independent ksi
lition, to the muscular parts.of the. whole frame. FAR th iS


_. In what manner these cecal impressions. are cupnidiel by the'nerves,
has never yet been fully determined; but it has long been conjectured, that =
the medium of communication may bear a considerable analogy to the electrical ah Oa
fluid; and the extreme sensibility of the nerves to the slightest portion of | ;
electrical influence, as well as the real and apparently spontaneous excitation of
that influence in animal bodies, which have been of late years evinced b
vanic experiments. have added very materially to the probability of the opi-
nion. An extremely slender fibre, of a substance capable of conducting elec- —
tricity with perfect freedom, enveloped in a sheath of a perfect nonconductor, s
would perhaps serve to communicate an impulse, very nearly inthesame man-
ner, as the nerves appear todo. Indeed nothing can be more fit to constitute
a connecting link between material and immaterial beings, than some modi- OF
fication of a fluid, which appears to differ very: considerably, imits essential , yy
properties, from the common gross matter of the universe, and to possess a i
subtility and an activity, which entitle it to a sat paakii in the order of rola
created substances.


+ oi, he uate vA
’ Suh} - ty


sich tee Miu)


When all the functions of pains life are unin on in their perfect and Anes
natural manner, the animal is said to be in health: when they are disturbed,
a state of disease ensues. The diseases to which the human frame is liable .
are so various and irregular, that they cannot easily be reduced to any s

_ tematical order. Dr. Cullen has divided. emcee ene se:
eases, which constitute the first class, consist p ;
the frequency of the pulsations of the heart. and
elevation of the temperature, the whole animal e
time in some measure impaired: they-are often, ce

_ irregular actions of the vessels of particular parts, ¢
tions, which were formerly considered asa is
falling on those parts: thus, a pleurisy is a
membrane lining the chest. The incapacity ¢
upon the application of a natural stimulus, o

. incapacity of the nerves to transmit to it the di

a palsy: such derangements, and others, by whi


she


ON ANIMAL LIFE. .. Thy


system are peculiarly impaired, form the class of neuroses, including spasmo-
dic affections, madness, melancholy, and epilepsy. A general derangement
of the system, without fever,, or any peculiar debility of the nerves, ‘consti-
tutes the class of cachectic diseases, such as atrophy, consumption, scrofula,
and dropsy. Besides these diseases, we have a fourth class, consisting of lo-
cal affections only, such as, blindness, deafness, tumors, and luxations.


Notwithstanding the labours of men of the greatest learning and genius,
continued for many centuries, it must be confessed that the art of healing dis-
eases is still in a state of great imperfection. Happily, however, for man-
kind, we may, observe in almost all’ cases, where the offending cause is disco-


: verable, and where ‘the system is not at once overwhelmed by its magnitude, a


wise and> wonderful provision for removing it, by a mechanism admirably
simple and efficacious; and it is reasonable to conclude, where the cause is
more obscure, that the same benevolent Providence has employed agents
equally, well adapted for counteracting it, although their operations ane, ut-
terly beyond the reach of human penetration, re Ne


tres Galas ‘ td bbb wd Ap 49 7 « 2 bya.t Z


hte uO of nal


7 *
Li stigitre cyl ut
- tne. ton 4 f fi 1 it
} bafirs i Lk Uist ; nm
i +b b 2
“spa “tak Tastidod: io. ‘ban {Vitse ;
hi Hist: Kitz! Pies {ai Set Io ve tileaittioo ot fines
Be at sp Monngro iz ic a dhtfxe sus we 287k oily. Atdien We astathons;
ef Cae i ft Pulte gly y a8 fsinian to swat Sod and atviol ark 51
{ et paar ot Sy af fides n° oit8 jue pevteppree wo i067 isto’ +3
; & TNT Pink wate total wild brs Vrinset fetes i


: oka ye
Halt ty yen ogni: ifiioits atu, sebils oT


J


Keats ott oy (afonories tS fossnassteawby te rag Silt 1O

(o>. & bated! seestjeani APPA” Saree? lasers
eR Ay Payg Va" roincientiets ori,

ae het Be. wwele ass


,


five.


UILRCPURR: EX! ~
> ANOTE seu se] - :
ON THE HISTORY OF TERRESTRIAL PHYSICS. ~~
; a) EY 3 » me 41 i-aqt 4 te


'THROUG HOUT the whole of nature, we discover a tendency Ay the mul-
tiplication of life, of activity, ‘and of enjoyment: man is placed at the head
of terrestrial beings, the only one that comprehends, and that ¢an, trace, i ina faint
outline, the whole plan of the universe. We have seen the innumerable lumina-
ries which enliven the widely expanded regions of immeasurable space, with their
brilliant, but distant emanations of light and heat. Revolving round them at
lesser intervals, and cherished by their fostering influences, are their planets !
and their comets; those preserving their distances nearly equal, and these,
ranging more widely from the upper to the lower regions, without limits to
their numbers or to their motions. Having conjectured what might possibly
exist on other planetary globes, we descended to our own, and examined its
structure and the proportions of its parts. Next-we studied the general pro-
perties of the matter within our reach, and then the particular substances
or qualities that are either not material, or are distinguished by very
remarkable properties from other matter, as we found them concerned in
the phenomena of heat, of electricity, and of magnetism; and we after-
wards examined the combinations of all these, in the great atmospherical
apparatus of nature, which serves for the exhibition of meteorological phe-
nomena. The forms and the laws of animal and vegetable life have been the


“last objects of our inquiries; but the magnitude of some departments of


natural history, and the obscurity of others, have prevented our entering
more than superficially upon any of them. :


Of the gradual advancement of astronomy we have already taken a his-
torical view. With respect to the other sciences comprehended under
the denomination of proper physics, the progress of discovery has generally
been slow, and frequently casual. The ancients had little or no substantial


ON THE HISTORY OF TERRESTRIAL PHYSICS. 3 748


knowledge of any part of physics, except astronomy and natural history:
their opinions ‘were in general mere speculations, derived from fancy, and
inapplicable to the real phenomena of nature. Opinions such as these will
only require to be so far examined, as to enable us to trace the imperfect
rudiments of discoveries, which were only completed after intervals of many


ages. : , j


The Chinese are said to have been acquainted with the use of the compass
above 3000 years ago; but in such accounts, it is impossible to ascertain how


- far the spirit of national vanity may have induced a historian to falsify his


dates. It has been conjectured that the death of Numa, like that of Pro-
fessor Richmann, was occasioned by some unguarded experiments on the
electricity of the atmosphere, which drew on him the effects of a thunderstorm
that was passing by. ‘If, however, the fact was such, the experiments must
probably have been suggested rather by an accidental discovery of the light
on the point of a Spear, than’ by any ssi rape opinions. respecting the nature:
of the ethereal fire.

Thales is the most ancient of the Grecian philosophers, who appear to have
seriously studied the phenomena of nature. He supposed water to be the
general principle from which all material things are formed, and into which
they are resolved; an opinion which was without doubt suggested to him
by the obvious effects of water in the nutrition of plants and of animals. He
particularly noticed the properties of the magnet, which had been before
observed to attract iron, aswell as the effect of friction ‘in exciting the elec-
tricity of amber; and he attributed to both of these substances a certain
degree of animation, which he sang as the only disor source of motion
of any Sites: : |:

Iealkdanbani appears to hav ai some: attentidt to meteorology ; h H
dérived the winds'from the raréfaction of ‘thé air, produced by ‘the Sper
of heat: thunder and lightning he attributed to ‘the violent explosion ‘or
bursting of the clouds, which he seems to have considered as bags, filled with
amixture of wind. and. water, ' The! sanie'mistakén’ notion ‘Was entertained
by Anaximenes, who compared the light ‘attending the explosion, to
that whichis frequently exhibited? by“ the%sea, when ‘striick “with an oar.


- « oe hy ° »
} 5 Vinee


was ya yp ppp RESTPRE LX.


, dinate great.a3 he was in some other essiieal of PIES i
respecting physical effects ina manner too mathematical and visionary, to
allow him much claim-to.be ranked among those wha have studied to inyes- .
tigate thé minute operationsof nature.) 5 en nip ino
(ronayve spoil es hai fest i
Anaxagoras was so far fom ‘confining himaclf to the supposition’ olfoen
elements, which was most generally received by the philosophers of antiquity, —
. that he imagined the number of elements: nearly if mot absolutely infinite. ==
He conceived that the ultimate atoms, composing every. substance, were of e
the same kind with that substance, and his system was..thence- led; the
homoeomeria; it erred perhaps less from the truth than many of the: Shes
prevalent opinions. Democritus, adopting ‘panneneaket Lea see
a still more correct theory of the constitution of matter, sonore: sth is.
ultimately so far homogeneous, that the weight, of its pM 1
to their, bulk. He-asserted that, the forms of t
unalterable; that they were always in motion, and ‘aia, bev, sen aa
tive difference of form, they were also susceptible | of. a variety in the mode ‘es
of their arrangement. The space not occupied by the atoms of ma oF
considered as a perfect vacuum,


) uly du, gedit eae see


io Sot


As Thales had sree water. tobe, the frst principle of.
Anaximenes air, so) Heraclitus fixed..on: fire as the foundatia
attributing to it the property of constant, motion, and.
grosser matter from. its condensation in, different degrees. . This.

wholly unsupported by any thing, like reason er olneryon
° 1 Dudectia

Plato introduced. into philosophy.» iwatiety.¢ m

sembled the fictions of poetry much more than 1

He maintained, for example, that ideas existed indep
mind, and of the external world, and that they. comps
kinds, by their union. with an imperfect.matter, It is
~his essay on the opinions, of, Parmenides, ; } ;
Empedocles,. Anaxagoras, Anaximenes,
mitted their minds. to things; as they found
world subject to ideas, and, Aristotle made
things, PANEER to words ; the minds of


’


ON THE HISTORY OF TERRESTRIAL PHYSICS. FAS


those times, with idle discussions and verbal disputations, ,and «the ‘correct
investigation of nature being wholly neglected: Plato entértained, ‘however,
some correct notions respecting the distinction of denser from rarer matter
by its greater inertia; and it would be extremely unjust to deny. a very bigh
degree of merit to Aristotle's experimental researches, in various -parts of
natural philosophy, and in particular to the vast collection of:real information
contained in his works on natural jistory.. Aristotle attributed absolute
levity to fire, and gravity to the earth, considering air and water as of an
intermediate nature. By. gravity the ancients appear inogeneral to have'un-
derstood a tendency towards the centre of the earth, which they considered .
as identical with that of the universe; and as long as they entertained this
opinion, it'was almost impossible that they should suspect the operation of a
’ mutual attraction in all matter, as a cause of gravitation. ‘The first, traces
~ of this more correct opinion respecting it are found in the works. - Plu-
tarch.: Fo- 2 33e40s
Epicurus appears to |have reasoned as justly respecting, many. particular
_ subjects of natural philosophy, as he.did absurdly respecting the origin of the
world, and of the animals which inhabit.it. He adopted in great:measure the
principles of ‘Democritus respecting;atoms, but attributed ito them an innate
_ power of affecting each other's: motions, and of declining, iti sich a manner,
as to constitute, by: the diversity of their spontaneous arrangements, all the
varieties of natural:bodies. He considered both heat and cold as material;
the heat emitted*by the’sun he’ thought’ not absolutely identical with light,
and even went so'far as to conjecture that some.of the«sun’s rays might
possibly: possess the power of :heating bodies, and yet:riot affect the: sense of
vision. In order to explain | the phenomena of magnetism, he'supposea a
current of atoms, passing, in certain directions, through the magnet and
througiriron, which produced  allythe :effects by their interference with each
other. » Be entrants a a aay violent neers of
Drisi » 8G Areal aso brn tac I Ac tovieniens


hw ria oil t t


was sci eats established upon parte Poni idenanleddara eels
tions had ‘acertain degree of merit; and we find many interesting facts relating


~ A gemma Aistotle, but also


—-


7A6~ LECTURE Lx.


in Theophrastus, Dioscorides, and Pliny, as well as in some of the historical writ-
ers of antiquity. Protagorides of Cyzicum, who is quoted by Athenaeus, relates
that in the time of king Antiochus, it was usual, asa luxury, to cool water by
evaporation ; and it is not impossible that the custom may have been introduced
from the east, where even ice is frequently made at present by a similar process ; ~
others of the ancients had remarked, according to Dr. Falconer, that water
usually froze the more readily for having been boiled; and it is possible that
some other detached observations of a similar nature may occur to those jing
have the curiosity to make them objects of research.


The thirteenth century may be considered as the date of the revival, if not
of the commencement, of physical discoveries. Our countryman, Roger
Bacon, was one of its principal ornaments: he appears to have anticipated in ©
his knowledge of chemistry, as well as of many other parts of natural phi-.
losophy, the labours of later times. The polarity of the magnetic needle is
described in some lines which are attributed to Guyot, a French poet, who
lived about 1180; but some persons are of opinion that this description was
actually written by Hugo Bertius, in the middle of the succeeding century;
and it is generally believed that the compass was first employed in navigation
by Gioja of Amalfi, about the year 1260; he is said to have marked the north
with a fleur de lis, in compliment to.a branch of the royal family of France,
then reigning at Naples. The declination of the needle from the true meri-
dian is mentioned by Peter Adsiger, the author of a manuscript which bears
the date 1269... The poet Dante, who flourished at the close'of this century,
distinguished himself not only by his literary, but also by his. philosophical
pursuits; and we find among his numerous works an ena on the nature of
the elements.


The learned and voluminous labours, ‘by which Gesner and Aldrovandus
enriched the: various departments of. natural history, may be considered as
comprehending the greatest part of what had been done by the ancients in
the investigation of the economy of the animal world; but their works
have too much the appearance of collections of what others had asserted, rather
than of original observations of their own. ;


The first of the moderns,, whose. discoveries respecting the properties of


ON THE HISTORY OF TERRESTRIAL PHYSICS. 747


hatural bodies excite our attention, by their novelty and importance, is Dr.
Gilbert, of Colchester: his work on magnetism, published in 1590, contains
4 copious collection of valuable facts, and ingenious reasonings. He also
extended his researches to many other branches of science, and in particular

to the subject of electricity, It had been found, in the preceding century,
~ that sulfur, as well as amber, was capable of electric excitation, and Gilbert
made many further experiments on the nature of electric phenomena. The
change or variation of the declination of the needle is commonly said to have
been discovered by Gellibrand, a professor at Gresham college, in. the
year 1625; but it must have been inferred from Gunter’s. observations,
made in 1622, if not from those of Mair, or of some other person, as early as
1612; for at this time the declination was considerably less than Burrows had
found it in 1580, ,3


In the beginning of the seventeenth century, Lord Bacon acquired, by his
laudable efforts to explode the incorrect modes of reasoning, which had oc-
cupied the schools, the just character of a reformer of philosophy: but his
immediate discoveries were neither strikg nor numerous. In, 1620, he
proposed, with respect to heat, an opinion which appears to have been at
that time new, inferring, from a variety of considerations, which he has very
minutely detailed in his Novum, organum, that it consisted in “an expan-
sive motion, confined and reflected within a body, sojas,to becdme alternate
and ‘tremulous ; having alsoa certain tendency to ascend”. -A similar opinion,
respecting the vibratory nature of heat, was also suggested, about the same
time, by David Gorlaeus, and it was afterwards adopted by Descartes, as a
part of his hypothesis respecting the constitution of matter; which he ima-
gined to consist of atoms of different forms, possessing no property besides
extension, and to derive all its other qualities from the operation of an
ethereal and infinitely elastic fluid, continually. revolving in different orders
of vortices. :


A much more important step, than the proposal of any hypothesis concern-
ing the nature of heat, was also made about the year 1620, by Cornelius Drebel,
who appears tohave been the original inventor of the method of measuring the
degrees of heat by a thermometer. The utility of the instrument remained,
however, much limited, for want of an accurate method of adjusting its scale,


Sc ce ee te aaal


7A8 LECTURE LX.


and it was not till the close of the century, that Dr. Hooke’s discovery, of the
permanency of the temperature of boiling water, afforded a correct and con-


venient limit to the scale on one side, while the melting of snow served for.


fixing a similar point on the other; although there would have been no
great difficulty in forming a scale sufficiently natural, from the Proportion
of the expansion of the fluid contained in’ the thrmaomeeter to its whole
bulk.


‘


It was about the year 1628, that Dr. Harvey succeeded in detiatating
by a judicious’ ‘and conélusive train of experiments, the true course of the
circulation of the blood, ‘through the veins and arteries, both in the perfect


state of the animal, aad during its existence as an embryo. Servetus had


explicitly asserted, in his work on the Trinity, as early as the year 1553,
that the blood performed, in its passage through the lungs, a complete re-


‘volution, beginning and ending in the heart; and Cisalpinus had even expressed,


in 1569, some suspicions that’ the circulation of the whole body was of a


similar nature; but neither of ‘these authors hed advanced any satisfactory


proofs in confirmation of his opinions.


In the middle of the seventeenth century, the barométer was invented by
Torricelli;' the variation of ‘the. atmospheric pressure was discovered by
Descartes; and Pascal: made several experiments on the difference of its
magnitude at different places, which tended to illustrate the principles, on
which the method of determining heights by barometrical observations is
founded.


What Gesner and Aldrovandus had before ddne with regard to the animal
kingdom, was performed, a century later, for the vegetable world by John
and Caspar Bauhin, whose works, as collections of all that was to be found on
record respecting the distinctions and properties of plants, have not yet been
superseded by the latest publications. Our countrymen, Ray and Willughby,
contributed’ also'to add much new matter to the stores of natural history,
in all its departments; ‘and their labours, as well as those of Tournefort and


Réaumur, are of the more value, as they were far more studious than their —


predecessors to discriminate truth from fiction.


ON THE HISTORY OF TERRESTRIAL PHYSICS. 749


The foundation of the most'celebrated of the philosophical societies of Eu-
rope renders the latter half of the seventeenth century a very interesting pe-
riod in the history of natural knowledge. The Royal Society of London, and
the Academy of Sciences of Paris, have always been the most distinguished
of these: and the Florentine Academy del Cimento, although its labours were
not of long duration, produced at first in a short time a very copious and in-
teresting, collection of experiments, relating to various subjects of physical re-
search. In the Royal Society, Boyle, Hooke, and Newton were the most industri-
ous, as well as the most successful investigators of natural phenomena: the ele-
mentary doctrines of chemistry, the nature of combustion, the effects of heatand
cold, and the laws of attraction, repulsion, and ‘cohesion were attentively examin-
ed and discussed. The expansion of water, by a reduction of its temperature, near
the freezing point, was first observed by Dr..Croune; although his experi-
ments were considered by Dr. Hooke as inconclusive. The attention of the
society was directed: by Newton ‘to the phenomena of electricity, some of
which had been a short time before particularly noticed by Guericke; the
mode of making electrical experiments was greatly improved by Hauksbee;
this accurate observer investigated also the nature of capillary attraction
with considerable success. Early in the succeeding century, many of the
members of the. Academy of Petersburg followed the example-of other 'so-
cieties with great industry; and the experiments of Richmann on heat were
among the first and best fruits of their researches.


Dr. Halley employed himself, with the most laudable zeal, in procuring in-
formation respecting the variation of the compass; he undertook a voyage
round the world, for the express purpose of making magnetical observations ; and
he published a chart of variation,adapted to the year 1700. He also collected
many particulars respecting the trade winds and monsoons, and he endea-
voured to explain them by a theory which has been adopted by some of the
latest authors, but which is in reality nich less satisfactory than the hy-
pothesis proposed some time afterwards by Hadley. His maguetical inyesti-
gations were continued with great diligence by Mountaine and Dodson, whe
published, at different periods, two charts representing the successive states of
the variation, Euler, Mayer, and others have attempted, in later times, to


discover such general laws as might be sufficient to determine the magnitude
VoL, 1. 5a ;


‘* r
Ot Dare ee —s at a hls PF


geo? _ LECTURE Lx,: Le Ke


of the variation for every piiigid the globe ; but Petey been very
much limited. 24hh FALLS Sebi


BYrs etree sh
The science of electricity was diligently ctltivated 4 in eas middle of the
last century by Stephen Gray, Dufay, Winkler, Nollet, Musschenbroek, and
Franklin, As early as 1735 it was remarked by Gray, that’ “‘the electric fire
seemed to be of the same nature as lightning,” and their identity was after-
wards more strongly asserted by Winkler, and experimentally demonstrated by .
Franklin. The shock of a charged jar was first discovered’ by Kleist, in 1745;
and the experiment was repeated by Lallamand and Musschenbroek, who de-
scribed its disagreeable effects on the sensations with an exaggeration not the
most philosophical. The theory of the nature of praia con
great improvement made by Dr. Franklin in this aati Ra br!
: pole FDS Fi q
The introduction a the Linnean system of botany disk icp al te
considered as bringing near to perfection the logic and phraseology of ni


ral history; nor has its celebrated author wholly neglected the philosophy of
the science. The number and the diligence of his successors have


already —
furnished to the different departments of natural history a much ampler store
of observations than could easily have been expected from the short time
which their labours have occupied. Buffon had. merit of Rarwrwiew


elegance of his writings have made their subjects highly int
general reader. Among other modern naturalists of great re
lanzani, Daubenton, Degeer, Geoffroy, Pennant, the Sussieus
Haiiy, have particularly distinguished themselves by the import
discoveries, and the accuracy of their eee ee
Sineah
The absorption of ants: during the conversion of ice in
have been separately observed by Deluc, Black, and Wi
1755. On this experiment Dr. Black principally founde
tent heat, supposed tp be retained in chemical com
of fluids, Dr. Irvine and Dr. Crawford explained
what differently, by the theory of a change of capac
mann, Lavoisier, Laplace, Kirwan, Seguin, and r
' ihe


he, OE


sen re


ON THE HISTORY OF TERRESTRIAL PHYSICS. 751


illustrated, by experiments and calculations, the various opinions which have
been entertained on this subject; and few chemists, from the times of Boer-
haave, Stahl, and Scheele to those of Priestley and other later authors, have
left the propertiie of heat wholly unnoticed. ‘
The elegant: hypothesis of Aepinus, respecting magnetism and electricity,
founded in great measure on the theory of Franklin, was advanced in 1759:
~ our venerable countryman, Mr. Cavendish, had invented a similar theory, and
had entered in many respects more minutely into the detail of its conse-
quences, without being acquainted with Aepinus’s work; although the publi-,
cation of his paper on the subject was 12 years later. Lambert, Mayer,
€oulomhb, and Robison have also pursued inquiries of a similar nature, both
theoretically and experimentally, with great success. . The electrophorus of
Wilke, and the condenser of Volta, are among the earliest fruits of the cul-
tivation of a rational system of electricity, and Mr. Cavendish’s investigation
of the properties of the torpedo may serve as a model of accuracy and —
sion in the conduct. of experimental researches.


The speculations of Boscovich respecting the fundamental properties of
matter, and the general laws of the mutual action of bodies on each other,
haye been considered by some candid judges as deserving the highest com-
mendation; they remain however almost in all cases speculations only; and
some of the most intricate of them, being calculated for the explanation of ~
some facts, which have perhaps been much misunderstood, must consequently
be both inaccurate and oujepnonts

The attention of several experienced philosophers, who are now living, has
been devoted, with much perseverance, to the ditficult subject of hygrome-
try. Deluc’s experiments have offered us a very useful comparison of the
hygrometrical qualities of various substances: Saussure has investigated, with
great labour, the indications of the hygrometer and the thermometer, as
connected with the presence of a certain portion of vapour, contained in air
of various densities; and Pictet has ascertained some similar circumstances
respecting vapours of different kinds wholly unmixed with any air. The hy-
potheses, which have usually accompanied the relation of most of these expe-


752 2 LECTURE Lx: !


riments, have however been in general too little mannered by facts to be en-
titled to universal adoption, eisit


- Forsome years past, the philosophical, as well as the unphilosophical world,
has been much occupied and entertained by the discoveries of Galvani, Volta,
and others, respecting the operations of the electric fluid. ‘The first circum-
stance, that attracted Galvani’s attention.to the subject of animal electricity,
was the agitation of a frog, that had a nerve armed; that is, laid bare and co-
vered with a metal, when a spark was taken in its neighbourhood. »-A person
acquainted with the well known laws of induced electricity might easily
have foreseen this effect: it proved, however, that a frog so prepared ‘was a
very delicate electrometer, and it led Galvani to further experiments.’ It has
been shown by Volta, that an entire frog may be convulsed bya degree of
electricity which affects an electrometer but very weakly; but that when
prepared in Galvani’s manner, it will be agitated by an electricity one fiftieth
part as great, which cannot be discovered, by any other means, without the —
assistance of a condenser. Galvani, however, found that a communication
made between the armed nerve and its muscle, by means of any conducting
substance, was sufficient to produce a convulsion, without the presence of
foreign electricity: hence he concluded that the nerve and muscle, like the —
opposite surfaces of a charged jar, were in contrary states of electricity, and
that the communication produced a discharge between them.’ He observed,
however, a considerable difference in the effects, when different metals were
employed for forming the circuit;. and this circumstance led to the discovery
of the excitation of electricity by means of a combination of different inani-
mate substances only; which Mr. Davy attributes to Fabroni, Creve, and Dr.
Ash.. It was, however, still more satisfactorily demonstrated ‘by Volta ;
and he at first supposed: thatvall the phenomena observed by Galvani were de-
rived from effects ofthis kind, but on further examination he was obliged to
allow the independent existence of animal electricity. This industrious and
ingenious philosopher has the sole merit of the invention of the pile or battery,
which has rendered every other mode of exciting the guensic action come
ratively insignificant.


No sooner was Volta’s essay communicated to the Royal Society, than a
i


ON THE HISTORY OF TERRESTRIAL PHYSICS. 753


-pile was constructed by Mr. Carlisle, and-its singular effects in the decompo-
sition of water were jointly observed by himself and Mr. Nicholson. The
-original existence of animal electricity, as asserted by Galvani and Volta,
‘has been in some degree confirmed by the experiments of Aldini, the nephew
‘of Galvani. A number of detached observations, of considerable merit, have
also’been made by Pfaff, Ritter, Cruikshank, Wollaston, Fourcroy, and many
other chemists, both in this country and on the continent. But Mr. Davy’s
late experiments must be considered as exceeding in importance every thing
‘that has been done upon the subject of electricity, since the discovery of
‘the pile of Volta. The conclusions which they have enabled him to form
respecting the electrical properties of such bodies as have the strongest ten-
dencies:to act chemically on each other, and the power of modifying and
counteracting those tendencies which the electric fluid possesses, have
greatly extended our views of the minute operations of nature, and have
opened a new field for future investigations. I hope that I shall be par-
doned by astronomers for having inserted, on this occasion, in a vacant space
among the constellations, in the neighbourhood of Pegasus, the figure of a
galvanic battery; which must now be allowed to have as great pretensions
to such a distinction as the electrical machine and the chemical furnace,


~ The late niin and speculations of Mr. Dalton, on various subjects,
helonging to different branches of physics, have tended to place some parts
of the science of meteorology in a new light. It is true that many of his hy-
potheses are very arbitrarily assumed; some of them are manifestly contrary
to experiment, and others to analogy and probability; at the same time his
remarks appear in some cases to be either perfectly correct, or to lead to de-
terminations which are sufficiently accurate for every practical purpose. I have
attempted to borrow from Mr. Dalton’s ideas some hints, which I have incor-
porated witha less exceptionable system; and by a comparison of his experi- °
ments with those of many other philosophers, I have deduced some methods
of calculation which may perhaps be practically useful; in particular a’sim-
ple rule for determining the elasticity of steam, and a mode of reducing the
indications of hygrometers of different kinds to a natural scale,


Count Rumford’s establishment of a prize medal, to be given every three


754 LECTURE LX.


years by the Royal Society to the author of the most valuable discovery te-
specting heat or light, forms an era less remarkable, than the first adjudication
of the medal to himself, and the second to Mr. Leslie. Count Rumford’s nu-
merous experiments on the production and communication of heat are highly
important, both for.the utility which may be derived from their economical
application, and for the assistance which they afford us in the investigation
of the intimate nature of heat. Mr. Leslie’s discovery. of the different pro-
perties possessed by surfaces of different kinds, with regard to emitting and
receiving radiant heat, is in every respect highly interesting; and the multi-
plicity and diversity of his experiments would have entitled him to still
higher commendation than he has obtained, if they had been more simply and
_circumstantially related. Perhaps, however, none of the modern improvements
in speculative science deserves a higher rank than Dr. Herschel’s discovery of
the separation of heat from light by refraction. Mr. Prévost has made some
just remarks on the experiments of other philosophers respecting heat; and
his own theory of radiant heat, and his original investigations, on the effect of
the solar heat on the earth, have tended materially to illustrate the subject of
his researches. :

The general laws of the ascent and descent of fluids in capillary tubes, and
between plates, of different kinds, had long ago been established by the ex-
periments of Hauksbee, Jurin, and Musschenbroek; many other circum-
stances, depending on the same principles, had been examined by Taylor,
Achard, and Guyton; and some advances towards a theory of the forms as-
sumed by the surfaces of liquids, had been made by Clairaut, Segner, and
Monge. In an essay on the cohesion of fluids, read before the Royal Society
in the year 1804, I have reduced all effects of this nature to the j joint opera+
tion of a cohesive and repulsive force, which balance each. other; assuming
only that the repulsion is more augmented by the approach of the particles to
each other than the cohesion; and I have had the satisfaction of discovering
in this manner a perfect correspondence between many facts, which had not
been supposed to have the slightest connexion with each other. Almost a
year after the publication of this paper, Mr. Laplace read to the National In-
stitute a memoir on capillary tubes, in which, as far as he has pursued the
subject, he has precisely confirmed the most obvious of my conclusions;


ON THE HISTORY OF TERRESTRIAL PHYSICS. 755


although his mode of calculation appears to be by no means unexcep-
tionable, as it does not include the consideration of the effects of repul-
sion. Had my paper been so fortunate as to attract Mr. Laplace’s attention
before his memoir. was presented to the Institute, he would perhaps have
extended the results of my: theory with the same success, which has uni-
formly distinguished his labours in every other department of natural philo-
sophy,

When we reflect on the state of the sciences im general, at the beginning
of the seventeenth century, and compare it with the progress which has been
since made in all of them, we shall be convinced that the last two hundred
years have done much more for the promotion of knowledge, than the two
thousand that preceded them: and we shall be still more encouraged by the
consideration, that perhaps the greater part of these acquisitions has been
made within fifty or sixty years only. We have therefore the satisfaction of
viewing the knowledge of nature not only in a state of advancement, but
even advancing with increasing rapidity ; and the universal diffusion of a
‘taste for science appears to promise, that, as the number of its cultivators in-
creases, new facts will be continually discovered, and those, which are already
known, will be better understood, and more beneficially applied. The Royal In-
stitution, with other societies of a similar nature, will have the merit of assist-
ing in’ the dissemination of knowledge, and in the cultivation of a taste for
its pursuit; and the advantages arising from the general introduction of
philosophical studies, and from the adoption of the practical improvements
depending on them, will amply repay the labours of those, who have been ac-
tive in the establishment and support of associations so truly laudable.


756 LECTURE Lx. ‘ -


a ~ sloo 5 4/00
FF ii x Gs E s. “IN AXAGORAS.
-AN|AXIMANDE.R DEM °o Cc MY IT v x
ANAXIMENES. P. A oO.
.PYTHAGORAS ‘ARISTOTLE,


HERA CLITUS
~ BIRTH OF CHRIST.


| -
DIOSCORIDES


a - keg,


758


PLATE I.


Fig. 1. The point A being supposed to move in a
right line to B, AB is the direction of its motion. P.
a1.

Fig. 2. The lines AB, BC, CD, are the successive
directions of the point A, moving Reena Aaa
figure ABCD. P. 21.

Fig 3. The tangent AB iste direction ofthe mo-
tion of the point C, movi Bi Garve CD, when it
arrivesatE. P2100

Fig. 4. The siuee A marehie ie tec Ds
so that the points E, F, describe the parallel lines EG,
EH, with equal velocities, the plane AEF Bis in rec-
tilinear motion with respect to thesurfaceCD. P. 94.

Fig. 5. The cycloid ABC, and the trochoid DEF
are the results of the rotatory motion of the points B
and E round the centre of the wheel, combined with
the progressive motion of the leet along thie “base
AC. P. 24, 44.

Fig. 6. AB isa fixed bar, CD an arm which slides
on it, ECF a thread passing round the pulley at C,
and either fixed to the pin on the slider F, or passed
over the pulley G, and fixed again at H. The arm
turns round the same axis that carries the pulley at
C, and may be fixed by means of the screw which is
cut on the axis, while two other screws keep it steady
by pressing on the slider below it. The point I de-
scribes, by its compound motion, the oblique line KI,
P. 24.

Fig. 7. The diagonal A B of the parallelogram C D
is the joint result of the motions, represented by its
sides AC, AD. P. 25.

Fig. 8. The line AB may be either simply drawn
in the direction A B, or it may be traced by the equal
motions A C and AD of the arm and its slider, or by
the unequal motions AE and AF. P. 25.

Fig. 9. The body A, moving uniformly along the
line AB, first approaches to the point C, and then
recedes from it, as if repelled. P. 27.

Fig. 10. When AB and AC approach each other,
and coincide, the diagonal AD becomes equal to their
sum. P, 30,


Fig. 11. Atwood’s machine. The boxes A, B, con-
taining equal weights, are connected by the thread
ACB, passing over the pulley C, which is supported ei-
ther on friction wheels, or by the points of screws, one
of which is seen at D. The box A is made to descend
either by a flat weight placed on it, or by the bar E,
which is intercepted by the ring F, and the box conti-
_nues to descend till it strikes the stage G; the space
being measured on the scale HI, and the time by the
pendulum K, which may be kept in motion byaclock
seapement with a weight. The machine i is levelled
by the screws L,M. P. 31.

Fig. 12. The time of the descent of a falling body
being represented by any portion A B of the base of a _
triangle, the velocity will be proportional, to BC, which

_ is equal to AB, and the space described during the
time DE, supposed. infinitely short, will be propor-
tional tothe area DE FG, which is expressed by the
product of BC and DE; consequently the whole area
AEF will represent the space described in the time
AE, and AHI the space described in the time AH;
but AHI is half of the square HK, and AEF of
EL: the space is therefore always as the square of the
time, and is equal to half the space which would be de-
scribed in the same time with the final velocity. P. 32,

Fig. 13. The whirling table. The arms AB, CD,
are made to revolve on the axes EF, GH by the
string passing over the wheel I, the upper or under
pulley of either axis being employed at pleasure: the
stages K,L, with their weights, are placed at certain
distances from the centre, by means of the racks or
teeth below them; they move along the arms by means
of friction wheels resting on wires, and they raise the
weights M,N, by means of threads passing each over
two pullies. P. 35.

Fig. 14. If a body revolving ina curve ABC, by
means of a force directed to D, describe the portions
AE, BF, CG in equal times, the areas ADE, BDF,
CDG, will be equal, and the velocities in A, B, and
G, will be inversely as the perpendiculars DH, DI,
and DK, P. 36,


Fig. 5.


Lub. by T. Johnson Lender «July 28.06


f


Tubby J. Johnson, London 2 Jilly 1806.


759


PLATE II. .


Fig. 15. The ball A, revolving round the point B,
‘and being drawa towards it by means of the thread
BC, with a force variable at pleasure, its velocity may
be observed to vary, according to its distance from the
point B. P. 37. ;

Fig. 16. The curvé ABCD E is an ellipsis; E and
G are its foci, AD its greater axis, und C E its lesser
axis. P.37.

Fig. 17. The horizontal range, AB, of a body pro-
jected at an elevation of 45°, is greater than AC or
AD, the ranges of bodies projected with the same ve-
locity at a greater or less elevation. If the parallel
dines EF, GH, be always as the squares of AE, AG,
the curve AFH will be @ parabola; seg ng
path of a projectile. P. 39, 40.

Fig. 18. ° The path of a ball moving swiftly through
See ee eae P.


Fig-19, Theball A, having descended slong the groove
A.B, describes the parshola BC, passing through the,
rings D, E.. P. 40.

Fig. 20. ‘The cylinder A, loaded nt the axis, de-
scends along an inclined plane more rapidly than the
eylinder B, loaded with an equal weight at the circum-
ference. P. 42.

Fig. 21. ‘The balls A, B,C descend along the planes


peda mvannco hae


BD,CD. P. 43.
ae ‘ball, descending from equal
seb ao
‘on the opposite side of E P.
Ea her


Suna oe


and the balls B,E, descending from any two points of
the carve, will meet at E, in the same time that the
ball G falls froma point nearly 3 of AE above A. The
Space described by the pendalum in descending is al-
ways proportional tothe height HT, to which a body
cibhnatel tha seliandlees iinentncecaie
will rise m the same time. The circle FT lies without
the cycloid CED, and is somewhat less inclined to
the horizon at equal distances from E. P. 44, 45.

Fig. 25. The ball A, descending from B in the
curve BA, arrives at C before the ball D moving ina
right line on the plane BC. P."46.

Fig. 26. The balls A,B,C, being made to revolve
by means of the whirling table, they are always found
in the same horizontal plane. The joint connecting
See ee a ae eT, ease tm
‘above. P. 47.

Fig. 27. The equal vibrations, represented by A B,
CD, compose, when united, the circular revolution
AEB: the unequal vibrations AB, FG, a
ellipsis AH'B; the place of the body being
cri by coming he vere ef we
ar arcs increasing uniformly. P.ar.

Fig. 28. The balls A,B, as their revolution.
ete es
P. 48.

Fig. 29, “tua te W eiedy-A Seca od
of B §, and AC being twige BC, C is the contre of tx-


©. ettia, P51. 9 ist Ss


Fig. $0. ‘The balls A and B are suspended by long
threads, which How anbesakemast yl


BD; the e ball id
the thread E, and yee, set at liberty bay
powns pete pincer at as

are, of ee
rev nef P. st dh


ae
a
Be A Bg
“i |
des oe
Fig. 31, The centre of inertia of the bodies A.B,


c,D, nay be determined either by finding E the cen-
tre of inertia of A and B, and supposing a body equal
to
* from E and C;,and G, the point required, from F and
‘Dj ot by finding first H and I from A, C, B,D, taken
in pairs, and dividing HI in due proportion in the


me raps P,. ;
patios tn a


the bodies B,C, D, roducts obtained by n multi-
ot BE ten D by ‘DH, and E by EL,
are equal, when ) added together, to the product of the
masses of all the bodies by the distance A K; all the
lines drawn to the plane FI being parallel. P. 55.

” Fig. 83. The weights ABC will remain at rest
when they are in the same proportion to each other


tohay i


as the respective sides of the triangle DRED me :


parallel to EG, P. 61.

Fig. 34. The bodies A,B, remain in, “Squlibriom
when centre of inertia C is immediately below the
point of sion D. P. 61.

Fig. 35. The system of bodies A,B,C, is at rest
when the centre of inertia D is immediately below the
paint of suspension E. P. 61.

. 36. The bodies A,B, remain at elietiog the
centre of inertia C is immediately above the point of
support D. P, 61.

Fig. 87. The bodies A,B, remain at rest sd the
centre of inertia C coincides ith the falarure or point
wots support, P. 61,

Fig. 38. The irregular-body AB remains at rest
when the centre.of inertia C is immediately below the
point of suspension. D. P. 61,

3 ire 39. A being the centre of gravity ofthe board

B,C, the point of suspension | being D,E, or F, the posi-

ion of the vertical line willbe DA, EA, or FA, P.62,
Fig. 40. The itis of the vessel A is stable;


- sum to be placed in it, then determining F


of.


760


PLATE ut.


shenlitis real thru to pt ho osaiv of
gravity having its concavity. upwards in the first, and
downwards in the second. P. 62. thot

Fig. 41, Paths of the centre of gravity often oval.
P. 62.

Fig. 42, Paths of the centre of gravity of ss rd
resting on a sphere. P. 62. si 4. ziee
~. Figs. «A, the path of ta abi OR yradegcBe
body standing on a flat basis;. resort =
brium of the same body inclined. P.63.

» Fig. 44. The effects of a certain ‘Setinnsion abd
waggon, loaded with light and heavy materials, are ro-
presented at A and B respectively, P.63,. 05 © +

Fig. 45. The suspension Sidney
jecting over atable. P.64.00 0 hk
_ Fig. 46. A shows the path of the combi ipl
of a loaded cylinder on an inclined plane, B thatof
the centre of gravity of a double cone moving towards
the more elevated end of a triangular, surface. C } inne
‘elevation of the double cone. P. 64, |

Fig. 47. AB isa lever of the first.kind, the Pa
acting on different sides of the fulewmC; DE. of the
second kind, the forces being applied at D and. F, on
the same side of E. P. 65. A

Fig. 48. A force applied at A may be held in equi-
librium by a triple force, applied in the direction BC
either at B or at C, or in a direction perpendicular to
the arm OU ails DE eu. 5 heeaeaeh eee
ofAD. P. 67.

Fig. 49. A force, acting at A on neler A Tas
agreat mechanical advantage in turning the lever CD;
but when the levers are in the position BE, D F, the
force acts with a similar disadvantage. P. 67.

Fig. 50. ‘The diameter of the cylinder A being three
times as great as that of B, the weight C, or an
equivalent force applied to the winch D, will support
a triple weight at E. P, 67.


Pub. by J. Johnson, London 1 Fuly 2806


aéd


smaller nt E, and ie Ne a la lf lh


CF, acting on the axis F,
to the difference of the


tere


C were attachied to the lit
of which the diameter tae
radii of the double cylinder. Pp.

‘xed pally,» sporting wo equal


Fig. 52. Asingle’
weights. P. 68." : Esta

é pulley, by means of
saa A ha P.


Fig. 53. A oe
b= Sabin ar,

cage Te aranenitofplisin sis! ake,
-with a force of six to one. “P69. —

Fig. 55. An range Pl in vere
line, with a forcé of six to one. P. 69.

Fig. 56. Mr. Smeaton’s blocks, giving 8 force of
twenty to one, the rope being applied in the middle
of the outer series, ‘and ing the order of the f-
gures from 1 to 21. ‘P. 69, 207

Fig. 57. Al ayecem of pillies ‘fxed°on'one axis in
each block; having « power of 8 to1. P. 69.

Fig. 58. A system of pullies, each of which doubles
the effect; having a power of 8 to 1. P. 69.

Fig. 59. A system of pullies with each rope fixed to
the weight, having’a force of 7 to 1. P. 69. - .

Fig. 60, Two systems of pullies, of the kind denomi-


>)


BEATE A ec deer tat


J nated Spanish bartons, in which two of the ararea
in suspénded by thé same rope: the ond has s power of


cea
.


4, the other of 5. P. 69.

Fig. 61. A. The depression of the middle weight be-
ing one third of its distance from the pullies, it sustains
two equal weights, which are together three times as
great ‘as itself. B. The depression ‘of the smaller
‘weight being one fourth of its distance from the pulley,
‘it supports a weight twice as great as itself. P, 70.

Fig. 62. A joiner’s saw, stretched | by twisting a
double cord, by means of a lever passing through i it.

Fig. 63. The weight A, resting on an inclined plane
of which the height is to the oblique length as 3 to 5,
is sustained by a weight B three fifths as great as itself;
and if for the resistance of the plane we substitute the
action of the weight C, reduced to the directian AD
perpendicular to the plane, this weight must be four
fifths of the weight A, the horizontal length of the
wedge being four fifths of its oblique length. P. 70.

Fig. 64. ‘The weights A, B, and C, acting, by means
of threads passing over pullies, which are fixed to any
required part’ of a horizontal table, on the rollers
which press against the sides of a wedge, proportional
in length to the respective weights, retain each: other
in equilibrium, when their directions meet in one point!
In order that the threads may pass on each side of the
wedge, it may be’ ‘supported by three do sth
P. 71,


a me :
PLATE Y. onthe


Fig. 65. By:eans of the moveable inclined plane


+ AB, of which the hoight AC is one third of the hori.


zontal length BC, the weight D, acting horizontally,
sustains a triple weight E, acting in a vertical direc-
tion. | P. 71, y

Fig. 66. AB being one fourth of BC, the rope
AB minst exert a force of tension equal to one fourth
of the weight C, in order. to support it, supposing. the
surfaces) to be without friction. But if the friction of
the end of the beam AC were equal to one fourth
of the pressure, it would support the weight C withr
out any other-force,. whatever might be its magnitude
P18. ee ;
Fig 07. AB being :
CD, the force extending the rope CD each way is
equal to the weight BE. P. 72.

Fig. 68.. The thin wedge AB, of which the height
is one fifth of the length, being rolled round the cy-
linder C, makes the screw D, by means of which the
weight E is capable of supporting a weight five times
asgreat as PF. PLT dah ve

Fig. 69. A is @ screw, and B the nut belonging to
it. P. 72. ;

Fig, 70, The endless screw AB acts on the teeth
of the wheel CD. P. 72.

Fig. 71, The distance of the threads of the inte-
rior screw is four fifths of that of the exterior or per-
fornted screw, and this distanee is one thirtieth of the
circumference. Hence the weight A is capable of
sustaining a weight B 150 times as great-as itself,

. 73,

/ ig. 72. The apparatus for experiments on collision.
Those balls which are not employed may be left be-
hind the graduated arc, as at A and B; some of the
strings have balls of half the weight of the rest, others
have a small dish C, on which balls of clay, or of wax


softened with one fourth its weight of oil, may be sup- :


ported. P. 76.

Fig. 73. If the ball A strike the ball B in the
oblique direction AC, the ball B will be impelled in
the direction C D perpendicular to the surface of con~
tact; and the velocity EC being resolved into EF
and FC, the part FC will continue unaltered; and if
the balls are equal, the part I. F will be destroyed, so
that the ball A will move after the stroke in the direc-
tion CG, excepting the effect of any accidental dis-
4


half of BC, or one fourth of


“phnpss ohh ey adil ED
the surrounding bodies, If we imagine a ball Cin
contact with B, in the direction DB, we may aim a


blow at the centre of this ball, in onder to dei lis
ball BtoD; and if B bappen to be situated any whe


in. the semicircle DCG, the motion of A after the
impulse will be in the direction BG or GB, if there
be no resistance. When the ball His reflected bya
fixed obstacle, as by the cushion of a billiard table, at
I, its velocity KI may be resolved into the parts KL,


LI; the partK Lcontinues,and may be 1 rest :
LM equal to K1y the pan LT woenreed math :
makes IM, the angle LIM being equal to LIK. We
may find the proper direction for striking any ball by

reflection if we suppose ball N in contact with the neat= ;
est pointofthe cushion, and making N O equal to MN,

aim at a ball supposed to be at O. An the same man-
ner if we wish to impel the ball P in the direction PQ
by a stroke of the ball R after reflection at S, we first _
place a ball at T behind P, ;
tion RS by aiming ata ball U, as if we wished to strike
a ball at T witha direet impulse, But in the case ofa
billiard ball, the rotation of the ball round its axis, which
is not destroyed by the collision, will cause the
move, on account of the friction of the table, i


will not go on to G, but will strike the cushion be-
tween C and D; and the ball H, after reflecti in f
will proceed in a direction a little nearer N than
IM; so that the imaginary ball O ought perhaps
placed as far from the cushion itself as M, in.

the ball may be struck after reflection.

Fig. 74. Mr. Smeaton'saj


and determine the direc:


ballto
tion different from its first direction: thus the ball


\


Fig. 73.


PLATE V.


Fig. 75.


Taseph Stelter, sexlp


PLATE V1.


Fig’.77-


Ree po. YO + Se
ENGL SV GAR (SAG 0. xX Capea


Fig. 82.


Pub.by J Johnson London 2 July 2806 .


763


| dee PLATE Vir


Mg tt. ties of the diameters. of the
different parts of the double pullies being 3 to 2, 5to
SSSR Se wg Tee eR elemred


 xise the most rapidly.


Fig. 78. Deiat ss iicivoh of pro-
ducing a perpetual motion; the descending balls, act-
ing at a greater distance from the centre, but being
fear ‘in number, than the ascending. In the model,


the balls may be kept in their places by a place of


glass covering the wheel. P. 92.
Fig. 79. Ay, the inclination of cross lines generally


a convenient for producing the effect of a tint, in


drawing. B shows the effect of lines crossing each
other perpendicularly, and C that of lines crossing too
. Where the surface to peceeee aim
\Sinclepacats finsh or Lalbypa honda begin
a point, in order that the junction of thed
tions may escape observation. P. 95,


yet


Fig. 80. Da tows telegraph, in which the chee


Fig, BL. Dr, Hooke’s aaa with some other
arbitrary characters for his telegraph. P. 100.

Fig. 82. A beam compass, with ascale. P. 102.
Fig. 83, . 85. Instruments for sep 887) of
large circles. P. 102.

Fig. 86. ‘A pair of triangular compasses. P. 102.
—s Marquois’s scales, for drawing parallellines,
. 103.

Fig. 88, A pen for ruling musical lines, P. 103.
Fig. 89, A pantograph. A being the centre of motion,
B the tracing point, and C the describing point, AB
is always to AC as AD to AE, akin
milar to the original G. P. 103.


Fig. 90, Saree peepee angio: P. 104,


eT ete


‘PLATE VII. f


‘Fig! 91. A ‘sector. The scale of equal parts is
marked L. As A'Bis to AC, so is BD toC E; and
if any line BD be placed with its extremities in the
“third division’of the scale on each leg, the distance
. CE between the seventh divisions will contain 7 equal
pat St Aled Doe ae ee Se
of any other numbers. P. 104.00

Fig. 92, A vernier, inating 9 of te disiony
of its scale. P. 105. td peylne) f

Fig. 93., A sliding rule. "The slider’ teing’ drawn
ont, so that the division marked 1 is opposite to 3 on
the rule; all the other figares 6n the rule are triple of
those which stand opposite to them. P. 107. —

Fig. 94. A circular logarithihic instrament: The
imnercircleslides within the outer, arid as itistepresent-

ed in the figure, cach number stands opposite to an-

other which is twice as great P..107 GOP 24

Fig. 95. A steel chain, made by Ramsden, A,<the
screw for bringing the mark B precisely to the point
required; C a joint between the adjoining links; D,
a cross joint at every tenth link; E, a pulley and
weight for stretching the chain, P. 112.

Fig. 96. A micrometrical scale made by Troughton.
‘The compound microscopes A and B are fixed nearly
at the required distance on the scale C: A is then made
to point exactly to a division of the standard scale D
by means of the screw E, and B to another division,
at the required distance, by means of the screw F, the —
fractiona. parts being added by the turns of the screw
G. Thescale D is then removed, and the object to
be compared with it is put in its place. P. 112.

Fig. 97, A diagonal scale. -The line A B contains
274 parts, of which the units of the scale contain 100.
P. 112.

Fig. 98. The statuary’s compass, seen sideways.
The pin AB is forced down, till it is stopped by the


position. It is also capable
EB; which i xed by the serew


poine of distance, ifs grouad plan EG ;

on the horizontal plane be placed in its t

respect to LK, the bottom of the picture, the
ing points of all its lines will be found by
DM, DN, and oe parallel to th
ively ; and the whole Recast: aes 1
QM, KN, and [0, Prabeliy n
tions, the Ggure RSTO, which we


_tion of EFGH, The plan may also


Mi


& oes


ian


Na fo te NO


ie


a att


|


Fig.104.


Pub. by I. Johnson London a Tuby 1806


Toseph Skelton seul


—


_ Fig, £08. ‘The hieights of the houses, windows, doore,
and figures arc determined by lines directed to the
centre of the pictire; the true height being measured
on the lines A B,C D, where the objects are supposed

“to touch the plane of projection. The distance EF»
and ‘all other parts: of lines perpendictilar to the pic-
ture, ate measured by laying off'the lengths of the
originals, as GH, ow the line AC, and drawing TEG
IEH, from J, the point of distance; which, in most
cli, WA backers remote from the centre of the pic-
ture than it.is here made. The line KL, and others
parallel to AC, may be: ‘measured by the assistance
of any point ‘MT in the horizontal line, the distances,
NO, OP; being laid of on AC, or simply by reduc-
ing: the sealé inthe opi atieeete Seat Ha ML. P.
116. I sa ed sh!

Fig. 104, ‘A’ citcle thrown into’ pehnyctive by
means of the cirewmnveribed square, th of con-
tact being found by bisecting the ‘sides. "P.116.

Fig. 105. Two perspective delice, ‘and two

U projections df a cube, in different
positions. For the’ orthogriphical projection, ‘the
ground plan being ABCD, the image of any point
A,B, may be found by drawing AE, BF, perpendicu-
lar to the ground line, EG, FH, -parallel to the line
assumed for the direction of the centre of the picture,
and AG, BU parallel to the line of direction of, the
point of distance; the intersections G and H will then
be the points corresponding to A and B, P. 116.

Fig. 106. A is the orthographical projection. of a
sphere, with some ofits circles; B the stereographical
projection ofthe same circles. P, 117.

Fig 107. A balance made by Fidler for the Royal
Institution, nearly resembling those of Ramsden and
‘Troughton, ‘The middle coluran A is raised at plea-
‘Sure-by the cock B, and carries the round ends of the

VOL. I.


5


Sg PLATE VIII.


‘axis in the forks at its upper part, in order to remove
the pressure on the sharp edges of the axis within the
forks. ‘The scales are occasionally supported by the
pillars C and D, which are elevated or depréssed by
turning the handle E. The screw F serves for rais-
ing or lowering a weight within the conical beam, by
means of which the place of the centre of gravity is
regulated. The extent of the vibrations i is measured
on the graduated. arc G,  P. 425. .

Fig. 108, A balance for the Tlouraton of the dit
ferent kinds of equilibrium. When the scales are hung -
on the mide pins, A, B, which are in the same hori-
zontal line with the support of the beam, the equili-
brium is neutral, the weights acting a’ if the centre of
gravity coincided. with the point of suspension, If the
scales be hung on the lowest pins C,D, the centre of
gravity willbe nearly in the line CD, and its path the
curve E, which bas its. concavity upwards; but if the
scales are hung on the pins F,G, the path of the
centre of gravity will be convex upwards, and the beam
will overset. In reality the true paths of the centre of
gravity would be nearly in the curves H and I, situated
between the weights in the scales: but these are
similar to the othercurves. P. 125.

Fig. 109. When the equilibrium ofa balance is totter-
ing, the lower weight acts with the greatest advantage :
thus the effect of the weight A is reduced in the pro-
portion of BC to DC, by the obliquity of the arm
CA, while the weight Eacts~on the whole length of
itsarmC F. P. 125.

Fig. 110. If ABC be a semicircle, and BD repre
sent a given weight, and A D its counterpoise in one
of the scales of an unequal balance DC will be the
counterpoise in the othe? scale. It is obvious that
ACis more than twice asgreatas BD. P. 126,


oc


Fig. 111. A weighing machine. ‘re platform aL
porting the weight” rests on the pins A,B,C, D,
equal distances from the falera E,F,G,H; so me

wherever the weight may be > placed, it presses equally

on the lever IK, at L, and is counterpoised bya much
smaller weight placed in the scale M. P. 126.

Fig. 112. ‘A steclyard resembling that of Mr. Paul,


"in which different weights may be employed. Ava 3


loop to check the vibrations; B a scale to be sus”
pended by the hook C. “It great delicacy be required
in the weights, the fractional parts may be expre d
by. pee eerie with
a P, 126.

. Fig. 115. “A bes ee tans,


Fig. 114. A spring ‘steelyard: halt sac


semoved, to show thespring. P. 197. In: spy nap
- Fig. 115. _AB, the path of the centre of gravity of
the human ‘body, such as it would ‘be. described in
wralking, if the legs were inflexible. CD, the path de-
scribed in running, on the same supposition. P. 130.
‘Fig. 116, The actual path of the centre of gravity,
as itis Praised described. Pr, 180. ig


‘PLATE; IX.


arses sedioonee i conlirh, f th from


Fig. 128. ee ee
— iexoren esis 198 n*4


igh


H 10a seta 94 oloaht plawted ha neta y ah
; feud Tpseksdyinek


; e Phar dD bom!


. EOF


Mig. 117, ne Roseper pry thn a .


th -


Pi agg bait ; f


Y
.


PLATE IX.


Pub ty TJoknsem London 2 July 1806


TJorgph Skelton reulp


Toveph Sholom 10
Pub.by J. Johnson, London 1 July 1806.


b 767°


Fig. 124. ‘The manner in which a prismatic column
is crushed by pressure, supposing the lateral adhesion
to be simply Proportional to the surface concerned.
sad: st ‘ a

bs ett 7 column is crush-
ed, supp iyg the lateral adhesion to be increased by
Teas. The circle is a strong as rete ord


pposing the
5 te the relative teresof all all its apoio 4
. 146.
127. The three circles the cir-
ice are an strong a9 | cir.


gs FE taretges Gita te a Bea cut out
j of w plank of uniform depth, for ‘resisting’ longitu-
| nanerhoa: B, the form into which it is bent; oth
ing cwcular.» P. 150,


> “Te eeu es be nib Eien for’s Genial cae bat
fa readth, for resisting a longitu-
af force whch ends it into the cycloidal curve


ar ats is form for
strongest form fora ey Sea
eli of elu slightly bent b; “slongitadionl
‘the form into. which it is it by such a


131. form of a beam cut out of
i Ay, fixed at Os end, and supporting a
tat the other. P. 150.

_ Fig, 132, The strongest form of a beam cut out Be
@ vertical plank, fixed at one end, and su porting
weight at ‘other; ‘the outline bemg parabolic! n
Practice the best method in such a case would be
Simply to reduce the depth ot the end to one half of
the whole, keeping the outline straight; in this

one one fourth of the timber would be saved, P:


Fig. 133.- ‘The strongest form of a ware or turned
beam, fixed at one end, and capportiog a weight at
‘The other; the outline being a cubic parabola. P.


Fig. 3 134. The, strongest formefor the outline of a


Bo spring, ieee weight at the end.


Fig, mA a behets fur a beam cut out of

» fixed at one end, and supporting

an a weight % ao distributed throughout its 3
—— P. 150.

t form for a beam cut out of

at one end, and supporting a


ae vtec "The stfu
 # vertical plank, rs


PLATE X. -


“weight equally distributed throughout its Length. Po


rer


or turned ©


i he form for & square “
writ rand supporting a weight le ,


distributed throughout its length ;
asemicubic parabola, in which the cube of tia dbioke
pens pas the aque of the distance from the end.


Fig. 138. The strongest form for a it out
aaa plank, for coreerting: its own aie cs


Fig. 139. The strongest: form for a turned beam,
rrr own weight; the outline being a
Ic, .
Fig. 140. ‘The strongest'form ofa beam calculated
to resist the pressure of its own weight b;
hesion.only. The outline. is a cite hea
which never comes into contact with the axis,
order that the condition of equal strength may be
le, the _— ry ery with a be and at
ws oneal » equal to portion whichis
“ Cpeniletp the'figure. P. 150.
Fig. at. The strongest form fora beam cut oat of
a horizontal plank; mapper ane eey and bear-
me weight at the mi
. 142. The strongest form for a beam cut out of
a boreal Lesenit by sah ey aes ends, and bear-
ing a weight equally ughout its length;
the outline parabolic. P. 150,
wee . 143. bt Aen form ae a beam Gif ont
6 a vertical lank, su) ported at ends, re
ing a weight wweiglit silly Qntributed throughout, the out-
line being elliptic. *p. 150.
ig. 144. ‘Pe a er form for a beam cut out of
a totes nk, firmly ut at both ends,and sup-
ae cres wel mee at the middle. 150,
he strongest form ‘for a beam cut out of
‘a si he tis “firmly fixed at bothends, aid sup-
porting a weight at the middle, the curves being pa-
vabolic, P. 150.
Fig. Teh gd strpegest i form for a om cut esis
a vertica sank, and su every where a we at
proportions to the previ / the extremity: the
ine being a.cubic parabola. P. 150.
he Ad. She Bron ees ey for Soe or saroad
portin re a weight, proportional
to ‘acne Sas ace tomer extremity, aud represented
by the section ott the sawe figure, which is a pyramid
oracone, P. 150.


~ outline being a parabola.


im ‘PLATE XI.


Fig 148. A machine for examining the strength of
materials. The force is applied by means of the
winch A, which winds up the rope BC, passing over
the first pulley, and under the second, whieh is directly
under the point D, at which the force acts on the piece
EF tovbe broken; the pullies slide on two~ parallel
bats,‘ fixed’ ii a frame, which is held down by a paint
projecting at-G, from the lever GH, which is gra-
duated:tike « steelyard, and measures the force. The
piece to be | broken is held by a double vice, 1K, with
four screws, two of them hiding the other two in the

if’a wire is to be torn, it may be fixed to be
the bar LM; and a substance to be crushed
must be placed under the lever N.O, the end N. re-
eeiving ‘the rope, and the end O being*held down by
thefelick, which acts on the double ratchet OP. The
leqetisdoublefrom | O to Q, and acts on the substance
by a leop, fixed to it bya pin. P. 151.

Fig. 149. The outline of a columa diminished one
. 6fth of its diamever, in two different ways: the side A
-being an arc of an ellipsis, of which the semidiameter
ABis the lesser semiaxis, joined at A to a right line
AC, of one third of the length of ‘the column, the
part AD being cylindrical; the side DP is a cubic
parabola, aud may be drawn mechanically by fixing a
straight ruler EF,insucha position that DF may be twice
the diminution at E,and then bending itto D : the dimi-
nution being every where as the cube of the distance
from D. ‘These two methods are compared in a con-
tracted scale at G: the outer line represents the first
method, ant the next liue the second; the third,
which is nearest to, G the eonchoid of Nicomedes, re-
commended by Chanibers, said to be fonnd in the
columns of the Pantheon; the curre beginning at the
base.’ Palladio fixes the ruler at A, and bends it to H,
which makes the curvature abruptly greateratH. P,
158.

Fig. 150. A section of Mr. Smeaton’s light house
at the Eddystone, P, 159.


Fig. 151. Mr, Smedton’s mode of uniting tiers of
stones by wooden pins and wedges. | P. 160.

Fig. 1520 A string of beads, suspendedin equilibrium
from two points, and remaining in equilibrium in an
inverted position. The ends are supported by two
pieces, which slide backwards and forwards, and are
fixed by screws: the string is also tightened by turn
ingapim P. 161, :

~ Fig. 153. 4 systern Gf bars; keanging ia dqiltibriom,
and supporting cach other in the same forin when in
yerted. P. 161.

Fig. 154. A, a chain loaded, at equal distances,
with other chains ‘of such a length, as to represent
the depth of che: materials pressing on an arch of
the form shown by the first chain, and holdi tin ~
equilibrium, B, paaryehin ypray P. 161, 5
» Figs 155.) A. comparison of the.cury which have
various advantages for the construction of au arch sup
porting a horizontal road. The fall line is an. elliptic
‘arc, somewhat less than half the ellipsis, The outside
curve, which is also continued farthest down, is that
whichiscalculated for resisting the pressure of materials
acting like a fiuid, or inthemanner of wedges: the second
dotted curve; for supporting the pressure of the mate-
rials above each part, supposed to act in a vertical di-
rection only: the third isa circular arc, making one
third ofa whole circle: the fourth is part of a logarith-
mic curve, which is nearly of equal strength with re-
spect to the tendency of the materials.to give way for
want of lateral adh@sion, and the’ fifth is composed
of parabolic curves, showing the outline which would
be strongest for supporting any additional weiglit placed
on the middle of the arch.’ If the height were greater
in proportion to the span, as usually happens in prac-
tice, there would be less difference between the curves.
‘The radius of curvature at the summit being A B, the
horizontal thrust is equal to the weight of the por-
tion ABC D of the materials,


Pub by J. Johnson, London 2 July 1806.


Ti od
r


wns


Morph Seelten seul.


cae


Fig..a6o. Fig. 162. Fig-162. Fig.163. Fig.a64.


!
)
|
]
|
|


Pub by J. Johnson London 2Fuly 806 .


eS Be


w


Soseph Shelter


Fig. 156 Ale aréh of Bta Bridge, Fig. 160, Ate ih nylaning
: ot eh P. 165. }


16%. An Tonic column. P. 165. :
. # ee as. A Corinthian column. P. 165. |

“Fig. 164. A Composite column, P. 165.

- Fig. 165. An elevation of the end of King’s College
ithout the app ' ee ee
_ the section is represented at C,D,- If the thickness the tower being supposed to be removed, atid on the
. Were not at all increased, a hoop would be required other the tower, which not only supplies the place of a

< i P. 165. y buttress at the end, but aisists also in supporting a

¢ roof of St. Paul's Cathe- considerable portion of the thrust in the direction ox
the length of the chapel; “the t6of, which is of stone,
: being vaulted in this direction as well as tranversely,
There is also a roof of ciirpentry, covered with lead


On Oe Fs 2
a


161: A Doric column. P. 165. Re


PLATE; XIU sigue’ 2


Fig, 166. Joints fora tie beam, Baka i
B cannot be more than half as
beam, raposing en, poe nege ufone
sure of the bolts, as strong as could be required.
joint at C is called a dovetail joint; its strength is a
litde less ‘than chat of A and :B, but the adhesion is


nek but it would ‘be difi-.
to create snch an ad-
were subject to. be. much
In | be a very bad one. P. 167.
age y good joint fora tic beam; the adhe.
sion being secured by a sight dimioution of the
strength. P. 167.

Fig. 169. A, ‘a simple scarfed joint, which may be
tightened by a wedge at the centre; it is not strong.
B, a scarfed joiut which is much stronger. P. 167,

Fig. 170. A joint for a beam supporting a weight
by its transverse strength. The junction might be made,
if it were necessary, by means of a third piece, of
which the limits are marked by the dotted line. The
strength is but little diminished by the joint. P. 168.

Fig. 171. A beam supporting a weight by its trans-
verse strength, joined to another by means of a third
piece of half the depth, spliced or fished on, below
the beam, and secured by pins, and by blocks or jog-
gles. The strength is a little greater than that of the
original beam. ‘The dotted lines show the proportion
in which the strata are extended or compressed, the
lower part of the original beam remaining in its natus
ral state, without sustaining any pressure, as far as one
fourth of the depth, and a little further. P. 163,


Bid 172, -A joint for beam pressing obliquely


the beendth
palgeia
to rc .


nishes the strength of
Fig. 174. ‘The straps,
oy the. ioe,


heal that which the
eee


tne Sona het in Hg iD
Speen bo 308


Fig. 175. The simplestform ofa roof. AB,AC, are — a


the rafters, and B C the tie beam; the weight of each {
half being represented by A B, or AC, the thrast
direction of the rafters will be AD, and the bi

thrust each way BD orC D. It is obvious that AD
will be least when BAC is a right angle. P.170.

Fig. 176. A common roof, with.braces. A Bis the
king post, and BC, BD the braces, P. 170.

Fig. 177. A kirb or mansard roof, the rafters of
which hold each other in equilibrium, AB andCD
are queen posts helping to support the tie beam. The-
piece AC acts as a strut, in supporting the pressure
occasioned by the weight of the tie beam. The heads of
the queen posts are not much thickened, in order to
avoid the change arising from the unequal contraction
of the wood. P, 170,


PLATE Xl


Fig.176-


A


Pub. by J. Johovsom, Lonsion 3 Suly 1806.


Joseph Shalt seule


BOK
vA \L Ze <a>
| \Z


Fig.184. ee a


Fig.188.


| | ‘DT TTT iin


Pub.by J. Johnson. London x July 2806.


pohecla Gemalto
colle waste, dat a paats the domed lines spring,


. show the effective magnitude of the wheels. P. 176.
| Fig. 191. The teeth of two wheels, forined into in-


volutes of circles, described by uncoiling a thread
from the dotted circles; the poimt of contact of the
sone tog svar: Wi epcontals Hie wineries
‘both circles) (P1760 sate
Fig. 192. Wivnsaiblces formed ico iavohtia ofl.


> Fig. 193. "The ipinion' A is of the hind called alepur
wheel; B is a crows wheel, or a contrate wheel. P.
177.

Fig. 194. ‘The wheel and pinioa are-both bevilled s
Chip “Sioae ok, ie eta ees eee ern
P. 177.

Fig. 195. Two wheels a litle eoceaticy acting on
each other, P. 178.

Fig, 196. An eccentric contrate wheel, acting on a
long pinion. P, 178


-


‘cles, revolvitig’ in contact with each other, the equi- = the h
“distant lines, drawa on them, continuing to meet each
Steers re P. 176. udu seb


paktperte rs


iat


° Soseph Skelton scdp
Pub by J. Johnson London 1 July 2806 . :


_ Fig’ 200. A fusee with an auxiliary spring, for con-
__tinuing the motion.when-the watch is woun ‘up. The
“action of the main spring turns the fusce in the direc-
_ tion AB; ‘the*fusee acts on the ratchet wheel ABC
means of the.click B, and this wheel impels the
toothed wheel D E by the spring C BA, which is sup-
“posed to be seen durough it. When the watch is
wound up, this spring forces back the wheel ABC
against the click F, which serves as a fixed point, while
¢ other end continues to act on DE, and to main-
tain the’motion. P. 193.


in the
crutch


he. dead beat scapement. The teeth
ed on the flat or rather cylindrical sur-
A, B, on which rest until the peiure are
near the middle of its vibration, when the teeth
to sien the inclined surfaces terminating the
; Dl
‘204. The horizontal scapement, for a watcli,
. tooth A rests first on the.external surface of the
~~ eylinder, BC, and then impels it by its inclined face,
in the direction BC; it ahcewarde falls on the con-
cave surface DE, and lastly impels the cylinder in the
2ontrary direction. P.195. — 3
Fig. 205. The duplex scapement. AB is the pallet,
hich the cylinder, and the tooth which rests
‘are supposed to be seen, the t of the tooth
ing about to escape from the notch towards C. The
ort too! next impels the point of the pallet, and
= long tooth E falls on.the cylinder. Te firstrests on
vex


which causes a sli
the tooth F being b ‘ach of
on its return, the tooth falls again into the notch; and
ane a 1 it escapes, the: pallet is impelled as before. P.
Fig. 200. Mr, Mudge’s watch scapement. A, the
1ecl, and one a the subsidiary springs, seen
t c; B.a general et the been tay

_ both the subsidia: rings, seen from one side, ,

point Stonaof the teetls reste at C on the end of the
let, which is bent so as to detain it until the pin D,
hed to the halance, sets it at liberty, by
‘the arm E: this arm is then carried
the end of its vibration, and im-


its return bcp a meets the next”
other spring acts alternately in the same


contrary direction, P. 197.


PLATE XVI.


~ Arnold. The outside of the hoops A,.B is aren bx


» site degree of compensation. ‘The weights E, F, are em-


773


_ Fig. 207. An improvement on -Meh-Cumming’s


scapement for a clock. The tooth A jis seen resting ~


on a flat surface at the end of the pallet B» it is dis-
engaged by the descent of the ee eee
‘position in which it is represented, the pallet ‘B being
impelled byit at C. This pallet continues resting on
the flat‘end of the tooth, until the pin D of the pendu-
lum strikes against the arm E, which is carried before
it; and impels the pendulum in its descent,:until the
pallet B acquires the situation in which the opposite
a is represented, and sets that pallet at liberty
rom the tooth E, which has raised it. The situation
and magnitude.of the weights G, H, may be adjusted


* at pleasure, P, 197.


- Fig. 208, Mr. “Arnold’s watch scapement. The
ame projecting from the verge or axis of the-balance,
moving towards B, carries before it the spring B, and
with it the stiffer. spring C, so as to set at liberty the
tooth D, which rests on a pallet projecting from the
spring. The angle £.of the princip: pale has then
od gr cge the tooth F, and is impelled by it until the
tooth G arrives at the detent, In the return of the
‘balance, the pin A — easily by the detent, by forc-
ing back the spring B., The screw H serves to adjust
the position of the detent, which presses against it. P.
197. Y *

Fig. 209. Mr. Earnshaw’s scapement. A is the
unlocking pallet, B the spring on which it acts, C the
detent, holding the tooth D by a pin; E is the point
of the ‘principal ‘pallet first inipelled by the tooth F,
“ is the tooth next locked, and H the adjusting screw.

. 197. hoe: :

Fig. 210. A gridiron
bars of iron, and two of a mixture of zinc and silver.

200, r ; wit


‘21 1h compensation balance, as‘emplo


the inside of steel: weights C, D are screwe
backwards and forwards, in order to obtain the requie


Boyes to regulate the mean rate of the watch, and
G,H, and I, for adjusting it to all positions with re~
spect to the horizon, ‘P, 201. :

Fig. 212. The compound plate AB rests on two
supports, which are adjusted to a proper distance by
turning the double screw C, the flexure of the plate
by heat rising the bar D, which supports the pendu-
jom, widte its effective length is determined by a
fixed clip, which is seen below the plate. P. 211.


- s0s


eae
ndulym, consisting of threa ~


774


“PLATE XVI.


’.


te oa! ade Raine vows eect
nate motions of a lever, the clicks on each side being


_ detained in the teeth of the ratchets by the assistance


of the springs in which they terminate, and which are
connected together. P. 204.
Fig. 214. The mode of supporting a tackle for


"_ gaising stones in building; the summit of the triangle,
* which is composed, of three. poles, ‘being raised or


lowered by means of a rope and pullies. P. 207.

Fig. 215. A method of raising weights obliquely,
by means of a rope, passing over a pulley, which is
rl ea Ns lg A P. 207.

Fig. 216. AB, a section of an inclined plane, belong-
ing to the Duke of Bridgwater's canal: the boats are
@rawn into the locks at A, which are then filled with
water ; C is the plan of the windlass, by which the de-
scending and ascending boats are connected together,
‘and which {s tarned by a winch; D and E are the
locks. P. 208.

Fig. 217. A crane, with an oblique walking whl,
for oxen br horses.” The wheel is taken from a mill
of Leupold. P. 209.

Fig. 218. A crane with a wheal and break bke at,
“White's. The man ‘walks at any required distance
cheng ors stint, eet Maem Sewer


A, which moves the bis BE, inenscuih heb
axis, and removes the break CD from the ircumfe-
rence of the wheel. P. 210, & Paget ns

Fig. 219. A lewis, for raising stones. P. 210.

Fig. 220. When the centre of gravity A is twice as
far from one of the porters B, as from the other C, the
first bears one third of the w:
wor “eee nr

. Fig. 221. When the centre of gravity A’
line joining the points « of support B, C,.1
vided in the rai af the epmens €D, BD, toi
nated by the vertical line AD; but it may ye sup :
ported by two equal forces in the directions BE, E,
found by making G H equal to BG, and joining © H;
the angle GBE being equal to GHF; the forces and
she weight may thin bei megepessietiie, tn lings cl,
IK, and CK. P. 212. »

Fig, 222. “A rollee with to wiels Baad basa
by means of which the slab restingyon it may be
moved to a considerable distaice without leaving the »
roller bebind. 'P. 233.

| Fig. 223, - Mr, Garnet's: rollers, for dianlalbing fi
tion: their axes being loosely connected by a ring, in
order to Keep them ia their places. P. ats,


;


a+. & See eeee SS = Sl Tee eee ee or re
= — . .
» F ~


PLATE XVII.


Fig. 221.


Joseph Shelton oc
Pub. by J. John con Zila tJuly 2806. 7
.


wt


Pub. by I. Johnson London 2 July 2806.


"of the workmen, P. 221.


: 15


PLATE XVIII.


Fig, 224, A pair of friction wheels, supparting one
end of the axis of a wheel. P. 214. :
Fig. 225. The centre of the wheel AB, passing


“ever the obstacle C, describes the path DE; that of
_ the larger wheel FG, the path HI, which is less


ateep. P. 214,
+ Fig. 226. The centre of the wheel AB describes
the curved path CD, in passing over the obstacle E,
while that of the larger wheel FG has an anyle at
i. P. 214. ‘

Fig. 227. The wheel AB, moving on a soft road
towards B, has to overcome the resistance of the earth
aC. -P. 215.

Fig, 228." A section of the wheel of a carriage, a
little dished, or inclined outwards. P. 217.

Fig, 229. A Band CD being the straps or braces by
which a coach is suspended, if the centre of gravity be


at E, F, or G, it must move, when the carriage swings,


in the curve passing through e point. P,
218.

~. Fig. 280. ‘The mode of two horses, so as
‘to make them draw. ‘conveniently together: when ei-
ther horse advances so far that the bar AB assumes
the position C.D, the foremost horse has the disad-
vantage of acting on a lever equivalent only to EF,
while the other horse acts on EC. P, 218,

Fig. 231. A sugar-mill. The axis A is turned cither
by animal force or by water: the liquor is collected in
_~ the trough’ B, and runs off in the channel C. The
openings D are for the purpose of adjusting the axes


982. A glazier’s vice. The vacuity ia the mid-


from an axis, either at A, or, more conveni-
at B, and | thrown, iene against the wooden


weight C, held by the tongs D, fixed in the follower


E, which are opened, when they reach the summit, by
being pressed between the inclined planes F, G, so as
to let the weight fall. At the same time the lever H
is raised by the rope I, and presses on the pin K L, so
as to depress the lever MN, and draw the pin O out
of the drum PQ; the follower then descends, and un-
coils the rope, its too rapid motion being prevented
by the counterpoise R, acting on the spiral barrel Q.
The motion is regulated by the fly S, the pinion of
which is turned by the great wheel T, P. 226,

Fig. 235. The rollers of the slitting mill. P. 228.

Fig. 236. A simple plough, A is the coulter, for
dividing the ground; B the share, fixed on the mould
board C, for turning it to the right hand; D is the rest,
and B, F, the handles. P, 229.

Fig. 237. Section of a threshing mill, The corn is
drawn in by the rollers or feeders A, B: it is beaten


by the revolving beaters.C,D, and the straw is drawn _


ont by the cakes EF, which discharge it at G; the
grain falling through the arched boltows HI, IGy
which are formed like sieves. . P. 233.

Fig. 238. A corn mill, with some of the improve-
ments made in America, by’ Mr. Ellicott and Mr,
Evans. The corn, being poured into the funnel A, is


conveyed, by the revolutions of a spiral BC, to ©, .


whence it is raised, by the chain of buckets CD, to be


cleaned by the revolving sieve E, and the fan F; it is


then deposited in the granary G, which supplies the


. funnel or mill bopper H ; this being perpetually agitated


by the iron axis of the upper mill stone, shakes it by


- degrees into the perforation of the stone; it escapes,


when ground, at I, and is conveyed, by means of the
carrier KL, and the elevator LM, to the cooler N,
where it is spread on a large surface: ‘it passes after-
terwards to the boiter O, and is received in the binn
P, from whence it is taken to be packed in sacks or
‘barrels! Q represents’ the surface of a mill stone,


cut into furrows, in order to make it act more readily
on the corn. ce


We Te "


ner as if the tube were absent, and the fluid made a
part of that which is contained in the reservoir CD,
P. 260

Fig: 140. The bucket A being suspended by the
rope B, and made to revolve rapidly. round its axis, the
surface of the water assumes a parabolic form. P.
261. - 7,

Fig. 241. A heavier fluid being’ contained in the
upper part of the bent tube AB, which i immersed
in the lighter fluid filling the vessel CD, the fluid’ in
the: tube remains in a state of tottering equilibrium,
when its surfaces are in the same level. P. 261.

Fig. 242. The fluid ABC presses on the bottom of
the vessel BC with the samie force as a Ue tes


; of the form BC DE. P. 261." a
Fig. 243. The portion ABCD of the fia being”


supposed to be congealed, and then to form a part of
the vessel; the pressure On the bottom ‘would remain
unaltered. P. 263.

Fig. 244. The weight A-may be supported by the
pressure of a small quantity of fluid, either by making
the surface of the vessel BC very large, and the height
of the tube DE moderate, or, while the vessel F re-
mains of a moderate size, by making the height of thé
tube GH very great. P. 263.

Fig. 245. ‘The pressure on any small part of tlie sidé
of the vessel AB, at C or D' may be represented by
the line C E, D F, and the whole pressure on the side
by the triangle BG, of which the centre of gravity is


at H; and if the side AI be supported by a single.


prop, it must be placed at the point K, the height of
which is equal to thatof H. P. 265.

Fig. 246. If the height of the surface A above'B be
to BC as the specific gravity of the fluid in BC to that
of the fluid in A B, the nd will support each other.
P. 265.

Fig. 247. Two squat Pad floating at the depths


a,


PLATE XIX.


He aon. The itfanen of the ficid’ in the ‘bent *
~tube AB remain on the samie level, in the same man-


ot eye met fe)


'


776° ap ies


shown at A and B, will have a certain degree of  sta~
bility, but if they sink,as at C, they will overset. Buta
beam of the breadth shown at D will alivays fldar
securely. P. 267.

Fig. 248. A jar containing images of fishes, with
bubbles of air in them, which sink when the cover *F
the jar is pressed with the hand. P.268.

Fig. 249. Dr, Hooke’s semicylindrical - “counter
poise, by means of which a vessel is = always ce
P. 268. 5

Fig. 250. The form into which tise flexible bottom’
of acistern would be bent by the pressure of the water:
the curve is the same as that into which an elastic rod
would be bent by forces acting at A and BB. P. 269. _

Fig. 251. The botle A, containing si and mercury,
has the tube “AB. fitted into it: and when
CD, in which itis enclosed, is exhausted by means
the air pump, the elasticity of the air in tase
forces the mereury up the tube. PLRT0. eS #


which the ball bli ‘ 7” the dis
minution of the weight of the air.* 'P. 2798> sia? i) .
+ Fig. 253. The fine 0 denoting the nataral déusity
of the air, the line 1A next above it shows the degree
in. which the air is expanded at the height of | a mile, f
and 1B the density of the air at the same height: im | .
the same tanner 10 C shows the expansion of-the air us
at the height of 10 miles, and 10 D its density; and
5B, below the line, the density which it would acquire
at the depth of 5 miles below the earth’s surface. The”
lines AC, DBF, are of the kind ane: logarithmic
curves. P, 272.
Fig. 254. The box ir banat ie
of the common barometer is contained: A is a float
for adjusting the height, by means ‘of the screw By: a
operating’ on the leather whidh forms weer ’
the cavity. P. 276. be -


“F


ns Z
Pre
ae a> be acai at
ie “td =


he PLATE XXI. Sc nipare ot


Fig. 268. A stress af oi Wing foie evagh Os
pipes A and B, the mercury in the bot yp anit
falls from C to D. P. 297. =

Fig. 269. 4 sibiabh wnblilly albvinst stat hip te
pipe B,carries with it all the waterC,which stands above
the level of its upper surface. P. 297. ‘

Fig. 270. The ball A is permanently supported by”
the jet B, because, when it falls into the position here’
uepresented, the centrifugal force of the water at A
‘carries it back to the middle of the jet. P. 298.

Fig. 271. A plate, bent into the form A BC, turn-
ing on the centre B, is impelled by a stream of air
D in the direction C D.  P. 298. ‘

* Fig. 972. ik eylndle mov tabi ote tt, with on
curved pipes inserted in its lower part, scen from
above. The stream A enters at the top of the cy-


linder, and is discharged by the orifices B, C, 80 as to


éurn the vessel in the direction BD. P. $01.

Fig. 273. A jet of a fluid, striking on an obstacle
of equal diameter, and separated by it so as ¢o con-
tinue its motion obliquely. P. 302.

» Fig. 274, The whole resistance directly opposed
to the surface A B being represented by BC, the por- ©


tion which, according to the principles of the reso- —


Jation of forces, ought to act on the wedge A BD, is re«
presented hy BE; and in the same manner the resist-
ance on A BF is to the whole as BG to BC. P. 303,

Fig. 275. The form of the dead water moving before


_ an obtuse body is nearly like that of ABC; and the


form adapted for moving through the water with the
least possible resistance like ABDC, P.304.

Fig. 276. The direction in which the particles of a
fluid are supposed to move when they strike against a
concave surface, _P. 305. :

Fig. 277. A hydrostatic balance. P. 309.


Fig. 278. Mr. Nicholson's hydrometer, to be em-


ployed with weights, for finding Rebar hee of
Auids or solids. P. 309,
Mid 279. A spirit level, P. 311.


778 ie


“at sousterpolse lash bs ap Abe, er


gravity is at A, raises the surface of the heavy fluid B- ay
the higher as it is more exhausted, s0 that the oil © ae
is always forced up nearly to the level of the wick atD. — sai


_The oil is poured in by a pipe, in the middle of the


cylindrical columa. The ir holes may be made t.
wherever it is most convenient. P.Sit, ©
Fig. 281. ‘A eaction of oh embhament;f apeipa


form to be opposed to the sea, with a drain passing


throogh it, and a valve at its opening. P. 312, |
Fig. 282. "The Aotya‘eepomenniiied babi i
ofa river or canal. P. 313. 4
Fig. 285. A Bibietasincehe
beam, fixed above and below, and
padistomehe cytes ari


throughout the sluice or floedgate. P. ii
Fig. 984. A bor, with a valve supported


Fig. 289. ‘Two mptssad of Ueiag Oe
when it is above the level of the reservoir;


Pub by T-Tohnson. London 2 July 2806.


CS ia Oe Se aaa
PLATE XXII. >) ee


Fiz. $04. A centrifugal pump. The machine is
first filled through the funnel A, and when it is made
to revolve, the water is discharged into a circular
trough, of which a section is seen at BandC. The
valve at ID rémains.shut while the =? is filling. - P,
3816.

Fig. 305. A pump colle, of two plungers, con-
tinued nearly to the height at which the water is de-
jivered. P. 332.

Fig. 306. Lahire’s double -forcing pump. “When
the piston is depressed, theater enters the barrel at
the valve A, and goes out at B; when it is elevated, it
enters at C and escapes at D. « P, 332.

Fig. 807, The common a SS with leather.

“P. 332,

Fig. 308. Mr. Bramah’s 6 prem: “The pump A xen
the water through the pipe B intopthésbarrel C, in
which it aéts very powerfully on the large. _ D,
and raises the bottom of the press E,  P. 332. i

Fig. 309. . The common sucking pump. P. ‘398.

Fig. 310. A bag pump, the bag of puff A being ex-
tended and Contracted ‘by tlie motion of the piston:
P. 333. ta

Fig. 311, A lifting pump, ret piston rod AB being
drawn up by a frame. P. 333. *

» Fig. $12. A sucking pump, cotiverted, by the addi-
tion of a collar of leathess at A, into-a forcing one
P, 333.

Fig. 313. A fire engine, on a construction sienilgts
some machines described by Ramelli: A B is the pis-
ton, working Within a cylindrical barrel, and moved.
by the handles’ C.D. When- the end C is depressed
the water-enters through the valves E and F, and is
discharged at G and H; when D is depressed, the wa-
ter enters.at I-and K, and is discharged at L and M,
into the air yesse! N, whence it is expelled by the pipe
0,.The pipes P and Q may be united, if it be re-
quired. “Pe S34.

‘Fig. 814. “From Ramelli, The wheel AB, revolving
in the direction B A, carries a portion of water C be-

tween itself and the sweep DE, which is intercepted


by the slider F, and forced up the pipe FG. P. 335, _


Fig. 315. From Ramelli. The roller A, revolving —
within the reservoir B C, which i is nearly cylindrical, ©


the internal surface J }


mieans of a projecting surface acting on
thay the water G is forced through t

Fig. 916. From the cabinet of Mr.
wheels A and B carry, during their l
tity-of water from C to D, or from to,
to the direction in which they are tur
Fig. 917. Mr. Gwynn's patent


~ into the pipe F; cor is drawn from to
roller revolves in Souraiiriaeal >


air, and water being ashetied
in B acts by thauripe D game mnest
_ itap the pipe E. P.337.:

Fig. 321. :


ao that « part


Fig.3n. Fig.3az.


eh


beeeeet homey


When, the sence bb tre was


na ore adn the skin was also
Gi was | jaeed. ~P?


939,963. ri
Mr. Cuthbertson’s air TEP. \

iston tod A. is.de; essed, it leaves $
Fire to make


are
the f
oe roe ee pee :


bh i low, ha en Pe to
oe a oil, as ped be aga may oe freely


in ve
398, The two flies, A and B being caused to
wig with equal velocities by pe descent of the
: weight as ey continue to move for an <<
of the airpump: P. 344
air in the bottle Aex ha the
water to rise


os is inexinusied and causes


‘in aje
gage; to be suspen deli Seeaner


by book | like mesa ater ate
Tig! 9201" ee


the receiver. A isw the degree ry con-
Ss B the rst of the syringe wi ih ava a ae
a best et! wi i conical, ati


‘xpritig: Bu meno, ae ate rm
a ther, eimest to strengthen it,


he {490% “A diving’ Vell Al i8 the forcing pump,

Ba stopcock for ‘tg oot the Heated air, Coa strong

i jing light, a float for the security of the
iver.


ret 331. Ate ati gail bellowsy | When the
is raised, the air entérs ab the valve Bs when
ressed, the valve B shuts; and-the air is fo
the ¥ CD, which conducts it to the reser
cbnfiried by the valve P, and forced b:
rae a the pipe G.. P. 3:


Spore the pressure is
aoe


cays ea thar of the ‘weights A and'B,
rt: of the


es C, D,'s0 ag to sustainia
ight’ of the inverted vessel, re
yy, the exterior dotted line. ‘The gas is adinitted at
ot F, and is delivered at C. OH is # gage for stow:


bd ness


VoL, 1."


PLATE XXIV.


ing he ‘height of the Water


within and without the
le vessel: Pe ees thé water.


The. iro 6
isa gaan

, which fises to

and-is discharged by the pipe


agile By the revolu-
teal ead oer els


agrees eas sera


“ing turned, the steatn cools-and i is co
te sco being red he eam


P. 344. SOL totally 2
si


wv F acts alternately with A. P. 347.


common steam = of Newcomen

steant’ Agee Sow initted irito the cy~

weight B is allowed to

descend: a jet

C, which condenses the steam, and i pressure of

the’ atmosphere then riage
—— is admitted) by

to. it waecently fi Ane ian 3H.

Mr. Watt's steam engine.

a ‘js Velow the piston, is vestape into |
ee condenser A by the cock ae ene


the rod C, C, and at the same ti the steam is admit-_
ted b: pe ZS into the upper part atthe: ae)
wll fed, the'cooks Brand’ Fact


pin por in Jetting out the steam fromabave
and ed by the rs ing it below the piston, ee is suppli-
ater of the cistern G, w

Seat och a resérvoir: it‘iS drawn Seg

wath: nid air that is extricated ftom it, the air pump

I, which throws it into the cistern, |

a L raises it to the cistern M; aud it enters the
iler through’ a valve, which’ opens! wherever the

figat- N descends below its:proper place. ‘The pipes

2 P serve also to ascertain the quantity of water
bdiler, The piston rod is confined to a miotion

pee rectilinear by the frame Q;- tlié fly wheel Fis

turned by the sun and planet wheel S, 1; and the strap

Uturns the. centrifugal regulator W, ‘which avers

the fey ‘of stedin bythe valve or opeoct X;


reed Mr. Symin; "s steam boat,
et dati dy the


he cylinder, C the Paes D the conden-
oH Babe, PA, the jal pop, breuk-


aay pei The air is forced by the .


‘syringe A into the cavity surrounding the barrel, whence
Fi rg te the valve Hy which istopelied ithe

immediately by Brotiocste the trigger Cy.or by a
spring, which is bent by cocking the gun, and set at
hberty by the trigger. P. 351,


3k,


See ee


782
PLATE XXV.


Fig. 340. A series of waves or pulses of sound,
diverging from one of the foci of an ellipsis, and re-
flected towards the other. P. $75. :
"Fig. $41. Waves diverging from a point near the
centre of acircle, and converging after reflection to
® point at an equal distance On the other side of ‘the
wentre. P.375. 0 | :

Fig. $42. A section of a speaking trumpet and of a
hearing trumpet: the lines representing the direction
‘of the sound before and after its reflections. P. 375.

Fig. 343. A swing impelled by the bow of a violin,
and lightly touched at the same time at a point one
third of its length from the end: the small pieces of
paper fly off fromthe middle of the vibrating portions,
while the piece situated at the remaining point of
division retains its situation, P. 383. :
| Fig. $44. A vibration compounded with another
‘smaller vibration, three times as frequent, in @ trans-
verse direction, the separate vibrations being such
that the points may be always opposite. to & point
moving uniformly in a circle. ° Thus the vibrations in
the lines AB and AC compose the complicated
figure DE. P. 384.
~~ Fig 345. A specimen of the manner in which the
vibrations of a string are usually performed when it is
struck with a bow. P. 384. ‘

Fig. 346. Specimens of the simplest manner in
which sand is collected into lines, on a plate of glass
or metal, which is made to sound by means of the bow
fa violin, P. 885.

Fig. 347. A round, plate, performing some of its
‘most complicated vibrations, the lines of division
being indicated by the place of the sand. From
Chladni, P. 385. ; :
” Fig. 348. A square plate divided into a diversity
of vibrating portions. From Chladni. P. 385, —_

Fig. 349. The small bones of the left ear, nearly
three times the natural size, supposed to be seen
through the membrane of the tympanum, by looking
directly into the auditory canal. A B is the membrane
of the tympanum, C the hammer, D the anvil, E its
attachment to the surrounding bone, F the stirrup, G
the round aperture in the bone leading to the cochlea.
P. 388.

Fig. 350. A view of the vestibule of the left ear,
with the semicircular canals and the cochlea, seen
with the eye a little mére depressed than by looking
straight through the canal, and exactly in the direc-


Aarti a Ma =


tion of the stirrup. ABC is the le, imme-
diately behind the oval aperture, which is covered by


éochlea, the upper spire terminating im the vestibule,


an oval fine. P. 38g) ae.

Fig. 351, The structure of the left ear, seen from
above, the upper part of the canal being supposed to
be removed. -4 is the auditory eanal, B'the membrane
of the tympanum, C the hammer, D the anvil, E the
stirrup; F the place of the canals, which are higher
than the parts represented, G the place of the éochilea, le
H the round aperture. P.388. 0),
f Fig. 352. A, B,C, ® representation ‘of the joint
effect of two equal vibrations variously comibided, the
middle line being always half way between the, two
Outer ones, and showing the cot pound vibration res
duced to, half its real extent: Di shows the modé of
finding the joint effect of vibrations, by cutting a sur-
face into sliders, which are retained in their places
by.ascrew. P. 390. iia arta he a

Fig. 353. The uppermost and lowermost curves re«
present a series of vibrations, of which 12 6 a
nid period of time: the hid ane sts Hee ooo
series of which 15 and 16 occupy respectively the
same time: the joint effect of ath paris shown by
the dotted curves which are interposed between them,
the middle one representing the effect denominated
a beat. P. 391. ‘ waned

Fig. 854. The proportional lengths of a chord or
pipe, constituting the different notes of the simple dir
tonic scale, with their mutual relations, shown by their
divisions into aliquot parts. P, 393. _ aa

Fig. 355. A good practical mode of temperament
making all the fifths and the third in the first division
perfect concords; the three remaining fifths equally _
imperfect, P9060 8) ay as

Fig. 456. The trumpet Marigni, with its bridge,
which is supported by the string AB nearly in contact
with: the sounding board; this string being ei
stretched by a pin at B, or by across string BC. ‘The
places, at which the string is to be touched, may be
marked by frets Sxed under them, ng they are bere
shown by points. AtD, the seale of this instrument
is exhibited, resembling that of the teumpet and the
French horn, P. 399. are:


3 20


Fig-357- Fig. 359.


Fig. 369. Fig. 370. Fig. 372.


Lub by J. Johnson London x July 2806.


788


PLATE XXVE


Fig. $57. The right. half of the human -larynx.


a ABC is the outline of the cricdid cartilage, DEFGH-


, of the thyreoid, and IK L of the arytaenoid cartilage;
ia M isthe epiglottis, NK the upper “ligament of the glot-
1 tis, OP the lower ligament, and Q the trachea. P. 400.

> Fig. 358. A view of the ligaments of the glottis,
] seen from above, the larynx being divided by a hori-

\ p zontal section a little above them! P. 400.-

, Fig. 359. Sections of the pipes employed by Kratz-_
Saeatain for producing the sounds of the different vou-
els; in general by*means of a larynx resembling the
Wa ‘ ~ mouth piece of a reed organ pipes, but in the case of
i - the vowel I by simple inflation through the tube B.
CS The | pipe for U produces the sound O, except when‘it
." - is very nearly shut up. PB. 401.) > sy. silpit

oo) aig $06, ‘The vox humana organ pipey with the

mouth” Piece common to reed pipes in general; the
f Tower part in contact with the tongue being ‘nearly se-

’ tnicylindrical : the” tongue’ being ‘adjusted to the pro-

“per pitch by means of a sliding wire, which | regulates

ae ine of the part that is at liberty to vibrate. P.


© Tig 361. The mouth piece proposed. by Kratzen-
stein, for imitating the human voice, the tongue A
Passing freely in and out of the tube, which is more
than half of a cylinder, as is seen at B. ‘Pp. 402.

ig. 362. ahr ee ne re pe. P.


Fig. 369. A ray or pencil of light A B, C Byfalling
on the surface DE, a portion of the light is reflected.
and another portion is transmitted, i in’ uh 1¢ direction’
BF, BG, so that BG i alto BC, and BH to BI,
CIK and GHL’ Volig ttiiperptdcalsc toDE at
any. such distances, that BK m ray | be to B Lia acer,
tain potporticns thechibon de the sines of the angles:
of incidence A BM, CBM, to those of the angles of re~
fraction FBN, GBN. BO and BP are, Saini
portions of the POM, 2095% anya rt ait
* Fig. 370; A’ mode of determining che pelo of a
‘refracted ray, which is particularly convenient in the ;
case of refractions at spherical surfaces. ABC being
any circle, either touching the refractive Surface at Ay.
or being itself. section of the, refracting substance, if
another circle DEF be ‘drawn’ on the’ same centre;

_ having its diameter to that of the first as the, sine of
‘the angle of incidence to that of refraction, anda third
circle G HI, which is less than the first in the same
_ Proportion ‘as the second is greater; and ifthe ¢ difection
of the incident ray K A be continued to D, and LD be
drawn from the centre, cutting GHT in G, A'G will be
the direction of the refracted ray: and if this ray
pass again out of the denser medium at B, its direc+
tion BM may be found by drawing LIF, and FBM:
will be thus truly determined. P: 411. 4
» Fig. 371. A ray or pencil A B, refracted ae BoC;
t erpendicitlar


wee ia og Pat pi Peon, Se he
; Fa rape aint eones a dol cons gn Bf oki
pice iid Er and TF . Spee lenses; but’ a menis-


yea


PLATE. XXVIII.


vt Eee ae ee ee


Sere oa


A actual focus el rhea the direct iC, nd tsi
Saar: 28 is aon their vive foci ou sane plane D EB. 410.


. ‘converging and of diverging rays, F responsive foci
yinwal | of cont ‘and D Fig. 387. The
imeninrencnaece tpg fe ee


ce. Pe d2t.
GE Scene page,


efi ofthe tee Pt 41.) Fe 2!
pet het ‘we


mirror; and in manner


word is formed in an inverted: Pats. shadows of the
BY ee SO Ce


into the principal focus at E, which is half way be- through


; and its centre, F is the princi Fig. 389.

Yap sow peamlacb asym. and} that of the fe spreteat
_ fracting surface I. a shied VE
i A bei cosiinp lialis candies les examined is attached;


Fig. 371 ‘
fi teioner of 99, deri eck wil befoond se Dy aad ‘ogee


ig 379. A Poem ers tw


eus ot the form AeBnree by F is sometimes called formed by the concave mirror


ong tigate

. $82. The
aa nyex lens éy in the same ee ae as they would
have been by the circumscribed double DE;


422.
and ip the same manper the egpente les lens F resembles. Fig, 393,


in its operation the
verge, by a dou!


centre of curvature. D a planoco!
which


and inal Ge Rmaecetoies <i foeus of the convex lens

meter. P. 417. : formed at an in i
Fig. 384. ‘The. lensés represented by the shaded Maca tog C, or

object subten


surfaces are equivaleat in their efiecls to those of
which ed sections are shown by the dotted lines; the


atC
Fig. $85. At A, a radiant rote sca ‘are
raising rt rte ike
rom the lens; at is more rem
nearer; and CB io DE a EF te Foy
being the principal foci of the lens, P. & id.
. Fig. 386, The Se game of rays A, B, and


lens. P, 437, ig
encils of light A, B are refracted by H says ag by
“ai is. sabes yirtual i


lens of crown glass, to the “Fig. 994. Ai
centre of curvature of one of its surfaces. Ba drahie og rel mg
concave ‘ey scaring the Be to orm toe . be ject. P. 422.

x lens,


be gemp owe he ofthe lee


epee
pew : Ji
Reo Fr Sen Son en We phe Mec ‘ome


sgh th than when the object in 4


se a ;


rt yt
oft candle

prisms G,H. P. 417. placed within the focal distance at sh a ~

Fig. zou A, pe corral of parallel rays, made to con- _C, the image remai


PLATE XXVI.


Pud.by J. Sohnson.Lenden 1 July 1806 Joseph Skelton sexlp


Fig. 897. An imperfect image of an external object,
peed in adark room, in an inverted position, by the
a coming in right lines through a small aperture.

. 425. ALS

Fig. 398. A portable camera obscura. A is a lens,
B a mirror paced obliquely, and throwing the image:
on a plate of ground glassCD. Lisa able cover,
Fru as serpeH attached) to it, for excluding foreign

~ tight. P. 425.

a’ Hig! 399. A camera obscura, which throws down an
image, by means of the mirror A, and the lens Byon
the surface C, where it may be seen through the apery
ture D. The surface C has here the curvature best
adapted to receive every where a perfect image of &
distant object. P, 425. 3
_. Fig..400,. An arrangement proposed for a solar mir

A \ ‘croscope, adapted to a window facing the south. The

. mirror A is moved by a hinge into the position required,

for the day, aud during the employment of the instru-

: ment is turned only, round the axis A B, which is par

es rallel to that of the earth. The mirror C is fixed: it

. fectives the beat of tight from A, and throws it on the
object through theJenses.D and E, of which the joint

focus is near the magnifying levs F; this lens paints

an image of the object in an inverted position on a

| aoreen at G. If the focus of the condensing lenses

~ ° were behind the object,.ay at H, the light. would. be
tab's, to be condepsed into a spot.on the scxeen at I.


01. An arrangement proposed for a phanitas-
magoria. .The light of the lamp A is thrown by the
mirror 8 and the lenses Cand D on the painted slider
‘at EB, and the magnifier F forms the image on the
screen at G. gh is dear ybnecheseg 207 7 pes
drawn out support or 1:
mare box is drew ark ny opto the iad
Etowers’the: it K, and by theans of the rod KL
adj the slider in such a mander, that the image is
always distingtly, paiuted on the sercen G.. When the
box adyances towards the screen, in, order that the
‘images may be diminished and appear to vanish, the
_ support of the lens F suffers the.screev M to fall and
i A part of the light... The red KN must be
I the point I must be twice the focal
etre the object, 1 being imme-
vof the lens. ‘Tlie screen M may
middle


ing, 80 as 10


me) nt Wnay Perey
“the:


in
manner.’ ' P! Bd


te
of the


Be


Fy


pencils of rays in the double
microscope. P. 428.
: pencils in the Galilean tele-


can


ah. PLATEcXXVII.


is raised or by the pullies at Hand I. K one
of two renee the Gaaelapietion of the ob-
server's assistants. The wheels, ynder the frame, serve


“Yo turn the whole instrument round its centre. P. 429.


Fig. 407. The Newtonian telescope, with the di-
rection of the central rays. These are not the rays by
Pee ati pom teng sesmampo
in i na lum, but they a
simplest Saanitbe Saat of the magnitude a the field
of view, ' P. 429. oe ?


- Pig. 408, ‘The supposed path of athe central rays


in the Gregorian telescope. P. 429. :
a Fig. 409. a supposed ae the Cty rays in
C in’s . Here ‘ays actually repre-
sunita cull perigee ie de pak


only be intercepted
gpinror,, but they wool also fall on the perforation of
at mirror. ‘They, ever, serve equally well
‘0 determing whe wrignitade of she Geld: "Pi 499.
ig. 410, e supposed ath of the cent rays in
Dr. Sinith’s microscope. ‘The rays running directly from
‘the object are intercepted by a sereen.  P. 429.
- Fig. 411. A; the dotted line represents the curve
called the caustic of a concave mirror, in which the
rays proceeding, in -the section represented by the fi-
ure,
dotted line a ee mirror. ona
supposed ata stance from 1]
mi igal mirrors C and ri the images of distant ob-
jects in all directions will be tuund between the dotted


curves, distance of those curves showing the do-
gree of confusion. The images of distant objects in
all directions formed by the small concave vex
mirrors E and F, are found between the dotted circle


and the straight line touching it. » P. 430. ~. »
ig. 449. the eflect ot bald glee acbegoed
ore ;.the inner lines showing what wor

‘the magnitude of the field without it. P.491. 0° | “©


Fig. 413. The manner in which Mr. Ramsden.em=


vol
ic


a
See ener marae
ne

into mafia parts, ach" formed by thetarger leps, in

She focue of the smaller, through which itis viewed.

‘Fig. 414. An achromatic telescope, with a triple
object glass, and with Boscoyich’s achromati

which is

is


7 -1de ee similer lens
eet wot taced gases eal or vas ols, ate


ba etianh thecilied Yo om wor) Wenn os wakeo ci

Fig. 415. The dotted lines AB and ‘C D represent
two images of the same object, formed by rays differ-
ently refrangible, passing through a simple object glass,
which are brought, by the effect of the lens or field glass
E, into such places and dimensions asto nearly
the same*angle from the eye glass\F. P. 432.

Fig. 416. A represents Mr. Ramsden's divided eye
glass micrometer, the two portions being moved at
once in contrary directions by turning i


ion
until the two extremities of pay mph rarron


sured appear to coincide. P. 493,
uh S26 Dr. Maskelyne’s micrometer, made by a
achromatic prism A, exhibiting two i B,


dou!

C, the different parts of which are made to coi yby

moving the prism wards and forwards inthe direc-

tion of the axis of the telescope. Mr. Ramsden thinks,
that any substance thus int ed must interfere

greatly with the perfection of the telescope. P. 453.


a distant point, would be collected.” B; the


Jens in the eye pieces of histele-


i
\
y


Fig. 418. If ABand AC represent the comparative
velocity of light and of the earth, Str semsae
directions, a telescope must be placed in the direction
BC, in order to see the star D;:and the star will’ap-
pearatE, P. 437.

Fig. 419. The spectrum produced by looking through
& prism at a narrow line of light. P. 438.

Fig. 420. The appearance of a portion of the blie
light at the bottom ws eadie, viewed. depreice


the two ends of a broad white surface, or a window,
when viewed through a prism. ‘The oblique stripes of
colour show the degrees by which the lights of different
kinds enter into the compound light. It follows from


Fig. 422. AB and CD represent the appearance of .


this analysis, that the colours, horizontally opposite . 1


onck: other, AD S08 C.D weet Snares area
make up white light. P. 439...

Fig. 423. The colours on the cicle exhib, when
wired eiftly round, a, whitah light resembling, B


, Pea.


Fig. 424... 426. “Tha! oli ‘of the inde pe
danny when moda tp-epreirecnesets, ee, See.eere
atB. P. 440.

Fig. 427. A triangular figure, exhibiting in theory
all possible shades of colours. The red, the green, and
the violet, are single at their respective angles, and are
gradually shaded off towards the opposite sides: a
little yellow and blue only are..added in their places,


in order to supply the want of brilliancy in the colours ‘


ae
Dan sete Webi


ta torday od?
Aaeit


PLATE XXIX.


Fig 19 - Fig. 420. Fig. 421. Figr. 422.


Pub.by J. Johnson London2 July 2806 Josep Shelton sexilp


be te ines MS ath


~


PLATE XXX


Pub. by J. Johnson, London 2 July 1806


787,


‘ TAL
b _ Fig, 436. hi anton ofa teatna ape. Naik
‘corned; B the aqueous humour, in which the uvea
~ hangs;,€, the crystalline lens; the ciliary. processes.
"being between. it and the uvea; D the vitreous hu-
r tous; EPG is the choroid cont, ined by the retina;
HLK the sclerotica, and L,the optic nerve. P. 447.
_Fig,487,, A. picture, painted on the retina ia an.
epeies. sone by ciewctinn Sie AeA
: MARC shee ont F


if Eee graeme a, strong. light, a
w resembling B,, which is red within gad green
uty ands hich appears Serviahan aes


Scala te form penne e J
however usually a little-dilated, as at


series of stripes of all colours, of their
ths, placed side by side in the man-
| they would be separated by refraction,
together so as to form the fringes of
— P. 465.


| PLATE XXX.


rere


» 2a


Bieri A seis of corona, sen round the sun
moon, _P 466,

Fig. 445. ‘The intemal hyperbolic finges of a rect
angular shadow. P. 467.


Fig. 446. The external ftinges seen on each side :


of the.shadow, ofa hair or wire, hints dagen
by, its, internal, fringes, The dotted Lin ee show the
natural magnitude of the shadow, independently of.
diffraction, P. 468, dott tuts te

Fig. 447. ‘Aanlysie al nn cops of oie pases ooo
by reflection, beginning from black. A line drawn
across the curved fringes would show the portions i into
which the light of any part iy divided when viewed
through a prism. P. 469.

Fig. 448. The” coloured stripes of a flea of soapy
water, covering awine glass. P. 469.

. Fig, 449,; The colours of a thin plate of air or water,
contained between a convex and a plane glass, as seen
by reflection. P. 469,

Fig. 450. The colours of a mixed plate; as seen by
partially greasing a lens a little convex, and a flat glass,
and holding them together between the eye and the
edge of a dark object. One half of the series begins
from white, the other from black, and each colouris the
contrast to that of the opposite half of the ring. P. 470.

Fig. 451. The composition of the colours of the
primary rainbow, when attended by sg gage
bows. P. 471. :

Fig. 452. The colours of concave mirrors. The
small circles in the middle white ring represent the
aperture by which the light is admitted, and its image ;
the coloured rings are formed by the light irregularly
Pee P. 471.


a Fah:
fi ‘ 8 Fe 0.2 5 Seam tae et ate ak
? PLATE XXXII. t :
: “it 24 boy, ; EER heb gt oalt ci & ae cen i bi -


: F wager medt-yaitlod hire .oud aifo to wedge denponp? ie
“eateed eprom ea gid > senile: Jeanie cubo lo ennil Mey ot peste “i hee:


% noe Opes yh hog eae ahi pe 16088 ete ere siege 0 over dyponds fe
at a! eee “PrAp VI. e
em
OY -epyAd ete de ebogains sar), wea wt oe
comonueiéuus yO hobadia nedw ywodniat qreayety :
lta math
T Se ee a eT
B12 Sores, weit setter, OTe ef? ai enterio eon *
‘ 3 ?
er Sanh te ot death 8s doit ye nore
padigord sagh lt yt boa ein gyaty bdiintos ads oe Ot vs 6 od
> reamed ag wh
is
; .
|
. sap hides


Sascph Skelton
Pub.ty I.Johnson Londons July 2806. a:


=
*


DH EMCO MO PHO


Fig. 471. A representing the sun, B the earth, and
c the planet Mars; supposing Mars and the earth to
* get out together from D and E, the angle DAC was
determined by Kepler from calculation, and the angles
BAD and ABC by observation ; whence it was easy
to construct the triangle ABC, and to find the pro-
portion of ABto AC. P. 505.

Fig. 472. The solar system, representing the form
and proportions of the orbits of all the primary planets,
and of three of the comets. ‘The parts of the orbits
epresented by entire lines are on the north of the


ecliptic, the dotted parts on the south: the letters A


and P denote'the aphelion and perihelion. The point
in the centre, which ought to be only yy of an inch in
diameter, represents the sun. The figures of the re>
spective planets show their comparative magnitude,
that of the sun being represented by the innermost of
the graduated circles which inclose the whole: they


os


foie st4htet 2
Ne a test ai


: _ 789


PLATE’XXXI0


are placed according to their actual situations on the
14th June, 1806. The letters MD show the mean
distance of the comet of 1759, being placed at the ex-
tremity of the lesser axis of the ellipsis in which it
must be supposed to revolve. P. 514. ;
' Fig. 473, The periodical times of the different pla-
nets, represented by lines of different lengths. P.
514. ¥

Fig. 474. The comparative velocities of the dif+
ferent planets, represented by lines which show the
number of English miles described in a second, on the
scale marked on the lowestline. P.514, 0 0 ©

-Fig. 475. The places of the ascending nodes of all
the planets, marked on one half of the ecliptic, sup-
posed to be extended in a straight line; together with
‘the inclinations of their orbits. The line marked
F.F. ey ere tere P.
514,


Be


ig oes |
} y


790


PLATE XXXIII.
Fig. 476. Ax The, appearance of Venus, from 22 Eudoxus 5 Mons Carpathes
Dr, Herschel: B,C, from, Mr, Schroeter. P 514. 23 Aristoteles Mons Serrorum
Fig. 477. A. ..D, the appearance of Mars, from 24 Manilius Insula Berbicus
Dr. Herschel. The ‘figures. are inverted, as they 25 Menelaus Byzantium
appear in the astronomical telescope. P. 514. » 96 Hermes * Mons Bodinus
Fig. 478; A;B.. The appearance of Jupiter, with 97 Dionysius . ‘
his belts, from-Dr. Herschel, P. 514. (d) Albategnius
Fig. 479. The appearance of Saturn, with he age 29 Plinius ‘ Promontorium Acherusia
from Dr. Herschel. P. 514... 90 8, Theophilus Mons Moschi
Fig. 480. The appearance of silesialep in anin- $1 Fracastorius» ~ Lacus Thospitis
verted position. The figure is. copied from Mr. 32 Censorinus ’ . Promontorium acutum
Nicholson's plate, the references from (Cassini and 33 “Messala. 1 ia. Wee tee
Lalande. Eq. perce darpeiehiesa. P. 84.0440 -_ Promontoriam Somnii
514, air i Viel 35 Proclus . Mons Corax —
wane of thee, ndsdillags to $6 Cleomedes -. Montes Riphaei
ont and: Hevelius. |) * 81 Snellius Mons Paropamisus
+ Goede “Palas Mareotiss 9: > 38 Petavius. Petra Sogdiana
2 Galileus Mons Andus as 39 Langrenus® Tnsula major) -
8 Aristarchus . ‘Mons Porphyrites 40 Taruntius Sinus Phiisianus
4 Keplerus * | Loca paludosa ; A Mare iumorum id
5, Gassendus Mons Cataractes B Mare Nubium re
6 Schikardus” ~ Mons Troicus._ C Mare Imbrium v.
7 Harpalus Insula sinus hyperborei D Mare Nectaris
8 Heraclides Caput mulieris E Mare Tranquilitatis
(0) Vulcanus F Mare Sérenitatis
9 Lansbergius , _ Insula Malta G Mare Foecunditatis. 3
10 Reinoldus Mons Neptunus Ii Mare Cristiani | * ‘
11 Copernicus Mons Aetna Fig. 481. . 488. The: sjasolia’ aioe
12 Helicon * Insula erroris and the Georgian planet, at their proper distances, i £
13 Capuanus® Regio Cassiotis. reogorton bs. Oie Caters oft ghee Serna ,
14 Bullialdus —_ _Tnsula Creta the same scale. P.514.
15 Eratosthenes . Tnsula Valeania “Fig 484, The Ggure of ibe eail pte comet of 1680,
16 Timocharis . Insula Corsica represented in the plane of its ‘orbit, from Newton. —
17 Plato Locus niger major AB is the earth’s orbit, C and D are the first and last
18 Archimedes appearances of the tail, and EF is the line of the
(a) Aratus nodes; P. 514. 2
19 Insula sinus medii © Fig. 485. A,B, Two successive appearances of the
20 Pitatus Mare mortaum | comet of 1723, from Lord Paisley. P. 514.
21 Tycho Mons Sinai wun


Pub by J. Tohnson London 1 July 1806.


* AB, are bent by the


791


to revolve on the axis AC, the fluid coluron
must be longer than ED, in order to Support iis.
Oe er. Ion the place oP tp at,

487. Are t jace

whaeee the earth, an C that of the moon,
to AC as the square of AC is to the square o
AD will iupresent the sun’s attraction ‘acting on
earth, and CD the distu vin: dyed which,
with AD, makes up AC,

moon ; and it is hoes
~ any oblique: situation, as E
to some point. D, bewween Band A, while the moon
moves from G to H ree fore CD will tend to lessen
the epee while the perending Sree E
towards C, and or cabbe'tis Gough comaee ck to-
wards G, and, when it is Ke ent agen
F, the inclination will be increased, and
miade to recede towards 11, until the oe arrives at.
H, and the force becomes directed to ‘on the


Fig. 486. The gravitating: bod ABC, being ‘sup-
~ Bp


D
AB,


v


the
acting “on ‘the
fiee cba


towards
i¢ node F detached


fa Ls B; ieee Ha he cer while the —


mee P


488. ‘Avbod tre A,
ee be trot B in the clip
incination ofits orbit to the reva

perpetu changed, until at
pendicular to a but when the


the ori earvee ya


it becomes per-
e increases more


to’
AD moves forwards to


she
light aod darken Mi onthe ee of ae md


equinox, Bat the win-
ter solstice: EQ bre ‘he onan, N the north
pole, and § the south. Sei

ra het NESW being the horizon, and Z the
zenith, EA W shows the sun’s ‘in'Lou-


BOD) Martie -
radius AB, AC,


don at the time ribewnne be ).
and “at mi Ser
as circles were jeve :


feet he b worm et dans, mee oe
is the boun ‘su it
eft [3 fect wt}

the tw et
and K.P. 527. td 4 :

Fig. 491. The Poe of light, conta in the dittetion
as to urrive at C,
and to illominate a spare of the ne re there,
which is visible, by means of a second refraction, to a
spectator at D, and occasions the first And Inst twi-

ght. P. aot


nitude is shown by tt
"535.


PLATE XXXIV. —_


492, Venus is at ek elongation
soe distance : the er 2 Seesee as ae
wil reopsce © to the earth at C; a stationary
at D, when. with the same veloc io
earth, with ‘Of the ¢


earth,
Se pl


one of them ph the menn an apparent magna, aD


Fig. 501.


oped aap heys
seen from the different fe Mauer


lanets; for Mercury,
ef of the earth io Sy aot, E.


on, to 40 hours andj, whence the .
is shown by the lines divega’ @y Chaceap aautiee yea meee rie abou after six; but in. latitud i
back observation by the two stars, Ais adark glass 85¢the sun never se ts on thatday. P. 507, 0 fa
ld pees ler grr eR F ror pertn § ren : neo
PLATES XXXVI, XXXVII " vey ‘ae Oe
: ” Plate XXXVI. Figs 517. Projection of the com. Plate XXXVII._ Fig. 518. Projection of the south 7
s stellations of the northern hemisphere on the plane of ern hemisphere. P. 498, 567.
the equator, P, 498, 567. git :
i


AX


Pub. by J. Johnson, London. 1 July 806.


--:
ie


2 ght TES Ale ait!


PLATE XXMVI-Fig. 517.


alse tts place at Ax in
the croning the following


Did by J. Tohnsom London 1Jaly 1806. i lt


>»
“ Te be Peed facing PUXXSVU


iS a


PLATE XXXIX.


a


te g ° - ae)
Fig. $30. The rep olive’ enemas if 6 n ; ; f
eRe situated at the distance nial : f flat e fou '
sented by the sree ot
drawn vf wap curve topes te force to be
inversely ‘as the Ladin we ve of the force
Pf Saat phe more pemeady represeated by. agent a


cohesive fue, heh overcomes the ‘apalaidn & S “4
distance AG, and is balanced by it when a
arrive at the distance A B or AH, een

ture of | le in the ieee


vation of temperature.
y tye


Be sr A booger eA pobadigeaty ar Nd
as a ae et of water from wi 8 on which it star i ;
il


a parts, P.620.
532. A. The transverse section of adrop, sup-
re to cite Ofte titi Jeng ngth, and fob ute ores ; Hi
curvature o outline bein; every where
tional to its distance from: the the’ horizontal Te AB Pi toring i we
B, a round drop, the concavity at the horizontal line junction, causes
being equal to the couvexity which would be found
by pg ed the sop bactsontalis eee sum or a,
curvatures every W “sephoaep
to the distance from this ine. P. 621 pe f
Fig. 533. The solid AB possessin, half the attrac-
.tive power a the liquid CD. the surface of ‘the liquid  €xperiments, tbe
will remain horizontal: for the attractions will be re a of the line DEC.


$ presented by DA, DE, and DC; and of these DA ig. 547. Dr. Herschel’s: te gure ee 48
ie tnd DE m ¢ DB, and DB and DC make DF, which re ‘teat a and =~ ecay aceordi division oe
hs, _is ina vertical direction. | If the solid be more attract- ‘ ol-
= ive, the forces will be cheohions baeaaty as atG, and ison. “030 639. ‘

‘ af less attractive, as at H. P. ,
Fig. 534. The form of the Aa ofa ‘liquid ine
contact with a plane and vertical side of asglid which is
wetted by it. The height of the ascent of water is about
iS one fourth of that which is here represented. P. 622. Fig. 550.- A dierential thpatanideas on Mr. Leslie
ge) Fig. 535. The form of the surface of a liquid elevat- construction.
ie ed between two plates which meet at A, andare ata ata 551.The diatbution ofthe electric fluid in


B : Jittle distance from each other at B; about one third 5 cae at different eres
of an inch, supposing the liquid to be water. P. 623. conical pen he density is represented ta io.
Fig. 536. ‘The height at which water will stand in tance of the dotted line from the surface. P. 663.
tubes of the form oe ad eee which are here re-
presented. P. 6:


BNL THES
MMUENE eS)


Fig.561. |


Jos: Shelton scup .


ars


PLATE XL.


Published by J. Johnson Lenflon.» July ob


ee.


+ 3


6
pare: ‘XLI. x : waehe tal :
Fig. 569. Tha focmaf the: cécvep Siselimow the cn of gig bo pro pa
direction of the magnetic needle, in consequence of _ P. 689. r
the attraction and repulsion of two poles, situated at Fig 573. A dipping needle, 4 bats
Aand B, They are found by drawing the lines ACD, brought into such a situation, ‘drawn on


BED, so that the sui or difference of the parts AC»


- BE, shall be always equal, ACEB being a semi-
~ | circle: and the direction D F may be found by making
" AF w BF asthe cube of AD to that of BD. P.


688. ; :
. Fig. 570. The arrangement of iron’ filings in the
neighbourhood of a maguet.’ P. 683.

Fig. 571. The particle of iron AB, lying ona card


- nearly over the magnet C, assumes, when the card is


shaken, first the position D,”then, falling to E and F,
is left .® little further from the magnet than at first.
P. 689.

’ Fig. 572. An azimuth compass. The box is turned
round, ‘until the shadow of the thread A Bor AC falls
on the line CD: the position of the needle is then
ascertained by that of the card E, which is fixed on it.
‘The compass is kept always in a horizontal position,
by means of a double suspension on the gimbals EG.


Instead of this'suspension, Mr. M‘Culloch makes the
bottom of the box in the form of a hollow cone, rest-
hide 7 a loaded with aweee eee gee


PLATES XLU, XL.


Fig. 582, Achart ofthe world, on Mercato’ pro- year 1794;and


of the compass, principally uss Churchman, fr the


acedle. ao pain ao ol ane ae
persia vnensep—rg yo
needle within the stand, P.689.


Tig. 574. 576. The situations of
proms tera ct =


ee


WW
RS Gs
ISS ‘Soi:


\


A
BL \ \
¢ \


~ de.


With the Dip and Variation of the Compal; ~--
principally from Churchman ; for the west S


and with the Trade Winds and Monsoons.


Constant Winds. / Summer and Autumn.


a


From


on Mercators Projection!


Sizele


jAmtazeric.


/ Winter and Spring.


-
Pub. by S-Sohnron Londen 1 July 18.06.
