The Holy Science
Swami Sri Yukteswar Giri (1894)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): The text of Swami Sri Yukteswar Giri's The Holy Science (1894), transcribed from a later Self-Realization Fellowship reprint with all post-1894 front matter and advertisements removed. The 1894 work is public domain.

========================================================================

INTRODUCTION


This Kawalya Darsanam (exposition of Final
Truth) has been written by Priva Nath Swami,
son of Kshetranath and Kadambini of the Karar
family.

At the request in Allahabad of the Great
Preceptor (Mahavatar Babaji) near the end of
the 194th year of the present Dwapara Yuga,
this exposition has been published for the ben-
efit of the world.


The purpose of this book is to show as clearly
as possible that there is an essential unity in all
religions; that there is no difference in the truths
inculcated by the various faiths; that there is but
one method by which the world, both external
and internal, has evolved; and that there is but
one Goal admitted by all scriptures. But this basic
truth is one not easily comprehended. The dis-


n 1894, when this book was written, Babaji gave the author the
title of “Swami.” He was later formally initiated into the Swami
Order by the Mahanta (monastery head) of Buddha Gaya, Bihar,
and took the monastic name of Sri Yukteswar. He belonged to the
Giri (“mountain”) branch of the Swami Order. (Publisher’s Note)


UI


ven


cord existing between the different religions, and
the ignorance of men, make it almost impossible
to lift the veil and have a look at this grand verity.
The creeds foster a spirit of hostility and dissen-
sion; ignorance widens the gulf that separates one
creed from another. Only a few specially gifted
persons can rise superior to the influence of their
professed creeds and find absolute unanimity in
the truths propagated by all great faiths.


The object of this book is to point out the
harmony underlying the various religions, and to
help in binding them together. This task is indeed
a herculean one, but at Allahabad I was entrusted
with the mission by a holy command. Allahabad,
the sacred Prayaga Tirtha, the place of confluence
of the Ganges, Jamuna, and Saraswati rivers, is a
site for the congregation of worldly men and of
spiritual devotees at the time of Kumbha Mela.
Wordly men cannot transcend the mundane lim-
it in which they have confined themselves; nor
can spiritual devotees, having once renounced the
world, deign to come down and mix themselves in
its turmoil. Yet men who are wholly engrossed in
earthly concerns stand in definite need of help
and guidance from those holy beings who bring
light to the race. So a place there must be where
union between the two sets is possible. Tirtha af-
fords such a meeting place. Situated as it is on the
beach of the world, storms and buffets touch it
not; the sadhus (ascetics) with a message for the
benefit of humanity find a Kumbha Mela to be an


Vite


ideal place to impart instruction to those who can
heed it.


A message of such a nature was I chosen to
propagate when I paid a visit to the Kumbha Mela
being held at Allahabad in January 1894. As I was
walking along the bank of the Ganges, I was
summoned by a man and was afterwards honored
by an interview with a great holy person, Babaji,
the gurudeva of my own guru, Lahiri Mahasaya, of
Banaras. This holy personage at the Kumbha Mela
was thus my own paramgurujt maharaj,* though
this was our first meeting.


During my conversation with Babaji, we
spoke of the particular class of men who now
frequent these places of pilgrimage. I humbly
suggested that there were men greater by far in
intelligence than most of those then present, men
living in distant parts of the world— Europe and
America—professing different creeds, and igno-
rant of the real significance of the Kumbha Mela.
They were men fit to hold communion with the
spiritual devotees, so far as intelligence is con-
cerned; yet such intellectual men in foreign lands
were, alas, wedded in many cases to rank mate-
rialism. Some of them, though famous for their
investigations in the realms of science and philos-
ophy, do not recognize the essential unity in reli-


Paramguru, literally, “guru beyond,” hence the guru of one’s guru.
The suffix ji denotes respect. Maharaj, “great king,” is a title often
added to the names of exceptional spiritual personages. (Publisher's
Note)


SRI SRI PARAMAHANSA YOGANANDA


gion. The professed creeds serve as nearly insur-
mountable barriers that threaten to separate man-
kind forever.


My paramgurujt maharaj Babaji smiled and,
honoring me with the title of Swami, imposed on
me the task of this book. I was chosen, I do not
know the reason why, to remove the barriers
and to help in establishing the basic truth in all
religions.


The book is divided into four sections, accord-
ing to the four stages in the development of
knowledge. The highest aim of religion is Atma-
jnanam, Self-knowledge. But to attain this, knowl-
edge of the external world is necessary. Therefore
the first section of the book deals with a+ (veda)
the gospel, and seeks to establish fundamental
truths of creation and to describe the evolution
and involution of the world.


All creatures, from the highest to the lowest
in the link of creation, are found eager to realize
three things: Existence, Consciousness, and Bliss.
These purposes or goals are the subject for dis-
cussion in the second section of the book. The
third section deals with the method of realizing
the three purposes of life. The fourth section
discusses the revelations which come to those who
have traveled far to realize the three ideals of life
and who are very near their destination.


The method I have adopted in the book is
first to enunciate a proposition in Sanskrit terms


of the Oriental sages, and then to explain it by
reference to the holy scriptures of the West. In
this way I have tried my best to show that there is
no real discrepancy, much less any real conflict,
between the teachings of the East and the West.
Written as the book is, under the inspiration of
my paramgurudeva, and in a Dwapara Age of
rapid development in all departments of knowl-
edge, I hope that the significance of the book will
not be missed by those for whom it is meant.


A short discussion with mathematical calcula-
tion of the yugas or ages will explain the fact that
the present age for the world is Dwapara Yuga,
and that 194 years of the Yuga have now (A.D.
1894) passed away, bringing a rapid development
in man’s knowledge.


We learn from Oriental astronomy that
moons revolve around their planets, and planets
turning on their axes revolve with their moons
round the sun; and the sun, with its planets and
their moons, takes some star for its dual and re-
volves round it in about 24,000 years of our
earth—a celestial phenomenon which causes the
backward movement of the equinoctial points
around the zodiac. The sun also has another mo-
tion by which it revolves round a grand center
called Vishnunabhi, which is the seat of the creative
power, Brahma, the universal magnetism. Brahma
regulates dharma, the mental virtue of the internal
world.


Xz


When the sun in its revolution round its dual
comes to the place nearest to this grand center,
the seat of Brahma (an event which takes place
when the Autumnal Equinox comes to the first
point of Aries), dharma, the mental virtue, be-
comes so much developed that man can easily
comprehend all, even the mysteries of Spirit.


The Autumnal Equinox will be falling, at the
beginning of the twentieth century, among the
fixed stars of the Virgo constellation, and in the
early part of the Ascending Dwapara Yuga.*


After 12,000 years, when the sun goes to the
place in its orbit which is farthest from Brahma,
the grand center (an event which takes place
when the Autumnal Equinox is on the first point
of Libra), dharma, the mental virtue, comes to
such a reduced state that man cannot grasp any-
thing beyond the gross material creation. Again,
in the same manner, when the sun in its course of
revolution begins to advance toward the place
nearest to the grand center, dharma, the mental
virtue, begins to develop; this growth is gradually
completed in another 12,000 years.


Each of these periods of 12,000 years brings
a complete change, both externally in the material
world, and internally in the intellectual or electric
world, and is called one of the Daiva Yugas or
Electric Couple. Thus, in a period of 24,000
years, the sun completes the revolution around its


See diagram on page xii.


DIAGRAM


NEAREST POINT


A TNIoa tsaHiavs


Virgo is the sign opposite Pisces. The Autumnal Equinox is
now falling in Virgo; the opposite point, the Vernal Equinox, is
perforce now falling in Pisces. Western metaphysicians, who con-
sider the Vernal Equinox to have chief significance, therefore say
the world is now in the “Piscean Age.”

The Equinoxes have a retrograde movement in the constella-
tions; hence, when the Equinoxes leave Pisces-Virgo, they will enter
Aquarius-Leo. According to Swami Sri Yukteswaryi’s theory, the
world entered the Pisces-Virgo Age in a.D. 499, and will enter the
Aquarius-Leo Age two thousand years later, in a.n. 2499. (Pub-
lisher’s Note)


X2 22


dual and finishes one electric cycle consisting of
12,000 years in an ascending arc and 12,000 years
in a descending arc.


Development of dharma, the mental virtue, is
but gradual and is divided into four different
stages in a period of 12,000 years. The time of
1200 years during which the sun passes through a
1/20th portion of its orbit (see Diagram) is called
Kah Yuga. Dharma, the mental virtue, is then in its
first stage and is only a quarter developed; the
human intellect cannot comprehend anything
beyond the gross material of this ever-changing
creation, the external world.


The period of 2400 years during which the
sun passes through the 2/20th portion of its orbit
is called Dwapara Yuga. Dharma, the mental vir-
tue, is then in the second stage of development
and is but half complete; the human intellect can
then comprehend the fine matters or electricities
and their attributes which are the creating princi-
ples of the external world.


The period of 3600 years during which the
sun passes through the 3/20th part of its orbit is
called Treta Yuga. Dharma, the mental virtue, is
then in the third stage; the human intellect be-
comes able to comprehend the divine magnetism,
the source of all electrical forces on which the
creation depends for its existence.


The period of 4800 years during which the
sun passes through the remaining 4/20th portion


xiv


of its orbit is called Satya Yuga. Dharma, the men-
tal virtue, is then in its fourth stage and completes
its full development; the human intellect can
comprehend all, even God the Spirit beyond this
visible world.


Manu, a great rishi (illumined sage) of Satya
Yuga, describes these Yugas more clearly in the
following passage from his Samhita:


wane: weorfor a ea Bry |

arr mag wee meai aerferer: i

gag casey aai aw fag |

qanmi adet agerfor waa a u

waq wfedenaaada wary

gag aage gaat amped u

Hasit amare, wet hien |

aama ga aad afseq su

[Four thousands of years, they say, is the
Krita Yuga (Satya Yuga or the “Golden Age” of
the world). Its morning twilight has just as many
hundreds, and its period of evening dusk is of the
same length (1.e., 400+4000+400=4800). In the
other three ages, with their morning and evening
twilights, the thousands and the hundreds
decrease by one (i.e., 300+3000+300=3600;
etc.). That fourfold cycle comprising 12,000
years is called an Age of the Gods. The sum of a
thousand divine ages constitutes one day of
Brahma; and of the same length is its night.]


The period of Satya Yuga is 4000 years in
duration; 400 years before and after Satya Yuga


XU


proper are its sandhis or periods of mutation with
the preceding and the succeeding Yugas respec-
tively; hence 4800 years in all is the proper age of
Satya Yuga. In the calculation of the period of
other Yugas and Yugasandhis, it is laid down that
the numeral one should be deducted from the
numbers of both thousands and hundreds which
indicate the periods of the previous Yugas and
sandhis. From this rule it appears that 3000 years
is the length of ‘Treta Yuga, and 300 years before
and after are its sandhis, the periods of mutation,
which make a total of 3600 years.


So 2000 years is the age of Dwapara Yuga,
with 200 years before and after as its sandhis; a
total of 2400 years. Lastly, 1000 years is the length
of Kah Yuga, with 100 years before and after as
its sandhis; ‘a total of 1200 years. Thus 12,000
years, the sum total of all periods of these four
Yugas, is the length of one of the Daiva Yugas or
Electric Couple, two of which, that is, 24,000
years, make the electric cycle complete.


From 11,501 s.c., when the Autumnal Equi-
nox was on the first point of Aries, the sun began
to move away from the point of its orbit nearest to
the grand center toward the point farthest from
it, and accordingly the intellectual power of man
began to diminish. During the 4800 years which
the sun took to pass through one of the Satya
Couples or 4/20th part of its orbit, the intellect of
man lost altogether the power of grasping spiri-
tual knowledge. During the 3600 years following,


XUI


which the sun took to pass through the Descend-
ing Treta Yuga, the intellect gradually lost all
power of grasping the knowledge of divine mag-
netism. During the 2400 years next following,
while the sun passed through the Descending
Dwapara Yuga, the human intellect lost its power
of grasping the knowledge of electricities and
their attributes. In 1200 more years the sun
passed through the Descending Kali Yuga and
reached the point in its orbit which is farthest
from the grand center; the Autumnal Equinox
was on the first point of Libra. The intellectual
power of man was so much diminished that it
could no longer comprehend anything beyond
the gross material of creation. The period around
A.D. 500 was thus the darkest part of Kali Yuga
and of the whole cycle of 24,000 years. History
indeed bears out the accuracy of these ancient
calculations of the Indian rishis, and records the
widespread ignorance and suffering in all nations
at that period.


From a.D. 499 onward, the sun began to ad-
vance toward the grand center, and the intellect of
man started gradually to develop. During the
1100 years of the Ascending Kali Yuga, which
brings us to a.D. 1599, the human intellect was so
dense that it could not comprehend the elec-
tricities, Sukshmabhuta, the fine matters of cre-
ation. In the political world also, generally speak-
ing, there was no peace in any kingdom.


Subsequent to this period, when the 100-year


XVl


transitional sandhi of Kali Yuga set in, to effect a
union with the following Dwapara Yuga, men
began to notice the existence of fine matters, pan-
chatanmatra or the attributes of electricities; and
political peace began to be established.


About a.p. 1600, William Gilbert discovered
magnetic forces and observed the presence of
electricity in all material substances. In 1609 Kep-
ler discovered important laws of astronomy, and
Galileo produced a telescope. In 1621 Drebbel of
Holland invented the microscope. About 1670
Newton discovered the law of gravitation. In 1700
Thomas Savery made use of a steam engine in
raising water. Twenty years later Stephen Gray
discovered the action of electricity on the human


body.


In the political world, people began to have
respect for themselves, and civilization advanced
in many ways. England united with Scotland and
became a powerful kingdom. Napoleon Bona-
parte introduced his new legal code into southern
Europe. America won its independence, and
many parts of Europe were peaceful.


With the advance of science, the world began
to be covered with railways and telegraphic wires.
By the help of steam engines, electric machines,
and many other instruments, fine matters were
brought into practical use, although their nature
was not clearly understood. In 1899, on comple-
tion of the period of 200 years of Dwapara San-


XUL


dhi, the time of mutation, the true Dwapara Yuga
of 2000 years will commence and will give to
mankind in general a thorough understanding of
the electricities and their attributes.


Such is the great influence of Time which
governs the universe. No man can overcome this
influence except him who, blessed with pure love,
the heavenly gift of nature, becomes divine; being
baptized in the sacred stream Pranava (the holy
Aum vibration), he comprehends the Kingdom of
God.


The position of the world in the Dwapara
Sandhi era at present (a.D. 1894) is not correctly
shown in the Hindu almanacs. The astronomers
and astrologers who calculate the almanacs have
been guided by wrong annotations of certain
Sanskrit scholars (such as Kulluka Bhatta) of the
dark age of Kali Yuga, and now maintain that the
length of Kal Yuga is 432,000 years, of which
4994 have (in a.p. 1894) passed away, leaving
427,006 years still remaining. A dark prospect!
and fortunately one not true.


The mistake crept into almanacs for the first
time about 700 s.c. during the reign of Raja
Parikshit, just after the completion of the last
Descending Dwapara Yuga. At that time Maha-
raja Yudhisthira, noticing the appearance of the
dark Kali Yuga, made over his throne to his
grandson, the said Raja Parikshit. Maharaja
Yudhisthira, together with all the wise men of his
court, retired to the Himalaya Mountains, the


XIX


paradise of the world. Thus there was none in the
court of Raja Parikshit who could understand the
principle of correctly calculating the ages of the
several Yugas.


Hence, after the completion of the 2400
years of the then current Dwapara Yuga, no one
dared to make the introduction of the dark Kali
Yuga more manifest by beginning to calculate
from its first year and to put an end to the
number of Dwapara years.


According to this wrong method of calcula-
tion, therefore, the first year of Kali Yuga was
numbered 2401 along with the age of Dwapara
Yuga. In a.p. 499, when 1200 years, the length of
the true Kali Yuga, was complete, and the sun had
reached the point of its orbit farthest from the
grand center (when the Autumnal Equinox was
on the first point of Libra in the heavens), the age
of Kali in its darkest period was then numbered
by 3600 years instead of by 1200.


With the commencement of the Ascending
Kali Yuga, after a.p. 499, the sun began to ad-
vance in its orbit nearer to the grand center, and
accordingly the intellectual power of man started
to develop. Therefore the mistake in the almanacs
began to be noticed by the wise men of the time,
who found that the calculations of the ancient
rishis had fixed the period of one Kali Yuga at
1200 years only. But as the intellect of these wise
men was not yet suitably developed, they could


XX


make out only the mistake itself, and not the rea-
son for it. By way of reconciliation, they fancied
that 1200 years, the real age of Kali, were not the
ordinary years of our earth, but were so many
daiva years (“years of the gods”), consisting of 12
daiva months of 30 daiva days each, with each
daiva day being equal to one ordinary solar year
of our earth. Hence according to these men 1200
years of Kali Yuga must be equal to 432,000 years
of our earth.


In coming to a right conclusion, however, we
should take into consideration the position of the
Vernal Equinox at spring in the year 1894.


The astronomical reference books show the
Vernal Equinox now to be 20°54'36"' distant from
the first point of Aries (the fixed star Revati), and
by calculation it will appear that 1394 years have
passed since the time when the Vernal Equinox
began to recede from the first point of Aries.


Deducting 1200 years (the length of the last
Ascending Kali Yuga) from 1394 years, we get
194 to indicate the present year of the world’s
entrance into the Ascending Dwapara Yuga. The
mistake of older almanacs will thus be clearly
explained when we add 3600 years to this period
of 1394 years and get 4994 years—which accord-
ing to the prevailing mistaken theory represents
the present year (a.D. 1894) in the Hindu alma-
nacs.


[Referring to the Diagram given in this


XXL


book, the reader will see that the Autumnal
Equinox is now (a.D. 1894) falling among the
stars of the Virgo constellation, and in the As-
cending Dwapara Yuga.]


In this book certain truths such as those
about the properties of magnetism, its auras, dif-
ferent sorts of electricities, etc., have been men-
tioned, although modern science has not yet fully
discovered them. The five sorts of electricity can
be easily understood if one will direct his atten-
tion to the nerve properties, which are purely
electrical in nature. Each of the five sensory
nerves has its characteristic and unique function
to perform. The optic nerve carries light and does
not perform the functions of the auditory and
other nerves; the auditory nerve in its turn carries
sound only, without performing the functions of
any other nerves, and so on. Thus it is clear that
there are five sorts of electricity, corresponding to
the five properties of cosmic electricity.


So far as magnetic properties are concerned,
the grasping power of the human intellect is at
present so limited that it would be quite useless to
attempt to make the matter understood by the
general public. The intellect of man in Treta Yuga
will comprehend the attributes of divine magne-
tism (the next ‘Ireta Yuga will start in a.p. 4099).
There are indeed exceptional personages now
living who, having overcome the influence of
‘Time, can grasp today what ordinary people can-


XXL


not grasp; but this book is not for those exalted
ones, who require nothing of it.


In concluding this introduction, we may ob-
serve that the different planets, exercising their
influence over the various days of the week, have
lent their names to their respective days; similarly,
the different constellations of stars, having influ-
ence over various months, have lent their names
to the Hindu months. Each of the great Yugas has
much influence over the period of time covered
by it; hence, in designating the years it is desirable
that such terms should indicate to which Yuga
they belong.


As the Yugas are calculated from the position
of the equinox, the method of numbering the
years in reference to their respective Yuga is
based on a scientific principle; its use will obviate
much inconvenience which has arisen in the past
owing to association of the various eras with per-
sons of eminence rather than with celestial
phenomena of the fixed stars. We therefore pro-
pose to name and number the year in which this
introduction has been written as 194 Dwapara,
instead of a.p. 1894, to show the exact time of the
Yuga now passing. This method of calculation was
prevalent in India till the reign of Raja Vikrama-
ditya, when the Samvat era was introduced. As the
Yuga method of calculation recommends itself to
reason, we follow it, and recommend that it be
followed by the public in general.


XXL


Now, in this 194th year of Dwapara Yuga, the
dark age of Kali having long since passed, the
world is reaching out for spiritual knowledge,
and men require loving help one from the other.
The publishing of this book, requested from me
by my holy paramguru maharaj Babaji, will, I hope,
be of spiritual service.


Swami Sri Yukteswar Giri


Serampore, West Bengal
‘The 26th Falgun, 194 Dwapara
(a.D. 1894)


PACAT A
CHAPTER 1


az: THE GOSPEL


SUTRA 1


fact pia aa ITH |
adadadag st at R


Parambrahma (Spirit or God) is everlasting,
complete, without beginning or end. It is one, indi-
visible Being.*


The Eternal Father, God, Swami Param-
brahma, is the only Real Substance, Sat, and is all
in all in the universe.


Why God is not comprehensible. Man possesses
eternal faith and believes intuitively in the exis-
tence of a Substance, of which the objects of
sense—sound, touch, sight, taste, and smell, the
component parts of this visible world—are but
properties. As man identifies himself with his
material body, composed of the aforesaid proper-
ties, he is able to comprehend by these imperfect
organs these properties only, and not the Sub-
stance to which these properties belong. The Eter-


Swami Sri Yukteswarji stated these sutras (precepts) in Sanskrit
only, as shown. The translation has been provided by Self-
Realization Fellowship. (Publishers Note)


2 THE HOLY SCIENCE


nal Father, God, the only Substance in the uni-
verse, is therefore not comprehensible by man of
this material world, unless he becomes divine by
lifting his self above this creation of Darkness or
Maya. See Hebrews 11:1] and John 8:28.


“Now faith is the substance of things hoped for,
the evidence of things not seen.”


“Then said Jesus unto them, When ye have lifted
up the son of man, then shall ye know that I am he.”


SUTRA 2


a aeaiia aa e amaaa zu


In It (Parambrahma) is the origin of all knowl-
edge and love, the root of all power and joy.


Prakriti or Nature of God. The Almighty Force,
Sakti, or in other words the Eternal Joy, Ananda,
which produced the world; and the Omniscient
feeling, Chit, which makes this world conscious,
demonstrate the Nature, Prakriti, of God the
Father.


How God is comprehended. As man is the like-
ness of God, directing his attention inward he can
comprehend within him the said Force and Feel-
ing, the sole properties of his Self—the Force
Almighty as his will, Vasana, with enjoyment,
Bhoga; and the Feeling Omniscient as his Con-


THE GOSPEL 3


sciousness, Chetana, that enjoys, Bhokta. See
Genesis 1:27.


“So God created man in his own wnage, in the
image of God created he him; male and female created
he them.”


SUTRA 3


Teed artes z ETET: |
mar: feereratoratsfo ae emor n n


Parambrahma causes creation, inert Nature
(Prakriti), to emerge. From Aum (Pranava, the Word,
the manifestation of the Omnipotent Force), come
Kala, Time; Desa, Space; and Anu, the Atom (the
vibratory structure of creation).


The Word, Amen (Aum), is the beginning of the
Creation. The manifestation of Omnipotent
Force (the Repulsion and its complementary ex-
pression, Omniscient Feeling or Love, the Attrac-
tion) is vibration, which appears as a peculiar
sound: the Word, Amen, Aum. In its different as-
pects Aum presents the idea of change, which is
Time, Kala, in the Ever-Unchangeable; and the
idea of division, which is Space, Desa, in the
Ever-Indivisible.


The Four Ideas: the Word, Time, Space, and the
Atom. The ensuing effect is the idea of particles


f THE HOLY SCIENCE


—the innumerable atoms, patra or anu. These
four—the Word, Time, Space, and the Atom—
are therefore one and the same, and substantially
nothing but mere ideas.


This manifestation of the Word (becoming
flesh, the external material) created this visible
world. So the Word, Amen, Aum, being the man-
ifestation of the Eternal Nature of the Almighty
Father or His Own Self, is inseparable from and
nothing but God Himself; as the burning power is
inseparable from and nothing but the fire itself.
See Revelation 3:14; John 1:1,3,14.


“These things saith the Amen, the faithful and
true witness, the beginning of the creation of God.”


“In the beginning was the Word, and the Word
was with God, and the Word was God....All things
were made by him; and without him was not anything
made that was made....And the Word was made flesh
and dwelt among us.”


SUTRA 4


ade maan ara dearer, ver aferen ue i


The cause of creation is Anu or the Atoms. En
masse they are called Maya or the Lord’s illusory
power; each individual Anu is called Avidya,
Ignorance.


Atoms the throne of Spirit the Creator. These


THE GOSPEL 5


Atoms, which represent within and without the
four ideas mentioned above, are the throne of
Spirit, the Creator, which shining on them creates
this universe. They are called en masse Maya, the
Darkness, as they keep the Spiritual Light out of
comprehension; and each of them separately is
called Avidya, the Ignorance, as it makes man
ignorant even of his own Self. Hence the afore-
said four ideas which give rise to all those confu-
sions are mentioned in the Bible as so many
beasts. Man, so long as he identifies himself with
his gross material body, holds a position far infe-
rior to that of the primal fourfold Atom and
necessarily fails to comprehend the same. But
when he raises himself to the level thereof, he not
only comprehends this Atom, both inside and
outside, but also the whole creation, both un-
manifested and manifested (i.e., “before and be-
hind”). See Revelation 4:6.


“And in the midst of the throne, and round about
the throne, were four beasts full of eyes before and
behind.”


The Omniscient Love aspect of Parambrahma is
Kutastha Chaitanya. The individual Self, being Its
manifestation, is one with It.


6 THE HOLY SCIENCE


Kutastha Chaitanya, the Holy Ghost, Purushot-
tama. The manifestation of Premabyam Chit (At-
traction, the Omniscient Love) is Life, the Omni-
present Holy Spirit, and is called the Holy Ghost,
Kutastha Chaitanya or Purushottama, which shines
on the Darkness, Maya, to attract every portion of
it toward Divinity. But the Darkness, Maya, or its
individual parts,* Avidya the Ignorance, being
repulsion itself, cannot receive or comprehend
the Spiritual Light, but reflects it.


Abhasa Chaitanya or Purusha, the Sons of God.
This Holy Ghost, being the manifestation of the
Omniscient Nature of the Eternal Father, God, is
no other substance than God Himself; and so
these reflections of spiritual rays are called the
Sons of God—Abhasa Chaitanya or Purusha. See
John 1:4,5,11.
“In him was life; and the life was the light of


men.


“And the light shineth in darkness; and the dark-
ness comprehended it not.”


“He came unto his own, and his own received him
”


not.


SUTRA 6


Brean oe aeae, aaageraar: |
aa ofg: aaefa va:
adsfuaratssarvenca ola: 1 & 1


That is, its presence in each man.


THE GOSPEL 7


The Atom, under the influence of Chit (univer-
sal knowledge) forms the Chitta or the calm state of
mind, which when spiritualized is called Buddhi,
Intéllig igence. Its opposite is Manas, Mind, in which
lives the Jiva; the self with Ahamkara, Ego, the idea
of separate existence. baag


Chitta, the Heart; Ahamkara, Ego, the son of
man. This Atom, Avidya, the Ignorance, being
under the influence of Universal Love, Chit, the
Holy Spirit, becomes spiritualized, like iron filings
in a magnetic aura, and possessed of conscious-
ness, the power of feeling, when it is called Mahat,
the Heart, Chitta; and being such, the idea of
separate existence of self appears in it, which is
called Ahamkara, Ego, the son of man.


Buddhi, the Intelligence; Manas, the Mind.
Being thus magnetized, it has two poles, one of
which attracts it toward the Real Substance, Sat,
and the other repels it from the same. The former
is called Sattwa or Buddhi, the Intelligence, which
determines what is Truth; and the latter, being a
particle of Repulsion, the Almighty Force spiri-
tualized as aforesaid, produces the ideal world
for enjoyment (ananda) and is called Anandatwa


or Manas, the Mind.
SUTRA 7-10


aeea faafanua a 1 9 1
wag asreoent pared


y sion
Ss
d R


7


yl y Shy


\ yndi UHA Vd


LMAWAS
Te


YASIU YRINGS


-
te ann ae fps ase amet


~
Mn deine G O e R ate aglar O a AA AND h pea aa ai aD oie


$
&


x
N
N
:


; nee tS


9 E
(C) ’ ILIY
& r Wa Tn
O Pa Ubey
o 73 t naan
_ shies pe Paai S = T

NOIL S Š O
oO r9
= =
A ec
D ~~
=x N
O <


À


‘


RIVAS


KARMEND.


PHYSICAL BODY


THE GOSPEL 9


dat faspter: sea fasdfararfor ie |
gata aatiferat og marae
fegan 1 xo |


Chitta, the spiritualized Atom, in which Aham-
kara (the idea of separate existence of Self) appears,
has five manifestations (aura electricities).


They (the five aura electricities) constitute the
causal body of Purusha.


The five electricities, Pancha Tattwa, from their
three attributes, Gunas—Sattwa (positive), Rajas
(neutralizing), and Tamas (negative)—produce Jna-


nandriyas (organs of sense), Karmendriyas (organs of
action), and Zanmatras (objects of sense).


These fifteen attributes plus Mind and Intelli-
gence constitute the seventeen “fine limbs” of the
subtle body, the Lingasarira.


Pancha Tattwa, the Root-Causes of creation, are
the causal body. This spiritualized Atom, Chitta
(the Heart), being the Repulsion manifested,
produces five sorts of aura electricities from its
five different parts: one from the middle, two
from the two extremities, and the other two from
the spaces intervening between the middle and
each of the extremities. These five sorts of elec-
tricities, being attracted under the influence of
Universal Love (the Holy Ghost) toward the Real


OPPOSITE PAGE: This diagram, prepared by the publishers, is
intended only to show the progression of development of various


aspects of creation, and does not purport to illustrate their spatial
relationship to one another.


10 THE HOLY SCIENCE


Substance, Sat, produce a magnetic field which is
called the body of Sattwa Buddhi, the Intelligence.
These five electricities being the causes of all
other creations are called Pancha Tattwa, the five
Root-Causes, and are considered the causal body
of Purusha, the Son of God.


Three Gunas, the electric attributes. The elec-
tricities, being evolved from the polarized Chitta,
are also in a polarized state and are endowed with
its three attributes or Gunas: Saitwa the positive,
Tamas the negative, and Rajas the neutralizing.


Jnanendriyas, the five organs of the senses. ‘The
positive attributes of the five electricities are Jna-
nendriyas, the organs of the senses—smell, taste,
sight, touch, and hearing—and being attracted
under the influence of Manas, Mind, the opposite
pole of this spiritualized Atom, constitute a body
of the same.


Karmendriyas, the five organs of action. The
neutralizing attributes of the five electricities are
Karmendriyas, the organs of action—excretion,
generation, motion (feet), manual skill (hands),
and speech. These organs, being the manifesta-
tion of the neutralizing energy of the spiritualized
Atom, Chitta (the Heart), constitute an energetic
body, called the body of energy, the life force or


Prana.


Vishaya or Tanmatras, the five objects of the
senses. The negative attributes of the five elec-
tricities are the five Tanmatras or objects of the


THE GOSPEL Il


senses of smell, taste, sight, touch, and sound,
which, being united with the organs of sense
through the neutralizing power of the organs of
action, satisfy the desires of the heart.


Lingasarira, the fine material body. These
fifteen attributes with two poles—Mind and
Intelligence—of the spiritualized Atom constitute
Lingasarira or Sukshmasarira, the fine material


body of Purusha, the Son of God.


SUTRAS 11, 12


aa: qaqata ferfasiteranrfae rrsan

qsa epaarkengts sehparrseafercagtat
TSM aa 1 RR I

qara afasia: aearf 1 221


The aforesaid five objects, which are the nega-
tive attributes of the five electricities, being com-
bined produce the idea of gross matter in its five
forms: Kshiti, solids; Ap, liquids; Tejas, fire; Marut,
gaseous substances; and Akasa, ether.


These five forms of gross matter and the
aforesaid fifteen attributes, together with Manas,
Mind, sense consciousness; Buddhi, discriminative
Intelligence; Chitta, the Heart or power of feeling;
and Ahamkara, the Ego, constitute the twenty-four
basic principles of creation.


Gross material body. The aforesaid five objects,
which are the negative attributes of the five elec-


12 THE HOLY SCIENCE


tricities, being combined together produce the
idea of gross matter which appears to us in five
different varieties: Kshitz, the solid; Ap, the liquid;
Tejas, the fiery; Marut, the gaseous; and Vyoma or
Akasa, the ethereal. These constitute the outer
covering called Sthulasarira, the gross material
body of Purusha, the Son of God.


Twenty-four Elders. These five gross matters and
the aforesaid fifteen attributes together with
Manas, the Mind; Buddhi, the Intelligence; Chitta,
the Heart; and Ahamkara, the Ego, constitute the
twenty-four principles or Elders, as mentioned in
the Bible. See Revelation 4:4.


“And round about the throne were four and
twenty seats; and upon the seats I saw four and twenty
elders.”


The aforesaid twenty-four principles, which
completed the creation of Darkness, Maya, are
nothing more than the development of Igno-
rance, Avidya; and as this Ignorance is composed
only of ideas as mentioned above, creation has in
reality no substantial existence, but is a mere play
of ideas on the Eternal Substance, God the Father.


SUTRA 13
wat agarana aenn E 1 22 1


This universe is differentiated into fourteen
spheres, seven Swargas and seven Patalas.


THE GOSPEL 13


Seven Spheres or Swargas. This universe thus
described, commencing from the Eternal Sub-
stance, God, down to the gross material creation,
has been distinguished into seven different
spheres, Swargas or Lokas.


7th Sphere, Satyaloka. The foremost of these is
Satyaloka, the sphere of God—the only eal Sub-
stance, Sat, in the universe. No name can describe
it, nor can anything in the creation of Darkness or
Light designate it. This sphere is therefore called
Anama, the Nameless.


6th Sphere, Tapoloka. The next in order is
Tapoloka, the sphere of the Holy Spirit which is the
Eternal Patience, as it remains forever undis-
turbed by any limited idea. Because it is not ap-
proachable even by the Sons of God as such, it is
called Agama, the Inaccessible.


5th Sphere, Janaloka. Next is Janaloka, the
sphere of spiritual reflection, the Sons of God,
wherein the idea of separate existence of Self
originates. As this sphere is above the com-
prehension of anyone in the creation of Darkness,
Maya, it is called Alakshya, the Incomprehensible.


4th Sphere, Maharloka. Then comes Mahar-
loka, the sphere of the Atom, the beginning of the
creation of Darkness, Maya, upon which the
Spirit is reflected. This, the connecting link, is the
only way between the spiritual and the material
creation and 1s called the Door, Dasamadwara.


14 THE HOLY SCIENCE


3rd Sphere, Swarloka. Around this Atom is
Swarloka, the sphere of magnetic aura, the elec-
tricities. This sphere, being characterized by the
absence of all the creation (even the organs and
their objects, the fine material things), is called
Mahasunya, the Great Vacuum.


2nd Sphere, Bhuvarloka. The next is Bhuvar-
loka, the sphere of electric attributes. As the gross
matters of the creation are entirely absent from
this sphere, and it is conspicuous by the presence
of the fine matters only, it is called Sunya, the
Vacuum Ordinary.


lst Sphere, Bhuloka. The last and lowest
sphere is Bhuloka, the sphere of gross material
creation, which is always visible to everyone.


Sapta Patalas, seven churches. As God created
man in His own image, so is the body of man like
unto the image of this universe. The material
body of man has also seven vital places within it
called Patalas. Man, turning toward his Self and
advancing in the right way, perceives the Spiritual
Light in these places, which are described in the
Bible as so many churches; the lights like stars
perceived therein are as so many angels. See Reve-
lation 1:12, 13, 16,20.


“And being turned, I saw seven golden candle-
sticks, and in the midst of the seven candlesticks one
like unto the son of man....”


“And he had in his right hand seven stars....


“The seven stars are the angels of the seven


THE GOSPEL 15


churches; and the seven candlesticks which thou sawest
are the seven churches.”


14 Bhuvanas, the stages of creation. The above-
mentioned seven spheres or Swargas and the
seven Patalas constitute the fourteen Bhuvanas,
the fourteen distinguishable stages of the creation.


SUTRA 14


T VT TST HT: Power i ey |


Purusha is covered by five koshas or sheaths.


5 Koshas or Sheaths. This Purusha, the Son of
God is screened by five coverings called the koshas
or sheaths.


Heart, the 1st Kosha. The first of these five is
Heart, Chitta, the Atom, composed of four ideas
as mentioned before, which feels or enjoys, and
thus being the seat of bliss, ananda, is called Anan-
damaya Kosha.


Buddhi, the 2nd Kosha. The second is the
magnetic-aura electricities, manifestations of
Buddhi, the Intelligence that determines what is
truth. Thus, being the seat of knowledge, jnana, it
is called Jnanamaya Kosha.


Manas, the 3rd Kosha. The third is the body of
Manas, the Mind, composed of the organs of


16 THE HOLY SCIENCE


senses, as mentioned above, and called the Man-
omaya Kosha.


Prana, the 4th Kosha. The fourth is the body
of energy, life force or Prana, composed of the
organs of action as described before, and thus
called Pranamaya Kosha.


Gross matter, the 5th Kosha. The fifth and last
of these sheaths is the gross matter, the Atom’s
outer coating, which, becoming Anna, nourish-
ment, supports this visible world and thus is
called the Annamaya Kosha.


Action of Love. The action of Repulsion, the
manifestation of the Omnipotent Energy, being
thus completed, the action of Attraction (the
Omnipotent Love in the core of the heart) begins
to be manifested. Under the influence of this
Omniscient Love, the Attraction, the Atoms,
being attracted toward one another, come nearer
and nearer, taking ethereal, gaseous, fiery, liquid,
and solid forms.


Inanimate kingdom. Thus this visible world
becomes adorned with suns, planets, and moons,
which we call the inanimate kingdom of the
creation.


Vegetable kingdom. In this manner, when the
action of Divine Love becomes well developed,
the evolution of Avidya, Ignorance (the particle of
Darkness, Maya, the Omnipotent Energy man-
ifested), begins to be withdrawn. Annamaya Kosha,
the Atom’s outer coating of gross matter being


THE GOSPEL 17


thus withdrawn, Pranamaya Kosha (the sheath
composed of Karmendriyas, the organs of action)
begins to operate. In this organic state the Atoms,
embracing each other more closely to their heart,
appear as the vegetable kingdom in the creation.


Animal kingdom. When the Pranamaya Kosha
becomes withdrawn, the Manomaya Kosha (the
sheath composed of Jnanendriyas, the organs of
sense) comes to light. The Atoms then perceive
the nature of the external world and, attracting
other Atoms of different nature, form bodies as
necessary for enjoyment, and thus the animal
kingdom appears in the creation.


Mankind. When Manomaya Kosha becomes
withdrawn, Jnanamaya Kosha (the body of Intelli-
gence composed of electricities) becomes percep-
tible. The Atom, acquiring the power of de-
termining right and wrong, becomes man, the
rational being in the creation.


Devata or Angel. When man, cultivating the
Divine Spirit or Omniscient Love within his heart,
is able to withdraw this Jnanamaya Kosha, then the
innermost sheath, Chitta, the Heart (composed of
four ideas), becomes manifest. Man is then called
Devata or Angel in the creation.


Free, Sannyasi. When the Heart or innermost
sheath is also withdrawn, there is no longer any-
thing to keep man in bondage to this creation of
Darkness, Maya. He then becomes free, Sannyasi,


18 THE HOLY SCIENCE


the Son of God, and enters into the creation of
Light.


SUTRAS 15, 16


epea qentordfeewart AT, 1 ey |
ated aatfeersararatate octet 1 ee |


Just as the objects seen in our dreams are found,
when we awake, to be insubstantial, so our waking
perceptions are likewise unreal—a matter of infer-
ence only.


Sleeping and waking states. When man com-
pares his ideas relating to gross matters conceived
in the wakeful state with his conception of ideas in
dream, the similarity existing between them natu-
rally leads him to conclude that this external
world also is not what it appears to be.


When he looks for further explanation, he
finds that all his wakeful conceptions are substan-
tially nothing but mere ideas caused by the union
of five objects of sense (the negative attributes of
the five internal electricities) with the five organs
of sense (their positive attributes) through the
medium of five organs of action (the neutralizing
attributes of the electricities).


This union is effected by the operation of
Mind (Manas) and conceived or grasped by the
Intelligence (Buddhz). Thus it is clear that all con-


THE GOSPEL 19


ceptions which man forms in his wakeful state are
mere inferential Parokshajnana—a matter of in-
ference only.


SUTRA 17


TH: mape feaa AAT: 1 RO |


What is needed is a Guru, a Savior, who will
awaken us to Bhakti (devotion) and to perceptions of
Truth.


When man finds his Sat-Guru or Savior. When
man understands by his Aparokshajnana (true
comprehension) the nothingness of the external
world, he appreciates the position of John the
Baptist, the divine personage who witnessed
Light and bore testimony of Christ, after his
heart’s love, the heavenly gift of Nature, had be-
come developed.


Any advanced sincere seeker may be fortu-
nate in having the Godlike company of some one
of such personages, who may kindly stand to him
as his Spiritual Preceptor, Sat-Guru, the Savior.
Following affectionately the holy precepts of these
divine personages, man becomes able to direct all
his organs of sense inward to their common cen-
ter—the sensorium, Trikuti or Sushumnadwara,
the door of the interior world—where he com-


20 THE HOLY SCIENCE


prehends the Voice, like a peculiar “knocking”
sound, [the Cosmic Vibration that is] the Word,
Amen, Aum; and sees the God-sent luminous body
of Radha, symbolized in the Bible as the Forerun-
ner or John the Baptist. See Revelation 3:14,20
and John 1:6,8, 23.


“These things saith the Amen, the faithful and
true witness, the beginning of the creation of God....
Behold, I stand at the door, and knock; if any man
hear my voice and open the door, I will come in to him
and will sup with him, and he unth me.”


“There was a man sent from God, whose name
was John....He was not that Light, but was sent to
bear witness of that Light....He said, I am the voice of
one crying in the wilderness, Make straight the way of
the Lord.”


Ganga, Jamuna, or Jordan, the holy streams.
From the peculiar nature of this sound, issuing as
it does like a stream from a higher unknown re-
gion and losing itself in the gross material cre-
ation, it is figuratively designated by various sects
of people by the names of different rivers that
they consider as sacred; for example, Ganga by
the Hindus, Jamuna by the Vaishnavas,* and Jor-
dant by the Christians.


The 2nd birth. Through his luminous body, man,
believing in the existence of the true Light—the
Life of this universe—becomes baptized or ab-


Worshipers of Vishnu, God as Preserver.
. Matthew 3:13-17.


THE GOSPEL 21


sorbed in the holy stream of the sound. The bap-
tism is, so to speak, the second birth of man and is
called Bhakti Yoga,* without which man can never
comprehend the real internal world, the kingdom
of God. See John 1:9 and 3:3.


“That was the true Light, which lighteth every
man that cometh into the world.”


“Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be
born agan, he cannot see the kingdom of God.”


Aparokshajnana, the real comprehension. In
this state the son of man begins to repent and,
turning back from the gross material creation,
creeps toward his Divinity, the Eternal Substance,
God. When the developments of ignorance are
stopped, man gradually comprehends the true
character of this creation of Darkness, Maya, as a
mere play of ideas of the Supreme Nature on His
own Self, the only Real Substance. This true
comprehension is called Aparokshajnana.


SUTRA 18


aera: earns Teer: HASNT 1 RS |


Emancipation (Kaivalya) is obtained when one
realizes the oneness of his Self with the Universal
Self, the Supreme Reality.


* Union with God through Love, the Attraction, which 1s constantly
drawing man toward the kingdom of God. (Publisher's Note)


22 THE HOLY SCIENCE


Sannyasi or Christ the anointed Savior. When all
the developments of Ignorance are withdrawn,
the heart, being perfectly clear and purified, no
longer merely reflects the Spiritual Light but ac-
tively manifests the same, and thus being conse-
crated and anointed, man becomes Sannyasi, free,
or Christ the Savior.” See John 1:33.


“Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending,
and remaining on him, the same is he which baptizeth
with the Holy Ghost.”


Baptized in the stream of Light. Through this
Savior the son of man becomes again baptized or
absorbed in the stream of Spiritual Light, and,
rising above the creation of Darkness, Maya, en-
ters into the spiritual world and becomes unified
with Abhasa Chaitanya or Purusha, the Son of God,
as was the case with Lord Jesus of Nazareth. In
this state man is saved for ever and ever from the
bondage of Darkness, Maya. See John 1:12 and
3:5;
“But as many as received him, to them gave he


power to become the Sons of God, even to them that
believe on his name.”


“Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man be
born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into
the kingdom of God.”


Fhat is, he becomes one with Christ Consciousness, the reflected
consciousness of the Eternal Father God in creation, immanent in
the Word or Aum, the Cosmic Vibration. Thus is he freed or saved
from the darkness of Maya, the delusion of separateness from the
Father. (Publishers Note)


THE GOSPEL 23


Sacrifice of self. When man thus entering into the
spiritual world becomes a Son of God, he com-
prehends the universal Light—-the Holy Ghost
—as a perfect whole, and his Self as nothing but a
mere idea resting on a fragment of the Aum
Light. Then he sacrifices himself to the Holy
Ghost, the altar of God; that is, abandons the vain
idea of his separate existence, and becomes one
integral whole.


Kaivalya, the unification. Thus, being one with
the universal Holy Spirit of God the Father, he
becomes unified with the Real Substance, God.
This unification of Self with the Eternal Sub-
stance, God, is called Kaivalya.* See Revelation
Ko or


“To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with
me in my throne, even as I also overcame, and am set
down with my Father in his throne.”


Literally, “isolation, absolute independence or emancipation
through oneness with God. (Publisher's Note)


CHAPTER 2


adea 1 THE GOAL


SUTRA 1


amt apfeefsrarar le |


Hence there is desire for emancipation.


Liberation, the prime object. When man under-
stands even by way of inference the true nature of
this creation, the true relation existing between
this creation and himself; and when he further
understands that he is completely blinded by the
influence of Darkness, Maya, and that it is the
bondage of Darkness alone which makes him
forget his real Self and brings about all his suffer-
ings, he naturally wishes to be relieved from all
these evils. This relief from evil, or liberation
from the bondage of Maya, becomes the prime
object of his life.


SUTRA 2


afar: AESAAT, 1 2 I


Liberation is stabilization of Purusha (jiva, soul)
in its real Self.


25


26 THE HOLY SCIENCE


Residing in Self is liberation. When man raises
himself above the idea creation of this Darkness,
Maya, and passes completely out of its influence,
he becomes liberated from bondage and is placed
in his real Self, the Eternal Spirit.


SUTRA 3


aa adra a: oearetfatesd 121


Then there is cessation of all pain and the at-
tainment of the ultimate aim (true fulfillment, God-
realization).


Liberation is salvation. On attaining this libera-
tion, man becomes saved from all his troubles,
and all the desires of his heart are fulfilled, so the
ultimate aim of his life is accomplished.


SUTRA 4


zaa piraan nT Ta 1 g


Otherwise, birth after birth, man experiences
the misery of unfulfilled desires.


Why man suffers. So long, however, as man iden-
tifies himself with his material body and fails to
find repose in his true Self, he feels his wants
according as his heart’s desires remain unsatis-
fied. To satisfy them he has to appear often in flesh


THE GOAL 27


and blood on the stage of life, subject to the influ-
ence of Darkness, Maya, and has to suffer all the
troubles of life and death not only in the present
but in the future as well.


SUTRAS 5, 6


aetatsfrarargs: 1 ¥ |
aasman wre sede atetsferar 1 & |


Troubles are born from Avidya, Ignorance. Ig-
norance is the perception of the nonexistent, and the
nonperception of the Existent.


What is ignorance? Ignorance, Avidya, is miscon-
ception, or is the erroneous conception of the
existence of that which does not exist. Through
Avidya man believes that this material creation is
the only thing that substantially exists, there being
nothing beyond, forgetting that this material cre-
ation is substantially nothing and is a mere play of
ideas on the Eternal Spirit, the only Real Sub-
stance, beyond the comprehension of the materia!
creation. This Ignorance is not only a trouble in
itself but is also the source of all the other troubles
of man.


SUTRAS 7-12


aaao farar e Par Parse carey
gaafe a aannam 1 9


28 THE HOLY SCIENCE


aenar ee eana ar adat fees maa IS |
carfurraictafaaarraferat 1 & |

mg fameen aa a aa: 1 eo |
garfan WT: 1 RR |

TRIP aaan FT: RR


Avidya, Ignorance, having the twofold power of
polarity, manifests as egoism, attachment, aversion,
and (blind) tenacity.


The darkening power of Maya produces egoism
and (blind) tenacity; the polarity power of Maya
produces attachment (attraction) and aversion
(repulsion).

Egoism results from a lack of discrimination
between the physical body and the real Self.


Tenacity is a result of natural conditioning (be-
lief in Nature and her laws as final, instead of belief
in the all-causative powers of the Soul).


Attachment means thirst for the objects of hap-
piness.


Aversion means desire for the removal of the
objects of unhappiness.


Ignorance is the source of all troubles. In order
to understand how this Ignorance is the source of
all other troubles we should remember (as has
been explained in the previous chapter) that Ig-
norance, Avidya, is nothing but a particle of
Darkness, Maya, taken distributively, and as such
it possesses the two properties of Maya. The one
is its darkening power, by the influence of which


THE GOAL 29


man is prevented from grasping anything beyond
the material creation. This darkening power pro-
duces Asmita or Egoism, the identification of Self
with the material body, which is but the develop-
ment of Atom, the particles of the universal force;
and Abhinivesa or blind tenacity to the belief in the
validity and ultimate worth of the material cre-
ation.


By virtue of the second of the properties of
Maya, Ignorance or Avidya in its polarized state
produces attraction for certain objects and repul-
sion for others. The objects so attracted are the
objects of pleasure, for which an Attachment,
Raja, is formed. The objects that are repulsed are
the objects producing pain, for which an Aver-
sion, Dwesha, is formed.


SUTRA 13


ata ant afana va Gar IRI


The root of pain is egoistic actions, which (be-
ing based on delusions) lead to misery.


Why man is bound. By the influence of these five
troubles—Ignorance, Egoism, Attachment, Aver-
sion, and Tenacity to the material creation—man
is induced to involve himself in egoistic works and
in consequence he suffers.


30 THE HOLY SCIENCE
SUTRAS 14, 15


aden faqfafreret: 1 ee i
faaara: eT: 1 R I


Man’s purpose is complete freedom from un-
happiness.


Once he has banished all pain beyond possibil-
ity of return, he has attained the highest goal.


Ultimate aim of the heart. With man the cessation
of all suffering is Artha, the heart’s immediate
aim. The complete extirpation of all these suffer-
ings so that their recurrence becomes impossible,
is Paramartha, the ultimate goal.


SUTRAS 16-21


atampi atest: wer
qer fe a: 1 ee |

afenn anaana e a fervent: 1 go l

apean aa Paree ware Wares: 1 gS 1

wT: was ara araea adra ser | RE |

aa aya facocivafer: wa 1 Ro 1

Tet eed NET RR |


Existence, consciousness, and bliss are the
three longings (of the human heart).


Ananda, bliss, is the contentment of heart at-
tained by the ways and means suggested by the
Savior, the Sat-Guru.


THE GOAL 31


Chit, true consciousness, brings about the com-
plete destruction of all troubles and the rise of all
virtues.


Sat, existence, is attained by realization of the
permanency of the soul.


These three qualities constitute the real nature
of man.


All desires being fulfilled, and all miseries re-
moved, the achievement of Paramartha (the highest
goal) is made.


The real necessities. Man naturally feels great
necessity for Sat, Existence; Chit, Consciousness;
and Ananda, Bliss. These three are the real neces-
sities of the human heart and have nothing to do
with anything outside his Self. They are essential
properties of his own nature, as explained in the
previous chapter.


How man attains Bliss. When man becomes
fortunate in securing the favor of any divine per-
sonage, Sat-Guru (the Savior), and affectionately
following his holy precepts is able to direct all his
attention inward, he becomes capable of satisfy-
ing all the wants of his heart and can thereby gain
contentment, Ananda, the Real Bliss.


How Consciousness appears. With his heart
thus contented, man becomes able to fix his atten-
tion upon anything he chooses and can com-
prehend all its aspects. So Chit, Consciousness of
all the modifications of Nature up to its first and
primal manifestation, the Word (Amen, Aum),


39 THE HOLY SCIENCE


and even of his own Real Self, gradually appears.
And being absorbed in the stream thereof, man
becomes baptized and begins to repent and re-
turn toward his Divinity, the Eternal Father,
whence he had fallen. See Revelation 2:5.


“Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen,
and repent.

How Existence is realized. Man, being con-
scious of his own real position and of the nature
of this creation of Darkness, Maya, becomes pos-
sessed of absolute power over it, and gradually
withdraws all the developments of Ignorance. In
this way, freed from the control of this creation of
Darkness, he comprehends his own Self as Inde-
structible and Ever-Existing Real Substance. So
Sat, the Existence of Self, comes to light.


How main object of the heart is attained. All the
necessities of the heart—Sat, Existence; Chit,
Consciousness; and Ananda, Bliss—having been
attained, Ignorance, the mother of evils, becomes
emaciated and consequently all troubles of this
material world, which are the sources of all sorts
of sufferings, cease forever. Thus the ultimate
aim of the heart is effected.


SUTRA 22


vat atampenda aea oarra area
arqa: waeuutassr, ada Haart 1 22 |


THE GOAL 33


All fulfillments of his nature attained, man is
not merely a reflector of divine light but becomes
actively united with Spirit. This state is Kaivalya,
oneness.


How man finds salvation. In this state, all the
necessities having been attained and the ultimate
aim effected, the heart becomes perfectly puri-
fied and, instead of merely reflecting the spiritual
light, actively manifests the same. Man, being thus
consecrated or anointed by the Holy Spirit, be-
comes Christ, the anointed Savior. Entering the


kingdom of Spiritual Light, he becomes the Son
of God.


In this state man comprehends his Self as a
fragment of the Universal Holy Spirit, and, aban-
doning the vain idea of his separate existence,
unifies himself with the Eternal Spirit; that is,
becomes one and the same with God the Father.
This unification of Self with God is Kaivalya,
which is the Ultimate Object of all created beings.
See John 14:11.


“Believe me that I am in the Father, and the
Father in me.”


CHAPTER 3


mmt THE PROCEDURE


SUTRAS 1-4


areena aa aea a Bet: 1 8

maei fafaa aT: 1 21
srenaeaiue araoa Aa a anaa Aa ET: 3 |
ma wa enr ago: afera


arramit aafaa l} i


Yajna, sacrifice, means penance (Tapas), deep
study (Swadhyaya), and the practice of meditation on
Aum (Brahmanidhana).


Penance is patience or evenmindedness in all
conditions (equanimity amidst the essential duali-
ties of Maya; cold and heat, pain and pleasure, etc.).


Swadhyaya consists of reading or hearing spiri-
tual truth, pondering it, and forming a definite con-
ception of it.


(Meditation on) Pranava, the divine sound of
Aum, is the only way to Brahman (Spirit), salvation.


Patience, faith, and holy work explained. Tapas is
religious mortification or patience both in enjoy-
ments and in sufferings. Swadhyaya is sravana,
study, with manana, deep attention, and thereby
nididhyasana, forming of an idea of the true faith
about Self; that is, what I am, whence I came,
where I shall go, what I have come for, and other


36 THE HOLY SCIENCE


such matters concerning Self. Brahmanidhana is
the baptism or merging of Self in the stream of
the Holy Sound (Pranava, Aum), which is the holy
work performed to attain salvation and the only
way by which man can return to his Divinity, the
Eternal Father, whence he has fallen. See Revela-
tion 2:19.


“I know thy works, and charity, and service, and
faith, and thy patience, and thy works; and the last to
be more than the first.”


SUTRAS 5, 6


sadedeqfoanierperid aen aria: 1 y
eraser: airdiaar war 1 & |


Aum is heard through cultivation of Sraddha
(heart’s natural love), Virya (moral courage), Smriti
(memory of one’s divinity), and Samadhi (true
concentration).


Sraddha is intensification of the heart’s natural
love.


How the Holy Sound manifests. This Holy Sound
Pranava Sabda manifests spontaneously through
culture of Sraddha, the energetic tendency of the
heart’s natural love; Virya, moral courage; Smriti,
true conception; and Samadhi, true concentration.


The virtue of Love. The heart’s natural love is the
principal requisite to attain a holy life. When this


THE PROCEDURE 37


love, the heavenly gift of Nature, appears in the
heart, it removes all causes of excitation from the
system and cools it down to a perfectly normal
state; and, invigorating the vital powers, expels all
foreign matters—the germs of diseases—by nat-
ural ways (perspiration and so forth). It thereby
makes man perfectly healthy in body and mind,
and enables him to understand properly the
guidance of Nature.


When this love becomes developed in man it
makes him able to understand the real position of
his own Self as well as of others surrounding him.


With the help of this developed love, man
becomes fortunate in gaining the Godlike com-
pany of the divine personages and is saved for-
ever. Without this love, man cannot live in the
natural way, neither can he keep company with
the fit person for his own welfare; he becomes
often excited by the foreign matters taken into his
system through mistakes in understanding the
guidance of Nature, and in consequence he suf-
fers in body and mind. He can never find any
peace whatever, and his life becomes a burden.
Hence the culture of this love, the heavenly gift, is
the principal requisite for the attainment of holy
salvation; it is impossible for man to advance a
step toward the same without it. See Revelation


2:2-4.


“I know thy works, and thy labor, and thy pa-
tience, and how thou canst not bear them which are


38 THE HOLY SCIENCE


evil: and thou hast tried them which say they are
apostles, and are not, and hast found them liars.


“And hast borne and hast patience, and for my
name’s sake hast labored, and hast not fainted.


“Nevertheless I have somewhat against thee, be-
cause thou hast left thy first love.”


SUTRAS 7, 8


Moral courage (Virya) arises from Sraddha, di-
recting one’s love toward the guru, and from affec-
tionately following his instructions.


Those who remove our troubles, dispel our
doubts, and bestow peace are true teachers. They
perform a Godlike work. Their opposites (those who
increase our doubts and difficulties) are harmful to
us and should be avoided like poison.


As explained in the previous chapter, this
creation 1s substantially nothing but a mere idea-
play of Nature on the only Real Substance, God,
the Eternal Father, who is Guru—the Supreme
—in this universe. All things of this creation are
therefore no other substance than this Guru, the
Supreme Father, God Himself, perceived in plur-


THE PROCEDURE 39


ality by the manifold aspects of the play of Na-
ture. See John 10:34 and Psalm 82:6.


-


“Jesus answered them, Is it not written in your
law, I said, Ye are gods?”


“I have said, Ye are gods; and all of you are
children of the most High.”


Out of this creation, the object that relieves
us of Our miseries and doubts and administers
peace to us, whether animate or inanimate, and
however insignificant the same may be, is entitled
to our utmost respect. Even if it be regarded by
others as an object of vilest contempt, it should be
accepted as Sat (Savior) and its company as God-
like. That which produces opposite results, de-
stroying our peace, throwing us into doubts, and
creating Our miseries, should be considered Asat,
the bane of all good, and should be avoided as
such. The Indian sages have a saying:


aqa gat mga feta gat rA, |
area wet geef gaa i


Some consider the deities to exist in water
(i.e., natural elements) while the learned con-
sider them to exist in heaven (astral world); the
unwise seek them in wood and stones (i.e., in
images or symbols), but the Yogi realizes God in
the sanctuary of his own Self.


To attain salvation men choose as their Savior
the objects that they can comprehend according


38


THE HOLY SCIENCE


evil: and thou hast tried them which say they are
apostles, and are not, and hast found them liars.


“And hast borne and hast patience, and for my
name’s sake hast labored, and hast not fainted.


“Nevertheless I have somewhat against thee, be-
cause thou hast left thy first love.”


SUTRAS 7, 8


Moral courage (Virya) arises from Sraddha, di-
recting one’s love toward the guru, and from affec-
tionately following his instructions.


Those who remove our troubles, dispel our
doubts, and bestow peace are true teachers. They
perform a Godlike work. Their opposites (those who
increase our doubts and difficulties) are harmful to
us and should be avoided like poison.


As explained in the previous chapter, this


creation is substantially nothing but a mere idea-
play of Nature on the only Real Substance, God,
the Eternal Father, who is Guru—the Supreme
—in this universe. All things of this creation are
therefore no other substance than this Guru, the
Supreme Father, God Himself, perceived in plur-


THE PROCEDURE 39


ality by the manifold aspects of the play of Na-
ture. See John 10:34 and Psalm 82:6.


“Jesus answered them, Is it not written in your
law, I said, Ye are gods?”


“I have said, Ye are gods; and all of you are
children of the most High.”


Out of this creation, the object that relieves
us of our miseries and doubts and administers
peace to us, whether animate or inanimate, and
however insignificant the same may be, is entitled
to our utmost respect. Even if it be regarded by
others as an object of vilest contempt, it should be
accepted as Sat (Savior) and its company as God-
like. That which produces opposite results, de-
stroying our peace, throwing us into doubts, and
creating our miseries, should be considered Asat,
the bane of all good, and should be avoided as
such. The Indian sages have a saying:


aqa gat vasa fefa dat nAPO i
arate, water geef daar


Some consider the deities to exist in water
(i.e., natural elements) while the learned con-
sider them to exist in heaven (astral world); the
unwise seek them in wood and stones (i.e., in
images or symbols), but the Yogi realizes God in
the sanctuary of his own Self.


To attain salvation men choose as their Savior
the objects that they can comprehend according


40 THE HOLY SCIENCE


to their own stage of evolution. Thus, in general,
people think that illness is a dire calamity; and as
water, when properly administered, tends to re-
move illness, ignorant men may choose for their
Divinity water itself.

Philosophers, being able to comprehend the
internal electrical Light that shines within them,
find their heart’s love flowing energetically toward
the Light that relieves them of all causes of excita-
tion, cools down their system to a normal state,
and, invigorating their vital powers, makes them
perfectly healthy, both in body and in mind. They
then accept this Light as their Divinity or Savior.


Ignorant people in their blind faith would
accept a piece of wood or stone as their Savior or
Divinity in the external creation, for which their
heart’s natural love will develop till by its energetic
tendency it will relieve them of all exciting causes,
cool their system down to a normal state, and
invigorate their vital powers. The adepts, on the
other hand, having full control over the whole
material world, find their Divinity or Savior in
Self and not outside in the external world.


Regard the Guru with deep love. To keep com-
pany with the Guru is not only to be in his physi-
cal presence (as this is sometimes impossible), but
mainly means to keep him in our hearts and to be
one with him in principle and to attune ourselves
with him.


This thought has been expressed by Lord


THE PROCEDURE 4]


Bacon: “A crowd is not a company, it is a mere
gallery of faces.” To keep company, therefore,
with the Godlike object is to associate him with
Sraddha, the heart’s love intensified in the sense
above explained, by keeping his appearance and
attributes fully in mind, and by reflecting on the
same and affectionately following his instructions,
lamblike. See John 1:29.


“Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the
sin of the world.”


By so doing, when man becomes able to con-
ceive the sublime status of his divine brothers, he
may be fortunate in remaining in their company
and in securing help from any one of them whom
he may choose as his Spiritual Preceptor, Sat-
Guru, the Savior.


Thus, to resume, Virya or moral courage can
be obtained by the culture of Sraddha, that is, by
devoting one’s natural love to his Preceptor, by
being always in his company (in the internal sense
already explained), and by following with affec-
tion his holy instructions as they are freely and
spontaneously given.


SUTRAS 9-11


watt mafra ge a: 1 &
afearnareduasrreatutraercea BA: 1 go |
maarata enaa: fret: 1 RR I


42 THE HOLY SCIENCE


Moral courage is strengthened by observance of
Yama (morality or self-control) and Niyama (reli-
gious rules).

Yama comprises noninjury to others, truthful-
ness, nonstealing, continence, and noncovetousness.


Niyama means purity of body and mind, con-
tentment in all circumstances, and obedience (fol-
lowing the instructions of the guru).


Firmness of moral courage can be attained
by the culture of Yama, the religious forbearances:
abstention from cruelty, dishonesty, covetousness,
unnatural living, and unnecessary possessions;
and of Niyama, the religious observances: purity
in body and mind—cleaning the body externally
and internally from all foreign matters which,
being fermented, create different sorts of diseases
in the system, and clearing the mind from all
prejudices and dogmas that make one narrow—
contentment in all circumstances; and obedience
to the holy precepts of the divine personages.


What is natural living? To understand what nat-
ural living is, it will be necessary to distinguish it
from what is unnatural. Living depends upon the
selection of (1) food, (2) dwelling, and (3) com-
pany. To live naturally, the lower animals can
select these for themselves by the help of their
instincts and the natural sentinels placed at the
sensory entrances—the organs of sight, hearing,
touch, smell, and taste. With men in general,
however, these organs are so much perverted by


THE PROCEDURE 43


unnatural living from very infancy that little re-
liance can be placed on their judgments. To un-
derstand, therefore, what our natural needs are,
we ought to depend upon observation, experi-
ment, and reason.


What is natural food for man? First, to select
our natural food, our observation should be di-
rected to the formation of the organs that aid in
digestion and nutrition, the teeth and digestive
canal; to the natural tendency of the organs of
sense which guide animals to their food; and to
the nourishment of the young.


Observation of teeth. By observation of the
teeth we find that in carnivorous animals the in-
cisors are little developed, but the canines are of
striking length, smooth and pointed, to seize the
prey. The molars also are pointed; these points,
however, do not meet, but fit closely side by side
to separate the muscular fibers.


In the herbivorous animals the incisors are
strikingly developed, the canines are stunted
(though occasionally developed into weapons, as
in elephants), the molars are broad-topped and
furnished with enamel on the sides only.


In the frugivorous all the teeth are of nearly
the same height; the canines are little projected,
conical, and blunt (obviously not intended for
seizing prey but for exertion of strength). The
molars are broad-topped and furnished at the top
with enamel folds to prevent waste caused by their


44 THE HOLY SCIENCE


side motion, but not pointed for chewing flesh.


In omnivorous animals such as bears, on the
other hand, the incisors resemble those of the
herbivorous, the canines are like those of the car-
nivorous, and the molars are both pointed and
broad-topped to serve a twofold purpose.


Now if we observe the formation of the teeth
in man we find that they do not resemble those of
the carnivorous, neither do they resemble the
teeth of the herbivorous or the omnivorous. They
do resemble, exactly, those of the frugivorous
animals. The reasonable inference, therefore, is
that man is a frugivorous or fruit-eating animal.*


Observation of the digestive canal. By observa-
tion of the digestive canal we find that the bowels
of carnivorous animals are 3 to 5 times the length
of their body, measuring from the mouth to the
anus; and their stomach is almost spherical. The
bowels of the herbivorous are 20 to 28 times the
length of their body and their stomach is more
extended and of compound build. But the bowels
of the frugivorous animals are 10 to 12 times the
length of their body; their stomach is somewhat
broader than that of the carnivorous and has a
continuation in the duodenum serving the pur-
pose of a second stomach.


This is exactly the formation we find in hu-
man beings, though Anatomy says that the hu-


* Fruit comprises any part of plant life useful to man. The fruit-
arian diet referred to by Swami Sri Yukteswarji includes vegetables,
nuts, and grains. (Publisher's Note)


THE PROCEDURE 45


man bowels are 3 to 5 times the length of man’s
body—making a mistake by measuring the body
from the crown to the soles, instead of from mouth
to anus. Thus we can again draw the inference that
man is, in all probability, a frugivorous animal.


Observation of organs of sense. By observation
of the natural tendency of the organs of sense—
the guideposts for determining what is nutritious
—by which all animals are directed to their food,
we find that when the carnivorous animal finds
prey, he becomes so much delighted that his eyes
begin to sparkle; he boldly seizes the prey and
greedily laps the jetting blood. On the contrary,
the herbivorous animal refuses even his natural
food, leaving it untouched, if it is sprinkled with a
little blood. His senses of smell and sight lead him
to select grasses and other herbs for his food,
which he tastes with delight. Similarly with the
frugivorous animals, we find that their senses
always direct them to fruits of the trees and field.


In men of all races we find that their senses
of smell, sound, and sight never lead them to
slaughter animals; on the contrary they cannot
bear even the sight of such killings. Slaughter-
houses are always recommended to be removed
far from the towns; men often pass strict ordi-
nances forbidding the uncovered transportation
of flesh meats. Can flesh then be considered the
natural food of man, when both his eyes and his
nose are so much against it, unless deceived by
flavors of spices, salt, and sugar? On the other


46 THE HOLY SCIENCE


hand, how delightful do we find the fragrance of
fruits, the very sight of which often makes the
mouth water! It may also be noticed that various
grains and roots possess an agreeable odor and
taste, though faint, even when unprepared. ‘Thus
again, we are led to infer from these observations
that man was intended to be a frugivorous ani-
mal.*


Observation of the nourishment of the young.
By observation of the nourishment of the young
we find that milk is undoubtedly the food of the
newborn babe. Abundant milk is not supplied in
the breasts of the mother if she does not take
fruits, grains, and vegetables as her natural food.


Cause of disease. Hence from these observa-
tions the only conclusion that can reasonably be
drawn is that various grains, fruits, roots, and—
for beverage—milk, and pure water openly ex-
posed to air and sun are decidedly the best natu-
ral food for man. These, being congenial to the
system when taken according to the power of the
digestive organs, well chewed and mixed with
saliva, are always easily assimilated.


Other foods are unnatural to man and being
uncongenial to the system are necessarily foreign
to it; when they enter the stomach, they are not
properly assimilated. Mixed with the blood, they
* “And God said, Behold, I have given you every herb bearing seed,
which is upon the face of all the earth, and every tree, in which is


the fruit of a tree yielding seed; to you it shall be for meat.”
—Genesis 1:29. (Publishers Note)


THE PROCEDURE 47


accumulate in the excretory and other organs not
properly adapted to them. When they cannot find
their way out, they subside in tissue crevices by the
law of gravitation; and, being fermented, produce
diseases, mental and physical, and ultimately lead
to premature death.


Children’s development. Experiment also
proves that the nonirritant diet natural to the
vegetarian is, almost without exception, admira-
bly suited to children’s development, both physi-
cal and mental. Their minds, understanding, will,
the principal faculties, temper, and general dis-
position are also properly developed.


Natural living calms passions. We find that
when extraordinary means such as excessive fast-
ing, scourging, or monastic confinement are re-
sorted to for the purpose of suppressing the sex-
ual passions, these means seldom produce the
desired effect. Experiment shows, however, that
man can easily overcome these passions, the arch-
enemy of morality, by natural living on a nonirri-
tant diet, above referred to; thereby men gain a
calmness of mind which every psychologist knows
is the most favorable to mental activity and to a
clear understanding, as well as to a judicial way of
thinking.


Sexual desire. Something more should be said
here about the natural instinct of propagation,
which is, next to the instinct of self-preservation,
the strongest in the animal body. Sexual desire,


48 THE HOLY SCIENCE


like all other desires, has a normal and an abnor-
mal or diseased state, the latter resulting only
from the foreign matter accumulated by unnatu-
ral living as mentioned above. In the sexual desire
everyone has a very accurate thermometer to in-
dicate the condition of his health. This desire is
forced from its normal state by the irritation of
nerves that results from the pressure of foreign
matter accumulated in the system, which pressure
is exerted on the sexual apparatus and is at first
manifested by an increased sexual desire followed
by a gradual decrease of potency.


This sexual desire in its normal state makes
man quite free from all disturbing lusts, and op-
erates on the organism (awaking a wish for ap-
peasement) only infrequently. Here again exper-
iment shows that this desire, like all other desires,
is always normal in individuals who lead a natural
life as mentioned.


The root of the tree of life. The sexual organ
—the junction of important nerve extremities,
particularly of the sympathetic and spinal nerves
(the principal nerves of the abdomen) which,
through their connection with the brain, are ca-
pable of enlivening the whole system—is in a
sense the root of the tree of life. Man well-
instructed in the proper use of sex can keep his
body and mind in proper health and can live a
pleasant life throughout.


The practical principles of sexual health are


THE PROCEDURE 49


not taught because the public regards the subject
as unclean ancl indecent. Thus blinded, mankind
presumes to clothe Nature in a veil because she
seems to them impure, forgetting that she is al-
ways clean and that everything impure and im-
proper lies in man’s ideas, and not in Nature
herself. It is clear therefore that man, not know-
ing the truth about the dangers of misuse of the
sexual power, and being compelled to wrong
practices by the nervous irritation resulting from
unnatural living, suffers troublesome diseases in
life and ultimately becomes a victim of premature
death.


Dwelling place of man. Secondly, about our
dwelling place. We can easily understand, when
we feel displeasure on entering a crowded room
after breathing fresh air on a mountaintop or in
an expanse of field or garden, that the atmo-
sphere of the town or any crowded place is quite
an unnatural dwelling place. The fresh atmo-
sphere of the mountaintop, or of the field or gar-
den, or of a dry place under trees covering a large
plot of land and freely ventilated with fresh air is
the proper dwelling place for man according to
Nature.


The company we should keep. And thirdly, as
to the company we should keep. Here also, if we
listen to the dictates of our conscience and consult
our natural liking, we will at once find that we
favor those persons whose magnetism affects us


50 THE HOLY SCIENCE


harmoniously, who cool our system, internally
invigorate our vitality, develop our natural love,
and thus relieve us of our miseries and administer
peace to us. This is to say, we should be in the
company of the Sat or Savior and should avoid
that of the Asat, as described before. By keeping
the company of Sat (the Savior) we are enabled to
enjoy perfect health, physical and mental, and
our life is prolonged. If on the other hand we
disobey the warning of Mother Nature, without
listening to the dictates of our pure conscience,
and keep the company of whatever has been des-
ignated as Asat, an opposite effect is produced
and our health is impaired and our life short-
ened.


Necessity of natural living and purity. T hus
natural living is helpful for the practice of Yama,
the ascetic forbearances as explained earlier. Pur-
ity of mind and body being equally important in
the practice of Niyama, the ascetic observances
already explained, every attempt should be made
to attain that purity.


SUTRAS 12-18


aT: TMT: 1 RRI
COTA STATA MS PTS THAT: TMS HAT | RR I
war Pater mge divet ar i eet
TTS ELTA ATT MT TTT TOT TTT TET TIA,

aaa T 1 RK |


THE PROCEDURE 5i


Pergam 1 RE |


UOA HAA: MONT: | 29 1


sfam a ETT: 1 RS |


Hence bondage disappears.


The eight bondages or snares are hatred, shame,
fear, grief, condemnation, race prejudice, pride of
family, and smugness.


(Removal of the eight bondages) leads to mag-
nanimity of heart.


Thus one becomes fit to practice Asana, Prana-
yama, and Pratyahara; and to enjoy the househol-


der’s life (by fulfilling all one’s desires and so get-
ting rid of them).


Asana means a steady and pleasant posture of
the body.


Pranayama means control over prana, life
force.


Pratyahara means withdrawal of the senses
from external objects.


The eight meannesses of the heart. Firmness of
moral courage, when attained, removes all the
obstacles in the way of salvation. These obstacles
are of eight sorts—hatred, shame, fear, grief,
condemnation, race prejudice, pride of pedigree,
and a narrow sense of respectability—which eight
are the meannesses of the human heart.


Awakening magnanimity of the heart. By the
removal of these eight obstacles, Vzratwam or
Mahattwam (magnanimity of the heart) comes in,


52 THE HOLY SCIENCE


and this makes man fit for the practice of Asana
(remaining in steady and pleasant posture),
Pranayama (control over prana, involuntary nerve
electricities), and Pratyahara (changing the direc-
tion of the voluntary nerve currents inward).
These practices enable man to satisfy his heart by
enjoying the objects of the senses as intended for
Garhasthyasrama (domestic) life.


Value of Pranayama. Man can put the voluntary
nerves into action whenever he likes, and can give
them rest when fatigued. When all of these volun-
tary nerves require rest he sleeps naturally, and
by this sleep the voluntary nerves, being re-
freshed, can work again with full vigor. Man’s
involuntary nerves, however, irrespective of his
will, are working continuously of themselves from
his birth. As he has no control over them, he
cannot interfere with their action in the least.
When these nerves become fatigued they also
want rest and naturally fall asleep. This sleep of
the involuntary nerves is called Mahanidra, the
great sleep, or death. When this takes place, the
circulation, respiration, and other vital functions
being stopped, the material body naturally begins
to decay. After a while, when this great sleep
Mahanidra is over, man awakes, with all his de-
sires, and is reborn in a new physical body for the
accomplishment of his various yearnings. In this
way man binds himself to life and death and fails
to achieve final salvation.


Control over death. But if man can control these


THE PROCEDURE 53


involuntary nerves by the aforesaid Pranayama, he
can stop the natural decay of the material body
and put the involuntary nerves (of the heart,
lungs, and other vital organs) to rest periodically,
as he does with his voluntary nerves in sleep.
After such rest by Pranayama the involuntary
nerves become refreshed and work with newly
replenished life.


As after sleep, when rest has been taken by
the voluntary nerves, man requires no help to
awaken naturally; so after death also, when man
has enjoyed a full rest, he awakens naturally to life
in a new body on earth. If man can “die,” that is,
consciously put his entire nervous system, volun-
tary and involuntary, to rest each day by practice
of Pranayama, his whole physical system works
with great vigor.


Life and death come under the control of the
yogi who perseveres in the practice of Pranayama.
In that way he saves his body from the premature
decay that overtakes most men, and can remain as
long as he wishes in his present physical form,
thus having time to work out his karma in one
body and to fulfill (and so get rid of) all the vari-
ous desires of his heart. Finally purified, he is no
longer required to come again into this world
under the influence of Maya, Darkness, or to
suffer the “second death.” See I Corinthians
15:31, and Revelation 2:10, 11.


“I protest by our rejoicing which I have in Christ


54 THE HOLY SCIENCE


[consciousness |, I die dady.” —St. Paul.

“Be thou faithful unio death, and I will give thee
a crown of life....He that overcometh shall not be
hurt of the second death.”


Necessity of Pratyahara. Man enjoys a thing
when he so desires. At the time of the enjoyment,
however, if he directs his organs of sense, through
which he enjoys, toward the object of his desire,
he can never be satisfied, and his desires increase
in double force. On the contrary, if he can direct
his organs of sense inward toward his Self, at that
time he can satisfy his heart immediately. So the
practice of the aforesaid Pratyahara, the changing
of the direction of the voluntary nerve currents
inward, is a desirable way to fulfill his worldly
desires. Man must reincarnate again and again
until all his earthly longings are worked out and
he is free from all desires.


Necessity of Asana. Man cannot feel or even
think properly when his mind is not in a pleasant
state; and the different parts of the human body
are so harmoniously arranged that if even any
minutest part of it be hurt a little, the whole sys-
tem becomes disturbed. So to comprehend a
thing, that is, to feel a thing by the heart clearly,
the practice of the aforesaid Asana, the steady and
pleasant posture, is necessary.


SUTRAS 19-22
fadmead afr afta: efa: leE |


THE PROCEDURE 3>


meea aaa eaaa aea afer: 1 20 |
TT: AAAA AE AA HET: 1 3e


afee abt feae Aa 1 RR |


Smriti, true conception, leads to knowledge of
all creation.


Samadhi, true concentration, enables one to
abandon individuality for universality.


Hence arises Samyama (“restraint” or overcom-


ing the egoistic self), by which one experiences the
Aum vibration that reveals God.


Thus the soul (is baptized) in Bhakti Yoga (devo-
tion). This is the state of Divinity.


Smriti, the true conception. Man, when expertin
the above-mentioned practices, becomes able to
conceive or feel all things of this creation by his
heart. This true conception is called Smrt.


Samadhi, true concentration. Fixing attention
firmly on any object thus conceived, when man
becomes as much identified with it as if he were
devoid of his individual nature, he attains the
state of Samadhi or true concentration.


Pranava Sabda, the Word of God. When man
directs all his organs of sense toward their com-
mon center, the sensorium or Sushumnadwara, the
door of the internal world, he perceives his God-
sent luminous body of Radha or John the Baptst,
and hears the peculiar “knocking” sound, Pranava
Sabda, the Word of God. See John 1:6, 7, 23.


90 THE HOLY SCIENCE


“There was a man sent from God, whose name
was John.


“The same came for a witness, to bear witness of
the Light, that all men through him might believe.”


“I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness.”


Samyama, the concentration of the self. Thus
perceiving, man naturally believes in the existence
of the true Spiritual Light, and, withdrawing his
self from the outer world, concentrates himself
on the sensorium. This concentration of the self is
called Samyama.


Bhakti Yoga or baptism, the second birth of man.
By this Samyama or concentration of self on the
sensorium, man becomes baptized or absorbed in
the holy stream of the Divine Sound. This bap-
tism is called Bhaktz Yoga. In this state man re-
pents; that is, turning from this gross material
creation of Darkness, Maya, he climbs back to-
ward his Divinity, the Eternal Father, whence he
had fallen, and passing through the sensorium,
the door, enters into an internal sphere, Bhuvar-
loka. This entrance into the internal world is the
second birth of man. In this state man becomes
Devata, a divine being.


SUTRA 23


Te taterceafardtanm fae erfsereatereat
Srerererfeumy: 122 1


THE PROCEDURE 57


Translation same as following commentary.


Five states of human heart. There are five states
of the human heart: dark, propelled, steady, de-
voted, and clean. By these different states of the


heart man is classified, and his evolutionary status
determined.


SUTRA 24


qefa faredaateargre, e A, eT AEON:
mani a nae a aaa ata: 1 ey |


In the dark state of the heart, man harbors mis-
conceptions (about everything). This state is a result
of Avidya, Ignorance, and produces a Sudra (a man
of the lowest caste). He can grasp only ideas of the
physical world. This state of mind is prevalent in
Kali Yuga, the Dark Age of a cycle.


The dark heart. In the dark state of the heart man
misconceives; he thinks that this gross material
portion of the creation is the only real substance
in existence, and that there is nothing besides.
However, this is contrary to the truth, as has been
explained before, and is nothing but the effect of
Ignorance, Avidya.


Sudra or servant class. In this state man is called


Sudra, or belonging to the servant class, because
his natural duty then is to serve the higher class


58 THE HOLY SCIENCE


people in order to secure their company and
thereby prepare his heart to attain a higher stage.

Kali Yuga, the dark cycle. This state of man is
called Kal; and whenever in any solar system man
generally remains in this state and is ordinarily
deprived of the power of advancing beyond the
same, the whole of that system is said to be in Kali
Yuga, the dark cycle.


SUTRAS 25, 26


rar: wera faaea areara erT
faae Preire moa aea, aerea 1 ae |
aa: agrem Pesa wer MPANA, 1 26 |


Passing beyond the first stage in Brahma’s plan,
man strives for enlightenment and enters the natu-
ral Kshatriya (warrior) caste.


He is propelled (by evolutionary forces) to
struggle (for truth). He seeks a guru and appreciates
his divine counsel. Thus a Kshatriya becomes fit to
dwell in the worlds of higher understanding.


The propelled heart. When man becomes a little
enlightened he compares his experiences relating
to the material creation, gathered in his wakeful
state, with his experiences in dream, and under-
standing the latter to be merely ideas, begins to
entertain doubts as to the substantial existence of
the former. His heart then becomes propelled to
learn the real nature of the universe and, strug-


THE PROCEDURE 59


gling to clear his doubts, seeks for evidence to
determine what is truth.


Kshatriya, the military class. In this state man is
called Kshatriya, or one of the military class; and
to struggle in the manner aforesaid becomes his
natural duty, by whose performance he may get
an insight into the nature of creation and attain
the real knowledge of it.


Sandhisthala—the place between higher and
lower. This Kshatriya state of man is called San-
dhisthala, the place between higher and lower. In
this state men, becoming anxious for real knowl-
edge, need help of one another; hence mutual
love, the principal necessity for gaining salvation,
appears in the heart.


Motivated by the energetic tendency of this
love, man affectionately keeps company with
those who destroy troubles, clear doubts, and
afford peace to him, and hence avoids whatever
produces the contrary result; he also studies
scientifically the scriptures of divine personages.


When man finds Sat-Guru, the Savior. In this
way man becomes able to appreciate what true
faith is, and understands the real position of the
divine personages when he is fortunate in secur-
ing the Godlike company of some one of them
who will kindly stand to him as his Spiritual Pre-
ceptor, Sat-Guru, or Savior. Following affection-
ately the holy precepts, he learns to concentrate
his mind, directing his organs of sense to their


60 THE HOLY SCIENCE


common center or sensorium, Sushumnadwara,
the door of the internal sphere. There he per-
ceives the luminous body of John the Baptist, or
Radha, and hears the holy Sound (Amen, Aum)
like a stream or river; and being absorbed or
baptized in it, begins to move back toward his
Divinity, the Eternal Father, through the different
Lokas or spheres of the creation.


SUTRA 27


qaren: aea afar acr ater: 1 x9 |


The worlds or Lokas of creation are seven: Bhu,
Bhuvar, Swar, Mahar, Jana, Tapo, and Satya. (This
earth, and the “earthy” stage of man’s conscious-
ness, are called Bhuloka.)


The Seven Lokas. In the way toward Divinity
there are seven spheres or stages of creation, des-
ignated as Swargas or Lokas by the Oriental sages,
as described in Chapter 1:13. These are Bhuloka,
the sphere of gross matters; Bhuvarloka, the
sphere of fine matters or electric attributes; Swar-
loka, the sphere of magnetic poles and auras or
electricities; Maharloka, the sphere of magnets,
the atoms; Janaloka, the sphere of Spiritual Re-
flections, the Sons of God; Tapoloka, the sphere of
the Holy Ghost, the Universal Spirit; and Satya-
loka, the sphere of God, the Eternal Substance,
Sat. Of these seven planes, the first three (Bhuloka,
Bhuvarloka, and Swarloka) comprise the material


THE PROCEDURE 6l


creation, the kingdom of Darkness, Maya; and the
last three ( Janaloka, Tapoloka, and Satyaloka) com-
prise the spiritual creation, the kingdom of Light.
Maharloka or the sphere of Atom, being in the
midst, is said to be the “door” communicating
between these two—the material and spiritual
creation —and is called Dasamadwara, the tenth
door, or Brahmarandhra, the way to Divinity.


SUTRA 28


waar war: Padana ena TAE, T: steer
faasa, wet ferae faercrcareer qfaffPET: 1 251


Entering Bhuvarloka (“air” or “the world of
becoming”) man becomes a Dwija or “twice born.”
He comprehends the second portion of material
creation—that of finer, subtler forces. This state of
mind is prevalent in Dwapara Yuga.


Dwija or twice-born. When man, being baptized,
begins to repent and move back toward the Eter-
nal Father and, withdrawing his self from the
gross material world, Bhuloka, enters into the
world of fine matter, Bhuvarloka, he is said to
belong to the Dwija or twice-born class. In this
state he comprehends his internal electricities, the
second fine material portion of the creation; and
understands that the existence of the external is
substantially nothing but mere coalescence or
union of his fine internal objects of sense (the


62 THE HOLY SCIENCE


negative attributes of electricities) with his five
organs of sense (the positive attributes) through
his five organs of action (the neutralizing attri-
butes of the same), caused by the operation of his
mind and conscience (consciousness).


The steady heart. This state of man is Dwapara;
and when this becomes the general state of
human beings naturally in any solar system, the
whole of that system is said to be in Dwapara
Yuga. In this Dwapara state the heart becomes
steady.


If man continues in the baptized state, re-
maining immersed in the holy stream, he gradu-
ally comes to a pleasant state wherein his heart
wholly abandons the ideas of the external world
and becomes devoted to the internal one.


SUTRA 29
ent frasana afa: efren:


>
aat, aer fare MAET 1 2c |


In Swarloka (“heaven”) man is fit to understand
the mysteries of Chitta, the magnetic third portion
of material creation. He becomes a Vipra (nearly
perfect being). This state of mind is prevalent in
Treta Yuga.


The devoted heart. In this devoted state man,


THE PROCEDURE 63


withdrawing his self from Bhuvarloka, the world
of electric attributes, comes to Swarloka, the world
of magnetic attributes, the electricities and poles;
he then becomes able to comprehend Chitta,
Heart, the magnetic third portion of creation.
This Chitta, as explained in Chapter 1, is the spiri-
tualized Atom, Avidya or Ignorance, a part of
Darkness, Maya. Man, comprehending this Chitta,
becomes able to understand the whole of Dark-
ness, Maya itself, of which Chitta is a part, as well
as the entire creation. Man is then said to belong
to the Vipra, or nearly perfect, class. This state of
human beings is called Treta; when this becomes
the general state of human beings naturally in any
solar system, the whole of that system is said to be
in Treta Yuga.


SUTRA 30


near feraca fregona qafa
ad: adframe waa AAN,
FAO CAHAT TT ASOT SAAT AIT TST | ATH 1 20 |


Through true repentance man reaches Mahar-
loka (the “great world”). No longer subject to the
influence of ignorance, Maya, he attains a clean
heart. He enters the natural caste of the Brahmanas
(“knowers of Brahma”). This state of mind is preva-
lent in Satya Yuga.


The Clean Heart. Man continuing Godward fur-


64 THE HOLY SCIENCE


ther lifts up his self to Maharloka, the region of
magnet, the Atom; then all the developments of
Ignorance being withdrawn, his heart comes to a
clean state, void of all external ideas. Then man
becomes able to comprehend the Spiritual Light,
Brahma, the Real Substance in the universe,
which is the last and everlasting spiritual portion
in creation. In this stage man is called Brahmana
or of the spiritual class. This stage of the human
being is called Satya, and when this becomes the
general state of man naturally in any solar system,
the whole of that system is said to be in Satya
Yuga.


SUTRAS 31, 32


afr eama maae gerar
aa: Jaaa eaaa amenas aerate
PATIL | 28-22 |


Not merely reflecting but manifesting Spiritual
Light, man rises to Janaloka, the kingdom of God.


Then he passes into Tapoloka, the sphere of
Kutastha Chaitanya.


Abandoning the vain idea of his separate exis-
tence, he enters Satyaloka, wherein he attains the
state of final release or Kaivalya, oneness with
Spirit.


In this way, when the heart becomes purified,
it no longer merely reflects but manifests Spiri-


THE PROCEDURE 65


tual Light, the Son of God; and thus being con-
secrated or anointed by the Spirit it becomes
Christ, the Savior. This is the only way through
which man, being again baptized or absorbed in
Spirit, can rise above the creation of Darkness
and enter into Janaloka, the Kingdom of God;
that is, the creation of Light. In this state man is
called Jivanmukia Sannyasi, like Lord Jesus of
Nazareth. See John 3:5 and 14:6.


“Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be
born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into
the kingdom of God.”

“Jesus saith unto him, I am the way, the truth,
and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by
me.”


In this state man comprehends himself as
nothing but a mere ephemeral idea resting on a
fragment of the universal Holy Spirit of God, the
Eternal Father, and understanding the real wor-
ship, he sacrifices his self there at this Holy Spirit,
the altar of God; that is, abandoning the vain idea
of his separate existence, he becomes “dead” or
dissolved in the universal Holy Spirit; and thus
reaches Tapoloka, the region of the Holy Ghost.


In this manner, being one and the same with
the universal Holy Spirit of God, man becomes
unified with the Eternal Father Himself, and so
comes to Satyaloka, in which he comprehends that
all this creation is substantially nothing but a mere
idea-play of his own nature, and that nothing in


66 THE HOLY SCIENCE


the universe exists besides his own Self. This state
of unification is called Kaivalya, the Sole Self. See
Revelation 14:13 and John 16:28.


“Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from
henceforth.”

“I came forth from the Father; and am come into
the world: agan, I leave the world, and go to the
Father.”


CHAPTER 4
facia: THE REVELATION


SUTRAS 1-3


gears: de agp a cart: fate: 12 |
Ve Pra a wea | = |
asz epa wre qerer Ae


aro afaa a fa: RI


Adeptship is achieved by purification of man’s
three bodies. It is also attainable through the grace


of the guru.

Purification comes through Nature, penance,
and mantras.

Through Nature there is purification of dense
matter (the physical body); through penance, puri-
fication of the fine matter (the subtle body); through
mantras, purification of the mind.


Adeptship is attainable by the purification of
the body in all respects. Purification of the mate-
rial body can be effected by things generated
along with it by Nature; that of the electric body
by patience in all circumstances; and that of the
magnetic body (Paachitia, spiritualized Atom,
Heart) by regulation of the breath, which is called
mantra, the purifier of the mind (#4: arr efa
wat: ). The process of how these purifications can


67


68 THE HOLY SCIENCE


be effected may be learnt at the feet of the divine
personages who witness Light and bear testimony
of the Christ Consciousness.


SUTRAS 4, 5


aerator masaa Wea ty |
dud ae der serde: area ty |


Through the holy effect of the mantra, the
Pranava or Aum sound becomes audible.


The sacred sound is heard in various ways, ac-
cording to the devotee’s stage of advancement (in
purifying his heart).


By culture of regulation of the breath as di-
rected by the Spiritual Preceptor (Sat-Gurw), the
holy Word (re, wẹ Pranava or Sabda) spontane-
ously appears and becomes audible. When this
mantra (Word, Pranava) appears, the breath be-
comes regulated and checks the decay of the ma-
terial body.


This Pranava appears in different forms at
the different stages of advancement, according to
the purification of the heart (Chitta).


SUTRA 6


sanpa wapeanverd: wefacaca


THE REVELATION 59
Ma PaE MAET i & |


One who cultivates the heart’s natural love ob-
tains the guidance of a guru, and starts his sadhana
(path of spiritual discipline). He becomes a Pravar-
taka, an initiate.


It has already been explained what Sat-Guru
is and how to keep the company thereof. Man,
when endowed with the heavenly gift of pure
love, naturally becomes disposed to avoid the
company of what is Asat and to keep the company
of what has been described as Sat. By affection-
ately keeping the company of Sat he may be for-
tunate enough to please one who may kindly
stand to him as his Sat-Guru or Spiritual Precep-
tor. By keeping his preceptor’s Godlike company
there grows an inclination, Pravritti, in the disci-
ple’s heart to save himself from the creation of
darkness, Maya, and he becomes Pravartaka, an
initiate in the practices of Yama and Niyama, the
ascetic forbearances and observances necessary to
obtain salvation.


SUTRA 7


aafaa caperarsrera: Aena aer
ahaa a ar aanren wader io |


By the practice of Yama and Niyama, the eight
meannesses of the human heart disappear and virtue


70 THE HOLY SCIENCE


arises. Man thus becomes a Sadhaka, a true disciple,
fit to attain salvation.


It may be remembered that by the culture of
Yama and Niyama, the eight meannesses vanish
from the human heart and magnanimily comes
in. It is at this stage that man becomes fit for the
practice of ascetic posture and the other processes
pointed out by his Sat-Guru to attain salvation;
when he continues to practice the processes so
pointed out to him by his Sat-Guru he becomes a
Sadhaka or disciple.


SUTRA 8


aa: water feed fea oarfed pean
meae a Poses MAET 15 |


He progresses in godliness, hears the holy Aum
sound, and becomes a Siddha, divine personage.


On reference to Chapter 3 it will be found
how a disciple, while passing through the differ-
ent stages, becomes able to conceive the different
objects of creation in his heart; and how he
gradually advances through the states of medita-
tion; and how, ultimately, by concentrating his
attention on the sensorium, he perceives the
peculiar sound, Pranava or Sabda, the holy Word,
at which time the heart becomes divine and the
Ego, Ahamkara, or son of man becomes merged


THE REVELATION 7i


or baptized in the stream thereof, and the disciple
becomes Siddha, an adept, a divine personage.


SUTRA 9


aima maaa a R aaee aE: 1 e


Then he perceives the manifestations of Spirit,
and passes through the seven Patala Lokas (or cen-
ters in the spine), beholding the seven rishis.


In the state of baptism (Bhakti Yoga, or Surat
Sabda Yoga, absorption of the Ego in the holy
Sound) man repents and withdraws his self from
the external world of gross matters, Bhuloka, and
enters into the internal one of fine matter, the
Bhuvarloka. There he perceives the manifestation
of Spirit, the true Light, like seven stars in seven
centers or astrally shining places, which are com-
pared to seven golden candlesticks. These stars,
being the manifestation of true Light, the Spirit,
are called angels or rishis, which appear one after
another in the right hand of the son of man; that
is, in his right way to Divinity.

‘The seven golden candlesticks are the seven
shining places in the body, known as brain, the
sahasrara; medulla oblongata, the ajna chakra; and
five spinal centers—cervical, visuddha; dorsal,
anahata; lumbar, manitpura; sacral, swadhishthana;
and coccygeal, muladhara, where the Spirit be-


72 THE HOLY SCIENCE


comes manifested. Through these seven centers
or churches, the Ego or son of man passes toward
the Divinity. See Revelation 1:12, 13, 16, 20, and
ad


“And bemg turned, I saw seven golden candle-
sticks; and in the midst of the seven candlesticks one
like unto the son of man....And he had in his right
hand seven stars.”

“The mystery of the seven stars which thou sawest
in my right hand, and the seven golden candlesticks.
The seven stars are the angels of the seven churches;
and the seven candlesticks which thou sawest are the
seven churches.”


“These things saith he that holdeth the seven stars


in his right hand, who walketh in the midst of the seven
golden candlesticks.”


In this state of baptism (Bhakti Yoga or Surat
Sabda Yoga) the Ego, Surat, the son of man, gradu-
ally passing through the seven places mentioned,
acquires the knowledge thereof; and when he
thus completes the journey through the whole of
these regions he understands the true nature of
the universe. Withdrawing his self from Bhuvar-
loka, the fine material creation, he enters into
Swarloka, the source of all matters, fine and gross.
There he perceives the luminous astral form
around his Heart, Atom, the throne of Spirit the
Creator, provided with five electricities and with
two poles, Mind and Intelligence, of seven differ-
ent colors as in rainbows. In this sphere of elec-


THE REVELATION 73


tricities, mind, and intelligence, the source of all
objects of senses and of organs for their enjoy-
ment, man becomes perfectly satisfied with being
in possession of all objects of his desires, and
acquires a complete knowledge thereof. Hence
the aforesaid astral form with its electricities and
poles, the seven parts thereof, has been described
as a sealed casket of knowledge, a book with seven
seals. See Revelation 4:3 and 5:1.


“And there was a rainbow round about the
throne.”

“And I saw in the right hand of him that sat on
the throne a book written within and on the back side,
sealed with seven seals.”


SUTRA 10


aa gaafe aaea
aas erara a aaa: 1 go 1


Then, because of yoga knowledge and power,
man obtains supremacy over the seven Swargas
(heavens). He achieves salvation by dissolving the
four original ideas (the “four manus” or primal
thoughts by which creation sprang into being).


Passing through this Swarloka, the son of
man comes to Maharloka, the place of magnet (the
Atom), of which the ideas of manifestation
(Word), Time, Space, and particle (Atom) are the


74 THE HOLY SCIENCE


four component parts. As mentioned in Chapter
1, this Maharloka represents Avidya, Ignorance,
which produces the idea of separate existence of
self and is the source of Ego, the son of man.
Thus man (ama, manava), being the offspring of
Ignorance, and Ignorance being represented by
the four ideas aforesaid, these ideas are called the
four manus (H+ = aaa), the origins Or sources
of man.


SUTRA il


aa: yasane foma ser ean aaa: 1 ge 1


Being thus victorious over the powers of Dark-
ness and Ignorance, man becomes one with God.


Maharloka, the place of Magnet (Atom), is the
Brahmarandhra or Dasamadwara, the door between
two creations, material and spiritual. When Ego,
the son of man, comes to the door, he compre-
hends the Spiritual Light and becomes baptized
therein. And passing through this door he comes
above the ideational creation of Darkness, Maya,
and entering into the spiritual world, receives the
true Light and becomes the Son of God. Thus
man, being the Son of God, overcomes all bon-
dage of Darkness, Maya, and becomes possessed
of all aiswaryas, the ascetic majesties. These ais-
waryas are of eight sorts:


Anima, the power of making one’s body or


THE REVELATION 75


anything else as small as he likes, even as tiny as an
atom, anu.

Mahima, the power of magnifying or making
one’s body or anything else mahat, as large as he
likes.

Laghima, the power of making one’s body or
anything else laghu, as light in weight as he likes.

Garima, the power of making one’s body or
anything else guru, as heavy as he likes.

Prapti, the power of apti, obtaining anything
he likes.

Vasitwa, the power of vasa, bringing anything
under control.

Prakamya, the power of satisfying all desires,
kama, by irresistible will force.

Isitwa, the power of becoming Isa, Lord, over
everything. See John 14:12.

“Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that believeth on
me, the works that I do shall he do also; and greater


works than these shall he do; because I go unto my
Father.”


SUTRA 12


ma: afsetertanarsrara ae ag a: |
aver arnfesesd aea: oeurenfa gq EEA 1 RR


Knowledge of evolution, life, and dissolution
thus leads to complete emancipation from the bonds


—


76 THE HOLY SCIENCE


of Maya, delusion. Beholding the self in the Su-
preme Self, man gains eternal freedom.


Thus man, being possessed of azswaryas, the
ascetic majesties aforesaid, fully comprehends the
Eternal Spirit, the Father, the only Real Sub-
stance, as Unit, the Perfect Whole, and his Self as
nothing but a mere idea resting on a fragment of
the Spiritual Light thereof. Man, thus compre-
hending, abandons altogether the vain idea of the
separate existence of his own Self and becomes
unified with Him, the Eternal Spirit, God the
Father. This unification with God is Kaivalya, the
ultimate goal of man, as explained in this treatise.
See Revelation 3:21.


“To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with
me in my throne, even as I also overcame, and am set
down with my Father in his throne.”


CONCLUSION


“Love rules the court, the camp, the grove,
The men below and saints above;
For love is heaven and heaven is love.”


The power of love has been beautifully de-
scribed by the poet in the stanza quoted above.* It
has been clearly demonstrated in the foregoing
pages that “Love is God,” not merely as the no-
blest sentiment of a poet but as an aphorism of
eternal truth. To whatever religious creed a man
may belong and whatever may be his position in
society, if he properly cultivates this ruling princi-
ple naturally implanted in his heart, he is sure to
be on the right path, to save himself from wander-
ing in this creation of Darkness, Maya.


It has been shown in the foregoing pages
how love may be cultivated, how by its culture it
attains development, and when developed,
through this means only, how man may find his
Spiritual Preceptor, through whose favor he
again becomes baptized in the holy stream, and
sacrifices his Self before the altar of God, becom-
ing unified with the Eternal Father forever and
ever. This little volume is therefore concluded
with an earnest exhortation to the reader never to


Stanza 2 from the third canto of The Lay of the Last Minstrel, by Sir
Walter Scott.


77


78 THE HOLY SCIENCE


forget the great goal of life. In the words of the
illumined sage, Sankaracharya:


"afate amra aana agaaa aaraa Ek
anfoe assag forar afr aotea aT n


“Life is always unsafe and unstable, like a
drop of water on a lotus leaf. The company of a


divine personage, even for a moment, can save
and redeem us.”
