Yusuf and Zulaikha (Jami; Ralph T. H. Griffith (trans.), 1882)
==========================================================
Jami's great Persian romance of Joseph and Zulaikha in Ralph T. H. Griffith's 1882 English verse translation (Trubner's Oriental Series) — the classic Victorian rendering of the Sufi love epic. Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/ysufzulaikhapo00jamiuoft).

PK

6490

Y8E5

18S2

c.  1

ROBA


TRUBNER'S   ORIENTAL   SERIES.


"  A  knowledge  of  the  commonplace,  at  least,  of  Oriental  literature,  philo-
sophy, and  religion  is  as  necessary  to  the  general  reader  of  the  present  day
as  an  acquaintance  with  the  Latin  and  Greek  classics  was  a  generation  or  so
ago.  Immense  strides  have  been  made  within  the  present  century  in  these
branches  of  learning;  Sanskrit  has  been  brought  within  the  range  of  accurate
philology,  and  its  invaluable  ancient  literature  thoroughly  investigated ;  the
language  and  sacred  books  of  the  Zoroastrians  have  been  laid  bare ;  Egyptian,
Assyrian,  and  other  records  of  the  remote  past  have  been  deciphered,  and  a
group  of  scholars  speak  of  still  more  recondite  Accadian  aud  Hittite  monu-
ments ;  but  the  results  of  all  the  scholarship  that  has  been  devoted  to  these
subjects  have  been  almost  inaccessible  to  the  public  because  they  were  con-
tained for  the  most  part  in  learned  or  expensive  works,  or  scattered  through-
out the  numbers  of  scientific  periodicals.  Messrs.  TRUBXEU  &  Co.,  in  a  spirit
of  enterprise  which  does  them  infinite  credit,  have  determined  to  supply  the
constantly-increasing  want,  and  to  give  in  a  popular,  or,  at  least,  a  compre-
hensive form,  all  this  mass  of  knowledge  to  the  world." — Times.


New  Edition  in  pi°eparalion,
Post  8vo,  pp.  xxxii. — 748,  with  Map,  cloth.

THE  INDIAN  EMPIRE  :    ITS  HISTORY,  PEOPLE,
AND  PRODUCTS.

Being  a  revised  form  of  the  article  "India,"  in  the  "Imperial  Gazetteer,"

remodelled  into  chapters,  brought  up  to  date,  and  incorporating

the  general  results  of  the  Census  of  1881.

By  the  HON.  W.  W.  HUNTER,  C.S.I.,  C.I.E.,  LL.D.

Member  of  the  Viceroy's  Legislative  Council,
Director-General  of  Statistics  to  the  Government  of  India.

"The  article  'India,'  in  Volume  IV.,  is  the  touchstone  of  the  work,  and  proves
clearly  enough  the  sterling  metal  of  which  it  is  wrought.  It  represents  the  essence
of  the  ioo  volumes  which  contain  the  results  of  the  .statistical  survey  conducted  by
Dr.  Hunter  throughout  each  of  the  240  districts  of  India.  It  is,  moreover,  the  only
attempt  that  has  ever  been  made  to  show  how  the  Indian  people  have  been  built  up,
and  the  evidence  from  the  original  materials  has  been  for  the  first  time  sifted  and
examined  by  the  light  of  the  local  research  in  which  the  author  was  for  so  long
engaged.  "—Times.


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES.


THE  FOLLOWING    WORKS  HAVE  ALREADY  APPEARED:—
Third  Edition,  post  8vo,  cloth,  pp.  xvi.— 428,  price  i6s.

ESSAYS  ON  THE  SACRED  LANGUAGE,  WRITINGS,
AND  RELIGION  OF  THE  PARSIS.

BY  MARTIN  HAUG,  PH.D.,

Late  of  the  Universities  of  Tubingen,  Gottingen,  and  Bonn  ;  Superintendent
of  Sanskrit  Studies,  and  Professor  of  Sanskrit  in  the  Poona  College.

EDITED  AND  ENLARGED  BY  DR.  E.  W.  WEST.

To  which  is  added  a  Biogi-aphical  Memoir  of  the  late  Dr.  HAUG

by  Prof.  E.  P.  EVANS.

I.  History  of  the  Researches  into  the  Sacred  Writings  and  Keligion  of  the

Parsis,  from  the  Earliest  Times  down  to  the  Present.
IT.  Languages  of  the  Parsi  Scriptures.

III.  The  Zend-Avesta,  or  the  Scripture  of  the  Parsis.

IV.  The  Zoroastrian  Religion,  as  to  its  Origin  nnd  Development.

"  'Essays  on  the  Sacred  Language,  Writings,  and  Religion  of  the  Parsis.'  by  the
late  Dr.  Martin  Ilaug,  edited  by  Dr.  E.  W.  West.  The  author  intended,  on  his  return
from  India,  to  expand  the  materials  contained  in  this  work  into  a  comprehensive
account  of  the  Zoroastrian  religion,  but  the  design  was  frustrated  by  his  untimely
death.  We  have,  however,  in  a  concise  and  readable  form,  a  history  of  the  researches
into  the  sacred  writings  and  religion  of  the  Parsis  from  the  earliest  times  down  to
the  present — a  dissertation  011  the  languages  of  the  Parsi  Scriptures,  a  translation
of  the  Zend-Avesta,  or  the  Scripture  of  the  Parsis,  and  a  dissertation  oil  the  Zoroas-
trian religion,  with  especial  reference  to  its  origin  and  development."—  Times.


Post  8vo,  cloth,  pp.  viii. — 176,  price  ys.  6d.

TEXTS  FROM  THE  BUDDHIST  CANON

COMMONLY  KNOWN  AS  "  DHAMMAPADA."

With  Accompanying  Narratives.

Translated  from  the  Chinese  by  S.  BEAL,  B.A.,  Professor  of  Chinese,
University  College,  London.

The  Dhammapada,  as  hitherto  known  by  the  Pali  Text  Edition,  as  edited
by  Fausboll,  by  Max  Muller's  English,  and  Albrecht  Weber's  German
translations,  consists  only  of  twenty-six  chapters  or  sections,  whilst  the
Chinese  version,  or  rather  recension,  as  now  translated  by  Mr.  Beal,  con-
sists of  thirty-nine  sections.  The  students  of  Pali  who  possess  Fausboll's
text,  or  either  of  the  above  named  translations,  will  therefore  needs  want
Mr.  Beal's  English  rendering  of  the  Chinese  version  ;  the  thirteen  above-
named  additional  sections  not  being  accessible  to  them  in  any  other  form  ;
for,  even  if  they  understand  Chinese,  the  Chinese  original  would  be  un-
obtainable by  them.

"  Mr.  Beal's  rendering  of  the  Chinese  translation  is  a  most  valuable  aid  to  the
critical  study  of  the  work.  It  contains  authentic  texts  gathered  from  ancient
canonical  books,  and  generally  connected  with  some  incident  in  tlie  history  of
Buddha.  Their  great  interest,  however,  consists  in  the  light  which  they  throw  upon
everyday  life  in  India  at  the  remote  period  at  which  they  were  written,  and  upon
the  method  of  teaching  adopted  by  the  founder  of  the  religion.  The  method
employed  was  principally  parable,  and  the  simplicity  of  the  tales  and  the  excellence
of  the  morals  inculcated,  as  well  as  the  strange  hold  which  they  have  retained  upon
the  minds  of  millions  of  people,  make  them  a  very  remarkable  study." — Times.

"  Mr.  Beal,  by  making  it  accessible  in  an  English  dress,  has  added  to  the  great  ser-
vices he  has  already  rendered  to  the  comparative  study  of  religious  history." — Awdt  my,

"Valuable  as  exhibiting  the  doctrine  of  the  Buddhists  in  its  purest,  least  adul-
terated form,  it  brings  the  modern  reader  face  to  face  with  that  situ  pie  creed  and  rule
of  conduct  which  won  its  way  over  the  minds  of  myriads,  and  which  is  now  nominally
professed  by  145  millions,  who  have  overlaid  its  austere  simplicity  with  innumerable
ceremonies,  forgotten  its  maxims,  perverted  its  teaching,  and  so  inverted  its  leading
principle  that  a  religion  whose  founder  denied  a  God,  now  worships  that  founder  as
a  g»d  himself." — Scot*nt<'i>.


TR  UB NEK'S  ORIENTAL  SRKIKS.


Second  Edition,  post  8vo,  cloth,  pp.  xxiv. — 360,  price  ics.  6d.

THE  HISTORY  OF  INDIAN  LITERATURE.

Bvr  ALBRECHT  WEBER.

Translated  from  the  Second  German  Edition  by  JOHN  MANN,  M.  A.,  and
THEODOK  ZACHAUIAE,  Ph.D.,  with  the  sanction  of  the  Author.

Dr.  BUHLER,  Inspector  of  Schools  in  India,  writes: — "When  I  was  Pro-
fessor of  Oriental  Languages  in  Elphiiistone  College,  I  frequently  felt  the
want  of  such  a  work  to  which  I  could  refer  the  students."

Professor  CoWELL,  of  Cambridge,  writes  :— "  It  will  be  especially  useful
to  the  students  in  our  Indian  colleges  and  universities.  I  used  to  long  for
such  a  book  when  I  was  teaching  in  Calcutta.  Hindu  students  ate  intensely
interested  in  the  history  of  Sanskrit  literature,  and  this  volume  will  Supply
them  with  all  they  want  on  the  subject."

Professor  WHITNEY,  Yale  College,  Newhaven,  Conn.,  U.S.A.,  writes  :—
"  I  was  one  of  the  class  to  whom  the  work  was  originally  given  in  the  form
of  academic  lectures.  At  their  first  appearance  they  were  by  far  the  most
learned  and  able  treatment  of  their  subject ;  and  with  their  recent  additions
they  still  maintain  decidedly  the  same  rank.'*

"  Is  perhaps  the  most^  comprehensive  and  lucid  survey  of  Sanskrit  literature
extant.  The  essays  contained  in  the  volume  were  originally  delivez-ed  as  academic
lectures,  and  at  the  time  of  their  first  publication  were  acknowledged  to  be  by  far
the  most  learned  and  able  treatment  of  the  subject*  They  have  now  been  brought
up  to  date  by  the  addition  of  all  the  most  important  results  of  recent  research.  "^»
Times.

Post  8vo,  cloth,  pp.  xii. — 198,  accompanied  by  Two  Language
Maps,  price  128.

A  SKETCH  OP
THE  MODERN  LANGUAGES  OF  THE  EAST  INDIES.

BY  ROBERT  N.  CUST.

The  Author  has  attempted  to  fill  up  a  vacuum,  the  inconvenience  of
which  pressed  itself  on  his  notice.  Mueh  had  been  written  about  the
languages  of  the  East  Indies,  but  the  extent  of  our  present  knowledge  had
not  even  been  brought  to  a  focus.  It  occurred  to  him  that  it  might  be  of
use  to  others  to  publish  in  an  arranged  form  the  notes  whieh  he  had  collected
for  his  own  edification.

"  Supplies  a  deficiency  which  has  long  been  felt." — Times.

"  The  book  before  us  is  then  a  valuable  contribution  to  philological  science.  It
passes  under  review  a  vast  number  of  languages,  and  it  gives,  or  professes  to  give,  in
every  case  the  sum  and  substance  of  the  opinions  and  judgments  of  the  best-informed
Writers. " — Saturday  Reviev}.

Second  Corrected  Edition,  post  8vo,  pp.  xii. — 116,  cloth,  price  58,

THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

A  Poem.     BY  KALIDASA.

Translated  from  the  Sanskrit  into  English  Verse  by
RALPH  T.  H.  GRIFFITH,  M.A.

"  A  very  spirited  rendering  of  the  Kumdrasambhara,  which  was  first  published
twefity-six  years  ago,  and  which  we  are  glad  to  see  made  once  more  accessible." —
Times.

"  Mr.  Griffith's  very  spirited  rendering  is  Well  known  to  most  who  are  at  all
interested  in  Indian  literature,  or  enjoy  the  tenderness  of  feeling  and  rich  creative
imagination  of  its  author."— Indian  Antiquary.

"  We  are  very  glad  to  welcome  a  second  edition  of  Professor  Griffith's  admirable
translation.  Few  translations  deserve  a  second  edition  better."— Aihei\aurn.


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES.


Post  8vo,  pp.  432,  cloth,  price  i6s.

A  CLASSICAL  DICTIONARY  OF  HINDU  MYTHOLOGY

AND  RELIGION,  GEOGRAPHY,  HISTORY,  AND

LITERATURE.

BY  JOHN  DOWSON,  M.R.A.S.,
Late  Professor  of  Hindustani,  Staff  College.

"  This  not  only  forms  an  indispensable  book  of  reference  to  students  of  Indian
literature,  but  is  also  of  great  general  interest,  as  it  gives  in  a  concise  and  easily

cessible  form  all  that  need  be  known  about  the  personages  of  Hindu  mythology
whose  names  are  so  familiar,  but  of  whom  so  little  is  known  outside  the  limited
circle  of  savants." — Times.

"  It  is  no  slight  gain  when  such  subjects  are  treated  fairly  and  fully  in  a  moderate
space  ;  and  we  need  only  add  that  the  few  wants  which  we  may  hope  to  see  supplied
in  new  editions  detract  but  little  from  the  general  excellence  of  Mr.  Dowson's  work."
— Saturday  Review.

Post  8vo,  with  View  of  Mecca,  pp.  cxii. — 172,  cloth,  price  gs,

SELECTIONS  FROM  THE  KORAN.

BY  EDWARD  WILLIAM  LANE,

Translator  of  "  The  Thousand  and  One  Nights ; "  &c.,  &c.
A  New  Edition,  Revised  and  Enlarged,  with  an  Introduction  by

STANLEY  LANE  POOLE.

"...  Has  been  Ion?  esteemed  in  this  country  as  the  compilation  of  one  of  the
greatest  Arabic  scholars  of  the  time,  the  late  Mr.  L-ane,  the  well-known  translator  of
the  '  Arabian  Nights. "...  The  present  editor  has  enhanced  the  value  of  his
relative's  work  by  divesting  the  text  of  a  great  deal  of  extraneous  matter  introduced
by  way  of  comment,  and  prefixing  an  introduction." — Times.

"  Mr.  Poole  is  both  a  generous  and  a  learned  biographer.  .  .  .  Mr.  Poole  tells  us
the  facts  ...  so  far  as  it  is  possible  for  industry  and  criticism  to  ascertain  them,
and  for  literary  skill  to  present  them  in  a  condensed  and  readable  form." — English-
man, Calcutta.

Post  8vo,  pp.  vi. — 368,  cloth,  price  143.

MODERN  INDIA  AND  THE  INDIANS,
BEING  A  SERIES  OF  IMPRESSIONS,  NOTES,  AND  ESSAYS.

BY  MONIER  WILLIAMS,  D.C.L.,
Hon.  LL.D.  of  the  University  of  Calcutta,  Hon.  Member  of  the  Bombay  Asiatic

Society,  Boden  Professor  of  Sanskrit  in  the  University  of  Oxford.
Third  Edition,  revised  and  augmented  by  considerable  Additions,

with  Illustrations  and  a  Map.

"  In  this  volume  we  have  the  thoughtful  impressions  of  a  thoughtful  man  on  some
of  the  most  important  questions  connected  with  our  Indian  Empire.  .  .  .  An  en-
lightened observant  man,  tra veiling  among  an  enlightened  observant  people,  Professor
Monier  Williams  has  brought  before  the  public  in  a  pleasant  form  more  of  the  manners
and  customs  of  the  Queen's  Indian  subjects  than  we  ever  remember  to  have  seen  in
any  one  work.  He  not  only  deserves  the  thanks  of  every  Englishman  for  this  able
contribution  to  the  study  of  Modern  India— a  subject  with  which  we  should  be
specially  familiar — but  he  deserves  the  thanks  of  every  Indian,  Parsee  or  Hindu,
Buddhist  and  Moslem,  for  his  clear  exposition  of  their  manners,  their  creeds,  and
their  necessities."— Times.

Post  8vo,  pp.  xliv. — 376.  cloth,  price  143.

METRICAL  TRANSLATIONS  FROM  SANSKRIT
WRITERS.

With  an  Introduction,  many  Prose  Versions,  and  Parallel  Passages  from

Classical  Authors.
BY  J.  MUIR,  C.I.E.,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.,  Ph.D.

"...  An  agreeable  introduction  to  Hindu  poetry."—?'"/"'.

"...  A  volume  which  maybe  taken  as  a  fair  illustration  alike  of  the  religious
and  moral  sentiments  and  of  the  legendary  lore  of  the  best  Sanskrit  wii'
Edinburgh  Daily  R^ieii.


TKUISXKR'S  ORIENTAL  .VAA'/A.Y


Second  Edition,  post  8vo,  pp.  xxvi. — 244,  cloth,  price  IDS.  6d.

THE     GULISTAN;
OR,  ROSE  GARDEN  OF  SHEKH  MUSHLIU'D-DIN  SADI  OF  SHIRAZ.

Translated  for  the  First  Time  into  Prose  and  Verse,  with  an  Introductory
Preface,  and  a  Life  of  the  Author,  from  the  Atish  Kadah,

BY  EDWARD  B.  EASTWICK,  C.B.,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  M.R.A.S.

"  It  is  a  very  fair  rendering  of  the  original." — Times.

"  The  new  edition  has  long  been  desired,  and  will  be  welcomed  by  all  who  take
any  interest  in  Oriental  poetry.  The  Gulistan  is  a  typical  Persian  verse-book  of  the
highest  order.  Mr.  Eastwick's  rhymed  translation  .  .  .  has  long  established  itself  in
a  secure  position  as  the  best  version  of  Sadi's  finest  work." — Academy.

"  It  is  both  faithfully  and  gracefully  executed."—  Tablet.


In  Two  Volumes,  post  8vo,  pp.  viii. — 408  and  viii. — 348,  cloth,  price  283.

MISCELLANEOUS    ESSAYS    RELATING     TO    INDIAN
SUBJECTS.

BY  BRIAN  HOUGHTON  HODGSON,  ESQ.,  F.R.S.,

Late  of  the  Bengal  Civil  Service  ;  Corresponding  Member  of  the  Institute  ;  Chevalier
of  the  Legion  of  Honour  ;  lato  British  Minister  at  the  Court  of  Nepal,  die.,  &c.

CONTENTS  OF-'  VOL.  I.

SECTION  I.— On  the  Kocch,  Bodo,  and  Dhinial  Tribes.— Part  I.  Vocabulary.--
Part  II.  Grammar.— Part  III.  Their  Origin,  Location,  Numbers,  Creed,  Customs,
Character,  and  Condition,  with  a  General  Description  of  the  Climate  they  dwell  iu.
— Appendix.

SECTION  II. — On  Himalayan  Ethnology. — I.  Comparative  Vocabulary  of  the  Lan-
guages of  the  Broken  Tribes  of  Ne"pal. — II.  Vocabulary  of  the  Dialects  of  the  Kiranti
Language. — III.  Grammatical  Analysis  of  the  Vayu  Language.  The  Vayu  Grammar.
—IV.  Analysis  of  the  Bahing  Dialect  of  the  Kiranti  Language.  The  Billing  Gram-
mar.—V.  On  the  Vayu  or  Hayu  Tribe  of  the  Central  Himalaya.— VI.  On  tue  Kirami
Tribe  of  the  Central  Himalaya.

CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  II.

SECTION  III. — On  the  Aborigines  of  North-Eastern  India.  Comparative  Vocabulary
of  the  Tibetan,  Bodo,  and  Garo  Tongues.

SECTION  IV. — Aborigines  of  the  North-Eastern  Frontier.

SECTION  V.— Aborigines  of  the  Eastern  Frontier.

SECTION  VI. — The  Indo-Chinese  Borderers,  and  their  connection  with  the  Hima-
layans  and  Tibetans.  Comparative  Vocabulary  of  Indo-Chinese  Borderers  in  Arakan.
Comparative  Vocabulary  of  Indo-Chinese  Borderers  in  Tenasserim.

SECTION  VII. — The  Mongolian  Affinities  of  the  Caucasians. — Comparison  and  Ana-
lysis of  Caucasian  and  Mongolian  Words.

SECTION  VIII.— Physical  Type  of  Tibetans.

SECTION  IX. — The  Aborigines  of  Central  India. — Comparative  Vocabulary  of  the
Aboriginal  Languages  of  Central  India. — Aborigines  of  the  Eastern  Ghats. — Vocabu-
lary of  some  of  the  Dialects  of  the  Hill  and  Wandering  Tribes  in  the  Northern  Sircars.
— Aborigines  of  the  Nilgiris,  with  Remarks  on  their  Affinities. — Supplement  to  the
Nilgiriaii  Vocabularies.— The  Aborigines  of  Southern  India  and  Ceylon.

SECTION  X. — Route  of  Nepale^e  Mission  to  Pekiu,  with  Remarks  on  the  Water-
Shed  and  Plate  ;u  of  Tibet.

SECTION  XL— Route  from  Kathmandvi,  the  Capital  of  Nepal,  to  Darjeeling  in
Sikim.— Memorandum  relative  to  the  Seven  Cosis  of  Nepal.

SECTION  XII.— Some  Accounts  of  the  Systems  of  Law  and  Police  as  recognised  in
the  State  of  Nepal.

SECTION  XIII. — The  Native  Method  of  making  the  Paper  denominated  Hindustan,
Nepalese.

SECTION  XIV.— Pre-eminence  of  the  Vernaculars;  or,  the  Anglicists  Answered  ;
Being  Letters  on  the  Education  of  the  People  of  India.

"For the  study  of  the  less-known  races  of  India  Mr.  Brian  Hodgson's  'Miscellane-
ous Essays'  will  be  found  very  valuable  both  to  tnc  philologist  and  tho  ethnologist."
—  Times


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES.


Third  Edition,  Two  Vols.,  post  8vo,  pp.  viii.— 268  and  viii.— 326,  cloth,
price  2is.

THE  LIFE  OR  LEGEND  OF  GAUDAMA,

THE  BUDDHA  OF  THE  BURMESE.     With  Annotations.

The  Ways  to  Neibban,  and  Notice  on  the  Phongyies  or  Burmese  Monks.

BY  THE  EIGHT  REV.  P.  BIGANDET,
Bishop  of  Ramatha,  Vicar- Apostolic  of  Ava  and  Pegu.

"The  work  is  furnished  with  copious  notes,  which  not  only  illustrate  the  subject-
matter,  but  form  a  perfect  encyclopaedia  of  Buddhist  lore." — Times.

"A  work  which  will  furnish  European  students  of  Buddhism  with  a  most  valuable
help  in  the  prosecution  of  their  investigations." — Edinburgh  Daily  Review.

"  Bishop  Bigandet's  invaluable  work." — Indian  Antiquary.

"  Viewed  in  this  light,  its  importance  is  sufficient  to  place  students  of  the  subject
under  a  deep  obligation  to  its  author." — Calcutta  Review.

"This  work  is  one  of  the  greatest  authorities  upon  Buddhism."— Dublin  Review.


Post  8vo,  pp.  xxiv, — 420,  cloth,  price  i8s.

CHINESE    BUDDHISM.

A  VOLUME  OF  SKETCHES,  HISTORICAL  AND  CRITICAL.

BY  J.  EDKINS,  D.D.
Author  of  " China's  Place  in  Philology,"  "Religion  in  China,"  &c.,  &c.

"It  contains  a  vast  deal  of  important  information  on  the  subject,  such  as  is  only
to  be  gained  by  long-continued  study  on  the  spot."~Athenceum.

"  Upon  the  whole,  we  know  of  no  work  comparable  to  it  for  the  extent  of  its
original  research,  and  the  simplicity  with  which  this  complicated  system  of  philo-
sophy, religion,  literature,  and  ritual  is  set  forth." — British  Quarterly  Review.

"  The  whole  volume  is  replete  with  learning.  ...  It  deserves  most  careful  study
from  all  interested  in  the  history  of  the  religions  of  the  world,  and  expressly  of  those
who  are  concerned  in  the  propagation  of  Christianity.  Dr.  Edkins  notices  in  terms
of  just  condemnation  the  exaggerated  praise  bestowed  upon  Buddhism  by  recent
English  writers."— Record,


Post  8vo,  pp.  496,  cloth,  price  i8s.

LINGUISTIC   AND   ORIENTAL   ESSAYS.

WRITTEN  FROM  THE  YEAR  1846  TO  1878.

BY  ROBERT  NEEDHAM  CUST,
Late  Member  of  Her  Majesty's  Indian  Civil  Service;  Hon.  Secretary  to

the  Royal  Asiatic  Society ;
and  Author  of  "  The  Modern  Languages  of  the  East  Indies."

"  We  know  none  who  lias  described  Indian  life,  especially  the  life  of  the  natives,
with  so  n:u;h  learning,  sympathy,  and  literary  talent.  "t—A cademy.

"They  seem  to  us  to  be  full  of  suggestive  and  original  remarks."— 52.  James's  Gazette.

"  His  book  contains  a  vast  amount  of  information.  The  result  of  thirty-five  years
of  inquiry,  reflection,  and  speculation,  and  that  on  subjects  as  full  of  fascination  as
of  food  for  thought."— Tablet.

"  Exhibit  such  a  thorough  acquaintance  with  the  history  and  antiquities  of  India
as  to  entitle  him  to  speak  as  one  having  authority.  "—Edinburgh  Daily  Review.

"  The  author  speaks  with  the  authority  of  personal  experience It  is  this

constant  association  with  the  country  and  the  people  which  gives  such  a  vividness
to  many  of  the  pages." — Athenatuvi.


TRUBN£R'S  ORIENTAL  SKR1KS.


Post  8vo,  pp.  civ.— 348,  cloth,  price  i8s.

BUDDHIST  BIRTH  STORIES;   or,  Jataka  Tales.

The  Oldest  Collection  of  Folk-lore  Extant :

BEING   THE   JATAKATTHAVANNANA,

For  the  first  time  Edited  in  the  original  Pali.

BY  V.  FAUSBOLL  ;

And  Translated  by  T.  W.  RHYS  DAVIDS.

Translation.     Volume  T.

"These  are  talcs  supposed  to  have  been  told  by  the  Buddha  of  what  he  dad  seen
and  heard  in  his  previous  births.  They  are  probably  the  nearest  representatives
of  the  original  Aryan  stories  from  which  sprang  the  folk-lore  of  Kurope  jis  well  -1.1
India.  The  Introduction  contains  a  most  interesting  disquisition  on  the  migrations
of  these  fables,  tracing  their  reappearance  in  the  various  groups  of  folk-lore  legends.
Among  other  old  friends,  we  meet  with  a  version  of  the  J udgment  of  Solomon. " —  Ti  mat.

"  It  is  now  some  years  since  Mr.  Bhys  Davids  asserted  his  right  to  be  heard  on
this  subject  by  his  able  article  on  Buddhism  in  the  new  edition  of  the  '  Encyclopaedia
Britannica."' — Leeds  Mercury.

"  All  who  are  interested  in  Buddhist  literature  ought  to  feel  deeply  indebted  to
Mr.  Rhys  Davids.  His  well-established  reputation  as  a  Pali  scholar  is  a  sufficient
guarantee  for  the  fidelity  of  his  version,  and  the  style  of  his  translations  is  deserving
of  high  praise." — Academy.

"  No  more  competent  expositor  of  Buddhism  could  be  found  tnan  Mr.  Rhys  Davids.
In  the  Jataka  book  we  have,  then,  a  priceless  record  of  the  earliest  imaginative
literature  of  our  race ;  and  ...  it  presents  to  us  a  nearly  complete  picture  of  the
social  life  and  customs  and  popular  beliefs  of  the  common  people  of  Aryan  tribes,
closely  related  to  ourselves,  just  as  they  were  passing  through  the  first  stages  of
civilisation." — St.  James's  Gazette.


Post  8vo,  pp.  xxviii. — 362,  cloth,  price  143.

A    TALMUDIC    MISCELLANY;
OR,  A  THOUSAND  AND  ONE  EXTRACTS  FROM  THE  TALMUD,

THE  MIDRASHIM,  AND  THE  KABBALAH.

Compiled  and  Translated  by  PAUL  ISAAC  HERSEON,

Author  of  "  Genesis  According  to  the  Talmud,"  &c.

With  Notes  and  Copious  Indexes,

"  To  obtain  in  so  concise  and  handy  a  form  as  this  volume  a  gene;:il  idea  of  the
Talmud  is  a  boon  to  Christians  at  least." — Times.

"  Its  peculiar  and  popular  chai-aeter  will  make  it  attractive  to  general  readers.
Mr.  Hershou  is  a  very  competent  scholar.  .  .  .  Contains  samples  of  the  good,  bad,
and  indifferent,  and  especially  extracts  that  throw  light  upon  the  Scriptures." —
British  Quarterly  Review.

"  Will  convey  to  English  readers  a  more  complete  and  truthful  notion  of  the
Talmud  than  any  other  work  that  has  yet  appeared."— Dailn  JV>«.

"  Without  overlooking  in  the  slightest  the  several  attractions  of  the  previous
volumes  of  the  '  Oriental  Series.'  we  have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that  this  surpasses
them  all  in  interest." — Edinburgh  Daily  Review.

"  Mr.  Hershon  has  .  .  .  thus  given  English  readers  what  is.  we  believe,  a  fair  set
of  specimens  which  they  can  test  for  themselves."—  The  RecarA

"  This  book  is  by  far  the  best  fitted  in  the  present  state  of  knowledge  to  enable  the
general  reader  to  gain  a  fair  and  unbiassed  conception  of  the  multifarious  contents
of  the  wonderful  miscellany  \vhich  can  only  be  truly  understood— so  Jewish  pride
asserts by  the  life-long  devotion  of  scholars  of  the  Chosen  People." — Inquirer.

"  The  value  and  importance  of  this  volume  consist  in  the  fact  that  scarcely  a  single
extract  is  given  in  its  pages  but  throws  some  light,  direct  or  refracted,  upon  thoso
Scriptures  which  are  the  common  heritage  of  Jew  and  Christian  alike."— John  Bull.

"  It  is  a  capital  specimen  of  Hebrew  scholarship ;  a  monument  of  learned,  loving,
light-giving  labour."— Jewish  Herald.


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES.


Post  8vo,  pp.  xii. — 228,  cloth,  price  75.  6d.

THE  CLASSICAL  POETRY  OF  THE  JAPANESE.

BY    BASIL    HALL    CHAMBERLAIN,

Author  of  "  Yeigo  Henkaku  Shiran."

"  A  very  curious  volume.  The  author  has  manifestly  devoted  much  labour  to  the
task  of  studying  the  poetical  literature  of  the  Japanese,  and  rendering  characteristic
specimens  into  English  verse." — Daily  News.

"  Mr.  Chamberlain's  volume  is,  so  far  as  we  are  aware,  the  first  attempt  which  has
been  made  to  interpret  the  literature  of  the  Japanese  to  the  Western  world.  It  is  to
the  classical  poetry  of  Old  Japan  that  we  must  turn  for  indigenous  Japanese  thought,
and  in  the  volume  before  us  we  have  a  selection  from  that  poetry  rendered  into
graceful  English  verse." — Tablet.

"It  is  undoubtedly  one  of  the  best  translations  of  lyric  literature  which  has
appeared  during  the  close  of  the  last  year." — Celestial  Empire.

"Mr.  Chamberlain  set  himself  a  difficult  task  when  he  undertook  to  reproduce
Japanese  poetry  in  an  English  form.  But  he  has  evidently  laboured  con  amore,  and
his  efforts  are  successful  to  a  degree." — London  and  China  Express.


Post  8vo,  pp.  xii. — 164,  cloth,  price  zos.  6d.

THE  HISTORY  OF  ESARHADDON  (Son  of  Sennacherib),
KING  OF  ASSYRIA,  B.C.  681-668.

Translated  from  the  Cuneiform  Inscriptions  upon  Cylinders  and  Tablets  in
the  British  Museum  Collection ;  together  with  a  Grammatical  Analysis
of  each  Word,  Explanations  of  the  Ideographs  by  Extracts  from  the
Bi-Liugual  Syllabaries,  and  List  of  Eponyms,  &c.

BY  ERNEST  A.  BUDGE,  B.A.,  M.R.A.S.,

Assyrian  Exhibitioner,  Christ's  College,  Cambridge.

"  Students  of  scriptural  archaeology  will  also  appreciate  the  '  History  of  Esar-
haddou.' " — Times.

"There  is  much  to  attract  the  scholar  in  this  volume.  It  does  not  pretend  to
popularise  studies  which  are  yet  in  their  infancy.  Its  primary  object  is  to  translate,
but  it  does  not  assume  to  be  more  than  tentative,  and  it  offers  both  to  the  professed
Assyriologist  and  to  the  ordinary  nou-Assyriological  Semitic  scholar  the  means  of
controlling  its  results." — Academy.

"Mr.  Budge's  book  is,  of  course,  mainly  addressed  to  Assyrian  scholars  and
students.  They  are  not,  it  is  to  be  feared,  a  very  numerous  class.  But  the  more
thanks  are  due  to  him  on  that  account  for  the  way  in  which  he  has  acquitted  himself
in  his  laborious  task." — Tablet.


Post  8vo,  pp.  448,  cloth,  price  2is.

THE    MESNEVI

(Usually  known  as  THE  MESNEVIYI  SHERIF,  or  HOLY  MESNEVI)

OF
MEVLANA  (OUR  LORD)  JELALU  'D-DIN  MUHAMMED  ER-RUMI.

Book  the  First.
Together  with  some  Account  of  the  Life  and  Acts  of  the  Author,

of  his  Ancestors,  and  of  his  Descendants.
Illustrated  by  a  Selection  of  Characteristic  Anecdotes,  as  Collected

by  their  Historian,
MEVLANA  SHEMSU-'D-DIN  AHMED,  EL  EFLAKI,  EL  'AniFi.

Translated,  and  the  Poetry  Versified,  in  English,
BY   JAMES   W.    REDHOUSE,    M.  R.  A.  S.,   &c.

"  A.  complete  treasury  of  occult  Oriental  lore." — Saturday  &•,

'  'Tins  book  will  be  a  very  valuable  help  to  the  reader  ignorant  of  Persia,  who  is
desirous  of  obtaining  an  insight  into  a  vury  important  department  of  the  literature
extant  in  that  language."— Tablet.


TK  <7/>'.V/-:  A'  'S  OK  I  EN  TA  I.  A  /•:  K 1 1. S.


Post  8vo,  pp.  xvi.—  280,  cloth,  price  6s.

EASTERN   PROVERBS   AND  EMBLEMS

ILLUSTRATING  OLD  TRUTHS.

BY  REV.  J.  LONG,
Member  of  the  Bengal  Asiatic  Society,  F.R.G.S.

"  We  regard  the  book  as  valuable,  and  wish  for  it  a  wide  circulation  ami  attentive
reading."  —  A'«v<,-./.

"  Altogether,  it  is  quite  a  feast  of  good  things."—  Olobe.
"  It  is  full  of  interesting  matter."  —  Antiquary.


Post  8vo,  pp.  viii.  —  270,  cloth,  price  73.  6d.
INDIAN     POETRY;

Containing  a  New  Edition  of  the  "Indian  Song  of  Songs,"  from  the  Sanpcrit
of  the  "Gita  Govinda"  of  Jayadeva  ;  Two  Books  from  "The  Iliad  of
India"  (Mahabharata),  "  Proverbial  Wisdom  "  from  the  Shlokas  of  the
Hitopadesa,  and  other  Oriental  Poems.

BY  EDWIN  ARNOLD,  C.S.I.,  Author  of  "The  Light  of  Asia."

"  In  this  new  volume  of  Messrs.  Triibner's  Oriental  Series,  Mr.  Edwin  Arnold  does
good  service  by  illustrating,  through  the  medium  of  his  musical  English  melodies,
the  power  of  Indian  poetry  to  stir  European  emotions.  The  '  Indian  Song  of  Songs  '
is  not  unknown  to  scholars.  Mr.  Arnold  will  have  introduced  it  among  popular
English  poems.  Nothing  could  be  more  graceful  and  delicate  than  the  shades  by
which  Krishna  is  portrayed  in  the  gradual  process  of  being  weaned  by  the  love  of

1  Beautiful  Radha,  jasmine-bosomed  Radha,'

from  the  allurements  of  the  forest  nymphs,  in  whom  the  five  senses  are  typified."—
Times.

"  No  other  English  poet  has  ever  thrown  his  genius  and  his  art  so  thoroughly  into
the  work  of  translating  Eastern  ideas  as  Mr.  Arnold  has  done  in  his  splendid"  para-
phrases of  language  contained  in  these  mighty  epics."—  Daily  Telegraph.

"  The  poem  abounds  with  imagery  of  Eastern  luxuriousness  and  sensuousn'  ss  ;  the
air  seems  laden  with  the  spicy  odours  of  the  tropics,  and  the  verse  has  a  richness  and
a  melody  sufficient  to  captivate  the  senses  of  the  dullest."  —  SUnu/anl.

"  The  translator,  while  producing  a  very  enjoyable  poem,  has  adhered  with  toler-
able fidelity  to  the  original  text."—  Overland  M«'t1.

"  We  certainly  wish  Mr.  Arnold  success  in  his  attempt  '  to  popularise  Indian
classics,'  that  being,  as  his  preface  tells  us,  the  goal  towards  which  he  bends  his
efforts."  —  Allen's  Indian  Mail.


Post  8vo,  pp.  xvi. — 296,  cloth,  price  IDS.  6d.

THE  MIND  OF  MENCIUS ;

OH,  POLITICAL  ECONOMY  FOUNDED  UPON  MORAL
PHILOSOPHY.

A  SYSTEMATIC  DIGEST  OF  THE  DOCTRINES  OF  THE  CHINESE  PHILOSOPHER
MENCIUS.

Translated  from  the  Original  Text  and  Classified,  with
Comments  and  Explanations,

By  the  REV.  ERNST  FABER,  Rhenish  Mission  Society.

Translated  from  the  German,  with  Additional  Notes,
By  the  REV.  A.  B.  HUTCHINSON,  C.M.S.,  Church  Mission,  Hong  Kong.

"  Mr.  Faber  is  already  well  known  in  the  field  of  Chinese  studies  by  his  digest  of
the  doctrines  of  Confucius.  The  value  of  this  work  will  be  perceived  when  it  is
remembered  that  at  no  time  since  relations  commenced  between  China  and  the
West  has  the  former  been  so  powerful — we  had  almost  said  aggressive — as  now.
For  those  who  will  give  it  careful  study,  Mr.  Faber's  work  is  one  of  ti
valuable  of  the  excellent  series  to  which  it  bcluiigs." — Jfiituri.


7'RUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES.


Post  8vo,  pp.  336,  cloth,  price  i6s.

THE    RELIGIONS  OF    INDIA.

BY  A.  EARTH.
Translated  from  the  French  with  the  authority  and  assistance  of  the  Author.

The  author  has,  at  the  request  of  the  publishers,  considerably  enlarged
the  work  for  the  translator,  and  has  added  the  literature  of  the  subject  to
date  ;  the  translation  may,  therefore,  be  looked  upon  as  an  equivalent  of  a
new  and  improved  edition  of  the  original.

"  Is  not  only  a  valuable  manual  of  the  religions  of  India,  which  marks  a  distinct
step  in  the  treatment  of  the  subject,  but  also  a  useful  work  of  reference." — Academy.

"This  volume  is  a  reproduction,  with  corrections  and  additions,  of  an  article
contributed  by  the  learned,  author  two  years  ago  to  the  '  Encyclopedic  des  Sciences
Religieuses.'  It  attracted  much  notice  when  it  first  appeared,  and  is  generally
admitted  to  present  the  best  summary  extant  of  the  vast  subject  with  which  it
deals."—  Tablet.

"  This  is  not  only  on  the  whole  the  best  but  the  only  manual  of  the  religions  of
India,  apart  from  Buddhism,  which  we  have  in  English.  The  present  work  .  .  .
shows  not  only  great  knowledge  of  the  facts  and  power  of  clear  exposition,  but  also
great  insight  into  the  inner  history  and  the  deeper  meaning  of  the  great  religion,
for  it  is  in  reality  only  one,  which  it  proposes  to  describe."— Modem  Revieio.

"  The  merit  of  the  work  has  been  emphatically  recognised  by  the  most  authoritative
Orientalists,  both  in  this  country  and  on  the  continent  of  Europe,  But  probably
there  are  few  Indianists  (if  we  may  use  the  word)  who  would  not  derive  a  good  deal
of  information  from  it,  and  especially  from  the  extensive  bibliography  provided  in
the  notes." — Dublin  Review.

"  Such  a  sketch  M.  Barth  has  drawn  with  a  master-hand."— Critic  (New  York).


Post  8vo,  pp.  viii. — 152,  cloth,  price  6s.

HINDU   PHILOSOPHY.
THE  SANKHYA  KARIKA  OF  IS'WARA  KRISHNA.

An  Exposition  of  the  System  of  Kapila,  with  an  Appendix  on  the
Nyaya  and  Yais'eshika  Systems.

BY  JOHN  DAYIES,  M.A.  (Cantab.),  M.R.A.S.

The  system  of  Kapila  contains  nearly  all  that  India  has  produced  in  the
department  of  pure  philosophy.

"The  non-Orientalist  .  .  .  finds  in  Mr.  Davies  a  patient  and  learned  gu:de  who
leads  him  into  the  intricacies  of  the  philosophy  of  India,  and  supplies  him  witli  a  clue,
that  lie  may  not  be  lost  in  them.  In  the  preface  he  states  that  the  system  of
Kapila  is  the  '  earliest  attempt  on  record  to  give  an  answer,  from  reason  alone,
to  the  mysterious  questions  which  arise  in  every  thoughtful  mind  about  the  origin  of
the  world,  the  nature  and  relations  of  man  and  his  future  destiny,'  and  in  his  learned
and  able  notes  he  exhibits  '  the  connection  of  the  Sankhya  system  with  the  philo-
sophy of  Spinoza,'  and  '  the  connection  of  the  system  of  Kapila  with  that  of  Schopen-
hauer and  Von  Hartniann.'  " — Foreign  Church  Chronicle.

"  Mr.  Davies's  volume  on  Hindu  Philosophy  is  an  undoubted  gain  to  all  students
of  the  development  of  thought.  The  system  of  Kapila,  which  is  here  given  in  a  trans-
lation from  the  Sankhya  Kuvika,  is  the  only  contribution  of  India  to  pure  philosophy.
.  .  .  Presents  many  points  of  deep  interest  to  the  student  of  comparative  philo-
sophy, and  without  Mr.  Davies's  lucid  interpretation  it  would  be  difficult  to  appre-
ciate these  points  in  any  adequate  manner." — Saturday  Remcio.

"  We  welcome  Mr.  Davies's  book  as  a  valuable  addition  to  our  philosophical
library." — Notes  and  Queries.


TRUBNRR'S  ORIENTAL  SERIKS.


Post  8vo,  pp.  x. — 130,  cloth,  price  6s.

A  MANUAL  OF  HINDU  PANTHEISM.    VEDANTASARA.

Translated,  with  copious  Annotations,  by  MAJOR  G.  A.  JACOB,
Bombay  Staff  Corps  ;  Inspector  of  Army  Schools.

The  design  of  this  little  work  is  to  provide  for  missionaries,  and  for
others  who,  like  them,  have  little  leisure  for  original  research,  an  accurate
summary  of  the  doctrines  of  the  Vedanta.

"  The  modest  title  of  Major  Jacob's  work  conveys  but  an  inadequate  idea  of  the
vast  amount  of  research  embodied  in  his  notes  to  the  text  of  the  Vedant;war:i.  S>
copious,  indeed,  are  these,  and  so  much  collateral  matter  do  they  bring  to  bear  on
the  subject,  that  the  diligent  student  will  rise  from  their  perusal  with  a  fairly
adequate  view  of  Hindi!  philosophy  generally,  His  work  ...  is  one  of  the  best  of
its  kind  that  we  have  seen." — Calcutta  Review.


Post  8vo,  pp.  xiL— 154,  cloth,  price  73.  6d.

TSUNI— I  I  GO  AM  :

THE  SUPKEME  BEING  OP  THE  KHOI-KHOI.
BY  THEOPHILUS  HAHN,  Ph.D.,

Custodian  of  the  Grey  Collection,  Cape  Town  ;  Corresponding  Member

of  the  Geegr.  Society,  Dresden  ;  Corresponding  Member  of  the

Anthropological  Society,  Vienna,  &c.,  &c.

"The  first  instalment  of  Dr.  Hahn's  labours  will  be  of  interest,  not  at  the  Cape
only,  but  in  every  University  of  Europe.  It  is,  in  fact,  a  most  valuable  contribution
to  the  comparative  study  of  religion  and  mythology.  Accounts  of  their  religion  and
mythology  were  scattered  about  in  various  books ;  these  have  been  carefully  col-
lected by  Dr.  Halm  and  printed  in  his  second  chapter,  enriched  and  improved  by
what  he  has  been  able  to  collect  himself .  "—Prof.  Max  Mutter  in  the  Nineteenth
Century.

"  It  is  full  of  good  things."— St.  James's  Gazette.


In  Four  Volumes.    Post  8vo,  Vol.  L,  pp.  xii.— 392,  cloth,  price  123.  6d.,

Vol.  II.,  pp.  vi.— 408,  cloth,  price  123.  6d.,  Vol.  III.,  pp.  viii.— 414,

cloth,  price  123.  6d.

A  COMPREHENSIVE  COMMENTARY  TO  THE  QURAN.

TO  WHICH  IS  PREFIXED  SALE'S  PRELIMINARY  DISCOURSE,  WITH
ADDITIONAL  NOTES  AND  EMENDATIONS.

Together  with  a  Complete  Index  to  the  Text,  Preliminary
Discourse,  and  Notes.

By  Rev.  E.  M.  WHERRY,  M.A.,  Lodiana.

"  As  Mr.  Wherry's  book  is  intended  for  missionaries  in  India,  it  is  no  doubt  well
that  they  should  be  prepared  to  meet,  if  they  can,  the  ordinary  arguments  and  inter-
pretations, and  for  this  purpose  Mr.  Wherry's  additions  will  prove  useful."— Saturday


Review.


Post  8vo,  pp.  vi.— 208,  cloth,  price  8s.  6d.

THE  BHAGAVAD-GITA.

Translated,  with  Introduction  and  Notes
BY  JOHN  DAVIES,  M.A.  (Cantab.)

"Let  us  add  that  his  translation  of  the  Bhagavad  Gita  is,  as  we  judge,  the  bot
that  has  as  yet  appeared  in  fhiglish,  and  that  his  Philological  >otes  are  of  quite
peculiar  value." — Di'JAin  Jiidcic.


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES.


Post  8vo,  pp.  96,  cloth,  price  53.

THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.

Translated  by  E.  H.  WHINFIELD,  M.A.,
Barrister-at-Law,  late  H.M.  Bengal  Civil  Service.

Post  8vo,  pp.  xxxii. — 336,  cloth,  price  IDS.  6<1.

THE   QUATRAINS    OF    OMAR    KHAYYAM.

The  Persian  Text,  with  an  English  Verse  Translation.
By  E.  H.  WHINFIELD,  late  of  the  Bengal  Civil  Service.

"  Mr.  Whinfield  has  executed  a  difficult  task  with  considerable  success,  and  Ms
version  contains  much  that  will  be  new  to  those  who  only  know  Mr.  Fitzgerald's
delightful  selection. " — Academy.

"  The  most  prominent  features  in  the  Quatrains  are  their  profound  agnosticism,
combined  with  a  fatalism  based  more  on  philosophic  than  religious  grounds,  their
Epicureanism  and  the  spirit  of  universal  tolerance  and  charity  which  animates  them."
— Calcutta  Review.

Post  8vo,  pp.  xxiv. — 268,  cloth,  price  gs.

THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UPANISHADS  AND
ANCIENT  INDIAN  METAPHYSICS.

As  exhibited  in  a  series  of  Articles  contributed  to  the  Calcutta  Review.

By  ARCHIBALD  EDWARD  GOUGH,  M.A.,  Lincoln  College,  Oxford;
Principal  of  the  Calcutta  Madrasa.

"For  practical  purposes  this  is  perhaps  the  most  important  of  the  works  that  have
thus  far  appeared  in  '  Triibner's  Oriental  Series.'  .  .  .  We  cannot  doubt  that  for  all
who  may  take  it  up  the  work  must  be  one  of  profound  interest." — Saturday  Review.


In  Two  Volumes.    Vol.  I.,  post  8vo,  pp.  xxiv. — 230,  cloth,  price  75.  6d.

A  COMPARATIVE  HISTORY  OF  THE  EGYPTIAN  AND
MESOPOTAMIAN  RELIGIONS.

By  DR.  C.  P.   TIELE.

Vol.  I. — HISTORY  OF  THE  EGYPTIAN  RELIGION.

Translated  from  the  Dutch  with  the  Assistance  of  the  Author.

By  JAMES  BALLINGAL.

"  It  places  in  the  hands  of  the  English  readers  a  history  of  Egyptian  Religion
which  is  very  complete,  which  is  based  on  the  best  materials,  and.  which  has  been
illustrated  by  the  latest  results  of  research.  In  this  volume  there  is  a  great  deal  of
information,  as  well  as  independent  investigation,  for  the  trustworthiness  of  which
Dr.  Tiele's  name  is  in  itself  a  guarantee ;  and  the  description  of  the  successive
religions  under  the  Old  Kingdom,  the  Middle  Kingdom,  and  the  New  Kingdom,  is
given  in  a  manner  which  is  scholarly  and  minute." — Scotsman.


Post  8vo,  pp.  xii. — 302,  cloth,  price  8s.  6d.

YUSUF  AND  ZULAIKHA.

A  POEM  BY  JAMI.

Translated  from  the  Persian  into  English  Verse.
BY  RALPH  T.  H.  GRIFFITH.

"  Mr.  Griffith,  who  has  done  already  good  service  as  translator  into  verse  from  the
Sanskrit,  has  done  further  good  work  in  this  translation  from  the  Persian,  and  lie
has  evidently  shown  not  a  little  skill  in  his  rendering  the  quaint  and  very  oriental
style  of  his  author  into  our  more  prosaic,  less  figurative,  language.  .  .  .  The  work,
besides  its  intrinsic  merits,  is  of  importance  as  being  one  of  the  most  popular  and
famous  poems  of  Persia,  and  that  which  is  read  in  all  the  independent  native  schools
of  India  where  Persian  is  taught."— Scuts/nan.


TRUBb


Post  8vo,  pp.  viii. — 266,  el<>th,  juice  9*.

LINGUISTIC   ESSAYS.

P.Y  CAKL  AI'.KL.

"An  entirely  novel  mo'hod  of  de  din<r  with
iv.-il  lnun:in  interest  to  the  others

••Mr.  Abel  is  an  opponent  from  wlioin   it   is  pleas. mt    to -liir.-r.
enthusiasm  :nul  temper,  and  liis  mastery  over  the  English  language  :
champion  of  unpopular  doctrine8." — Athenceum.


Post  8vo,  pp.  ix. — 281,  cloth,  price  IDS.  6d.

THE    SARV A  -  DARSAN A  -  SAMGRAHA  ;

Ou,  REVIEW  OF  THE  DIFFERENT  SYSTEMS  OF  HINDU

PHILOSOPHY.
BY  MADHAVA  ACHARYA.

Translated  by  E.  B.  CO  WELL,  M.  A.,  Professor  of  Sanskrit  in  the  University
of  Cambridge,  and  A.  E.  GOUGH,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Philosophy

iu  the  Presidency  College,  Calcutta.

This  work  is  an  interesting  specimen  of  Hindu  critical  ability.  The
author  successively  passes  in  review  the  sixteen  philosophical  systems
current  in  the  fourteenth  century  in  the  South  of  India ;  and  he  gives  what
appears  to  him  to  be  their  most  important  tenets.

"The  translation  is  trustworthy  throughout.  A  protracted  sojourn  in  Indin,
where  there  is  a  living  tradition,  has  familiarised  t  ie  transitions  \\iih  Indian
thought."— A  themeum.


Post  8vo,  pp.  Ixv. — 368,  cloth,  price  143.
TIBETAN  TALES  DERIVED  FROM  INDIAN  SOURCES.

Translated  from  the  Tibetan  of  the  KAH-Gvuu.

BY  F.  ANTON  VON  SCHIEFNER.

Done  into  English  from  the  German,  with  an  Introduction,
BY  W.  R.  S.  RALSTON,  M.A.

"  Mr.  Ralston,  whose  name  is  so  familiar  to  all  lovers  of  Russian  folk-lore,  h.is
siipplied  some  interesting  Western  analogies  and  paralK-ls,  drawn,  for  the  m
from  Slavonic  sources,  to  the  Eastern  folk-tales,  culled  from  the  Kahgyur,  one  of  the
divisions  of  the  Tibetan  sacnd  books."—  Ac<'

"The  translation  .  .  .  could  scarcely  have  fallen  into  better  bands.  An  Introduc-
tion .  .  .  gives  the  leading  facts  in  the  lives  of  those  scholars  who  have  given  tlu-ir
attention  to  gaining  a  knowledge  of  the  Tibetan  literature  and  language." — Calcutta
Review.

"  Ought  to  interest  all  who  care  for  the  East,  for  amusing  stories,  or  for  comparative
folk-lore."— Pall  Mall  Gazette.


Post  8vo,  pp.  xvi. — 224,  cloth,  price  93.

UDANAVARGA.

A  COLLECTION  OF  VERSES  FROM  THE  BUDDHIST  CANON.

Compiled  by  DHARMATRATA.
BEING  THE  NORTHERN  BUDDHIST  VERSION  OF  DHAMMAPADA.

Translated  from  the  Tibetan  of  Bkah-hgyur,  with  Notes,  and
Extracts  from  the  Commentary  of  Pradjnavannan,

By  W.  WOODVILLE  ROCKHILL.

"  Mr.  Rockhill's  present  work  is  the  first  from  which  assistance  will  be  gained
for  a  more  accurate  understanding  of  the  Pali  text ;  it  is,  in  ;

term  of  comparison  available  to  us.  The  '  Udanavarga,'  the  Thibetan  version,  was
originally  discovered  by  tne  late  M.  Schiefner,  who  published  tne  Tibetan  text,  and
had  intended  adding  a  translation,  an  intention  frustrated  by  his  death,  but  which
has  been  carried  out  by  Mr.  Rockhill.  .  .  .  Mr.  Rockhill  may  be  congratulated  fur
having  well  accomplished  a  difficult  task."— Saturday  Review.


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES.


In  Two  Volumes,  post  8vo,  pp.  xxiv.— 566,  cloth,  accompanied  by  a
Language  Map,  price  255.

A  SKETCH  OF  THE  MODERN  LANGUAGES  OF  AFRICA.

BY  ROBERT  NEEDHAM  CUST,
Barrister-at-Law,  and  late  of  Her  Majesty's  Indian  Civil  Service.

"  Any  one  at  all  interested  in  African  languages  cannot  do  better  than  get  Mr.
Gust's  book.  It  is  encyclopaedic  in  its  scope,  and  the  reader  gets  a  start  clear  away
in  any  particular  language,  and  is  left  free  to  add  to  the  initial  sum  of  knowledge
there  collected." — Natal  Mercury.

"  Mr.  Gust  has  contrived  to  produce  a  work  of  value  to  linguistic  students."—
Nature.


Post  8vo,  pp.  xii. — 312,  with  Maps  a7id  Plan,  cloth,  price  149.

A  HISTORY  OF  BURMA.

Including  Burma  Proper,  Pegu,  Taungu,  Tenasserirn,  and  Araltan.     From
the  Earliest  Time  to  the  End  of  the  First  "War  with  British  India.

BY  LIEUT. -GEN.  SIR  ARTHUR  P.  PHAYRE,  G.C.M.G.,  K. O.S.I.,  and  C.B,,

Membre  Oorrespondant  de  la  Societe  Academique  Indo-Chinoise

de  France.

"Sir  Arthur  Phayre's  contribution  to  Triibner's  Oriental  Series  supplies  a  recog-
nised want,  and  its  appearance  has  been  looked  forward  to  for  many  years

General  Phayre  deserves  great  credit  for  the  patience  and  industry  which  has  resulted
in  this  History  of  Burma." — Saturday  Review.


Third  Edition.     Post  8vo,  pp.  276,  cloth,  price  73.  6d.

RELIGION      IN      CHINA.

By  JOSEPH  EDKINS,  D.D.,  PEKING.

Containing  a  Brief  Account  of  the  Three  Religions  of  the  Chinese,  with
Observations  on  the  Prospects  of  Christian  Conversion  amongst  that
People.

"  Dr.  Edkins  has  been  most  careful  in  noting  the  Varied  and  often  complex  phases
of  opinion,  so  as  to  give  an  account  of  considerable  value  of  the  subject."— Scotsman.

"  As  a  missionary,  it  has  been  part  of  Dr.  Edkins'  duty  to  study  the  existing
religions  in  China,  and  his  long  residence  in  the  country  has  enabled  him  to  acquire
an  intimate  knowledge  of  them  as  they  at  present-exist."— Saturday  Review.

"  Dr.  Edkins'  valuable  work,  of  which  this  is  a  second  and  revised  edition,  has,
from  the  time  that  it  was  published,  been  the  standard  authority  upon  the  subject
of  which  it  treats." — Nonconformist.

"  Dr.  Edkius  .  .  .  may  now  be  fairly  regarded  as  among  the  first  authorities  on
Chin  tse  religion  and  language." — British  Quarterly  Review.


Third  Edition.     Post  8vo,  pp.  xv.-25O,  cloth,  price  73.  6d.

OUTLINES  OF  THE  HISTORY  OF  RELIGION  TO  THE
SPREAD  OF  THE  UNIVERSAL  RELIGIONS.

BY  C.  P.  TIELE,
Doctor  of  Theology,  Professor  of  the  History  of  Religions  in  the

University  of  Leyden.
Translated  from  the  Dutch  by  J.  EsTLIN  CARPENTER,  M.A.

"  Few  books  of  its  size  contain  the  result  of  so  much  wide  thinking,  able  and  labo-
rious study,  or  enable  the  reader  to  gain  a  better  bird's-eye  view  of  the  latest  results
of  investigations  into  the  religious  history  of  nations.  As  Professor  Tiele  modestly
says,  '  In  this  little  book  are  outlines — pencil  sketches,  I  might  say — nothing  more.'
But  there  are  some  men  whose  sketches  from  a  thumb-nail  are  of  far  more  worth
than  an  enormous  canvas  covered  with  the  crude  painting  of  others,  and  it  is  easy  to
see  that  these  pages,  full  of  information,  these  sentences,  cut  and  perhaps  also  dry,
short  and  clear,  condense  the  fruits  of  long  and  thorough  research."— Scotsman.


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES.


Post  8vo,  pp.  X.-274,  clotli,  pric.

THE  LIFE  OF  THE  BUDDHA  AND  THE  EARLY
HISTORY  OF  HIS  ORDER.

Derived  from  Tibetan  Works  in  the  Bkah-hgyur  and  Bstan-hgyur.

Followed  by  notices  on  the  Early  History  of  Tibet  and  Klioten.
Translated  by  "W.  W.  ROCKHILL,  Second  Secretary  U.S.  Legation  in  China.

"The  volume  bears  testimony  to  the  diligence  and  fulness  with  which  t!.
h:is  consulted  and  tested  the  ancient  documents  bearing  upon  i
jecfc." — Ti  inm.

"  Will  be  appreciated  by  those  who  devote  themselves  to  those  Buddhist
which  have  of  late  years  taken  in  these  Western  regions  so  remarkable  a
ment.     Its  matter  possesses  a  special  interest  as  being  derived  from  ,n
works,  some  portions  of  which,  here  analysed  and  translated,  have  n<  •
the  attention  of  scholars.     The  volume  is  rich  in  ancient  stoi  ,  |,,>n  tin;
world's  renovation  and  the  origin  of  castes,  as  recorded  in  these  venerable  autho-
rities."— Daily  A'ews.

Third  Edition.     Post  8vo,  pp.  viii.-464,  cloth,  price  i6s.

THE   SANKHYA   APHORISMS   OF   KAPILA,

"With  Illustrative  Extracts  from  the  Commentaries.
Translated  by  J.  R.  BALL  ANT  YNE,  LL.D.,  late  Principal  of  the  Benares

College.
Edited  by  FITZEDWARD  HALL.

"The  work  displays  a  vast  expenditure  of  labour  and  scholarship,  for  which
students  of  Hindoo  philosophy  have  every  reason  to  be  grateful  to  Dr.  Hull  uud  the
publishers."—  Calcutta  Rev '«.><•.


In  Two  Volumes,  post  8vo,  pp.  cviii.-242.  and  viii.-37O,  cloth,  price  243.
Dedicated  by  permission  to  H.R.H.  the  Prince  of  Wales.

BUDDHIST  RECORDS  OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD,

Translated  from  the  Chinese  of  Hiuen  T.siang  (A.D.  629).

BY  SAMUEL  BEAL,  B.A.,
(Trin.  Coll.,  Camb.) ;  R.N.  (Retired  Chaplain  and  N.  I. )  ;  Professor  of  Chinese,

University  College,  London  ;  Rector  of  Wark,  Northumberland,  &c.
An   eminent  Indian  authority  writes  respecting  this  work: — "Nothing
more  can  be  done  in  elucidating  the  History  of  India  until  Mr.  Real's  tran.>-
lation  of  the  'Si-yu-ki'  appears."

"  It  is  a  strange  freak  of  histoi'ical  preservation  that  the  best  account  of  the  con-
dition  of  India  at  that  ancient  period  has  come  down  to  us  in  the  books  of  tr.ivel
written  by  the  Chinese  pilgrims,  of  whom  Hweu  Thsang  is  the  best  known." — Ti**et.


Post  8vo,  pp.  xlviii.-398,  cloth,  price  123.

THE    ORDINANCES    OF    MANU.

Translated  from  the  Sanskrit,  with  an  Introduction.

By  the  late  A.  C.  BURNELL,  Ph.D.,  C.I.E.
Completed  and  Edited  by  E.  W.  HOPKINS,  Ph.D.,

of  Columbia  College,  N.Y.

"  This  work  is  full  of  interest ;  while  for  the  student  of  sociology  and  the  science
of  religion  it  is  full  of  importance.  It  is  a  great  boon  to  get  so  notable  a  work  iu  so
accessible  a  form,  admirably  edited,  and  competently  translated."  £

"Few  men  were  more  competent  than  Burnell  to  give  us  a  really  good  translation
of  this  well-known  law  book,  first  rendered  into  English  by  Sir  William  Jones.
Burnell  was  not  only  an  independent  Sanskrit  scholar,  but  an  experienced  lawyer,
and  he  ioined  to  these  two  important  qualifications  the  rare  faculty  of  being  able  to
express  his  thoughts  in  clear  and  trenchant.  English.  .  .  .  We  ought  to  feel  very
grateful  to  Dr.  Hopkins  for  having  given  us  all  that  could  be  published  of  the  trans-
lation left  by  Uurnell."— F.  MAX  31  i  1.1.1:1:  in  the  A*


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES.


Post  8vo,  pp.  xii.-234,  cloth,  price  95.

THE  LIFE  AND  WORKS  OF  ALEXANDER
CSOMA  DE  KOROS,

Between  1819  and  1842.  With  a  Short  Notice  of  all  his  Published  and  Un-
published Works  and  Essays.  From  Original  and  for  most  part  Un-
published Documents.

By  THEODOEE  DUKA,  M.D.,  F.R.C.S.  (Eng.),  Surgeon-Major
H.M.'s  Bengal  Medical  Service,  Retired,  &c.

"Not  too  soon  have  Messrs.  Triibner  added  to  their  valuable  Oriental  Series  a
history  of  the  life  and  works  of  one  of  the  most  gifted  and  devoted  of  Oriental
students,  Alexander  Csoma  de  Koros.  It  is  forty-three  ye.-irs  since  his  death,  and
though  an  account  of  his  career  was  demanded  soon  after  his  decease,  it  has  only
now  appeared  in  the  important  memoir  of  his  compatriot,  Dr.  Duka."— Bookseller.


In  Two  Volumes,  post  8vo,  pp.  xii.~3i8  and  vi.-3i2,  cloth,  price  2is.

MISCELLANEOUS    PAPERS

RELATING  TO

INDO-CHINA.

Reprinted  from  "Dalrymple's  Oriental  Repertory,"  "Asiatick  Researches,"
and  the  "Journal  of  the  Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal."

"The  papers  treat  of  almost  every  aspect  of  Indo-China— its  philology,  economy,
geography,  geology — and  constitute  a  very  material  and  important  contribution  to
our  accessible  information  regarding  that  country  and  its  people." — Contemporary
Review.


Post  8vo,  pp.  xii.-ya,  cloth,  price  53.

THE    SATAKAS    OF    BHARTRIHARI.

Translated  from  the  Sanskrit

By  the  REV.  B.  HALE  WORTHAM,  M.R.A.S.,

Rector  of  Eggesforcl,  North  Devon.

"  A  very  interesting  addition  to  Triibner's  Oriental  Series." — Saturday  Review.
"  Many  of  the  Maxims  in  the  book  have  a  Biblical  ring  and  beauty  of  expression."
— St.  James'  Gazette.

Post  8vo,  pp.  xii.-i8o,  cloth,  price  6s.

ANCIENT  PROVERBS  AND  MAXIMS  FROM  BURMESE

SOURCES ;

OR,  THE  NITI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA.
BY  JAMES  GRAY,

Author  of  "Elements  of  Pali  Grammar,"  "Translation  of  the
Dhammapada,"  &c.

The  Sanscrit-Pali  word  Niti  is  equivalent  to  "conduct"  in  its  abstract
and  "guide"  in  its  concrete  signification.  As  applied  to  books,  it  is  a
general  term  for  a  treatise  which  includes  maxims,  pithy  sayings,  and
didactic  stories,  intended  as  a  guide  to  such  matters  of  every-day  life  as
form  the  character  of  an  individual  and  influence  him  in  his  relations  to  his
fellow-men.  Treatises  of  this  kind  have  been  popular  in  all  ages,  and  have
served  as  a  most  effective  medium  of  instruction.


LONDON  :  TRUBNER  &  CO.,  57  AND  59  LUDGATE  HILL.

250— 22/11/85— M.


TRUBNER'S

ORIENTAL   SERIES.


BALLANTYNE,    HANSON   AND  CC.
EDINBURGH   AND   LONDON


&


YU8UF  AND   ZULAIKHA


H  poem  bp  Jamu


TRANSLATED   FROM   THE   PERSIAN   INTO
ENGLISH    VERSE.


EALPH  T.  H.  GRIFFITH.


?C;^0£,Vlc
?


....;,  ..........  ,,:


LONDON:
TRUBNER    &    CO.,    LUDGATE    HILL.

1882.

[All  rights  reserved.]


PREFACE.


ABDU-R-EAHMAN  was  born  in  the  year  1414
A.D.,  at  Jam,  a  little  town  in  Khurasan,  from  which
he  took  the  poetic  name,  Jami,  by  which  he  is  generally
known.     At  the  age  of  five  he  received  the  name  of
Niiru-d-din,  or,  Light  of  the  Faith ;  and.in  later  life  his
learning,  fame,  and  sanctity  gained  for  him  the  title  of
Maulana,  or,  Our  Master.      He  studied  at  Herat  and
Samarkand,  where  he  not  only  outstripped  the  ablest
and  most  diligent  of  his  fellow-students,  but  puzzled
the  most  learned  of  his  teachers.      The  fame  of  his
learning  soon  spread  to  the  most  distant  provinces  of
Persia,  and  into  other  Asiatic  countries.     Sultan  Abu
Sa'id,  Timur's  uncle,  invited  him  to  his  court  at  Herat,
and  all  the  princes,  nobles,  and  learned  men  of  the  time
sought  the  company  of  the  distinguished  poet.     In  1472
A.D.,  Jami  performed  the  pilgrimage  to  Mecca,  and,  after
some  stay  at  Baghdad,  returned  in  the  following  year
to  Herat,  where  he  died  in  1492.

Jami  is  the  last  great  poet  that  Persia  has  produced.
He  devoted  the  whole  of  his  life  to  study  and  literary
work,  and  has  left  behind  him  at  least  fifty  volumes  of
poetry,  grammar,  and  theology,  which  are  still  read  and


vi  PREFACE.

admired  in  the  eastern  world.  "  With  us,"  says  Mr.
Fitzgerald,  in  his  notice  of  Jami's  Life  prefixed  to  his
translation  of  "  Salaman  and  Absal,"  "  his  name  is  almost
wholly  associated  with  his  '  Yusuf  and  Zulaikha  ; '  the
'  Beharistan ; '  and  this  present  '  Salaman  and  Absal/
which  he  tells  us  is  like  to  be  the  last  product  of  his
old  age.  And  these  three  count  for  three  of  the  brother
stars  of  that  constellation  into  which  his  seven  best
mystical  poems  are  clustered  under  the  name  of  '  Heft
Aurang ' — those  '  Seven  Thrones  '  to  which  we  of  the
West  and  North  give  our  characteristic  names  of  '  Great
Bear  '  and  '  Charles's  Wain.' "

But  of  all  the  works  of  Jami,  "  Yiisuf  and  Zulaikha"
is  undoubtedly  the  most  famous.  In  India — although
for  obvious  reasons  it  is  not  admitted  into  the  course  of
Government  or  aided  schools — it  is  read  in  all  indepen-
dent indigenous  schools  in  which  Persian  is  taught,
and  is  in  them  what  Ovid  is  or  was  in  all  grammar-
schools  in  England.  Every  Persian  scholar  in  the
country  has  read  it,  and  many  know  its  finest  passages
by  heart.  In  Europe,  too,  the  merits  of  the  poem  have
been  acknowledged  :  "Le  poe"me"  (says  Thornton)  "  des
amours  de  Joseph  et  de  Zulikha,  qui  est  considere  par
les  juges  competens  de  la  litterature  comme  le  plus  bel
ouvrage  qui  existe  en  Orient."  "  Jaumee,"  says  another
scholar  in  his  old-fashioned  phonetic  spelling,  "  whose
poem  on  the  loves  of  Joseph  and  Zuleika  is  one  of  the
finest  compositions  in  the  language,  and  deserves  to  be
translated  into  every  European  language — Jaumee  has


PREFACE.  vii

decorated  with  all  the  graces  of  poetry  the  romantic
story  of  the  youthful  Canaanite."

"  Yusuf  and  Zulaikha  "  has  been  translated  into  Ger-
man blank  verse  by  Eosenzweig,  whose  meritorious
though  decidedly  heavy  version  was  published  side  by
side  with  the  Persian  text  in  a  handsome  well-printed
folio  at  Vienna  in  1824.  This  work  has  long  been  out
of  print,  and  is  now  almost  unprocurable.  I  am  indebted
to  Messrs.  Trubner  &  Co.  for  a  copy  which,  after  three
years'  inquiries,  they  obtained  for  me ;  and  I  gratefully
acknowledge  my  obligations  to  the  translation,  which
has  been  of  service  to  me  at  times,  and  to  the  explana-
tory notes,  from  which  I  have  borrowed  freely.  The
poem  has  not,  I  believe,  been  translated  into  any  other
European  language ;  only  a  little  volume  entitled
"Analysis  and  Specimens  of  the  Joseph  and  Zulaikha,"
by  S.  E.,  was  published  by  Messrs.  Williams  &  Norgate
in  1872.  This  very  unpretending  work  does  not  appear
to  have  attracted  much  notice,  and  I  was  unaware
of  its  existence  till  a  month  ago.  The  translator  has
followed  Eosenzweig  very  carefully  in  the  specimens
which  he  gives  in  prose,  and  his  analysis  of  the  rest  of
the  poem  is  accurate  and  good.

It  is  well  known  that  Yusuf,  or  Joseph,  as  we  call
him,  is  looked  upon  by  the  people  of  Islam  as  the  ideal
of  manly  beauty  and  more  than  manly  virtue ;  but  it
is  not  so  generally  known  perhaps  that  the  romantic
tale  of  the  love,  the  sufferings,  and  the  crowning  happi-
ness of  Zulaikha,  as  told  by  Jami,  was  intended  to


viii  PREFACE.

shadow  forth  the  human  soul's  love  of  the  highest
beauty  and  goodness — a  love  which  attains  fruition
only  when  the  soul  has  passed  through  the  hardest
trials,  and  has,  like  Zulaikha,  been  humbled,  purified,
and  regenerated.  So  this  Allegory  resembles  in  its  drift
that  famous  and  lovely  one  in  which  Celestial  Cupid —

"  Holds  his  dear  Psyche  sweet  entranced,
After  her  wandering  labours  long,
Till  free  consent  the  Gods  among
Make  her  his  eternal  bride."

I  have  endeavoured  in  my  translation  to  give  what  I
can  of  the  spirit  of  the  poem,  and  at  the  same  time  to
reproduce  its  form  and  manner  as  closely  as  the  differ-
ing idioms  of  the  two  languages  permit  me  to  do.  But
Jamfs  plays  upon  words — which  are  looked  on  as
beauties  in  Persian  poetry — I  have  been  obliged  to  pass
by  without  attempting  the  almost  impossible  and  use-
less task  of  reproducing  them.  Most  of  them  I  omit
even  to  notice,  as  they  are  unintelligible  without  the
Persian  text  and  context,  and  my  translation  is  intended
for  English  readers.

My  version  covers  a  little  more  than  three-fourths  of
the  entire  poem,  which  contains  about  eight  thousand
lines.  In  the  Appendix  I  give  some  notice  of  the
omissions  I  have  made  in  the  introductory  cantos  and
of  the  concluding  cantos  which  I  have  not  translated.
I  think  it  best  to  end  my  version  with  the  betrothal  of
Yiisuf  and  Zulaikha,  where  the  interest  of  the  story
culminates  and  ends.


PREFACE.  ix

Jami  has  employed  throughout  this  poem  the  rhymed
hendecasyllabic  couplet,  and  a  translation  in  unrhymed
verse  would  altogether  fail  to  give  an  idea  of  his
manner.  Accordingly  for  the  introductory  cantos,
which  are  didactic  and  somewhat  stately  in  style,  I
have  used  the  old  rhymed  heroic  metre,  and  for  the  rest
of  the  poem  a  lighter  and  freer  measure,  in  which  I
vary  at  will  the  number  of  syllables  or  accents.  I  fear
that  many  of  my  lines  will  not  read  off  easily  at  first
sight :  but  T  trust  that  the  greater  fault  of  monotony
has  to  some  extent  been  avoided.


CONTENTS.


PAGE
PREFACE       ........  V

PROLOGUE    ........  3

INVOCATION       .......     5

THE  CREATOR     .......     8

PRAISE  OF  GOD    .       .       .       .       .       .       .II

PRAYER  FOR  AID  .......    13

PRAISE  OF  THE  PROPHET  .       .       .       .       .          1 6

BEAUTY    ........    19

LOVE  .  .  23

SPEECH  .  •  .  .  .  .  -  .  .26

THE  VISION  OF   ADAM  .  .  .  .  .  '3°

YtfsuF         ....  33

ZULAIKHA  .  '        .  .  .  .  .  .  -39

THE  FIRST  VISION  ....  45

LOVE'S  LONGING     ....  49

SUSPICIONS  .......      53

THE  SECOND  VISION          .  .  .  .  .  60

THE  THIRD  VISION  ....  .66

THE  SUITORS  .......         71

THE  AMBASSADOR   .......        76

THE  DEPARTURE      .  .  .  .  .  .  .Si

THE  WELCOME  ......  86

DESPAIP.        ........        89


xii  CONTENTS.

PAGE
THE  RECEPTION       .......        93

PINING          ........        97

ENVY  ........      104

YUSUF'S  DREAM       .  .       t  .  .  .  .      IQ*J

THE   PLOT    .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .Ill

DECEIT          .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .114

THE  WELL  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .117

THE  CARAVAN          .......      123

THE  KING    .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .127

THE  BATH    ........      130

RECOGNITION  .  .  .  .  .  ,  .      134

THE  SLAVE-MARKET  .  .  .  .  .138

BAZIGHA       ........      143

LOVE'S  SERVICE     .  .  .  .  .  .  .150

SYMPATHY  ........    154

THE  SHEPHERD      .  .  .  .  .  .  .158

LOVE  REPELLED       .......      l6l

QUESTIONINGS  .  .  .  .  .  .  .165

THE  MESSENGER       .  .  .  .  .  .  .169

EXCUSES        ........      173

THE  GARDEN  .......      178

THE   SLAVE-GIRLS    .  .  .  .  .  .183

FRESH   COUNSEL       .  .  .  .  .  .  .      1 88

THE  PALACE  .......      192

IN   THE   PALACE       .......      196

FLIGHT  .  ....      203

THE  FALSE   CHARGE  .  ...      214

THE  INFANT  WITNESS          .  .  .  .  .  .219

THE    WOMEN  OF   MEMPHIS  .....      223


CONTENTS.  xiii

PAOE

THREATS       ........  232

IMPRISONMENT          .......  237

REPENTANCE               .......  243

THE  VISIT  TO  THE   PRISON                .....  2$O

THE   PALACE-ROOF  .  .  .  .  .  .255

FELLOW-PRISONERS                 ......  260

THE  KING'S  VISION           ......  264

RELEASE       ........  270

THE   BLIND  WIDOW                ......  275

THE   COTTAGE   OF  REEDS     ......  282

THE    CONVERT           .......  287

YOUTH   RESTORED    .......  2Q2

APPENDIX   ...                                                ...  297


YtiSUF    AND    ZULAIKHA.


(    3    )


prologue.

UNFOLD,  0  God,  the  bud  of  hope :  disclose

From  Thine  eternal  Paradise  one  rose

Whose  breath  may  flood  my  brain  with  odour,  while

The  bud's  leaf-liplets  make  my  garden1  smile.

O  grant  that  I,  in  this  drear  world  of  woe,

The  boundless  riches  of  Thy  grace  may  know.

May  gratitude  to  Thee  my  thoughts  employ ;

To  sing  Thy  praises  be  my  task  and  joy.

Vouchsafe  a  prosperous  day  from  those  that  are
Best  on  the  roll  of  "Wisdom's  calendar.
Send  forth  Thy  soldier  to  the  war 'and  teach
His  lips  to  conquer  in  the  field  of  speech.
Grant  that  my  tongue  may  weigh  the  pearls,  0  Lord,
Which  Thy  dear  bounty  in  my  heart  has  stored ;
And  let  the  fragrance  Thou  hast  lent  my  muse
Its  musky  breath  from  Kaf  to  Kaf2  diffuse.
Lips  sweet  as  sugar  on  my  pen  bestow,
And  from  my  book  let  streams  of  odour  flow.

1  That  is,  my  heart.

2  From  east  to  west,  from  north  to  south.    Kdf  is,  like  the  Lokdloka
of  the  Hindus,  the  ring  of  mountains  which  encircles  the  flat  earth.


4  PROLOGUE.

In  this  world's  inn,  where  sweetest  songs  abound,
I  hear  no  prelude  to  the  strain  I  sound.
The  guests  have  quaffed  their  wine  and  passed  away ;
Their  cups  were  empty  and  they  would  not  stay.
No  sage,  no  stripling — not  a  hand  ere  mine —
Has  held  this  goblet  o£  poetic  wine.
Kise,  Jami,  rise :  thy  fear  behind  thee  cast,
And,  be  it  clear  or  dull,  bring  forth  the  wine  thou  hast.


(     5    }


3n\>ocatton

ON  Him  I  call  who  keeps  the  worlds,  the  Lord
Whose  praises  deck  the  tongue  as  gems  the  sword ;
Dewed  with  the  fountain  of  whose  grace  the  tongue
Finds  its  best  rapture  when  His  name  is  sung.
To  mortal  sense  each  moment  He  declares
Ten  thousand  subtleties  like  finest  hairs.
He  formed  the  tongue  to  comb  those  hairs,  and  laid
The  teeth  in  even  rows  that  task  to  aid.
Supreme,  omniscient,  God  for  ever  reigns ;
He  lifts  the  humble  and  the  weak  sustains.
He  framed  the  roof  of  heaven's  revolving  sphere,
And  bade  the  elements  their  walls  uprear.
He  bids  the  rose  that  decks  the  bush  unfold,
Balmed  with  the  musk  He  gives,  her  leaves  of  gold.
From  Him  the  flowers,  the  brides  of  Spring,  receive
The  glorious  raiment  which  His  fingers  weave.
He  bids  the  cypress  by  the  river-side
Lift  her  fair  form  erect  in  stately  pride.
He  to  the  great  of  soul  gives  high  renown,
And  casts  the  arrogant  and  foolish  down.


INVOCATION.

Still  near  to  those  who  watch  the  night  away,
He  is  the  Friend  who  cheers  the  toiler's  day.
His  vernal  clouds  from  bounteous  seas  upborne
Bedew  alike  the  jasmine  and  the  thorn.
Eich  from  His  mines  the  winds  of  Autumn  blow,
And  o'er  the  mead  a  gold- wrought  carpet  throw.
His  body  is  the  sun's  resplendent  sphere,
Lighting  each  atom,  be  it  far  or  near.
If  from  the  sun  or  moon  He  hid  His  face,
Each  globe  would  perish,  lost  in  empty  space.
To  us  His  grace  the  boon  of  being  gives :
In  His  existence  every  creature  lives.
Go,  with  the  foot  of  lightest  fancy  tread
Down  to  earth's  centre  from  the  vault  o'erhead ;
Above,  below,  no  spot  thine  eye  shall  find
Marked  with  no  impress  of  His  sovereign  mind.
To  Him  their  forms  embodied  creatures  owe  :
Before  His  glory  loftiest  heads  are  low.
To  tell  His  nature  weak  is  wit  and  lore ;
Hopeless  the  search  that  would  His  ways  explore.
Unless  He  meet  and  guide  us  on  our  way,
Farther,  still  farther  from  His  grace  we  stray.
When  loud  hosannas  laud  with  high  acclaim
His  might  and  majesty,  a  pang  of  shame
Thrills  through  the  angels  in  His  court  who  own
They  ne'er  may  know  Him  as  He  should  be  known,


INVOCATION.

And  heaven's  revolving  sphere  itself,  dismayed,
Would  ceasetfrom  motion  and  awhile  be  stayed.
Let  us,  mere  handfuls  of  the  shifting  dust,
Purge  our  soul's  mirror  from  ambition's  rust,
Low  on  the  knee  of  wondering  silence  sink,
And  on  our  brief  existence  cease  to  think.


Creator*


How  long,  my  soul,  in  this  false  world  wilt  thou
Pursue  the  childish  play  which  charms  thee  now  ?
Thou,  dainty  bird,  wast  bred  with  care  to  rest,
Tar  from  this  vain  earth,  in  a  sweeter  nest.
Why  seems  that  home  so  strange  and  far  away  ?
Why,  owl-like,  wilt  thou  in  this  desert  stay  ?
Throw  off  the  dust  that  dims  thy  feathers,  spring
Forth  to  thy  heavenly  home  on  burnished  wing.
Behold  those  spheres  for  ever  circling,  bound
With  scarves  of  azure,  in  their  mystic  round.
See,  their  light  mantles  loosely  floating  throw
A  flood  of  radiance  on  the  world  below.
See  them  pursuing  through  the  night  and  day,
True  to  their  purpose,  their  triumphant  way.
Each,  like  a  player's  ball  obedient,  still
Is  moved  and  guided  by  superior  will.
One  eastward  from  the  west  its  journey  bends  ;
The  other's  ship  to  western  waves  descends.
Each  in  due  progress  with  alternate  sway
Lights  the  still  night  or  cheers  the  busy  day.


THE  CREATOR.  9

One  writes  fair  lines  that  promise  golden  joys :
One  with  sad  aspect  bonds  of  bliss  destroys.
All,  joying  in  their  might,  their  task  renew,
And  with  untiring  haste  their  course  pursue.
Onward  for  ever  to  the  goal  they  press
With  feet  and  loins  that  know  not  weariness.
Who  learns  the  secret  of  their  dark  intent  ?
Who  knows  on  whom  each  wanderer's  face  is  bent  ?
Break  from  these  reins,  deluding  doubt  dismiss  :
Ne'er  of  a  planet  say,  "  My  Lord  is  this."
Seek,  like  the  Friend,1  truth's  kingdom,  nor  forget
To  cry  with  him,  "  I  love  not  gods  who  set."  '*
Cast  doubt  away,  each  idle  fancy  shun,
And  turn  thine  eyes  in  constant  faith  to  One.
One,  only  One,  see,  learn,  and  know,  and  seek :
Call  on  One  only,  of  One  only  speak.
Each  several  atom  leads  the  soul  to  Him,
And  proves  His  being  though  our  eyes  be  dim.
Deep  lies  the  truth  impressed  on  every  heart —
The  picture  certifies  the  painter's  art,


1  Abraham,  called  by  the  followers  of  Islam,  the  Friend  of  God,  or
simply,  as  here,  the  Friend.

2  "  And  when  the  night  overshadowed  him,  Abraham  saw  a  star,
and  he  said,   '  This  is  my  Lord ; '   but  when  it  set,  he  said,  '  I  love  not
gods  which  set.'     And  when  he  saw  the  moon  rising,  he  said  '  This  is
my  Lord  ; '  but  when  he  saw  it  set,  he  said, '  Verily,  if  my  Lord  direct
me  not,  I  shall  become  one  of  them  that  go  astray.' " — Kurdn,  Sura
vi.  77.


io  THE  CREATOR.

Without  whose  forming  hand  no  single  line
In  fair  proportion  aids  the  fair  design.
Scan  every  brick  in  this  world's  frame :  behold
Each  one  will  show  the  great  Creator's  mould.
Each  bears  the  impress  of  His  pen ;  the  writ
Proves  that  the  hand  of  Wisdom  fashioned  it.
And  canst  thou  read  the  message  there,  nor  learn
On  Him  who  fashioned  all  thy  thoughts  to  turn  ?
Canst  thou  behold  each  glorious  scene,  nor  spare
One  thought  to  Him  who  made  the  world  so  fair  ?

In  life's  last  hour,  which  none  who  breathes  can  flee,
Thine  only  Lord,  thine  only  hope,  is  He.
Then  turn  to  Him  e'en  now  thy  longing  eyes,
And  joy  for  ever  be  thy  labour's  prize.


(  II  )


praise  of  <So&,

IN  the  beginning,  Lord,  unformed  were  we,
And  from  the  fear  of  non-existence  free ;
Then,  bound  in  chains  of  water  and  of  clay,
Thy  fiat  called  us  to  the  light  of  day.
From  helpless  childhood  by  Thy  grace  released,
Our  knowledge  grew  and  ignorance  decreased.
Thy  mercy  sent  the  Scripture's  blessed  light,
With  clear  commands  to  guide  our  steps  aright.
We,  failing  yet  to  know  Thy  sovereign  will,
Fail  or  exceed,  confounding  good  and  ill.
From  our  allegiance,  Lord,  we  err  and  stray,
Forget  Thy  holy  laws  or  disobey.
Yet  spite  of  sin,  spite  of  rebellious  pride,
Thy  light  is  not  withdrawn,  Thy  grace  denied.
But  ah !  what  boots  it,  when  our  hearts  are  dead
To  earnest  effort,  that  Thy  light  is  shed  ?
Give  us  Thy  grace — hear  our  dull  hearts  complain-
Thy  grace  to  toil,  nor  let  that  toil  be  vain.
When  sage  and  idiot  perish  in  the  pool,
How  is  the  sage  more  happy  than  the  fool  ?


12  PRAISE  OF  GOD.

Ne'er  may  the  guiles  of  sensual  joy  impede
Our  forward  course  in  virtuous  thought  and  deed.
Let  Thy  sweet  mercy  from  this  world  of  woes
Some  path  of  safety  to  our  feet  disclose.
Still  to  the  ways  of  faith  conduct  Thine  own,
And  lead  us  with  Thee  to  Thy  glorious  throne.


prater  for  Hi&,

I  AM  the  bird,  my  lure  Thy  heavenly  grain ;
Thy  story  tames  me  like  a  magic  strain.
Thou  hast  equipped  me  for  mine  earthly  race,
And  opened  for  my  feet  Thy  door  of  grace.
Thou  hast  not  spurned  my  feeble  service ;  Thou
My  head  exaltest  when  in  prayer  I  bow.
To  Thy  pure  path  through  Thee  my  forehead  cleaves ;
Mine  eye  clear  vision  from  Thy  touch  receives.
By  Thee  my  lips  to  sing  Thy  praise  are  stirred,
And  in  my  heart  Thy  name  is  charactered.

Thou  at  the  portal  of  my  throat  hast  hung
That  member  soft  and  delicate,  my  tongue,
To  meet  with  gentle  touch  and  tempered  sound
The  rows  of  even  teeth  which  fence  it  round.
Sweeten  my  lips,  0  Lord,  to  sing  of  Thee ;
From  taint  of  gall  make  Thou  mine  utterance  free.
This  tongue,  Thy  gift,  from  evil  words  restrain ;
Ne'er  may  it  lead  me  to  disgrace  or  pain.

And  if  my  pen,  in  unconsidered  haste,
A  word  that  needs  excuse  or  blame  has  traced,


J4  PRAYER  FOR  AID.

Each  letter  that  offends  in  mercy  blot,

And  keep  mine  honour  free  from  stain  and  spot.

Thy  nursling  I,  a  weed  beside  the  way,
Eaised  by  Thy  bounty  from  the  mire  and  clay :
Each  breeze  that  passes  bows  my  humble  head,
Yet  in  Thy  path  my  clinging  rootlets  spread
To  clay  more  precious  than  the  rose  may  be
Whose  scent  and  beauty  speak  not,  Lord,  of  Thee.
Like  some  sweet  bud's,  a  single  heart  be  mine,
The  tulip's  single  mark  within  its  shrine.
A  double  heart  is  fraught  with  grief  and  pain,
And  single-mindedness  alone  is  gain.
The  full  ear  holds  a  hundred  grains,  and  all
Beneath  the  sickle  of  the  reaper  fall :
The  rosebud  wears  a  single  heart,  and  scorns
The  thousand  daggers  of  encircling  thorns.

Though  vast  the  burthen  of  my  many  crimes,
Thy  grace  is  vaster,  Lord,  a  thousand  times.
If  ample  garners  scarce  contain  my  guilt,
My  lightning  sighs  may  burn  them  if  Thou  wilt.
What  though  a  hundred  books  my  sins  record  ?
Thou  with  my  tears  canst  wash  them  clean,  0  Lord.

Each  cheek  I  loved,  fair  as  the  rose's  bud,
Draws  from  each  eyelash  now  a  tear  of  blood.
Still  from  their  fount  the  drops  of  anguish  start
And  wash  each  lovely  image  from  my  heart.


PRAYER  FOR  AID.

In  vain  mine  eyes  would  look  for  honour  fled :
Mine  only  honour  is  the  tear  I  shed.
Mine  eyes  are  rivers  full  of  floods  of  shame :
This  till  the  Day  of  Doom  is  all  my  fame.
Now  if  my  yearning  aught  of  gain  may  bring,
Lead  to  the  Prophet,  Lord,  the  song  I  sing.


16


praise  of  tbe  ipropbet

IN  separation  pine  the  souls  of  all :

For  pity,  Prophet  sent  by  God,  we  call.

Art  thou  not  he  who  pities  all,  and  how

Canst  thou  be  distant  from  the  wretched  now  ?

0  dew-sprent  Tulip,  thou  hast  drunk  thy  fill  :

Awake,  Narcissus  !  wilt  thou  slumber  still  ?

Show  from  the  screen  of  bliss  thy  head ;  display

That  brow  that  bids  the  dawn  of  life  be  gay.

Turn  thou  our  night  of  woe  to  sun-bright  morn,

And  let  thy  face  our  glorious  day  adorn.

Loose  from  thy  head  thy  long  black  hair,  to  meet

Like  shadows  falling  at  thy  cypress' l  feet.

Soft  skins  of  Taif 2  for  thy  sandals  take,

And  of  our  heart-strings  fitting  latchets  make.

Sages  before  thee  like  a  carpet  lie,

And  fain  would  kiss  thy  foot  that  passes  by.

Leave  for  the  sacred  court  thy  far  retreat,

And  tread  on  lips  which  yearn  to  touch  those  feet.

1  Cypress,  for  a  tall  graceful  figure  in  man  or  woman,  is  one  of  the
commonplaces  of  Persian  poetry.

2  A  town  not  far  from  Mecca.


PRAISE  OF  THE  PROPHET.  17

Eaise  up  the  fathers ;  from  their  misery  free,

And  comfort  those  who  give  their  hearts  to  thee.

Though  o'er  our  heads  the  waves  of  sin  roll  high ;

Though  by  thy  path  with  thirsty  lips  we  lie ;

Thou  art  a  cloud  of  gentle  mercy  :  turn

Thy  pitying  look  on  lips  that  thirst  and  burn.

O  blest  are  they  who  turn  to  thee  with  eyes

Dimmed  with  thy  pathway's  dust  and  strengthened  rise.

We  sought  the  mosque  thanksgivings  to  renew ;

Our  souls  like  moths  about  thy  splendour  flew.

Each  heart  a  lattice  open  to  the  day,

We  sported  in  thy  garden  and  were  gay.

On  sacred  thresholds  of  thy  courts  we  wept

Tears  from  the  clouds  of  eyes  that  never  slept.

We  swept  the  dust  that  on  the  pavement  lay,

And  cleared  the  thistles  with  our  hands  away.

Of  that,  a  salve  to  purge  our  sight  we  made ;

Of  these,  a  plaster  on  our  hearts  we  laid.

Near  to  the  pulpit  in  thy  mosque  we  drew,

And  laid  beneath  it  cheeks  like  gold  in  hue ;

Moved  from  the  arch  to  offer  prayer,  and  wept

With  tears  of  blood  where'er  thy  foot  has  stepped.

Erect  we  stood  at  every  pillar's  base,

And  'mid  the  upright  prayed  for  blissful  place.

Our  souls  yearned  for  thee  :  warmed  with  sweet  desire,

We  fed  each  flambeau  from  our  holy  fire.


i8  PRAISE  OF  THE  PROPHET.

Our  souls,  thank  God,  are  in  that  holy  spot,
Though  with  their  dust  our  bodies  strew  it  not.

Helpless  are  we ;  our  own  wild  aims  we  seek  :
0  aid  the  helpless  and  forgive  the  weak.
Do  thou  with  loving  hand  our  steps  sustain,
Or  all  our  labour,  all  our  strength  is  vain.
Fate  drives  us  wandering  from  the  path  astray :
To  God  our  guide,  to  God  for  light  we  pray.
May  His  great  mercy  keep  our  lives  secure,
And  in  the  path  of  faith  our  steps  assure.
When  comes  that  day  that  wakes  the  dead  at  last,
Let  not  our  honour  to  the  flames  be  cast.
Still  may  He  grant,  though  we  have  wandered  thus,
Free  leave  to  thee  to  intercede  for  us.
'Tis  thine  with  downward  head,  as  suits  the  mace,1
To  urge  the  ball  through  intercession's  space.
And  through  thy  aid  may  Jami's  work  be  found —
Though    some    may    scorn    it — with    completion
crowned.

1  An  allusion  to  the  game  of  changdn,  the  modern  polo.


Beauty

roiD  lay  the  world,  in  nothingness  concealed,
Without  a  trace  of  light  or  life  revealed,
Save  one  existence  which  no  second  knew —
Unknown  the  pleasant  words  of  We  and  You.
Then  Beauty  shone,  from  stranger  glances  free,
Seen  of  herself,  with  naught  beside  to  see,
With  garments  pure  of  stain,  the  fairest  flower
Of  virgin  loveliness  in  bridal  bower.
No  combing  hand  had  smoothed  a  flowing  tress,
No  mirror  shown  her  eyes  their  loveliness.
No  surma1  dust  those  cloudless  orbs  had  known,
To  the  bright  rose  her  cheek  no  bulbul  flown.
No  heightening  hand  had  decked  the  rose  with  green,
No  patch2  or  spot  upon  that  cheek  was  seen.
No  zephyr  from  her  brow  had  filched  a  hair,
No  eye  in  thought  had  seen  the  splendour  there.
Her  witching  snares  in  solitude  she  laid,
And  love's  sweet  game  without  a  partner  played.

.     l  Collyrium  or  antimony,  applied  under  the  eyelid.

2  Small  black  "  beauty  spots  "  were  used  by  Persian,  as  formerly  by
English  ladies.


20  BE  A  UTY.

But  when  bright  Beauty  reigns  and  knows  her  power,
She  springs  indignant  from  her  curtained  bower.
She  scorns  seclusion  and  eludes  the  guard,
And  from  the  window  looks  if  doors  be  barred.
See  how  the  tulip  on  the  mountain  grown,
Soon  as  the  breath  of  genial  Spring  has  blown,
Bursts  from  the  rock,  impatient  to  display
Her  nascent  beauty  to  the  eye  of  day.

When  sudden  to  thy  soul  reflection  brings
The  precious  meaning  of  mysterious  things,
Thou  canst  not  drive  the  thought  from  out  thy  brain  ;
Speak,  hear  thou  must,  for  silence  is  such  pain.
So  beauty  ne'er  will  quit  the  urgent  claim
Whose  motive  first  from  heavenly  beauty  came,
When  from  her  blessed  bower  she  fondly  strayed,
And  to  the  world  and  man  her  charms  displayed.

In  every  mirror  then  her  face  was  shown,
Her  praise  in  every  place  was  heard  and  known.
Touched  by  her  light,  the  hearts  of  angels  burned,
And,  like  the  circling  spheres,  their  heads  were  turned,
While  saintly  bands,  whom  purest  motives  stir,
Joined  in  loud  praises  at  the  sight  of  her,
And  those  who  bathe  them  in  the  ocean  sky
Cried  out  enraptured,  "  Laud  to  God  on  high ! "

Bays  of  her  splendour  lit  the  rose's  breast
And  stirred  the  bulbul's  heart  with  sweet  unrest.


BEAUTY.  21

From  her  bright  glow  its  cheek  the  flambeau  fired,
And  myriad  moths  around  the  flame  expired.
Her  glory  lent  the  very  sun  the  ray
Which  wakes  the  lotus  on  the  flood  to-day.
Her  loveliness  made  Laila's1  face  look  fair
To  Majniin,  fettered  by  her  every  hair.
She  opened  Shirm's  sugared  lips,  and  stole
From  Parviz'  breast  and  brave  Farhad's  the  soul.
Through  her  his  head  the  Moon  of  Canaan2  raised,
And  fond  Zulaikha  perished  as  she  gazed.

Yes,  though  she  shrinks  from  earthly  lovers'  call,
Eternal  Beauty  is  the  queen  of  all ;
In  every  curtained  bower  the  screen  she  holds,
About  each  captured  heart  her  bonds  enfolds.
Through  her  sweet  love  the  heart  its  life  retains,
The  soul  through  love  of  her  its  object  gains.
The  heart  which  maidens'  gentle  witcheries  stir
Is,  though  unconscious,  fired  with  love  of  her.
Eefrain  from  idle  speech  ;  mistake  no  more  :
She  brings  her  chains  and  we,  her  slaves,  adore.
Fair  and  approved  of  Love,  thou  still  must  own
That  gift  of  beauty  comes  from  her  alone.
Thou  art  concealed :  she  meets  all  lifted  eyes ;
Thou  art  the  mirror  which  she  beautifies.

1  Laila  and  Majniin,    and  Shirin,  Parviz,   and  Farhdd,  are  typical
lovers,  celebrated  and  frequently  alluded  to  in  Persian  poetry.

2  Yusuf.


22  BEAUTY.

She  is  that  mirror,  if  we  closely  view

The  truth — the  treasure  and  the  treasury  too.

But  thou  and  I — our  serious  work  is  naught ;
We  waste  our  days  unmoved  by  earnest  thought.
Cease,  or  my  task  will  never  end,  for  her
Sweet  beauties  lack  a  meet  interpreter.
Then  let  us  still  the  slaves  of  love  remain,
Tor  without  love  we  live  in  vain,  in  vain.


Hove,

No  heart  is  that  which  IOVQ  ne'er  wounded :  they
Who  know  not  lovers'  pangs  are  soulless  clay.
Turn  from  the  world,  0  turn  thy  wandering  feet ;
Come  to  the  world  of  love  and  find  it  sweet.

Heaven's  giddy  round  from  craze  of  love  was  caught ;
From  love's  disputes  the  world  with  strife  is  fraught.
Love's  slave  be  thou  if  thou  would  fain  be  free :
Welcome  love's  pangs,  and  happy  shalt  thou  be.
From  wine  of  love  come  joy  and  generous  heat :
From  meaner  cups  flow  sorrow  and  deceit.
Love's  sweet,  soft  memories  youth  itself  restore :
The  tale  of  love  gives  fame  for  evermore.
If  Majmin  ne'er  the  cup  of  love  had  drained,
High  fame  in  heaven  and  earth  he  ne'er  had  gained.
A  thousand  sages,  deep  in  wisdom's  lore,
Untaught  of  love,  died,  and  are  known  no  more :
Without  a  name  or  trace  in  death  they  sank,
And  in  the  book  of  Time  their  name  is  blank.

The  groves  are  gay  with  many  a  lovely  bird :
Our  lips  are  silent  and  their  praise  unheard ;


24  LOVE.

But  when  the  theme  is  love's  delicious  tale,
The  moth  is  lauded  and  the  nightingale.
What  though  a  hundred  arts  to  thee  be  known :
Freedom  from  self  is  gained  through  love  alone.
To  worldly  love  thy  youthful  thoughts  incline,
For  earthly  love  will  lead  to  love  divine.
First  with  the  Alphabet  thy  task  begin,
Then  take  the  Word  of  God  and  read  therein.

Once  to  his  master  a  disciple  cried  :—
"  To  wisdom's  pleasant  path  be  thou  my  guide."
"Hast  thou  ne'er  loved?"  the  master  answered  ;  "learn
The  ways  of  love  and  then  to  me  return."
Drink  deep  of  earthly  love,  that  so  thy  lip
May  learn  the  wine  of  holier  love  to  sip.
But  let  not  form  too  long  thy  soul  entrance ;
Pass  o'er  the  bridge :  with  rapid  feet  advance.
If  thou  would  rest,  thine  ordered  journey  sped,
Forbear  to  linger  at  the  bridge's  head.

Thank  God  that  ever  from  mine  early  days
My  steps  have  been  in  love's  delightful  ways.
Love  stood  beside  me  when  my  life  was  new,
And  from  my  mother's  breast  love's  milk  I  drew.
White  as  that  milk  are  now  my  hairs,  but  still
Sweet  thoughts  of  love  mine  aged  bosom  thrill.
Still  in  my  heart -the  youthful  warmth  I  feel,
While  in  mine  ear  re-echoes  Love's  appeal : —


LOVE.  25

"  In  love,  0  Jami,  have  thy  days  been  passed :
Die  in  that  love  gay-hearted  to  the  last.
Some  tale  of  love's  adventure,  that  may  win
Thy  name  remembrance  in  the  world,  begin :
Some  picture  with  thy  finest  pen  assay,
Which  still  may  live  when  thou  art  gone  away."
I  heard  entranced :  my  spirit  rushed  to  meet
Love's  welcome  order,  for  the  voice  was  sweet ;
With  gladsome  heart  the  clear  command  obeyed,
And  straight  the  magic  of  new  spells  essayed.
Now  if  kind  Heaven  will  bless  and  aid  the  task,
And  lade  my  palm-tree  with  the  fruit  I  ask,
I  from  this  glowing  heart  will  pour  a  song
To  melt  the  tender  and  to  move  the  strong;
Veil  the  blue  vault  of  heaven  with  cloud  of  sighs,
And  with  wild  weeping  dim  its  starry  eyes.


Speecb.

SPEECH,  prime  of  new-born  blossoms  that  belong

To  Love,  is  prelude  to  Love's  book  of  song :

The  loftiest  height  the  sage's  foot  may  climb,

The  surest  monument  to  vanquish  time.

The  might  of  speech  alone  unfolds  to  view

Whate'er  the  world  brings  forth  of  old  or  new.

Speech  gave  the  mandate :  eager  to  obey,

The  writer's  pen  on  Being's  tablet  lay.

The  pen's  existence  from  that  hest  began,

And  from  its  opening  eye  a  fountain  ran.

Those  waters  dancing  as  they  murmur  by

Inebriate  the  world,  the  low  and  high :

They  move  the  tongue ;  each  word  becomes  a  rose

From  mystic  gardens  as  the  lips  unclose,

And  comes,  the  breath  of  life  about  it  shed,

With  graceful  motion  from  its  flowery  bed.

It  gains  the  portal  of  the  listening  ear,

And  Wisdom  trembles  when  the  power  is  near.


SPEECH.  27

The  will  speeds  forth  to  greet  the  welcome  guest,

And  shrines  the  virgin  bud  within  the  breast.

Now  to  the  lip  the  smile  of  joy  it  brings ;

Now  wins  the  tear-drop  from  her  secret  springs ;

Now  with  gay  smile  it  wreathes  the  lip  of  woe ;

Now  from  each  laughing  eye  bids  tears  o'erflow.

When  linked  with  speech  this  heavenly  power  I  see,

Her  faithful  servant  let  me  ever  be.

Old  age  has  caught  me  drinking  still  this  wine :

Now  to  cast  off  the  load  of  eld  be  mine.

The  secret  of  my  heart  I  will  not  keep,

But  make  the  world  that  listens  smile  and  weep.

Shirin  and  Khusrau's1  might  are  themes  outworn ;

A  sweeter  Khusrau  shall  my  song  adorn.

Laila  and  Maj  nun's  love  have  had  their  day ;

Another's  name  shall  animate  my  lay,

Who  spread,  a  parrot  sugar-fed,  the  fame

Of  Yiisuf  s  beauty  and  Zulaikha's  flame.

The  Word  of  God  has  called  this  tale  the  best ; 2

And  in  my  sweetest  verse  shall  it  be  dressed.

No  lie  may  here  find  entrance  :  search  it  through  ;

The  tale  is  stamped  by  revelation  true.

A  falsehood  never,  dressed  by  flattering  Art

To  show  like  truth,  may  satisfy  the  heart.

1  Khusrau  Parviz  (Chosroes),  the  lover  of  Shirin.

2  "We  will  relate  to  you  the  most  excellent  of  stories." — Kurdn,
Sura  xii.


28  SPEECH.

Speech  by  fair  truth  is  decked  and  honoured  best,

As  the  full  moon  is  ever  loveliest.

Dark  is  the  dim  false  dawn,1  because,  forsworn,

It  proudly  boasts  to  usher  in  the  morn ;

But  the  true  morning  comes,  and  straight  unfurled,

His  golden  banner  glitters  o'er  the  world.

No  darling  ever  was  like  Yusuf  fair,
In  peerless  beauty  far  beyond  compare.
Still  is  each  youth,  above  his  fellows  famed
For  charm  of  face,  a  second  Yiisuf  named.
None  like  Zulaikha  loved.     0  far  above
All  women's  her  immeasurable  love !
To  age  from  childhood,  love's  unconquered  flame
In  wealth  and  poverty  burnt  on  the  same.
When  after  age,  infirmity,  and  pain,
Her  youth,  and  strength,  and  gladness  came  again,
She  never  turned  from  love's  true  path  aside,
But,  born  to  love,  in  love  she  lived  and  died.
Now  from  my  pen  I  strew  the  pearls  of  verse
And  the  sweet  story  of  her  love  rehearse.
A  store  of  wisdom  ever  new  repays
Each  golden  piece  expended  in  their  praise.
If  some  good  man — this  grace  I  pray  to  win —
Opens  this  book  of  love  and  reads  therein,

1  A  transient  light  on  the  horizon  preceding  the  true  dawn  in  the
East.


SPEECH.

May  he  not  turn,  as  turns  the  leaf,  his  back,
Nor  with  his  finger's  reed  my  lines  attack.
If  here  and  there  a  slip  or  fault  he  see,
May  he  not  lay  the  blame  of  all  on  me.
May  he  correct  my  errors,  or  befriend
With  generous  silence  faults  he  cannot  mend.


29


IDteion  of  Hbam,


THEY  who  can  read  the  Book  which  God  revealed,
And  weigh  the  pearls  which  mystic  oceans  yield,
Tell  thus  of  Adam,  when  their  pens  begin
The  story  of  this  world  and  all  therein.
His  world-embracing  eye  unclosed  to  see
In  glorious  line  his  children  yet  to  be.
There  in  due  order  of  precedence  stood
Before  his  face  the  prophets'  brotherhood.
Then  from  the  rest  apart,  a  noble  band,
He  saw  the  saints  of  God  in  order  stand  ;
Then  crowned,  in  pomp  and  pride  of  royal  state,
Passed  many  a  king  and  famous  potentate  ;
And  myriad  others  came,  apart  from  those,
In  due  succession  of  their  marshalled  rows.

The  long  procession  passed,  and  Adam  viewed
Each  for  a  moment  in  the  multitude.
He  looked  on  Yiisuf  and  beheld  a  moon,
A  sun  most  glorious  in  his  height  of  noon  ;
A  chosen  lamp  conspicuous  o'er  the  rest,
Of  all  the  goodly  throng  the  goodliest.


THE  VISION  OF  ADAM.  31

Before  the  golden  sun  the  stars  are  dim,
And  beauty  faded  at  the  sight  of  him.
Loose  flowed  his  graceful  mantle ;  prone  before
His  feet  adorers  kissed  the  robe  he  wore.
Thought  cannot  picture,  lips  can  ne'er  express,
Though  skilled  in  speech,  his  perfect  loveliness.
Robed  in  the  garb  of  heavenly  favour,  on
His  brow  a  crown  of  kingly  glory  shone.
Spring  of  the  dawn  of  joy,  his  brow  was  gay ;
Night  at  his  coming  shone  like  glorious  day.
Before,  behind,  from  darkening  bodies  free,
The  holy  prophets'  glorious  company,
And  spirits  sanctified,  a  countless  band,
Waving  a  banner  in  each  radiant  hand
Before  that  temple  and  the  light  he  shed
In  whispering  adoration  bowed  the  head.

And  Adam  marvelled  at  the  glorious  show,
And  from  his  lips  came  question  soft  and  low : —
"  Lord,  in  whose  garden  grows  this  gracious  plant  ?
Whose  happy  eyes  will  its  sweet  flower  enchant  ?
Why  falls  on  him  this  light  of  glory  ?     WTience
This  splendour,  beauty,  and  magnificence  ?  "
"  Thine  eyes'  dear  light  is  he,"  a  voice  replied,
"  Thy  wounded  bosom's  sweetest  joy  and  pride.
A  tender  plant  from  Jacob's  flowery  dell,
From  Abraham's  spacious  plain  a  fair  gazelle.


32  THE  VISION  OF  ADAM.

High  over  Saturn  shall  his  palace  tower,
And  Egypt's  fruitful  land  enthrone  his  power.
The  perfect  beauty  in  his  face  expressed
Shall  wake  the  envy  of  earth's  loveliest.
He  holds  a  mirror  in  his  hand  to  show
His  face  ;  on  him  thy  treasured  gift  bestow."

And  Adam  said : — "  Unclosed  is  favour's  door  :
Six  shares  has  beauty,  and  I  give  him  four.
May  every  charm  by  loveliest  youth  possessed
In  him  be  double,  single  in  the  rest ;
And,  when  his  splendour  comes  to  vanquish  all,
Their  gift  of  beauty  to  a  third  shall  fall."

Then  to  his  guileless  heart  the  youth  he  drew,
And  gave  him  strength  to  keep  him  pure  and  true ;
Told  him  the  love  that  thrilled  his  happy  breast,
And  on  his  brow  a  father's  kiss  impressed ;
Bloomed  like  the  rose  in  proud  paternal  joy,
And  blessed  in  bulbul 1  tone  that  rose-like  boy.

1  The  bulbul,  or  nightingale,  is  the  lover  of  the  rose,


(    33    )


IN  this  orchestra  full  of  vain  deceit

The  drum  of  Being,  each  in  turn,  we  beat.

Each  morning  brings  new  truth  to  light  and  fame,

And  on  the  world  falls  lustre  from  a  name.

If  in  one  constant  course  the  ages  rolled,

Full  many  a  secret  would  remain  untold.

If  the  sun's  splendour  never  died  away,

Ne'er  would  the  market  of  the  stars  be  gay.

If  in  our  gardens  endless  frost  were  king,

No  rose  would  blossom  at  the  kiss  of  Spring.

When  Adam's  service  in  the  temple  ceased,
Seth  took  his  station  as  presiding  priest.
He  passed  away,  and  Idris *  next  began
In  this  sad  world  to  preach  pure  lore  to  man.
When  he  was  called  away  to  read  in  heaven,
To  Noah's  watchful  care  our  faith  was  given.   •
When  Noah  sank  beneath  death's  whelming  wave,
To  Allah's  friend 2  the  door  admittance  gave.

1  Enoch.     Idris  is  derived  from  darasa,  "he  read,"  and  the  follow
ing  line  contains  a  play  on  the  word.

2  Abraham.

0


34  YUSUF.

When  heavenly  mansions  claimed  him  for  a  guest,

Isaac  the  treasure  which  he  left  possessed.

When  Isaac  wearied  of  the  world  and  died,

The  voice  of  Jacob  was  religion's  guide.

He  lived  and  prospered :  planted  by  his  hand,

His  banner  waved  o'er  Shain1  and  Canaan's  land,

Wherein  he  made  his  dwelling.     Eich  was  he

In  patriarchal  wealth  and  progeny ;

And  sheep  and  rams  cropped  on  his  hills  their  food

Like  ants  and  locusts  for  their  multitude.

Twelve  sons  were  his.      Among  them  Yusuf  won

The  father's  heart,  his  best  beloved  son,

The  darling  of  his  age.     The  happy  mother

Bore  him  the  heavenly  moon's  terrestrial  brother.

In  the  heart's  garden  a  fair  plant  was  reared ;

A  bright  young  moon  in  the  soul's  heaven  appeared ;

In  Abraham's  rosebed  a  sweet  blossom,  bright

In  gar.b  of  tender  beauty,  sprang  to  light ;

In  the  House  of  Isaac  there  rose  a  star

Whose  splendour  streamed  through  the  sky  afar ;

In  the  garden  of  Jacob  a  tulip  grew,

The  balm  of  his  heart  and  its  sorrow  too :

A  fawn  of  the  sweetest  odour,  that  made

Cathay2  envy  the  fields  where  his  young  feet  strayed.

1  Syria.
2  Khutan  or  Chinese  Tartary,  famous  for  its  musk-deer.


YUSUF.  35

The  mother,  while  earth  was  her  place  of  rest,
Dewed  the  babe's  sweet  lips  from  her  loving  breast.
When  two  glad  years  she  had  nursed  her  son,
Time  poisoned  her  food  and  her  course  was  run.
That  pearl  from  the  ocean  of  grace  was  left
An  orphan  in  tears,  of  her  love  bereft.
The  father  pitied  the  babe.     The  fair
Young  pearl  he  gave  to  his  sister's  care ;
And  her  heart's  dear  nursling,  a  bird  endued
With  gay  wings,  roamed  in  the  garden  of  food.1
Then  stood  the  child  on  his  baby  feet,
And  the  lisping  words  of  his  lips  were  sweet.
Not  for  an  instant  the  dame  would  part
From  the  infant  whose  love  had  enchained  her  heart.
On  her  bosom  at  night,  like  her  soul,  he  lay,
And  was  ever  the  sun  of  her  eyes  by  day.

But  the  love  of  the  father  grew  strong,  and  he
Would  fain  the  face  of  his  darling  see ;
He  longed  that  the  babe,  who  alone  could  kill
The  grief  of  his  heart,  should  be  near,  him  still ;
Day  and  night  he  would  have  him  near,
A  moon  the  gloom  of  his  soul  to  cheer.
Thus  to  his  sister  he  said : — "  0  thou
Whom  love  for  me  bends  like  the  willow  bough,

1  Was  weaned  and  began  to  eat.


36  YUSUF.

My  Yusuf,  my  child,  to  my  side  restore ;
His  absence  is  grief  I  can  bear  no  more.
Let  him  come  to  the  place  where  I  pray  alone,
To  the  dreary  cell  where  I  make  my  moan."

The  sister  heard  the  words  that  he  said;
In  sign  of  obedience  she  bowed  her  head,
But  plotted  deep  in  her  heart  the  while
To  bring  the  child  back  to  her  home  by  guile.
She  had  a  belt  which  Isaac  had  given,
Worn  by  him  long  in  the  service  of  Heaven :
Free  from  all  evil  was  he  whose  hand
Bound  on  his  body  that  blessed  band.
When  she  sent  the  boy  to  his  father,  she  braced
The  girdle  secretly  round  his  waist,
Fastened  so  deftly  that  Yiisuf  felt
No  strain  or  touch  of  the  supple  belt.
So  the  boy  went  forth.      But  a  sudden  shout
And  a  bitter  cry  from  the  dame  rang  out :
"  Lost  is  the  girdle  I  wore."     She  left
None  unaccused  of  the  graceless  theft.
Those  of  her  household  came  at  her  call,
And,  ranged  before  her,  she  searched  them  all.
At  last  came  the  turn  of  Yusuf,  and  round
His  waist  the  girdle  she  sought  was  found.

There  was  a  law  for  repressing  crime,
Fixed  for  the  faithful  in  ancient  time,


YUSUF.

Which  to  the  injured  owner  gave

The  captured  thief  for  his  thrall  and  slave.

Thus,  by  the  fraud  she  had  plotted  caught.

The  boy  again  to  her  home  was  brought.

Glad  was  her  eye  and-  her  soul  elate,

But  that  eye  soon  closed  at  the  stroke  of  Fate.

The  heart  of  Jacob  at  last  reposed,
As  he  gazed  with  his  fond  eyes  that  never  closed ;
From  the  sons  that  were  round  him  he  looked  away,
And  turned  to  him  as  we  turn  to  pray.
For  Yusuf  now  was  his  only  thought
In  each  work  that  he  planned,  in  each  aim  that  he  sought.
In  Yiisuf  only  his  soul  had  delight,
For  only  Yiisuf  his  eye  grew  bright.

How  may  I  tell  the  boy's  beauty  ?     Where
Could  Houri  or  Peri  be  found  so  fair  ?
When  the  moonlight  shines  on  the  landscape,  none
Would  turn  to  look  on  a  garish  sun.
He  was  a  moon  in  the  sphere  of  grace
That  threw  a  soft  light  over  life  and  space :
And  yet  no  moon,  but  a  sun  that  lent
His  light  to  the  moon  of  the  firmament.
But  shall  I  his  light  to  the  sun's  compare —
To  the  false  mirage  of  the  desert  air  ?
'Twas  a  wondrous  ineffable  lustre,  far
Beyond  the  brightness  of  things  that  are ;


38  YUSUF.

For  the  One  Unspeakable  God  in  that  frame

Lay  concealed  under  Yiisuf  s  name.

How  shall  we  marvel  if,  fostered  long

In  the  father's  bosom,  his  love  grew  strong  ?

Zulaikha,  envied  of  Houris,  at  rest
In  her  virgin  bower  afar  in  the  West,
Ne'er  had  seen  the  sun  of  his  beauty  gleam,
But  was  snared  by  his  loveliness  seen  in  a  dream.
If  Love's  dominion  no  distance  can  bar,
When  heart  is  near  heart  he  can  never  be  far.


(    39    )


Zulaifcba.

THUS  the  masters  of  speech  record,

In  whose  bosoms    the  treasures    of    words    are

stored :

There  was  a  king  in  the  West.1     His  name,
Tainriis,  was  spread  wide  by  the  drum  of  fame.
Of  royal  power  and  wealth  possessed,
No  wish  unanswered  remained  in  his  breast.
His  brow  gave  lustre  to  glory's  crown,
And   his  foot  gave  the   thrones  of  the  mighty

renown.

With  Orion  from  heaven  his  host  to  aid,
Conquest  was  his  when  he  bared  his  blade.
His  child  Zulaikha  was  passing  fair,
None  in  his  heart  might  with  her  compare ;
Of  his  royal  house  the  most  brilliant  star,
A  gem  from  the  chest  where  the  treasures  are.
Praise  cannot  equal  her  beauty,  no ;
But  its  faint,  faint  shadow  my  pen  may  show.

1  In  Mauritania.


40  ZULAIKHA.

Like  her  own  bright  hair  falling  loosely  down,

I  will  touch  each  charm  to  her  feet  from  her  crown.

May  the  soft  reflexion  of  that  bright  cheek,

Lend  light  to  my  spirit  and  bid  me  speak,

And  that  flashing  ruby,  her  mouth,  bestow

The  power  to  tell  of  the  things  I  know.

Her  stature  was  like  to  a  palm-tree  grown
In  the  garden  of  grace  where  no  sin  is  known.
Bedewed  by  the  love  of  her  father  the  king,
She  mocked  the  cypress  that  rose  by  the  spring.
Sweet  with  the  odour  of  musk,  a  snare
For  the  heart  of  the  wise  was  the  maiden's  hair.
Tangled  at  night,  in  the  morning  through
Her  long  thick  tresses  a  comb  she  drew,
And  cleft  the  heart  of  the  musk-deer  in  twain
As  for  that  rare  odour  he  sighed  in  vain.
A  dark  shade  fell  from  her  loose  hair  sweet
As  jasmine  over  the  rose  of  her  feet.
A  broad  silver  tablet  her  forehead  displayed
For  the  heaven-set  lessons  of  beauty  made.
Under  its  edge  two  inverted  Nuns1
Showed,  black  as  musk,  their  splendid  half-moons,
And  beneath  them  lively  and  bright  were  placed
Two  Sads2  by  the  pen  of  her  Maker  traced.

1  The  letter  Ntin  (^  of  the  Arabic  alphabet.

2  The  letter  Sdd  (j°  is  supposed,  in  its  right-hand  portion,  to  resemble
the  eye.


ZULAIKHA.  41

From  Nun  to  the  ring  of  the  Mim1  there  rose,

Pure  as  silver,  like  Alif,2  her  nose.

To  that  cipher  her  mouth  add  Alif,  then

She  had  ten  strong  spells  for  the  conquest  of  men.2

That  laughing  ruby  to  view  exposed

A  Sin3  when  the  knot  of  her  lips  unclosed

At  the  touch  of  her  pure  white  teeth,  and  between

The  lines  of  crimson  their  flash  was  seen.

Her  face  was  the  garden  of  Iram,4  where

Roses  of  every  hue  are  fair.

The  dusky  moles  that  enhanced  the  red

"Were  like  Moorish  boys  playing  in  each  rosebed.

Of  silver  that  paid  no  tithe,  her  chin

Had  a  well  with  the  Water  of  Life  therein.

If  a  sage  in  his  thirst  came  near  to  drink,

He  would  feel  the  spray  ere  he  reached  the  brink,

But  lost  were  his  soul  if  he  nearer  drew,

For  it  was  a  well  and  a  whirlpool  too.

Her  neck  was  of  ivory.     Thither  drawn,

Came  with  her  tribute  to  beauty  the  fawn ;

And  the  rose  hung  her  head  at  the  gleam  of  the  skin

Of  shoulders  fairer  than  jessamine.

1  The  small  circular  part  of  the  letter  Mim  is  compared  to  a  mouth.

2  Alif  is  a  long  straight  letter ;  it  stands  for  the  number  one,  and,
prefixed  to  a  cipher,  notes  10.

3  The  letter  Sin  bears  a  rough  resemblance  to  teeth.

4  A  fabulous  garden  in  Arabia,  like  the  Garden  of  the  Hesperides  of
the  Greeks.


42  ZULAIKHA.

Her  breasts  were  orbs  of  a  light  most  pure,

Twin  bubbles  new-risen  from  fount  Kafur : 1

Two  young  pomegranates  grown  on  one  spray,

Where  bold  hope  never  a  finger  might  lay.

The  touchstone  itself  was  proved  false  when  it  tried

Her  arms'  fine  silver  thrice  purified ;

But  the  pearl-pure  amulets  fastened  there

Were  the  hearts  of  the  holy  absorbed  in  prayer.

The  loveliest  gave  her  their  souls  for  rue,2

And  round  the  charm  their  own  heartstrings  drew.

Her  arms  filled  her  sleeves  with  silver  from  them

Whose  brows  are  bound  with  the  diadem.

To  labour  and  care  her  soft  hand  lent  aid,

And  to  wounded  hearts  healing  unction  laid.

Like  reeds  were  those  taper  fingers  of  hers,

To  write  on  each  heart  love's  characters.

Each  nail  on  those  fingers  so  long  and  slim

Showed  a  new  moon  laid  on  a  full  moon's  brim,

And  her  small  closed  hand  made  the  moon  confess

That  she  never  might  rival  its  loveliness.

Two  columns  fashioned  of  silver  upheld

That  beauty  which  never  was  paralleled,

And,  to  make  the  tale  of  her  charms  complete,

They  were  matched  by  the  shape  of  her  exquisite  feet.

1  Camphor  :  the  name  of  a  well  in  Paradise.
2  The  small  black  seeds  of  the  wild  rue  were  used  in  enchantments.


ZULAIKHA.  43

Feet  so  light  and  elastic  no  maid  might  show,
So  perfectly  fashioned  from  heel  to  toe.
If  on  the  eye  of  a  lover  she  stepped,
Her  foot  would  float  on  the  tear  he  wept.

What  shall  I  say  of  her  gems  and  gold  ?
Weak  were  my  tale  when  my  best  were  told.
She  was  not  fairer  for  gold  or  gem,
But  her  perfect  loveliness  glorified  them.
Each  gem  the  tax  of  a  realm,  she  set
On  her  forehead  a  glistering  coronet ;
And  the  rubies  that  hung  from  her  fine  ears  stole
Each  gazer's  senses,  and  heart  and  soul.
A  thousand  jewels  most  rich  and  rare
Studded  the  band  that  confined  her  hair.
Not  a  hand  but  hers  had  the  art  to  twist
The  bracelet  which  circled  her  delicate  wrist.
What  need  I  say  of  her  jewels  more  ?
Glistering  anklets  of  gold  she  wore.
She  moved  through  her  chambers  in  raiment  wrought
With  gold,  from  Egypt  and  Syria  bought,
Or  with  languishing  looks  on  her  couch  she  leant
In  brocades  which  China  and  Bum1  had  sent.
She  decked  her  beauty  with  some  new  dress
Each  morn  that  she  lit  with  her  loveliness.
As  the  moon  each  night  by  fresh  stars  is  met,

1  Greece.


44  ZULAIKHA.

So  she  wore  not  twice  the  same  coronet.

The  hem  of  her  mantle  alone  might  gain

A  kiss  of  that  foot  while  kings  sought  it  in  vain ;

And  no  hand  but  the  fold  of  her  robe  embraced

The  delicate  stem  of  her  dainty  waist.

Maidens  like  cypresses  straight  and  tall,
With  Peri  faces,  obeyed  her  call ;
And  by  day  and  by  night  in  her  service  stood
The  Houris'  loveliest  sisterhood.
No  burthen  as  yet  had  her  sweet  soul  borne ;
Never  her  foot  had  been  pierced  by  a  thorn.
No  breath  of  passion  her  heart  might  stir,
And  to  love  and  be  loved  was  unknown  to  her.
Like  the  languid  narcissus  she  slept  at  night,
And  hailed  like  an  opening  bud  the  light.

With  silver-faced  maidens  in  childhood's  hour,

i

And  gazelle-like  playmates  in  garden  and  bower,

Heedless  of  Fate  and  its  cruel  play,

Sport  was  her  business  and  life  was  gay.

By  no  fear  of  peril  or  woe  oppressed,

Blithe  was  each  thought  of  her  virgin  breast,

Tor  she  knew  not  the  fate  that  the  days  would  bring,

Or  what  terrible  birth  from  the  nights  would  spring.


(    45    )


ifirst  IDision*


SWEET  as  the  morning  of  life,  the  night

Was  filled  like  the  springtide   of  youth  with  de-

light.

Each  bird  was  asleep,  and  each  fish  in  the  rill,
And  even  the  stream  of  event  was  still.
In  this  garden,  the  joy  of  uncounted  eyes,
All  were  at  rest  save  the  stars  in  the  skies.
Night  had  hushed  the  tongue  of  the  tinkling  bell,
And  stolen  the  sense  of  the  sentinel.
His  twisted  tail,  as  he  curled  him  round,
Was  a  collar  to  choke  the  voice  of  the  hound.
The  bird  of  night  had  no  power  to  sing,
For  his  reed  was  cut  with  the  sword  of  his  wing.
The  drowsy  watchman  scarce  raised  his  eye,
And  the  palace  dome,  where  it  rose  on  high,
Wore,  as  his  senses  had  well-nigh  fled,
The  form  of  a  monstrous  poppy-head.
The  drummer  ceased,  and  his  hand,  o'ercome
By  the  might  of  slumber,  lay  still  on  the  drum,


46  THE  FIRST  VISION.

Ere  the  loud-voiced  Muezzin  calling  to  prayer

Had  rolled  up  the  beds  of  the  sleepers  there.

Her  narcissus  eyes *  in  deep  slumber  closed,

Sweetly  the  sweet-lipped  Zulaikha  reposed.

Tresses  of  spikenard  her  pillow  pressed,

And  the  rose  of  her  limbs  strewed  the  couch  of  her

rest,

While  the  hair  dishevelled  on  that  fair  head
Wrote  on  the  rose  with  each  silken  thread.
The  outward  eye  of  the  maiden  slept,
But  the  eye  of  her  spirit  its  vigil  kept ;
And  she  saw  before  her  a  fair  youth  stand —
Nay,  'twas  a  being  from  spirit-land :
From  the  world  of  glory,  more  lovely  far
Than  the  large-eyed  damsels  of  Paradise  are ;
For  his  face  made  their  beauty  and  glances  dim,
And     their    glances    and    beauty    were    stolen    from

him.

His  form  like  a  sapling  was  straight  and  tall,
And  the  cypress-tree  was,  to  him,  a  thrall.2
His  hair,  a  beautiful  chain  to  bind
The  heart  of  the  wisest,  flowed  unconfined.
The  sun  and  the  moon  confessed  with  shame
That  a  purer  light  from  his  forehead  came.

1  Eyes  heavy  with  sleep  are  frequently  compared  to  the  narcissus.
2  The  usual  epithet  of  the  cypress  is  "  free."


THE  FIRST  VISION.  47

The  arch l  of  the  mosque  where  the  holy  bow,
Or  the  canopy  made  for  their  rest,  was  his  brow.
His  eyes,  where  the  tint  of  the  surma  was  new,
With    a  dart    from  each  lash  pierced  the  bosom

through,

And  the  pearls,  when  the  rubies  apart  were  drawn,
Were  as  lightning's  flash  through  the  red  of  dawn.

Zulaikha  saw,  and  a  moment — one —
Was  too  much,  for  the  maid  was  for  ever  undone.
One  glance  at  that  loveliest  form,  which  passed
Men,  and  Peris,  and  Houris,  she  cast,
And  to  that  sweet  face  and  those  charms  a  slave
Her  heart — nay,  a  hundred  hearts — she  gave.
From  the  visional  form  she  would  never  forget
The  plant  of  love  in  her  breast  was  set.
Lit  by  the  light  of  his  beauty,  the  flame
Zulaikha's  patience  and  faith  o'ercame.
She  tied  her  heartstrings  to  each  hair  of  that  head
Whence  the  precious  odour  of  amber  was  shed.
The  tears  welled  forth  from  her  eyes  in  a  flood,
And  those  orbs,  as  she  slumbered,  were  flecked  with

blood.

The  mole  on  that  fair  face  was  still  in  her  view,
And  she  burned  in  the  fire  of  his  love  like  rue.2


1  The  arch  towards  which  worshippers  turn  in  prayer.
2  The  seeds  of  the  wild  rue  burnt  as  a  charm.


48  THE  FIRST  VISION.

That  rounded  throat  was  her  constant  pain,
And  that  chin  a  sweet  apple  she  longed  to  gain.
0  marvellous  beauty !    The  shape  had  fled,
But  the  love  grew  stronger  which  fancy  fed.
Weary  of  self  had  the  maiden  grown,
And  could  find  her  rest  in  that  form  alone.


(    49    )


Xove's  longing,

NIGHT,  the  black  raven,  had  flown  away,
And  the  cock  crew  loud  at  the  dawn  of  day.
The  voice  of  the  bulbul  to  song  addressed,
Drew  the  veil  of  her  leaves  from  the  rose's  breast.
With  the  tears  of  morning  the  jasmine  was  wet,
And  dew  gemmed  the  bud  of  the  violet.

Zulaikha  still  lay  motionless  there,
Her  heart  turned  to  that  night  as  we  turn  for  prayer.
But  no  sweet  slumber  now  held  her  fast,
But  the  senseless  swoon  of  the  night  that  had  passed.
Her  maidens  kissed  her  soft  hand,  and  round
Her  couch  their  foreheads  were  pressed  to  the  ground.
Then  the  veil  from  the  dew-sprent  tulip1  she  raised,
And  with  weary  eyes  round  the  chamber  gazed.
Like  a  fair  young  sun  or  a  moon  her  face
Shone  forth  from  her  collar,  its  rising-place.
No  sign  of  that  youth  could  her  eye  behold,
And  she  shrank  as  a  soft  flower  shrinks  in  the  cold.
She  thought  of  that  cypress  in  longing  grief
And  would  rend  her  robe  as  the  rose  her  leaf.

1  The  dew-sprent  tulip  is  her  eye.

D


50  LOVE'S  LONGING.

But  the  maiden's  hand  was  by  shame  restrained,

And  her  foot  'neath  the  mantle  of  patience  retained,

And  her  secret  love  she  still  kept  unknown

like  the  ruby  that  sleeps  in  the  heart  of  the  stone.

Her  bosom  bled,  but  no  drop  might  show

The  cause  of  the  wound  and  her  bitter  woe.

With  her  waiting-maids  she  would  talk  and  smile,

But  her  soul  was  heavy  with  grief  the  whila

Her  lips  of  sugar  would  laugh,  but  pain

Knotted  her  heart  like  the  sugar-cane.

Gay  was  her  tongue  with  the  tale  and  jest,

But  the  tongues  of  love's  flame  flickered  fierce  in  her

breast.

On  the  forms  of  her  maidens  her  eye  she  cast,
But  her  heart  was  bound  to  the  loved  one  fast
Her   soul's   rein   had  slipped  from  the   hand  of  her

will,

For  where'er  she  might  be  she  was  with  him  still
'Tis  vain  for  the  poor  heart  to  struggle  while
Love  holds  it  with  teeth  of  the  crocodile.
Xo  wish  had  she  now,  not  a  thought  save  for  one ;

in  him  no  rest  and  no  comfort,  none.
If  she  spoke,  his  image  prompted  the  word ;
If  she  wished,  he  only  her  bosom  stirred.
Often  her  soul  had  near  passed  away
Ere  the  sweet  night  ended  her  weary  day —


LOVE'S  LONGING.  51

Night,  the  dear  friend  of  all  lovers ;  night,

Who  hides  their  secrets  that  fear  the  light —

Night,  the  meet  theme  of  the  lover's  praise,

AVI  10  drops  the  kind  veil  which  the  morn  would  raise.

Then  she  turned  her  face  to  the  wall  of  lament,

And  her  back  was  curved  as  a  harp  is  bent.

The  strings  of  that  harp  were  the  streams  from  her

eyes,

And  its  voice  was  the  tune  of  her  ceaseless  sighs.
From  the  depths  of  her  soul  the  wild  music  rose,
And  its  treble  and  bass  were  the  tale  of  her  woes.
The  loved  one's  image  in  sight  she  kept,
And  uttered  these  pearls  with  the  pearls  she  wept :
"  Purest  of  gems,  from  what  mine  art  thou
For  whom  I  am  weeping  these  tear-gems  now  ?
Thou  art  gone  from  my  sight  with  the  heart  thou  hast

snared,

But  thy  name  and  thy  home  thou  hast  not  declared.
Of  whom  shall  I  ask  ?     To  whom  shall  I  turn,
Thy  name  and  the  place  where  thou  dwellest  to  learn  ?
Art  thou  a  king,  by  what  name  art  thou  known  ?
A  moon  ? — with  what  stars  is  thy  heavenly  throne  ?
Ah,  ne'er  may  a  maiden  be  captured  like  me !
I  am  robbed  of  my  heart  and  the  robber  goes  free.
I  saw  thine  image  ;  it  stole  my  sleep  ;
And  now  blood  from  mine  eyes  and  my  heart  I  weep.


52  LOVE'S  LONGING.

Sleepless  for  ever  my  body  must  be,

For  my  heart  is  on  fire  with  the  love  of  thee.

I  was  a  rose  in  youth's  garden ;  there

Like  the  Water  of  Life  I  was  fresh  and  fair.

No  breeze  might  roughly  visit  my  head,

And  my  delicate  foot  on  no  thorn  might  tread.

With  one  glance  thou  hast  thrown  to  the  winds  my

rest,

And  a  thousand  thorns  my  pillow  infest.
On  a  thorny  bed  there  is  little  repose
Tor  a  frame  that  is  soft  as  the  leaf  of  a  rose."

Thus  in  wailing  and  wild  lament
For  the  vanished  image  her  night  was  spent.
When  the  flush  of  morning  was  near,  to  hide
All  traces  of  sorrow  her  eyes  she  dried.
Her  cypress  form  on  her  bed  she  threw,
And  the  pillow  was  bright  with  the  rose's  hue.
But  the  wounds  of  her  teeth  were  visible  yet
On  the  lips  where  her  sorrow-parched  tongue  was  set.
Thus  unchanging,  by  night  and  by  day,
The  hours  of  Zulaikha  passed  sadly  away.


(    53    )


Suspicions*

THE  arrows  of  Love  are  pointed  so  well

That  no  wisdom's  shield  may  their  stroke  repel.

To  the  ground  of  the  heart  they  will  cleave  their  way,

And  a  hundred  traces  their  wounds  betray.

The  odour  of  incense  breathes  far  and  wide,

And  love,  like  musk,  it  were  vain  to  hide.

Through  a  hundred  folds  of  the  veil  will  steal

The  perfume  your  labour  would  fain  conceal.

The  love  of  Zulaikha  was  unconfessed,
And  the  seed  of  sorrow  lay  dark  in  her  breast.
But  the  love  waxed  strong,  and  the  sorrow  grew,
And  more,  ever  more,  they  were  forced  to  view.
The  water  flowed  from  her  eyes  in  a  flood —
Water  ?     All,  no  ;  'twas  a  stream  of  blood  ;
And,  as  each  big  drop  from  their  lashes  fell,
There  was  a  traitor  her  secret  to  tell.
From  her  burning  bosom  she  heaved  the  sigh,
And  the  steam1  of  her  sorrow  went  up  to  the  sky,

1  A  sigh  is  called  in  Persian  the  "  smoke  of  the  heart."


54  SUSPICIONS.

While  each  long  sigh  from  her  bosom  came
To  show  the  fierce  heat  of  her  secret  flame.
At  night  she  was  sleepless ;  her  food  she  spurned,
And  to  yellow  tulips  her  roses  were  turned.
You  may  search  the  garden,  but  look  in  vain
For  a  tulip l  free  from  all  spot  and  stain.

'Twas  known  to  her  maidens  by  signs  like  these
That  the  mind  of  Zulaikha  was  ill  at  ease.
But  her  hidden  sorrow  they  knew  not,  nor  guessed
What  troubled  the  calm  of  their  lady's  breast.
"  Who  ever,"  cried  one,  "  has  seen  aught  so  strange  ?
Some  evil  glance  may  have  wrought  the  change."
Another  maiden  the  grief  would  trace
To  a  Dev,2  or  one  of  the  Peris'  race.
Cried  a  third :  "  A  magician,  I  know  full  well,
Has  laid  on  our  lady  his  secret  spell."
"  Nay,"  said  another,  "  'tis  Love  that  weighs
On  the  captive  bosom  whereon  he  preys.
When  she  wakes  no  lover  can  meet  her  sight,
And  the  anguish  comes  from  the  dreams  of  night."
Thus  each  maiden  her  thought  expressed,
Pondered  each  sign,  and  inferred  and  guessed.
But  still  the  secret  of  love,  concealed
Mid  doubt  and  conjecture,  was  unrevealed.

1  The  flecked  tulip  is  the  emblem  of  a  love-wounded  heart.

2  An  evil  spirit.


SUSPICIONS.  55

She  had  a  nurse  who  possessed  a  store
Gleaned  from  the  treasures  of  magic  lore.
Deep  was  her  knowledge  of  lovers'  ways ;
She  had  loved  and  been  loved  in  her  youthful  days.
Skilled  in  the  arts  which  let  lovers  meet,
She  could  lead  the  cold  youth  to  the  maiden's  feet.
Before  her  lady  one  night  she  fell,
Eecalled  how  long  she  had  served  her  well,
And  "  Sweet  bud  of  the  royal  garden,"  she  cried,
"  A  thorn  from  whose  stem  were  a  beauty's  pride,
May  thy  lips  ever  smile,  and  thy  heart  be  gay,
And  thy  splendour  lend  to  my  fortune  a  ray.
My  soul  like  a  pheasant  would  flutter  round  thee,
Of  the  garden  of  beauty  thou  fair  cypress-tree.
My  sea  of  affection  the  stream  has  supplied,
Which  has  fed  thy  growth  on  its  fertile  side.
These  eyes  of  mine  saw  thy  dear  cheek  first,
And  the  new-born  child  in  these  arms  was  nursed.
With  musk  and  rose-water  thy  limbs  and  head
I  bathed,  and  sweet  drops  on  thy  lips  I  shed.
With  the  strings  of  mine  own  loving  soul  I  tied
The  cradle  bands  which  my  heart  supplied.
Thy  sugar  lips  to  this  breast  I  drew,
And  by  me  thy  body  and  spirit  grew.
Night  came,  but  my  care  for  thee  robbed  me  of  rest ;
Morn  dawned,  and  my  nursling  I  bathed  and  dressed.


56  SUSPICIONS

The  babe  that  by  night  on  my  bosom  lay,

Was  the  stamp  on  my  back  when  I  moved  by  day.

The  fair  rose-bush  to  a  cypress  grew,

But  my  hand  from  thy  mantle  I  never  withdrew.

In  each  loving  service  for  thee  I  wrought,

And  cared  for  thy  needs  with  mine  earnest  thought.

Where'er  that  heart-ravishing  cypress  moved,

The  love  of  thy  faithful  shadow  was  proved.

When  my  dear  lady  rested  I  stood  by  her  bed,

And  laid  at  her  feet,  when  she  slumbered,  my  head.

Ne'er  has  this  love  for  thee  fallen  away:

Still  with  faith  and  affection  I  serve  and  obey.

Then  wilt  thou  refuse  thy  heart's  secret  to  tell,

A  stranger  to  her  who  has  served  thee  so  well  ?

Tell  me  the  cause  of  this  wild  unrest,

Of  this  heavy  heart  in  a  youthful  breast.

Why  are  thy  roses  so  faded  ?     Why

Is  thy  warm  breath  turned  to  a  cold  cold  sigh  ?

Why,  sun  as  thou  art,  wilt  thou  wane  like  the  moon,

And  long  for  the  eve  ere  the  height  of  thy  noon  ?

Some  moon  has  bewitched  thee.     But,  darling,  say

What  moon  is  he  that  has  crossed  thy  way.

If  he  be  an  angel  in  heaven  above,

A  child  of  pure  light,  who  has  gained  thy  love,

By  adoration  and  stress  of  prayer

I  will  draw  him  down  from  the  glories  there.


SUSPICIONS.  57

If  a  Peri,  dwelling  in  waste  and  hill,
My  trade  and  my  strength  is  in  magic  skill.
The  might  of  my  spells  shall  the  spirit  confine
In  a  glassy  prison  and  make  him  thine.
And  soon  shall  thy  bosom  be  glad,  if  a  son
Of  the  race  of  Adam  thy  heart  has  won.
For  what  son  of  earth  would  refuse  to  see
His  lady,  and  mistress,  and  queen  in  thee  ? "

She  ceased ;  and  the  heart  of  Zulaikha  was  stirred
By  the  tale  of  magic  and  love  she  heard.
Her  only  hope  was  the  truth  to  speak,
While  her  tears  were  as  stars  to  the  moon  of  her  cheek :
"  Unseen  is  the  treasure  I  long  for.     The  key
Of  the  treasure-house  door  is  lost  to  me.
How  can  I  tell  where  the  bird  may  rest
Who  makes  with  the  phoenix  of  story  his  nest  ?
Yet  the  fabled  phoenix  is  known  to  fame,
While  the  bird  of  my  love  has  not  even  a  name.
How  sweet  is  their  longing,  compared  with  mine,
Who  can  name  the  dear  object  for  which  they  pine !
Though  bitter  the  thought  that  they  may  not  meet,
Yet  to  name  the  beloved  one  ever  is  sweet."

Then  the  faithful  nurse  was  honoured,  and  shared
The  secret  the  love-lorn  maiden  declared.
The  tale  of  the  vision  made  watchful  her  eyes,
And  the  senseless  love-swoon  made  her  active  and  wise.


58  SUSPICIONS.

Scarce  a  line  in  the  book  of  that  heart  had  she  read,

And  the  hope  to  aid  her  was  cold  and  dead.

Tor  that  line  was  conjecture  and  vain  surmise,

And  where  can  be  searching  with  blinded  eyes  ?

She  could  open  no  prison  to  free  Love's  slave,

But  she  opened  her  lips  in  the  counsel  she  gave :

"  The  hand  of  the  Devs  in  this  trouble  I  trace,

For  guile  and  deceit  is  the  joy  of  their  race.

They  raise  bright  phantoms  and  overthrow

Our  maddened  brain's  empire  with  empty  show."

"  Nay,"  cried  Zulaikha,  "  weak,  weak  were  their  skill,

To  show  the  rare  beauty  that  haunts  me  still.

And  poor  frail  woman  could  ne'er  give  birth

To  an  angel  fairer  than  children  of  earth."

"  Why  trouble  thy  soul,"  said  the  nurse,  "  for  a  dream

Whose  forms  are  but  fancy  and  only  seem  ? "

"  If  the  dream  had  been  false  it  had  never  misled

A  true-hearted  maiden,"  Zulaikha  said ;

"  For  the  maxim  of  sages  is,  all  the  world  through,

'  The  false  to  the  false,  and  the  true  to  the  true.' "

"  Thou  art  wise  and  prudent,"  she  answered ;  "  strive

The  thought  of  the  dream  from  thy  breast  to  drive."

"  Had  I  strength,"  said  Zulaikha,  "the  thought  to  control,

This  crushing  weight  never  had  pressed  on  my  soul.

But  counsel  is  feeble  the  load  to  withstand,

And  the  reins  of  my  purpose  fall  loose  from  my  hand.


SUSPICIONS.


59


On  my  heart  the  fair  vision  I  saw  in  my  sleep

Is  engraved  as  on  stone,  and  the  letters  are  deep.

The  flood  may  rush  o'er  them,  wild  winds  blow  in  vain,

For  the  lines  that  are  graven  on  rock  will  remain."

The  sad  nurse  ceased  from  the  vain  assay

To  counsel  where  Love  held  his  paramount  sway.

To  Zulaikha's  father  the  tale  she  confessed,

And  wild  was  the  grief  of  his  troubled  breast,

But  the  hand  of  counsel  might  lend  no  aid,

And  Fate  must  be  guide  of  the  life  of  the  maid.


60


Seconfc  IDteion,


SUPEEMELY  blest  is  the  bosom  where

Love  rules  unfettered  by  earthly  care  ;

Whence  fire  to  the  flash  of  the  lightning  is  lent,

That  on  garners  of  wisdom  and  patience  is  spent.

Thought  may  not  vex  it  for  life  or  fame,

And  light  as  a  straw  is  a  mountain  of  blame.

For  Love  laughs  at  the  counsel  which  Wisdom  would

give,

And  reproach  is  the  food  that  will  help  him  to  live.
Twelve  months  Zulaikha  declined  and  sank,
And  the  fair  full  moon  to  a  crescent  shrank.
One  eve  she  sat  curved  like  the  young  moon  with  woe,
And  her  eyes  were  red  like  the  morning's  glow.
"  How  hast  thou  dealt  with  me,  Heaven  ?  "  she  cried  ;
"  The  sun  of  my  glory  has  faded  and  died.
Like  an  archer's  bow  thou  hast  bent  my  frame,
And  made  me  the  mark  of  the  arrow  of  blame.
Thou  hast  given  my  reins  to  rebellion  ;  beside
Eebellion  my  heart  will  acknowledge  no  guide.


THE  SECOND  VISION.  61

That  form  made  my  bosom  with,  love  to  glow,

But  scarce  in  a  dream  his  dear  face  will  he  show.

Never  he  comes  when  I  watch  and  weep,

And  he  comes  no  more  in  a  vision  of  sleep.

The  sight  of  that  world-lighting  moon  was  a  gleam

Of  waking  bless  and  no  empty  dream.

With  ceaseless  watching  these  eyes  are  dim :

May  my  waking  fortune  give  sleep  to  him !

Tor  then  would  my  fortune  watch  o'er  me  in  truth,

And  grant  me  a  sight  of  that  well-loved  youth."

Hours  of  the  night  in  this  wild  lament,
With  her  troubled  soul  at  her  lips,  she  spent.
Slumber  at  length  lulled  to  rest  her  thought —
Slumber  ? — the  swoon  of  a  brain  o'erwrought.
Ere  she  had  rested  her  weary  frame,
Again  the  sight  that  she  longed  for  came.
The  self-same  form  with  a  cheek  more  fair
Than  the  softest  moonlight  was  standing  there.
When  her  eye  saw  the  face  she  remembered  so  well
She  sprang  from  her  couch  and  before  it  fell.
"  Dear  cypress,"  she  cried,  "  with  the  grace  of  the  rose,
Thou  hast  robbed  me  of  patience  and  strength  and  repose.
By  that  Creator  who  fashioned  thee
From  the  purest  light  where  no  stain  may  be.
Sweet  as  the  Water  of  Life,  a  king
In  beauty  supreme  o'er  each  living  thing :


62  THE  SECOND  VISION.

Who  gave  thee  that  lip  for  the  spirit's  food,

And  that  rose  with  a  charm  for  the  soul  endued ;

Who  gave  bloom  to  that  cheek  and  soft  light  to  those  eyes,

Where  the  moth  of  my  heart  flutters  round  till  it  dies ;

Who  gave  thee  those  musky  tresses,  a  snare

Whereof  my  heart  prizes  each  single  hair  ?

Give  my  lost  heart  the  sweet  pity  I  seek,

Open  that  ruby,  thy  mouth,  and  speak.

Speak  in  thy  fulness  of  ravishing  grace ;

Say  who  thou  art  and  the  name  of  thy  race.

Art  thou  a  gem  ?     From  what  mine  dost  thou  spring  ?

Where  is  thy  palace  if  thou  art  a  king  ? "

"  Of  the  children  of  Adam,"  his  answer  came ;
"  Earth  and  water  composed  my  frame.
Now  if  the  words  of  thy  lips  be  true,
That  my  love  has  pierced  thy  young  bosom  through,
Ne'er  from  thy  promise  and  faith  must  thou  swerve,
But  thy  troth  unplighted  for  me  reserve.
Beware,  sweet  maiden ;  let  no  one  sip
The  sugar  that  lies  on  thy  virgin  lip.
That  lip  and  thy  heart  and  thy  love  must  be
Preserved  from  others  and  kept  for  me.
Think  not  the  heart  in  this  bosom  is  cold
And  returns  not  the  love  which  thy  lips  have  told.
The  net  of  thy  charms  o'er  my  heart  is  thrown,
And  the  brand  of  thy  love  marks  me  out  as  thine  own."


THE  SECOND  VISION.  63

Soon  as  the  maid  from  his  lips  had  heard
That  his  answering  breast  with  her  loved  was  stirred,
Anew  o'er  her  bosom  the  frenzy  came,
And  her  soul  like  a  moth  fluttered  fast  to  the  flame.
She  arose  from  the  thought  of  that  vision  of  night,
And  the  flame  that  consumed  her  rose  fierce  and  bright.
Wild  and  more  wild  grew  her  sorrow ;  her  sighs
Went  up  from  her  heart  like  a  cloud  to  the  skies.
Her  hand  cast  the  rein  of  her  prudence  away ;
No  prayer  could  move  her,  no  counsel  stay.
She  tore,  till  a  rosebud,  her  soul's  veil  apart,
And  poured  down,  like  a  tulip,  the  blood  of  her  heart.
She  wounded  her  cheek  because  his  was  so  fair,
And  tore,  when  she  thought  of  his  tresses,  her  hair.
Her  maidens  about  her  sate  close  in  a  ring
As  ye  see  round  the  moon  a  fair  halo  cling.
Had  the  chain  been  unlinked,  like  an  arrow  sped
From  a  bended  bow  far  away  she  had  fled.
That  circle  of  maidens  her  garment  held,
Or  forth  she  had  rushed  by  her  frenzy  impelled.
The  bud  of  her  will  was  fast  bound,  or  her  feet
Like  a  rose  deflowered  had  sought  the  street.
When  her  father  was  ware  of  her  madness,  he  sought
From  the  sages  a  cure  for  her  mind  distraught.
Through  the  paths  of  wisdom  they  roamed  in  vain,
And  could  find  no  counsel  but  bond  and  chain.


64  THE  SECOND  VISION.

So  they  brought  her  a  serpent  of  burnished  gold,

With  ruby  and  pearl  on  each  twisted  fold,

Like  the  watchful  guardian  of  treasure,1  round

Her  silver  ankle  the  snake  was  bound.

Each  treasure  is  watched  by  a  serpent.     Where

Was  a  treasure  of  beauty  so  rich  and  rare  ?

Soon  as  the  snake  'neath  her  mantle  slept,

She  uttered  these  pearls  with  the  pearls  she  wept:

"  My  heart  is  the  captive  of  Love.     My  chains

Are  dearer  than  all  that  the  world  contains.

Why  will  life-wasting    Heaven  with    its    sleight    of

hand

Make  heavy  my  foot  with  the  weight  of  this  band  ?
To  me,  of  all  vigour  and  strength  bereft,
Scarce  is  the  power  of  motion  left.
Why  drive  this  sword  through  my  bosom  ?     Why
Let  this  heavy  chain  on  my  weak  foot  lie  ?
Deep  is  the  cypress-tree  rooted  in  clay,
And  hard  were  the  task  would  it  move  away.
About  its  foot  will  the  gardener  cast
His  chains  of  water  to  bind  it  fast  ?
Not  me,  my  heart's  robber  in  chains  ye  should  bind
Who  stole  in  a  moment  my  peace  of  mind ;
Who  would  not  stay  near  his  victim  till
On  his  tulip  face  she  had  gazed  her  fill.

1  A  serpent  is  supposed  to  be  the  guardian  of  hidden  treasures.


THE  SECOND  VISION.  65

Like  the  flash  of  the  lightning  he  fled  from  mine  eyes,

And  uprose  from  my  heart  a  thick  cloud  of  sighs.

If  happy  Fortune  should  favour  at  last,

With  this  chain  of  gold  I  would  bind  him  fast.

While  I  chose  I  would  gaze  on  his  cheek's  fair  bloom,

And  his  eyes  should  lighten  my  days  of  gloom.

Did  I  say  I  would  bind  the  soft  darling  ?     Nay,

If  a  grain  of  dust  on  his  instep  lay,

A  mountain's  weight  on  my  soul  it  would  be,

And  the  carpet  of  joy  would  be  folded  for  me.

Would  I  lay  on  his  heart  a  load  heavy  to  bear,

Or  his  silver  ankle  with  fetters  wear  ?

No ;  my  heart  with  a  thousand  daggers  be  torn

Ere  his  robe  be  pierced  by  a  single  thorn."

Of  the  wishes  she  uttered  in  deep  lament
One,  only  one,  to  its  aim  was  sent.
For  with  mangled  heart  to  the  earth  she  fell
Like  a  bird  when  the  fowler  has  aimed  too  well.
Senseless  awhile  was  her  'wildered  brain,
But  sense  returned  and  renewed  her  pain.
Again  love's  flame  in  her  bosom  rose,
Again  she  recounted  her  tale  of  woes.
In  her  altering  mood  she  would  laugh  or  weep,
Now  full  of  life,  now  as  dead,  or  asleep.

Thus  ever  changing  from  day  to  day,
She  lived  while  a  year  passed  slowly  away.


(    66    )


IDisioru


LOVE,  with  thy  magic  and  guile,  draw  near,
To  whom  now  war  and  now  peace  is  dear:
Thou,  who  canst  turn  with  the  might  of  thy  rule
The  fool  to  a  sage,  and  the  sage  to  a  fool.
When  thy  net  is  spread  in  a  maiden's  hair,
Wisdom  is  caught  in  the  maddening  snare  ;
And  when  thy  hand  loosens  the  braided  chain,
The  lamp  of  wisdom  hums  bright  again.

Zulaikha,  senseless  in  dark  despair,
The  twin-sister  of  sorrow,  embraced  by  care,
Drank  to  the  dregs  of  the  bitter  bowl,
And  found  no  rest  for  her  love-lorn  soul  ;
From  her  head  in  her  passion  the  coif  she  drew,
And  dust  on  her  amber-sweet  tresses  threw,
Bent  her  cypress  form  to  the  earth  in  prayer,
While  the  rosebuds  of  Iram  were  wild  with  despair.
She  wept  red  tears  from  narcissus  eyes,
And  her  tongue,  like  the  lily's,  gave  words  to  her  sighs,
As  with  anguish  deep  in  her  tender  breast,
The  youth  of  her  vision  she  thus  addressed  :


THE  THIRD  VISION.  67

"  Thou  hast  robbed  me  of  sense  and  of  comfort,  and  left

The  life  of  thy  victim  destroyed  by  the  theft ;

Thou  hast  pierced  me  with  grief,  and  I  sorrow  alone ;

Thou  hast  stolen  my  heart,  and  not  given  thine  own.

I  know  not  thy  name  for  my  lips  to  speak,

Nor  thy  home  for  my  love-guided  foot  to  seek.

Sweet  as  pure  sugar  was  once  my  smile —

Like  the. sugar-cane  now  I  am  bound  by  thy  guile.

Like  a  rose  unveiled  I  am  scorned,  though  a  bud,

I  drank  for  my  love  of  the  draughts  of  blood.

I  claim  not  dear  in  thine  eyes  to  be ;

To  be  least  of  thy  slaves  were  enough  for  me.

Some  favour,  at  least,  to  thy  servant  show,

And  deliver  her  soul  from  the  fetters  of  woe.

May  no  maiden,  as  I  am,  with  blood  be  stained,

None  mocked  by  the  people,  like  me,  and  disdained.

My  mother  weeps  for  the  daughter  she  bore,

And  my  father  delights  in  his  child  no  more.

The  maidens  who  served  me  are  distant,  and  leave

Their  love-lorn  mistress  alone  to  grieve.

And  by  thee  are  lighted  the  fires  that  feed

On  my  helpless  heart  like  a  worthless  weed."

Thus,  ere  sleep  o'er  her  senses  stole,
She  reproached  the  idol  that  filled  her  soul.
When  her  eyes  were  heavy  with  sleep's  soft  dew,
Came  the  thief  of  her  rest  in  a  vision  anew.


68  THE  THIRD  VISION.

Words  would  fail  me  to  tell  how  fair

Was  the  wondrous  beauty  she  looked  on  there.

The  hem  of  his  garment  was  fast  in  her  hold,

And  over  his  feet  her  hot  weepings  rolled.

And  she  cried :   "  0  thou,  for  whose  dear  love  flies

All  calm  from  my  bosom,  all  sleep  from  mine  eyes,

By  the  Pure  One  who  made  thee  so  pure  from  thy  birth,

And  chose  thee  most  fair  of  the  beauties  of  earth,

Pity  the  anguish  I  suffer,  disclose

Thy  name  and  thy  city,  and  lighten  my  woes."

He  answered :  "  If  this  may  content  thee,  hear  ;
In  Egypt's  land  I  am  Grand  Vizier.
Mid  her  proudest  princes  my  place  is  high,
And  the  trusted  friend  of  the  king  am  I."

These  words  from  her  idol  Zulaikha  heard,
And  her  spirit,  long  dead,  with  new  life  was  stirred,
In  the  quickening  balm  of  his  sweet  voice  came
To  her  soul  new  patience,  and  strength  to  her  frame.
She  rose  from  her  dream,  and  her  heart  was  gay;
The  cloud  of  madness  had  passed  away.
Again,  recalling  the  words  that  brought
Joy  to  her  heart  in  her  loving  thought,
She  cried  to  the  maidens  about  her :  "  You
Who  shared  the  keen  sorrow  that  pierced  me  through,
Bear  the  glad  news  to  my  father ;  free
His  heart  from  the  grief  that  he  feels  for  me.


THE  THIRD  VISION.  69

Say  that  my  senses  are  troubled  no  more,
And  the  stream  flows  clear  as  it  flowed  before.
Say :  '  Be  not  thou  as  the  misers  are,
But  release  thy  treasure  from  lock  and  bar.
Come,  loose  my  foot  from  the  golden  chain,
For  I  fear  not  the  fury  of  madness  again.' "

When  the  joyful  news  to  the  king  was  brought,
He  flew  to  his  daughter  like  one  distraught
He  opened  the  jaws  of  the  snake  and  unrolled
From  the  silver- armed  maiden  the  coil  of  gold.
Her  damsels  bowed  them  before  her  feet,
And  prepared  for  their  lady  a  royal  seat,
Where  they  placed  her  with  dutiful  hands,  and  set
On  her  fair  brow  a  glittering  coronet.
Her  Peri-faced  maidens  about  her  came,
Drawn  by  her  beauty  as  moths  by  the  flame.
Pleasant  and  gay  were  Zulaikha's  words,
And  her  voice  was  sweet  as  a  musical  bird's ;
The  seal  of  the  casket  of  speech  she  broke,
Arid  of  many  a  city  and  country  spoke,
And  of  Sham  and  Piiim,  and  sugar  ran  down
From  her  lips  at  mention  of  Egypt's  renown ;  *
Of  the  deeds  that  her  people  had  done  of  old,
Of  the  Grand  Vizier  and  his  state  she  told.

1  Egypt  (Misr)  was  famous  for  sugar,  which  in  India  is  still  called
misri.


70  THE  THIRD  VISION.

When  she  spoke  of  the  title  she  loved  so  well,
As  falls  a  shadow,  to  earth  she  fell ;
She  rained  down  blood  from  the  cloud  of  her  eyes,
And  the  voice  of  her  weeping  went  up  to  the  skies.

Thus  passed  her  day  and  her  night ;  of  naught
Save  her  love  and  his  country  she  spoke  or  thought.
When  she  mentioned  his  title,  her  voice  was  glad,
Else  she  lay  sullen  and  silent  and  sad.


Suitors*


ZULAIKHA  lay  pining.     The  world  no  less
Was  filled  with  the  fame  of  her  loveliness,
And  her  beauty,  whispered  from  land  to  land,
Unseen,  was  a  spell  which  no  heart  could  withstand.
Slaves  to  the  might  of  the  maid's  renown,
Enamoured  princes  and  kings  bowed  down,
And  again  and  again  for  the  love  of  her
Sent  trusty  herald  and  messenger,

One  day  in  her  calmer  moments  she
Sate  high  on  her  throne,  from  her  frenzy  free,
Envoys  of  kings  of  each  distant  land,
From  famous  Kiim  and  from  Syria's  strand,
More  than  a  hundred,  about  her  pressed,
And  in  her  bright  presence  at  length  had  rest.
One  bore  a  list  of  the  realms  of  his  king,
And  one  on  his  finger  showed  Solomon's  ring.
Each  with  the  gift  of  a  monarch  came
To  woo  the  fair  maid  in  his  master's  name.
"  The  land  she  may  shine  on  will  see  the  town
Where  its  queen  dwells  graced  with  a  matchless  crown,


72  THE  SUITORS.

And  her  feet  shall  be  set  upon  diadems  strewn
In  the  streets  of  the  city  she  makes  her  own.
If  she  pour  on  Damascus  her  soft  moonlight
They  will  bless  their  lady  from  morn  till  night.
If  Bum  be  her  choice,  her  glad  slaves  will  be
All  nations  from  Bum  to  the  Indian  Sea."

Thus  mid  the  envoys'  assembly,  each
Spoke  for  his  master  a  suitor's  speech.
Zulaikha,  'ware  of  the  aims  they  sought,
Was  tossed  on  the  billows  of  anxious  thought :
"  Has  the  land  of  Egypt  no  envoy  sent  ?
With  the  love  of  her  people  my  heart  is  bent.
As  Egypt's  land  to  my  soul  is  most  dear,
What  boots  it  if  none  from  that  realm  is  here  ?
The  soft  wind  blowing  from  Egypt's  sand,
Bringing  dust  to  mine  eyes  from  that  happy  land,
Sweeter  a  hundredfold  would  be
Than  the  musk-laden  breezes  of  Tartary."

Thus  in  the  depth  of  her  heart  she  cried ;
And  thus  spoke  the  king  as  she  sate  by  his  side  :
"  Thou  light  of  mine  eyes  and  my  spirit's  joy,
Sweet  charter,  exempting  from  care  and  annoy,
Kings  through  the  world  for  their  beauty  known, —
Each  lord  of  a  crown  and  ancestral  throne, —
Are  suitors  for  thee,  while  their  bosoms  bleed,
Filled  with  the  growth  of  Love's  maddening  seed.


THE  SUITORS.  73

Afire  with  the  hope  of  my  daughter's  hand,
They  have  sent  their  envoys  from  every  land.
I  will  speak  of  the  herald  of  each  who  sues,
And  try  which  king  it  may  please  thee  to  choose.
Of  the  country  to  which  thy  free  heart  may  incline
I  will  make  thee  queen,  and  its  people  thine."

Still  and  silent  Zulaikha  remained ;
For  the  loved  one's  name  her  fond  ear  she  strained,
For  'tis  sweet  to  listen  in  hope  to  hear
The  name  breathed  forth  which  we  hold  most  dear.
He  spoke  of  them  all  from  the  first  to  the  last,
But  the  land  of  Egypt  unnamed  was  past.
His  tale  was  done ;  and  Zulaikha  knew
That  from  Egypt — his  home — there  was  none  to  woo.
She  rose  to  her  feet  with  one  hopeless  look,
And  with  grief,  like  the  spray  of  a  willow,  shook.
Pearls  on  the  lash  of  her  eye  were  strung,
And  she  cried,  as  the  blood  from  her  heart  was  wrung :
"  0  that  my  mother  had  never  born
Or  fed  from  her  bosom  her  child  forlorn !
What  star  that  frowned  on  my  natal  hour
Has  darkened  my  fate  with  its  evil  power  ?
If  a  cloud  were  to  rise  from  the  distant  main,
On  every  lip  it  would  pour  sweet  rain,
But  if  to  my  thirsty  mouth  it  came
It  would  bring  no  water  but  scorching  flame.


74  THE  SUITORS.

What  sin,  0  Heaven,  in  me  hast  thou  known

That  blood  has  reddened  my  skirts  like  thine  own  ? 1

Though  I  may  not  fly  to  the  love  of  my  heart,

Think  not  'tis  distance  that  keeps  us  apart.

Wilt  thou  have  me  die  ?     I  am  dead  even  now,

And  the  cruel  cause  of  my  death  art  thou.

Wilt  thou  see  me  troubled  and  sore  distressed  ?

A  mountain  of  woe  hast  thou  laid  on  my  breast.

What  matter  to  thee  if  my  life  be  glad,

Sweet  or  bitter,  joyous  or  sad  ?

What  is  my  being,  and  what  am  I  ?

What  matter  to  thee  if  I  live  or  die  ?

Should  I  cast  my  life  to  the  wind  he  would  scorn,

Mid  a  hundred  harvests,  my  single  corn.

He  hurries  a  thousand  fresh  roses  away,

Which  thou  hast  delivered  to  death  and  decay.

When    bright    blooms    unpitied    are    torn    from    the

stem,
Will  it  trouble  his  heart  if  I  perish  with  them  ? "

She  wailed  through  the  livelong  day;  like  a  bud
Her  heart  was  filled  full  to  the  brim  with  blood.
A  deluge  of  tears  from  her  eyes  she  shed,
And  the  hand  of  sorrow  threw  dust  on  her  head.

When  her  father  knew  that  her  troubled  breast
With  the  love  of  Egypt's  Vizier  was  possessed,

1  The  sun -flu  shed  horizon.


THE  SUITORS.  75

He  dismissed  the  envoys  with  friendly  speech,

And  with  princely  presents  he  honoured  each :

"  Already  to  Egypt's  Grand  Vizier

Pledged  was  the  troth  of  my  daughter  dear :

And  ye  know  full  well — for  your  hearts  are  wise —

That  the  first  in  the  race  ever  wins  the  prize.

I  hold  this  proverb  the  best  of  all,

<  To  the  lot  of  the  first  must  the  treasure  fall/  "

Thus,  baffled  in  hope,  with  defeated  aim,
The  royal  envoys  went  as  they  came.


Hmbassabor,

DAY  by  day  Zulaikha's  despair

Grew  a  weight  too  heavy  for  her  to  bear.

In  blank  pale  longing,  though  overcast

With  the  black  hue  of  sorrow,  her  days  were  passed.

The  father  pitied  the  maiden's  grief

And  counselled  thus  for  her  soul's  relief :

"  A  prudent  envoy  I  needs  must  send

To  Egypt's  Vizier  that  her  woe  may  end,

A  tender  message  from  her  to  bear,

That  the  bonds  of  love  may  unite  the  pair."

He  chose  a  chamberlain  deeply  skilled :
With  praise  of  his  wisdom  his  ear  he  filled,
And  with  many  a  present  most  rich  and  rare
Bade  him  to  Egypt's  vizier  repair,
And  say :  "  0  Prince  on  whose  threshold  lies
Dust  that  is  kissed  by  the  circling  skies,
May  the  favour  of  Heaven  increase  each  day
Thy  fame  and  honour  and  princely  sway.
In  the  House  of  Purity  shines  my  Sun
By  whose  splendour  the  envious  moon  is  outdone.


THE  AMBASSADOR.  77

Higher  her  place  than  the  moon's,  I  ween :

Her  shadow  never  the  sun  has  seen.

Purer  than  pearls  in  their  virgin  shells  ^

Her  splendour  the  lustre  of  stars  excels.

She  veils  her  moonlight  from  the  world,  and  debars

From  the  sight  of  her  beauty  the  curious  stars.

Only  her  comb  may  loosen  each  tress,

And  her  mirror  behold  her  loveliness.

Only  the  coils  of  her  hair  are  blest

On  her  delicate  foot  for  a  while  to  rest.

The  hem  of  her  mantle — and  only  this —

As  she  walks  in  the  courtyard  her  foot  may  kiss.

Never  her  chin  has  been  touched  by  her  maid,

On  her  lip  not  the  sugar-cane's  finger  laid.

She  shrinks  away  from  that  flower  who  throws

The  veil  of  her  beauty  aside,  the  rose.

From  the  sweet  narcissus  her  eyes  decline,

For  its  blossom  is  heavy  and  drunk  with  wine.

Even  her  shadow's  pursuit  she  would  shun,

And  fly  from  the  lustre  of  moon  and  sun.

To  the  stream  and  the  fountain  she  will  not  repair

Lest  her  eye  should  meet  her  reflexion  there.

She  dwells  in  her  home  behind  screen  and  bar,

But  the  fame  of  her  beauty  is  known  afar.

A  hundred  kings  with  their  hearts  on  fire

In  eager  Jiope  to  her  hand  aspire.


78  THE  AMBASSADOR.

From  Eum  to  Damascus  beyond  the  flood
Each  heart  for  her  love  has  drunk  deep  of  blood.
But  longing  for  Egypt  has  filled  her  breast,
And  she  turns  her  eye  and  her  heart  from  the  rest.
Eor  Kum  she  can  find  in  that  heart  no  room,
And  gay  Damascus  is  naught  but  gloom.
Her  eye  towards  Egypt  has  marked  the  road,
And  the  Nile  of  her  tears  has  for  Egypt  flowed.
I  know  but  her  longing ;  I  know  not  the  cause,
Or  the  charm  that  to  Egypt  her  spirit  draws.
'Tis  her  destined  home,  and  from  Egypt  came
The  dust,  I  ween,  that  composed  her  frame.
If  in  thy  sight  it  seem  good,  I  have  planned
To  send  her  to  thee  in  her  chosen  land.
If  she  be  not  peerless  in  beauty  and  grace
She  may  hold  in  thy  palace  a  menial's  place."

The  Grand  Vizier  heard  the  speech,  and,  amazed,
To  the  highest  heaven  his  head  was  raised.
He  bowed  and  made  answer :  "  And  what  am  I
That  a  seed  of  this  doubt  in  my  heart  should  lie  ?
The  grace  of  thy  lord  lifts  me  up  from  the  mire,
And  'tis  meet  that  my  head  to  the  heavens  aspire.
I  am  the  dust  which  the  cloud  of  spring
Bedews  with  the  drops  which  he  loves  to  fling.
If  a  hundred  tongues  like  the  grass-blades  grew,
My  tongues  to  thank  him  were  all  too  few.


THE  AMBASSADOR.  79

The  grace  of  the  monarch  is  guarantee

That  Fortune  ever  shall  favour  me.

With  the  head  of  my  foot,  with  the  eyes  of  my  shoe,

I  would  hasten  to  meet  him,  his  pleasure  to  do.

But  to  Egypt's  ruler,  the  great  and  wise,

I  am  bound  so  closely  by  duty's  ties,

That,  were  I  absent  a  single  hour,

I  should  feel  the  weight  of  the  sword  of  his  power.

Then  pardon  the  servant  whom  duties  bind,

And  impute  not  the  blame  to  a  haughty  mind.

Should  the  king  thy  lord  to  my  prayer  attend,

Two  hundred  litters  of  gold  will  I  send

With  thousands  of  boys  and  maidens,  all

Like  the  Tuba- tree,1  graceful,  and  straight,  and  tall ;

Those  boys  are  noble,  and  free  from  vice,

And  purer  than  children  of  Paradise.

Their  laughing  lips  are  most  sweet,  with  rare

Pearl  and  ruby  they  bind  their  hair ;

With  caps  coquettishly  set  on  the  side

Of  their  heads,  on  saddles  of  gold  they  ride.

And  the  maidens  are  robed  like  the  Houris ;  they

Are  pure  of  all  blemish  of  water  and  clay.

Above  their  bright  faces  are  full-drawn  bows,

And  their  sweet  locks  shadow  their  cheeks  of  rose.

1   Tubd  is  the  name  of  a  tree  iu  Paradise.


So  THE  AMBASSADOR.

All  gems  and  jewels  their  beauty  adorn,

And  veiled  in  litters  of  gold  are  they  borne.

Their  guides  shall  be  elders,  the  pillars  of  State,

Prudent  in  council,  and  wise  in  debate,

To  receive  the  fair  maid  with  due  honour,  and  bring

To  my  humble  home  the  sweet  child  of  the  king."

He  ceased :  the  envoy  bowed  down  his  head,
And  kissed  the  ground  at  his  feet,  and  said :
"  Spring  of  the  glory  of  Egypt,  thou
Hast  added  a  grace  to  thy  favours  now.
But  send  no  escort;  my  lord  will  provide
From  his  ample  household  a  train  for  the  bride.
The  boys  and  the  delicate  maids  who  dwell
In  his  courts  are  too  many  for  number  to  tell ;
Robes  of  honour  in  store  has  he,
More  than  the  leaves  of  a  shady  tree,
Showering  gems  from  a  liberal  hand
More  than  the  desert  has  grains  of  sand ;
To  please  thee  only  his  wish  is  bent,
And  blest  is  the  man  with  whom  he  is  content.
If  the  vintage  be  worthy  thy  table,  he
Will  quickly  send  the  sweet  fruit  to  thee."


Departure.

To  release  Zulaikha's  sad  heart  from  pain
From  Egypt  returned  the  wise  chamberlain,
And  even  the  selfish  rejoiced  to  hear
The  message  he  brought  from  the  Grand  Vizier.
Her  rose  of  felicity  bloomed  anew,
And  the  Huma *  of  fortune  above  her  flew.
A  dream  had  bound  her  in  fetters :  she
Saw  a  vision  again  and  her  soul  was  free.
So  ever  from  dream  or  from  fancy  springs
The  joy  or  the  sorrow  which  this  world  brings.
Most  happy  is  he  who  from  both  can  fly,
And  lightly  pass  the  dread  whirlpool  by.

Her  father  rejoiced,  and  with  care  and  speed
He  prepared  the  escort  the  bride  would  need.
Thousands  of  maids  in  their  youthful  bloom
He  chose  from  the  fairest  of  Bus2  and  Bum.

1  The  humd  is  a  fabulous  bird  whose  shadow  falling  on  a  man's  head
denotes  that  he  will  become  a  king.

2  Russia.

P


82  THE  DEPARTURE.

Their    breasts    were    pomegranates,  their    mouths,

half-shut,

Showed  each  like  a  tender  pistachio-nut,
And  over  each  bosom  and  cheek  was  spread
The  sweet  faint  flush  of  a  young  rosebed.
Orient  pearls  from  their  fine  ears  hung,
And  black  bows  over  their  eyes  were  strung,
Pure  of  all  dye  as  the  leaves  of  the  rose
In  the  cool  of  the  morning  when  zephyr  blows.
On  tulip  blossoms  fell  scented  curls,
And  on  rounded  necks  was  the  glimmer  of  pearls ;
And  a  thousand  boys  with  bright  eyes  that  took
The  heart  of  a  maiden  with  each-  long  look,
With  red  caps  stuck  on  their  heads  oblique,
And  loose  locks  shading  each  youthful  cheek.
Each  of  his  gold-hued  garment  was  vain,
'Twas  soft  as  the  rosebud,  and  tight  as  the  cane.
Each  tress  escaping,  as  loosely  it  flowed,
Like  spikenard  under  a  tulip  showed.
Their     jewelled     belts     round    their    fine    waists

clung,

And  a  hundred  hearts  on  their  bright  hair  hung.
There  were  thousand  horses  of  noble  breed,
Gentle  to  saddle,  unmatched  in  speed ;
With  paces  easy  as  rivulets,  all
Meeter  at  need  than  the  flying  ball.


THE  DEPARTURE.  83

If  they  saw  but  the  shade  of  a  falling  lash,

Away  from  the  race-course  of  Time  would  they  dash.

Swift  as  wild  asses  they  scoured  the  plain,

And  like  birds  of  the  water  they  swam  the  main.

Their  tails  were  knotted  like  canes ;  the  dint

Of  their  strong  hoofs  shattered  the  hardest  flint.

They  flew  o'er  the  hill  like  an  even  lawn,

But  stayed  their  speed  when  the  rein  was  drawn.

And  a  thousand  camels,  a  wondrous  sight,
With  their  mountain  backs  and  their  stately  height.
Mountains,  supported  on  pillars,  were  they,
And  the  course  of  their  tempest  no  hand  might  stay.
Like  holy  hermits,  their  food  was  spare ;
Burthens  they  bore  as  the  patient  bear.
Through  a  hundred  deserts  unwearied  they  went,
With  thorns,  as  with  spikenard  and  rose,  content.
They  tasted  no  food  and  they  closed  no  eye,
But  toiled  on  through  the  sand  at  the  drivers'  cry,
A  hundred  loads  from  the  royal  store,
Each  the  yearly  yield  of  a  province,  they  bore  ;
Two  hundred  carpets  of  rich  brocade,
In  Eiim  and  Damascus  and  Egypt  made ;
Two  hundred  caskets  of  gems  most  rare, —
Pearls,  sapphires,  Badakhshan's  rubies  were  there ;
Two  hundred  trays  with  fine  musk  therein,
And  amber,  and  aloe  from  Comorin.


84  THE  DEPARTURE.

Like  a  meadow  in  China  each  spot  was  bright
Where  the  driver  rested  his  camels  at  night.

Her  father's  care  for  Zulaikha  supplied
A  litter  fair  as  the  bed  of  a  bride.
Of  the  wood  of  the  aloe  its  frame  was  made,
And  the  well-joined  boards  were  with  gold  o'erlaid.
Its  gold- wrought  awning  was  bright  as  the  sun, —
Jamshid1  never  boasted  a  brighter  one.
Pearl  in  clusters,  and  many  a  pin
And  stud  of  gold  decked  it  without  and  within ;
And  finest  needlework  graced  each  fold
Of  the  heavy  hangings  of  tissue  of  gold.

Thus  with  imperial  pomp  and  pride
They  carried  to  Memphis  the  beautiful  bride.
Her  litter  was  borne  by  swift  steeds,  as  the  rose
Is  wafted  by  winds  from  her  place  of  repose.
Her  maidens  followed,  with  figures  fine
As  the  graceful  cypress,  the  plane,  or  the  pine ;
With  arm  and  bosom  and  cheek  and  hair
Like  jasmine  sweet  or  like  jasmine  fair.
You  had  said  that  the  bloom  of  the  young  spring-
time

Was  fleeting  away  to  a  distant  clime.
Iram's  garden  envied  the  spot  which  those
Bright  flowers  of  the  palace  to  rest  them  chose ;

1  A  celebrated  Persian  king,  the  builder  of  Persepolis.


THE  DEPARTURE.  85

Where  the  boys  dismounting  their  pastime  took,
And  the  girls  from  their  litters  shot  many  a  look,
And  spread  the  fine  net  of  their  beautiful  hair
Till  each  captured  her  prey  in  the  silken  snare ;
And  each  boy  shot  from  his  eye  a  dart
That  enslaved  a  maiden  and  touched  her  heart.
Here  were  seen  gallantry,  glances,  and  smiles,
The  lover's  wooing,  the  maiden's  wiles.
Lovers  and  loved  were  assorted  well,
Those  eager  to  buy  and  these  ready  to  sell.
Thus  each  stage  of  the  journey  they  passed,
And  Memphis  city  was  gained  at  last.

Zulaikha — for  Fortune  now  seemed  her  friend —
Had  longed  in  her  heart  for  the  journey's  end,
When  the  dawn  should  rise  on  her  night  of  woe
And  the  pangs  of  the  parted  no  more  she  should  know.
But  oh !  black  is  the  night  that  before  her  lies ;
'Tis  an  age  till  the  sun  of  her  joy  shall  rise.

Through  the  glare  of  day,  through  the  gloom  of  night,
They  travelled,  and  Memphis  was  now  in  sight.
From  the  city  a  messenger  came  at  speed —
Whose  litter  the  coming  pomp  should  precede
To  bring  the  glad  news  to  the  Grand  Vizier,
That  she  whom  he  looked  for  was  near,  was  near.
"  Eise  up,  rise  up,  and  with  eager  feet
Thy  bliss  who  approaches  go  forth  to  meet."


Welcome.


To  the  Grand  Vizier  the  glad  news  was  brought,
And  he  deemed  he  had  compassed  each  aim  he  sought.
He  bade  proclamation  be  made,  and  all
The  army  of  Memphis  obeyed  the  call,
That  with  full  equipment  and  arms  complete,
At  the  place  appointed  the  hosts  should  meet.

From  head  to  foot  they  were  bright  to  behold,
Smothered  in  jewels,  and  sheen  of  gold.
Myriad  boys  and  maidens  were  there,
With  cheeks  of  the  rose,  and  like  full  moons  fair.
Like  a  palm-tree  of  gold  in  the  saddle  set,
Showed  each  youth  with  his  collar  and  coronet,
And  bright  in  her  charms  with  their  sevenfold  aid,1
Screened  in  her  litter  of  gold  was  each  maid  ;
Loudly  in  triumph  glad  voices  rang
As  sweet-toned  singers  in  unison  sang,
The  harp  of  the  minstrel  was  strung  anew,
And  the  music  he  made  was  of  triumph  too.

1  Hemra  for  the  hands  ;  surma  or  Tcuhl  for  the  eyes  ;  wasma  for  the
eyebrows  ;  rouge  and  sapeddb,  or  white  water,  for  the  face  ;  and
bracelets  and  anklets.  Other  enumerations  are  also  given.


THE  WELCOME.  87

Of  meeting  and  pleasure  the  soft  flute  spoke,
And  tender  thoughts  in  each  heart  awoke,
While  sorrow  fled  far  at  the  merry  din
Of  the  drum,  and  rebeck,  and  violin.

Thus  in  jubilee  blithe  and  gay,
The  escort  from  Memphis  pursued  its  way.
Three  stages,  as  journeys  the  moon,  they  passed,
And  the  sun  of  beauty  was  reached  at  last.
To  a  smooth  and  spacious  meadow  they  came,
Studded  with  thousands  of  domes  of  flame,
You  had  said  that  the  sky  had  poured  down  on  the  plain
Its  brightest  stars  in  a  golden  rain.
There  rose  a  pavilion,  girt  with  a  wall
Of  chosen  sentinels,  high  over  all
Laughed  the  Vizier  as  he  saw  it  gleam,
As  the  orient  laughs  with  the  first  sunbeam.
Swift  from  his  steed  he  alighted  and  bent  t
His  eager  steps  to  the  royal  tent.
The  harem  warders  came  forth  to  meet
The  noble,  and  bowed  to  the  earth  at  his  feet.
He  asked  of  their  lady,  and  bade  them  say,
What  of  the  weather  and  toil  of  the  way.

Of  the  princely  gifts  that  were  with  him,  those
That  were  fairest  and  best  in  his  sight  he  chose :
Sweet-smiling  boys  of  his  own  household,
With  caps  and  girdles  ablaze  with  gold ;


88  THE  WELCOME.

High-bred  horses  with  golden  gear,

Covered  with  jewels  from  croup  to  ear;

Eaiment  of  satin  and  woven  hair,

And  pearls  from  his  storehouse  most  rich  and  rare ;

Sugar  of  Egypt,  with  care  refined,

And  sherbet  of  every  colour  and  kind —

All  on  the  spacious  plain  were  arrayed,

And  with  courteous  words  his  excuses  he  made.

He  ordered  the  march  at  the  break  of  day,

When  homeward  again  he  would  bend  his  way.


Beapair.

THE  ancient  Hraven  delights  to  cheat
The  children  of  earth  with  his  vain  deceit.
The  heart  of  the  lover  with  hope  he  will  stay,
And  then  dashes  the  idle  phantom  away.
The  fruit  that  he  longed  for  was  shown  afar,
And  his  bosom  will  bear  through  his  life  a  scar.

A  shadow  lay  on  the  ground,  and  near
Zulaikha's  tent  stood  the  Grand  Vizier.
She  dropped  the  rein  of  patience  and  prayed
For  one  glance  at  her  love  with  her  nurse's  aid.
"  0  thou  whose  affection  through  life  I  have  tried,
I  can  bear  this  longing  no  longer,"  she  cried.
"  Near  a  cup  of  sweet  water  the  thirsty  lip
Is  maddened  with  pain  if  it  may  not  sip."

The  faithful  nurse  marked  the  maiden's  grief,
And  looked  round  the  wall  for  a  way  of  relief.
With  her  crafty  finger  she  made  a  rent
Like  a  narrow  eye  in  the  cloth  of  the  tent.
Zulaikha  looked  through  with  an  eager  eye,
But  heaved  from  her  bosom  a  long  sad  sigh :


90  DESPAIR.

"  Ah  me !  that  so  wondrous  a  fate  should  befall !

Low  in  the  dust  lies  my  half-built  wall.

This  is  not  the  youth  of  my  vision,  he

Whom  after  long  troubles  I  hoped  to  see ;

Who  seized  the  rein  of  my  heart  and  stole

With  his  magic  power  my  sense  and  soul ;

Who  told  me  his  secret  and  gently  brought

Eeason  again  to  a  mind  distraught.

Alas  !  the  star  of  my  hapless  fate

Has  left  me  deceived  and  disconsolate.

Palm-trees  I  planted,  but  thistles  grew :

I  sowed  Love's  seed,  but  the  harvest  is  rue.

I  endured  for  my  treasure  long  sorrows  and  toils,

But  the  guardian  dragon  my  labour  foils.

I  would  cull  the  rose  for  the  precious  scent,

But,  alas !  my  robe  with  the  thorn  is  rent.

I  am  one  athirst  in  a  desert  land,

Seeking  for  water  and  mocked  with  sand.

Dry  is  my  tongue  with  unbearable  thirst,

And  the  blood  from  my  feverous  lip  would  burst.

I  see  at  a  distance  fair  water  gleam,

And  I  struggle  and  crawl  to  the  tempting  stream,

And  find  no  water  but  sand  whereon

Deluding  beams  of  the  bright  sun  shone.

A  camel  am  I,  on  the  mountain  strayed,

With  a  mountain  of  hunger  and  toil  down-weighed.


DESPAIR.  91

The  stones  are  sharp  and  my  feet  are  sore :

I  fear  to  stay  but  can  move  no  more.

A  form  I  see  with  my  blood-shot  eye,

And  I  deem  that  my  lost  companion  is  nigh.

My  weary  steps  to  his  side  I  bend  :

'Tis  a  ravening  lion  and  not  my  friend.

I  am  a  sailor ;  my  vessel  sank,

And  I  float  forlorn  on  a  single  plank.

On  the  restless  wave  I  am  tossed  on  high

And  low  in  the  depths  of  the  ocean  lie.

A  light  skiff  near  me  comes  on  o'er  the  wave,

And  my  heart  is  glad,  for  it  comes  to  save.

Nearer  and  nearer  my  rescue  draws :

Ah  !  'tis  a  shark  with  his  cruel  jaws.

Ah  me  !  of  unfortunate  lovers  none

Is  helpless  as  I  am,  ah  no,  not  one.

My  heart  is  stolen,  my  lover  is  fled :

A  stone  lies  on  my  back  and  dust  on  my  head.

0  Heaven !  pity  my  many  woes

And  a  door  of  hope,  in  thy  mercy,  unclose.
If  Thou  wilt  not  bring  my  dear  love  to  my  side,
Oh  save  me  from  being  another's  bride.
Preserve  the  pure  name  of  the  hapless  maid,
No  polluting  touch  on  her  vesture  laid.

1  made  a  vow  to  my  lover,  mine  own,
To  keep  my  love  ever  for  him  alone.


92  DESPAIR.

Ah,  let  not  grief  my  poor  heart  consume,
Nor  give  to  a  dragon  my  virgin  bloom."

Thus  she  ceased  not  to  sigh  and  complain,
And  tears  on  her  eyelashes  hung  like  rain.
Transfix'd  with  anguish  her  young  heart  bled,
And  low  in  the  dust  lay  her  beautiful  head.
Then  the  Bird  of  Comfort1  came  near,  and  there  fell
On  her  ear  the  sweet  message  of  Gabriel :
"  Lift  thy  head,  sad  maiden,  and  cease  to  repine,
Tor  easy  shall  be  this  sore  burthen  of  thine.
The  Vizier  is  not  he  whom  thou  longest  to  gain,
But  without  him  thy  wish  thou  canst  never  attain.
Through  him  wilt  thou  look  on  thy  loved  one's  eyes,
And  through  him  at  last  thou  wilt  win  the  prize."

Zulaikha  heard,  and  in  grateful  trust
Bowed  down  humbly  her  head  to  the  dust.
She  ceased  from  weeping,  and  strove  like  a  bud
To  drink  in  silence  her  own  heart's  blood.
Fraught  with  deep  grief  was  each  breath  that  came,
But  speechless  she  suffered  woe's  scorching  flame.
Her  eyes,  though  eager,  must  look  and  wait,
Till  the  knot  shall  be  loosed  by  the  hand  of  Fate.

1  Gabriel,  the  messenger  of  Heaven.


(     93    )


IReception.


WITH  a  drum  of  gold  the  bright  firmament  beat
At  morn  the  signal  for  night's  retreat.
The  stars  with  the  night  at  the  coming  of  day
Broke  up  their  assembly  and  passed  away.
From  that  drum,  gold-scattering,  light  was  shed,
Like  a  peacock's  glorious  plumes  outspread.

In  princely  garb  the  Vizier  arrayed,
Placed  in  her  litter  the  moon-bright  maid.
In  the  van,  in  the  rear,  on  every  side,
He  ordered  his  soldiers  about  the  bride,
And  golden  umbrellas  a  soft  shade  threw
O'er  the  heads  of  Zulaikha's  retinue.
The  singers'  voices  rang  loud  and  high,
As  the  camels  moved  at  the  drivers'  cry,
And  the  heaven  above,  and  below,  the  ground
Echoed  afar  with  the  mingled  sound.

Glad  were  the  maids  of  Zulaikha's  train
That  their  lady  was  free  from  her  sorrow  and  pain  ;
And  the  prince  and  his  people  rejoiced  that  she
The  idol  and  queen  of  his  house  should  be.


94  THE  RECEPTION.

Alone  in  her  litter  she  wept  her  woes,

And  her  lamentation  to  Heaven  arose :

"  Why  hast  thou  treated  me  thus,  0  Fate,

And  left  me  unhappy  and  desolate  ?

For  what  sin  against  thee,  what  fault  of  mine,

Hast  thou  left  me  hopeless  to  weep  and  pine  ?

Thou  stolest  my  heart  in  a  dream,  like  a  thief,

And  I  awoke  but  to  suffer  still  bitterer  grief.

But  if  thou  hast  ruined  my  life,  mine  all,

Why,  in  my  folly,  on  thee  do  I  call  ?

Nay,  at  the  moment  when  help  was  near,

Thou  hast  torn  me  from  home,  and  from  all  that  was

dear.

Beneath  the  weight  of  one  sorrow  I  bent,
And  thou  addest  the  burthen  of  banishment.
If  thine  only  aid  is  to  rend  the  breast,
Oh !  what  must  she  feel  whom  thou  torturest !
Break  not  the  cup  of  my  patience,  nor  set,
Again  to  ensnare  me,  thy  terrible  net.
Thine  was  the  promise  that,  sorrows  passed,
I  should  find  sweet  rest  for  my  soul  at  last.
With  thy  word  of  comfort  I  fain  was  content ;
But  is  this  the  rest  that  the  promise  meant  ? "

Thus  Zulaikha,  weary  and  faint

With    her    burthen    of    sorrow,    poured    forth     her
plaint.


THE  RECEPTION.  95

Loud  rose  the  cry  of  the  host  meanwhile,
"  Memphis  !  Memphis  !  the  Nile  !  the  Nile  ! "
Horse  and  foot  onward  in  tumult  hied,
And  rejoicing,  stood  on  the  river's  side.

To  the  Grand  Vizier,  as  by  duty  taught,
Trays  piled  high  with  treasures  they  brought,
To  lade  the  bride's  litter  with  wealth  untold,
Of  the  rarest  jewels  and  finest  gold.
Each  brought  his  gift,  and  a  mighty  cry,
Welcome  !  welcome  !  went  up  to  the  sky.
On  the  head  of  Zulaikha  fell  pearl  in  showers
As  the  rain  of  spring  on  the  opening  flowers
Till  the  lady's  litter  beneath  a  heap
.Of  countless  jewels  was  buried  deep.
Wherever  the  feet  of  the  camels  trod,
They  trampled  jewels,  not  sand  or  sod.
When  the  spark  leapt  forth  at  the  courser's  dint,
The  shoe  and  the  ruby  were  steel  and  flint ;
In  ranks  extended  o'er  many  a  mile,
Still  scattering  jewels,  they  left  the  Nile,
And  the  rain  of  pearl  from  their  hands  that  fell
Made  each  fish's  gill  like  a  pearl-rich  shell,
And  the  countless  dirhams  they  cast  therein
Made  the  crocodile  gleam  with  a  silver  skin.

Thus  the  escort  in  proud  array,
To  the  prince's  palace  pursued  their  way;


96  THE  RECEPTION.

Nay,  'twas  an  earthly  paradise ;  sun

And  moon  in  their  splendour  were  here  outdone.

In  the  midst  of  the  palace  was  set  a  throne,

Fairest  of  all  that  the  world  has  known.

The  hand  of  a  skilful  artist  had  made

The  glorioiis  seat  with  fine  gems  o'erlaid.

Close  to  the  throne  her  litter  was  placed,

And  the  seat  by  that  jewel  of  ladies  graced.

But  still  no  rest  to  her  sad  soul  came,

The  gold  she  pressed  was  as  burning  flame.

The  peerless  maiden  was  brighter  yet

Than  the  throne  and  the  crown  on  her  forehead  set.

But  the  glittering  crown  that  her  temples  pressed

Increased  the  mountain  of  woe  in  her  breast ;     •  §

They  showered  pearl  on  her  head  like  rain :

It  tortured  her  heart  like  a  flood  of  pain.

Pearls,  the  desire  of  the  maids  of  the  sky,

Filled  with  the  pearls  of  her  tears  her  eye.

In  the  battle  of  Love,  who  cares  for  a  crown,
When  a  hundred  heads  to  the  dust  go  down  ?
Who  for  the  loveliest  pearl  will  care,
When  her  eye  is  damp  with  the  dew  of  despair  ?
Shame  on  the  wretch  who  would  value  a  throne,
When  his  love  is  lost,  and  he  pines  alone !


(    97     )


pining,

WHEN  the  heart  has  found  with  its  darling  rest,

Will  it  turn  to  welcome  a  meaner  guest  ?

Will  the  moth  spread  her  wings  in  the  warm  sunlight,

When  the  sheen  of  the  lamp  has  attracted  her  flight  ?

In  vain  for  the  bulbul  sweet  basil  is  strown,

For  he  lives  for  the  love  of  the  rose  alone.

If  the  rising  sun  bids  the  lotus  wake,

Will  she  glance  at  the  moon  from  her  native  lake  ?

In  a  palace  meet  for  the  mightiest  kings,
Zulaikha  saw  round  her  all  precious  things.
The  Grand  Vizier  was  her  watchful  slave ;
Gold  and  treasure  unasked  he  gave.
Maidens,  lovely,  with  cheeks  of  rose,
Served  her  ever,  nor  sought  repose  ;
Slave-girls,  whose  ravishing  glances  were  sweet,
Sate  waiting  her  pleasure  about  her  feet ;
And  boys  in  silk  raiment,  a  goodly  train,
Young,  fresh,  and  sweet  as  the  sugar-cane —
Moorish  pages  of  amber  wrought,
Pure  as  angels,  in  word  and  thought —


98  PINING.

Duteously  served  in  the  harem,  all
Eeady  to  come  at  their  lady's  call.

Many  a  young  and  lovely  dame
Of  Memphis  to  visit  Zulaikha  came ;
They  delighted  to  talk  with  the  bride,  her  peers
In  graceful  stature  and  youthful  years.
She  received  her  guests  in  the  corridor,  where
Stranger  and  friend  might  her  welcome  share  ;
She  spread  the  carpet  of  joy,  and  while
Her  heart  was  bleeding,  her  lip  had  a  smile.
She  spoke  and  listened ;  her  look  was  gay,
But  her  heart  was  in  pain,  ah !  far  away.
By  her  absent  lover  her  soul  was  claimed,
Though  words  of  welcome  her  sweet  lip  framed.

When  night  o'er  her  face  a  dark  curtain  had  thrown,
She  withdrew,  like  a  moon,  to  her  chamber  alone.
On  the  pedestal  raised  by  her  love  she  set
The  dear,  dear  form  she  could  never  forget ;
Humbly  before  it  her  knee  she  bent,
And  poured  out  her  grief  in  a  wild  lament ;
While  the  harp  of  her  love  with  a  mournful  air,
Kept  time  with  the  outburst  of  deep  despair  :
"Didst  thou  not  tell  me,  0  thou  most  dear
To  this  longing  heart,  that  thy  home  was  here,
The  Grand  Vizier  of  the  kingdom  ?     How
I  wish  that  thine  were  the  title  now !


PINING.  99

Thine  honour  the  crown  of  my  head  would  be,

And  to  live  thy  slave  were  enough  for  me ;

I  pine  in  Egypt,  forlorn,  unknown,

Hopeless  of  meeting  with  thee,  mine  own.

How  long  to  this  terrible  fate  am  I  doomed  ?

How  long  shall  my  heart  in  this  flame  be  consumed  ?

Come,  be  the  light  of  my  garden ;  calm

The  pangs  of  my  soul  with  thy  healing  balm.

In  the  deep  of  despair  for  my  lover  I  pined,

But  an  angel  came  and  left  hope  behind ;

That  hope  has  driven  my  doubt  away,

And  is  still  my  life's  consolation  and  stay.

By  the  light  of  thy  beauty  that  lives  in  my  heart,

I  know  we  shall  meet,  yes,  never  to  part.

Tears  of  hot  blood  these  sad  eyes  ever  fill,

But  in  all  the    six    regions 1    they    yearn   for    thee

still

How  blessed,  my  love,  will  the  time  be  when
I  shall  look  once  more  on  my  moon  of  men.
I  shall  roll  up  the  carpet  of  life  when  I  see
Thy  dear  face  again,  and  shall  cease  to  be.
For  self  will  be  lost  in  that  rapture,  and  all
The  threads  of  my  thought  from  my  hand  will  fall ;
Not  me  wilt  thou  find,  for  this  self  will  have  fled :
Thou  wilt  be  my  soul  in  mine  own  soul's  stead.

1  Above,  below,  right,  left,  before,  and  behind.


ioo  PINING.

All  thought  of  self  will  be  swept  from  my  mind,
And  thee,  only  thee,  in  my  place  shall  I  find ;
More  precious  than  heaven,  than  earth  more  dear,
Myself  were  forgotten  if  thou  wert  near."

Thus  through  the  night  in  her  anguish  she  spoke,
Nor  ceased  her  complaint  till  the  morning  broke.
At  the  first  faint  breath  of  the  young  day's  breeze,
She  changed  her  lament  into  words  like  these :
"  Wind  of  the  morning,  whose  soft  touch  floods
With  musky  odour  the  jasmine  buds,
That  makes  the  cypress  and  lily  so  fair,
And  decks  the  rose-leaf  and  the  spikenard's  hair ;
Each  leaf  is  a  bell  while  the  branches  sway,
And  the  trees  are  dancing,  though  rooted  in  clay  ;
The  heart  has  rest  when  thy  light  wings  stir,
Tor  thou  art  the  lover's  fleet  messenger.
From  the  distant  beloved  thou  bringest  news,
That  bids  the  sad  spirit  forget  its  bruise.
And  what  beating  heart  has  a  woe  like  mine  ?
What  soul  in  such  anguish  can  waste  and  pine  ?
Bowed  down  with  sorrow,  my  heart  is  faint,
Have  pity  upon  me,  and  hear  my  plaint.
The  world  has  no  place  where  thou  mayest  not  win
An  easy  entrance  to  breathe  therein ;
By  no  gate  of  iron  art  thou  opposed,
A  window  admits  thee  if  doors  are  closed.


PINING.  101

Pity  me,  visit  each  distant  place

Where  thy  breath  may  fall  on  my  loved  one's  face ;

Visit  each  palace  where  dwells  a  king,

Each  prince's  home,  on  thy  balmy  wing ;

Seek  my  moon  in  each  city ;  repair

To  each  throne  and  see  if  my  king  be  there.

Steal  through  the  garden  where  spring  is  gay,

On  the  lip  of  the  streamlet  a  moment  stay.

Peradventure,  thine  eye  in  the  search  may  discover

By  the  rill  the  cypress  form  of  my  lover ;

Speed  to  the  deserts  of  far  Cathay,

And  the  picture-houses  of  China l  survey.

Here  look  around  for  his  likeness  ;  snare

A  wild  gazelle  with  his  fragrance  there.

When  thou  turnest  back  from  those  distant  scenes,

Over  mountain  tops  and  through  deep  ravines,

If  a  partridge  gracefully  move  from  the  brake,

Lay  thy  hand  on  the  bird  for  my  dear  love's  sake.

Shouldst  thou  meet  on  thy  journey  a  caravan

Led  by  a  gallant  heart-ravishing  man,

Look  with  mine  eyes  on  that  prince  that  he

May  travel  hither  and  come  to  me ;

One  glance  of  his  eye  will  assuage  my  woes,

And  I  from  Hope's  garden  shall  gather  a  rose."

1  Allusions  to  the  painters  and  pictures  of  China  frequently  occur  in
Persian  poetry.


102  PINING.

Thus,  from  the  dawn  till  the  sun  rose  high

And  raced  through  the  course  of  the  noonday  sky,

With  blood  in  her  eyes,  in  her  heart  unease,

She  poured  her  complaint  to  the  morning  breeze,

And  when  the  whole  land  with  the  full  light  glowed,

The  light  of  her  face  to  her  friends  she  showed.

The  maidens  her  fellows,  each  in  her  place,

Basked  in  the  light  of  the  lady's  face ;

With  those  damsels,  gay-hearted  and  pure  as  gay,

Her  bearing  changed  not  from  day  to  day.

Thus,  in  the  gloom  of  unceasing  woe,

Month  and  year  passed  dreary  and  slow.

In  the  guarded  bounds  of  the  house  confined,

For  the  fresh  free  air  of  the  field  she  pined ;

Then  seared  with  anguish,  with  woe  forspent,

Like  the  mourning  tulip  she  raised  her  tent.

To  the  tulip  she  spoke  of  the  scars  she  bore,

And  her  love  whom  perchance  she  should  see  no  more.

Like  a  torrent  that  sweeps  down  a  deep  defile,

She  sped  with  wet  eyes  to  the  banks  of  Nile,

Confided  to  him  her  keen  sorrow  and  gave

The  flood  of  her  tears  to  the  rushing  wave.

Thus,  through  the  daylight  she  sorrowed  and  wept,
And  the  eye  of  hope  on  the  road  she  kept,
If  perchance  her  love,  her  true  soul's  delight,
Should  rise  like  the  sun  or  the  moon  on  her  sight.


PINING.  103

Rise,  Jaini !  rise  !  turn  thy  thought  aside,
And  the  Moon  of  Canaan  from  Canaan  guide.
In  the  heart  of  Zulaikha  sweet  hope  is  strong
As  she  looks  on  the  road  she  has  watched  so  long ;
Too  long  has  she  waited,  and*  hoped,  and  endured,
Let  her  lover  come,  and  her  heart  be  cured.


(     104    )


SAGES,  who  guided  the  pen  of  old,
Thus  the  story  have  framed  and  told :
As  Yiisuf  in  stature  and  beauty  grew,
His  father's  heart  to  himself  he  drew ;
The  old  man  turned  from  the  rest  aside
To  his  own  eye's  apple,  his  joy  and  pride ;
And  to  him  such  kindness  and  favour  showed,
That  the  hearts  of  his  brothers  with  envy  glowed.
In  the  court  of  the  house  stood  an  ancient  tree
Whose  leafy  branches  were  fair  to  see ;
In  their  vesture  of  green  like  monks  the  sprays
Danced  in  a  rapture  of  joy  and  praise  ;
From  the  level  ground  of  the  court  it  grew,
And  its  stately  height  a  long  shadow  threw;
Each  leaf  on  the  tree  was  a  vocal  tongue,
Singing  a  hymn  as  the  branches  swung.
To  heaven  rose  the  boughs  of  the  topmost  stem,
Whose  birds  were  the  angels  who  rested  on  them,


ENVY.  105

When  a  son  to  Jacob  by  God  was  given ;

From  that  tree  that  rivalled  the  Lote-tree1  in  heaven,

A  tender  branchlet  sprouted  anew,

And  still  with  the  growth  of  the  infant  grew ;

And  when  the  boy  came  to  his  manhood  he

Eeceived  a  green  staff  from  the  honoured  tree.

But  for  Yiisuf,  first  in  his  father's  eyes,

A  staff  from  the  tree  were  too  mean  a  prize  ;

A  severed  bough  were  no  gift  for  one

From  his  own  soul's  garden,  his  darling  son.

One  night  the  boy  to  his  father  cried :
"  0  thou  whose  wishes  are  ne'er  denied,
To  the  Lord  of  Paradise  offer  thy  prayer,
And  win  me  a  staff  from  the  garden  there,
That  whithersoever  my  feet  may  stray,
From  youth  to  age  it  may  guide  my  way."

Humbly  the  father  bowed  down  and  prayed,
And  suit  to  the  Lord  for  his  darling  made.
Then  Gabriel  came  from  the  Lote-tree's  height,
A  topaz  staff  in  his  hand  shone  bright,
That  never  had  suffered  a  wound  or  flaw
From  the  axe  of  Time  or  from  Change's  saw,
Precious  in  value,  but  light  to  wield,
Splendid  with  hues  of  its  native  field.


1  The  Sidra  or  Lote-tree  is  the  seat  of  the  angel  Gabriel  in  Para-
dise.


io6  ENVY.

And  a  voice  was  heard :  "  Take  the  staff  I  bring,
Which  shall  prop,  as  a  pillar,  the  throne  of  a  king."
Thus  Yiisuf  by  Heaven  was  favoured  and  blest ;
But  envy  burnt  fierce  in  each  brother's  breast.
A  hundred  wood  staves  were  a  lighter  load
For  them  than  this  one  which  the  Lord  bestowed.
Tell  fancy  wrought  in  each  bosom  apart,
And  each  sowed  the  seed  of  deep  hate  in  his  heart;
He  nursed  the  seedling  with  tender  care,
But  shame  was  the  fruit  which  the  tree  should  bear.


(     107     )


H?u$uf  $  Bream.

How  blest  is  lie  who  can  close  his  eye

And  let  the  vain  pageants  of  life  pass  by ;

Untouched  by  the  magic  of  earth  can  keep

His  soul  awake  while  the  senses  sleep ;

Scorn  the  false  and  the  fleeting  that  meets  the  view,

And  see  what  is  hidden  and  firm  and  true.

Before  the  eyes  of  his  sire  one  night,
Who  loved  him  more  than  his  own  eyesight,
Yusuf  his  head  on  a  pillow  laid,
And  slept  while  a  smile  on  his  sweet  mouth  played.
But  the  heart  of  Jacob  was  troubled  while
On  that  sleeping  face  he  beheld  the  smile.
"When,  damp  with  the  dew  of  their  soft  repose,
Those  eyes  of  narcissus  began  to  unclose,
And,  like  his  own  fortune,  the  boy  was  awake.
Thus  to  his  darling  the  father  spake :
"  Why,  0  sweeter  than  sugar,  didst  thou
Wear  a  sugar-sweet  smile  on  thy  lip  but  now  ? "
And  Yiisuf  answered  :  "  Father,  I  dreamed,
And  the  sun  and  moon  and  eleven  stars  seemed


io8  YUSUF'S  DREAM.

To  gather  about  me,  high  honour  to  pay,

And  their  heads  before  me  in  dust  to  lay."

"  Beware,"  said  the  father,  "  my  son,  beware  ;

Thy  secret  vision  to  none  declare.

Let  not  thy  brothers  the  story  know:

In  a  hundred  ways  they  would  work  thee  woe.

With  hatred  and  envy  their  heart  is  stirred ;

They  would  hate  thee  more  if  the  tale  were  heard.

The  thought  of  this  dream  they  would  ne'er  endure,

For  the  meaning  thereof  is  too  clear  and  sure."

Thus,  in  his  prudence  the  father  spoke ;

But  Fate  the  chain  of  his  counsel  broke.

One  with  whom  Yiisuf  the  secret  shared,

To  all  the  brothers  the  tale  declared.

The  secret  that  passes  beyond  a  pair,

Is  bruited  abroad  on  the  moving  air.

"  Yes,"  said  a  sage,  "  but  that  pair  are  the  lips,

And  no  secret  is  that  which  beyond  them  slips."

The  fury  of  carnage  has  oft  been  stirred,

And  nobles  have  died  for  a  spoken  word.

Wise  is  the  saw  of  the  sage  who  said,

"  Who  heeds  his  secret  will  keep  his  head."

When  the  wild  bird  flies  from  her  cage,  in  vain

Will  ye  follow  her  flight  to  ensnare  her  again.

When  the  tale  to  the  ears  of  the  brothers  came,

They  rent  their  garments  with  hearts  aflame :


YUSUF'S  DREAM.  109

"  What  ails  our  father,"  they  cried,  "  that  he

His  loss  and  advantage  should  fail  to  see  ?

What  can  come  of  a  foolish  boy

But  the  childish  play  that  is  all  his  joy  ?

He  works  on  all  with  deceit  and  lies,

And  raises  his  value  in  folly's  eyes.

Our  aged  father  his  wiles  ensnare,

And  life  with  him  will  be  hard  to  bear.

He  rends  the  bond  of  affection  apart,

And  engrosses  the  love  of  our  father's  heart.

Not  content  with  the  favour  his  arts  have  gained,

He  wishes  that  we,  pure-hearted,  unstained,

Should  bend  our  heads  and  adore  in  the  dust

The  stripling  raised  high  by  his  father's  trust ;

Nay,  father  and  mother,  as  well  as  we :

What  will  the  end  of  this  madness  be  ?

We,  not  this  boy,  are  our  father's  friends ;

On  us,  not  on  him,  his  welfare  depends.

On  the  hills  in  the  daytime  we  guard  his  sheep,

And  our  nightly  watch  in  his  house  we  keep.

Our  arm  protects  him  from  foemen's  might,

And  we,  mid  his  friends,  are  his  glory  and  light.

What  is  there  in  him  but  his  guile  that  thus

His  head  is  exalted  o'er  all  of  us  ?

Come,  let  us  counsel  together  and  plot

To  drive  him  away  to  a  distant  spot.


i  io  YUSUF'S  DREAM.

Ne'er  has  he  felt  for  our  griefs  and  pains,

And  banishment  now  the  sole  cure  remains.

Quick  to  the  task  we  must  needs  away!

Still  it  is  left  us  to  choose  the  way.

The  thorn  that  springs  fast  for  mischief  should  be

Torn  up  from  the  root  ere  it  grow  to  a  tree."


in


plot

WHEN  Yiisuf  s  brothers,  with  hatred  fired,

Against  the  innocent  boy  conspired,

Said  one  :  "  Our  hearts  in  our  sorrow  have  bled,

And  his  blood  should  flow  for  the  blood  he  has  shed.

When  the  arm  of  the  slayer  is  lifted  to  smite,

Can  ye  save  your  lives  by  a  timely  flight  ?

Let  him  die  the  death,  and  our  task  is  sped :

There  comes  no  voice  from  the  lip  of  the  dead."

"  Nay,"  cried  a  second,  "  'tis  not  for  us

To  compass  the  death  of  the  guiltless  thus.

Though  we  check  his  folly,  he  may  not  bleed ;

We  hold,  remember,  the  one  true  creed.

We  shall  gain  our  end  if  we  drive  him  hence

As  well  as  by  death-dealing  violence.

Let  us  hide  him  far  from  our  father's  eyes

Where  a  wild  and  desolate  valley  lies ;

In  a  waste  full  of  pitfalls,  from  help  afar,

Where  the  ravenous  wolves  and  the  foxes  are ;


ii2  THE  PLOT.

His  only  water  the  tears  of  despair,

And  his  only  bread  the  sun's  scorching  glare ;

Where  the  night  around  him  for  shade  shall  spread,

And  thorns  be  the  pillow  to  rest  his  head.

He  may  linger  awhile  neath  the  lonely  sky,

But  soon  of  himself  he  will  waste  and  die,

Not  a  stain  of  his  blood  on  our  swords,  and  we

From  the  sword  of  his  guile  and  deceit  shall  be  free."

"  Nay,  this,  my  brother,"  a  third  broke  in,

"  Were  the  worst  of  murders  and  grievous  sin.

'Tis  better  to  perish,  if  die  we  must,

Not  of  hunger  and  thirst,  but  a  dagger's  thrust.

This  is  my  counsel,  which  seems  more  fit,

To  search  near  and  far  for  a  deep  dark  pit,

And  therein,  cast  down  from  his  place  of  pride,

In  sorrow  and  darkness  the  youth  to  hide.

Some  travelling  merchants  may  pass  that  way,

And  halt  at  the  well  at  the  close  of  day.

They  may  lower  for  water  a  bucket  and  cord,

And  the  boy  to  the  air  will  be  thus  restored.

Some  merchant  who  looks  on  the  prize  will  be  glad

To  take  for  a  son  or  a  slave  the  lad,

Who,  carried  away  to  a  distant  place,

Will  vex  us  no  longer  with  pain  and  disgrace."

Soon  as  he  spoke  of  this  living  grave,
The  brothers  approved  the  counsel  he  gave.


THE  PLOT.  113

Unheeding  the  pit  of  their  murderous  thought,

The  pit  of  dishonour  they  wildly  sought.

In  their  evil  purpose  they  all  agreed

The  heart  of  their  father  to  wound  and  mislead.

Then  to  their  labour  they  turned,  each  one ;

And  the  morrow  was  fixed  for  the  deed  to  be  done.


deceit

BLEST  are  the  souls  who  are  lifted  above

The  paltry  cares  of  a  selfish  love ;

And  conquering  sense  and  its  earthly  ties,

Are  dust  in  the  path  of  the  love  they  prize ;

Who  add  no  weight  to  another's  care,

And  no  wreight  of  reproach  from  another  bear,

But  in  this  sad  world  are  resigned  to  their  lot,

Support  their  brethren  and  murmur  not ;

Who  sleep  with  no  malice  or  fraud  in  their  breast,

And  rise  as  pure  from  their  welcome  rest.

The  foes  of  Yusuf  came  glad  and  gay
As  they  thought  of  the  counsel  of  yesterday,
With  love  on  their  tongue,  in  their  heart  fraud  and

lies,

Like  wolves  that  have  taken  the  lamb's  disguise,
In  reverent  duty  their  father  to  see,
And  bowed  them  down  on  the  bended  knee.
They  opened  the  flattering  door  of  deceit,
And  the  words  they  uttered  were  soft  and  sweet.


DECEIT.  115

They  spoke  awhile  of  things  old  and  new,

And  near  and  more  near  to  their  object  drew :

"  Father,  we  weary  of  resting  at  home ;

Through  the  plain  around  us  we  fain  would  roam.

If  thou  wilt  grant  the  permission  we  pray,

Hence  will  we  wander  at  break  of  day.

Our  brother  Yiisuf,  the  light  of  thine  eyes,

Knows  not  the  region  which  round  us  lies.

Wilt  thou  not  send  him  with  us  ?     Our  joy

Will  be  great  to  attend  on  thy  darling  boy.

He  stays  in  the  house  through  the  weary  day :

Send  him  out  with  us  to  rove  and  play.

Through  the  field  and  the  plain  his  steps  we  will  guide

Up  to  the  slope  and  the  steep  hill's  side.

We  will  milk  the  ewes  in  the  grassy  field,

And  drink  with  delight  the  sweet  draught  they  yield.

Through  beds  of  tulips  our  way  will  pass,

And  our  playground  will  be  the  carpet  of  grass.

We  will  steal  the  bright  crowns  of  the  tulips,  and  set

Their  bloom  on  his  brow  for  a  coronet,

And  the  boy  thus  decked  we  will  gently  lead

In  his  graceful  gait  through  the  flowery  mead.

We  will  watch  the  herds  of  the  browsing  deer,

And  the  wolf  shall  be  slain  if  he  venture  near.

Perchance  the  fresh  scene  will  his  spirit  restore,

And  the  dulness  of  home  will  oppress  him  no  more.


n6  DECEIT.

Set  a  thousand  marvels  before  a  child,
Still  only  by  play  is  his  heart  beguiled."

The  father  heard  as  their  suit  they  pressed,
But  turned  away  and  refused  their  request.
"  Why  should  he  follow  you  ? "  thus  he  spake  i
"  My  heart  is  sad  for  my  darling's  sake.
I  fear  lest,  eager  and  reckless,  ye
The  perils  about  him  may  fail  to  see.
I  fear  lest  a  wolf  from  the  neighbouring  waste
Should  sharpen  his  teeth  the  boy's  blood  to  taste ;
Should  tear  with  keen  fangs  each  delicate  limb,
And  rend  my  soul  as  he  mangles  him."

Thus  was  their  suit  by  the  father  denied  :
Again  to  move  him  their  arts  they  tried :
"  Think  us  not,  father,  such  feeble  men
That  a  single  wolf  can  o'ermatch  the  ten.
"We  can  seize,  as  we  seize  a  fox,  and  slay
A  lion  making  of  men  his  prey."

Thus  they  insisted.     The  father  heard :
He  gave  no  refusal,  he  spoke  no  word.
But  his  will  at  last  by  their  prayers  was  bent,
And  woe  brought  on  his  house  by  his  silent  consent.


Well.


SHAME,  conjuring  Heaven,  whose  fell  delight
Is  to  bury  each  morn  a  fair  moon  from  sight  !
Who  givest  for  prey  to  the  wolf  the  gazelle
That  browses  at  ease  in  life's  flowery  dell.

When  Yiisuf  in  charge  to  those  wolves  was  given,
"  See,  they  harry  a  lamb,"  cried  pitiless  Heaven.
While  yet  in  the  ken  of  their  father's  eyes,
Each  strove,  as  in  love,  to  be  nearest  the  prize.
One  raised  him  high  on  his  back,  and  round
His  waist  another  his  strong  arm  wound.
But  the  touch  of  each  hand  was  more  rough  and  rude,
When  they  came  to  the  desert  of  solitude.
From  the  shoulder  of  pity  the  burden  they  threw,
Where  the  flint-stones  were  hard,  and  the  sharp  thorns

grew.

Through  the  pitiless  briars  he  walked  unshod,
His  rosy  feet  rent  by  the  spines  where  he  trod,
As  he  walked  barefooted  by  thistle  and  thorn,
The  silver  skin  of  his  hand  was  torn.


iiS  THE  WELL.

The  tender  soles  of  his  young  feet  bled,

And,  soft  as  the  rose,  like  the  rose  were  red.

If  he  lingered  a  moment  behind  the  band,

One  smote  his  fair  cheek  with  a  ruthless  hand.

May  the  vengeful  sword  on  the  fierce  hand  fall

Which  struck  the  fair  face  which  is  loved  of  all !

If  he  walked  before  them  they  rained  their  blows

On  his  neck  like  a  rebel's  till  red  wheals  rose.

May  each  hand  be  bound  to  the  neck  with  a  chain,

That  gave  his  soft  neck  that  unmerited  pain  !

If  he  walked  abreast  in  his  trembling  fear,

Hard  hands  on  each  side  of  him  pulled  his  ear.

May  the  savage  have  naught  but  his  fingers  to  clasp,

Who  could  hold  that  ear  in  his  merciless  grasp !

When  he  clung  to  one's  skirt  with  a  loud  lament,

He  was  flung  aside,  and  his  collar  rent.

When  he  lay  at  their  feet  in  his  utter  dread,

They  laughed  as  their  cruel  feet  pressed  on  his  head.

When  his  pale  lips  uttered  a  bitter  cry,

With  jeer  and  reproach  came  the  harsh  reply.

In  the  depth  of  despair  with  wild  words  he  complained,

And  the  rose  of  his  cheek  like  the  tulip  was  stained.

Now  in  the  dust,  now  in  blood  the  boy  lay,

And  heart-broken  cried  in  his  utter  dismay :

"  Where  art  thou,  my  father,  where  art  thou  ?     Why

Wilt  thou  heedlessly  leave  me  to  suffer  and  die  ?


THE  WELL.  119

See  the  son  of  her  whom  thou  lovedst  so  well;

See  those  who  'gainst  wisdom  and  duty  rebel.

What  their  hearts  have  devised  for  thy  heart's  love,  see,

And  how  they  repay  obligation  to  thee.

From  the  ground  of  thy  soul  a  young  rosebud  grew,

And  thy  tender  love  fed  it  and  nursed  it  with  dew.

By  anguish  and  thirst  it  lies  withered  and  dried,

Its  life  is  departing,  its  bright  hues  have  died.

In  a  garden  kept  with  each  loving  device,

Was  planted  a  scion  of  Paradise.

By  the  blast  of  oppression  the  plant  is  o'erthrown,

By  the  thorn  and  the  thistle  its  height  overgrown.

The  moon  whose  fair  light  for  thy  guidance  was  shed,

Which  the  dark  gloom  of  fate  ever  failed  to  o'erspread,

Has  suffered  such  hardship  from  Heaven  on  high,

That  it  prays  the  new  moon  its  faint  light  to  supply."

Onward  thus  for  a  league  they  went,
He  longing  for  peace,  they  on  slaughter  bent.
He  was  all  tenderness,  they  were  stern ;
His  prayers  were  warm,  their  words  cold  in  return.
They  came  at  last  to  a  well  where  they
Eested  awhile  from  the  toil  of  the  way.
Like  the  grave  of  a  tyrant,  deep,  dark  as  night,
It  struck  with  horror  the  reason's  sight.
Like  the  mouth  of  a  dragon  its  black  jaws  gaped —
A  terrible  portal  whence  none  escaped.


120  THE  WELL.

A  tyrant's  dungeon  was  not  so  deep,

Where  deadly  snakes  o'er  the  prisoner  creep.

The  depth  was  too  deep  for  the  reach  of  sense,

And  wide  was  its  horror's  circumference.

Dire  was  the  centre,  the  circle  despair:

The  spring  was  bitter  and  poison  the  air.

For  living  creature  to  draw  a  breath

In  that  terrible  pit  were  his  instant  death.

No  depths  could  be  found  better  suited  to  quell

That  rosy-cheeked  moon  than  that  horrible  well.

Once  more  he  endeavoured  to  move  them ;  again
Sought  to  touch  their  hard  hearts  in  so  soothing  a  strain
That,  could  it  have  heard  his  sweet  pleading,  a  stone
Softer  than  wax  in  its  fibres  had  grown.
But  the  heart  of  each  brother  grew  harder  still,
More  firm  the  resolve  of  each  murderous  will.
How  shall  I  tell  it  ?     My  heart  grows  weak ;
Of  the  deed  they  accomplished  I  scarce  can  speak.
On  that  delicate  arm  for  which,  soft  and  fair,
The  silk  of  heaven  were  too  rough  to  wear,
They  firmly  fastened  a  goat-hair  cord
Whose  every  hair  seemed  a  piercing  sword.
A  woollen  rope  round  his  delicate  waist
Fine  as  a  hair  was  securely  braced.
His  coat  from  his  beautiful  shoulders  had  slipped,
And  he  stood  like  a  rose  when  her  leaves  are  stripped.


THE   WELL.  121

So  they  rent  the  robe  of  their  honour  away,

And  clothed  them  with  shame  till  the  Judgment  Day.

They  lowered  him  down  in  the  deep  dark  well,

And  sunk  in  the  water  half-way  he  fell.

Down  into  darkness  by  Fate  was  hurled

The  sun  that  illumined  the  whole  wide  world.

But  a  stone  jutting  out  from  the  rocky  side,
Above  the  water  a  seat  supplied.
That  humble  stone,  as  high  Fate  ordained,
A  value  greater  than  rubies  gained.
The  bitter  water  beneath  his  feet
At  the  sight  of  that  ruby,  his  lip,  grew  sweet.
The  well  shone  with  the  splendour  his  fair  cheek  shed,
Like  the  face  of  the  earth  with  the  moon  o'erhead.
The  fragrance  that  breathed  from  his  flowing  hair
Purged  of  its  poison  the  deadly  air,
And  snakes  and  venomous  creatures  fled
From  his  radiant  face  and  the  light  it  spread.

A  shirt  in  an  amulet  round  him  slung,
Which  had  saved  his  grandsire  from  the  flame,  was

hung;

To  Abraham  sent  by  Eizvan,1  when  the  flame
Like  a  garden  of  roses  about  him  became.

1  Abraham  was  by  the  order  of  Nimrod  thrown  into  the  fire.  He
wore  a  silken  shirt,  sent  to  him  from  Heaven,  and  the  flame  turned
into  a  bed  of  roses.  The  shirt  was  transmitted  through  Isaac  and
Jacob  to  Yusuf.  Rizvdn  is  the  porter  of  Paradise.


122  THE  WELL.

From  the  Sidra-tree  Gabriel  came  in  haste,

And  the  heavenly  gift  from  his  arm  embraced.

The  precious  shirt  from  within  he  drew,

And  o'er  that  pure  body  the  garment  threw.

Then  spoke  the  angel:  "Lone  mourner,  see,

The  Eternal  Himself  sends  a  message  to  thee :

'  The  day  is  nigh  when  I  bring  that  band,

Who  in  false-hearted  malice  thy  death  have  planned,

Before  thy  presence  to  bend  and  bow

With  hearts  deeper  wounded  than  thine  is  now.

Then  recall  to  thy  brothers  their  crime  and  shame,

But  keep  from  their  knowledge  thy  story  and  name.' '

The  words  of  Gabriel  cheered  his  heart,
And  bade  his  sorrow  and  pain  depart.
In  calm  content  on  the  jutting  stone
He  sate  like  a  king  on  his  royal  throne,
While  the  faithful  angel,  if  grief  should  stir
The  heart  of  the  boy,  was  a  minister.


Caravan.


BLEST  was  the  lot  of  the  caravan

From  which,  when  he  thirsted  at  eve,  a  man

From  that  well  in  the  desert  his  bucket  drew,

And  brought  unburied  the  moon  to  view  ;

Which  three  days  in  the  depth  had  been  forced  to

dwell
Like  the  moon  of  Nakhshab  1  in  Nakhshab's  well.

On  the  fourth  bright  morn  when  the  Yiisuf  of  day2
Arose  from  the  gulf  where  entombed  he  lay,
There  came  by  good  fortune  a  caravan,
Passing  to  Egypt  from  Midian.
By  the  weary  length  of  the  way  distressed
They  halted  there  and  unloaded  to  rest.
High  fate  was  theirs  to  have  wandered  far
And  found  Yiisuf  himself  for  a  guiding  star.
The  weary  merchants  halted,  and  first
To  the  well  they  hastened  to  quench  their  thirst.

1  The  "Veiled  Prophet  of  Khorosan"  is  said  to  have  caused  a
luminous  body  like  the  moon  to  rise  out  of  a  well  at  Nakhshab  in
Turkestan.  2  The  sun.


124  THE  CARAVAN.

Happy  was  lie  who  most  speedily  pressed

To  that  Water  of  Life  and  outstripped  the  rest,

And,  a  second  Khizar 1  of  high  renown,

Sent  through  the  darkness  his  bucket  down.

Then  Gabriel  called  to  Yiisuf,  "  Shed

The  water  of  grace  on  the  world,"  he  said.

"  Take  thy  seat  in  the  bucket  a  brighter  sun,

And  from  west  to  east  in  thy  swift  course  run.

Thine  horizon  shall  be  the  well's  circular  brim,

And  shall  ne'er,  while  thou  shinest/be  dark  or  dim.

Send  forth  a  beam  from  thy  face,  and  through

The  whole  wide  world  light  shall  shine  anew."

Then  Yiisuf  sprang  from  the  stone,  and  fleet

As  water  took  in  the  bucket  his  seat.

A  strong  man  drew  it,  one  skilled  to  say

What  the  water  he  drew  from  a  well  should  weigh.

"  What  may  there  be  in  the  bucket  beside

The  water  that  makes  it  so  heavy  ?  "  he  cried.

When  that  moon  appeared,  from  his  happy  soul

Burst  a  cry  of  rapture  beyond  control :

"  0  joy,  that  so  lovely  a  moon  to  illume

The  world  should  arise  from  the  depth  of  gloom,

And  out  of  the  bitterest  spring  a  stream

Of  light  and  glory  should  suddenly  gleam  ! "

1  The  prophet  Khizar,  or  Elijah,  is  the  guardian  of  the  Water  of
Life.


THE  CARAVAN.  125

So  for  him  grew  a  rose  in  that  desolate  spot ;
But  he  to  his  fellows  revealed  it  not.
To  the  place  where  he  rested  the  youth  he  bare,
And  gave  him  in  charge  to  his  people  there.
Unworthy  his  lot  is  the  man,  unwise,
Who  hides  not  his  treasure  from  envious  eyes.

But  the  brothers  had  lingered  not  far  from  the  well,
And  they  burned  in  their  hearts  to  know  what  befell ;
They  saw  the  merchants  arrive  and  stood
Waiting  for  news  in  the  neighbourhood.
To  Yiisuf  they  called  with  a  secret  cry,
But  a  hollow  echo  came  back  in  reply.
To  the  caravan  with  quick  steps,  intent
On  claiming  the  boy  as  their  slave,  they  went,
And  with  toil  and  labour  they  made  their  way
Within  the  ring  where  the  merchants  lay.
"  This  is  our  slave,"  as  they  touched  him,  they  cried ;
"  The  collar  of  service  his  hand  has  untied.
The  bonds  of  his  duty  were  loosened,  and  he
From  the  yoke  of  his  masters  has  dared  to  flee.
Though  born  in  our  house  we  will  gladly  sell
The  idle  boy  who  will  never  do  well.
When  a  slave  is  negligent,  idle,  perverse,
Ever  growing  from  bad  to  worse,
'Tis  better  to  sell  him,  though  small  the  price,
Than  suffer  still  from  his  rooted  vice.


126  THE  CARAVAN.

We  will  labour  no  more  to  improve  the  wretch,
But  sell  him  at  once  for  the  price  he  may  fetch."

He  was  sold  for  a  trifle  to  him  whose  cord
Had  brought  him  up  to  the  light  restored.
Malik — so  named  was  the  merchant — gave
A  few  pieces  for  Yiisuf  as  household  slave.
Then  the  traders  arising  their  march  renewed,
And  onward  to  Egypt  their  way  pursued.

Woe  unto  those  who  that  treasure  sold,
And  bartered  their  souls  for  some  paltry  gold  !
No  life,  nor  the  treasures  of  Egypt,  could  buy
One  word  from  his  lip  or  one  glance  from  his  eye.
Only  Jacob  his  sire  and  Zulaikha,  the  true,
The  priceless  worth  of  that  treasure  knew.
But  his  worth  was  unknown  to  those  blinded  eyes,
And  they  took  a  few  pence  for  the  blessed  prize,


(     127     )


Iking*


THUS  Malik  gained  with  no  labour  the  prize
That  fell  to  his  fortunate  merchandize.
Such  joy  in  the  sight  of  his  purchase  he  found
That  scarcely  his  foot  seemed  to  touch  the  ground.
With  the  hope  that  was  in  him  his  heart  was  gay,
And  with  double  marches  he  sped  on  his  way.

Ere  to  the  city  of  Memphis  he  came,
The  story  was  bruited  abroad  by  fame  :
"  Malik  returns  from  his  journey  this  morn
With  a  slave  of  the  race  of  the  Hebrews  born  :
A  moon  in  the  zenith  of  beauty,  above
All  others  a  king  in  the  realm  of  love.
In  the  picture-house  of  the  earth  the  skies
Have  not  seen  his  peer  with  their  thousand  eyes."
The  King  of  Egypt  the  rumour  heard,
And  the  heart  within  him  was  strangely  stirred  :
"  Is  not  Egypt  the  garden  of  beauty  ?     Where
Can  the  eye  see  roses  so  bright  and  fair  ?
The  roses  of  heaven  would  droop  from  their  stem
And  hide  their  shamed  heads  in  the  dust  before  them."


128  THE  KING.

Then  he  cried  in  haste  to  the  Grand  Vizier :
"  Go,  meet  the  merchants  whose  train  is  near,
Go  forth  this  moon  of  rare  beauty  to  see,
And  lead  him  straight  to  my  court  with  thee."

The  noble  obeyed  ;•  the  merchants  he  met,
And  his  eyes  on  that  joy  of  the  soul  were  set.
At  the  sight  of  that  beauty  his  senses  fled,
And  he  fain  would  bow  down  in  obeisance  his  head.
But  Yiisuf  raised  him  as  lowly  he  bent,
And  chid  the  obeisance  he  might  not  prevent  :
"  Bow  down  thy  head  to  none  living  beside
Him  who  set  that  head  on  thy  neck,"  he  cried.

He  called  for  Malik  and  bade  him  brino-

o

The  beautiful  slave  to  the  court  of  the  king.

But  Malik  answered :  "  We  thought  not  yet

In  the  monarch's  palace  our  feet  to  set.

We  are  weary  and  worn  with  the  length  of  the  way,

And  crave  of  thy  kindness  some  rest  and  delay.

With  wakeful  nights  and  with  hunger  distressed

We  need  three  days  to  recruit  and  rest.

We  will  wash  off  the  dust,  and  refreshed  after  toil,

Will  wait  on  the  king  without  spot  and  soil."

The  Grand  Vizier  gave  his  ready  consent,
And  again  to  the  king  and  his  duties  went.
Of  the  beauty  of  Yiisuf  he  spoke  but  a  word,
Yet  the  king's  jealous  heart  at  the  story  was  stirred.


THE  KING.  129

He  gave  command,  and  they  picked  and  chose,
As  ye  cull  from  a  rosebed  each  fairest  rose,
The  most  beautiful  boys  that  the  land  possessed,
In  the  kingdom  of  beauty  kings  over  the  rest :

«

With  dainty  caps  bright  with  glittering  gold,

And  shawls  of  brocade  round  their  shoulders  to  fold :

With  a  jewelled  girdle  round  each  fine  waist,

And  gay  lips  sweeter  than  sugar  to  taste  ;

That  when  Yiisuf  s  owner  should  spread  the  tale

Of  his  marvellous  beauty,  and  bring  him  for  sale,

They  to  the  market  should  come  and  display

Their  fair  forms  and  features  in  rival  array.

Then  were  he  the  sun,  their  more  beauty  would  dim

His  splendour,  and  chill  the  demand  for  him.


(     130    )


Batlx


PAST  were  the  promised  three  days,  and  on

The  blue  heaven  of  the  Mle1  the  sun  Ytisuf  shone.

"0  world-adorner,"  said  Malik,  "awhile

Light  with  thy  splendour  the  bank  of  the  Mle.

Bathe  in  the  stream,  and  the  waters  shall  flee

More  bright  with   the  dust  they   shall  borrow   from

thee."

That  sun  of  beauty  the  order  obeyed  :
Alone  on  the  bank  of  the  flood  he  strayed.
His  cap  of  bright  gold  he  removed  from  his  head,
And  his  raven  locks  to  the  sun  dispread  ;
He  threw  off  his  robe,  and  his  limbs  were  bare
Like  the  moon  that  shines  through  the  cloudless  air  ;
And  his  neck  and  shoulders  were  tinged  with  a  flush
Like  the  first  faint  hue  of  the  morning's  blush.
A  bathing-robe  round  his  waist  he  tied,
And  the  cypress  of  silver  hung  o'er  the  stream's  side.

1  The  Persian  word  nil  signifies  both  "blue"  and  "Nile."     Jdmi
frequently  plays  upon  the  two  meanings  of  the  word.


THE  BATH.  131

The  voice  of  the  heavens  cried :  "  Blest,  0  blest
Is  the  bank  of  the  Nile  which  his  feet  have  pressed.
Ah,  if  in  the  place  of  the  flood  I  might  kiss
Those  delicate  feet,  how  supreme  were  the  bliss !
Nay,  the  sun  would  bend   down  from   his   noonday

height,

And  give  the  glad  waters  his  fountain  of  light.
Yet  he  heeds  not  that  fountain  of  splendour,  but  laves
The  dust  from  his  limbs  in  the  turbid  waves."

He  entered  the  river,  awhile  to  shine
In  the  stream  like  the  sun  in  th§  Watery  Sign.
He  dipped  the  fair  face  that  was  bright  as  a  sun,
As  the  lotus  dips  where  the  sweet  waters  run.
He  struck  the  waves  with  each  naked  limb,
And  the  waters  lived  at  the  touch  of  him.
He  loosened  the  chains  of  his  hair  while  the  fleet
Stream  made  a  chain  for  his  silver  feet,
And  to  capture  the  spoil  of  the  river  he  set
From  the  moon  to  the  Fish1  a  fine  amber-sweet  net.
Now  a  stream  from  his  hand  on  his  beautiful  head,
Like  the  Pleiades  decking  the  moon,  was  shed.
Now  he  rubbed  the  rose  where  the  big  drops  lay,
Now  combed  with  his  fingers  the  spikenard  spray.2

1  That  is,  from  above  the  earth  to  under  it,  with  an  allusion  also  to
the  fish  in  the  river.     The  earth  is  said  to  rest  on  Gau  or  the  Bull,  and
Gau  on  Ma~hi  or  the  Fish.

2  His  hair.


132  THE  BATH.

Then  pure  from  all  dust  of  the  journey  he

Eose  up  on  the  bank  like  a  cypress-tree.

Then  he  put  on  his  raiment :  the  rose  of  his  skin

Was  enhanced  by  the  white  of  the  jessamine.1

About  his  body  his  coat  he  drew,

Worked  with  fine  fancy  of  many  a  hue.

A  gold-bright  cap  on  his  brow  he  placed,

And  girt  with  a  zone  rich  with  jewels  his  waist.

Loose  hung  his  ambrosial  tresses,  and  lent

To  the  breezes  of  Egypt  the  breath  of  their  scent.

Again  in  his  litter  the  youth  was  placed,
And  they  drove  to  the  court  of  the  king  in  haste.
There  in  front  of  the  palace  gate
High  on  a  throne  was  the  king  in  state,
And  the  fairest  boys  of  the  realm  stood  near
Expecting  when  Yusuf  himself  should  appear,
And  a  thousand  eyes  to  the  litter  flew
As  near  to  the  throne  of  the  king  it  drew.
It  chanced  the  clouds  in  their  dense  array
Hid  the  light  of  the  sun  that  day.
Then  Malik  gave  order  to  Yiisuf :  "  Spring
From  the  litter  and  come  to  the  throne  of  the  king.
Cast  the  veil  from  thy  face,  for  a  sun  art  thou,
And  the  world   shall   be   gay  with  the  light  of  thy
brow."

1  His  shirt.


THE  BATH.  133

He  spoke  ;  and  the  lovely  boy  sprang  to  the  ground,
And  shot  sunlike  rays  on  the  circle  around.
"  'Tis  the  blessed  sun,"  thought  the  wondering  crowd,
"  That  has   come   from  the  screen  of  his   dark  blue

cloud."

But  they  turned  their  eyes  to  the  sun,  and  knew
It  was  not  his  rays  that  the  splendour  threw,
For  the  dark  cloud  still  o'er  the  sun  was  spread,
And  the  face  of  Yiisuf  the  radiance  shed.
They  clapped  their  hands,  and  on  every  side
Eose  up  a  murmur  of  voices  that  cried :
"  What,  0  Heaven,  is  the  brilliant  star
Outshining  the  sun  and  the  moon  by  far  ? "
And  the  darlings  of  Egypt  looked  down  disgraced
As  they  saw  their  beauty  by  his  effaced.
When  the  sun  shines  forth  in  his  splendour,  where
Is  the  faintest  star  in  the  Lesser  Bear  ?


(     134    )


IRecognitiom

NE'ER  had  it  entered  Zulaikha's  heart

That  one  stage  kept  herself  and  her  darling  apart.

But  a  secret  impulse  at  work  in  her  breast

Filled  her  with  longing  and  wild  unrest.

She  strove  to  calm  it,  and  knew  not  whence

Came  the  hidden  yearning  that  moved  each  sense.

She  roamed  in  the  meadow  for  change  and  relief,

For  the  house  seemed  a  dungeon  of  care  and  grief.

But  still  each  day  was  dreary  and  slow,

And  she  gnashed  her  teeth  in  her  depth  of  woe.

She  gathered  all  luxuries  round  her  in  vain,

For  each  moment  that  passed  but  increased  her  pain.

Her  fountain  of  tears  was  outwept,  and  her  mind

To  change  once  more  and  to  home  inclined.

Again  in  her  litter  the  lady  lay

And  hastened  back  on  her  homeward  way.

On  her  journey  homeward  Zulaikha  sped,

And  her  road  by  the  gate  of  the  palace  led.


RECOGNITION.  135

And  she  asked,  as  the  press  of  people  she  viewed,

If  Doomsday  had  gathered  the  multitude.

One  made  answer  and  said  to  her :  "  Nay,

A  youth  from  Canaan  is  here  to-day :

No  slave  is  he,  but  a  splendid  sun,

In  the  kingdom  of  beauty  the  brightest  one."

She  raised  the  curtain,  her  glances  fell
On  the  form  and  features  she  knew  so  well
A  long  sigh  burst  from  her  heart  as  she  lay
Back  in  her  litter,  her  senses  astray.
Home  with  their  lady  the  servants  pressed ;
In  her  secret  chamber  they  laid  her  to  rest.
Again  the  light  in  her  sad  eyes  burned,
And  her  senses,  lost  in  her  swoon,  returned.
"  Say,  light  of  my  soul,"  cried  the  nurse,  "  say  why
From  thy  troubled  breast  came  that  bitter  sigh.
What  reft  thy  senses  away  ?     What  woes
Made  thy  sweet  lips  with  a  cry  unclose  ? "
"  Dear  mother,"  she  said,  "  what  reply  can  I  make  ?
At  each  word  I  say  must  my  bosom  ache.
Thou  sawest  that  youth  in  the  midst  of  the  press,
While  the  people  were  praising  his  loveliness.
It  is  he,  my  beloved,  so  long  adored,
My  life  and  my  treasure,  my  love  and  my  lord,
Whose  face  in  my  vision  I  saw  when  my  soul,
Lured  by  his  splendour,  burst  forth  from  control ;


136  RECOGNITION.

For  whom  body  and  soul  burnt  with  feverous  flame,

For  whom  tears  of  blood  from  these  fountains  came ;

Whose  dear  love  led  me  to  this  far  land

When  I  came  to  this  city  to  yield  him  my  hand.

By  him  from  my  home  and  my  friends  was  I  torn,

And  left  amid  strangers  unfriended,  forlorn.

The  pangs  thou  hast  witnessed,  the  long  weary  sighs,

The  woes  that  have   banished    all    rest    from    mine

eyes,

Tor  him  all  these  sorrows  were  suffered,  for  him
My  heart  was  heavy,  mine  eyes  were  dim.
I  know  not  what  grief  has  assailed  me  to-day,
But  my  woes  in  my  breast  like  a  mountain  weigh.
What  court  as  a  king  does  my  fair  moon  grace  ?
What  chamber  is  blest  with  the  light  of  his  face  ?
Whose  eye  takes  the  splendour  his  glances  shed  ?
And  whose  house  does  he  turn  to  a  sweet  rosebed  ?
Who  wins  from  those  fresh  lips  a  life-giving  kiss
And  beneath  the  fair  cypress  reposes  in  bliss  ?
Whose  fingers  the  braid  of  his  tresses  entwine  ?
Who  joys  in  the  shade  of  that  palm  to  recline  ?
Who  would  give  all  her  treasure  to  purchase  the  prize
And  make  dust  for  his  feet  of  the  tint  of  her  eyes  ? "
When  the  loving  nurse  saw  whence  the  fierce  passion

came,
She  wept  like  a  candle  that  melts  with  the  flame.


RECOGNITION.  137

She  said  :  "  Lamp  of  beauty,  hide,  hide  this  fire ;
Conceal  thy  longing  and  sweet  desire.
Long  hast  thou  suffered  in  patience  thy  woe :
This  day,  too,  endeavour  like  patience  to  show.
For  hope  from  thy  patience  at  length  may  arise,
And  thy  sun  may  burst  forth  from  the  cloud  where
he  lies.3'


(     138    )


Slave^flDarfcet


BLEST  is  the  time,  of  all  hours  most  sweet,
When  two  fond  lovers,  long  parted,  meet.
When  love's  touch  burns  with  a  steady  ray,
And  the  pangs  of  longing  have  passed  away.

The  beauty  of  Yusuf  so  charmed  each  eye
That  thousands  of  Memphis  came  round  to  buy.
Each  one  his  costliest  treasure  sold,
And  ran  to  the  mart  with  the  ready  gold.
They  say  an  old  crone  for  his  beauty  sighed  :
She  caught  up  a  handful  of  yarn  and  cried  :
"  No  gold  or  silver  to  show  have  I,
But  this  will  admit  me  with  those  who  would  buy."

The  crier  shouted  :   "  Come,  listen  to  me.
Who  would  purchase  a  slave  from  all  blemish  free  ?
The  first  dawnings  of  grace  on  his  young  cheek  shine,
And  his  lip  is  a  ruby  from  beauty's  mine.
High  wisdom's  stamp  on  his  brow  is  impressed,
And  the  gentle  virtues  have  filled  his  breast.
He  speaks  no  word  but  the  truth  alone,
And  fraud  and  falsehood  to  him  are  unknown."


THE  SLAVE-MARKET.  139

The  first  who  spoke  in  the  dense  array
A  bag  of  red  gold  for  the  boy  would  pay :
A  bag  containing,  all  duly  told,
A  thousand  coins  of  the  finest  gold.
Then  others  on  horseback  the  market  sought,
And  a  hundred  bags,  each  of  like  value,  brought.
Another  outbid  them  all  and  would  pay
As  much  fine  musk  as  the  boy  might  weigh.
Another  priced  him  at  higher  rate
And  offered  in  ruby  and  pearl  his  weight.
Thus  each  tendered  his  wealth  in  store,
And  the  price  of  Yiisuf  rose  more  and  more.

Zulaikha  was  'ware  of  the  strife  and  stir,
And  the  highest  offer  was  doubled  by  her.
Their  lips  were  closed,  and  their  faces  blank,
As  low  on  the  knee  of  despair  they  sank.
To  the  Grand  Vizier  in  her  haste  she  spake :
"  The  price  of  the  slave  to  his  owner  take."
He  answered :  "The  musk  and  the  pearl  and  gold,
And  all  the  wealth  that  my  treasuries  hold,
Not  half  the  price  of  the  boy  would  be ;
And  how  can  the  ransom  be  paid  by  me  ? "

She  had  a  casket  of  jewels — nay,
A  vault  of  heaven  where  the  bright  stars  lay ;
And  of  all  the  gems  of  her  treasure  few
Were  less  valued  than  Egypt's  whole  revenue.


140  THE  SLAVE-MARKET.

"  Take  these  jewels,"  she  cried,  "  0  my  soul's  dear  gem,

And  pay  the  price  of  the  boy  with  them."

With  fresh  excuses  he  met  her  prayer :

"  The  king  will  buy  him,  a  slave  so  fair,

And  set  over  all,  at  his  household's  head,

A  youth  so  true  and  so  gently  bred."

"  Hasten,"  said  she,  "  to  the  king,  and  all

Thy  faithful  care  to  his  mind  recall.

Say,  '  Bar  to  my  joy  have  I  only  one,

That  mine  eyes  may  look  on  no  darling  son.1

Enhance  my  state  by  the  boon  I  crave,

And  leave  me  free  to  command  the  slave.' "

Zulaikha  spoke,  and  her  lord  obeyed :
Before  the  king  his  request  he  laid.
Just  was  the  plea,  and  the  monarch  bent
His  ear  to  listen,  and  gave  assent.
.He  gave  him  permission  the  slave  to  buy
And  look  on  the  boy  with  a  father's  eye.

He  brought  the  youth  to  his  home ;  and  she,
Zulaikha,  at  length  from  her  grief  was  free.
Thus  in  a  rapture  the  lady  cried
As  her  eyes  from  the  pearls  of  her  joy  she  dried :
"  Can  it  be  real,  this  bliss  supreme  ?
Have  I  found  my  love,  or  is  all  a  dream  ?

1  Zulaikha' s  nominal  husband  belonged  to  "that  unhappy  class
which  a  practice  of  immemorial  antiquity  in  the  East  excluded  from
the  pleasures  of  love  and  from  the  hope  of  posterity."


THE  SLAVE-MARKET.  141

Ne'er  could  I  hope  in  the  gloom  of  night

To  look  on  the  dawn  of  a  day  so  white.

The  moon  of  triumph  her  splendour  shows  :

Night  has  no  sorrow  and  day  no  woes.

My  gentle  friend  will  my  secrets  share —

Thanks  be  to  Heaven  who  has  heard  my  prayer.

Who  is  blest  like  me  in  this  world  of  grie°,

When  verdure  revisits  the  faded  leaf?

I  gasped  for  water,  but  none  was  nigh :

The  sun  was  fierce  and  the  sand  was  dry.

From  the  cloud  of  grace  came  the  gentle  rain

And  bore  the  poor  fish  to  her  native  main.

I  wandered  lost  in  the  gloom  of  night,

My  soul  on  my  lips  for  toil  and  affright.

A  fair  moon  rose  in  the  east  and  led

My  faint  steps  home  with  the  light  it  shed.

I  lay  on  my  bed,  I  was  tortured  with  pain,

With  the  lancet  of  Death  in  my  heart's  vital  vein,

When  suddenly  Khizar  appeared  in  the  room,

And  with  Water  of  Life  brought  me  back  from  the  tomb.

Now  thanks  be  to  Heaven  who  has  sent  me  my  friend,

And  brought  the  long  woes  of  my  life  to  an  end.

A  thousand  lives  be  that  noble  heart's  prize

Who  brought  to  the  market  such  merchandize.

If  my  jewels  are  gone,  and  I  gain  a  rich  mine

Of  jewels  instead,  shall  I  fondly  repine  !


1 42  THE  SLA  VE-MA RKET.

What  are  jewels  and  gems  when  compared  with  !

soul?

He  is  welcome,  whate'er  they  may  be,  to  the  whole.
I  recover  my  soul,  and  a  few  stones  are  lost:
Whoe'er  bought  such  a  prize  at  so  paltry  a  cost  ?
What  does  he  gain  by  his  traffic  who  sells
The  blessed  f  sa 1  for  coral  and  shells  ? 2
My  coral  and  shells  I  have  bartered  away :
But  f  sa  the  blessed  is  mine  to-day."

She  sifted  these  thoughts  in  the  sieve  of  her  soul,
And  let  pearls  of  tears  from  her  glad  eyes  roll.
Now  she  thought  of  Yiisuf  but  spoke  no  word,
Though  her  heart  with  the  joy  of  his  presence  stirred,
Again  she  recounted  the  woes  that  were  past,
And  her  soul  rejoiced :  he  had  come  at  last.

1  Jesus.  2  Things  of  little  worth.


NOT  from  sight  only,  but  oft  from  the  tongue

The  gracious  glory  of  love  has  sprung.

Through  the  ear  an  entrance  will  beauty  find,

To   steal  sense  from  the  heart  and  repose  from  the

mind.

A  whisper  of  beauty  has  power  to  raise
The  soft  flame  nursed  by  a  skilful  praise.
Love  secretly  reigns  in  the  bosom,  and  yet
The  eyes  of  the  lovers  may  never  have  met.

In  Egypt  a  maiden  was  born  to  grace
The  Adites' 1  ancient  and  princely  race.
The  land  was  sweet  with  the  smile  of  the  girl,
And  her  onyx  casket2  was  fairer  than  pearl.
Her  sugar  lips  had  a  laugh  to  enchain
The  knotty  heart  of  the  sugar-cane.
Her  hand  by  the  lords  of  the  realm  was  sought,
But  to  none  of  its  darlings  she  gave  a  thought.

1  Descendants  of  a  famous  King,  'Ad,  of  Arabia  Felix.

2  Her  mouth.


144  BAZIGHA.

On  the  best  of  the  nobles  her  pride  looked  down,
For  in  heaven  itself  was  the  maiden's  crown,
From  her  height  of  glory,  and  riches,  and  rank,
To  earthly  suitor  her  eye  ne'er  sank.
But  soon  as  the  beauty  of  Yiisuf  she  learned,
The  sun  of  her  love  to  that  fair  moon  turned.
Wider  and  wider  the  rumour  flew,
And  her  love  fresh  might  from  each  whisper  drew.
She  heard  of  his  beauty,  and  longed  to  see ;
For  hearing  the  root  is,  and  seeing  the  tree.
The  price  of  the  marvellous  boy  she  inquired,
And  strove  to  obtain  what  her  heart  desired.
A  thousand  camels  she  bade  them  lade,
With  gold,  and  jewels,  and  musk,  and  brocade,
And  precious  things  from  her  stores  she  brought
That  the  price  might  be  worthy  the  prize  she  sought.
The  best  of  her  treasure  she  would  not  spare,
Till  casket  and  chamber  were  empty  and  bare.
Thus  furnished,  the  way  to  Memphis  she  led,
And  swiftly  the  news  of  her  coming  was  spread.

Soon  as  the  place  where  he  dwelt  she  knew,
With  an  eager  heart  to  the  spot  she  flew.
Like  a  soul  with  no  mixture  of  clay  she  beheld
His  beauty,  which  thought  never  paralleled.
Ne'er  had  she  seen  such  a  marvel,  ne'er
Dreamed  of  a  form  so  divinely  fair.


BAZIGHA.  145

As  she  looked  on  his  splendour  she  swooned  and  lay
In  a  rapturous  trance  with  her  senses  astray.
She  woke  to  consciousness  slowly,  and  passed
Out  of  the  swoon  that  had  held  her  fast.
Her  lips  she  opened ;  she  fain  would  speak,
From  that  storehouse  of  riches  rare  pearls  to  seek.1
"  0  youth,"  she  cried,  "  from  all  evil  free,
Who  made  thy  beauty  so  fair  to  see  ?
By  whom  was  the  sun's  own  splendour  lent,
And  the  moon,  for  thy  forehead's  ornament  ?
Say  in  what  garden  that  cypress  grew,
And  what  artist  hand  the  fair  picture  drew  ?
Whose  compasses  marked  thy  brow's  delicate  line  ?
Who  curled  in  bright  clusters  those  locks  of  thine  ?
Who  set  the  young  flower  in  the  garden  ?     Who
Fed  the  tender  plant  with  the  splendour  of  dew  ?
Where  could  a  master  be  found  to  teach
Thy  cypress  its  motion,  thy  ruby  its  speech  ?
Thy  locks'  fair  letters  whose  pen  could  trace  ?
Who  read  the  book  of  thy  moon-bright  face  ?
Who  bade  thee  from  nothingness  wake  and  arise  ?
And  opened  to  light  those  narcissus-like  eyes;
And  that  onyx  lock  in  that  pearl-casket  laid,
Whence  the  soul  of  the  hearer  is  strengthened  and
stayed  ?

1  That  is,  to  obtain  an  answer  from  Yusuf.

K


146  BAZIGHA.

Who  hollowed  the  well  in  thy  soft  round  chin,
And  poured  the  sweet  Water  of  Life  therein  ?
Who  set  the  dark  mole  on  thy  cheek,  and  spread
The  raven's  wing  o'er  the  roses'  bed  ? "

He  heard  her  speech;  and  from  wisdom's  spring
Flowed  forth  the  reply  to  her  questioning  :
"  I  am  the  work  of  that  Maker,"  said  he,
"  From  whose  ocean  one  drop  is  enough  for  me.
Heaven  is  but  a  dot  which  His  pen  has  made,
And  the  earth  but  a  bud  in  His  garden  displayed.
The  sun  is  a  spark  of  His  wisdom's  light,
And  a  bubble  the  world  of  the  sea  of  His  might.
From  atoms  He  made  us,  as  mirrors  to  shine
With  the  borrowed  light  of  His  face  divine.
Screened  by  dark  curtains  from  mortal  eye,
On  His  pure  perfection  no  stain  may  lie.
Whatever  fair  to  thy  sight  appears
Is  the  light  of  His  face  when  thy  vision  clears.
Dost  thou  see  the  reflection  ?     Then  fly  to  Him
To  whom  faint  is  that  shadow  and  cold  and  dim.
Dost  thou  shun  the  light's  Author  ?     No,  God  forbid
Or  dark  were  thy  lot  when  that  reflex  is  hid.
It  will  last  but  a  moment — this  borrowed  ray —
As  the  bloom  of  the  rose  and  her  scent  decay.
Dost  thou  seek  the  eternal,  the  firm,  the  true  ?
Then  fix  on  Him  ever  thy  steadfast  view.


BAZIGHA.  14?

Tis  this  that  pierces  our  hearts  with  pain,
That  fair  things  are  with  us,  ah !  not  to  remain."

The  maiden  listened  as  Yusuf  replied :
She  folded  love's  carpet  and  laid  it  aside.
"  I  heard  thy  praises,"  'twas  thus  she  spoke,
"  And  the  flame  of  love  in  my  heart  awoke.
Hither  I  journeyed  thy  face  to  see,
And  my  head  was  my  foot  in  the  search  for  thee.
I  came,  I  found  thee :  I  swooned  away,
And  my  life  at  thy  feet  I  was  fain  to  lay.
But  wisdom's  pearls  thou  hast  deigned  to  string,
And  pointed  the  way  to  the  pure  light's  spring.
Thou  hast  cut  the  fine  hair  with  the  word  of  truth,
And  repelled  the  love  of  mine  eager  youth.
Thou  hast  lifted  the  veil  of  my  hope  and  shown
The  way  to  that  Sun  which  I  never  had  known.
This  truth  at  last  to  my  heart  is  plain,
That  my  love  for  thee  like  a  dream  was  vain.
Mine  eyes  have  been  touched  by  the  truth's  pure  ray,
And  the  dream  of  folly  has  passed  away.
Mine  eyes  thou  hast  opened — God  bless  thee  for  it ! —
And  my  heart  to  the  Soul  of  the  soul  thou  hast  knit.
From  a  fond  strange  love  thou  hast  turned  my  feet
The  Lord  of  all  creatures  to  know  and  meet,
If  I  bore  a  tongue  in  each  single  hair,
Each  and  all  should  thy  praise  declare.


148  BAZIGHA.

But  the  voice  of  thanksgiving  I  scarce  can  raise

To  string  together  the  pearls  of  thy  praise."
Her  speech  was  ended ;  with  one  adieu,

Set  free  from  her  fancy,  the  maid  withdrew.

She  hastened  away  from  his  presence,  and  there

On  the  bank  of  the  Nile  built  a  house  of  prayer.

From  love  of  the  world  and  its  treasures  freed,

Her  door  she  opened  to  all  in  need ;

And  they  on  the  stores  of  her  bounty  fed

Till  she  scarce  had  enough  for  her  evening  bread.

For    the    crown    that    had    glittered  with    precious
stone,

A  tattered  veil  o'er  her  head  was  thrown ;

For  the  band  of  gold  that  had  bound  her  brow,

A  woollen  fillet  sufficed  her  now.

Her  silks  and  satin  she  used  no  more,

But  a  robe  of  felt,  like  a  glass,1  she  wore,

And  instead  of  the  gems  of  her  bracelet,  she

Counted  the  beads  of  her  rosary.

From  the  world  and  its  pleasures  she  turned  away

To  her  lowly  cottage  to  muse  and  pray.

The  ashes  she  brought  from  the  bath-stove  spread

In  the  place  of  ermine  supplied  her  bed.

With  her  head  on  a  cold  rough  stone  she  slept,

And  the  people  looked  on  her  woes  and  wept.

1  Covered,  for  protection,  with  thick  felt.


BAZIGHA.  149

Thus  in  obedience  and  meek  content
In  the  house  of  worship  her  days  she  spent,
And,  when  the  hour  of  her  death  was  nigh,
Resigned  her  spirit  as  heroes  die.

Think  not  the  meed  she  had  earned  was  denied :
The  bright  cheek  of  her  loved  one  she  saw  ere  she

died.

Oh,  learn  from  this  maiden  a  hero's  part :
Let  her  mourning  teach  thee  to  mourn,  my  heart
If  thou  hast  not  her  sorrow,  go  mourn  thy  lot,
And  grieve  for  thyself  if  grief  trouble  thee  not.
In  long  devotion  to  forms  that  cheat
Thou  hast  suffered  the  days  of  thy  life  to  fleet
But  outward  forms  are  still  passing  away,
Changing  their  fashion  from  day  to  day.
Tread  not  ever  on  stones  that  are  rough  to  thy  f eet»
Nor  shift  from  one  branch  to  another  thy  seat
Seek  high  o'er  the  sphere  of  this  world  thy  rest:
In  the  world  of  reality  make  thee  a  nest
If  Truth  be  thine  object^  form-worshippers  shun ;
For  form  is  manifold,  Truth1  is  one.
In  number  trouble  and  error  lie :
To  Unity  then  for  sure  refuge  fly*
If  the  might  of  the  foeman  oppress  thee  sore,
Fly  to  the  fortress  and  fear  no  more.

1  The  One  Absolute,  besides  whom  all  is  merely  phenomenal.


Xov>e'6  Service*

WHEN  the  prize  to  the  net  of  Zulaikha  came,

Heaven  struck  its  coin  in  her  happy  name.

The  care  of  Yusuf  was  now  her  task,

And  no  higher  joy  would  the  lady  ask.

Silk  embroidered  with  gold  and  brocade

To  suit  his  stature  her  care  arrayed.

Gold-wrought  coronets,  studded  zones

Bright  with  the  lustre  of  precious  stones ;

For  each  day  of  the  year  a  new  dress  to  wear

She  saw  provided,  and  ceased  from  her  care.

When  the  breath  of  morning  was  fresh  with  dew,

With  a  bright  fresh  robe  to  his  side  she  flew.

When  the  Lord  of  the  East  with  red  gold  was  crowned,

With  a  new  gold  circlet  his  brow  she  bound.

Each  day  that  the  cypress  upreared  his  pride,

In  varied  fashion  his  zone  she  tied.

Changed  each  morning  that  sunlight  shone

Stealing  the  heart  that  it  looked  upon.

Never  two  days  might  the  same  crown  press

The  head  of  that  cypress  of  loveliness.


LOVE'S  SERVICE.  151

Never,  though  sweet  as  the  sugar-cane,

Might  he  wear  the  same  girdle  like  it  again.

With  a  thousand  kisses  she  cried,  as  she  set

On  his  temples  a  glittering  coronet :

"  May  the  dust  of  thy  feet  be  to  me  for  a  crown,

For  a  ladder  to  climb  the  tall  height  of  renown  ! "

When  over  his  shoulders  his  robe  she  drew,

She  communed  thus  with  the  vest  anew :

"  Oh  that  this  body  of  mine  might  be,

To  cling  to  his  body,  one  thread  of  thee !  "

The  shawl  she  folded  about  his  breast

In  amorous  words  like  these  was  addressed :

"  Ah,  how  I  long  for  that  cypress-tree,

To  be  folded  close  to  his  heart  like  thee ! "

When  round  his  waist  she  adjusted  the  zone,

In  these  wild  words  was  her  passion  shown :

"  Ah,  that  mine  arms  were  that  girdle  to  fold

The  waist  of  my  love  in  their  clinging  hold ! "

When  she  combed  the  locks  of  his  curling  hair,

She  found  a  balm  for  her  sorrow  there.

But  ah,  from  its  amber  she  wove  and  set,

To  tangle  her  soul  in  its  meshes,  a  net.

For  breakfast  and  supper  he  might  not  leave

The  lady's  chamber  at  morn  and  eve,

Ever  supplied  by  her  tender  care

With  varied  dishes  of  daintiest  fare.


152  LOVE'S  SERVICE.

Sweet  sugar-candy  his  lips  supplied,

And    his     teeth    were    the    kernels     that     almonds

hide.

The  fairest  fruit  that  the  summer  brings  in
Was  that  silver  apple,  his  rounded  chin.
Now,  like  her  heart  as  it  burnt  in  the  flame,
She  gave  him  the  breast  of  some  winged  game.
Now  soft  fruits  which  her  care  had  dried,
Sweet  as  her  lips  were,  her  hand  supplied.
She  made  him  sherbet  with  sugar  sweet;
But  a  flush  came  o'er  her  and  drops  of  heat.
Whate'er  he  might  fancy,  as  swift  as  the  thought
Of  her  own  fond  bosom,  Zulaikha  brought.
When  the  day  was  done  and  he  fain  would  close
His  weary  eyelids  in  soft  repose,
A  coverlet  dainty  and  gay  was  spread
O'er  the  silk  and  brocade  of  his  sumptuous  bed.
Covered  with  roses  the  young  rose-spray
Pillowed  on  tulip  and  jessamine  lay.
Then  many  a  story  with  magic  spell,
To  clear  the  dust  from  his  soul,  would  she  tell.
When  slumber  a  veil  o'er  his  heavy  eyes  drew
She  watched  in  her  fever  the  whole  night  through,
Feeding  the  while  on  his  beauty's  lawn
Her  pair  of  wild  roes  l  till  the  light  of  dawn.

1  Her  eyes.


LOVE'S  SERVICE.  153

O'er  his  eyes  like  the  sleeping  narcissus  she  hent
And  inhaled  with  rapture  the  young  bud's  scent.
Now  on  a  tulip  her  fingers  would  close,
Now  from  the  rose-bed  she  gathered  a  rose.
Then  she  would  look  on  his  hair  and  say :
"  0  hair  beloved  of  grace's  rose-spray,
Tears  of  blood  from  my  sad  eyes  well
Because  thou,  a  Dev,  with  a  Peri  wilt  dwell ! "

Thus  in  her  passion  she  made  lament,
Till  the  long  night,  black  as  her  hair,  was  spent.
Ever  busied  in  cares  like  these,
Her  day  and  night  passed  without  rest  or  ease.
Her  constant  thought  to  his  wants  she  gave,
And,  queen  of  the  house,  was  his  humble  slave.

Ah !  fond  and  weak  is  a  lover,  fain
To  toil  that  the  loved  one  be  spared  a  pain.
If  dust  or  a  thorn  in  his  love's  path  lie,
He  would  sweep  it  away  with  the  lash  of  his  eye,
And  will  wait  with  his  soul  in  that  eye  for  her
To  bend  a  kind  look  on  her  worshipper.

1  Hair  black  as  a  Dev,  with  a  face  fair  as  a  Peri's.


(     154    )


THUS  will  the  singer  who  sings  the  song

The  pleasant  course  of  his  tale  prolong.

Pain  and  hunger  and  wild  unrest

Tortured  the  heart  in  Zulaikha's  breast.

Patience  fled  and  left  woe  behind,

Soul  and  body  no  rest  could  find.

On  no  household  care  could  she  fix  her  thought,

And    without   the   house    she   was    pleased   with

naught.

Out  and  in  ever  she  went  and  came,
Her  eyes  full  of  water,  her  heart  aflame.
The  nurse  addressed  her :  "  Beloved  moon,
Eclipsing  the  light  of  the  sun  at  noon,
From  the  malice  of  Fate  may  thy  life  be  free,
And  never  may  Heaven  be  wroth  with  thee.
What  has  come  o'er  thee,  I  fain  would  know,
That  thy  soul  is  drowned  in  a  sea  of  woe.
Thou  art  like  a  leaf,  not  a  moment  still,
Which  the  west  wind  blows  wheresoever  it  will.


SYMPATHY.  155

On  its  back,  on  its  face,  for  a  moment  it  lies,

And  this  way  and  that  way  it  restlessly  flies.

Ever  delighting  in  change  of  place,

Backward  and  forward  it  loves  to  race.

Tell  me  what  troubles  thy  rest,  and  who

Has  brought  a  grief  to  thy  soul  anew."

"  I  know  not,"  she  answered ;  "  I  cannot  say

Why  my  thoughts  are  troubled,  my  senses  astray.

I  know  that  I  suffer,  but  know  not  why

These  sorrows  sore  on  my  spirit  lie.

Some  hidden  grief  on  my  bosom  preys,

And  darkens  with  anguish  the  light  of  my  days.

I  am  like  the  soil  of  the  earth :  naught  breaks

The  calm  of  its  rest  till  the  whirlwind  wakes.

It  is  tossed  about  by  the  blast,  but  knows

Naught  of  the  source  whence  the  storm  arose."

Since  Yiisuf  came  to  Zulaikha,  they
Were  ever  together  by  night  and  day.
One  eve  he  opened  his  lips  to  disclose
His  mournful  story  of  many  woes.
He  told  the  tale  as  it  all  befell,
And  spoke  of  his  prison,  that  noisome  well.
Soon  as  the  words  from  his  lips  she  heard,
The  answering  chords  of  remembrance  stirred.
That  selfsame  day  she  remembered,  she  felt
The  heart  in  her  bosom  with  anguish  melt,


156  SYMPATHY.

And  when  the  past  months  had  been  reckoned,  she  knew
That  the  swift  surmise  of  her  soul  was  true.

Yes,  the  heart  that  is  watchful  will  never  deny
That  from  soul  to  soul  a  swift  message  may  fly ;
And  chief  from  the  soul  of  the  lover,  who
To  his  own  fond  darling  is  faithful  and  true,
There  lies  a  clear  path,  and  where'er  he  may  be,
The  steps  of  his  loved  one  he  still  may  see.
Still  to  his  eye  and  his  heart  he  will  feel
A  ray  from  the  light  of  her  beauty  steal.
If  a  thorn  wound  the  foot  of  his  darling,  the  heart
Of  the  faithful  lover  will  feel  the  smart.
If  the  zephyr  play  with  her  tangled  hair,
There  is  doubt  in  his  bosom  and  anxious  care.
If  a  grain  of  dust  on  her  dear  cheek  rest,
His  back  is  bent  with  its  weight  oppressed.
I  have  heard  the  story  how  Laila,  fain
"With  the  point  of  a  lancet  to  open  a  vein,
Touched  with  the  steel  her  soft  skin,  and  blood
Burst  from  the  hand  of  Majim  in  a  flood.

Come,  Jami,  from  dreams  of  thyself  forbear ;
Take  for  thy  being  no  thought  or  care.
God  is  the  giver  of  power  and  sense :
If  fame  be  thine,  thou  hast  gained  it  thence.
Be  pure  from  self-love  and  its  hate  and  fear,
And  let  thy  soul's  mirror  be  bright  and  clear.


SYMPATHY.  157

Then  the  light  of  the  beauty  we  may  not  see,
As  it  gleamed  on  Miisa1  will  gleam  on  thee.
When  thy  soul  is  illumed  with  this  light  from  above,
Thou  wilt  know  the  lore  of  eternal  love.

1  Moses.


(    153    )


Sbepberb.

BLEST  is  the  lover  allowed  by  Fate

About  his  beloved  to  serve  and  wait.

All  thought  of  himself  to  the  wind  is  thrown,

And  his  care  and  time  are  for  her  alone.

Would  she  have  his  life  ?     At  her  feet  it  lies :

He  kisses  the  ground  that  she  treads,  and  dies.

Would  she  take  his  heart  ?     Straight  that  heart  is  filled

With  love's  warm  blood  from  his  eyes  distilled.

His  head  is  a  foot  when  she  bids  him  rise,

And  he  deems  her  service  a  lordly  prize.

Oft  has  a  shepherd  been  known  to  claim,
As  the  guard  of  religion,  a  prophet's  name ;
And  stronger  and  stronger  in  Yiisuf's  heart
Grew  his  rooted  love  for  the  shepherd's  part.
Soon  as  the  wish  of  the  boy  she  knew,
The  rein,  as  he  guided,  Zulaikha  drew.
She  ordered  those  skilled  in  the  art  to  bring
For  the  use  of  her  darling  a  dainty  sling,
With  gold  like  the  sunlight,  woven  with  care,
And  bright  as  the  threads  of  his  fragrant  hair.


THE  SHEPHERD.  159

Ah,  how  she  longed  in  her  heart  that  she

Herself  one  thread  of  the  sling  might  be !

"  Mine  arm  round  his  body  I  may  not  twine,

But  a  touch  of  his  hand  would  be  surely  mine.

But  ah,  can  I  wish  with  one  single  hair

To  add  to  the  weight  which  that  hand  must  bear  ?  "

Earest  gems  in  the  sling  she  set,

And  pearls  such  as  made  her  own  eyes  so  wet :

And  the  precious  rubies  a  king  would  prize

"Were  as  worthless  stones  in  the  lady's  eyes.

Then  she  bade  the  shepherds  who  fed  their  sheep

On  the  grassy  plain  and  the  mountain-steep

Choose  from  their  flocks,  like  the  Earn l  that  feeds

In  the  heavens,  the  best  of  the  finest  breeds —

Lambs  fed  on  spikenard,  like  roes  of  Cathay,

"Whom  the  wolf   had  ne'er  looked  on   to    make   his

prey.

And  Yusuf  departed  to  shepherd  these,
Like  the  spring  sun  entering  Aries.
Like  a  young  musk-deer  alone,  astray,
To  the  lambs  in  the  valley  he  bent  his  way.
Zulaikha  sent  with  her  shepherd  boy,
Like  his  faithful  dog,  her  soul,  patience  and  joy,
And  Careful  guardians  about  him,  all
Charged  to  watch  o'er  him  lest  harm  befall.

1  The  zodiacal  sign  Aries.


160  THE  SHEPHERD.

Thus,  while  he  pleased,  passed  his  days,  and  still

He  knew  no  guide  but  his  own  free  will.

He  might  feed  his  flock,  if  he  chose,  on  the  plain ;

If  he  would,  in  the  realm  of  a  heart  might  reign.

Yet  still  in  his  inmost  nature  he  stood

Aloof  both  from  kingship  and  shepherdhood.1

1  That  is,  his  nature  was  unchanged  by  external  circumstances.


161


%o\>e  IRepellefc,

HE  who  gives  his  heart  to  a  lovely  form
May  look  for  no  rest  but  a  life  of  storm.
If  the  gold  of  union  be  still  his  quest,
With  a  foi\d  vain  dream  love  deludes  his  breast.
As  the  passionate  blood  from  his  heart  distils,
He  would  see  the  form  that  his  fancy  fills.
When  his  tearful  eyes  have  obtained  the  grace,
He  longs  for  a  kiss  and  a  close  embrace.
If  round  his  darling  his  arm  he  throws,
The  thoughts  of  parting  renew  his  woes.
Love  may  not  lead  us  to  perfect  bliss :
Life  is  not  sweeter  for  love  like  this.
From  the  secret  grief  of  the  soul  it  springs,
And  self-earned  death  is  the  end  it  brings.
How  should  his  days  in  sweet  calm  pass  by
Who  must  drink  the  blood  of  his  heart  or  die  ?

When  on  Yusuf,  seen  in  her  vision,  as  yet
No  waking  eye  had  Zulaikha  set,
One  wish  alone  in  her  heart  might  dwell, —
To  look  on  the  form  which  she  loved  so  well.

L


1 62  LOVE  REPELLED.

When  the  sight  of  her  darling  had  blessed  her  eyes,

Her  bosom  yearned  for  a  sweeter  prize,

And  her  loving  arms  round  that  form  to  wind

"Was  the  longing  thought  of  her  heart  and  mind,

With  a  kiss  on  his  ruby-red  lips  impressed,

By  his  arm  encircled,  to  take  her  rest.

When    a    youth    in    the    spring    through    a    garden

goes,

His  heart  marked  like  a  tulip,  for  love  of  the  rose,
First  on  its  petals  he  looks  with  delight,
And  then  plucks  the  fair  flower  that  has  charmed  his
sight.

With  winning  art  would  Zulaikha  woo ;
But  Yiisuf  far  from  her  gaze  withdrew.
Tears  of  hot  blood  would  Zulaikha  shed ;
But  her  tears  were  idle,  for  Yusuf  fled.
Zulaikha's  soul  with  deep  wounds  was  scarred ;
But  the  heart  of  Yiisuf  was  cold  and  hard.
Still  on  his  cheek  would  Zulaikha  gaze  ;
But  Yiisuf  never  his  eye  would  raise.
For  a  glance  from  her  darling  Zulaikha  burned ;
But  Yusuf  s  look  from  her  look  was  turned.
His  eye  he  kept  lest  his  heart  might  err,
And  no  fond  glance  would  he  bend  on  her.

What  rest  has  the  lover  who  pines  alone,
If  his  darling's  eye  may  not  meet  his  own  ?


LOVE  REPELLED.  163

He  sheds  his  tears,  and  he  heaves  his  sighs,

Hoping  to  gaze  on  his  loved  one's  eyes.

If  still  those  eyes  to  his  love  she  close,

With  the  blood  of  his  heart  he  must  weep  his  woes.

When  this  heavy  load  on  her  bosom  lay
Zulaikha  wasted  from  day  to  day.
In  the  chilling  autumn  of  pain  and  grief
The  tulip  banished  the  pink  rose-leaf.
Under  the  weight  of  her  sorrow  she  sank,
And    the   stately    young    cypress-tree    withered    and

shrank.

Gone  was  the  splendour  her  lips  had  shed,
And  the  light  that  had  shone  from  her  cheek  was

dead:

Faint  and  weary  she  hardly  through
Her  long  sweet  tresses  her  fingers  drew.
Scarce  would  she  look  at  her  mirror ;  she
Kept  her  eyes  bent  down  with  her  head  on  her  knee.
Xo  borrowed  bloom  on  her  cheek  was  spread,
For  the  blood  that  she  wept  from  her  heart  was  red.
The  world  about  her  was  black,  and  why
Should  she  darken  her  orbs  with  the  jetty  dye  ?
If  under  those  lids  the  dark  tint  had  lain,
The  tears  that  she  shed  would  have  washed  them  again.
When  Zulaikha's  heart  with  her  wound  was  torn
She  rebuked  her  spirit  with  queenly  scorn:


1 64  LOVE  REPELLED.

"  Shame  on  thee !     Disgrace  on  thy  name  thou  hast

brought

By  love  of  the  slave  whom  thy  gold  has  bought.
A  lady  thou  on  a  princely  throne,
Wilt  thou  stoop  to  make  love  to  a  slave  of  thine  own  ?
The  chains  of  thy  love  on  a  monarch  fling :
A  prince's  daughter  should  love  a  king.
But  of  all  that  is  strange  'tis  most  strange  that  he
Should  shrink  from  love  offered  by  one  like  thee.
If  the  dames  of  Memphis  but  knew  thy  shame,
Where  were  the  end  of  their  scorn  and  blame  ? "

Thus  spoke  Zulaikha ;  but  still  she  felt
That  he  alone  in  her  fond  heart  dwelt.
Him  she  could  not  banish,  but  strove  awhile
To  charm  her  pain  with  this  simple  guile.

When  the  loved  one  possesses  the  lover's  soul,
Can  he  tear  himself  free  from  her  sweet  control  ?
You  may  rend  his  heart  from  his  body,  yet
His  faith  to  his  love  he  will  never  forget.
The  words  of  the  love-stricken  bard  are  true :
"  Musk  will  keep  its  scent  and  the  rose  its  hue.
And  how  may  the  lover  have  power  to  part
From  the  soul  of  his  soul  and  the  heart  of  his  heart  ? "


©ueettomngs,

THE  nurse  beheld  her  thus  ill  at  ease,

And  questioned  her  lady  in  words  like  these :

"  Sweet,  to  whose  eye  all  its  light  mine  eye  owes,

The  flush   of  whose  cheek  makes  my  heart  like  the

rose,

I  see  thee  bowed  down  with  a  burthen  of  care,
And  I  know  not  the  source  of  thy  secret  despair.
Thou  art  ever  near  to  thy  heart's  desire ;
Then  why  art  thou  troubled,  thy  bosom  on  fire  ?
Not  a  word  to  blame  thine  unrest  could  I  say
In  the  time  when  thy  darling  was  far  away.
Wilt  thou  trouble  thy  heart  in  a  time  like  this,
And   consume    thy  sad  soul   when    assured    of   thy

bliss  ?

Where  is  the  lover,  supremely  blest,
Whom  his  darling  serves  when  he  gives  behest  ?
And  happy  in  truth  is  the  star  that  gave
The  lord  of  thy  bosom  to  thee  for  a  slave.
A  moon  most  worthy  of  kingly  sway —
What  wouldst  thou  more  ? — Must  thy  will  obey.


166  QUESTIONINGS.

Go,  look  on  his  face  and  be  happy  and  free
From  all  earthly  sorrows  that  trouble  thee.
Gaze  on  the  cypress  and  watch  in  thy  joy
The  graceful  step  of  the  blooming  boy.
Look  on  his  lip,  take  thy  solace  with  him,
And  the  cup  of  delight  shall  be  full  to  the  brim."

Zulaikha  heard  the  advice  of  the  dame,
And  blood  from  her  heart  in  her  hot  tears  came,
Poured  out  like  rain  from  the  cloud  of  her  eye,
As  thus  her  sad  story  she  told  in  reply :
"  Is  the  secret  that  weighs  on  this  breast,  mine  own
Dear  mother,  still  to  thy  heart  unknown  ?
Hast  thou  not  seen  what  my  ]ife  has  to  bear
From   that    soul    of   the    world — all    my  grief   and

despair  ?

He  waits  and  serves  in  my  presence,  but  still
He  is  deaf  to  each  hint  of  his  lady's  will.
He  is  ever  near  me  and  comes  at  my  call,
But  never  on  me  will  his  glances  fall.
Well  may  the  thirsty  complain  in  their  woe
With  parched  lips  on  the  bank  where  the  sweet  waters

flow.

When  the  torch  of  my  beauty  to  lure  him  burns,
His  heedless  eye  on  his  foot  he  turns.
Not  for  this  can  I  blame  him :  I  fain  would  confess
That  his  foot  shames  my  cheek  in  its  loveliness.


QUESTIONINGS.  167

When   on   him  lights   mine  eye  which    beholds   the

world,

His  brow  is  contracted,  his  lip  is  curled.
Yet  his  frown  has  a  charm :  can  I  blame  him  for

this,

AVlien  of  all  that  he  does,  naught  is  e'er  done  amiss  ?
There  are  knots   in   my  heart  from  the   arch  of  his

brow,

And  my  life  is  all  knot  and  perplexity  now,
While  the  knots  that  have  bound  all  my  acts  in  their

ties

Eestrain  me  from  resting  mine  eyes  on  his  eyes.
When  to  me  he  closes  his  mouth's  sweet  bud,
What  is  my  gain,  but  to  drink  my  heart's  blood  ?
My  mouth  may  water  for  that  red  rose,
But  mine  eye  has  no  water — 'tis  blood  that  flows.
That  tender  sapling  for  which  I  pine —
When  will  it  in  mercy  to  me  incline  ?
I  would  pluck  the  fair  fruit,  and  a  cloud  I  see
Of  woes  if  I  leave  the  sweet  fruit  on  the  tree.
Would  I  joy  in  the  dimple  of  that  soft  chin  ?
'Tis  a  well  of  woe  that  he  leaves  me  in.
I  envy  the  sleeve  of  my  darling's  dress,
For  still  on  that  arm  it  may  tenderly  press.
The  bliss  of  his  skirt  is  my  torture :  how  sweet
To  kiss  the  dust  pressed  by  his  delicate  feet ! "


168  QUESTIONINGS.

Weeping  the  nurse  gave  her  answer :  "  How
Can  one  live  in  the  sorrow  that  weighs  on  thee  now  ?
Better  is  absence  from  all  that  is  dear
Than  in  sorrow  and  bitterness  thus  to  be  near.
One  deep  pang  at  parting  the  bosom  may  rend,
But  meetings  like  these  must  be  woe  without  end."


flDessenger,


IN  course  of  long  sorrow  Zulaikha  knew

That  her  nurse  was  faithful  and  helpful  and  true.

"  Thou  hast  served  me  often,"  'twas  thus  she  prayed  ;

"  Help  me  again,  for  I  need  thine  aid.

To  him  as  my  messenger  take  thy  way,

Be  thou  mine  eloquent  tongue,  and  say  :

'  Delicate  plant,  ever  tended  with  care,

Lovely  with  blossom  but  wayward  as  fair  ;

In  the  garden  of  beauty  no  cypress-tree

Lifts  up  its  head  to  compare  with  thee.

Moulded  from  spirit  and  soul  was  the  clay

Wherein  was  planted  thy  Sidra-  spray.

When  the  green  leaves  came  on  each  growing  bough,

They  said  :  "  The  fairest  of  trees  art  thou."

Since  the  bride  of  Time  was  a  mother,  she

Was  never  made  glad  by  a  child  like  thee.

The  eye  of  Adam  was  bright  at  thy  birth,

And  the  bloom  of  thy  cheek  made  a  rosebed  of  earth.

For  none  of  the  children  of  men  is  so  fair  ;

No  Peri  has  beauty  with  thine  to  compare.


i  ;o  THE  MESSENGER.

If  thy  loveliness  shamed  not  the  Peris,  why
Should  they  hide  in  a  corner  when  thou  art  nigh  ?
Angels  enthroned  in  the  heavenly  height
Bend  their  heads  to  the  ground  when  thy  face  is  in

sight.

If,  by  favour  of  Heaven,  so  high  is  thy  place,
Have  mercy  and  show  thy  poor  captive  grace.
They  say  that  Zulaikha  is  witchingly  fair,
But  ah,  she  has  fallen  a  prey  to  thy  snare.
She  has  carried  from  childhood  the  wound  in  her  breast
Which  for  many  long  days  has  deprived  her  of  rest.
In  three  nightly  visions  thy  face  was  shown,
And  no  peace  in  her  heart  from  that  time  has  she

known.

Now  chained  like  the  waves  of  the  wind-rippled  sea,
Now  roaming  ere  morn  like  the  zephyr  is  she.
She  is  worn  by  her  sorrow  as  thin  as  a  hair,
And  her  longing  for  thee  is  her  only  care.
All  the  gold  of  her  life  for  thy  sake  has  she  spent ;
Have  pity  at  last :  it  is  sweet  to  relent.
Pure  and  fresh  is  the  Water  of  Life  on  thy  lip :
What  harm  if  a  drop  from  the  fountain  she  sip  ?
With  full  clusters  laden,  what  harm  to  allow
One  taste  of  the  fruit  that  hangs  ripe  on  the  bough  ?
On  thy  ruby  lip  let  her  feed  her  fill,
And  perhaps  the  wild  storm  of  her  breast  will  be  still.


THE  MESSENGER.  171

Let  her  pluck  the  dates  from  that  palm-tree's  height,
Or  lay  down  her  head  where  thy  foot  may  light.
What  wilt  thou  lose  of  thy  rank,  my  king,
If  thine  eye  one  glance  on  thy  servant  fling  ?
In  all  the  pride  of  her  station,  she
The  least  of  thy  handmaids  would  gladly  be.' "
He  heard  the  speech.     In  reply  to  the  dame
From  his  ruby  lips  opened  this  answer  came :
"  Skilled  in  the  secrets  thou  knowest  so  well,
Cheat  not  my  soul  with  thy  ravishing  spell.
The  slave  of  Zulaikha  and  bought  with  her  gold,
My  debt  for  her  kindness  can  never  be  told.
To  this  stately  mansion  she  raised  my  clay,
And  nurtured  my  soul  and  my  life  each  day.
If  I  counted  her  favours  my  whole  life  through,
I  never  could  pay  her  the  thanks  that  are  due.
On  the  line  of  her  pleasure  my  head  I  lay,
And  I  wait  ever  ready  to  serve  and  obey.
But  warn  her  never  to  hope  that  I
My  God's  commandment  will  break  and  defy.
Ne'er  let  her  tempt  me  in  hope  to  win
The  soul  which  I  strive  to  keep  pure  to  sin.
I  am  called  his  son  by  the  Grand  Vizier ;
He  counts  me  true  and  my  love  sincere.
Shall  I,  the  young  bird  whom  his  care  has  bred,
Bring  shame  on  the  house  where  I  long  have  fed  ?


172  THE  MESSENGER.

God  in  various  natures  has  sown  the  seeds
Of  divers  wishes  and  thoughts  and  deeds.
The  pure  in  nature  will  fear  disgrace  ;
But  base  are  his  actions  whose  birth  is  base.
Can  a  dog  be  born  of  a  woman  ?     "Where
Does  barley  wheat  or  wheat  barley  bear  ?
In  my  bosom  the  secrets  of  Jacob  dwell,
And  my  heart  keeps  the  wisdom  of  Gabriel.
Am  I  worthy  of  prophethood  ?     Well  I  know
To  holy  Isaac  that  hope  I  owe.
A  rose  am  I  and  a  secret  I  hold ;
In  Abraham's  garden  my  petals  unfold.
May  sin  never. drive  me — forbid  it,  God ! —
Aside  from  the  path  which  my  fathers  trod.
Bid  Zulaikha  spurn  the  wild  thought,  and  free
Her  own  kind  heart  from  the  sin,  and  me.
My  trust  in  the  God  whom  I  serve  is  sure
To  keep  my  life  undefiled  and  pure."


(     173    )


Eycuses*

THE  answer  was  brought  to  Zulaikha ;  despair

Made  her  senses  as  wild  as  her  own  wild  hair.

From  her  eye's  black  almond  there  came  a  flood

Of  thick  tears  mixed  with  her  own  heart's  blood.

She  reared  up  her  stately  cypress,  and  flew

Till  its  shade  o'er  the  head  of  her  darling  she  threw.

"  My  head,"  she  cried,  "  at  thy  feet  shall  be,

But  ne'er  shall  my  breast  from  thy  love  be  free.

My  love  of  thee  throbs  in  each  hair  of  my  head  :

Self-thought  and  self-feeling  are  vanished  and  dead.

That  vision  of  thee  is  my  soul,  and  the  snare

Of  thy  love  is  the  collar  which  slave-like  I  wear.

Have  I  a  soul  ?     'Tis  but  longing  for  thee  ;

A  body  ?     Its  spirit  is  hasting  to  flee.

But  how  of  the  state  of  my  heart  shall  I  speak  ?

'Tis  one  drop  of  the  torrent  that  pours  down  my  cheek.

In  the  whelming  sea  of  thy  love  I  drown ;

Its  waters  rush  o'er  me  and  weigh  me  down.

When  the  leech  with  his  lancet  would  ease  my  pain,

Love  of  thee,  and  not  blood,  gushes  forth  from  the  vein."


174  EXCUSES.

Then  Yiisuf  wept  at  her  words.     "  Ah,  why
Those  tears  ?  "  said  Zulaikha,  and  heaved  a  sigh.
"  Thou  art  mine  own  very  eye,  and  while
Tears  of  sorrow  are  dewing  it  how  can  I  smile  ?
For  each  big  drop  from  thine  eye  that  flows,
A  flame  of  fire  in  my  bosom  glows.
A  miracle  this  of  thy  beauty,  that  turns
Water  itself  into  flame  that  burns."

He  saw  her  anguish,  he  heard  her  sighs,
And  the  tears  flowed  down  from  his  lips  and  eyes
"  My  heart  is  broken,"  he  said,  "  when  I  see
How  woe  ever  waits  upon  love  of  me.
My  aunt's  foolish  love  was  my  earliest  grief,
For  it  made  me  appear  to  the  world  as  a  thief.
Loved  by  my  father  I  still  was  unblest,
For  envy  grew  fast  in  each  brother's  breast.
From  his  sight  they  banished  his  favoured  child,
And  to  Egypt's  land  have  I  come  exiled.
And  now  must  the  heart  in  my  bosom  bleed
At  thought  of  the  woe  which  thy  love  may  breed.
The  Lord  of  lovers  is  jealous  :  He
Will  brook  in  His  kingship  no  rivalry.
He  will  have  no  partner  to  share  His  throne,
But  from  first  to  last  He  will  reign  alone.
Scarce  may  a  cypress  its  proud  top  show
Ere  like  a  long  shadow  He  lays  it  low.


EXCUSES.  175

Scarce  can  the  moon  her  full  light  display
Ere  scathed  by  His  anger  it  fades  away.
Soon  as  the  sun  in  the  zenith  shines
The  golden  light  to  the  west  declines."

Zulaikha  answered  :  "  My  lamp  and  eye,
I  need  no  moonlight  when  thou  art  nigh.
If  I  may  not  be  dear  in  thy  sight,  to  be
The  least  of  thy  slaves  were  enough  for  me.
But  canst  thou  not  treat  her  in  gentler  mood,
And  free  her  from  sorrows  of  servitude  ?
No  outward  sign  will  thy  handmaid  show,
But  her  heart  will  long  and  her  bosom  glow.
Why  dost  thou  deem  me  a  foe  ?     Thou  art
Dearer  to  me  than  mine  own  dear  heart.
And  where  is  the  fool  who  would  add  a  care
To  double  the  load  which  his  heart  must  bear  ?
What  dost  thou  fear  from  my  hate  ?     My  heart
By  the  sword  of  thy  love  has  been  cleft  apart.
Ah,  kiss  me ;  the  touch  of  thy  lips  will  restore
The  rest  of  my  soul  that  I  sorrow  no  more."
"  Nay,  my  sweet  mistress,"  thus  Yiisuf  replied  :
"  In  duty's  bonds  I  am  chained  and  tied.
From  the  path  of  service  I  may  not  stray :
There  thou  commandest  and  I  obey.
More  than  such  duty  forbear  to  claim;
Make  not  thy  love  my  dishonour  and  shame.


176  EXCUSES.

Assign  me  some  labour  that  far  from  thy  side
My  days  still  for  thee  may  be  occupied.
Against  thy  light  orders  I  will  not  rebel,
But  remember  thy  bounties  and  serve  thee  well.
By  faithful  service  a  slave  like  me
Made  glad  by  kindness  at  length  is  free.
True  service  rejoices  a  master;  but  still
A  slave  he  continues  who  serves  him  ill."
"  Eare  jewel,"  she  answered,  "  compared  with  thee
The  meanest  slave's  rank  were  too  high  for  me.
For  each  slight  task,  when  my  voice  is  heard,
A  hundred  servants  obey  my  word.
Their  ready  service  can  I  refuse,
And  thee  for  the  task  or  the  message  choose  ?
The  eye  is  counted  of  higher  worth
Than  the  foot  which  is  fashioned  to  tread  the  earth.
Thorns  in  the  path  of  thy  foot  may  lie,
But  lay  not  upon  them  thy  precious  eye."
Again  said  Yiisuf  :  "  Dear  lady,  round
Whose  heart  the  bands  of  my  love  are  bound,
If  thy  love  like  the  light  of  the  morn  be  true,
Only  my  will  must  thou  seek  to  do.
My  wish  is  only  to  serve  thee ;  thou —
Or  thou  art  no  friend — must  the  wish  allow.
To  please  the  heart  that  he  loves,  a  friend
Eegards  as  his  being's  true  aim  and  end.


EXCUSES.  177

'Neath  the  foot  of  friendship  his  will  he  sets,
And  self  in  the  love  of  his  friend  forgets."

He  spake  in  the  hope  that  a  task  might  bar
All  converse  with  her  and  keep  him  afar.
He  knew  that  her  presence  was  trouble  and  fear :
In  distance  was  safety,  and  woe  to  be  near.
In  fire  and  tempest  the  wool  that  flies
When  it  may  not  contend  with  the  flame  is  wise.


(Sarbett


THE  singer  continues  the  story  told

By  saintly  lips  in  the  days  of  old.

What  time  Zulaikha  enamoured  hung

On  the  sugared  accents  of  Yiisuf  s  tongue,

The  loveliest  garden  was  hers  ;  the  breast

Of  jealous  Iram  its  charms  confessed.

Fountains  watered  the  wall-girt  ground,

And  dark  red  roses  shed  perfume  round.

The  boughs  of  the  trees  in  that  pleasant  place

Were  twined  like  lovers  in  fond  embrace.

The  plane-tree's  foot  touched  the  cypress's  skirt,

Whose  neck  with  its  amulet  arms  was  girt.

The  rose  lay  couched  on  her  leafy  bed,

And  the  pine  reared  a  tent  for  her  languid  head.

A  plain  prepared  for  the  orange  tree  lay,

Eeady  with  ball  and  with  stick  for  play.

In  that  garden  of  bliss  where  no  ill  might  befall

It  might  win  from  all  comers  the  victor's  ball.

The  date-palm  reared  her  slim  height  and  lent

The  garden  her  heightening  ornament  :


THE  GARDEN.  179

Each  golden  cluster  a  store  most  sweet

Which  the  broken-hearted  for  balm  might  eat.

The  milk  from  the  ripe  figs  was  ready  to  burst

If  the  garden's  young  nurslings,  the  birds,  were  athirst ;

And  the  bill  of  each  bird  was  with  rich  pearls  filled

As  he  sipped  the  sweet  drops  which  the  fruit  distilled.

When  the  light  of  the  noonday  sun  was  shed

Through  the  latticed  green  of  the  boughs  outspread,

The  earth  beneath  them  was  light  and  dusk

With  a  mingled  treasure  of  gold  and  musk.

The  flickering  gleams  o'er  the  shadows  played

Like  bells  for  the  drums  of  the  roses  swayed.

The  wakeful  nightingale  saw  them  swing,

And  emulous  lifted  his  voice  to  sing.

In  wind  and  shadow  the  bright  fish  gleamed

Where  rivulets  under  the  willows  streamed.

The  shade  of  each  bough  like  a  besom  lay

To  sweep  the  dry  leaves  of  the  garden  away.

The  ground  was  a  slate  with  its  green  lines  set

In  the  silver  frame  of  a  rivulet :

A  slate,  to  which  even  the  wisest,  to  learn

The  signs  of  our  Lord  the  Creator,  might  turn.

The  rose,  the  emblem  of  beauty,  glowed,

Or  like  a  sad  lover  her  pale  cheek  showed.

The  zephyr  loosened  the  spikenard's  braid,

And,  curling  her  leaves,  with  the  violet  played.


i So  THE- GARDEN.

Tulip,  jasmine,  and  basil  embraced  in  their  mirth,

And  like  delicate  silk  was  the  verdure  of  earth.

In  the  garden  of  bliss  were  two  fountains,  graced

With  the  fairest  marble-like  crystal,  placed.

Each  like  the  other  in  form  and  size,

They  were  near  together  like  beautiful  eyes.

Smooth  was  the  marble ;  its  polished  face

Showed  of  the  chisel  and  saw  no  trace.

Ne'er  could  the  eye  of  the  keenest  see

Where  the  joint  of  the  separate  slabs  might  be.

None  who  saw  them  forbore  the  thought

That  of  one  solid  piece  the  whole  work  was  wrought.

When  Zulaikha  went  to  her  garden  to  find
Eest  and  delight  for  her  troubled  mind,
One  brimming  fountain — for  so  she  willed —
With  milk,  and  the  other  with  honey  they  filled ;
And  the  maidens  who  followed  that  bright  moon  fed
On  milk  or  honey  as  fancy  led.
And  between  them  both  was  a  throne,  a  seat
For  a  darling  of  Heaven  like  Yiisuf  meet.

Hither  she  sent  him.     Her  heart  was  rent,
But  she  forced  her  will  to  a  slow  consent.
The  nightingale  sang  to  the  morning  air :
"  A  fair  gardener  comes  to  a  garden  fair.
The  garden  is  heaven  itself,  'tis  well
That  the  warder  of  Paradise  here  should  dwell."


THE  GARDEN.  181

A  hundred  maidens  all  pure  within,
Stood  round  him  with  bosoms  of  jessamine,
Planted  like  cypresses  tall  and  still,
Eager  to  serve  ere  he  spoke  his  will.
"  Sweet,"  said  Zulaikha,  "  all  these  are  thine  ;
Let  thy  youthful  heart  to  their  love  incline.
If  for  thy  love  I  must  sigh  in  vain —
A  thought  that  poisons  my  days  with  pain —
Love,  if  thou  wilt,  these  fair  maidens  :  be
Kinder  to  them  than  thou  art  to  me.
Love  and  be  happy ;  remember  this,
The  days  of  youth  are  the  days  of  bliss."
Then  she  said  to  the  maidens  assembled  there :
"  Sweet-lipped  damsels,  beware,  beware  !
Toil,  heart  and  soul,  in  his  service,  nor  shrink
From  poison  itself  if  he  bid  you  drink.
Whate'er  he  may  order  with  joy  obey,
And  cast  your  own  lives  for  his  sake  away.
And,  whoe'er  be  the  maiden  who  wins  his  heart,
The  tidings  first  to  mine  ear  impart."
She  spoke  impatient,  and,  all  untrue,
On  the  tablet  of  wish  a  false  picture  drew.
She  would  watch  her  time,  if  his  love  were  shown,
If  he  fain  would  be  with  his  darling  alone,
Herself  to  his  side  in  her  stead  would  creep,
And  the  sweet,  sweet  fruit  for  herself  would  reap.


1 82  THE  GARDEN.

Neath  the  palm-tree's  shade  she  would  watch  and  wait,
And  count  herself  blest  with  a  stolen  date.

So  Yiisuf  was  set  on  the  splendid  seat,
And  she  left  for  tribute  her  heart  at  his  feet.
She  called  about  him  that  fair  young  crowd,
And  her  head  in  obeisance  each  cypress  bowed.
She  turned  to  the  palace  her  steps :  behind
With  her  love  was  her  heart  and  her  soul  and  her
mind.

The  lover  is  true  who  consents  to  go
Ear  from  his  love  if  she  wills  it  so,
Obeys  her  pleasure  and  bears,  content,
The  bitter  sorrow  of  banishment.
Parting  is  torture,  but  sorer  pain
Is  to  live  in  her  presence  when  hope  is  vain.


ARRAYED  like  a  bride  with  the  golden  light
Of  stars  on  her  dark  robe  came  queenly  Night,
The  Pleiades  strung  from  her  ear  she  wore,
And  her  hand  the  full  moon  for  a  mirror  bore.
His  youthful  attendants  round  Yiisuf  stood
In  the  charms  of  their  frolicsome  maidenhood.
Eanged  in  a  ring  round  his  seat  they  strove
To  capture  his  heart  in  the  snares  they  wove.
"  Come  to  me,  come,"  said  the  first,  "  and  I
Will  give  thee  the  sugar  these  lips  supply.
Steal  what  thou  wilt  from  my  mouth,  and  eat,
Like  a  parrot,  the  candy,  and  find  it  sweet."
One  shot  a  glance  from  her  bright  eye,  and,  "  0
Fairer,"  she  said,  "  than  all  words  can  show,
I  mark  thee  with  world- seeing  glances ;  come  nigh,
And  be  thou  the  apple  that  shines  in  mine  eye."
One  said,  as  her  silk- vestured  form  she  displayed :
"  Let  thy  head  on  this  cypress  be  tenderly  laid.
Where  wilt  thou  look  for  sweet  slumber,  denied
If  thou  take  not  thy  rest  by  this  cypress's  side  ? "


184  THE  SLAVE-GIRLS.

One  twisted  a  ring  of  her  tress  with  a  sigh  :
"  Ah,  like  a  ring  headless  and  footless  am  I.1
Open  the  door,  to  thy  breast  will  I  cling ;
Let  me  not  hang  on  that  door  like  a  ring."
One  to  her  shoulder  the  loose  sleeve  drew,
And  her  rounded  arm  was  exposed  to  view :
"  Let  this  amulet  lie  round  thy  neck  to  keep
The  evil  eye  far  from  thy  gentle  sleep."
One  twisted  a  hair  round  her  dainty  waist :
Thus  with  one  hair  was  another  hair  graced.
"  Oh,  circle  my  waist  with  thine  arm,"  cried  she,
"  For  my  soul  has  flown  to  my  lips  for  thee."

Thus  in  order  each  rose-lipped  maid
Her  snare  of  temptation  to  win  him  laid.
Those  flowers  of  the  garden,  though  fresh  and  bright,
Were  but  as  weeds  in  his  steadfast  sight.
He  looked  on  each  temptress,  and  saw  in  her,
If  not  an  idol,  an  idol- worshipper,
And  only  one  wish  in  his  heart  he  knew, —
To  lead  them  to  worship  where  worship  is  due.
The  faith  that  was  in  him  made  strong  his  speech
To  banish  all  doubt,  and  the  truth  to  teach :
"  Beautiful  maidens,  whose  charms  are  worth
The  passionate  love  of  the  sons  of  earth,

1  "  Without  bead  or  foot "  is  a  common  expression  to  signify  utter
helplc


THE  SLAVE-GIRLS.  185

Come,  the  path  of  the  only  true  faith  pursue,

And  scorn  low  pleasures  unworthy  of  you.

One  God  is  above  us :  all  those  who  stray

Will  He  guide  aright  to  His  perfect  way.

He  watered  our  clay  with  His  mercy's  dew,

And  the  seed  of  knowledge  He  set  there  grew

Till  the  young  plant  rose  from  the  parent  root,

And  bore  in  earth's  garden  the  perfect  fruit.

Yes,  the  tree  springs  high  from  the  lowly  sod,

And  bears  fruit  for  those  who  will  worship  God ;

Lord  of  the  worlds,  the  One  God  must  be

Served  and  worshipped,  and  only  He.

Oh  come,  and  to  Him  be  our  worship  paid ;

We  are  poor,  indeed,  if  we  lose  His  aid.

Let  us  bow  the  heads  which  He  gave,  and  fall

Low  on  our  knees  to  the  Lord  of  all

Shall  the  foot  and  the  head  be  deemed  equal  ?     How

Shall  a  sage  to  his  fellow  in  worship  bow  ?

Will  he  grave  for  himself  a  fair  idol,  and  moan

For  the  love  of  the  image  he  carved  of  stone  ?

Nay,  he  knows  of  what  stuff  the  fair  image  is  made,

He  knows  how  the  service  of  love  would  be  paid."

From  the  fall  of  night  till  the  morning  broke,
To  the  listening  maidens  thus  Yiisuf  spoke.
Each  lip  sang  his  praise,  and  the  penitent  crowd
Their  heads  in  obedience  before  him  bowed.


1 86  THE  SLAVE-GIRLS.

Then  he  taught  the  true  faith  with  his  moving  speech,

And  the  pure  honey  sweetened  the  lips  of  each.

Ah,  blessed  honey !     One  drop  has  power

To  sweeten  a  life  till,  the  dying  hour,

For  all,  save  the  Devs,  who  refuse  to  heed,

In  their  blindness,  the  strength  of  the  holy  creed.

But  no  ill  from  their  evil  eye  can  betide

The  sage  who  makes  the  true  .Faith  his  guide.

Zulaikha  rose  at  the  break  of  day,
And  joyous  to  Yusuf  she  bent  her  way,
She  looked  on  the  maids  as  they  stood  round  the  youth,
And  drank  from  his  lips  the  new  words  of  truth.
She  looked  on  the  idols,  in  dust  o'erthrown,
And  the  rosary  clasped,  and  the  broken  zone.1
Lips  praising  the  Lord  Almighty  she  heard,
And  saw  eyes  to  new  worship  attuned  and  stirred.
"  Thou  art  from  thy  head  to  thy  foot,"  she  cried,
"  The  disturber  of  hearts,  and  their  joy  and  pride.
A  new  light  gleams  from  thy  glorified  brow
With  a  beauty  I  never  have  marked  till  now.
What  hast  thou  done  that  this  lustre  and  grace
Should  open  the  door  of  new  charms  in  thy  face  ?
What  drug  hast  thou  eaten  to  give  thee  this  gleam,
And  raise  thee  o'er  earth's  brightest  darlings  supreme?

1  The  girdle  worn  by  Fire-worshippers,  as  they  are  unjustly  called,
is  the  general  emblem  of  infidelity.


THE  SLAVE-GIRLS.  187

It  seems  that  this  bevy  of  maidens,  sweet
With  their  rosy  lips  and  their  silver  feet,
Have  combined  all  the  gifts  of  their  beauty  and  thrown
A  glory  upon  thee  to  heighten  thine  own.
For  fruit  ripens  fruit  when  the  clusters  hang  nigh,
And  most  lovely  are  lovers  when  loved  ones  are  by."
From  her  rosebud  mouth  the  gay  words  came  fast ;
But  he  opened  no  petal :  she  ceased  at  last.
While  his  lips  were  sealed  in  silence  there  came
A  rosy  flush,  o'er  his  cheek,  of  shame.
Abashed  in  spirit,  he  looked  not  round,
But  kept  his  eyes  silently  bent  to  the  ground.
Zulaikha  saw  that  he  still  was  stern,
And  no  pitying  glance  on  her  eye  would  turn.
She  lit  in  her  bosom  the  torch  of  regret,
And  the  fire  of  despair  to  her  soul  she  set,
With  a  heavy  heart  bade  her  love  adieu,
And,  to  hide  her  face,  to  her  chamber  flew.


(     i88    )


Ifresb  Counsel

DEEP  in  despair  was  Zulaikha,  slain

With  the  love  of  the  boy  whom  she  wooed  in  vain.

One  night  she  summoned  her  nurse  to  her  side,

Where  gently  she  bade  her  be  seated,  and  cried :

"  Strength  of  this  frame  when  my  limbs  are  weak,

Lamp  of  my  soul  when  thy  light  I  seek,

Thy  nursling  owes  thee  each  breath  that  she  draws ;

If  she  lives,  the  sweet  milk  of  thy  love  is  the  cause.

Love  more  than  a  mother's,  too  deep  to  be  told,

Has  raised  me  up  to  the  rank  I  hold.

How  long  must  I  pine  with  my  fond  bosom  scarred,

How  long  from  that  soul  of  the  world  be  debarred  ?

Wilt  thou  not  aid  me,  and  tenderly  guide

My  feet  to  the  harbour  that  still  is  denied  ?

What  profits  it  me  that  my  palace  walls  hold

My  friend  and  myself,  if  that  friend  is  so  cold  ?

The  lover,  whose  darling  refuses  to  hear,

Is  far  from  his  love,  though  he  seem  to  be  near.

If  spirit  from  spirit  be  still  far  away,.

What  fruit  has  the  meeting  of  water  and  clay  ? "


FRESH  COUNSEL.  189

"  Sweet  child  of  the  Peris,"  the  nurse  replied,

"  Though  what  were  a  Peri  if  set  by  thy  side  ?

God  gave  thee  thy  beauty  to  steal  from  the  wise

Their  heart  and  their  face  with  thy  ravishing  eyes.

If  a  painter  of  china  thy  form  portrayed,

And  hung  in  a  temple  the  picture  he  made,

The  very  idols  to  life  would  spring,

And  their  souls  be  the  slaves  of  so  fair  a  thing.

On  the  mountain  height  if  thy  cheek  were  shown,

Love  would  throb  and  thrill  in  the  hard  flint  stone.

When  to  the  garden  thy  steps  are  led,

Each  dry  tree  raises  his  amorous  head.

Each  fawn  on  the  plains  when  thy  form  she  spies,

Would  sweep  thee  a  path  with  the  fringe  of  her  eyes.

When  the  charm  of  thy  lip  dropping  sugar  is  heard,

From  river  and  sky  come  the  fish  and  the  bird.

Why  art  thou  sad,  when  such  beauty  is  thine  ?

Why  yield  to  thy  sorrow,  and  bitterly  pine  ?

Shoot  out  from  that  eye  but  one  arrow,  and  thou

Wilt  conquer  the  boy  with  the  bow  of  thy  brow.

Coil  but  a  lock  of  those  tresses,  his  feet

Will  be  caught  in  that  beautiful  snare  when  you  meet."

"  How  can  I  tell  thee  the  cruel  scorn,"

Zulaikha  said,  "  that  I  long  have  borne  ?

Can  I  show  my  beauty  to  one  whose  eye

Is  bent  on  the  ground  when  my  step  is  nigh  ?


190  FRESH  COUNSEL.

Were  I  the  moon,  he  would  turn  away :

The  sun,  he  would  shrink  from  his  golden  ray.

If,  his  own  eye's  apple,  I  lent  him  light,

Scarce  would  he  welcome  the  boon  of  sight.

Ah !  if  a  glance  on  mine  eye  he  would  throw,

The  pangs  that  I  suffer  perchance  he  might  know.

Those  griefs  would  find  place  in  his  heart ;  but  he

Would  never  languish  for  love  like  me.

'Tis  not  only  his  beauty  that  kills  me ;  no,

'Tis  the  cold,  cold  heart,  where  no  spark  will  glow.

Ah !  if  but  a  pang  for  my  sake  he  had  felt,

Thus  with  my  lover  I  never  had  dealt."

"  Thou  whose  beauty  casts  on  the  sun  a  shade  " —

The  nurse  to  her  lady  this  answer  made —

"  I  have  wrought  a  plan,  and  I  trust  that  rest

Will  at  length  be  thine  from  the  thought  in  my  breast.

Bring  forth  thy  treasure  stored  up  of  old,

Lade  a  camel  with  silver,  a  mule  with  gold.

I  will  build  a  palace  like  Iram  fair,

And  a  skilful  painter  shall  labour  there

To  paint  on  the  walls  with  seductive  charms,

Zulaikha  folded  in  Yiisuf's  arms.

If,  for  a  moment,  he  visit  the  place,

He  will  see  thee  locked  in  his  own  embrace.

Then  will  he  yearn  for  thy  touch,  and  at  length

The  love  of  thy  beauty  will  grow  to  its  strength.


FRESH  COUNSEL.  191

Soon  will  lie  yield  with  his  senses  on  fire,

And  naught  will  be  left  for  thy  heart  to  desire."

She  heard  the  counsel :  her  heart  was  bold :
She  brought  forth  the  stores  of  her  silver  and  gold ;
And  her  wealth,  fond  fancies  therewith  to  build,
She  gave  to  the  nurse  to  be  spent  as  she  willed.


(      192      )


palace.


THEY  who  raised  the  dome  of  this  story  say

That  the  nurse,  whom  the  plan  of  her  brain  made  gay,

Called  in  a  wise  master,  his  aid  to  lend,

With  a  hundred  arts  at  each  finger's  end  ;

A  skilled  geometer,  trained  and  tried,

Through  the  maze  of  the  stars  a  most  trusty  guide.

He  had  learned  his  figures  from  Almagest,1

And  his  problems  were  troubles  to  Euclid's  rest.

If  he  found  no  compasses  ready  at  hand,

Two  fingers  drew  deftly  the  circle  he  planned,

And  the  lines  that  he  wanted  most  straight  and  true

Without  the  help  of  a  rule  he  drew.

He  had  mounted  up  to  the  seventh  sphere,

And  built  in  Saturn  a  belvedere.

If  his  hand  but  turned  to  the  mason's  saw,

The  stone  grew  soft  as  the  clay  for  awe.

When  to  architecture  he  turned  his  thought,

Wondrous  and  fair  were  the  works  he  wrought.

1  Plotemy's  Syntaxis  Magna,  translated  into  Arabic  under  the  title
Al  Megiste,  about  800  A.D.


THE  PALACE.  193

The  endless  plain  of  the  world  on  the  space

Of  his  finger-nail  he  could  truly  trace,

And    with    heightened    charm    in    the    sketch    he

drew

The  shape  of  a  fairer  creation  grew.
There  was  life  and  soul  in  the  drawing  when
The  lines  were  sketched  by  his  artist  pen.
If  his  fingers  had  graven  a  bird  of  stone,
It  had  risen  up  in  the  air  and  flown.
By  the  nurse's  order  his  hand  of  gold
Began  the  work  on  the  plan  she  told.
There  was  hope  in  the  sheen  of  the  polished  walls,
And  the  dawn  of  bliss  gleamed  through  the  stately

halls.

The  brightest  marble  adorned  the  floor,
And  ivory  shone  on  each  ebony  door.
Within  the  palace  were  chambers  seven,
In  number  and  sheen  like  the  storeys  of  heaven,
Pure  and  polished  and  fair  to  view,
Each  wrought  of  stone  of  a  different  hue ;
The  seventh,  fair  as  the  seventh  sphere —
All  words,  all  painting  would  fail  me  here —
Forty  gold  pillars  upheld,  inlaid
With  jewels,  and  beasts  and  birds  portrayed.
Against  each  column  a  musk-deer  leant,
And  stored  in  the  gold  was  the  precious  scent ;

N


194  THE  PALACE.

And  peacocks  wrought  in  pure  gold  displayed
Their  jewelled  plumes  in  the  long  colonnade.
But  a  special  marvel,  eclipsing  them,
Was  a  shady  tree  with  a  silver  stem.
Never  a  man  might  its  like  behold,
With  leaves  of  turkis  and  boughs  of  gold.
On  each  branch  was  a  bird,  a  wonder  of  skill,
With  emerald  wings  and  a  ruby  bill.

The  painter  there,  to  his  orders  true,
The  forms  of  Zulaikha  and  Yusuf  drew,
Like  lovers  both  of  one  heart  and  mind,
With  the  arm  of  each  round  the  other  twined.
Like  heaven  was  the  ceiling,  for  wrought  thereon
The  sun  and  the  moon  in  their  glory  shone.
In  the  prime  of  Spring  on  the  walls  outspread
To  the  wondering  view  was  a  bright  rose-bed,
And  the  eye  might  mark  in  each  narrow  space
The  rose-sprays  twined  in  a  close  embrace.
Wherever  the  foot  on  the  carpet  stepped
Two  lovely  roses  together  slept.
Search  through  the  palace,  no  spot  was  there
But  showed  a  type  of  that  beauteous  pair.
Under  the  foot,  overhead,  and  around,
An  emblem  of  two  happy  lovers  was  found.
The  love  of  Zulaikha  still  grew  meanwhile,
And  rose  each  day  with  the  rising  pile.


THE  PALACE.  195

As  the  idol-house  met  her  eager  gaze,

With  fiercer  fire  was  her  heart  ablaze.

There  thrills  a  new  pang  through  the  lover's  breast

When  he  looks  on  the  picture  of  her  he  loves  best,

The  fair  lines  of  her  features  his  woes  recall,

And  he  sinks  in  his  sorrow  love's  helpless  thrall.


196


3n  tbe  palace.

ZTJLAIKHA  opened  her  hand  and  decked
The  finished  work  of  the  Architect.
Tissue  of  gold  on  the  floor  was  strown,
And  its  beauty  enhanced  with  a  golden  throne.
Jewelled  lamps  on  the  walls  were  hung,
And  odorous  herbs  were  beneath  them  flung.
She  gathered  together  all  things  most  fair,
And  unrolled  the  carpet  of  pleasure  there.
But  amid  the  charms  of  the  sumptuous  hall
She  longed  only  for  Yusuf,  far  dearer  than  all.
A  heavenly  palace  is  dark  and  dim
To  a  lover  whose  darling  is  far  from  him.

She  would  summon  Yiisuf,  once  more  they  would

meet :

She  would  set  him  high  on  a  princely  seat,
She  would  woo  his  beauty  and  win  success
With  her  tender  guile  and  her  soft  caress,
Or  feed  on  his  lips  and  beguile  her  care
With  the  tangled  locks  of  the  rebel's  hair.


IN  THE  PALACE.  197

But  to  conquer  his  heart  she  would  add  a  grace
To  her  peerless  form  and  her  perfect  face.
Her  beauty  needed  no  art,  and  yet
A  current  stamp  by  its  aid  was  set.
The  rose  of  the  garden  is  fair  to  view,
But  lovelier  still  with  her  pearls  of  dew.

She  freshened  the  tint  of  her  roses  and  spread
A  livelier  hue  where  a  bud  was  dead.
She  darkened  the  line  of  her  eyebrows,  so
To  curve  the  new  moon  to  a  full  rainbow.
Her  hair,  like  the  musk  of  China,  which  fell
In  long  black  tresses  she  braided  well,
And  the  pink  of  her  delicate  neck  between
The  coils  that  hung  over  her  shoulders  was  seen.
She  prepared  the  spell  of  her  witching  eye,
And  darkened  the  lid  with  the  jetty  dye.
She  set  here  and  there  a  dark  spot  on  her  cheek,
And    these   were    the  words   that   her   looks  would

speak :

"  Thy  face  is  so  fair,  love,  that  I  at  the  view
Consume,  heart  and  soul,  like  the  seeds  of  the  rue."  l
Her  fingers  deftly  with  henna  she  stained,
That  his  heart  thereby  might  be  caught  and  detained ;
But  a  painter  coloured  her  palm  with  care,
For  with  this  a  picture  she  hoped  to  snare.

1  The  seeds  are  black  and  are  burnt  as  charms.


198  IN  THE  PALACE.

The  jujube's  tint,  on  her  filberts  spread,

Spoke  of  tears  of  blood  that  her  eyes  had  shed.

The  fair  new  moon 1  of  each  delicate  nail,

Came  full  into  sight  from  the  shrouding  veil,

That    the    new     moon2    of    bliss    might    at    length

appear

And  announce  that  the  feast  of  her  joy  was  near.
Beside  her  cheek  was  an  earring-set,
And  a  moon  and  a  star  in  conjunction  met.
Ah,  might  that  meeting  herself  unite
With    the    moon    of    the    Faith,    the    wide  world's

delight !

Across  her  bosom,  like  sweet  flowers  grown
To  perfect  beauty,  a  scarf  was  thrown.
Then  she  drew  on  a  delicate  smock,  and  her  skin
Filled  with  roses  the  folds  of  the  jessamine,
Which  looked  to  the  eye  like  a  stream  that  flows
Over  a  garden  of  tulip  and  rose,
A  wondrous  stream,  of  fine  silver  made,
Where  two  fishes 3  at  rest  on  two  arms  were  laid.
On  each  wrist  a  fair  bracelet  shone  to  enfold
Each  glittering  fish  with  a  collar  of  gold.
So  by  her  cheek  and  her  hand  was  it  shown

1  The  white  of  the  nail.

2  The  appearance  of  the  new  moon  at  the  end  of  Ramazan,  the
Musalman  Lent,  is  eagerly  looked  for,  as  the  long  fast  then  ends.

3  Her  long  shapely  hands.


IN  THE  PALACE.  199

That  her  charms  from  the  moon  to  the  Fish1  were

known.

Next  the  lady  her  form  arrayed
In  precious  tissue  of  China  brocade.
She  shone  so  bright  in  that  robe,  Chinese
To  her  as  an  idol  had  bent  their  knees.
On  her  jet-black  garner  of  hair  was  set,
Of  pearl  and  gold  mingled,  a  coronet.
No  peacock,  proud  of  his  jewelled  plumes,
Could  move  more  bright  through  the  splendid  rooms.
She  reckoned  on  conquest,  for  who  could  withstand
The  charms  seen  in  the  mirror  she  held  in  her  hand  ?
Those  charms  she  assayed,  and  the  mirror  told
That  the  beauty  she  trusted  was  current  gold.
As  she  thought  of  her  treasures  her  joy  rose  high,
And  nothing  was  wanting  save  one  to  bay.

She  sent  her  maidens  and  bade  them  call
Yiisuf  to  visit  her  new-built  hall.
He  came,  bright,  noble,  and  mild,  like  the  sun
And  the  moon  and  Mercury  joined  in  one.
No  mixture  of  clay  made  his  nature  base,
And  light,  all  light,  were  his  brow  and  face.
One  glance  from  that  eye,  and  the  world  is  aglow:
He  speaks,  and  all  nations  his  utterance  know.

1  Her  cheek  is  the  moon  above  the  earth,  and  her  hand  the  Fish  on
which  the  earth  rests.


200  IN  THE  PALACE.

Zulaikha  saw,  and  the  flame  rose  high,
Like  the  spark  that  falls  where  the  reeds  are  dry.
"  Purest  of  creatures,  thou  lamp  to  guide
The  eyes  of  those  who  see  best,"  she  cried.
"  0  servant  faithful  and  prompt  to  obey,
High  favour  and  grace  should  thy  care  repay.
Thy  dutiful  love  I  can  never  forget,
And  my  glory  and  pride  is  my  collar  of  debt,
Come,  and  to-day  will  I  labour  to  show
Some  slight  return  for  the  debt  I  owe  :
Nay,  long  in  the  record  of  time  shall  live
The  meed  I  bestow  and  the  thanks  I  give."

With  gentle  charm  and  resistless  sway
To  the  first  of  the  chambers  she  led  the  way.

Soon  as  the  door  of  pure  gold  he  passed,
With  the  lock  of  iron  she  closed  it  fast.
The  door  she  closed,  but  the  secret  nursed
Deep  in  her  heart  from  her  lips  outburst.
Thus  she  addressed  him :  "  0  thou,  the  whole
Wish  and  desire  of  my  hungry  soul,
Thy  vision  appeared  in  my  dreams  and  beguiled
The  sleep  from  mine  eyes  when  I  yet  was  a  child.
That  vision  brought  frenzy  and  anguish  to  dwell
For  ever  with  me  :  I  loved  thee  so  well.
Ere  yet  I  had  seen  thee,  to  find  thee  here
I  came  from  my  country  and  all  that  was  dear.


IN  THE  PALACE.  201

A  helpless  exile  I  sate  and  grieved,
And  no  sweet  comfort  my  woes  relieved.
After  long  pain  I  was  blest  to  behold
Thy  face ;  but  hope  fled,  for  thine  eye  was  cold.
Look  on  me  no  longer  with  eyes  so  stern:
Oh,  one  word  of  love,  one  word,  in  return  ! "
He  bent  his  head  as  he  answered :  "  Thou
To  whose  bidding  a  hundred  high  princes  bow,
Eelease  me  from  this  sore  burthen  of  woe,
And  freedom  of  heart  on  thy  slave  bestow.
Dear  lady,  longer  I  would  not  be
In  this  curtained  chamber  alone  with'thee,
For  thou  art  a  flame,  and  the  wool  is  dry :
The  wind  art  thou  and  the  musk  am  I.
Is  the  wool  secure  when  the  flame  burns  fast  ?
Should  the  musk  be  left  to  the  boisterous  blast  ?  "
His  eager  words  to  the  winds  she  threw :
To  the  second  chamber  the  boy  she  drew.
Again  she  fastened  the  door:  again
The  heart  of  Yiisuf  was  rent  with  pain.
She  lifted  the  veil  of  the  days  gone  by
And  poured  out  her  grief  with  a  bitter  cry :
"  How  long  wilt  thou  scorn  me,  Oh !  thou  more  sweet
Than  my  soul,  and  rebel  when  I  fall  at  thy  feet  ?
I  lavished  my  treasure  to  buy  thee,  I  gave
My  faith  and  my  prudence  to  make  thee  my  slave.


202  IN  THE  PALACE.

For  I  hoped  in  my  heart  that,  pledged  to  obey,

Thou  wouldst  be  my  comfort  and  joy  and  stay.

But  no  order  I  give  thee  wilt  thou  fulfil,

And  thou  seekest  each  path  save  the  path  of  my  will."

"Sin  is  not  obedience,"  he  answered;  "shame

Ne'er  may  be  linked  with  true  duty's  name.

Each  act  defying  the  Master's  law

Is  in  true  service  a  breach  and  flaw;

And  never  mine  be  the  power  or  will

To  break  His  law  by  a  deed  so  ill."

Onward  from  chamber  to  chamber  they  strayed,

And  in  each  for  a  little  their  steps  delayed.

New  arts  of  temptation  in  each  she  plied,

In  each  new  magic  and  charms  were  tried.

Through  six  of  the  rooms  she  had  led  him,  still

She  won  not  the  game l  though  she  played  with  skill.

Only  the  seventh  was  left:  therein

Lay  her  strongest  hope  that  at  last  she  might  win.

In  this  way  was  nothing  of  dark  despair,

For  black  to  her  eyes  seemed  white  and  fair.

If  no  hope  from  a  hundred  doors  appears,

Eat  not  thy  heart  nor  give  way  to  tears.

For  yet  one  door  thou  mayst  open  and  see

A  way  to  the  place  where  thou  fain  wouldst  be.

1  An  allusion  to  the  game  of  draughts,  the  Persian  board  contain-
ing six  squares,  and  the  game  being  called  "  shashdar/'  i.e.,  "six-
doored."


THESE  are  the  words  of  the  bard  who  sings

This  ancient  story  of  mystic  things.

To  the  seventh  chamber  their  steps  they  bent,

And  Zulaikha  cried  in  her  discontent :

"  Pass  not  this  chamber  unnoticed  by,

And  lay  thy  foot  on  this  loving  eye."

He  entered  and  sate  where  she  bade  him :  aga
She  fastened  the  door  with  a  golden  chain.
No  spy,  no  stranger  might  there  intrude
To  break  the  charm  of  the  solitude.
'Twas  made  for  the  loved  and  the  lover  alone,
And  the  dread  of  the  censor  was  there  unknown.
The  loved  one's  beauty  was  there  more  bright,
And  the  lover's  heart  sang  a  song  of  delight.
ISTo  more  was  the  bosom's  soft  flame  concealed,
And  the  spirit  of  love  had  a  limitless  field.

Full,  eyes  and  heart,  of  the  flame  she  fanned,
She  seized  in  wild  passion  her  darling's  hand,
And  with  gentle  magic  of  words  most  sweet,
Half  led  and  half  drew  his  slow  steps  to  a  seat.


204  FLIGHT.

«

She  threw  herself  there  by  his  side.     Then  broke
A  flood  of  hot  tears  from  her  eyes,  and  she  spoke :
"  Look  on  me,  look  on  me  once,  my  sweet :
One  tender  glance  from  those  eyes,  I  entreat.
Then  if  the  sun  saw  my  glad  face,  he
Moon-like  might  borrow  new  light  from  me.
How  long  wilt  thou  see  my  poor  heart's  distress  ?
How  long  wilt  thy  heart  be  so  pitiless  ? "
She  told  her  love,  and  her  sorrow  woke
With  a  pang  renewed  at  each  word  she  spoke.
But  Yiisuf  looked  not  upon  her :  in  dread
He  lowered  his  eyes  and  he  bent  his  head.
As  he  looked  on  the  ground  in  a  whirl  of  thought
He  saw  his  own  form  on  the  carpet  wrought,
Where  a  bed  was  figured  of  silk  and  brocade,
And  himself  by  the  side  of  Zulaikha  laid.
From  the  pictured  carpet  he  looked  in  quest
Of  a  spot  where  his  eye  might,  untroubled,  rest.
He  looked  on  the  wall,  on  the  door;  the  pair
Of  rose-lipped  lovers  was  painted  there.
He  lifted  his  glance  to  the  Lord  of  the  skies :
That  pair  from  the  ceiling  still  met  his  eyes.
Then  the  heart  of  Yusuf  would  fain  relent,
And  a  tender  look  on  Zulaikha  he  bent,
While  a  thrill  of  hope  through  her  bosom  passed
That  the  blessed  sun  would  shine  forth  at  last.


FLIGHT.  205

The  hot  tears  welled  from  her  heart  to  her  eyes,

And  she  poured  out  her  voice  in  a  storm  of  sighs :

"  List  to  my  prayer,  thou  sweet  rebel,  and  calm

The  pangs  of  my  heart  with  thy  healing  balm.

Thou  art  Life's  Water :  these  lips  are  dry ;

Thou  art  life  for  ever :  I  faint  and  die.

As  thirsty  eyes  when  no  water  they  see,

As  the  dead  without  hope,  so  am  I  without  thee.

For  years  has  my  heart  in  its  love  for  thee  bled.

And,  fasting,  outworn,  I  have  tossed  on  my  bed.

Oh,  let  me  no  longer  in  misery  weep :

Give  my  body  its  food,  give  mine  eyelids  their  sleep,

Oh,  hear  my  entreaties :  on  thee  I  call

In  the  name  of  the  God  who  is  Lord  over  all ;

By  the   excellent  bloom    of   that    cheek   which    He

gave,
By  that  beauty  which  makes  the  whole  world  thy

slave  \

By  the  splendour  that  beams  from  that  beautiful  brow
That  bids  the  full  moon  to  thy  majesty  bow ;
By  the  graceful  gait  of  that  cypress,  by
The  delicate  bow  that  is  bent  o'er  thine  eye ;
By  that  arch  of  the  temple  devoted  to  prayer,
By  each  fine- woven  mesh  of  the  toils  of  thy  hair ;
By  that  charming  narcissus,  that  form  arrayed
In  the  sheen  and  glory  of  silk  brocade ;


206  FLIGHT.

By  that  secret  thou  callest  a  mouth,  by  the  hair

Thou  callest  the  waist  of  that  body  most  fair ;

By  the  musky  spots  on  thy  cheek's  pure  rose,

By  the  smile  of  thy  lips  when  those  buds  unclose ;

By  my  longing  tears,  by  the  sigh  and  groan

That  rend  my  heart  as  I  pine  alone;

By  thine  absence,  a  mountain  too  heavy  to  bear,

By  my  thousand  fetters  of  grief  and  care ;

By  the  sovereign  sway  of  my  passion,  by

My  carelessness  whether  I  live  or  die ;

Pity  me,  pity  my  lovelorn  grief :

Loosen  my  fetters  and  grant  relief:

An  age  has  scorched  me  since  over  my  soul

The  soft  sweet  air  of  thy  garden  stole.

Be  the  balm  of  my  wounds  for  a  little ;  shed

Sweet  scent  on  the  heart  where  the  flowers  are  dead.

I  hunger  for  thee  till  my  whole  frame  is.  weak :

Oh,  give  me  the  food  for  my  soul  which  I  seek."

"  Fair  daughter,"  said  he,  "  of  the  Peri  race —

But  no  Peri  can  match  thee  in  form  or  face —

Tempt  me  no  more  to  a  deed  of  shame,

Nor  break  the  fair  glass  of  a  stainless  name.

Drag  not  my  skirt  through  the  dust  and  mire,

Nor  fill  my  veins  with  unholy  fire.

By  the  Living  God,  the  great  Soul  of  all,

Inner  and  outward  and  great  and  small,


FLIGHT.  207

From  whose  ocean  this  world  like  a  bubble  rose,

And  the  sun  by  the  flash  of  His  splendour  glows ;

By  the  holy  line  of  my  fathers,  whence

I  have  learned  the  fair  beauty  of  innocence  ;

[From  whom  I  inherit  my  spirit's  light,

And  through  them  is  the  star  of  my  fortune  bright ;

If  thou  wilt  but  leave  me  this  day  in  peace,

And  my  troubled  soul  from  this  snare  release,

Thou  shalt  see  thy  servant  each  wish  obey,

And  with  faith  unshaken  thy  grace  repay.

The  lips  of  thy  darling  to  thine  shall  be  pressed,

And  the  arms  that  thou  lovest  shall  lull  thee  to  rest.

Haste  not  too  fast  to  the  goal :  delay

Is  often  more  blessed  than  speed  on  the  way,

And  the  first  paltry  capture  is  ever  surpassed

By  the  nobler  game  that  is  netted  at  last."

Zulaikha  answered  :  "  Ah,  never  think
That  the  thirsty  will  wait  for  the  morrow  to  drink.
My  spirit  has  rushed  to  my  lips,  and  how
Can  I  wait  for  the  joy  that  I  long  for  now  ?
My  heart  has  no  power  to  watch  and  wait
Tor  the  tender  bliss  that  will  come  so  late.
Thy  pleading  is  weak,  and  no  cause  I  see
Why  thou  shouldst  not  this  moment  be  happy  with  me."

Then  Yiisuf  answered  :  "  Two  things  I  fear —
The  judgment  of  God,  and  the  Grand  Vizier.


208  FLIGHT.

If  the  master  knew  of  the  shameful  deed,
With  a  hundred  sorrows  my  heart  would  bleed.
Full  well  thou  knowest  my  furious  lord
"Would  strike  me  dead  with  his  lifted  sword.
And  think  of  the  shame  that  the  sin  would  lay
On  my  guilty  soul  at  the  Judgment  Day,
When  the  awful  book  is  unclosed  wherein
Eecording  angels  have  scored  my  sin."

"  Fear  not  thy  master,"  Zulaikha  cried ;
"  At  some  high  feast  when  I  sit  by  his  side,
A  poisoned  cup  from  this  hand  shall  he  take,
And  sleep  till  Doomsday  shall  bid  him  wake.
And  the  God  thou  servest,  I  hear  thee  say,
Pardons  His  creatures  who  err  and  stray.
Still,  their  sole  mistress,  the  keys  I  hold
Of  a  hundred  vaults  full  of  gems  and  gold.
All  this  will  I  give  to  atone  for  thy  sin,
And  thy  God's  forgiveness  will  surely  win."

"  Ne'er  can  my  heart,"  he  made  answer,  "  incline
To  injure  another  by  deed  of  mine ;
Least  of  all  my  lord,  who  with  tender  thought
Bade  thee  cherish  and  honour  the  slave  he  bought.
And  will  my  God,  whom  no  thanks  can  pay,
Take  a  bribe  to  pardon  my  sin  to-day  ?
Shall  the  grace  which  a  life  cannot  buy  be  sold
By  the  Living  God  for  thy  gems  and  gold  ? "


FLIGHT.  209

"  0  King,"  she  said,  "  to  high  fortune  born,
May  throne  and  crown  be  thine  to  adorn !
My  soul  is  the  mark  of  the  arrows  of  pain,
And  excuse  on  excuse  thou  hast  marshalled  in  vain.
Crooked,  contemptible,  all  unmeet
For  a  noble  heart  is  the  way  of  deceit.
God  grant  that  my  heart  from  deceit  may  be  free,
And  let  me  not  hear  these  pretences  from  thee.
I  am  sorely  troubled :   Oh,  give  me  rest ;
Grant,  willing,  unwilling,  this  one  request.
In  words,  idle  words,  have  my  days  passed  by,
And  ne'er  with  my  wishes  wouldst  thou  comply.
A  truce  to  pretences,  or  thou  wilt  repent
That  thine  eye  would  not  glow  nor  thy  heart  relent.
A  fierce  flame  has  lighted  the  reeds  of  my  heart ;
Thou  canst  look  on  the  flame  and  stand  heedless  apart.
What  boots  it  to  burn  in  this  flame  of  desire,
If  thine  eyes  be  undimmed  by  the  smoke  of  the  fire  ?
Come,  pour  a  cool  stream  on  the  hot  flame,  if  I
Fail  to  melt  thy  cold  heart  with  the  heat  of  a  sigh."
For  new  excuses  his  lips  unclosed,
But  with  swift  impatience  she  interposed :
"  My  time  thou  hast  stolen  while  fondly  I  hung
On  the  guiling  words  of  thy  Hebrew  tongue.
No  more  evasion :  my  wish  deny,
And  by  mine  own  hand  will  I  surely  die.


210  FLIGHT.

Unless  thy  warm  arm  round  my  neck  I  feel,

I  will  sever  that  neck  with  the  biting  steel.

If  fondly  around  me  thou  wilt  not  cling,

A  streak  of  my  blood  shall  thy  neck  enring.

A  lily-like  dagger  shall  rend  my  side,

And  my  smock  in  blood  like  a  rose  shall  be  dyed.

Then  shall  my  soul  and  my  body  part,

And  thy  guile  no  longer  distress  my  heart.

My  lifeless  corse  the  Vizier  will  see,

And  the  crime  of  the  murder  will  rest  on  thee.

Then  under  the  earth,  when  the  doom  is  passed,

Near  this  loving  heart  thou  wilt  lie  at  last."

She  drew  from  the  pillow,  distraught  with  grief,

A  dagger  grey  as  a  willow  leaf,

And,  fierce  with  the  fire  of  fever,  laid

To  her  thirsty  throat  the  bright  cold  blade.

Up  sprang  Yiisuf ;  his  fingers'  hold

Circled  her  wrist  like  a  bracelet  of  gold.

"  Master  this  passion,  Zulaikha,"  he  cried ;

"  Turn  from  thy  folly,  oh,  turn  aside.

Wilt  thou  not  strive  for  the  wished-for  goal  ?

Wilt  thou  abandon  the  aim  of  thy  soul  ? "

She  fancied  his  heart  was  relenting ;  she  thought

His  love  would  give  her  the  bliss  she  sought.

The  gleaming  steel  on  the  ground  she  threw,

And  hope  sprang  up  in  her  breast  anew.


FLIGHT.  211

She  sugared  his  lip  with  a  touch  of  her  own :
One  arm  was  his  collar  and  one  his  zone.
With  a  long  sweet  kiss  on  his  lips  she  hung,
And  an  eager  arm  round  his  neck  was  flung.

One  nook  of  the  chamber  was  dark  with  the  shade
Of  a  curtain  that  glittered  with  gold  brocade.
And  Yusuf  questioned  her :  "  What  or  who
Is  behind  the  curtain  concealed  from  view  ? "
"  It  is  he,"  she  answered,  "  to  whom,  while  I  live,
My  faithful  service  I  still  must  give :
A  golden  idol  with  jewelled  eyes —
A  salver  of  musk  in  his  bosom  lies.
I  bend  before  him  each  hour  of  the  day,
And  my  head  at  his  feet  in  due  worship  lay.
Before  his  presence  this  screen  I  drew
To  be  out  of  the  reach  of  his  darkened  view.
If  I  swerve  from  religion  I  would  not  be
Where  the  angry  eyes  of  my  god  may  see."
And  Yiisuf  cried  with  a  bitter  cry :
"  Not  a  mite  of  the  gold  of  thy  faith  have  I.
Thine  eye  is  abashed  before  those  that  are  dead,
And  shrinks  from  the  sight  of  the  lifeless  in  dread.
And  God  Almighty  shall  I  not  fear,
Who  liveth  and  seeth  and  ever  is  near  ? "

He  ceased :  from  the  fond  dream  of  rapture  he  woke  ;
From  the  arms  of  Zulaikha  he  struggled  and  broke.


212  FLIGHT.

With  hasty  feet  from  her  side  he  sped,

And  burst  open  each  door  on  his  way  as  he  fled.

Bolt  and  bar  from  the  stanchions  he  drew —

All  opened  before  him  as  onward  he  flew.

Of  his  lifted  finger  a  key  was  made,

Which  every  lock  at  a  sign  obeyed.

But  Zulaikha  caught  him,  with  steps  more  fast,

Or  ever  the  farthest  chamber  he  passed.

She  clutched  his  skirt  as  he  fled  amain,

And  the  coat  from  his  shoulder  was  rent  in  twain.

Eeft  of  his  garment  he  slipped  from  her  hand

Like  a  bud  from  its  sheath  when  the  leaves  expand.

She  rent  her  robe  in  her  anguish ;  low

On  the  earth,  like  a  shadow,  she  lay  in  her  woe.

A  bitter  cry  from  her  heart  she  sent,

And  uttered  these  words  in  her  wild  lament :

"  Ah,  woe  is  me  for  my  luckless  fate !

He  has  left  my  heart  empty  and  desolate.

Ah,  that  the  game  from  my  net  should  slip !

Ah,  that  the  honey  should  mock  my  lip !

A  spider  once,  I  have  heard  them  say,

Went  forth  in  its  hunger  to  hunt  for  prey.

On  a  bough  a  falcon  had  taken  her  stand,

Who  had  fled  from  her  rest  on  a  royal  hand.

The  spider  would  weave  round  her  wings  a  snare

To  hinder  her  flight  through  the  fields  of  air.


FLIGHT.  213

It  laboured  long  on  this  toil  intent

Till  all  the  fine  threads  of  its  store  were  spent.

At  length  the  falcon  her  pinions  spread,

And  the  spider  had  naught  but  the  broken  thread.

I  am  that  spider :  I  weep  and  moan,

The  single  hope  of  my  heart  o'erthrown.

The  vein  of  my  heart  is  the  broken  thread,

And  the  bird  whom  I  hoped  to  ensnare  is  fled.

Each  tie  to  my  life  is  now  broken  in  twain,

And  the  severed  ends  in  my  hand  remain."


false  Cbarge,

THE  pen  that  has  written  this  tale  relates,

That  when  Yusuf  fled  through  the  palace  gates,

Soon  as  his  foot  in  the  court  was  set,

The  Grand  Vizier  and  his  lords  he  met.

The  master  looked  on  his  troubled  face

And  questioned  him  wherefore  he  fled  apace.

Yiisuf  was  ready  with  apt  reply,

And  with  courteous  words  put  the  question  by.

The  Grand  Vizier  took  his  hand  in  his  own,

And  they  came  where  Zulaikha  sate  brooding  alone,

She  saw  them  together,  and  cried,  dismayed,

To  her  own  sad  spirit,  "  Betrayed !  betrayed !  "

Moved  by  the  fancy,  in  loud  lament,

The  veil  of  the  secret  she  raised  and  rent :

"  0  Balance  of  Justice,  what  sentence  is  due

To  him  who  to  folly  thy  wife  would  woo  ?

And,  false  to  his  duty,  has  plotted  within

The  folds  of  his  treason  a  deed  of  sin  ? "

"  Speak,  fairest  one,  speak :  let  thy  tale  be  clear,

"Who  has  thus  dared  ? "  said  the  Grand  Vizier.


THE  FALSE  CHARGE.  215

"  The  Hebrew  servant,"  she  cried,  "  has  done
This  thing,  whom  thy  favour  has  made  a  son.
Freed  from  the  trouble  and  toil  of  the  day,
Here  in  my  chamber  asleep  I  lay,
He  came  to  the  bed  where  alone  I  repose,
And  would  pluck  the  flower  of  the  spotless  rose ;
But  the  hand  of  the  robber  my  slumber  broke,
With  a  start  and  a  cry  from  my  rest  I  woke.
He  started  in  fear  when  I  raised  my  head,
And  swift  to  the  door  of  the  chamber  fled.
He  fled  amain,  but  I  followed  fast
And  caught  him  ere  yet  from  the  palace  he  passed.
I  caught  his  garment,  my  strength  outspent,
And  it  split  as  the  leaf  of  a  rose  is  rent.
The  garment  he  wears  on  his  shoulders  view,
And  see  that  the  words  which  I  speak  are  true.
Now  were  it  best  for  a  little  time
To  send  him  to  prison  to  mourn  his  crime ;
Or  let  the  sharp  lash  on  his  tender  skin
Cure  the  wild  boy  of  his  wish  to  sin.
Let  the  scourge  be  heavy,  the  pain  severe,
That  others  in  time  may  be  warned  and  fear."
The  Grand  Vizier  in  amazement  heard :
His  visage  changed  and  his  heart  was  stirred,
From  the  path  of  justice  he  turned  aside,
And  his  tomme  was  a  sword  of  rebuke  as  he  cried :


216  THE  FALSE  CHARGE.

"  Treasures  of  pearl  and  of  gold  I  gave,
When  J  weighed  out  my  jewels  to  purchase  my  slave.
I  made  thee  my  son  of  mine  own  free  grace,
And  gave  thee  beside  me  an  honoured  place.
I  gave  thee  Zukaikha  for  guardian  to  tend
Thy  youth  with  her  maidens  and  be  thy  friend.
The  slaves  of  my  household  obeyed  thy  will;
They  were  gentle  in  speech  and  ne'er  wished  thee  ill.
I  made  thee  lord  over  all  that  I  had,
And  never  would  suffer  thy  heart  to  be  sad.
A  folly  and  sin  was  this  thought  of  thine :
May  God  forgive  thee  the  base  design.
In  this  evil  world,  full  of  grief  and  woe,
Kindness  responsive  to  kindness  we  owe.
But  thou,  all  my  love  and  my  trust  betrayed,
My  tender  affection  with  ill  hast  repaid.
Thou  hast  broken  the  bond  which  the  meal  had  tied,
And  the  pledge  which  the  salt  had  sanctified."
At  the  wrathful  words  of  the  Grand  Vizier
He  shrank  like  a  hair  when  the  flame  is  near.
He  cried  to  his  master :  "  How  long,  how  long
Wilt  thou  burthen  the  guiltless  with  cruel  wrong  ?
False  is  the  tale  that  Zulaikha  has  told  :
Her  lie  is  a  lamp  when  the  flame  is  cold.
From  the  man's  left  side  came  the  woman.     Who
Will  hope  that  the  left  will  be  right  and  true  ?


THE  FALSE  CHARGE.  217

From  the  day  Zulaikha  beheld  me  first,

A  frantic  passion  her  heart  has  nursed.

About  me  ever  she  comes  and  goes,

And  with  soft  allurement  her  fancy  shows.

But  ne'er  have  I  lifted  mine  eye  to  her  face,

Ne'er  have  I  looked  for  a  kiss  or  embrace.

Who  am  I,  thy  servant,  that  I  should  be

The  tempter  of  her  who  is  sacred  to  thee  ?

From  earthly  wealth  I  had  turned  away,

To  the  pangs  of  exile  my  heart  was  a  prey.

A  word  from  Zuliakha  bade  doors  unclose,

And  opened  a  way  to  a  hundred  woes.

She  called  me  hither — her  spells  were  sweet —

And  drew  me  aside  to  this  lone  retreat.

With  passionate  pleading  her  love  she  pressed,

And  made  my  bosom  a  stranger  to  rest.

By  many  a  bar  for  awhile  detained,

The  gate  of  the  palace  at  length  I  gained.

She  followed  fast  as  I  fled,  and  tore

Behind  from  the  shoulder  the  coat  I  wore.

This  is  the  story  I  have  to  tell :

This,  only  this  and  no  more,  befell.

If  thou  wilt  not  believe  I  am  free  from  guilt,

In  the  name  of  Allah  do  what  thon  wilt."

Zulaikha  heard,  and  in  self-defence
Called  Heaven  to  witness  her  innocence.


218  THE  FALSE  CHARGE.

She  swore  an  oath  on  each  sacred  thing,

By  the  throne,  and  the  crown,  and  the  head  of  the  king,

By  the  rank  and  state  of  the  Grand  Vizier

Whom  the  monarch  honoured  and  held  so  dear.

When  trouble  and  doubt  in  a  suit  arise,
An  oath  the  place  of  a  witness  supplies.
But  ah,  how  oft,  when  the  truth  is  known,
Has  the  shameless  lie  of  that  oath  been  shown !
Then  she  cried,  as  her  tears  in  a  torrent  ran :
"  From  Yiisuf  only  the  folly  began."
Tears,  ever  ready  to  flow,  supply
Oil  for  the  lamp  of  a  woman's  lie.
Ted  with  this  oil  the  flame  waxes  in  power
And  destroys  a  whole  world  in  one  little  hour.

The  oath  of  Zulaikha,  the  sob,  the  tear,
Shut  the  blinded  eye  of  the  Grand  Vizier.
He  gave  a  sergeant  his  order,  like
The  strings  of  a  lute  the  boy's  heart  to  strike,
That  the  vein  of  his  soul  might  be  racked  with  pain,
And  no  trace  of  compassion  or  mercy  remain ;
That  the  boy  should  be  lodged  in  the  prison  till
They  had  thoroughly  fathomed  the  secret  ill.


Jnfant  Witness,


His  hand  on  Yiisuf  the  sergeant  laid,

And  straight  to  the  prison  his  way  he  made.

The  heart  of  the  captive  with  woe  was  rent,

And  the  eye  of  complaint  on  the  sky  he  bent  :

"  Thou  who  knowest  all  hearts,"  he  cried,

"  And  every  secret  which  men  would  hide  ;

Who  discernest  the  true  from  the  false,  whose  might

Save  Thine  only  can  bring  this  secret  to  light  ?

Since  the  lamp  of  truth  in  my  heart  Thou  hast  placed,

Let  me  not  with  the  charge  of  a  lie  be  disgraced.

Bear  witness  against  mine  accuser,  I  pray,

That  rny  truth  may  be  clear  as  the  light  of  day."

He  spoke  in  his  sorrow;  and  straight  to  its  aim
The  shaft  of  his  prayer  from  his  spirit  came.
In  the  court  was  a  dame,  to  Zulaikha  allied,
Who  was  night  and  day  by  Zulaikha's  side.
With  her  babe  on  her  bosom  but  three  months  old
She  seemed  her  own  soul  in  her  arms  to  hold.
No  line  in  the  volume  of  life  had  it  read,
And  its  tongue  like  a  lily's  no  word  had  said.


220  THE  INFANT  WITNESS.

But  it  cried :  "  Vizier,  be  thy  judgment  more  slow,
And  beware  of  the  haste  that  will  end  in  woe.
No  stain  of  sin  upon  Yiisuf  lies,
But  he  merits  the  grace  of  thy  favouring  eyes."
In  courteous  words  spake  the  Grand  Vizier
In  reply  to  the  speech  which  he  marvelled  to  hear :
"  0  thou  whom  God  teaches  to  speak  while  yet
With  the  milk  of  thy  mother  thy  lips  are  wet,
Speak  clearly  and  say  who  lighted  the  flame
That  has  threatened   the   screen  of  my  honour  and

fame."

"  No  informer  am  I,"  said  the  babe,  "  to  reveal
The  secret  another  would  fain  conceal.
The  tell-tale  musk  is  so  black  in  its  hue,
For    no   folds    will    imprison    the    scent    that    steals

through ;

And  the  screen  of  the  petals  that  round  her  cling,
Gives  a  charm  to  the  smile  of  the  rose  in  Spring.
No  secret  I  utter,  no  tale  I  tell,
But  I  give  thee  a  hint  which  will  serve  thee  well.
Go  hence  to  Yiisuf ;  examine  and  note,
As  he  lies  in  the  prison,  the  rent  in  his  coat.
If  the  rent  in  the  front  of  the  garment  appear,
The  skirt  of  Zulaikha  from  soil  is  clear.
There  is  then  no  light  in  the  charge  he  brings,
And  the  stain  of  a  lie  to  his  story  clings.


THE  INFANT  WITNESS.  221

But  if  rent  be  the  back  of  the  garment,  lie
From  charge  of  falsehood  and  slander  is  free.
Then  faithless  Zulaikha  has  turned  aside
From  the  path  of  truth  and  has  basely  lied."

The  Grand  Vizier  to  the  prison  went,
And  summoned  Yusuf,  to  view  the  rent.
He  saw  that  the  garment  was  torn  behind ;
And  he  cried  to  that  woman  of  evil  mind :
"  Thou  hast  forged  a  lie,  and  thine  art  has  sent
The  innocent  boy  to  imprisonment.
What  hast  thou  gained  by  thy  crafty  toils
Since  the  shame  of  thy  deed  on  thyself  recoils  ?
Thou  hast  left  the  straight  path  and  hast  sullied  thy

name,

By  wooing  thy  slave  to  a  deed  of  shame,
From  the  path  of  honour  thy  feet  have  strayed,
And  on  him  the  guilt  of  thy  sin  thou  hast  laid.
The  arts  and  wiles  of  a  woman  rend
The  heart  of  a  man,  and  they  never  will  end.
Those  who  are  noble  they  bring  to  naught,
And  the  wisest  hearts  in  their  toils  are  caught.
0   that    men    from    the    plague    of    their    arts    were

free !

0  that  treacherous  woman  might  cease  to  be !
Begone :  on  thy  knees  in  repentance  fall,
And  pray  for  forgiveness,  thy  face  to  the  wall


222  THE  INFANT  WITNESS.

Let  the  tears  of  contrition  thy  penitence  grace,
And  the  blot  from  thy  volume  of  life  efface.
And,  Yiisuf,  set  on  thy  lips  a  seal :
This  tale  of  dishonour  to  none  reveal.
Enough  that  thy  speech — for  thy  words  were  wise —
Has  shown  thee  guiltless  and  opened  mine  eyes."
He  spoke ;  then  he  turned  from  the  prison :  and

food

For  tale  and  jest  was  his  clement  mood.
Ah  yes ;  it  is  good  to  forgive  and  forget ;
But  bounds  e'en  to  mercy  itself  should  be  set.
If  the  man  be  too  mild  when  the  woman  sins,
There  ends  good-nature,  and  folly  begins.
Too  patient  a  part,  should  thy  wife  offend,
Makes  a  rift  in  thine  honour  which  naught  can  mend.


Women  of  flDempbis,

LOVE  is  ill  suited  with  peace  and  rest :

Scorn  and  reproaches  become  him  best.

Eebuke  gives  strength  to  his  tongue,  and  blame

Wakes  the  dull  spark  to  a  brighter  flame.

Blame  is  the  censor  of  Love's  bazaar :

It  suffers  no  rust  the  pure  splendour  to  mar.

Blame  is  the  whip  whose  impending  blow

Speeds  the  willing  lover  and  wakes  the  slow ;

And  the  weary  steed  who  can  hardly  crawl

Is  swift  of  foot  when  reproaches  fall

When  the  rose  of  the  secret  had  opened  and  blown,

The  voice  of  reproach  was  a  bulbul  in  tone.1

The  women  of  Memphis,  who  heard  the  tale  first,

The  whispered  slander  received  and  nursed.

Then,  attacking  Zulaikha  for  right  and  wrong,

Their  uttered  reproaches  were  loud  and  long :

"  Heedless  of  honour  and  name  she  gave

The  love  of  her  heart  to  the  Hebrew  slave,

1  An  allusion  to  the  bulbul's  love  of  the  rose,  whose  beauty  he
sings.


224  THE  WOMEN  OF  MEMPHIS.

Who  lies  so  deep  in  her  soul  enshrined

That  to  sense  and  religion  her  eyes  are  blind.

She  loves  her  servant.     'Tis  strange  to  think

That  erring  folly  sojtow  can  sink ;

But  stranger  still  that  the  slave  she  wooes

Should  scorn  her  suit  and  her  love  refuse.

His  cold  eye  to  hers  he  never  will  raise ;

He  never  will  walk  in  the  path  where  she  strays.

He  stops  if  before  him  her  form  he  sees ;

If  she  lingers  a  moment  he  turns  and  flees.

When  her  lifted  veil  leaves  her  cheek  exposed,

With  the  stud  of  his  eyelash  his  eye  is  closed.

If  she  weeps  in  her  sorrow  he  laughs  at  her  pain,

And  closes  each  door  that  she  opens  in  vain.

It  may  be  that  her  form  is  not  fair  in  his  eyes,

And  his  cold  heart  refuses  the  proffered  prize.

If  once  her  beloved  one  sate  with  us

He  would  sit  with  us  ever,  not  treat  us  thus.

Our  sweet  society  ne'er  would  he  leave,

But  joy  unending  would  give  and  receive.

But  not  all  have  this  giio  in  their  hands :  to  enthral

The  heart  they  would  win  is  not  given  to  all.

There  is  many  a  woman,  fair,  good,  and  kind,

To  whom  never  the  heart  of  a  man  inclined ;

And  many  a  Laila  with  soft  black  eye,

The  tears  of  whose  heart-blood  are  never  dry."


THE  WOMEN  OF  MEMPHIS.  225

Zulaikha  heard,  and  resentment  woke
To  punish  the  dames  for  the  words  they  spoke.
She  summoned  them  all  from  the  city  to  share
A  sumptuous  feast  which  she  bade  prepare.
A  delicate  banquet  meet  for  kings
Was  spread  with  the  choicest  of  dainty  things.
Cups  filled  with  sherbet  of  every  hue
Shone  as  rifts  in  a  cloud  when  the  sun  gleams  through.
There  were  goblets  of  purest  crystal  filled
With  wine  and  sweet  odours  with  art  distilled.
The  golden  cloth  blazed  like  the  sunlight ;  a  whole
Cluster  of  stars  was  each  silver  bowl.
From  goblet  and  charger  rare  odours  came ;
There  was  strength  for  the  spirit  and  food  for  the  frame.
All  daintiest  fare  that  your  lip  would  taste,
From  fish  to  fowl,  on  the  cloth  was  placed.
It  seemed  that  the  fairest  their  teeth  had  lent
For  almonds,  their  lips  for  the  sugar  sent.
A  mimic  palace  rose  fair  to  view
Of  a  thousand  sweets  of  each  varied  hue,
Where  instead  of  a  carpet  the  floor  was  made
With  bricks  of  candy  and  marmalade.
Fruit  in  profusion,  of  sorts  most  rare,
Piled  in  baskets,  bloomed  fresh  and  fair.
Those  who  looked  on  their  soft  transparency  felt
That  the  delicate  pulp  would  dissolve  and  melt.


226  THE  WOMEN  OF  MEMPHIS.

Bands  of  boys  and  young  maidens,  fine

As  mincing  peacocks,  were  ranged  in  line ;

And  the  fair  dames  of  Memphis,  like  Peris  eyed,     •

In  a  ring  on  their  couches  sate  side  by  side.

They  tasted  of  all  that  they  fancied,  and  each

Was  courteous  in  manner  and  gentle  in  speech.

The  feast  was  ended ;  the  cloth  was  raised,
And  Zulaikha  sweetly  each  lady  praised.
Then  she  set,  as  she  planned  in  her  wily  breast,
A  knife  and  an  orange  beside  each  guest :
An  orange,  to  purge  the  dark  thoughts  within
Each  jaundiced  heart  with  its  golden  skin.
One  hand,  as  she  bade  them,  the  orange  clasped,
The  knife  in  the  other  was  firmly  grasped.
Thus  she  addressed  them :  "  Dames  fair  and  sweet,
Most  lovely  of  all  when  the  fairest  meet,
Why  should  my  pleasure  your  hearts  annoy  ?
Why  blame  me  for  loving  my  Hebrew  boy  ?
If  your  eyes  with  the  light  of  his  eyes  were  filled,
Each  tongue  that  blames  me  were  hushed  and  stilled.
I  will  bid  him  forth,  if  you  all  agree,
And  bring  him  near  for  your  eyes  to  see."
"  This,  even  this,"  cried  each  eager  dame,
"  Is  the  dearest  wish  that  our  hearts  can  frame.
Bid  him  come ;  let  us  look  on  the  lovely  face
That  shall  stir  our  hearts  with  its  youthful  grace.


THE  WOMEN  OF  MEMPHIS.  227

Already  charmed,  though  our  eyes  never  fell
On  the  youth  we  long  for,  we  love  him  well.
These  oranges  still  in  our  hands  we  hold,
To  sweeten  the  spleen  with  their  skins  of  gold.
But  they  please  us  not,  for  he  is  not  here :
Let  not  one  be  cut  till  the  boy  appear."

She  sent  the  nurse  to  address  him  thus  :
"  Come,  free-waving  cypress,  come  forth  to  us.
Let  us  worship  the  ground  which  thy  dear  feet  press,
And  bow  down  at  the  sight  of  thy  loveliness.
Let  our  love-stricken  hearts  be  thy  chosen  retreat,
And  our  eyes  a  soft  carpet  beneath  thy  feet."

But  he  came  not  forth,  like  a  lingering  rose
Which  the  spell  of  the  charmer  has  failed  to  unclose.
Then  Zulaikha  flew  to  the  house  where  he  dwelt,
And  in  fond  entreaty  before  him  knelt :
"  My  darling,  the  light  of  these  longing  eyes,
Hope  of  my  heart,"  thus  she  spoke  with  sighs,
"  I  fed  on  the  hope  which  thy  words  had  given ;
But  that  hope  from  my  breast  by  despair  is  driven.
For  thee  have  I  forfeited  all :  my  name
Through  thee  has  been  made  a  reproach  and  shame.
I  have  found  no  favour :  thou  wouldst  not  fling
One  pitying  look  on  so  mean  a  thing.
Yet  let  not  the  women  of  Memphis  see
That  I  am  so  hated  and  scorned  by  thee.


228  THE  WOMEN  OF  MEMPHIS.

Come,  sprinkle  the  salt  of  thy  lip  to  cure

The  wounds  of  my  heart  and  the  pain  I  endure.

Let  the  salt  be  sacred :  repay  the  debt

Of  the  faithful  love  thou  shouldst  never  forget."

The  heart  of  Yiisuf  grew  soft  at  the  spell
Of  her  gentle  words,  for  she  charmed  so  well.
Swift  as  the  wind  from  her  knees  she  rose,
And  decked  him  gay  with  the  garb  she  chose.
Over  his  shoulders  she  drew  with  care,
The  scented  locks  of  his  curling  hair,
Like  serpents  of  jet-black  lustre  seen
With  their  twisted  coils  where  the  grass  is  green.
A  girdle  gleaming  with  gold,  round  the  waist
That  itself  was  fine  as  a  hair,  she  braced.
I  marvel  so  dainty  a  waist  could  bear
The  weight  of  the  jewels  that  glittered  there.
She  girt  his  brow  with  bright  gems ;  each  stone
Of  wondrous  beauty  enhanced  his  own.
On  his  shoes  were  rubies  and  many  a  gem,
And  pearls  on  the  latchets  that  fastened  them.
A  scarf,  on  whose  every  thread  was  strung
A  loving  heart,  on  his  arm  was  hung.
A  golden  ewer  she  gave  him  to  hold,
And  a  maid  brow-bound  with  a  fillet  of  gold
In  her  hand  a  basin  of  silver  bore,
And  shadow-like  moved  as  he  walked  before.


THE  WOMEN  OF  MEMPHIS.  229

If  a  damsel  had  looked,  she  at  once  had  resigned
All  joy  of  her  life,  all  the  peace  of  her  mind.
Too  weak  were  my  tongue  if  it  tried  to  express
The  charm  of  his  wonderful  loveliness.

Like  a  bed  of  roses  in  perfect  bloom
That  secret  treasure  appeared  in  the  room.
The  women  of  Memphis  beheld  him,  and  took
From  that  garden  of  glory  the  rose  of  a  look.
One  glance  at  his  beauty  o'erpowered  each  soul
And  drew  from  their  fingers  the  reins  of  control.
Each  lady  would  cut  through  the  orange  she  held,
As  she  gazed  on  that  beauty  unparalleled.
But  she  wounded  her  finger,  so  moved  in  her  heart,
That  she  knew  not  her  hand  and  the  orange  apart.
One  made  a  pen  of  her  finger,  to  write
On  her  soul  his  name  who  had  ravished  her  sight —
A  reed  which,  struck  with  the  point  of  the  knife,
Poured  out  a  red  flood  from  each  joint  in  the  strife.
One  scored  a  calendar's  lines  in  red
On  the  silver  sheet  of  her  palm  outspread,
And  each  column,  marked  with  the  blood-drops,  showed
Like  a  brook  when  the  stream  o'er  the  bank  has  flowed.

When  they  saw  that  youth  in  his  beauty's  pride  :
"  No  mortal  is  he,"  in  amaze  they  cried.
No  clay  and  water  composed  his  frame,
But,  a  holy  angel,  from  heaven  he  came."


230  THE  WOMEN  OF  MEMPHIS.

"  'Tis  my  peerless  boy,"  cried  Zulaikha,  "  long
For  him  have  I  suffered  reproach  and  wrong.
I  told  him  my  love  for  him,  called  him  the  whole
Aim  and  desire  of  my  heart  and  soul.
He  looked  on  me  coldly ;  I  bent  riot  his  will
To  give  me  his  love  and  my  hope  fulfil.
He  still  rebelled :  I  was  forced  to  send
To  prison  the  boy  whom  I  could  not  bend.
In  trouble  and  toil,  under  lock  and  chain,
He  passed  long  days  in  affliction  and  pain.
But  his  spirit  was  tamed  by  the  woe  he  felt,
And  the  heart  that  was  hardened  began  to  melt.
Keep  your  wild  bird  in  a  cage  and  see
How  soon  he  forgets  that  he  once  was  free."
Of  those  who  wounded  their  hands  a  part
Lost  reason  and  patience,  and  mind  and  heart.
Too  weak  the  sharp  sword  of  his  love  to  stay,
They  gave  up  their  souls  ere  they  moved  away.
The  reason  of  others  grew  dark  and  dim,
And  madness  possessed  them  for  love  of  him.
Bare-headed,  bare-footed,  they  fled  amain,
And    the    light    that    had    vanished    ne'er    kindled

again.

To  some  their  senses  at  length  returned,
But     their     hearts     were     wounded,    their     bosoms

burned.


THE  WOMEN  OF  MEMPHIS.  231

They  were  drunk  with  the  cup  which  was  full  to  the

brim,

And  the  birds  of  their  hearts  were  ensnared  by  him.
Nay,  Yiisuf  s  love  was  a  mighty  bowl
With  varied  power  to  move  the  soul.
One  drank  the  wine  till 'her  senses  reeled ;
To  another,  life  had  no  joy  to  yield  ;
One  offered  her  soul  his  least  wish  to  fulfil ;
One  dreamed  of  him  ever,  but  mute  and  still.
But  only  the  woman  to  whom  no  share
Of  the  wine  was  vouchsafed  could  be  pitied  there.


WHEN  many  rivals  compete,  the  prize
Waxes  more  dear  in  the  winner's  eyes,
When  another  loves  the  fair  maid  you  seek,
The  love  grows  strong  that  before  was  weak,
And  the  flame  that  languished  bursts  forth  anew
When  eager"  rivals  come  near  to  sue.
The  flame  fed  afresh  on  Zulaikha's  mind,
And  her  heart  more  strongly  to  Yiisuf  inclined.
Again  she  spoke  to  that  lovely  band,
Whom  love  had  wounded  in  heart  and  hand :
"  If  ye  think  I  had  reason,  forbear  to  chide
And  blame  me  for  love  which  I  could  not  hide.
The  door  of  friendship  is  open ;  be
Friends  in  my  trouble  and  prosper  me."

They  swept  the  chords  of  love's  lute  and  raised
Their  voices  in  tune  and  excused  and  praised.
"  Yes,  he  is  lord  of  the  realm  of  the  soul ;
There  his  is  the  right  and  the  sway  and  control.
What  creature  that  looks — nay,  even  what  stone —
On  that  lovely  face,  calls  its  heart  its  own  ?


THREATS.  233

If  thy  love  for  him  be  thy  sum  of  distress,

Thine  excuse  is  sufficient,  his  loveliness.

Breathes  there  a  mortal  beneath  the  sky,

Who  can  look  unmoved  on  that  witching  eye  ?

The  heaven  has  oft  compassed  the  earth,  but  where

Has  it  seen  a  darling  so  bright  and  fair  ?

Thou  hast  loved  the  sweet  youth,  but  thou  art  not  to

blame,

Thy  soul  is  afire,  but  thy  love  is  no  shame.
May    his    strong    heart    touched    by    thy    passion

relent,

And  shame  make  thy  darling  his  coldness  repent."
They  ceased.     On  Yiisuf  their  eyes  they  bent,
And  addressed  him  thus  in  admonishment :
"  Joy  of  the  age,  from  the  east  to  the  west,
The  fame  of  thy  virtue  by  all  is  confessed.
This  garden,  where  roses  with  thorns  we  see,
Has  ne'er  grown  a  rose  without  thorns  like  thee.
Stoop  down  for  a  little,  and  add  a  grace
To  that  height  by  descent  from  thy  lofty  place.
Zulaikha  is  dust  for  thy  feet  to  tread,
Trail  thy  skirt  for  awhile  where  that  dust  is  spread.
How,  0  pure  one !  wilt  thou  be  hurt
By  touching  the  dust  for  a  time  with  thy  skirt  ?
One  wish  has  Zulaikha :  no  longer  refuse
To  grant  the  sole  favour  for  which  she  sues.


234  THREATS.

If  thy  wish  be  to  have  no  desires  of  thine  own,

Oh,  leave  not  the  thirsty  to  languish  alone.

She  has  waited  on  thee,  with  thy  wishes  complied ;

Oh,  let  not  the  meed  of  her  love  be  denied.

Eegard  her  entreaties,  no  longer  be  coy,

For  we  fear  in  our  hearts,  0  too  beautiful  boy,

If  thou  still  wilt  rebel  and  no  warning  wilt  heed,

The  fruit  in  the  end  will  be  bitter  indeed.

She  will  wash  out  thy  love  from  the  depths  of  her  soul,

And  a  deluge  of  fury  will  over  thee  roll.

Beware,  and  remember  love  turned  to  hate,

Will  press  the  old  friend  with  the  sorest  weight.

When  over  the  bank  the  fierce  torrents  burst,

The  mother  will  tread  on  the  child  she  nursed.

She  threatens  a  prison.     Beware,  beware,

And  think  of  the  pains  that  await  thee  there.

'Tis  narrow  and  dark  like  a  tyrant's  grave,

Far  from  it  fly  those  who  have  lives  to  save ;

Where  the  foul  air  stifles  the  living  breath,

Where  wretches  lie  who  are  waiting  for  death,

The  hand  of  the  builder  has  fashioned  there

No  narrowest  passage  for  light  or  air.

Plague  is  the  gift  which  the  close  air  brings,

And  its  floor  is  the  soil  whence  misery  springs.

The  light  of  dawn  never  enters  where

The  door  is  closed  with  the  key  of  despair.


THREATS.  235

Narrow  and  blacker  than  pitch,  the  chains

Are  the  only  treasure  the  vault  contains.

There  without  bread,  without  water,  lie

The  weary  wretches  who  fain  would  die.

"Warders  watch  over  them,  turn  by  turn,

And  their  eyes  are  fierce  and  their  words  are  stern.

"Now  say,  shall  such  an  ill  mansion  be,

0  heart- enslaver,  a  home  for  thee  ?

Let  not  thy  heart  be  so  cruel ;  spare

Thyself  and  open  the  door  to  her  prayer.

Bend  thy  proud  head  as  a  reed  is  bent  :

Banish  all  fear  from  thy  heart,  and  consent.

Or  if  thy  fancy  perchance  prefer

More  winning  beauty  and  turn  from  her,

To  us  in  secret  thy  heart  incline,

And  be  ours  for  ever  as  we  are  thine.

See,  in  our  charms  we  are  matchless ;  see,

Moons  lighting  the  heaven  of  beauty  are  we.

Shame  makes  Zulaikha  her  own  mouth  close

When  we  open  our  lips  whence  the  honey  flows.

How  can  Zulaikha  with  us  compare  ?

So  sweet  are  we  and  so  bright  and  fair."

He  heard  the  voice  of  the  charmers,  and  knew
That  their  zeal  for  Zulaikha  was  all  untrue.
They  would  lead  him  to  swerve  from  his  faith  and  err,
But  more  for  the  sake  of  themselves  than  of  her.


236  THREATS.

His  heart  was  troubled,  lie  turned  aside,

And  no  tender  look  to  their  looks  replied.

He  lifted  to  heaven  his  hands  and  prayed :

"  0  Thou  who  givest  the  needy  aid,

Friend  of  the  humble  recluse,  the  sure

Help  and  refuge  of  all  who  are  pure ;

Against  the  oppressor  a  strong  defence,

The  lamp  and  beacon  of  innocence  ;

Their  wiles  torment  me.     The  bolt,  the  bar,

The  chains  of  the  prison  were  better  far.

Years  in  a  dungeon  were  lighter  pain

Than  to  look  on  the  face  of  these  women  again.

Thus  our  hearts  grow  blind  that  we  cannot  see,

And  we  wander  farther  and  farther  from  Thee.

If  Thou  wilt  not  turn  their  devices  aside

Who  have  strayed  from  the  path  and  their  faith  denied'

Who  will  not  permit  me  to  rest  and  be  free —

If  Thou  wilt  not  aid  me,  ah,  woe  is  me."

For  prison  he  prayed.     Nor  would  God  deny
The  boon  he  sought  with  his  eager  cry.
But  had  Yusuf  asked  at  His  hands  release,
The  boy  unimprisoned  had  gone  in  peace.
From  the  snares  of  the  women  the  bird  had  flown,
And  the  pains  of  the  dungeon  he  ne'er  had  known.


237


3mprt0onment

IN  vain  they  tempted  him.     "No  success,
Had  the  art  of  each  wily  idolatress.
The  pure  soul  of  Yiisuf  was  still  unmoved,
Nay,  firmer  still  by  temptation  proved.
And  like  bats  that  flee  ere  the  sun  is  bright,
They  despaired  of  the  joy  of  his  beauty's  light.
But  they  left  not  Zulaikha  a  moment's  rest,
On  her  sorrowing  soul  their  advice  they  pressed.
"  Poor  suffering  creature,"  'twas  thus  they  cried,
"  Unworthiest  thou  to  be  thus  denied ;
No  Houri's  child  is  like  Yiisuf  fair,
But  he  will  not  listen  to  grant  thy  prayer.
We  gave  him  rebuke  and  advice  enough,
And  the  file  of  our  tongue  we  made  sharp  and  rough.
But  his  heart  is  hard,  and  he  will  not  feel ;
The  file,  though  rough,  would  not  bite  the  steel.
Let  the  forge — his  prison — be  heated,  so
The  stubborn  iron  will  melt  and  glow.
When  the  metal  grows  soft  in  the  flame,  the  skill
Of  the  smith  can  fashion  its  form  at  will.


238  IMPRISONMENT.

If  the  softened  iron  thou  canst  not  mould,
Why  hammer  in  vain  when  the  steel  is  cold  ? "

She  trusted  the  words  that  the  charmers  spoke,
And  hope  in  her  bosom  again  awoke.
She  would  prison  the  treasure  her  heart  loved  best,
And  make  him  suffer  that  she  might  rest.
When  love  is  not  perfect,  with  one  sole  thought —
Himself — is  the  heart  of  the  lover  fraught.
He  looks  on  his  love  as  a  charming  toy,
The  spring  and  source  of  his  selfish  joy.
One  rose  will  he  pluck  from  his  love,  and  leave
A  hundred  thorns  her  lone  heart  to  grieve.

As  Zulaikha  sate  by  her  husband's  side,
She  poured  out  the  rage  of  her  soul  and  cried :
"  This  boy  has  brought  me  to  grief  and  shame  ;
The  high  and  the  humble  reproach  my  name.
Men  and  women  the  story  tell,
How  I  pine  for  the  youth  whom  I  love  too  well ;
That  I  am  the  game  he  has  struck  with  his  dart,
And  laid  on  the  ground  with  a  bleeding  heart.
Barb  upon  barb  in  my  breast,  they  say,
Has  drained  the  blood  from  the  stricken  prey ;
No  hair  of  my  head  from  that  love  is  free,
And  my  very  self  is  a  stranger  to  me.
To  send  him  to  prison  and  thus  repel
The  growing  slander,  methinks,  were  well,


IMPRISONMENT.  239

And  in  every  street  of  the  town  to  proclaim
By  the  voice  of  the  crier  the  traitor's  shame  ;
Thus  shall  be  punished  the  slave  who  allows
His  eye  to  look  on  his  master's  spouse,
And  with  lawless  feet,  on  the  carpet  spread
For  the  lord  who  owns  him,  presumes  to  tread/
The  tongue  of  reproach  will  be  silent  when
My  avenging  wrath  is  made  known  to  men."

The  plan  she  spoke  to  his  willing  ear,
Delighted  the  heart  of  the  Grand  Vizier.
"  I  have  pondered  it  long,"  was  the  answer  he  made ;
"  Long  on  my  soul  has  the  trouble  weighed ;
But  I  never  have  pierced  a  pearl  so  fine,
Or  devised  a  plan  to  compare  with  thine.
The  boy  is  thine  own,  as  thou  wilt,  to  treat ;
Sweep  thou  the  dust  from  the  path  of  thy  feet."

She  heard  his  speech  with  a  joyful  smile,
And  she  turned  to  Yusuf  the  rein  of  her  guile :
"  0  wish  of  my  heart  and  desire  of  mine  eyes,
The  only  treasure  on  earth  I  prize,
My  lord's  permission  has  left  me  free
To  deal  as  my  will  may  incline  with  thee.
Thy  head,  if  I  will,  in  a  prison  must  lie,
Thy  foot,  if  I  order,  will  tread  the  sky.
Why  still  rebellious  ?  why  still  so  blind  ?
Bend  thy  proud  spirit  at  last  and  be  kind.


240  IMPRISONMENT.

Oh,  come,  tread  the  path  of  agreement  and  peace ;

Me  from  torment,  thyself  from  affliction,  release.

Come,  grant  me  my  wish ;  I  with  thine  will  comply ;

In  the  zenith  of  glory  thy  name  shall  be  high.

Beware,  beware,  or  the  door  will  unclose

Of  a  prison  fraught  with  a  hundred  woes ;

And  to  lie  there  in  sorrow  and  chains  will  be

Less  sweet  than  to  sit  and  smile  softly  on  me."

He  opened  his  lips  in  reply :  but  well

You  know  the  answer  I  need  not  tell.

In  Zulaikha's  bosom  resentment  woke,

And  thus  to  the  chief  of  the  guard  she  spoke :

"  Off  with  his  robe  and  his  cap  of  gold ;

In  coarsest  woollen  his  limbs  enfold.

His  silver  with  fetters  of  iron  deck,

And  bind  the  slave's  collar  about  his  neck.

Guilty  of  crime,  make  him  sit  on  an  ass

And  through  every  street  of  the  city  pass ;

And  let  a  crier's  loud  voice  proclaim

That  the  treacherous  servant,  lost  to  shame,

Who  dares  on  his  master's  carpet  to  tread,

Shall  thus  with  scorn  to  his  prison  be  led."

The  multitude  gathered  on  every  side,
And  "  God  forbid,"  in  amaze  they  cried,
"  That  from  one  so  fair  should  come  evil  deed —
The  robber  of  hearts  cause  a  heart  to  bleed.


IMPRISONMENT.  241

Of  the  race  of  the  angels  he  surely  is  one,

And  no  deeds  of  Satan  by  them  are  done.

No  evil  act  will  the  lovely  do,

For  the  sage  has  said,  and  his  words  are  true :

'  The  fair  in  face  are  not  soiled  with  sin  ;

Less  fair  are  their  looks  than  their  souls  within.

But  he  who  is  hideous  in  form  and  face,

Has  a  heart  in  his  breast  that  is  yet  more  base/

And  we  see  the  truth  of  the  maxim  still,

Ne'er  the  hideous  do  good  nor  the  lovely  ill."

Thus  to  the  dungeon  the  boy  was  driven/

And  there  to  the  charge  of  the  jailor  given.

Within  the  prison  the  saint  was  led,

And  life  seemed  to  return  to  the  corpse  of  the  dead.

A  cry  of  joy  from  the  captives  rose,

And  happiness  came  to  that  house  of  woes ;

While  all  in  rapture  their  fetters  beat

As  they  saw  the  approach  of  his  blessed  feet.

None  felt  the  chain  that  confined  each  limb,

The  ring  on  his  neck  was  no  bond  for  him.

A  rapturous  joy  was  his  gloomy  fate,

And  a  mountain  of  woe  was  a  straw  in  weight.

Wherever  is  one  of  the  Houris'  race

She  makes  a  heaven  of  the  dreariest  place.

Where  the  loved  one  comes  with  her  cheek  of  rose,

There  a  rose-bed  is  though  a  furnace  glows.

Q


242  IMPRISONMENT.

When  the  glad  commotion  was  hushed  and  still,

To  the  jailor  Zulaikha  declared  her  will :

"  Spare  him :  with  kindness  the  captive  treat ;

Strike  the  ring  from  his  neck  and  the  chain  from  his

feet.

Strip  off  the  rough  gown  from  his  silver  skin ;
Bring  silken  raiment  to  robe  him  in,
Wash  the  dust  of  toil  from  his  head,  and  set
On  his  brows  the  bright  round  of  a  coronet.
A  separate  house  for  his  rest  prepare,
And  lodge  him  apart  from  the  others  there.
The  door  and  the  walls  with  sweet  scent  perfume ;
Brighten  each  window  and  arch  of  his  room ;
And  over  the  floor  be  a  carpet  laid
Of  silver  tissue  and  gold  brocade."

Within  the  chamber  the  captive  passed :
The  carpet  of  prayer  on  the  ground  he  cast,
And  raised — for  such  was  his  wont  each  day —
His  tranquil  face  to  the  arch  to  pray.
He  joyed  to  have  fled  from  the  women's  snare,
And  his  burthen  was  light  for  his  heart  to  bear.  •
Woe  never  visits  the  world  but  it  brings

o

Sweet  scent  of  the  coming  of  happier  things  ;

And  the  weary  captive  who  lies  in  chains

Feels  the  breath  of  a  blessing  to  lighten  his  pains.


243


IRepentance.

IN  this  vault  of  turki's  upreared  of  old,
The  children  of  Adam  are  dull  and  cold ;
Their  hearts  are  never  in  thankful  mood,
But  their  thoughts  are  still  of  ingratitude ;
And  the  worth  is  unknown,  till  they  fade  away,
Of  the  blessings  which  brighten  each  passing  day.
Though  many  a  lover  may  nerve  his  heart,
When  he  deems  he  is  weary  of  love,  to  part,
When  the  flame  of  absence  is  kindled  by  Doom
His  body  will  waste  and  his  heart  consume.

The  light  that  the  rose-cheek  of  Yiisuf  shed
Made  the  house  of  bondage  a  bright  rose-bed ;
But  Zulaikha,  whose  palace  had  been  more  fair
Than  a  garden  of  roses  when  he  was  there,
Felt  a  deep  gloom  on  her  spirit  press,
When  she  saw  not  the  light  of  his  loveliness.
Sad  was  her  heart  in  that  dungeon's  hold,
And  one  sorrow  by  parting  became  twofold.

Where  is  woe  like  the  lover's  who  looks  on  the  place
Once  blest  with  the  light  of  his  darling's  face  ?


244  REPENTANCE.

What  comfort  is  found  in  the  drear  rose-bed,

When  the  thorns  are  left  and  the  roses  are  dead  ?

Ah,  how  the  heart  of  the  bulbul  is  torn —

A  roseless  garden  and  spears  of  thorn !

When  her  look  on  her  desolate  garden  was  bent,

Like  a  bud  unclosing  her  robe  she  rent.

Why  should  the  hand  of  the  mourner  refrain

From  tearing  his  robe  in  a  torment  of  pain  ?

Let  him  rend  through  his  bosom  a  way  to  his  heart

That  comfort  may  enter  and  banish  the  smart.
She  tore  her  rose-cheek  in  her  wild  despair ;

She  rent  her  locks  like  the  spikenard's  hair ;

And  her  mangled  cheek  and  her  hair  might  show
How  she  rent  her  heart  in  her  lonely  woe.
Her  heart  beat  her  bosom  with  fingers  of  stone,
And  the  war-drum  of  parting  was  loud  in  its  tone.
Though  queen  of  the  army  of  beauty,  the  beat
Of  that  drum  of  the  foeman  proclaimed  her  defeat.
With  both  hands  she  threw  ashes  and  dust  on  her  head,
And  a  flood  of  hot  tears  from  her  eyes  she  shed.
That  dust  and  water  were  clay  to  close
The  rifts  in  her  heart  that  was  rent  by  her  woes ;
But  a  handful  of  clay  were  applied  in  vain
To  a  heart  which  absence  has  broken  in  twain.
Her  lips  of  pomegranate  were  torn  by  the  teeth
Whose  pure  pearls  mangled  the  ruby  beneath ;


REPENTANCE.  245

But  those  teeth  were  pressed  on  her  lip  that  they

The  torrent  that  ran  from  her  heart  might  stay.

With  blue  she  tinted  her  cheek  of  rose,

Like  a  lily  drenched  when  the  brook  o'erflows :

Ked  for  the  days  of  our  joy  we  keep,

And  blue  is  their  colour  who  mourn  and  weep.1

With  the  blood  of  her  heart  on  her  cheek  she  wrote ;

With  the  hand  of  anguish  her  knee  she  smote :

"  Who  e'er  wrought  as  I  wrought  ?  " — it  was  thus  she

complained —

"  Who  has  drunk  of  the  poison  which  I  have  drained  ?
What  lover's  axe  in  this  world  of  woe
E'er  struck  his  own  foot  with  so  deadly  a  blow  ?
I  tore  out  mine  eyes  with  this  hand :  I  fell
In  my  blindness,  self-cast,  to  the  depths  of  the  well.
A  mountain  of  woe  on  my  back  I  laid,
And   am  crushed  to  the  earth  with  the  load  down-
weighed.

My  heart  is  made  blood  by  the  fate  that  drew
My  eager  steps  his  fair  shape  to  pursue.
The  treacherous  Heavens  have  darkened  my  day:
I  let  my  love  go  and  he  passed  away.
Estranged  from  mine  own  heart  no  longer  I  know
Where  balm  may  be  found  that  will  soften  my  woe."

1  Kaika"wus,  an  ancient  King  of  Persia,  ordered  his  subjects  to  wear
blue  as  mourning  for  his  son.


246  REPENTANCE.

Thus  broken-hearted  she  made  lament,
And  ever  in  weeping  the  night  was  spent.
Each  thing  he  had  touched,  as  it  met  her  eye,
Drew  from  her  bosom  a  long  deep  sigh.
Sad  was  her  soul,  and  her  eyes  were  dim,
As  she  caught  up  the  raiment  once  worn  by  him.
But  the  touch  was  to  her  as  the  breath  of  the  rose,
And  soothed  the  fierce  pain  of  her  burning  woes.
About  her  own  neck  his  collar  she  tied,
With  a  hundred  kisses  of  love  applied :
"  This  is  my  collar  of  glory,  nay,
The  band  of  my  heart,"  she  would  cry,  "  and  its  stay."
To  place  her  arm  in  his  mantle's  sleeve
Would  for  a  moment  her  pain  relieve ;
As  she  thought  of  her  love  it  was  touched  and  kissed,
And  with  silver  filled  of  her  dainty  wrist.
She  pressed  to  her  eyes — and  the  touch  was  sweet —
The  skirt  that  had  lain  on  her  darling's  feet,
And,  hopeless  to  fasten  her  lips  on  them,
Deluded  her  soul  with  a  kiss  of  the  hem.
Pearl  and  ruby  in  showers  she  spread
Over  the  cap  that  had  decked  his  head.
For  once  it  had  shaded  the  beautiful  brow
To  which  the  whole  world  loved  in  worship  to  bow.
To  the  zone  that  had  girdled  his  waist  she  gave
The  honour  due  from  a  faithful  slave ;


REPENTANCE.  247

As  a  token  most  dear  of  her  vanished  fawn
Round  her  neck  for  a  snare  was  the  girdle  drawn.
"With  dim  eyes  weeping,  her  hands  displayed
The  glittering  folds  of  his  robe  of  brocade.
She  bathed  its  skirts  with  her  tears,  and  the  gleam
Of  the  rubies  she  dropped  was  on  band  and  seam.

Thus  was  the  grief  of  Zulaikha  renewed
Through  the  dreary  day  by  each  thing  she  viewed.
As  she  knew  not  the  value  of  present  joy
The  fierce  flame  of  absence  must  bliss  destroy.
Zulaikha  sorrowed,  but  sorrowed  in  vain;
Only  patience  was  left  her  to  heal  her  pain.
Yes,  patience  would  bring  her  the  balm  of  rest,
But  how  could  she  banish  her  love  from  her  breast  ?

Death  to  the  lover  who  weeps  alone
Is  the  loss  of  the  love  he  has  loved  and  known.
Of  torments  and  woe  there  is  none  like  this —
To  part  from  one's  love  after  days  of  bliss.
If  no  sweet  companionship  linked  their  lives,
His  heart  may  break,  but  it  still  survives.

Zulaikha  fain  from  herself  would  fly,
And,  of  good  despairing,  would  gladly  die.
The  wall  and  the  floor  with  her  head  she  smote,
The  blood-thirsty  dagger  was  raised  to  her  throat.
She  sought,  like  a  watchman,  the  roof  at  night
To  cast  herself  down  from  the  giddy  height.


248  REPENTANCE.

She  twisted  a  cord  of  her  hair,  and  strove
To  stifle  her  breath  with  the  noose  she  wove.
She  sought  release  for  her  weary  soul —
A  poisonous  draught  from  life's  pleasant  bowl.
She  sickened  of  all,  and  would  fain  destroy
Her  life  with  each  thing  that  was  once  her  joy.

The  pitying  nurse  sought  her  lady's  side,
Kissed  her  hands  and  feet  and  blessed  her  and  cried
"  May  thy  darling  return  to  dispel  thy  woe ;
May  thy  cup  with  the  wine  of  his  love  o'erflow  !
May  a  happy  meeting  thy  bliss  restore,
With  no  fear  of  parting  for  evermore !
How  long  shall  this  folly  subdue  thee  ?     Arise,
Throw  off  thy  madness,  again  be  wise.
This  sad  heart  bleeds  when  thy  grief  I  see :
What  woman  ever  has  acted  like  thee  ?
Patience — list  to  the  voice  of  age —
Patience  alone  will  thy  grief  assuage.
Impatience  has  brought  thee  this  fever  of  pain :
Let  patience  allay  it  with  soothing  rain.
When  o'er  thee  the  whirlwinds  of  sorrow  pass,
Flee  not  before  them  like  scattered  grass.
Keep  thy  foot  in  thy  skirt  with  undaunted  will,
And  stand  firm  in  thy  place  like  a  rooted  hill.
Patience  will  lead  thee  to  lasting  bliss,
And  the  fruit  of  thy  longing  thou  shalt  not  miss.


REPENTANCE.  249

Every  triumph  from  patience  springs,

The  happy  herald  of  better  things.

Through  patience  the  pearl  from  the  rain-drop  grows,

And  the  diamond  shines  and  the  ruby  glows ;

The  full  ear  springs  from  the  scattered  seed,

And  food  from  the  ear  for  the  traveller's  need.

So  moons  come  and  vanish  till  babes  are  born,

And  with  moonlike  beauty  the  world  adorn."

Zulaikha  listened,  and,  half  consoled,
The  outward  signs  of  her  grief  controlled.
Eent  to  the  skirt  was  her  robe,  but  still
She  confined  her  feet  with  a  stronger  will.
But  if  for  a  moment  the  lover  hears,
The  warner  speaks  to  forgetful  ears ;
Hushed  is  that  tongue  and  no  traces  remain
Of  the  words  of  wisdom  he  spoke  in  vain.


IDisit  to  tbe  prison.


WHEN  the  sun,  like  Yiisuf,  afar  in  the  west,

In  his  gloomy  prison  had  sunk  to  rest  ;

And,  like  Zulaikha,  the  mourning  skies

Wept  for  his  loss  with  their  starry  eyes  ;

While  the  skirt  of  the  heavens  was  dipped  in  a  flood

Of  rose-red  hue  from  its  tears  of  blood;

Hot  tears  for  Yiisuf  Zulaikha  shed,

And  her  eyes  like  the  evening  horizon  were  red.

She  went  to  her  chamber  to  sigh  and  grieve,

And  the  wail  of  the  day  was  renewed  at  eve.

When  the  day  of  a  lover  is  merged  in  night
Again  wakes  his  pain  with  redoubled  might.
For  the  loss  of  his  love  his  lone  day  is  dim  ;
But  the  night  is  yet  darker  and  sadder  for  him.
Dark  is  the  day  when  she  comes  not  back,
But  the  night  is  darker,  deep  black  upon  black
For  night  to  the  lover  comes  heavy  with  gloom,
And  fierce  is  the  offspring  that  comes  from  her  womb
When  the  terrible  child  is  brought  forth  it  lives
On  blood  for  the  milk  which  a  mother  gives.


THE  VISIT  TO  THE  PRISON.  251

Ah,  think  what  woe  must  the  mother  bring

From  whom  a  child  thirsting  for  blood  can  spring !

In  the  wild  impatience  that  drove  her  mad,

The  night  to  Zulaikha  was  gloomy  and  sad ;

The  darling  who  ravished  her  heart  was  away,

And  her  night  was  moonless  and  sunless  her  day.

There  was  splendour  of  torches,  yet  dark  was  each  place

Where  shone  not  the  light  of  her  loved  one's  face.

Through  the  stress  of  her  anguish  she  closed  no  eye ;

And  she  said  with  hot  tears  and  a  bitter  cry :

"  How  fares  he  this  night  ?  Ah,  how  can  I  tell  ?

Who  is  the  bail  that  they  serve  him  well  ?

Who  has  smoothed  the  folds  at  his  feet,  and  set

In  order  the  bolster  and  coverlet  ?

Whose  hand  has  lighted  a  lamp  by  his  bed,

And  softened  the  pillow  to  rest  his  head  ?

Who  has  loosened  the  zone  from  his  waist,  and  told,

To  lull  him,  tales  of  the  times  of  old  ?

Has  the  prison  injured  his  tender  frame  ?

Like  a  bird  encaged,  is  the  captive  tame  ?

Have  his  roses  paled  in  the  dungeon  air  ?

Are  his  locks  still  bright  as  the  spikenard's  hair  ?

Is  the  bloom  of  the  rose-garden  faded  and  dead  ?

Is  the  splendour  that  shone  from  the  spikenard  fled  ?

Is  his  heart  like  a  rosebud  compressed  with  woes,

Or  expanded  in  joy  like  the  perfect  rose  ?  "


252  THE  VISIT  TO  THE  PRISON.

Thus  till  a  watch  of  the  night  was  spent
She  poured  out  her  anguish  in  wail  and  lament.
Then  strength  departed,  endurance  died ;
The  brook  of  her  patience  was  empty  and  dried.
Then  the  flame  of  her  longing  flashed  forth :  with  eyes
Streaming  she  called  to  her  nurse :  "  Arise,
I  can  wait  no  longer :  arise,  let  us  go
Unseen  of  all  to  the  house  of  woe.
There  we  will  hide  in  some  corner ;  thus
The  moon  of  our  prison  will  shine  for  us.
With  the  rosy  cheek  of  one's  darling,  there
No  prison  may  be,  but  the  spring  is  fair.
Let  others  be  glad  when  gay  gardens  they  see  :
This  bud  of  the  prison  is  all  to  me."

In  graceful  motion  away  she  sped,
And  the  nurse  followed  close  where  the  lady  led.
She  came  like  a  moon  to  the  prison  wall,
And  the  warder  rose  at  her  secret  call.
He  opened  the  gate  as  he  moved  the  bar
And  showed  her  the  moon  of  her  love  afar.
On  the  carpet  of  worship  his  head  he  bent,
As  the  sun  declines  ere  the  day  is  spent.
Then  he  reared  like  a  flambeau  his  stately  height,
And  threw  o'er  the  captives  long  rays  of  light.
Then  he  curved  his  back  to  a  moon  whose  glow
Fell  on  the  carpet  outspread  below.


THE  VISIT  TO  THE  PRISON.  253

Then,  like  a  rose-twig  by  the  night-wind  swayed,
He  bowed  and  to  God  for  forgiveness  prayed ;
Then  in  humble  hope  with  his  head  depressed
Like  a  modest  violet  sate  at  rest.

Silent  and  hidden  she  moved  no  limb,
Par  from  herself  but  so  near  to  him.
But  she  wept  in  her  heart,  and  the  tears  she  shed
Turned  the  jasmine  hue  of  her  cheek  to  red.
With  pearl  she  mangled  the  ruby,  and  tore
The  rich  ripe  dates  that  the  palm-tree  bore.
Then  her  grief  burst  forth,  and  while  hot  tears  ran
From  their  fountain  in  torrents,  she  thus  began :
"  Eye  and  lamp  of  the  lovely  ones,  thou
Whom  the  fairest  would  follow  with  prayer  and  vow,
In  my  breast  thou  hast  kindled  a  flame  of  fire;
From  my  head  to  my  foot  I  am  all  desire.
But  no  drop  of  pity  hast  thou  bestowed
To  quench  the  flame  when  its  fury  glowed.
Thou  hast  gored  my  breast  and  no  pity  felt
For  the  cruel  wound  which  thy  hand  has  dealt.
Hast  thou  no  ruth,  0  most  heartless,  none
For  me  rejected,  oppressed,  undone  ?
I  bear  from  thee  daily  fresh  grief  and  scorn :
Ah,  woe  is  me  that  I  ever  was  born !
Or  if  she  had  borne  me,  a  babe  unblest,
Would  I  ne'er  had  lain  on  my  mother's  breast,


254  THE  VISIT  TO  THE  PRISON.

Ne'er  on  kindly  milk  from  her  bosom  fed,
But  deadly  poison  had  sucked  instead."

Thus  sad  Zulaikha  wept  and  complained;
But  cold  and  unyielding  his  heart  remained.
Unmoved  was  his  soul,  or  no  sign  betrayed
That  his  ruth  was  stirred  as  she  wept  and  prayed.

The  night  passed  away :  the  pure  skies  o'erhead
Wept  tears  like  those  which  the  holy  shed.
Loud  sounded  the  drum  from  the  palace,  high
Eose  through  the  air  the  Muezzin's  cry.
The  watch-dog's  baying  was  hushed,  and  round
His  throat  for  a  collar  his  tail  was  wound.
Up  started  the  cock  from  his  sleep ;  his  throat
Sent  forth  to  the  morning  its  clarion  note.
Then  Zulaikha  rose  ;  from  the  jail  she  withdrew,
But  its  threshold  she  kissed  ere  she  bade  it  adieu.

Long  as  her  moon  in  that  prison  lay,
To  its  portal  nightly  she  found  her  way.
Thus  ever  she  went  and  she  came ;  and  this
Was  her  heart's  sole  comfort,  her  only  bliss.
None  loves  a  garden  where  bright  flowers  blow
As  she  loved  to  visit  that  house  of  woe.
Yes,  when  your  love  is  in  prison,  where
Will  your  soul  find  comfort  save  only  there  ?


255


NIGHT  o'er  the  lover  a  soft  veil  throws

To  lighten  the  pang  of  his  bitterest  woes,

And  brings  him  many  a  counsel  that  lay

Lost  in  the  toil  of  the  bustling  day.

As  her  nightly  sorrow  grew  less  and  less,

And  her  anguish  lost  some  of  its  bitterness,

The  day  returning  her  pangs  renewed,

And  the  hundred  woes  of  her  solitude.

Her  road  to  the  prison  by  day  was  barred,

And  away  from  that  prison  her  life  was  hard.

Some  costly  trifle  each  morn  she  laid

In  the  willing  hand  of  her  trustiest  maid,

And  instead  of  herself  she  commissioned  her

To  look  on  the  face  of  the  prisoner.

When  from  her  errand  the  maid  returned,

A  thousand  caresses  her  task  had  earned.

On  the  damsel's  foot  she  would  rest  her  cheek ;

She  would  kiss  her  eyes  and  thus  softly  speak  :

"  Thy  foot  has  been  where  my  darling  lies,

And  his  cheek  has  been  seen  by  these  happy  eyes.


256  THE  PALACE  ROOF.

No  kiss  of  mine  on  his  eyes  may  be  pressed ;

My  cheek  on  his  foot  is  forbidden  to  rest.

Yet  this  eye  of  thine  for  a  moment — for  this

Has  looked  on  the  eye  of  my  love — I  kiss ;

And  I  lay  my  cheek  on  thy  feet  instead,

Which  have  trodden  the  ground  which  my  darling's

tread."

Then  would  she  question  the  maiden :     "  How
Was  the  glance  of  his  eye  ?     And  his  cheek  ?     And

brow  ?

In  his  daily  life  is  there  knot  or  thorn  ?
Is  his  face  untroubled,  or  pale  and  worn  ?
Has  the  lonely  air  of  the  prison  made
His  body  suffer,  his  roses  fade  ?
Did  he  deign  to  taste  of  the  dainties  I  sent  ?
Does  he  think  of  her  whose  heart  he  has  rent  ? "
She  would  ask  and  listen ;  then  swift  would  she  rise
And  hasten  away  with  her  streaming  eyes.

High  on  her  house  stood  a  turret  between,
Whose  pillars  the  roof  of  the  prison  was  seen ;
There,  when  the  hours  of  the  night  had  flown,
She  would  close  the  door  fast  and  would  sit  alone.
On  each  cheek  was  a  ruby,  a  pearl  in  each  eye,
As  she  gazed  on  the  prison  and  said  with  a  sigh :
"  What  am  I  to  behold  his  dear  face  !     To  see
The  roof  where  he  dwells  is  enough  for  me.


THE  PALACE-ROOF.  257

Unworthy  to  look  on  his  cheek,  mine  eye

With  those  walls  and  that  door  will  I  satisfy.

A  Paradise  blooms  in  the  dreariest  walls

Wherever  the  light  of  my  dear  moon  falls.

That  roof  is  blest  with  a  matchless  prize,

Tor  the  sun  of  the  world  in  its  shelter  lies.

My  back  with  a  burthen  of  grief  is  bent

When  I  think  of  that  wall  where  his  back  has  leant.

Joy  through  that  portal  erect  can  march,

But  my  cypress  must  stoop  ere  he  passed  the  arch.

Ah,  happy  threshold !     Ah,  blest  above

All  others  to  kiss  the  dear  feet  of  my  love  !

0  joy,  when  that  sun  makes  me  crumble  away

Into  atoms  scarce  seen  as  they  float  in  the  ray,

When  I  leap  from  my  window  that  sun  to  meet

And  throw  myself  down  at  his  lovely  feet.

Ah,  even  the  earth  is  more  blest  than  I,

For  his  graceful  feet  on  her  bosom  lie ;

And  the  dust  of  the  path  which  his  footsteps  stir,

Clings  to  his  skirt  and  falls  sweetly  on  her."

Through  the  weary  day  till  the  night  brought  ease
Such  was  her  bondage,  her  words  were  like  these.
While  the  light  of  her  heart  in  that  prison  lay,
This  is  the  story  of  night  and  day.
Still  to  the  prison  at  night  she  went,
And  by  day  her  eyes  on  its  roof  were  bent.


258  THE  PALACE-ROOF.

Day  after  day,  week  after  week,

She  looked  on  that  wall  and  she  gazed  on  his  cheek.

She  had  made  him  a  home  in  her  heart :  no  care

Tor  her  life,  for  the  world,  could  find  entrance  there.

Lost  to  herself  she  thought  of  him  still,

From  her  heart's  tablet  washing  all  good  and  ill.

When  the  call  of  her  maidens  rang  loud  and  clear

She  scarce  came  to  herself,  though  she  seemed  to  hear.

Then  to  those  maidens  she  oft  would  say :

"  My  senses  are  gone,  ah,  for  ever,  astray.

Attention  from  me  it  is  hopeless  to  seek ;

Touch  me  and  shake  me  before  you  speak.

I  may  come  to  myself,  by  your  touches  stirred ;

Mine  ear  may  be  opened,  your  message  heard.

My  heart  is  with  him  in  the  prison :  hence

Springs  all  the  trouble  that  steals  my  sense.

She  in  whose  bosom  that  fair  moon  lives,

No  care  and  no  thought  to  another  gives."

Fierce  fever  followed  her  heart's  wild  pain,
And  the  point  of  the  lancet  must  open  a  vein.
They  who  stood  round  saw  each  blood-drop  spell
A  letter  of  Yiisuf's  name  as  it  fell.
This  word  on  the  ground,  so  that  all  might  note,
The  lancet-reed  of  the  surgeon  wrote.
So  full  of  her  love  were  the  vein  and  the  skin
That  nothing  save  Yusuf  might  dwell  therein.


THE  PALACE-ROOF.  259

Blest  is  the  lover  whose  sonl  has  fraught

The  zephyr  of  love  with  no  selfish  thought ;

Whose  heart  is  so  full  of  its  darling,  there

No  room  may  be  for  a  single  hair ;

Whose  absolute  love  through  each  vein  is  spread,

In  each  drop  of  his  blood,  in  each  hair  of  his  head ;

Who  forgets  his  own  form  and  his  features,  knows

No  love  of  friends  and  no  hatred  of  foes ;

Who  bids  farewell  to  the  world,  looks  down

With  scorn  on  ambition  and  throne  and  crown.

If  he  utters  a  word  'tis  to  her  that  he  speaks,

And  would  win  for  her  only  each  thing  that  he  seeks.

He  recks  not  of  self,  and,  in  all  he  desires,

His  love  for  his  darling  each  thought  inspires.

His  former  self  he  has  thrown  aside,

And  each  thought  is  ennobled  and  purified.

Eise,  Jami,  thou  !     A  new  life  begin ;
Seek  the  mansion  eternal  and  enter  in.
Thou  knowest  the  way  which  thy  feet  should  tread :
Ne'er  the  path  of  the  sluggard  to  bliss  hath  led.
Quit  self  and  this  being  for  ever :  set
Thy  feet  no  more  in  the  worldling's  net.
Once  thou  wast  not,  and  no  loss  was  thine :
Now  be  rich  for  ever,  this  life  resign.
Seek  not  thy  bliss  in  thyself;  refrain
From  the  fruitless  hope  that  will  bring  no  gain.


(      260     )'


HE  who  is  born  to  high  fate  on  earth

Disperses  the  dark  as  he  springs  to  birth.

For  him  in  each  thicket  a  lily  blows,

And  the  musk  of  Tartary  breathes  from  the  rose.

He  visits  the  field  like  a  cloud  of  soft  rain,

And  Paradise  blooms  on  the  thirsty  plain.

Like    a    breeze    of   spring    through    a    garden    he

strays,

And  the  rose  awakened  her  lamp  displays.
If  his  face  in  a  dungeon  he  deign  to  show,
Each  captive  there  will  forget  his  woe.
So  while  the  prison  where  Yiisuf  lay
Smiled  with  his  presence  and  all  was  gay,
Each  prisoner,  happy  in  heart,  forgot
The  bond  and  the  chain  and  his  dreary  lot.
But  if  ever  a  captive  sickened  there,
The  weary  victim  of  toil  and  care,
Yusuf  watched  tenderly  o'er  him  till  he
Was  made  whole  from  the  pain  of  his  malady.


FELLO  W-PRISONERS.  261

Was  the  soul  of  any  oppressed  with  grief

Yiisuf  was  ready  to  lend  relief,

With  a  smile  so  sweet  and  a  voice  so  kind

That    the    mourner    was    cheered    and     his    heart

resigned.

If  a  penniless  wretch  of  his  lot  complained,
As  the  new  moon  filled  or  the  full  moon  waned,1
Yusuf  took  from  the  wealthy  a  golden  key,
Eelieved  the  debtor  and  made  him  free.
If  a  rich  man  dreamed  a  sad  dream  and  was  caught
In  the  threatening  whirlpool  of  wildered  thought,
The  dream  was  explained  by  those  lips,  and  he
Was  saved  from  the  depth  of  the  surging  sea.

Two  lords,  once  high  in  the  ruler's  grace,
Had  fallen  low  from  their  lofty  place,
And,  doomed  in  that  prison  long  days  to  spend,
Had  won  the  love  of  that  faithful  friend.
Each  dreamed  a  dream  one  night,  and  the  breast
Of  each  was  moved  with  a  wild  unrest ;
For  one  had  the  promise  of  freedom,  one
Was  warned  that  the  days  of  his  life  were  done.
So  weighed  those  dreams,  both  of  hope  and  dread,
On  the  heart  of  each,  uninterpreted.
They  came  to  Yiisuf  and  prayed  him  unfold
The  secret  drift  of  the  dreams  they  told.

1  As  the  days  came  near  on  which  he  was  bound  to  pay  debts.


262  FELLO  W-PRISONERS.

"  Thou  on  the  gallows,"  he  said,  "  must  swing ;
And  thou  wilt  return  to  the  court  of  the  king."

True  were  his  words.     To  the  youth  restored
To  his  place  of  honour  beside  his  lord,
Ere    he    turned    to    the    court    from    his    bonds    set

free,

Thus  spoke  Yiisuf :  "  Eemember  me.
If  fortune  favour  thee,  time  may  bring
A  happy  hour  to  address  the  king.
Thou   wilt    gain    thy  reward  if   thou   speak   to   him

then

As  he  sits  in  the  hall  with  his  noblemen.
'  A  stranger/  say,  '  in  the  prison  lies
Barred  from  the  sight  of  thy  pitying  eyes.
It  beseems  not  a  heart  that  is  righteous  like  thine
To  suffer  the  guiltless  in  bonds  to  pine/  "

But  when  that  servant  his  rank  regained,
And  the  cup  of  the  grace  of  his  master  drained,
For  many  a  year  his  glad  heart  forgot
The  prayer  of  Yiisuf  or  heeded  not.
The  tree  of  his  promise  brought  forth  despair,
And  Yiisuf  yet  lingered  a  captive  there.

From  him  who  is  chosen,  whom  God  above
Deems  worthy  to  rest  in  the  shade  of  His  love,
All  earthly  means  in  this  world  are  withdrawn :
Xo  mortal  may  hold  His  elected  in  pawn.


FELLO  W-PRISONERS.  263

God  draws  him  away  to  Himself  alone,
And  to  none  but  Him  may  his  love  be  shown.
To  the  will  of  another  he  may  not  bend,
But  on  God  alone  may  his  hope  depend.
No  prayer  to  others  must  he  prefer,
But  be  God's  own  servant  and  prisoner.


IRing's  IDfsion*


MANY  a  lock  in  this  world  we  see
To  open  whose  wards  we  can  find  no  key,
When  the  wit  of  the  wise  is  of  no  avail,
And  care  and  quick  sight  and  endeavour  fail.
On  a  sudden,  touched  by  no  master-hand,
With  no  device  that  an  artist  planned,
Through  a  cause  unknown  the  lock  open  flies
And  displays  to  the  seeker  the  long-sought  prize.

The  heart  of  Yiisuf  all  hope  resigned
That  his  own  device  would  his  bonds  unbind.
His  hope  was  only  in  Him  from  whom
Comes  help  to  us  all  in  the  days  of  gloom,
And,  free  from  self-thought  in  his  low  estate,
He  was  guided  by  God  the  Compassionate.

Clear  to  the  ruler  of  Egypt's  sight
Appeared  seven  kine,  as  he  dreamed  one  night  ;
Each  more  fair  than  the  other,  all
Were  healthy  and  handsome  and  fat  from  the  stall.
After  them  others  advancing  were  seen,
Equal  in  number,  but  weak  and  lean.


THE  KING'S  VISION.  265

By  these  the  former  were  overpowered

And,  like  the  grass  of  the  field,  devoured.

Seven  ears  of  corn  then  were  seen  to  rise,

That  might  gladden  the  heart  and  delight  the  eyes.

Then  seven  thin  ears,  grown  each  from  a  stem,

Followed  and  withered  and  ruined  them.

In  the  early  morn  when  the  king  awoke,
To  each  wakeful  heart  of  his  dream  he  spoke.
"  We  cannot  interpret  it,"  all  replied  ;
"  Thought  and  conjecture  are  here  defied.
The  dream  is  a  riddle  no  wit  may  explain,
And  wisest  are  they  who  from  guess  refrain."
Then  he  who  had  knowledge  of  Yusuf  flung
Aside  the  veil  that  before  him  hung,
And  said : — "  A  youth  in  the  prison  lies,
In  solving  riddles  supremely  wise.
His  wit  can  interpret  each  dream,  and  he
Will  bring  up  the  pearl  when  he  dives  in  the  sea.
Permit  me  to  tell  him  this  secret  thing,
And  the  drift  of  thy  dream  from  his  lips  will  I  bring."
"  What  need,"  said  the  king,  "  of  permission  to  speak  ?
What  better  than  sight  may  the  blind  man  seek  ?
And  from  this  moment  the  eye  of  my  mind,
Till  I  master  this  secret,  is  dark  and  blind."
He  ran  to  the  prison  with  utmost  speed,
And  gave  to  Yiisuf  the  dream  to  read.


266  THE  KING'S  VISION.

"  Years,"  he  explained,  "  are  those  ears  and  kine,

Whose  looks  of  those  years  are  the  mark  and  sign.

The  fair  fat  kine  and  the  full  ears  well

The  nature  and  hope  of  those  years  may  tell.

The  meagre  ears,  the  kine  thin  and  weak,

Of  years  of  dearth  and  misfortune  speak.

In  the  former  seven  the  kindly  rain

Will  fill  the  fields  full  with  rich  grass  and  grain,

And  all  the  land  will  be  glad  and  gay.

But  seven  will  come,  when  those  pass  away,

To  ruin  the  gifts  of  the  years  before ;

And  the  hearts  of  men  will  be  glad  no  more.

No  gracious  cloud  the  sweet  rain  will  bring,

No  blade  of  grass  from  the  ground  will  spring.

No  joy  will  the  wealth  of  the  rich  supply,

And  the  poor  and  needy  will  hunger  and  die.

On  the  table  of  Time  is  no  food,  and  Bread !

Is  the  cry  of  thousands  who  die  unfed."

The  noble  listened,  and  straight  returned

To  the  court  of  the  king  with  the  lore  he  had  learned.

To  his  master  the  words  of  Yiisuf  he  told,

And  made  his  glad  heart  like  a  bud  unfold.

"  Bring  Yiisuf  to  me,"  said  the  monarch,  "  that  I

On  the  truth  of  these  words^  may  more  surely  rely.

'Tis  sweetest  to  hear  a  dear  friend  repeat

With  his  own  lips  the  words  which,  reported,  are  sweet;


THE  KING'S  VISION.  267

And  who  is  content  from  another  to  hear

The  words  he  may  draw  from  the  lips  that  are  dear  ? "

Again  to  the  prison  his  steps  he  bent,
And  gave  Yiisuf  the  message  the  king  had  sent:
"  Fair  cypress,  come  from  thy  still  retreat,
In  the  monarch's  garden  to  set  thy  feet.

0  come,  and  the  court  of  his  house  will  shine
More  fair  with  the  rose  of  that  cheek  of  thine."

"  Shall  I  visit,"  cried  Yiisuf,  "  the  court  of  a  king

Who  has  cast  me  aside  like  a  guilty  thing —

Who  has  left  me  in  prison  long  years,  nor  bent

One  pitying  glance  on  the  innocent  ?

Let  him  first  command,  if  he  will  that  I  go

Forth  to  his  court  from  this  house  of  woe,

That  they  whom,  at  sight  of  me,  wonder  led

To  wound  with  the  knife  their  own  hands  till  they  bled,

Like  the  Pleiades  gathered  before  his  face,

Uplift  the  veil  and  make  clear  my  case ;

And  let  them  declare  for  what  fault  or  crime

1  have  lain  in  the  prison  this  dreary  time.
Then  will  the  secret  come  forth  to  light,

And  my  skirt  will  be  proved  to  be  pure  and  white.

The  path  of  sin  have  I  never  pursued,

But  traitorous  thought  in  my  heart  eschewed.

To  my  lord  I  was  faithful  in  deed  and  in  thought,

No  perfidy  planned,  no  dishonesty  wrought.


268  THE  KING'S  VISION.

Ere  thus  with  my  master  I  stooped  to  deal,
Like  a  midnight  thief  I  would  plunder  and  steal."

The  message  was  given ;  the  monarch  heard ;
To  the  women  of  Memphis  he  sent  his  word,
And,  called  from  their  homes  by  the  summons,  they

came

To  the  light  of  his  presence  like  moths  to  the  flame.
When  their  company  entered  the  court  of  their  lord,
He  loosened  his  tongue  as  a  flaming  sword:
"  How  did  that  pure  light  offend,  that  you
The  sword  of  dishonour  against  him  drew  ?
How  could  you  send  to  a  prison  the  boy
Whose  face  was  your  garden  and  spring  of  joy  ?
Bind  chains  on  the  neck  of  an  idol  for  whom
The  weight  of  a  rose  were  too  heavy  a  doom  ?
No  chains  but  the  links  of  the  dew  should  be  borne
By  the  rose  that  is   bowed  by  the  breath  of   the

morn."

"  0  King,"  they  answered,  "  whose  splendour  has  lent
To  the  crown  and  the  throne  a  new  ornament,
Purity  only  in  Yiisuf  we  saw,
Honour  and  love  of  each  holiest  law.
No  pearl  ever  lay  'neath  the  depth  of  the  sea
More  pure  in  the  shell  that  enfolds  it  than  he."

There  too  Zulaikha  sate  with  the  rest,
With  no  lie  on  her  lip  and  no  guile  in  her  breast.


THE  KING'S  VISION.  269

The  schooling  of  love  and  his  sweet  control

Had  chastened  her  spirit  and  softened  her  soul.

The  splendour  of  truth  from  her  bosom  broke,

And  like  the  true  dawning  of  day  she  spoke.

The  veil  of  her  folly  was  flung  aside,

And,  "  The  light  of  the  truth  is  revealed,"  she  cried.

"  To  the  charge  of  Yusuf  no  sin  is  laid ;

I  in  my  love  for  him  erred  and  strayed.

With  the  spells  of  my  love  I  would  draw  him  near,

And  I  drove  him  afar  when  he  would  not  hear.

To  the  house  of  woe  for  my  woes  was  he  sent,

And  my  sufferings  caused  his  imprisonment.

When  the  love-grief  I  felt  was  too  heavy  to  bear,

Of  the  load  of  my  sorrows  I  gave  him  a  share.

I  was  the  tyrant,  and,  oh !  that  he

Were  repaid  for  the  woes  he  has  suffered  through  me  !

Each  grace,  each  honour  and  bounty — all

That  the  king  may  give — were  a  gift  too  small."

He  heard  Zulaikha  the  secret  disclose;
He  smiled  like  a  rosebud,  and  bloomed  like  a  rose.
He  gave  command  to  his  servants  to  speed,
And  back  from  the  prison  bring  Yusuf  freed.
"  In  the  loveliest  garden  the  rose  should  bloom,
And  not  lie  immured  in  a  dungeon's  gloom.
In  the  realm  of  love  he  is  lord  supreme,
And  no  seat  but  a  throne  may  that  king  beseem."


(      270      )


IRelease*

IN  this  ancient  lodge  'tis  a  well-known  tale
That  ne'er  without  bitter  may  sweet  prevail.
When  the  weary  days  of  the  moons  have  passed,
The  mother  looks  on  her  bahe  at  last.
In  the  rock  pines  the  ruby  till,  one  by  one,
Its  veins  are  filled  full  of  the  light  of  the  sun.

The  night  of  Yiisuf  was  long  and  drear,
But  it  fled  at  last  and  the  dawn  was  clear.
Long  on  his  heart  lay  a  mountain  of  woes,
But  bright  o'er  its  summit  the  sun  arose.
To  welcome  him  back  with  due  honour,  all
The  courtiers  who  stood  in  the  monarch's  hall,
Were  straightway  commanded  to  line  the  way
From  the  court  to  the  prison  in  full  array.
There  youths  apparelled  in  rich  brocade
And  glittering  girdles  with  gold  inlaid ;
There  skilful  riders  were  fair  to  see,
On  the  noblest  chargers  of  Araby ;
There,  bright  as  the  sun,  was  a  minstrel  throng
Skilled  in  all  Hebrew  and  Syrian  song ;


RELEASE.  271

And  the  lords  of  Egypt  on  every  side
Scattered  their  silver  coin  far  and  wide,
While  the  poor  and  needy  flocked  round  to  gain
A  share  of  the  wealth  of  the  shining  rain.

Forth  from  the  prison  came  Yusuf,  gay
In  the  pomp  and  sheen  of  a  king's  array.
The  stately  steed  by  his  hand  controlled
Was  a  mountain  covered  with  pearl  and  gold.
Bags  full  of  jewels  and  coin,  and  trays
Of  musk  and  ambergris  strewed  the  ways,
Thrown  from  each  side  at  the  feet  of  his  steed,
And  from  want  the  poor  were  for  ever  freed.

He  passed  through  the  street  of  the  royal  town ;
At  the  gate  of  the  palace  he  lighted  down,
And  silk  and  satin  and  gold  brocade
Beneath  his  feet — yea,  and  heads — were  laid,
And  o'er  azure  carpets  his  steps  he  bent
Like  a  moon  sailing  on  through  the  firmament.

Swift  as  the  wind  the  glad  monarch  pressed,
Warned  of  his  coming,  to  meet  the  guest.
He  clasped  him  close  to  his  bosom :  so
A  box-tree  her  arms  round  a  cypress  might  throw.
He  made  him  sit  on  his  royal  seat :
He  questioned  him  long,  and  his  words  were  sweet.
First  the  drift  of  his  dream  would  the  monarch  hear,
And  Yiisuf  s  words  made  the  meaning  clear.


272  RELEASE.

Then  of  many  an  action  and  place  and  thing

He  plied  him  with  eagerest  questioning.

Each  answer  of  Yiisuf  was  clear  and  true,

And  the  king's  delight  with  his  wonder  grew.

"  Help  me  with  counsel,"  at  last  he  said ;

"  This  dream  which  thy  lips  have  interpreted—

How  shall  I  meet  the  woe  threatened  ?     How  drain

The  bitter  cup  of  my  country's  pain  ? "

"  In  the  years  of  abundance/'  he  thus  replied,
"  When  the  clouds  the  blessing  of  rain  provide,
Send  out  thine  orders  that  all  shall  till
The  fields  of  the  land  with  one  heart  and  will ;
With  sharp  nails  harrow  each  stony  place,
And  scatter  the  seed  with  the  blood  of  the  face.
Let  the  grain,  which  the  ears  when  they  ripen,  afford
For  the  food  of  the  future  be  gathered  and  stored.
In  the  days  of  famine  each  laden  ear
Ilends  the  heart  of  thy  foe  with  its  pointed  spear.
Let  the  gathered  corn  in  the  granaries  lie ;
Then,  when  the  drought  and  the  dearth  are  nigh,
From  the  ample  stores  thou  hast  gathered  give
Enough  to  each  man  that  his  soul  may  live.
But  o'er  every  business  should  one  preside
Whose  skill  and  knowledge  are  proved  and  tried ;
Whose  keen-eyed  prudence  each  end  foresees,
And  his  hand  performs  what  his  head  decrees.


RELEASE.  273

Search  through  the  world  for  such  heart  and  brain,
A  man  like  me  will  be  sought  in  vain.
This  weighty  task  to  my  charge  commit,
For  none  in  the  land  wilt  thou  find  so  fit."

The  king  was  glad  at  his  sage  reply ;
Mid  the  lords  of  Egypt  he  raised  him  high.
He  bade  the  soldiers  his  word  obey,
And  gave  him  the  land  for  his  own  to  sway.
He  was  Grand  Vizier  by  the  monarch's  grace,
And  sate  on  the  throne  in  the  ruler's  place.
Enthroned  he  sate  in  his  seat  of  pride,
And  the  people  bowed  prostrate  on  every  side.
The  shouts  of  the  heralds,  as  forth  he  went
To  the  plain,  rose  up  to  the  firmament
To  every  place,  as  his  fancy  led,
By  thousands  his  coming  was  heralded ;
And  near  their  lord,  when  he  chose  to  ride,
Was  a  countless  army  to  guard  and  guide.

When  thus  to  Yiisuf  the  Lord  Supreme
Gave  the  highest  rank  in  the  king's  esteem,
The  Grand  Vizier  saw  his  sun  go  down,
And  low  sank  the  flag  of  his  old  renown.
Crushed  was  his  heart  by  his  loss  of  state,
And  he  fell  a  prey  to  the  dart  of  Fate.

To  the  wall  of  sorrow  Zulaikha  turned,
And  her  back  was  bowed  as  she  pined  and  yearned.


274  RELEASE.

The  beautiful  palace  was  hers  no  more,

And  the  burthen  of  love  on  her  heart  was  sore.

'Tis  the  way  of  Heaven  in  this  world  of  woe,

That  its  hate  is  swift  and  its  love  is  slow.

One  is  cast  down  to  the  earth,  and  one

Is  lifted  on  high  like  the  glorious  sun.

Blessed  is  he  who  has  wit  to  learn

How  the  favour  of  fortune  may  change  and  turn ;

Whose  head  is  not  raised  in  his  high  estate,

Nor  his  heart  in  misfortune  made  desolate.


275


Cbe  Slmfc  Wtoow.

UNTOUCHED  by  delight  and  by  meaner  pain
Is  the  heart  that  loves  fondly  but  loves  in  vain.
Only  this  care  to  its  skirt  may  cling ;
No  joy  may  gladden,  no  sorrow  sting.
If  this  world  of  ours  were  a  sea  of  woes,
And  the  billows  of  wrath  high  as  mountains  rose,
They  might  roar  about  him  and  rage,  but  the  hem
Of  his  garment  would  never  be  wetted  by  them.
If  Fate  spread  a  banquet  of  joy — a  feast
Whose  delight  never  ended  and  still  increased —
He  would  turn  away,  for  the  dainties  there
Would  not  lighten  his  load  by  a  single  hair.
A  hapless  bird  was  Zulaikha.     She  pined
In  the  narrow  cage  of  the  world  confined.
Befriended  by  Fortune,  in  pride  and  power,
When  a  rose-bed  bloomed  in  her  secret  bower ;
With  her  lord  beside  her  to  shade  and  screen
The  tender  plant  when  her  bud  was  green —
With  all  dainty  things,  if  she  cared  but  to  speak  ;
When  no  lamp  was  so  bright  as  her  youthful  cheek


276  THE  BLIND  WIDOW.

Yusuf  e'en  then  her  whole  heart  possessed —

The  sweet  name  on  her  lips,  the  dear  hope  in  her  breast.

Now,  when  from  her  side  her  protector  was  reft,

When  naught  of  her  rank  and  her  treasures  was  left,

The  sole  friend  of  her  heart,  who  ne'er  changed  his  place,

Was  the  sweet  remembrance  of  Yiisuf's  face.

She  thought  of  him  ever ;  her  sad  house  seemed

Her  dear  fatherland  when  of  him  she  dreamed.

]STo  food  could  she  eat,  and  she  closed  not  her  eyes ;

She  wept  tears  of  blood  and  she  said  with  sighs : —

"  Beloved  Yiisuf,  where,  where  art  thou  ?

Why  false  and  faithless  to  pledge  and  vow  ?

Oh,  that  again  those  sweet  hours  I  might  see,

When  one  happy  home  held  my  love  and  me !

When  no  fear  of  parting  could  mar  delight,

And  I  gazed  on  his  beauty  from  morn  till  night.

When  stern  Fate  robbed  me  of  this  sweet  joy,

I  sent  to  the  prison  that  innocent  boy.

Unseen  by  night  to  his  presence  I  stole,

And  the  sight  of  his  cheek  was  as  balm  to  my  soul ;

And  a  glance  at  the  walls  where  my  darling  lay

Eubbed  the  rust  of  grief  from  my  heart  by  day.

No  joy  is  now  left  me,  no  solace  like  these ;

My  heart  and  frame  perish  of  pain  and  disease.

All  I  have  left  is  the  image  which  still,

Where'er  I  may  be,  this  sad  bosom  must  fill.


THE  BLIND  WIDOW.  277

The  soul  of  this  frame  is  that  image,  and  I,
Bereft  of  its  presence,  should  languish  and  die."

Then  her  breast  and  her  heart  she  would  fiercely  tear,
And  engrave  the  form  of  her  darling  there.
She  would  strike  her  soft  knee  with  her  hand  till  the

blue

Of  the  lotus  supplanted  the  jasmine's  hue.
"  I  am  worthy  the  love  of  my  love,"  she  would  cry,
"  For  my  love  is  the  sun  and  the  lotus  am  I.
As  my  love  is  the  lord  of  the  east  and  the  west,
The  place  of  the  lotus  for  me  is  the  best."

She  would  strike  her  heart's  fir-cone  1  again  and-

again

With  closed  fingers  knotted  like  sugar-cane.
And  her  hand — no  picture  could  match  its  grace —
Left  on  her  bosom  a  blood-red  trace.
For  a  reed  each  bleeding  finger  she  took,
And,  white  as  pure  camphor,  her  hand  was  a  book;
But  the  only  word  she  could  write  therein
Was  the  syllable  grief  on  the  silver  skin ;
And  ah,  her  beloved  would  read  or  note
No  single  line  of  the  word  she  wrote.

Long  years  of  sorrow,  each  like  the  last,
In  hopeless  yearning  alone  she  passed.

1  The  heart,  from  its  shape,  is  frequently  by  Persian  poets  likened
to  a  fir-cone.


278  THE  BLIND  WIDOW.

White,  white  as  milk  grew  each  plaited  tress,

And  dark  was  the  light  of  her  loveliness.

The  musk  had  departed,  the  camphor  was  there,

And  the  grey  dawn  had  banished  the  night  of  her

hair.

From  the  arrow  of  Fate  had  the  raven  fled,
And  the  owlet  lodged  in  the  nest  instead ;
Lives  any  so  old  who  can  call  to  mind
Owls  keeping  a  nest  by  the  ravens  resigned  ?
In  her  eye's  narcissus  the  jasmine  grew :
Tears  had  washed  from  her  eyelid  its  jetty  hue.
Black  in  the  days  of  her  jay  was  that  eye
Which  looked  delighted  on  earth  and  sky.
Why,  when  her  hope  and  her  heart  had  failed,
And  her  joy  passed  away,  was  the  blackness  paled  ?
From  Hindustan  had  she  learned  to  wear
Nothing  but  white  in  her  woe  and  despair  ?
With  wrinkles  the  bloom  of  her  cheek  was  marred,
And  the  leaves  of  the  wild-rose  were  withered  and

scarred  ;

Each  line  that  in  blandishment  once  lent  a  grace
To  her  delicate  brow  now  disfigured  her  face.
In  this  ancient  world  who  ever  has  known
The  smooth  water  lined  when  no  breeze  has  blown  ?
But  there  ever  were  wrinkles  and  lines  to  deform
Her  face's  soft  splendour  in  calm  or  in  storm.


THE  BLIND  WIDOW.  279

Grief  had  bent  down  the  cypress  once  stately  and  proud,

And  her  head  like  a  ring  to  her  foot  was  bowed —

Weighed  down  by  its  burthen  it  lay  on  her  feet,

Like  a  ring  on  the  door  where  the  happy  ones  meet.

When  no  longer  the  blessing  of  sight  remained

On  this  earth  with  the  blood  of  the  dead  distained,

She  bowed  down  her  back  and  she  bent  her  head

As  if  seeking  the  treasure  which  long  had  fled.

Slowly  and  sadly  the  years  came  round:

Her  foot  was  unringed  and  her  head  uncrowned.

There  gleamed  on  her  shoulder  no  satin's  sheen,

No  precious  gems  in  her  ears  were  seen.

On  her  neck  was  no  collar  of  costly  stone  ;

No  gold-wrought  veil  o'er  her  cheek  was  thrown.

On  the  cold  bare  earth  for  a  bed  she  lay,

And  the  cheek  once  so  dainty  was  pillowed  on  clay.

Ah,  earth,  with  his  love,  were  a  pleasanter  bed

Than  a  silken  couch  by  a  Houri  spread !

Yes,  a  jewelled  pillow  from  Paradise  seemed

The  brick  under  her  cheek  when  of  him  she  dreamed.

In  this  sorrow,  of  which  but  a  part  is  sung
In  the  vocal  pearls  which  my  pen  has  strung,
His  name  was  all  that  her  lips  could  speak,
The  only  comfort  her  soul  might  seek.
While  yet  she  had  treasures,  a  wealth  untold
Of  jewels  and  silver,  of  pearl  and  gold,


280  THE  BLIND  WIDOW.

Her  gold  and  silver  she  cast  at  the  feet

Of  her  who  some  tale  of  her  love  would  repeat,

And  her  pearls  and  her  jewels  she  gave  to  each

Who  poured  forth  those  jewels  and  pearls  of  speech  ;

But  her  gold  and  silver,  her  pearls,  and  her  vast

Treasure  of  jewels  were  spent  at  last.

With  a  woollen  gown  and  a  girdle  rent

From  the  bark  of  the  palm  she  was  then  content.

Then  all  on  the  knee  of  deep  silence  fell :

No  more  of  Yusuf  she  heard  them  tell.

No  longer  came  the  sweet  tidings  to  cheer

Her  lonely  heart  through  the  path  of  her  ear.

That  this  food  of  her  life  might  be  still  supplied
She  built  her  a  hut  by  the  highway  side,
That  her  ear  might  catch — and  the  hope  was  sweet —
The  measured  tread  of  his  escort's  feet.
Ah,  poor,  unhappy,  deserted  soul,
From  whose  hand  has  fallen  the  rein  of  control !
From  the  love  of  her  darling  by  Fate  debarred,
The  voice  of  her  longing  was  tuneless  and  hard.
No  breath  from  her  love  might  be  wafted  to  her,
No  tidings  "be  learnt  from  a  messenger.
Oft  would  she  question  the  wind  if  it  knew
Aught  of  her  love,  and  the  bird  as  it  flew.
Whenever  a  traveller  passed  the  place
With  the  dust  of  the  road  on  his  weary  face,


THE  BLIND  WIDOW.  281

She  would  wash  that  brow,  she  would  bathe  those  feet,
For  they  came  from  his  home  to  her  lone  retreat.
If  her  lord  and  king  by  her  cottage  passed,
No  look  on  his  face  had  she  power  to  cast,
Content  with  the  sound  of  his  horse's  tread,
And  the  dust  of  his  path  on  her  happy  head.


(      282      )


Cottage  of  IReefcs*

A  COTTAGE  of  reeds  had  she  built  by  the  side
Of  the  way  where  Yiisuf  was  wont  to  ride ;
And  with  reeds  that  uttered  a  plaintive  sound
Like  the  voice  of  a  flute,  she  had  fenced  it  round.
Whenever  she  uttered  her  wail  and  cry,
Each  reed  in  concert  gave  sigh  for  sigh.
When  the  fire  of  absence  consumed  her,  the  seeds
Of  the  wild  flame  fell  on  the  pitying  reeds.
Heart-broken  she  dwelt  in  that  hut,  nor  stirred
From  the  place  where  she  lay  like  a  wounded  bird.
Yet  the  thought  of  her  love  was  so  sweet  a  pain
That  each  reed  was  to  her  like  a  sugar-cane.

In  his  stalls  had  Yiisuf  a  fairy  steed,
A  courser  through  space  of  no  earthly  breed ;
Swift  as  the  heavens,  and  black  and  white
With  a  thousand  patches  of  day  and  night  j
Now  a  jetty  spot,  now  a  starry  blaze,
Like  Time  with  succession  of  nights  and  days.
With  his  tail  the  heavenly  Yirgo's  hair,
With  his  hoof  the  moon,  was  afraid  to  compare.


THE  COTTAGE  OF  REEDS.  283

Each  foot  with  a  golden  new  moon  was  shod,

And  the  stars  of  its  nails  struck  the  earth  as  he  trod.

When  his  hoof  smote  sharp  on  the  rugged  flint

A  planet  flashed  forth  from  the  new  moon's  dint ;

And  a  new  moon  rose  in  the  sky  when  a  shoe

From  the  galloping  foot  of  the  courser  flew.

Like  an  arrow  shot  through  its  side  in  the  chase,

He  outstripped  the  game  in  the  deadly  race.

At  a  single  bound  he  would  spring,  unpressed,

With  the  lightning's  speed  from  the  east  to  the  west.

As  he  lifted  the  dust  with  his  foot  the  wind

Of  the  rushing  tempest  was  left  behind.

If  the  road  he  traversed  was  dank  and  wet,

On  his  coat  you  would  see  not  a  drop  of  sweat.

But  oft  would  his  paces  be  gentle  and  slow,

As  the  big  drops  combine  till  the  torrents  flow.

Now,  a  flying  treasure,  away  would  he  dash

O'er  the  plain,  untouched  by  the  snake 1  of  the  lash.

Had  he  loved  to  rest  in  his  quiet  stall,

The  heavens  had  served  him,  a  careful  thrall ;

Had  quenched  his  thirst  from  the  fount  of  the  sun,

With  the  urn  of  the  moon,  when  his  course  was  run.

They  had  fed  him  with  Virgo's  gold  barley,  and  hay

Gleaned  from  the  field  of  the  Milky  Way.2

1  An  allusion  to  the  serpent  which  is  said  to  guard  hidden  treasure.

2  Kahkashan,  its  Persian  name,  means  literally  "Hay-Attractor."


284  THE  COTTAGE  OF  REEDS.

A  sieve  for  his  use  they  had  bidden  prepare,

Each  year  and  month,  of  a  comet's  hair ;

And  the  birds  who  sing  praise  at  the  break  of  morn

Prom  the  Lote  tree  1  had  flocked  to  pick  stones  from

his  corn.

On  his  back  for  a  saddle  the  Scales  had  been  flung,
And  a  new  moon  each  side  for  his  stirrup  hung.
When  Yusuf  mounted,  the  moon  bestrode
The  Scales  his  saddle  and  forth  he  rode.
At  the  touch'  of  that  thigh  the  proud  courser  neighed,
And  his  thoughts  no  more  from  the  journey  strayed.
The  neigh  of  the  charger  rang  clear  and  loud,
And  the  drum  of  departure  was  shouts  from  the  crowd ;
And  like  planets  grouped  round  the  moon  a  ring
Of  courtiers  gathered  about  their  king.

From  her  cottage  of  reeds  came  Zulaikha  out
When  she  knew  of  his  coming  and  heard  them  shout.
In  grief  and  anguish  of  heart  by  the  side
Of  the  road  he  would  travel  she  sate  and  cried.
When  the  host  that  preceded  his  courser  was  near
Loud  rang  the  voices  of  boys  with  a  cheer :
"  Look,  Yiisuf  himself,  whom  the  sun  in  the  sky
And  the  bright  moon  envy,  is  nigh,  is  nigh."
Zulaikha  answered :  "  Mine  eyes  are  blind,
But  no  trace  of  Yusuf  'mid  these  I  find.

1  The  Sidra  or  Lote  tree  in  Paradise.


THE  COTTAGE  OF  REEDS.  285

Mock  me  not,  darlings !  oh,  spare  me  the  pain,

No  breath  from  Yusuf  has  reached  my  brain.

The  musk  of  Tartary  scents  the  place

That  is  blest  with  the  light  of  his  lovely  face,

And  when  he  sits  in  his  litter,  thence

A  precious  perfume  pervades  the  sense."

Nearer  and  nearer,  'mid  loud  acclaim,
Of  hearts  that  were  jubilant,  Yusuf  came.
They  called  to  Zulaikha  : — "  The  guards  are  nigh,
But  no  trace  of  Yusuf  has  met  our  eye."
"  Strive  not  to  deceive  me,"  Zulaikha  replied ;
"  My  darling's  coming  ye  may  not  hide.
Can  the  coming  of  one  who  was  born  to  wield
The  sceptre  of  sway  o'er  each  soul  be  concealed  ?
The  breath  of  his  fragrance  gives  life  to  the  whole
Of  this  world  of  ours  and  each  single  soul ;
And  the  presence  of  him  who  gives  life  is  made  known
To  the  poor  thirsty  soul  that  must  perish  alone."

"When  Zulaikha,  long  buried  in  darkness  and  gloom,
Heard  the  shout  of  the  escort,  "Make  room,  make  room!"
A  loud  cry  she  uttered :  "  Eejected,  forlorn,
A  long  age  of  absence  my  spirit  has  borne.
I  can  suffer  no  more :  I  have  had  my  full  share  :
Loss  of  patience  is  now  the  sole  loss  I  may  bear.
Far  better,  for  ever  excluded  from  bliss,
To  fly  from  myself  than  to  linger  like  this."


286  THE  COTTAGE  OF  REEDS.

Thus  cried  Zulaikha,  then  sank  and  lay
Unconscious  awhile,  all  her  senses  astray.
That  cup  of  unconsciousness  still  she  kept,
As,  oblivious  of  self,  to  her  cottage  she  crept.
Then  rose  the  shrill  wail  as  her  sad  heart  bled,
And  the  reeds  sighed  in  tune  with  the  strain  she  led.
Thus  passed  in  her  sorrow  the  time  away,
And  this  was  the  task  of  each  mournful  day.


Convert


NEVER  content  is  the  lover;  each  hour

His  longing  waxes  in  strength  and  power.

Ne'er  to  one  wish  for  two  moments  true,

A  joy  still  dearer  he  holds  in  view.

He  would  look  on  the  rose   when  he  breathes  her

scent,
And  pluck  the  fair  flower  when  the  stem  is  bent.

Zulaikha  had  sate  by  the  way,  but  now
She  would  lift  her  eyes  to  his  cheek  and  brow.
At  the  foot  of  the  image  to  which  she  had  prayed
From  the  days  of  childhood  her  head  she  laid  :
"  0  thou  to  whom  praying  I  turn  me,  before
Whose  feet  I  have  loved  thy  dear  might  to  adore  ;
I  have  served  thee  devoutly  from  youth's  early  day;
But  the  gem  of  my  sight  has  been  taken  away.
Cast  a  pitying  look  on  my  ruin  ;  restore
The  light  of  mine  eyes  that  I  sorrow  no  more.
Between  Yusuf  and  me  must  there  still  be  a  bar  ?
Oh,  let  me  but  see  him  —  one  look  from  afar.


288  THE  CONVERT.

This  prayer — thou  art  mighty ;  this  one  wish  fulfil ;
Give  this,  and  then  deal  with  me  after  thy  will.
What  is  life  to  a  wretch  who  must  hopelessly  pine  ?
Far  better  were  death  than  a  life  like  mine."
Thus  cried  Zulaikha.     She  laid  down  her  head,
And  wet  was  the  ground  with  the  tears  she  shed.
To  his  throne  in  the  east  rose  the  Lord  of  Day,
And  the  steed  of  Yiisuf  was  heard  to  neigh.
She  came  from  her  cottage  in  beggar's  weed
To  the  narrowest  turn  in  the  way  of  the  steed,
With  raised  hand  acted  the  mendicant's  part,
And  made  a  low  moan  from  the  ground  of  her  heart.
Before  their  master,  the  horsemen's  cry,
"  Make  room,  make  room ! "  went  up  to  the  sky ;
And  the  tread  and  tramp  of  the  mighty  throng,
And  the  neighing  of  steeds  as  they  moved  along,
Smote  on  each  ear,  and  no  eye  was  turned
To  the  spot  where  Zulaikha  sate  undiscerned.
He  looked  not  on  her ;  she  rose  forlorn,
In  a  hundred  pieces  her  heart  was  torn.
Her  broken  spirit  sent  out  a  cry,
And  a  flame  came  forth  in  each  burning  sigh.
To  her  house  of  woe  she  returned  distraught,
And  a  hundred  flames  for  each  reed  she  brought.
She  placed  before  her  the  idol  of  stone,
And  to  lighten  her  sorrow  thus  made  her  moan :


THE  CONVERT.  289

"  0  thou  who  hast  broken  mine  honour's  urn,
Thou  stone  of  offence  wheresoever  I  turn,
I  should  smite — for  thy  falsehood  has  ruined  my  rest —
With  the   stone  thou  art  made  of,  the  heart  in  my

breast.

The  way  of  misfortune  too  surely  I  trod
When  I  bowed  down  before  thee  and  made  thee  my  god  ;
When  I  looked  up  to  thee  with  wet  eyes  in  my  woe,
I  renounced  all  the  bliss  which  both  worlds  can  bestow.
From  thy  stony  dominion  my  soul  will  I  free,
And  thus  shatter  the  gem  of  thy  power  and  thee."
With  a  hard  flint  stone,  like  the  Friend,1  as  she

spoke,

In  a  thousand  pieces  the  image  she  broke.
Eiven  and  shattered  the  idol  fell,
And  with  her  from  that  moment  shall  all  be  well.
She  made  her  ablution,  'mid  penitent  sighs,
With  the  blood  of  her  heart  and  the  tears  of  her  eyes.
She  bent  down  her  head  to  the  dust ;  with  a  moan
She  made  supplication  to  God's  pure  throne : —
"  0  God,  who  lovest  the  humble,  Thou
To  whom  idols,  their  makers,  their  servants  bow ;
'Tis  to  the  light  which  Thy  splendour  lends
To  the  idol's  face  that  its  worshipper  bends.

1  Abraham,  the  Friend  of  God,  broke  the  images  which  his  father
and  his  people  worshipped.

T


290  THE  CONVERT.

Thy  love  the  heart  of  the  sculptor  stirs,
And  the  idol  is  graven  for  worshippers.
They  bow  them  down  to  the  image,  and  think
That  they  worship  Thee  as  before  it  they  sink.
To  myself,  0  Lord,  I  have  done  this  wrong,
If  mine  eyes  to  an  idol  have  turned  so  long.
I  have  erred  and  strayed ;  let  repentance  win
Forgiveness,  Good  Lord,  for  my  grievous  sin.
Because  I  have  wandered,  nor  heeded  Thy  right,
From  mine  eyes  Thou  has  taken  the  jewel  of  sight.
Thou  hast  washed  the  dark  stain  of  my  sin  away :
Now  restore  the  lost  blessing  for  which  I  pray.
May  I  feel  my  heart  free  from  the  brand  of  its  woes,
And  cull  from  the  garden  of  Yusuf  a  rose."

As  Yusuf  home  to  his  palace  hied,
Again  by  the  way  stood  Zulaikha  and  cried  :
"  Glory  to  God !  to  a  monarch's  state
He  has  lifted  the  poor  and  cast  down  the  great.
He  has  cast  the  king  from  his  glory  down,
And  set  on  the  head  of  a  servant  his  crown."
When  Yusuf  the  voice  of  Zulaikha  heard,
His  heart  in  his  bosom  was  strangely  stirred.
He  cried  to  a  lord :  "  As  I  hear  her  speak
My  spirit  sinks  and  my  heart  grows  weak.
Who  is  the  bedeswoman  ?     Bid  her  appear
In  my  council-chamber  that  I  may  hear


THE  CONVERT.  291

From  her  lips  the  tale  of  her  life,  and  know

Her  share  of  fortune,  her  dole  of  woe.

For  the  words  of  praise  which  mine  ears  have  caught

On  my  troubled  spirit  have  strongly  wrought.

By  some  grievous  woe  is  her  heart  down- weighed.

Or  why  should  my  soul  be  so  touched  and  swayed  ? "

Two  hundred  souls,  to  the  king  who  can  note
The  truth  of  each  sigh  and  each  glance,  I  devote ;
Whose  eye  can  discern  the  light  of  the  true
From  the  false  look  of  those  who  deceive  when  they  sue ;
Who  honour  and  punishment  justly  can  mete
To  the  true  light  of  dawn  and  the  liar's  deceit ;
Not  like  the  princes  whose  judgment,  for  gold,
In  our  evil  days  may  be  bought  and  sold.
Each  tyrant  with  cheeks  like  a  guinea  in  hue
Makes  a  hundred  wretches  his  mastery  rue.
Gold  brings  the  flush  of  delight  to  the  cheek ;
But  justice  from  gold  it  were  idle  to  seek.


IDoutb  IRestorefc,

FOR  what  sweeter  joy  can  a  lover  yearn
Than  to  love  his  love  and  be  loved  in  return ;
To  bear  to  her  bower  his  burthen  of  woes,
And  find  the  sweet  comfort  which  love  bestows ;
To  tell  the  dear  hopes  of  his  heart  and  repeat
The  tales  of  old  time  at  his  darling's  feet  ?

When  Yiisuf,  freed  from  the  pomp  and  din,
Had  sought  his  chamber  and  entered  in,
A  chamberlain  cried  at  the  door :  "  0  best
Of  princes,  famous  from  east  to  west,
That  ancient  woman  in  beggar's  weed,
Who  laid  her  hand  on  the  rein  of  thy  steed,
Whom  by  thine  order  I  bade  appear
This  day  in  thy  presence,  is  waiting  here."

"  Go,  hear  her  petition,"  thus  Yiisuf  replied,
"  Is  she  poor  and  in  want,  for  her  need  provide."

"  She  is  not,"  said  the  chamberlain,  "  one  of  those
Who  will  tell  me  the  tale  of  her  need  and  woes."

"  Admit  her,"  said  Yiisuf,  "  that,  face  to  face,
She  may  lift  the  veil  of  her  mournful  case."


YOUTH  RESTORED.  293

Zulaiklia  came  in,  when  permission  was  won,
As  free  as  the  motes  in  the  light  of  the  sun.
Like  a  bud  she  expanded :  the  lips  that  were  pale
Smiled  bright  as  a  rose,  and  she  bade  him  hail.
He  asked  her  her  name  an  d  her  home,  the  while
He  marvelled  much  at  that  joyous  smile.

"  I  am  she  who  chose  thee,"  she  cried ;  "  and  thou,
Since  that  one  first  glance,  hast  been  loved  till  now ;
To  whom,  bought  with  my  wealth,  I  devoted  the  whole
True  love  of  my  heart  and  my  mind  and  my  soul.
I  cast  for  thy  sake  my  young  life  to  the  wind,
And  age  has  come  o'er  me  and  youth  declined.
Thine  arms  for  a  consort  this  realm  have  embraced,
And  I  am  unpitied,  forgotten,  disgraced."

From  his  eye  the  big  tears  of  compassion  fell
As  he  heard  the  tale  he  remembered  so  well.
"  Zulaikha,"  he  said,  "  what  unhappy  fate
Has  brought  thee  down  to  thy  low  estate  ? "

When  she  heard  her  beloved  her  name  express,
Zulaikha  fell  prostrate,  Zulaikhaless.
The  wine  of  unconsciousness  boiled  in  her  heart,
And  the  sense  from  her  body  was  riven  apart.
Then  thus  began  Yusuf,  as  slowly  at  length
Zulaikha  recovered  her  senses  and  strength :

"  Where  is  thy  youth,  and  thy  beauty,  and  pride  ? "
"  Gone,  since  I  parted  from  thee,"  she  replied.


294  YOUTH  RESTORED.

"  Where  is  the  light  of  thine  eye  ? "  said  he,

"  Drowned  in  blood- tears  for  the  loss  of  thee."

"  Why  is  that  cypress-tree  bowed  and  bent  ? "

"  By  absence  from  thee  and  my  long  lament."

"  Where  is  thy  pearl,  and  thy  silver  and  gold,

And  the  diadem  bright  on  thy  head  of  old  ? "

"  She  who  spoke  of  my  loved  one,"  she  answered,  "  shed,

In  the  praise  of  thy  beauty,  rare  pearls  on  my  head.

In  return  for  those  jewels,  a  recompense  meet,

I  scattered  my  jewels  and  gold  at  her  feet.

A  crown  of  pure  gold  on  her  forehead  I  set,

And  the  dust  that  she  trod  was  my  coronet.

The  stream  of  my  treasure  of  gold  ran  dry ;

My  heart  is  love's  storehouse,  and  I  am  I."

Again  spoke  Yiisuf : — "  Zulaikha,  say,
What  is  the  wish  of  thy  heart  to-day  ? "
"  My  prayer,"  she  answered,  "  wilt  thou  refuse ;
But  no  help  save  thine  can  I  wish  or  choose.
And  if  with  an  oath  thou  wilt  pledge  thy  word,
To  utter  that  prayer  shall  my  tongue  be  stirred.
If  not,  in  silence  my  lips  I  close,
And  give  my  soul  back  to  my  life  of  woes."

"  By  the  truth  of  that  Father 1  who  reared  of  yore
The  temple  of  prophecy,"  thus  he  swore ;
"  To  whom  a  tulip  bloomed  forth  in  the  flame,
And  from  heaven  a  robe  of  high  honour  came ;

1  Abraham.


YOUTH  RESTORED.  295

Whatever  thy  will  be  this  day,  I  vow —

If  I  have  but  the  power — I  will  grant  it  now."

"  First,  my  beauty,"  she  cried,  "  and  my  youth  restore
In  the  pride  and  splendour  thou  knewest  before ;
Then  add  the  gift  of  new  sight  to  those,
To  see  thee  and  cull  from  thy  cheek  a  rose."

He  moved  his  lips  and  his  prayer  began
While  the  healing  stream  from  his  pure  mouth  ran.
The  beauty  returned  which  was  ruined  and  dead,
And  her  cheek  gained  the  splendour  which  long  had  fled.
Again  shone  the  waters l  which  sad  years  had  dried,
And  the  rose-bed  of  youth  bloomed  again  in  its  pride.
The  musk  was  restored  and  the  camphor  withdrawn,
And  the  black  night  followed  the  grey  of  the  dawn.
The  cypress  rose  stately  and  tall  as  of  old  :
The  pure  silver  was  free  from  all  wrinkle  and  fold.
From  each  musky  tress  fled  the  traces  of  white :
To  the  black  narcissus  came  beauty  and  light.
The  halo  of  youth  round  her  age  was  seen :
For  the  forty-years'  dame  stood  a  girl  of  eighteen ;
Yes,  fairer  and  brighter  in  loveliness  stood
Than  in  days  of  her  ripening  maidenhood.

Again  said  Yusuf : — "  0  thou  most  fair,
If  a  wish  now  be  left  thee,  that  wish  declare."

1  Ab,  in  Persian,  means  both  water  and  splendour.


296  YOUTH  RESTORED.

"  The  one  sole  wish  of  my  heart,"  she  replied,
"Is  still  to  be  near  thee,  to  sit  by  thy  side;
To  have  thee  by  day  in  my  happy  sight,
And  to  lay  my  cheek  on  thy  foot  at  night ;
To  lie  in  the  shade  of  the  cypress  and  sip
The  sugar  that  lies  on  thy  ruby  lip ;
To  my  wounded  heart  this  soft  balm  to  lay :
Tor  naught  beyond  this  can  I  wish  or  pray.
The  streams  of  thy  love  will  new  life  bestow
On  the  dry  thirsty  field  where  its  sweet  waters  flow."

When  Yiisuf  the  prayer  of  Zulaikha  had  heard,
He  bowed  down  his  head  and  he  spoke  no  word,
To  the  world  unseen  were  his  eyes  turned  away,
And  he  gave  her  no  answer  of  Yea  or  Nay.
Then  a  sound  on  his  ear,  as  he  doubted,  fell,
And  he  knew  'twas  the  wing-beat  of  Gabriel.
Thus  spoke  the  Angel :  "  To  thee,  0  king,
From  the  Lord  Almighty  a  message  I  bring.
'  Mine  eyes  have  seen  her  in  humble  mood ;
I  heard  her  prayer  when  to  thee  she  sued.
At  the  sight  of  her  labours,  her  prayers,  and  sighs,
The  waves  of  the  sea  of  My  pity  rise.
Her  soul  from  the  sword  of  despair  I  free,
And  here  from  My  throne  I  betroth  her  to  thee.' "


APPENDIX.


APPENDIX.


PRAISE  OF  THE  PROPHET.

IN  my  translation  I  have  omitted  the  two  preceding
cantos,  one  in  praise  of  Muhammad,  and  the  other
containing  an  account  of  the  Prophet's  miraculous
journey  to  heaven.  In  the  former,  the  poet  begins
by  assigning  a  mystic  meaning  to  each  letter  of
Muhammad's  name.  The  mim,  a  circular  letter,  is  a
collar  and  a  belt,  a  sign  of  servitude :

"A  ring

Meet  to  he  worn  by  Angel  and  by  King.
Can  mortal  wisdom  learn  the  meaning  hid
Deep  in  the  mystic  Ha  ?    No,  Heaven  forbid  ! "

The  letter  ddl  is  the  Prophet's  anklet.  The  poet
then  passes  from  the  name  to  the  Prophet  himself:

"  His  sun-bright  face  that  glorifies  the  day
Lent  breath  to  Adam  newly-formed  of  clay.
Ne'er  had  the  Ark  without  his  high  behest
Borne  Noah  safely  to  Mount  Judi's  crest.
A  gentle  breath  to  aid  the  Friend  he  sped,
And  threatening  flames  became  a  rose-strewn  bed  :
Glad  news  of  his  approach  Messiah  brought,
And  Miisa  from  his  touch  a  radiance  caught.
His  grace  a  home  in  foreign  Egypt  gave
To  Hebrew  Yiisuf  bought  with  gold,  a  slave."

He  is  a  fair  cypress  grown  in  the  garden  of  truth,
a  bright  pheasant  from  the  meadow  of  purity.  High
as  the  heaven  he  rears  his  form:


3oo  APPENDIX.

11  His  breath

Stirs  with,  new  life  the  mouldering  bones  of  death.
Thick  clouds  about  him  their  pavilion  fold,
And  the  sun  decks  it  with  a  ball  of  gold."

The  canto  contains  -  much  more  praise  of  a  some-
what similar  character,  and  mention  is  made  of  some
historical  or  miraculous  events  and  acts  in  the  Prophet's
life.

In  the  following  canto  the  poet  describes  the
visionary  journey  of  Muhammad  to  heaven.  "The
Angel  Gabriel  (to  quote  S.  E.'s  analysis)  awakes  him
as  he  is  slumbering  on  his  bed,  and  informs  him  that
he  has  brought  him  the  wonderful  horse  Borak,  a  kind
of  mysterious  animal  like  some  of  those  described  in
Ezekiel,  to  convey  him  to  Paradise.  Mounting  this,
he  first  visits  Jerusalem,  as  the  Hebrew  Prophets  had
done,  and  then  wings  his  flight  through  the  eight
inferior  heavens  to  the  ninth  and  highest."

The  poet  plays  somewhat  feebly  on  the  names  of
the  planets  and  constellations  which  the  Prophet
passes  in  his  ascent,  and  the  whole  account  of  the
journey  is,  I  think,  deficient  in  originality  and  vigour.
The  Persian  name  of  Jupiter  is  Mushtari,  or  the  Buyer,
and  musht  means  the  fist  or  closed  hand.  Accord-
ingly,

"  From  ruby  lips  on  Mushtarf  were  shed
Bich  pearls  that  filled  his  hand  and  decked  his  head."

Puns,  indeed  (if  they  can  be  called  puns),  are  too
frequently  the  rudders  of  the  verses —

"  By  which,  like  ships,  they  steer  their  courses."

At  last  he  came  to  the  highest  heaven  and  near  to
Allah's  throne :


APPENDIX.  301

"  He  saw  what  mortal  ne'er  before  might  see :
Ask  not  the  tale — 'tis  vain  to  ask — from  me.
That  realm,  unmeasured,  search  can  ne'er  explore ;
Eefrain  thy  lips,  nor  ask  of  less  and  more.
Naught  of  that  place  may  eloquence  declare ;
No  tongue  or  lip  may  tell  the  glories  there.
He  heard  what  mortal  ne'er  before  might  hear,
Mysterious  secrets,  shut  from  every  ear.
Unfathomable  secrets  :  as  the  wind
Eludes  the  grasp,  they  mock  both  ear  and  mind.
Too  deep  for  ear  to  hear,  for  eye  to  see,
The  tongue  that  names  them  still  for  life  must  be.

Thy  foot,  0  Jami,  in  due  bounds  restrain :
Fly  yet  in  time  this  soul-destroying  main.
No  longer  dare  to  touch  so  high  a  theme :
Hush  !    Still  omniscient  is  the  Lord  Supreme."

I  omit  two  cantos,  one  a  prayer  for  the  blessing  of
the  Prophet,  and  the  other  a  hyperbolical  eulogy  of
Sultan  Husen,  the  poet's  protector  and  patron.  I  find
nothing  worth  extracting  from  my  translation  of  the
former :  as  specimens  of  the  latter  the  following  rather
commonplace  verses  will  suffice :

"  He  holds  the  sea  of  bounty  in  his  hand,
And  from  his  fingers  streams  of  wealth  expand,
Till  each  blest  land  its  happy  increase  yields
Of  sweet  hope  ripening  in  a  thousand  fields.
The  cloud  in  thunder,  and  in  foam  the  main
Of  the  free  bounty  of  his  hand  complain.
When  his  drawn  sabre  flashes  gold,  the  sun
Sheathes  in  a  cloud  his  dimmer  sword  outdone.

4

E'en  through  the  night  his  justice  loves  to  keep
Strict  watch  and  ward  and  wake  when  others  sleep.
Hence  the  shy  roebuck,  fearless  of  attack,
Slumbers  securely  on  the  leopard's  back ;


302  APPENDIX.

And,  worn  with  prowling  through  the  night,  in  peace
The  wolf  lies  pillowed  on  the  wether's  fleece.

Before  his  goodness,  bright  as  perfect  day,
Oppression  flies  like  shades  of  night  away.
But  where  the  lightning  of  his  wrath  is  hurled,
A  single  flash  consumes  a  guilty  world."

I  have  omitted  eight  cantos  which  in  the  original
complete  the  poem.     The  interest  of  the  story  cul-
minates and  ends,  as  I  have  already  said,  with  the
betrothal  of  Yusuf  and   Zulaikha,  and  the  poem  in
my  version  will  probably  be  considered  sufficiently  long.
The   omitted    cantos    are    "The   Marriage,"  which   is
celebrated    with    great    pomp    and    rejoicing;    "The
Victory    of   Love,"    describing    a    sort    of    perennial
honeymoon,  when  "set  at  rest  in  her  earthly  affec-
tions, Zulaikha  feels  her  heart  strongly  drawn  towards
divine  ones;    and  Yiisuf,  perceiving   her  inclination
and  devotion  to  her  new  faith,  builds  her  a  beautiful
Prayer-house,  and  when  it  is  completed,  tenderly  takes
her   by  the   hand   and   conducts  her  to   it ; "     "  The
Longed-for  Death,"  when  Yusuf  receives  in  a  dream
a  message  from  his  father  and  mother  bidding  him
come  to  them  in  heaven,  and  his  consequent  prayer
to  God  to  be  taken  from  this  world ;    "  The  Double
Death,"  in  which  Zulaikha  soon  follows  her  beloved
husband,  whose  last  prayer  has  been  granted ;  "  The
Complaint  against  Fate,"  which  contains   some  fine
passages   which  I   reluctantly  omit;  "Advice  to   his
Son,"  full  of  wise  and  well-expressed  precepts,  which
deserve  to    be    separately  translated;   An    "Address
to  Himself,"  which  contains  nothing  remarkable ;  and
"  The  Conclusion,"  in  which  the  poet  thanks  God  that
his  soul-alluring  story  is  finished  at  last,  and  that  his


APPENDIX.  303

mind,  wearied  with  stringing  pearls  and  oppressed
by  the  solicitude  of  finding  rhymes,  flings  away  the
scales  from  the  hand  of  reflection,  and  sits  down  with
idle  arms  from  weighing  its  couplets.  After  invoking
a  blessing  on  the  Sultan,  the  Pillars  of  his  State,  and
his  Vizier,  he  concludes  thus  :  "  Thou  hast  ended  thy
words  with  a  blessing,  now  let  thy  tongue  give  counsel,
0  Jami.  Do  no  dark  deed  like  thine  own  pen ;  wash
clean  thy  book  with  tears  from  eyes  full  of  blood ;  use
thy  pen  only  in  the  service  of  the  beneficent ;  fold
up  thy  book  against  all  deluding  passion ;  inflict  on
thy  tongue  the  punishment  of  silence,  for  silence  is
better  than  aught  that  thou  canst  utter."


PRINTED    BY   BALLANTYNE,    HANSON    AND   CO.
EDINBURGH   AND   LONDON.


UNIVERSITY  OF  TOROJ
LIBRARY


PK

6M90

Y8

E5

1882

C.I

ROBA


brary    Card    Pocket

t-  "Kef.  Index  File."
LIBRARY  BUREAU
