The Grammar of Astrology (Zadkiel (Richard James Morrison), 1833)
==========================================================
Zadkiel's 1833 grammar; the Victorian rival to Raphael who carried the revival forward. Public domain. Digitized from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/b22014305).

53f53 jO

t\f,  V.


5 3 1 £ /


THE

GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY,

CONTAINING

ALL  THINGS  NECESSARY  FOR

CALCULATING  A NATIVITY

BY

COMMON  ARITHMETIC.

By  ZADKIEL  THE  SEER,

Author  of  the  “ Herald  of  Astrology .”


DEDICATED  TO  SIR  JOHN  HERSCHELL,  Bart.  &c.  &c.


LONDON :

SHERWOOD,  GILBERT,  AND  PIPER,

PATERNOSTER  ROW.


1833.


COMPTON  & RITCHIE,  PRINTERS,  MIDDLE  STREET,  CLOTH  PAIR,
LONDON.


s\\


TO


SIR  JOHN  HERSCHELL,  Bart.

&c.  &e.  &c.


SlR,

THE  indefatigable  industry  of  your  highly
honoured  father  and  yourself,  to  render  the  know-
ledge of  Astronomy  complete,  must  rank  your  names
among  the  benefactors  of  mankind  in  all  after  ages.
The  great  correctness  with  which  the  places  of  the
planets  may  now  be  calculated,  offers  a means  of
examining  into  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  the  doctrines
of  Astrology,  which  did  not  exist  in  the  days  of
your  able  predecessor  in  Astronomy,  Kepler , who,
as  you  are  aware,  was  one  of  the  great  men  who
have  believed  in  and  studied  Astrology.  The  intent
a 2


IV


DEDICATION.


of  this  work  being  to  open  the  way  to  a more  genera!
knowledge  of  that  ancient  but  at  present  little-
known  science*  I have  thought  I could  not  do  better
than  connect  it  with  the  name  of  one  of  the  first
philosophers  of  my  own  day.  With  the  highest
respect*  I beg  leave  then*  Sir*  to  dedicate  to  you  this
Elementary  Essay  on  the  Science  of  Nativities.

I am  not  aware  what  your  own  opinions  on  the
art  of  foreseeing  future  events  by  the  heavenly
bodies  may  be  ; but  if  you  should  choose  to  amuse
yourself*  or  unbend  from  your  severe  studies  by
examining  it  for  yourself*  the  present  work*  I believe*
will  give  you  a ready  means.  In  that  case*  I would
recommend  as  a first  effort*  the  Nativity  of  Prince
George  of  Cumberland*  as  the  time  of  birth*
having  been  particularly  well  noted*  and  published
by  authority,  may  be  considered  authentic.  The
figure  of  the  heavens  at  Berlin  for  the  moment  of


DEDICATION.


v


the  young  prince’s  birth,  and  the  places  of  the
planets  at  the  time,  were  carefully  calculated  and
published  by  me  in  the  “ Herald  of  Astrology  for
1832 and  you  will  observe.  Sir,  that  the  Moon
being  in  close  square  aspect  to  the  evil  planet  Mars,
together  with  other  circumstances,  has,  in  strict
accordance  with  the  rules  of  the  science*  caused  the
royal  native  to  become  blind.  And  it  is  worthy  of
especial  notice,  that,  on  the  very  day  the  prince  had
the  misfortune  to  receive  a blow  in  one  eye  (14th
September,  1832),  which  has  eventually  led  to  the
loss  of  sight,  the  Moon  was  on  the  place  of  Mercury
at  birth,  and  at  the  last  birth-day ; on  which  birth-
day the  Moon  was  on  the  place  of  Mars  at  birth,
and  the  Sun  in  square  aspect  to  Saturn : these,
together  with  other  exact  agreements  with  the
rules  of  Ptolemy,  occur  in  this  royal  and  authentic
nativity.  To  common  minds  they  may  appear
accidental  coincidences ; but  to  your  superior  un-


VI


DEDICATION.


derstanding,  as  you  are,,  of  all  men,  best  aware  of
bow  little  we  know  of  the  immensity  of  the  universe,
or  the  objects  or  modus  operandi  of  many  of  its
magnificent  parts,  they  will,  I hope,  appear  to
deserve  farther  consideration.

I remain.  Sir,

Your  very  obedient  Servant,


THE  AUTHOR.


PREFACE.


The  science  of  Astrology  consists  of  four
branches,  or  distinct  parts,  which  are  essen-
tially different  from  each  other:  they  are — 1,
Nativities , or  the  art  of  foreseeing,  from  the
figure  of  the  heavens  at  the  moment  of  birth,
the  future  fate  and  character  of  individuals  ;
2,  Mundane  Astrology , or  the  art  of  foreseeing
by  the  positions  of  the  heavenly  bodies  at  cer-
tain periods,  the  circumstances  of  nations,  such
as  wars,  pestilences,  inundations,  earthquakes,
&c.  &c. ; 3,  Atmospherical  Astrology , or  the
art  of  foreseeing  by  the  positions  of  the  planets
at  the  periods  of  the  Sun  and  Moon  being  in
mutual  aspect,  and  some  other  circumstances,
the  quality  of  the  weather  at  any  required  time
or  place ; 4,  Horary  Astrology , or  the  art  of
foreseeing  by  the  positions  of  the  heavens  at
any  period  when  an  individual  may  be  anxious


PREFACE.


viii

about  the  matter,  the  remit  of  any  business  or
circumstance  whatever.

The  Grammar  of  Astrology  is  intended
to  teach  the  principles  of  the  science  of  nati-
vities, and  to  render  them  so  plain,  by  divesting
them  of  the  trash  which  designing  or  ignorant
men  have  introduced,  that  persons  of  an  ordi-
nary capacity  and  a common  share  of  industry,
may  examine  and  decide  for  themselves, whether
there  be  any  truth  in  astrology  or  not.  To  those
who  consider  it  sufficient  to  decide  without
examination,  merely  because  others  have  de-
cided before  them,  this  work  has  no  recom-
mendation, inasmuch  as  the  gauntlet  of  argu-
ment is  not  thrown  down.  But  to  those  who
think  experience  a safer  guide  than  reason  in
natural  philosophy,  it  will  be  peculiarly  accept-
able ; as  herein  they  will  find  the  briefest
possible  rules  and  the  best  decided  principles
for  judging,  which  have  yet  appeared  before
the  world,  as  far  as  the  author  is  capable  of
forming  an  opinion  from  many  years’  experience
and  the  examination  of  many  hundred  nativities.

If  the  present  haughty  style  of  declaiming
against  a science  which  the  greatest  men  have


PREFACE.


ix


taken  a pride  to  cultivate  in  all  ages  and  all
countries,  should,  by  this  endeavour  to  open  a
clear  path  to  its  examination,  receive  a check,
such  as  the  power  of  truth  only  can  offer  to
the  headstrong  course  of  prejudice,  it  will  not
have  been  written  in  vain ; and  if  the  cause  of
truth  should  thereby  be  assisted,  either  through
public  demonstration  by  the  test  of  experiment
of  the  utter  fallacy  of  the  doctrines  of  Astrology,
or,  on  the  other  hand,  by  the  conviction  of  the
honest  portion  of  mankind  that  the  Almighty
does,  indeed,  choose  the  heavenly  bodies  as  the
instruments  of  his  will  in  bringing  about  the
ends  of  Providence ; this  little  wrork  will  very
well  bear  the  lash  of  critics,  whose  pride  will
not  believe  that  “ There  are  more  things  in
Heaven  and  Earth  than  are  dreamed  of  in  their
philosophy.”

In  perfect  but  humble  confidence  in  the  pu-
rity of  his  intentions  in  endeavouring  to  gain  a
hearing  for  Astrology,  the  Author  can  contem-
plate with  perfect  calm  the  bitterness  of  abuse
of  some  men  who  call  themselves,  par  excellence ^
philosophers  ; since  he  knows  that  there  are
many  who  will  soar  above  prejudice,  and  resolve


X


PREFACE.


on  seeing  with  their  own  eyes.  To  them  he
begs  to  dedicate  the  fruits  of  his  labour,  and
to  remind  them — if  they  would,  indeed,  be  cer-
tain whether  the  influence  of  the  stars  is  a
chimera  or  a reality — of  the  words  of  the  great
Bacon,—; fiat  experimentum .

If  this  work  be  well  received,  which,  from  the
number  of  applications  already  made  to  my
Publishers,  and  other  circumstances,  I have  no
doubt  of,  I shall  prepare  elementary  works  on
the  other  branches  of  the  science.

ZADKIEL  THE  SEER.


N.B.  To  those  who  wish  to  pursue  the  science
farther,  I recommend  the  Tetrabiblos  of  Pto-
lemy and  the  Primum  Mobile  of  Placidus.


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS


BOOK  THE  FIRST.

Page

Chap.  I....

..The  alphabet

Chap.  II.  . .

. .The  signs  of  the  zodiac

Chap.  111.  .

. .The  natures  of  planets

8

Chap.  IV...

. .Of  the  aspects

16

Chap.  V. . . .

. .The  qualities  of  the  aspects  . . .

Chap.  VI  ..

. .Of  the  figure  of  the  heavens. . .

23

Chap.  VII..

. .Of  the  twelve  houses  of  heaven

25

Chap.  VIII.  <

> .To  erect  a figure  of  the  heavens  at  birth  27

Chap.  IX

,. To  find  the  planets’  latitudes,

declina-

tions,  &c

Chap.  X To  judge  the  future  fate  by  the  figure

of  the  heavens  at  the  moment  of  birth  44
Chap.  XI. . , .To  judge  of  the  effects  of  directions..  63
Chap.  XII...  .Of  mundane  aspects  and  directions....  68


Chap.  XIII.. Of  the  mundane  parallels 71

Chap.  XIV..  .Of  the  Part  of  Fortune  . . 72


Chap.  XV. ...Of  the  hyleg  and  the  hylegiacal  places  75

BOOK  THE  SECOND.

Chap.  I Zodiacal  directions 77

Chap.  II To  direct  © to  any  aspect  in  the  zodiac,

except  a parallel  78

Chap.  III...  .To  direct  © to  a parallel  in  the  zodiac  85
Chap.  IV. . . .To  direct  ])  in  the  zodiac  to  any  aspect

except  a parallel 88

Chap.  V. To  direct  J)  to  parallels  of  declinations  93

Chap.  VI To  direct  the  ascendant  to  aspects  in  the

zodiac 95


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.


xu

Chap.  VII..
Chap.  Vlll.
Chap.  IX...


Chap.  X. ..

Chap.  XI.  ...
Chap.  XII..
Chap.  XIII.


Chap.  XIV..
Chap.  XV..


Chap.  XVI
Chap.  XVII,
Chap.  XVITI

Chap.  XIX.,


Page

, .To  direct  the  mid-heaven  to  aspects  in

the  zodiac  ...  * 98

. . Of  mundane  directions  to  the  angles,  that

is,  to  the  ascendant  or  M.  C 99

, .To  direct  © or  ])  to  any  aspect  in  the
world  (except  parallels),  by  converse

motion 105

..To  direct  © or  ])  to  any  aspect  in
mundo  (except  parallels)  by  direct

motion 109

, .To  direct  © or  J)  to  mundane  parallels,

converse ..Ill

, .To  direct  © or  ])  to  mundane  parallels,

direct l\S

.To  direct  © or  ])  to  parallels  in  mundo ,
that  is,  to  parallel  distances  from  the
meridian  by  rapt  motion,  called  rapt

parallels .......  ...114

.Of  directions  to  the  Part  of  Fortune  ..  .119
. Of  turning  the  arc  of  direction  into  time,
to  learn  at  what  age  its  effects  will  be

felt 121

.Of  secondary  directions ..122

.Of  revolutions,  lunations,  transits,  Ac. 124
, .To  rectify  the  estimated  time  of  birth  to

find  the  true  time 128

.A  judgment  for  marriage  in  the  nativity
of  Lord  Byron’s  daughter * * .135


ABBREVIATIONS.

A.  R.  signifies  Right  Ascension.


Asc.

M.  C.  ..

Mer.  Dist.
S.  S.  Q.

S.  □ ..


The  Ascendant.

The  Medium  Coeli  or  Mid-heaven.
The  Meridian  Distance.

A Sesquiquadrate  aspect.

A Semi-quartile  aspect.


INTRODUCTION.


It  is  not  intended  here  to  enter  upon  any  laboured
argument  to  prove  the  antiquity  of  the  science  of
the  Stars ; it  is  enough  for  my  present  purpose
(which  is  to  teach  the  mere  outline  of  the  art,  which
may  be  filled  up  as  the  student  has  inclination)  if  I
state  that  Astrology  existed  for  many  centuries
prior  to  the  Christian  era,  about  which  time  it
appears  to  have  been  taught  chiefly  by  tradition,
being  handed  down  from  father  to  son  by  word  of
mouth,  as  the  art  of  palmistry  now  is  among  the
gipsies.  There  is  no  good  evidence  of  any  perfect
system  of  Astrology  having  been  reduced  to  written
rules,  depending  on  mathematical  principles,  before
the  first  century  ; though  Sir  Isaac  Newton  admits,
in  his  Chronology,  that  it  was  in  existence  nearly
900  years  before  that  period.  Somewhere  about
the  year  133,  or  as  nearly  as  possible  1700  years
before  this  present  year  1833,  that  celebrated  astro-
nomer,geographer,  and  astrologer,  Claudius  Ptolemy,


XIV


INTRODUCTION.


compiled  his  notable  work  entitled  “ The  Tetra-
biblos,  or  Quadripartite,  being  Four  Books  of
the  Influence  of  the  Stars*.”  In  this  work  he
seems  to  have  collected  all  that  appeared  of  impor-
tance to  him  which  was  then  known  of  the  science  ;
but  as  Ptolemy  did  not  devote  the  whole  of  his
time  to  this  study,  which,  however,  would  require
the  entire  application  of  any  man’s  time  to  make
himself  thoroughly  and  entirely  master  of  it,  we
may  fairly  suppose  that  some  of  the  less  important
rules  had  not  been  tested  by  him  personally,  but
were  merely  adopted  as  the  current  opinions  of  the
day.  This  accounts  for  a few  of  his  doctrines  being
in  some  degree  erroneous  ; although  the  majority  of
them  are  true  to  nature,  and,  if  rightly  understood,
never  did  or  can  fail,  while  the  system  of  the  uni-
verse remains  unchanged.

The  principles  of  Ptolemy’s  doctrine  do  not
appear  to  have  been  ever  clearly  understood,  or
acted  upon  free  from  the  superstitious  trash  of  the
Arab  writers  before  the  years  1647  and  1657,  when

* Translated  by  J.  M.  Ashmand.


INTRODUCTION.


xv


Placidus  de  Titus , a Spanish  monk,  first  published
the  true  system  of  astrology  founded  on  Ptolemy’s
mathematical  calculations.  His  principal  work
was  printed  in  Latin,  and  called  the  Primum
Mobile , or  First  Mover,  translated  by  J.  Cooper.
It  is  remarkable  that  the  only  subsequent  works  of
any  value  on  that  part  of  astrology  which  is  of
most  importance,  nativities,  were  written  by  an
Englishman,  Mr.  Partridge,  whose  Almanack  is  still
in  existence.  His  works,  the  Opus  Reformatum  and
the  Defectio  Geniturarum , are  evidently  made  up
from  Placidus;  but  they  are  full  of  the  soundest
doctrines,  and  contain  numerous  examples.

No  good  translation  of  Placidus  appeared  in
English  until  that  made  by  Mr.  John  Cooper  in
1816;  nor  did  any  copy  of  Ptolemy’s  book,  from
which  all  we  know  of  Astrology  is  originally  derived,
until  1822,  when  Mr.  Ashmand’s  excellent  work
appeared.  The  interest  taken  in  the  science  has
already  called  for  another  translation  of  the  great
master,  which  Mr.  Wilson  has  recently  published.
This  gentleman  published  a very  useful  and  clever


XVI


INTRODUCTION.


work,  called  the  “Dictionary  of  Astrology/’  in
1819,  but  it  is  rather  dogmatical.  The  old  tran-
slations of  Ptolemy  and  Placidus,  especially  those
by  Dr.  Sibly,  are  detestable,  and  have  made  nu-
merous erring  astrologers,  and  done  the  science
infinite  injury.  All  the  host  of  English  astrologers,
such  as  Lilly,  Colley,  Sibly,  Gadbury,  White,  &c.
were  immersed  in  error  when  they  treated  on  nati-
vities; they  embraced  the  follies  of  the  Arabian
astrologers,  which  consisted  in  mixing  up  the  system
of  divination,  called  horary  questions,  with  the  ge~
nethliacal  art,  or  the  science  of  nativities ; and  those
who  open  any  of  their  works  only  lose  their  time.

In  short,  there  exists  no  brief,  cheap,  elementary
work  on  the  science ; which  numbers  require  who
would  willingly  learn  it  if  they  knew  how  to  begin :
such  the  Grammar  of  Astrology  will  become.  It  is
intended  to  be  clear  to  the  commonest  capacity,  and
to  contain  nothing  that  is  not  founded  on  actual
experience.


Grammar  of  astrology


FIRST  BOOK.


CHAP.  I.

THE  ALPHABET.

This  consists  of  twelve  characters,  which  represent
the  twelve  Signs  of  the  Zodiac : they  are  these —
Northern .

W Aries  25  Cancer
& Taurus  Leo
n Gemini  ti^  Virgo.


Southern.

=*=  Libra  Capricorn

1U  Scorpio  zz  Aquarius
f Sagittary  X Pisces.

Also  of  eight  others,  which  represent  the  Plane  fa ,
as  follow : —


y Herschel
T?  Saturn
% Jupiter
$ Mars


0 Sol,  the  Sun
? Venus
$ Mercury
D Luna,  the  Moon.


And  five  others,  which  represent  the  Aspects , or
positions  which  these  planets  bear  to  each  other,  as
follow  : — -

Conjunction , or  when  two  planets  are  in  the  same
place.

* Sextile , or  when  they  are  60  degrees  or  two  signs
apart.


B


2 GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.

□ Square,  or  when  they  are  90  degrees  or  three
signs  apart.

A Trine , or  when  they  are  120  degrees  or  four  signs
apart.

8 Opposition , or  when  they  are  180  degrees  or  six
signs  asunder.

N.B.  There  are  also  some  other  aspects,  called  the
new  aspects , because  unknown  to  the  ancients : they
were  discovered  by  the  great  Kepler,  one  of  the  ablest
astrologers  of  modern  date,  and  are  as  follow  : —
The  Semi-Sextile  or  30  degrees,  the  Semi-Square  or
45  degrees,  Sesquiquadrate  or  135  degrees,  and  the
Quintile  or  72  degrees,  mud  Biquintile  or  144  degrees.
The  power  of  these  is  not  so  great  as  that  of  the  old
aspects.  The  Moon’s  nodes  are  thus  marked- — Q
north,  £5  south.  Lastly,  there  is  another  character,
which  is  called  the  Part  of  Fortune  ®.

The  learner  should  practise  writing  the  cha-
racters, and  become  well  acquainted  with  the
signs  which  are  opposite  to  each  other.

CHAP.  II.

THE  SIGNS  OF  THE  ZODIAC.

It  is  presumed  that  the  reader  has,  at  least,  a
common-place  knowledge  of  the  nature  of  the  zodiac
and  the  solar  system,  which  may  be  acquired  in  a


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


3


few  hours  by  perusing  any  common  school  book  on
astronomy ; therefore,  I will  at  once  proceed  to
describe  the  astrological  nature  of  the  signs.

These  may  be  divided  into  north  and  south.  The
first  six,  from  Aries  to  Virgo,  are  northern ; the  latter
six,  from  Libra  to  Pisces,  are  southern : this  is  be-
cause the  Sun  and  planets,  when  in  the  first  six,  are
north  of  the  equator,  and  when  in  the  last  six,  they
are  south  of  that  line.  When  the  Sun  is  in  northern
signs  he  is  longer  above  the  Earth  than  below,  and
the  days  are  longer  than  the  nights ; when  he  is  in
the  southern  signs,  he  remains  longer  below  the
horizon  than  above,  and  the  nights  are  longer  than
the  days.

Of  course,  when  any  other  planet  is  in  a north  sign
it  remains  longer  above  the  Earth  than  below ; and,
vice  versa,  when  it  is  in  a south  sign  its  stay  is  longer
helowr  the  Earth.

Each  point  of  the  zodiac  rises  and  sets  once  every
24  hours,  occasioned  by  the  Earth  turning  round  on
its  axis  once  every  day ; therefore,  when  any  given
point  be  rising,  the  opposite  point  must  be  setting.

As  the  zodiac  consists  of  360  degrees  from  the
first  point  of  Aries  until  you  come  to  that  point  again ;
and  as  these  are  divided  into  12  portions  or  signs,
they  must  consist  of  30  degrees  each.  It  is  found  that
each  of  these  signs,  when  it  arises  at  the  birth  of  an
individual,  possesses  a certain  influence  or  secret
power  to  produce  a particular  form  of  body,  and
b 2


4


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


some  peculiar  mental  inclinations.  There  is  no
reason  to  suppose*  however*  that  the  influence  of
Aries*  or  any  other  sign*  proceeds  merely  from  that
sign  alone ; but  it  is  more  probable  that  when  that
sign  is  rising  the  whole  face  of  the  heavens  is  such
as  to  produce  a certain  effect . This  may  be  caused
as  much  by  the  distant  stars  in  the  milky  way  (that
large  shining  band  seen  in  the  heavens  on  a fine
night*  which  consists  of  innumerable  millions  of  stars*
and  of  which  our  sun  is  supposed  to  be  one)  as  by
any  others.  In  fact*  Ptolemy  speaks  of  these  effects
being  produced  by  the  “ ambient*”  which  means  the
entire  of  the  heavens,  and  not  the  ascending  sign
alone.

GENERAL  RULE  FOR  JUDGING  THE  EFFECT  OF
EACH  SIGN.

Aries. — This  sign  produces  a dry*  lean  body*  middle
stature*  strong  limbs*  large  bones*  long  and  meagre
face*  sharp  sight*  neck  rather  long  and  scraggy*
dark  eyebrows*  swarthy  complexion*  hair  reddish
and  wiry ; disposition  angry  and  violent  as  the
Ram .

Taurus. — A short*  full*  well-set  person ; full  face
and  eyes,  thick  neck  and  lips*  wide  nose  and
mouth*  swarthy  shining  face*  a short*  thick*  broad
hand;  dark*  harsh*  and  generally  curling  hair.
Given  to  eating*  unfeeling,  melancholy  and  slow
to  anger*  but  when  enraged  furious  as  the  BidL


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


5


Gemini. — A tall,  upright,  well-made  body,  with  good
carriage,  long  arms,  but  hands  and  feet  generally
short  and  fleshy;  hair  blackish,  eyes  hazel,  and
h aving  a sh  arp,  quick,  penetrating  look : if  a female,
she  has  very  flne  eyes,  body  strong  and  active,
step  smart  and  quick ; understanding  good ; ima-
gination powerful;  said  to  beget  or  bear  Twins.

Cancer. — A short,  small  person  invariably ; with  pale,
sickly  complexion,  round  full  face,  and  generally
small  features  ; sad  brown  hair,  small  grey  eyes  ;
the  upper  part  of  the  body  larger  than  the  lower ;
constitution  weakly : if  a female,  prolific.  Dull
and  timid  as  the  Crab.

Leo. — A large  noble  person ; full,  tail  stature,  well
proportioned ; shoulders  broad  and  well  set,  hair
yellowish  and  bushy  ; eyes  large  and  staring,  yet
quick  sighted;  countenance  fierce;  head  round;
complexion  ruddy ; step  firm  and  majestic  ; dispo-
sition free  and  courteous  ; heart  bold  and  courage-
ous as  the  Lion.

Virgo. — Middle  stature,  inclined  to  be  tall ; slender
figure,  neat  and  well  formed;  dark  brown  hair;
dark  complexion,  well  favoured,  but  not  hand-
some ; face  more  round  than  oval ; voice  weak  and
unmusical;  mind  ingenious;  pleasant  in  conver-
sation ; given  to  study ; fond  of  learning ; but
fickle— and  bashful  as  a Virgin.  \

Libra.— Tall  and  elegantly  formed,  rather  slender ;
hair  smooth,  and  a light  auburn  or  flaxen ; face


6


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


round  and  lovely,,  having  great  beauty;  fine,  clear
red  and  white  complexion,  which  in  old  age  be-
comes pimpled;  eyes  generally  blue  and  beautiful ;
mind  well  principled  ; temper  even  as  the  Balance.

Scorpio.— Thick,  well-set,  middle  sized  person;
strong  and  robust;  face  somewhat  broad  and
square ; complexion  dusky ; hair  dark  brown,
curling,  bushy  and  plentiful ; thick  neck ; coarse
hairy  legs,  often  bow-legged  or  club-footed,  or  ill-
made  feet ; mind  thoughtful,  reserved ; active  and
deceitful  as  the  Scorpion.

Sagittarius. — Well-formed  person,  rather  tall;
strong  active  body ; rather  long  face  and  hand-
some, with  generally  a straight  Grecian  nose ; fine
clear  eyes,  and  good  fresh-coloured  complexion ;
chesnut  coloured  hair,  growing  off  the  temples;
inclined  to  baldness ; daring  and  intrepid,  fond  of
horses  and  hunting.

Capricorn. — Short,  slender,  ill-formed  person  ; long
thin  face  ; generally  ugly ; chin  long  and  pointed  ;
thin  beard  ; neck  long  and  small ; hair  black  and
lanky;  narrow  breast;  weak  in  the  knees,  with
crooked  ill-formed  legs  ; mind  subtle  and  witty,
but  capricious  as  Capri,  the  Goat.

Aquarius.— Person  stout,  well-set,  and  comely,  rather
tall,  not  very,  but  never  short ; robust,  strong,
healthy  appearance;  a long  and  rather  fleshy  face ;
complexion  clear  and  delicate,  somewhat  sanguine  ;
hazel  eyes ; sandy  or  darkish  flaxen  hair.  This


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


sign  gives  more  beauty  than  any  other,  except
Libra;  disposition  gentle  and  benevolent;  said  to
take  delight  on  the  Water,

Pisces. — Person  short ; large  pale  and  fleshy  face ;
the  face  is  always  full,  but  sometimes  sanguine  in
complexion;  a stooping,  heavy  gait, holding  down
the  head  when  walking.  If  a female,  the  face  is
generally  plump,  and  the  skin  clear  and  lucid,  but
very  white;  hair  dark;  eyes  sleepy;  shoulders
round;  arms  and  legs  short  and  fin-like;  disposi-
tion indolent,  and  too  often  given  to  drink,  like
the  Fishes.

Caution.— These  descriptions  are  rarely  to  be  met
with  exactly.  Every  planet  which  throws  an  aspect
to  the  ascendant  has  an  influence  both  on  mind  and
body ; and  if  any  planet  be  rising  at  birth,  it  im-
presses its  own  character  most  powerfully  On  both.
If  the  latter  part  of  a sign  be  on  the  cusp  of  the
ascendant,  a portion  of  the  next  sign  must  be  also  in
the  ascendant ; and  then  the  native  will  partake  of
both  influences.  A person,  for  instance,  having  the
latter  part  of  Sagittary  rising,  and  the  whole  of
Capricorn  in  the  ascendant,  may  have  a fine  head  of
hair  and  handsome  forehead,  but  the  rest  of  the  face
and  person  extremely  ugly.  The  disposition  also
depends  chiefly  on  the  Moon  and  Mercury.


8


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


CHAP.  III.

THE  NATURES  OF  THE  PLANETS.

Herschel. — This  is  the  most  distant  planet  from  the
Sun  ; his  motion  is  extremely  slow,  as  he  takes  83
years  and  a half  to  go  through  the  12  signs.  He
c is  frequently  retrograde,  appearing  to  go  back-
ward in  the  heavens.  His  diameter  is  four  times
that  of  our  Earth.

The  nature  of  Herschel  is  extremely  evil.  If
ascending  at  the  time  of  birth,  he  causes  the  native
to  be  of  very  eccentric  disposition,  pursuing  ex-
traordinary and  uncommon  objects;  one  who
despises  the  track  of  custom,  and  is  very  abrupt
in  his  manners.  Whatever  good  he  may  produce,
when  well  aspected  or  situated,  will  be  of  a sudden
description,  and  quite  out  of  the  common  course  of
things.  Persons  whose  minds  are  influenced  by
this  planet  are  unsettled  in  life,  partial  to  travelling,
witnessing  many  strange  scenes,  and  very  romantic
and  extraordinary  in  their  ideas,  and  partial  to  the
study  of  antiquity,  but  yet  likely  to  strike  out
many  novelties.

Saturn. — This  planet  is  next  to  Herschel.  He  is  at
a great  distance  from  the  Sun,  and  is  about  1000
times  as  large  as  this  Earth.  He  gees  through  the
zodiac  in  29  years  and  a half.


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


9


The  nature  of  Saturn  is  far  more  evil  than  that
of  Herschel : he  is  called  the  Greater  Infortune  ;
and  he  is  undoubtedly  the  cause  (subservient  to  the
will  of  Providence)  of  the  greater  portion  of
human  suffering.  When  he  is  rising  or  setting  at
birth,  the  person  born  will  suffer  much  lingering
sickness,  and  be  very  subject  to  blows,  bruises,
and  falls.  If  he  be  on  the  meridian,  or  coming  to
the  meridian,  he  causes  perpetual  trouble  and  dis-
grace ; all  the  native’s  affairs  go  wrong,  and,
unless  there  be  some  very  strong  aspects  of  other
planets  to  counteract  this  evil  position,  the  native
is  the  complete  child  of  misfortune.  If  he  be  in
the  opposite  situation,  that  is,  near  the  north  me-
ridian, or  cusp  of  the  fourth  house,  his  effects  are
nearly  as  evil.  Persons  born  under  his  influence
are  nervous,  fearful,  bashful,  cowardly,  melancholy,
and  given  to  shed  tears.  They  suffer  from  chronic
diseases,  and  are  liable  to  mental  infirmities.  Their
dispositions  are  thoughtful,  malicious,  and  re-
served, and  they  are  firm  and  obstinate  in  their
opinions,  and  adhere  strongly  to  their  attach-
ments.

Jupiter. — This  planet  is  next  to  Saturn  in  the  solar
system.  He  is  the  largest  of  all,  being  nearly  one
thousand  five  hundred  times  as  large  as  this  globe.
He  is  very  nearly  12  years  in  going  round  the
zodiac.


10


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


His  nature  is  eminently  benefic,  and  lie  is  called
the  greater  fortune.  When  rising  at  birth,  he
confers  much  strength  of  constitution,  enabling  the
native  to  overcome  very  evil  directions,  which
would  otherwise  prove  fatal.  The  persons  under
his  influence  are  healthy,  cheerful,  and  jovial  in
disposition,  and  are  open,  sincere,  generous,  and
quite  free  from  fraud  or  meanness  of  any  kind.
They  are  generally  much  esteemed,  from  pursuing
always  very  honorable  magnanimous  conduct;
and  they  are  the  favorites  of  fortune.  If  Jupiter
be  approaching  the  meridian  at  birth,  the  native
will  (unless  very  evil  aspects  occur  to  counteract
his  influence)  become  extremely  wealthy,  and
arrive  at  distinction.  This  is  verified  in  the  na-
tivities of  the  Duke  of  Wellington  and  the  Princess
Victoria.

Mars. — This  planet  is  between  the  Earth  and  Ju-
piter ; he  is  rather  less  in  size  than  our  globe,  and
goes  round  the  Sun  in  about  six  weeks  less  than
two  years.  His  red,  fiery  appearance  renders
him  very  conspicuous  in  the  heavens.

Mars  is  a very  evil  planet ; but  his  nature  is
quite  different  from  Saturn.  He  causes  all  hot  and
violent  diseases,  and  the  persons  under  his  influence
are  subject  to  cuts,  burns,  and  other  violent  acci-
dents. They  are  rash  and  angry  in  disposition,
and  always  ready  t(>  rush  into  quarrels  and  blood-


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


11


shed.  If  Mars  be  in  the  ascendant  of  any  person’s
nativity,  he  makes  them  liable  to  receive  cuts  or
hate  marks  in  the  face;  they  are  fond  of  war  and
danger : if  in  the  10th  house,  or  on  the  meridian,
they  are  generally  observed  as  warlike  characters,
and  may  gain  honors  as  such.  In  George  the
Third’s  nativity  he  was  so  situated,  and  it  is  well
known  that  during  his  reign  England  was  per*
petually  at  war.

Venus.— This  beautiful  planet  is  situated  nearer  the
Sun  than  is  the  Earth.  She  goes  round  the  Sun
in  32  weeks,  and  is  very  nearly  the  same  size  as
our  globe.  Her  nature  is  decidedly  benefic,  but
her  power  nothing  equal  to  that  of  Jupiter.  She
assists  to  strengthen  the  constitution  if  ascending
at  birth,  but  she  gives  such  a strong  inclination  for
pleasure,  that  the  native  often  injures  his  health  in
its  pursuit.  She  was  ascending  when  George  the
Fourth  was  born,  and  gave  him  that  remarkably  re-
fined taste  which  he  possessed,  arid  also  a fondness
for  dissipation.  The  persons  born  under  her  in-
fluence are  generally  of  a mild,  quiet  disposition.
If  on  the  meridian,  she  renders  the  native  respect-
able in  life,  unless  in  ill  aspect  to  Saturn,  when  he
will  generally  be  very  mean  in  his  conduct.  She
partakes  very  much  of  the  nature  of  those  planets
to  which  she  is  in  aspect,  and  no  judgment  can  be
formed  of  her  effects  without  taking  this  into  full


12


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


consideration.  If  well  aspected,  the  native  will
gain  chiefly  through  the  means  of  females.

Mercury. — This  planet  is  the  nearest  to  the  Sun  of
any  yet  discovered.  He  is  very  small,  being  only
about  3000  miles  in  diameter,  and  travels  Very
swiftly,  going  round  the  Sun  in  12  weeks  and  4
days.

His  influence,  when  in  no  aspect  with  any  other
planet,  and  if  in  the  ascendant,  causes  great  rest-
lessness and  desire  of  change ; fondness  for  tra-
velling, and  a busy  turn  of  mind,  addicted  to  lite-
rature : but  as  this  planet  is  the  chief  ruler  of  the
mental  faculties,  great  care  must  be  taken  to  note
what  aspects  he  forms  with  other  planets,  for  on
that  will  chiefly  depend  the  mental  disposition  of
the  native.  If  close  to  the  sun,  the  native  never
has  any  great  abilities  for  science ; his  mind  is
rather  contracted,  though  he  may  be  very  well
adapted  for  any  kind  of  plodding  business.  If  at
the  same  time  he  be  afflicted  by  the  evil  aspects  of
the  malefics,  and  the  moon  also  be  weak  and
afflicted,  the  native  will  be  of  very  weak  mind ;
and  if  the  ascendant  also  be  afflicted  by  the  pre-
sence or  ill  aspect  of  evil  planets,  and  there  be  no
good  aspect  between  the  Moon  and  Mercury,  or
between  them  and  the  ascendant,  the  native  will
be  an  idiot,  or  become  insane.  This  may  be  the
case  even  where  Mercury  is  distant  from  the  Sun,


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


13


as  occurred  in  the  nativity  of  George  the  Third,
where  Mercury  was  12  degrees  and  a half  from  the
Sun.  In  that  king’s  nativity.  Mercury  had  the
sextile  aspect  of  Jupiter,  which  preserved  his
mental  faculties  for  several  years;  but  being  in
conjunction  with  Saturn,  and  in  semi-square  with
Mars,  and  the  Moon  being  also  in  square  to  Mars
and  in  no  aspect  to  Mercury,  and  neither  of  them
in  aspect  to  the  ascendant,  the  royal  native,  under
ill  directions,  lost  his  reason.

The  Sun. — The  glorious  body  which  gives  us  light
and  heat  is  less  noticed  than  the  Moon  in  the
judgment  of  a nativity ; though,  if  astrology  were
all  fancy,  his  appearance  would  have  been  likely
to  say  much  in  his  favor.  This  Earth  is  distant
about  95  millions  of  miles  from  the  Sun,  which  is
about  one  million  and  a half  times  as  large  as  the
Earth;  and  although  Jupiter  is  about  1500  times
the  size  of  our  Earth,  the  Sun  is  1 100  times  as  large
as  Jupiter.  The  human  mind  strives  in  vain  to
comprehend  its  immense  bulk.  Just  as  difficult  is
it  to  comprehend  how  he  keeps  all  the  planetary
bodies  in  perpetual  play  around  his  centre ; for
although  the  terms  of  attraction  and  gravitation
have  been  long  in  use,  they  are  still  as  full  of
mystery  as  is  that  of  planetary  influence.  The
specific  influence  of  the  Sun  is  small ; but  it  seems
to  be  similar  to  that  of  Mars.  If  in  the  ascendant,
or  in  aspect  to  it,  he  causes  a degree  of  pride ;


14


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


when  in  good  aspect  to  the  Moon,  he  causes  suc-
cess in  life ; but  if  in  evil  aspect,  he  gives  rash-
ness, and  injures  the  native’s  fortune.  If  in  con-
junction with  any  planet,  he  destroys  the  power  of
that  planet,  in  a great  measure,  and  assumes  the
nature  of  the  planet  himself,  to  a certain  extent.
It  is  highly  important  that  the  Sun  should  be  free
from  the  ill  aspects  of  the  malefic  planets,  to  pro-
duce success  in  life  ; and  it  is  better  that  he  have
no  aspect  whatever  to  them,  unless  it  be  to  Mars,
when  the  Sun  is  near  the  meridian,  as  this  may
cause  military  preferment.

The  Moon.— This  beautiful  globe  goes  round  the
Earth  in  27  days,  7 hours,  and  43  minutes.  Her
distance  is  about  240  thousand  miles  from  us ; and
she  is  nearly  50  times  her  own  size  smaller  than
this  earth.

She  has  most  powerful  influence  on  every  per-
son, according  to  her  situation  at  birth  as  regards
this  earth,  or  what  is  termed  her  mundane  posi-
tion ; that  is,  her  rising,  setting,  &c. ; and  also,
as  regards  her  aspect  with  other  planets.  If  she
be  nearly  in  conjunction  with  the  Sun,  the  native
will  be  of  weak  constitution ; and,  if  not  very
well  aspected,  and  the  Hyleg  not  strong,  of  very
short  life.  Persons  born  during  an  eclipse  of  the
Sun,  when  the  Moon  is  nearly  in  a direct  line
with  the  Sun,  are  invariably  very  weakly,  and  are
said  never  to  live  many  years.  The  Moon  has


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


15


certainly,  at  all  times,  much  to  do  with  the  sta-
mina of  the  native’s  constitution ; and,  if  she  be
much  afflicted,  his  health  will  rarely  be  good,  and
his  fortune  will  be  as  poor.  The  sensual  faculties
depend  almost  wholly  on  the  Moon;  and  if  she  be
afflicted,  the  native  will  be  idle  and  given  to  drink-
ing,  gluttony,  and  debauchery.  The  good  as-
spects  of  Mercury  and  the  Moon  to  each  other  are
important,  to  give  wit  and  ingenuity.  If  the
Moon  ascend  at  birth,  the  native  will  be  very  fond
of  novelty  and  roaming  about;  and  if  she  be
weak,  will  lead  a very  dissolute  life.  If  the  Moon
be  on  the  meridian,  or  approaching  it,  and  at  the
same  time  in  good  aspect  to  Mercury,  the  native
will  be  clever,  and  fortunate  through  his  own  ta-
lents ; if  in  good  aspect  to  Jupiter,  he  will  gain
wealth ; to  the  Sun,  he  will  meet  preferment ; to
Venus,  he  will  have  many  female  friends,  and  be
very  agreeable  in  his  manners ; to  Saturn,  if  Sa-
turn himself  be  strong,  he  may  gain  by  elderly
persons,  legacies,  buildings,  or  agricultural  pur-
suits ; to  Mars,  he  may  succeed  in  warfare,  or  as
a surgeon,  cutler,  &c.  But  in  all  these  cases,  if
there  be  any  evil  aspects  to  the  Moon,  or  to  the
meridian  itself,  the  good  will  be  materially  dimi-
nished, or  perhaps  destroyed.

When  evil  aspects  are  found  between  the  Mc)on,
Mars,  and  Mercury,  the  native  is  inclined  to  dis-
honesty. The  Moon  in  good  aspect  to  Mars  gives


16  GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.

courage ; and  if  Mars  be  evilly  affected  by  other

planets,,  boldness  and  impudence.

CHAP.  IV.

OF  THE  ASPECTS.

The  aspects  in  the  zodiac  consist  of  certain  dis-
tances, at  which,  when  two  bodies  are  found,  they
produce  a peculiar  effect.  Many  objections  have
been  made  to  this  part  of  the  science;  the  adver-
saries asserting  that  these  aspects  are  merely  arbi-
trary measures,  and  that  they  have  no  foundation  in
nature,  there  being  no  difference  whatever  in  ma-
thematics between  the  distance  of  120  degrees  and
the  distance  of  122  degrees  which  can  be  the  foun-
dation of  that  peculiar  effect  which  astrologers  de-
clare that  the  aspect  called  a Trine  does  produce.

Many  attempts  have  been  made  to  shew  that  the
aspects  are  produced  by  a division  of  the  circle,
which  is  analogous  to  the  measures  in  music;  and
that  they  are  aliquot  or  equal  parts  of  the  circle,  &c.
But  though  these  ideas  are  ingenious,  they  are  not
satisfactory;  and  though  the  old  aspects  produce
aliquot  or  even  divisions  of  the  circle,  and  also  of
the  twelve  signs,  yet  the  new  aspects  will  not  do  the
same.

The  number  360,  being  the  degrees  contained  in
the  circle  of  the  zodiac,  may  be  divided  equally  by
the  old  aspects  60,  90,  120,  and  180  degrees.  The


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


17


number  12,  the  number  of  the  signs/  may  also  be
divided  equally  by  the  old  aspects  ; a sextile  being  2
signs,  a square  3 signs,,  a trine  4 signs,  and  an  op-
position 6 signs.  But  when  we  come  to  try  these
divisions  with  the  new  aspects,  they  cannot  be  made :
for  example,  a quintile , 72  degrees,  will  divide  the
circle  equally,  but  not  the  signs;  and  a sesquiquad-
rate , 135  degrees,  will  not  give  an  equal  division  of
either : hence  this  idea  of  an  equal  division  is  not
founded  in  nature,  and  the  adversary’s  objection  re-
mains triumphant.

I do  not  think  it  would  be  very  satisfactorily  an-
swered, even  if  this  pretended  harmonious  division
could  be  established ; nor,  on  the  other  hand,  is  the
objection  itself  of  any  great  consequence.;  for,  if  it
can  be  proved  (which  it  certainly  can),  that  when
the  Moon,  for  example,  arrives  at  a trine  aspect  of
Jupiter,  or  120  degrees  from  that  planet  in  any  na-
tivity, certain  remarkable  effects  appear  which  do
not  appear  when  she  arrives  at  the  distance  of  122  or
123,  or  any  other  number  of  degrees,  this  fact  de-
monstrates that  there  is  something  peculiar  in  the
angle  formed  by  120  degrees,  which  constitute  a
trine  aspect.

Having  closely  investigated  this  subject,  1 have
discovered  a very  remarkable  peculiarity  in  the  angles
which  form  both  the  old  and  the  neio  aspects;  and  I
now,  for  the  first  time,  publish  it  to  the  world.  The
fact  is,  that  every  astrological  aspect  forms  the


c


18


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


EXACT  ANGLE,  OR  SUPPLEMENTAL  ANGLE,  OF  A RE-
GULAR POLYGON,  WHICH  MAY  BE  INSCRIBED  IN  A
CIRCLE.

Regular  polygons  (which  are  figures  whose  sides
are  of  equal  length),  if  they  contain  3,  4,  5,  6,  8,  9,
10,  or  12  sides,  may  be  inscribed  in  a circle,  which
they  will,  of  course,  divide  equally ; but  if  they  con-
tain either  7 or  1 1 sides,  they  cannot  be  so  inscribed,
and  produce  at  the  same  time  an  equal  division  of  the
360  degrees  of  the  circle.  Now  each  of  the  poly-
gons, or  figures  of  3,  4,  5,  6,  8,  10,  or  12  equal
sides,  will  be  found  to  contain  the  same  number  of
equal  angles  ; that  is  to  say,  a figure  of  3 equal  sides
will  contain  3 equal  angles,  a figure  of  4 equal
sides  will  contain  4 equal  angles,  and  so  of  the  re-
mainder ; and  it  is  a fact,  that  each  of  these  angles,
or  its  supplement,  is  exactly  the  amount  of  an  astro-
logical aspect !


The  following  is  a Table  of  the  Aspects  and
the  Polygons  whose  Angles  they  measure: — *

30  deg.  A semi-sextile , the  supplemental  angle  of  a
regular  duodecagon , or  figure  of  12  sides.

45  deg.  A semi-square , the  supplemental  angle  of  a
regular  octagon , or  figure  of  8 sides.

60  deg.  A sextile,  the  angle  of  a regular  triangle ,
or  figure  of  3 sides.


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.  19

72  deg.  A quintile , the  supplemental  angle  of  a re-
gular pentagon , or  figure  of  5 sides.

90  deg.  A square,  the  angle  of  a regular  quadrangle,
or  figure  of  4 sides.

120  deg.  A trine , the  angle  of  a regular  hexagon,  or
figure  of  6 sides.

135  deg.  A sesquiquadrate , the  angle  of  a regular
octagon,  or  figure  of  8 sides.

144  deg.  A biquintile , the  angle  of  a regular  deca-
gon, or  figure  of  1 0 sides.

Note . — 180  deg.  the  opposition,  the  amount  of  2
right  angles*  which  is  the  sum  of  the  3 angles  of
every  triangle.

There  is  one  polygon,  a figure  of  9 sides,  that
forms  an  angle  of  40  degrees,  which  have  not  yet
been  found  to  constitute  an  astrological  aspect ; but
I am  far  from  certain  that  it  may  not  be  so  consi-
dered.

No  person  can  deny  that  this  is  a very  curious  and
remarkable  agreement  between  the  aspects  and  the
angles  of  regular  polygons ; and  those  who  under-
stand geometry,  and  who  reflect  on  the  properties  of
the  triangle  and  other  polygons,  and  on  the  nature
of  the  circle  itself,  will  find  in  it  room  for  admiration
of  the  works  of  the  Almighty  Creator,  “ whose  ways
are  past  finding  out.”

The  student  will  perceive  that  these  facts  are
merely  offered  as  proof  that  the  aspects  are  not  arbi-
trary, but  are,  indeed,  intimately  connected  with  the
c 2


20


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


great  principles  of  geometry,  upon  which  the  archi-
tecture of  the  universe  itself  is  founded.

CHAP.  V.

THE  QUALITIES  OF  THE  ASPECTS.

The  benefic  aspects  are  the  semi-sextile , the
sex  tile,  the  quintile , the  trine , and  the  biquintile .
When  planets  are  found  situated  at  these  distances
from  each  other,  they  operate  beneficially  for  the  na-
tive ; and  if  the  aspect  be  not  yet  complete  at  births
hut  may  be  wanting  a few  degrees,  then  the  effect  is
less  powerful ; but  it  will  be  found  to  take  effect  at
that  period  in  life  when  it  becomes  complete,  which
will  be  explained  under  the  head  of  “ Directions.5 9
If  the  aspect  be  past,  the  planet  which,  by  its  more
speedy  motion,  is  separating  from  the  other,  will  still
retain  the  effect  of  the  aspect  until  it  has  separated
several  degrees.

The  Malefic  Aspects  are  the  semi- quar tile  or
semi- square,  the  square , the  sesquiquadrate , and  the
opposition.  When  planets  are  found  at  the  distances
which  constitute  these  aspects,  they  act  evilly  for  the
native.  The  same  observations  hold  good  with  re-
gard to  the  approaching  and  separating  as  are  made
in  the  last  paragraph.

Observe.— The  more  perfect  or  exact  is  the  aspect,
the  more  powerful  will  be  the  effect,  whether  good  or
evil.


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


21


The  Conjunction. — This  is  when  two  planets  are
in  the  same  longitude;  that  is,  in  the  same  de-
gree and  minute  of  any  sign.  If  either  of  the
lights  (the  Sun  and  Moon)  be  in  conjunction  with
an  evil  planet,  it  injures  the  native’s  constitution;
and  if  an  evil  planet  be  conjoined  with  the  Hyleg ,
the  native  will  be  very  liable  to  illness  all  through
life.

If  the  Hyleg  be  conjoined  with  Jupiter  or
Venus,  the  constitution  is  strengthened  thereby;
but,  if  it  be  the  Sun  which  is  Hyleg,  his  conjunc-
tion with  the  benefic  destroys  its  power  to  do  good
in  a great  measure,  and  its  favourable  aspects  to
the  Moon,  mid-heaven,  ascendant,  or  part  of  for-
tune, are  of  less  avail.

The  Semis  extile.— This  aspect  is  the  weakest
of  all ; it  is  of  no  importance  in  directions ; but  if,
at  birth,  the  Hyleg  have  an  exact  semi-sextile  to  a
benefic,  the  health  will  be  benefitted.

The  Semi-quart ile. — This,  whether  found  at
birth  or  formed  by  directional  motion,  is  evil ; but
if  the  aspect  be  between  the  Hyleg  and  Jupiter,  it
rather  strengthens  the  constitution.

The  S ext  ile. — This  is  a powerful  and  benefic
aspect.

The  Quintile. — This  is  benefic,  but  if  to  the  evil
planets  is  of.  no  avail,  as  it  is  much  less  powerful
than  the  sextile.

The  Square  or  Quartile. — This  is  a very  power-


22


GliAMMAK  OF  ASTROLOGY.


ful  and  evil  aspect;  and  if  the  planet  casting  it  be
Saturn,  and  he  in  the  10th  house,  and  the  planet
receiving  it  be  the  Hyleg,  the  native  will  always
be  ailing,  unless  very  powerful  aspects  counter-
act ; and  even  then  the  native  will  suffer  greatly
from  ill  health,  especially  if  Saturn’s  nature  be
rendered  more  evil  by  ill  aspects  to  Herschel  or
Mars.

The  Trine. — This  is  the  most  powerful  of  the
good  aspects.

The  Sesquiquadrate. — This  is  just  like  the
semhquartile.

The  Biquintile. — Consider  this  just  like  the
quintile.

The  Opposition. — This  is  the  most  powerfully
evil  aspect.  If  the  Hyleg  be  in  opposition  to
Saturn  or  Mars,  the  native  will  be  of  very  weak
constitution.

The  Zodiacal  Parallel. — This  was  formerly
termed  the  anti-scion . The  old  writers,  whose
works  I advise  the  student  to  avoid,  did  not  pro-
perly calculate  these  parallels,  as  they  omitted  the
planet’s  latitude : this  caused  continual  error,  as
they  never  could  be  correct  except  on  those  rare
occasions  when  two  planets  were  exactly  on  the
ecliptic.  The  zodiacal  parallel  signifies  a parallel
distance  from  the  equator,  or  being  in  the  same
degree  of  declination  ; and  whether  of  the  same
name,  north  or  south,  is  of  no  consequence.  The


23


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.

student  should  pay  very  particular  attention  to  the
declinations  of  the  planets*  as  the  zodiacal  pa-
rallel is  of  more  importance  than  any  other  as-
pect. The  effect  of  this  position  is  exactly  the
same  as  that  of  a close  conjunction*  but  more
powerful .

CHAP.  VI.

OF  THE  FIGURE  OF  THE  HEAVENS.

This  was  formerly  termed  a horoscope * and  is
sometimes  called  a scheme  of  the  heavens.  It  is  no-
thing more  or  less  than  a map  or  plan*  in  which  is
depicted  an  accurate  representation  of  the  heavens  at
any  required  time ; as*  for  example*  at  the  moment
a child  is  born.  It*  of  course*  will  shew  what  stars
are  rising*  setting*  or  coming  to  the  meridian  ; and*
also*  what  positions  are  held  by  the  Sun*  Moon*  and
planets*  and  also  by  any  comet  which  may  happen  to
be  visible  at  the  time.

It  has  two  grand  divisions * which  are  the  diurnal
and  nocturnal  hemispheres.  The  former  is  all  that
space  contained  between  the  eastern  and  western
horizons  above  the  earth  ; the  latter  is  all  the  re-
mainder of  the-heavens  which  are*  of  course*  below
the  earth . It  has  two  other  great  divisions  caused
by  the  meridian ; they  are  the  south  and  the  north
points.  The  former  is  that  at  which  the  Sun  arrives
every  day  at  noon*  being  then  in  an  exact  south  di-


24


GRAMMAR  of  astrology.


rection  from  the  spectator  on  this  side  the  equator ;
and  the  other  is  that  point  which  is  directly  opposite
to  the  south  meridian,  and  is,  of  course,  the  north
meridian,  where  the  sun  is  at  midnight.

These  four  divisions,  the  east , south , west , and
north , are  evidently  formed  by  nature.  The  east  is
that  point  where  the  Sun  rises  or  ascends,  and  be-
comes visible ; the  south  is  that  where  he  ceases  to
ascend,  and,  after  appearing  for  a moment  to  be
stationary,  begins  to  descend  ; the  west  is  that  where
he  sets  and  disappears ; lastly,  the  north  is  that  where
he  ceases  to  descend,  and  begins  again  to  ascend
and  approach  the  eastern  horizon.

Astrologers  divide  the  heavens  into  twelve  com-
partments, which  they  term  Houses  : these  four
points  are  the  most  important  of  those  twelve
houses,  and  are  called  the  Angles.  Planets,  when
found  in  the  angles  at  birth,  are  far  more  powerful
to  good  or  evil,  according  to  their  natures,  than  in
any  other  part  of  the  figure.  The  most  powerful
angle  is  the  south , or  when  a star  is  on  the  meridian
above  the  earth ; the  next  is  the  east , or  when  a star
is  ascending  ; the  next  is  the  west,  or  when  a star  is
setting ; the  least  powerful  is  the  north , or  when  a
star  is  on  the  nadir,  or  on  the  meridian  under  the
Earth. — {See  the  plate , fig.  1.)


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.  25
CHAP.  VLI.

OF  THE  TWELVE  HOUSES  OF  HEAVEN.

Having  divided  the  Heavens  into  four  quarters,
which  we  have  shewn  to  be  formed  by  nature,  we
shall  now  shew  how  these  are  again  subdivided  into
three  each,  comprising  in  all  twelve  divisions,  called
the  Twelve  Houses.

If  the  first  degree  of  Aries,  the  beginning  of  the
zodiac,  be  rising  in  the  east,  the  opposite  point  of
the  zodiac  (which  is  the  first  degree  of  Libra ) must
be  setting  at  the  same  moment.  If,  then,  we  exa-
mine the  heavens,  we  shall  find  that  on  the  meridian
(north)  will  be  found  the  first  degree  of  Cancer,  and
on  the  opposite  meridian  (south)  will  be  found  the
beginning  of  Capricorn.  Each  of  the  meridians,
therefore,  are  90  degrees  distant  from  the  east  point,
or  ascendant ; but,  for  the  sake  of  clearness,  we  will
consider  only  the  south  meridian.  If  the  Sun  be  in
the  first  degree  of  Aries  when  rising,  and  the  Moon
be  in  the  first  degree  of  Capricorn  at  the  same  time,
she  must  be  on  the  south  meridian,  and  be  also  at
90  degrees  distance  from  the  Sun,  which  is  a square
aspect  to  that  body.  If  the  Sun  rise  in  the  first  de-
gree of  Aries,  the  day  and  night  are  then  equal,  each
being  12  hours  long.  The  Sun  rises,  in  this  case,  at
6 o’clock,  comes  to  the  south  meridian  at  12,  "and


26


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


sets  at  6 in  the  evening ; and  if  we  suppose  the
Moon  to  remain  fixed  on  the  meridian,  the  Sun  will,
two  hours  after  rising,  be  within  60  degrees  of  her,
having  passed  one-third  of  the  distance  from  the
ascendant  to  the  meridian  or  mid-heaven:  this  is  a
sextile  aspect.  It  appears,  therefore,  that  one-third
of  the  half  of  the  arc  formed  by  the  Sun  in  his  daily
course  being  completed,  he  is  found  at  a sextile  as-
pect to  the  meridian.  Of  course,  he  must  then  be
30  degrees  (a  semi-sextile ) from  the  horizon,  or
ascendant.  Now  this,  being  one-third  of  one  quar-
ter of  the  heavens,  is  one-twelfth  part  of  the
Whole  ; and  thus  constitutes  one  house.  In  two
hours  more  the  Sun  proceeds  upwards  another  30
degrees,  and  arrives  at  the  distance  of  60  degrees
from  the  ascendant,  and  30  degrees  to  the  mid-hea-
ven. This  forms  another  third  of  the  quarter  con-
tained between  the  east  and  the  meridian,  and  be-
comes another  house.  When  he  arrives  at  the  mid-
heaven, at  noon,  he  has  passed  a third  house  ; whence
it  appears  that  there  are  three  houses  between  the
horizon  and  meridian,  and  the  beginning  of  each  is
in  aspect  to  both  of  those  points.  It  is  this  circum-
stance of  their  being  in  aspect , and  being  found  to
operate  certain  effects  which  they  do  not  when  other-
wise situated,  that,  no  doubt,  first  gave  rise  to  the
division  of  the  heavens  into  twelve  houses . It  is
plain  that,  in  passing  from  the  mid-heaven  to  the
western  horizon,  similar  positions  are  formed ; as


GUAM  MAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


27


also  in  passing  from  the  western  horizon  to  the  north
meridian,  and  again  from  the  north  meridian  to  the
place  of  Sun  rise,  in  the  east.  Each  quadrant  of  the
heavens  produces  three  houses  — each  hemisphere
contains  six;  there  are,  of  course,  Twelve  Houses.

Notice. — It  matters  not  whether  the  Sun  or  any
star  be  on  the  equator,  and  so  divide  the  heavens
into  equal  portions  to  constitute  the  houses,  or  be
distant  from  the  equator,  and  so  divide  the  heavens
into  unequal  portions ; since  one  house  in  the  course
of  any  heavenly  body  will  always  measure  exactly
one  third  part  of  the  arc  that  body  forms  between
the  horizon  and  the  meridian  If  it  be  more  than
180  degrees,  or  12  hours,  above  the  Earth,  it  must
be  exactly  so  much  less  than  180  degrees,  or  12
hours,  below  the  earth  ; because  it  must  be  24  hours
(equal  to  360  degrees)  in  passing  from  the  meridian
to  that  same  meridian  again.  Hence,  if  you  know
the  extent  of  half  its  diurnal  arc , you  have  only  to
take  that  from  180  degrees  (or,  if  it  be  given  in  time
instead  of  longitude  or  right  ascension,  from  12
hours)  to  find  the  extent  of  half  its  nocturnal  arc,

CHAP.  VIII.

TO  ERECT  A FIGURE  OF  THE  HEAVENS  AT
BIRTH.

This  is  merely  to  draw  a map  of  the  heavens  as
they  may  appear  at  the  moment  a child  was  born ;


28


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


and  according  to  the  situation  of  the  signs  of  the
zodiac,  the  Sun,  Moon,  and  other  heavenly  bodies,
will  be  the  destiny  of  the  native  or  child  then  born,
unless  by  care  and  prudence  any  portion  of  that  des-
tiny, being  foreseen,  may  be  avoided.

Take  a pair  of  compasses,  with  a pen  attached  to
one  leg,  and  draw  a circle  to  represent  the  heavens ;
within  which  draw  a second  smaller  circle,  to  repre-
sent the  Earth.  Then  draw  a straight  line  through
the  outer  circle  (as  in  Jig . 1)  to  represent  the  hori-
zon ; E being  the  east,  where  the  Sun  rises,  and  W
the  west,  where  the  Sun  sets.  Then  draw  another
line  at  right  angles  from  the  first,  to  represent  the
meridian ; S being  the  south,  where  the  Sun  is  at
noon,  and  N the  north,  where  the  Sun  is  at  mid-
night. These  four  points  are  the  angles,  or  cusps,
or  beginnings  of  the  1st,  4th,  7th,  and  10th  houses ;
which  are  of  most  consequence  in  every  figure  of
birth  or  nativity.  Proceed  to  divide  each  of  the  four
quadrants  of  the  figure  into  three  parts,  by  drawing
four  other  lines,  which  are  represented  by  the  dotted
lines  in  the  plate.  You  will  then  have  the  twelve
houses  ready  for  representing  the  planets  and  signs
as  they  may  happen  to  be  situated. — (See  Jig.  2.)

TO  IN8ERT  THE  SIGNS  OF  THE  ZODIAC.

1st,  Look  in  White’s  Ephemeris  for  the  year  of
birth,  for  the  degree  and  minute  of  longitude  the
Sun  was  in  at  the  noon  preceding  the  time  of  birth;


GRAMM  All  OF  ASTROLOGY.


29


and  then  find,  in  the  table  of  A.  R.,  what  degree  and
minute  that  answers  to  : note  this  down.  Then  take
the  time  of  the  birth  after  the  last  noon,  and  turn  it
into  degrees  and  minutes  by  Table  I,  or  by  multiply-
ing it  by  15;  add  these  sums  together,  and  the
amount  will  be  the  degree  of  right  ascension  on  the
meridian  at  the  moment  of  birth.

Remark. — The  true  moment  of  birth  is  that  when
the  child  first  draws  breath,  which  is  generally  known
by  its  crying ; and  this  may  happen  before  the  lower
extremities  of  the  child  are  born.  This  time  must  be
corrected  for  the  equation  of  time,  by  adding  the
time  the  clock  is  after  the  Sun,  or  subtracting  the
time  the  clock  is  before  the  Sun,  previously  to  add-
ing it  to  the  Sun’s  right  ascension  at  the  previous
noon,  as  above  directed.  This  equation  of  time  will
be  found  in  White’s  Ephemeris  for  every  day  at
noon.

2d.  Having  found  the  right  ascension  of  the  me-
ridian, or  mid-heaven,  at  birth,  look  in  the  table  of
houses  what  degree  of  longitude  it  answers  to,  and
write  that  down  on  the  cusp  of  the  10th  house  or
mid-heaven,  and  the  same  degree  of  the  opposite  sign
on  the  opposite  (the  4th)  house.

3d.  In  the  next  column  in  the  table  of  houses  you
will  find  the  degree  on  the  1 1th  house,  and  at  the  head
of  the  column,  or  in  some  part  of  the  column,  above  the
line  of  figures  you  are  using,  the  sign  which  is  on  that
house,  which  write  down  accordingly,  and  the  same


30


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


degree  of  the  opposite  sign  on  the  opposite  (the  5th)
house.

4th.  In  the  4th  column  you  will  find  the  degree  of
longitude  to  be  placed  on  the  12th  house ; place  the
same  degree  of  the  opposite  sign  on  the  6th  house.

5th,  In  the  5th  column  you  will  find  the  degree
and  minute  of  longitude  on  the  ascendant,,  or  which
is  actually  rising  at  the  moment  of  birth,  and  its  op-
po  site  is,  of  course,  on  the  7th  house,  or  descendant.

6th.  Take  the  degree  in  the  6th  column  for  the
longitude  of  the  2d  house,  and  its  opposite  for  that
on  the  cusp  of  the  8th.

7th.  Take  the  degree  in  the  7th  column  for  the
longitude  of  the  3d  house,  and  its  opposite  for  the
9th  house,  and  you  will  then  have  completed  the
cusps  of  the  twelve  houses. — [See  fig.  3.)

Example. — In  “ Moore’s  Life  of  Byron”  will  be
found  a letter,  written  by  Lord  Byron,  dated  Pisa ,
10 th  December,  1821,  which  contains  these  words —
<<r  This  day  and  this  hour  (one  on  the  clock),  my
daughter  is  six  years  old.”  We  will,  therefore,  take
this  as  a well  authenticated  nativity,  and  erect  a
figure  of  the  heavens  for  1 hour,  p.m.,  10th  Decem-
ber, 1815,  at  London.

1st.  Referring  to  White’s  Ephemeris  for  the  noon
preceding  the  time  of  birth,  which  was  the  noon  of
the  10th  Dec.  1815,  we  find  the  Sun’s  longitude  was
17  deg.  37  min.  of  Sagittarius.  The  right  ascension
of  17  deg.  of  that  sign  is  found  to  be  255°  52',  that


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


31


of  18  deg*,  of  the  same  sign  is  256°  57'  ; then,  by
the  rule  of  three,  say,  if  one  degree  or  60  minutes
give  the  difference  between  these  numbers,  65  mi-
nutes, what  will  37  minutes  give?  Ans.  40  minutes,
which,  added  to  the  first  number  255°  52',  makes
256°  32'  for  the  Sun’s  right  ascension  at  noon.  And
as  the  Sun  is  always  on  the  meridian  at  noon,  this
was  the  right  ascension  of  the  meridian  or  mid-heaven
at  noon.

The  time  of  birth,  1 hour  after  noon,  is  now  to  be
corrected  for  the  equation  of  time,  as  it  was  the  time
by  the  clock , and  we  require  the  time  by  the  Sun,
The  clock  at  noon  was  7 min.  9 seconds  after , or
slower  than  the  Sun,  and  on  the  next  day  it  was  6
min.  42  sec.  slower:  the  difference  is  27  seconds;
hence,  as  24  hours  give  27  sec.,  one  hour  will  give  1
sec.,  which  taken  from  the  7 min.  9 sec.,  leaves  the
clock  after  the  Sun  7 min.  8 sec.,  which  must  be
added  to  the  time  of  birth,  1,  p.m.

Thus,  time  of  birth . . . . * . 1 0 0

Add  for  the  clock  too  slow  0 7 8

17  8 equal  to

16  deg.  47  min.

Then  to  right  ascension  of  mid-heaven
(or  Sun)  at  noon

Add  the  right  ascension  for  time  of7  ^ ^

birth  after  noon 5

The  sum  is  the  right  ascension  of  the  7 ^

meridian  at  the  given  moment  of  birth  i


32


GRAMM  All  OF  ASTROLOGY.


2d.  This  right  ascension  is  found  to  answer  to
3 deg.  of  the  sign  Capricorn : we,  therefore,,  enter
yy  3°  on  the  cusp  of  the  10th  house  or  mid-heaven
(see  the  figure ),  and  the  same  degree  of  the  oppo-
site sign  93  on  the  4th,

3d.  In  the  next  (3d)  column  will  be  found  22° ;
which  shews  that  on  the  11th  house  must  be  placed
yy  22.,  and  the  like  number  of  the  opposite  sign  93
on  the  5th  house.

4th.  In  the  4th  column  will  be  found  17  deg.  of
Aquarius,  as  that  sign  is  given  at  the  head  of  the
column;  place  this  on  the  12th  house,  and  17  of  Leo
on  the  6th  or  opposite  house.

5th.  In  the  5th  column  you  find  7°  55',  which  de
notes  that  7 deg.  55  min.  of  Aries  were  ascending  in
the  east ; and  after  placing  T 7°  55'  on  the  1st,
place  =2=  7°  55'  on  the  opposite  or  7th  house.

6th.  On  the  2d  house  place  what  you  find  in  the
6th  column,  viz.  22°  Taurus ; thus  8 22°,  and  on  its
opposite  place  IR  22°.

7th.  On  the  3d  house  place  what  you  see  in  the
7th  column,  n 15°,  and  on  its  opposite  $ 15°.  The
figure  will  then  display  the  signs  of  the  zodiac  as
they  were  in  the  heavens  at  1 p.m.  10th  Dec  1815,
at  London . (See  fig . 3.)


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


33


TO  PLACE  THE  PLANETS  IN  THE  FIGURE.

Preliminary  Observation . — The  Ephemeris  being
calculated  for  the  meridian  of  London  (or  Greenwich,
which  is  the  same  thing  in  effect).,  if  the  birth  take
place  as  much  as  15  miles  to  the  eastward  or  west-
ward of  London,  the  time  of  birth  must  be  corrected
for  the  longitude  of  the  place,,  to  ascertain  the  time
it  was  in  London.,  before  we  find  the  planets’  places.

Rule. — If  the  longitude  be  east  of  London,  sub-
stract  1 minute  from  the  time  given  for  every  15
miles  of  longitude ; but  if  it  be  to  the  west  of  Lon-
don, add  1 minute  for  every  15  miles  of  longitude.

Example . — If  the  birth  be  at  Liverpool,  the  longi-
tude of  which  is  3 degrees  west,  or  180  miles,  add
12  minutes  to  the  time  given  (since  180  divided  by
15  gives  12),  and  you  will  have  the  time  it  was  in
London,  for  which  the  planets’  places  must  be
found.

To  find  the  Planets'  Places  at  Birth.

Rule.-— Find  the  amount  of  longitude  in  the  zodiac
traversed  by  each  planet  between  the  noon  preceding
and  that  which  follows  the  time  of  birth.  Then  say.
If  24  hours  give  that  amount,  what  will  the  time  of
birth  from  the  preceding  noon  give?  and  add  the
result  to  the  planets’  longitude  at  the  preceding  noon.

Example,  — In  the  nativity  of  Lord  Byron's

D


84


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY,


daughter,  © ’s  longitude  at  noon  on  the  10th  Decem-
ber was  4 17°  37'  (the  seconds  when  less  than  30
may  be  omitted ; if  above  30  call  them  one  minute,
and  add  it  to  the  minutes);  on  the  11th  it  was  $
18°  38',  the  difference  is  61  minutes;  then,  If  24
hours  give  61  minutes,  what  will  1 hour  7 minutes
give  ? Answer,  2 minutes  50  seconds,  which,  added
to  the  0 ’s  place  at  the  preceding  noon,  gives  © ’s
place  in  the  zodiac  at  birth.

Thus  © at  noon  preceding  f 17°  37'  21"

Longitude  gained  since  noon  2 50

©’s  longitude  at  birth  . . 17°  40'  11"

The •*  same  by  Proportional  Logarithms.

To  the  arith.  comp,  of  the  log.  of  24  hours  9.1249
Add  the  log.  of  longitude  made  in  24  ) 2 2481
hours — 1 hour,  1 minute  . . 5

And  the  log.  of  the  time  since  noon — 1 ) ^ 2073
hour,  7 minutes  ...  5

It  gives  the  log.  of  3 minutes  . . 3.5803

N.B.  For  rules  to  work  these  logarithms,  see
chap,  ix,  book  2.

Another  brief  Method  used  by  the  Author.

Divide  the  amount  of  longitude  made  in  24  hours,
and  also  the  time  since  noon,  by  12  ; then  multiply
the  quotients  together,  and  the  result  is  the  answer


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.  35

in  minutes  of  a degree,  the  last  figure  being  a de-
cimal.

Example , — .Longitude  made  in  24  hours  61  mi-
nutes, divided  by  12,  gives  5 ; time  since  noon,  67
minutes,  divided  by  12  gives  5J ; then  5 J multiplied
by  5 gives  27  J : the  last  figure  being  a decimal,  the
answer  is  2.7 J,  or  2 minutes  and  7J  tenths  of  a mi-
nute, which  may  be  called  3 minutes.

In  like  manner  find  the  D ?s  longitude  at  birth.
Thus  longitude  on  the  10th  is  T 5°  5',  ditto  on
the  11th,  T 17°  20',  difference  in  24  hours  12°  15';
this  divided  by  12  gives  1°  1J',  which,  reduced  to
minutes,  is  61 J,  and  multiplied  by  5J  produces  33.6f,
or  33  minutes  6|  tenths,  equal  to  34  minutes:  this,
added  to  ])  longitude  on  the  10th  at  noon,  T 5°  5',
gives  her  longitude  at  birth  T 5°  39'.

Having  found  the  other  planets5  places,  proceed  to
place  them  in  the  figure  as  follows :

1st.  ©.  On  the  cusp  of  the  9th  is  $ 15°;  but  as
© is  farther  on  in  $ , place  him  inside  the  house  :
if  he  had  been  in  less  than  15°  of  $ , he  would  have
gone  by  the  cusp  of  the  9th,  and  should  be  placed
just  outside.

2d.  D . On  the  ascendant  is  T 7°  55' ; and  as
])  is  not  so  far  on  in  the  sign,  she  appears  to  have
passed  the  cusp,  and  must  be  placed  just  above  the
1st  house.

3d.  $ is  not  so  far  on  as  the  cusp  of  the  9th,  and
must  be  placed  just  outside  the  same. — N.B.  His
d 2


86


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY,


place  is  only  given  for  the  noon  of  every  10th  clay
at  page  32  of  the  Ephemeris ; but  as  his  motion  is
very  slow,  his  longitude  is  easily  calculated.

4th.  Tp  is  in  zz  8°  36',  and  falls  just  outside  the
cusp  of  the  12th  house,  which  is  in  zz  17°;  he  is^
therefore,  in  the  11th.

5th.  If.  in  tr  2°  15',  and  ? in  tR  1°  32',  both
fall  in  the  7th,  because  ir  22°  are  on  the  cusp  of
the  8th.

6th.  $ being  farther  on  in  T than  the  cusp  of  the
1st,  is  in  the  ascendant,  in  T 20°  26

7th.  £ being  in  $ 0°  82',  falls  farther  outside
the  9th  than  does  Ijl,  and  is  near  the  middle  of  the
8th  house.

Q> . The  ’s  north  node  is  in  $ 24°  57',  and  falls
in  the  9th  house,  farther  on  than  © ; the  £S/the  south
node,  is  always  opposite  to  it,  and  is  of  course  in  n
24°  57'  in  the  3d  house.  The  figure  is  now  com-
plete. ( See  fig . 3.)

CHAP.  IX.

TO  FIND  THE  PLANETS’  LATITUDES,
DECLINATIONS,  &c.  j

1st.  The  Latitude . — This  is  given  in  the  Ephe-
meris for  every  day  at  noon  for  the  Moon ; and  the
proportional  part  may  be  found  by  either  of  the
rules  given  for  finding  the  longitude.

The  Sun  never  has  any  latitude.  The  other  pla-
nets’ latitude  is  given  for  every  6th  day;  and  the


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.  37

proportional  part  may  be  found  by  the  golden  rule,
with  great  ease.

Example . — The  latitude  of  Mercury  on  the  7th  of
December,  1815,  was  1°  33'  north,  and  on  the  13th
it  was  0°  49'  north,  difference  44  minutes ; then  if
6 days  give  44  minutes,  what  will  3 days  and  1 hour
(the  time  between  the  7th  day  at  noon  and  the  time
of  birth)  give  ? Answer,  22  minutes,  which,  taken
from  the  latitude  of  Mercury  at  noon  on  the  7th,  as
he  is  decreasing  in  latitude,  leaves  his  latitude  at
birth  1°  IF  north.

Observe.— Yi  the  planet  pass  from  north  to  south,
or  from  south  to  north  latitude,  add  the  amount  of
each  to  find  the  difference.

2d.  The  Declination . — On  this  depends  most  of
the  other  data  for  ascertaining  the  arcs  of  direction,
by  which  the  period  of  the  various  events  in  life  is
known.  It  should  be  accurately  calculated.  In
Wilson’s  Astrological  Tables  it  is  given  for  every
even  degree  of  longitude  and  latitude  in  which  the
planets  can  be  found ; but  as  they  are  seldom  in  an
even  degree,  it  is  necessary  to  take  the  proportional
part  both  for  the  longitude  and  latitude.

Example  1.— The  Sun  is  in  $ 17°  40',  the  de-
clination of  $ 17°  is  22°  50',  that  of  $ 18°  is
22°  56',  difference  6 minutes ; then  say.  As  one  de-
gree or  60  minutes  are  to  40  minutes,  so  are  6 mi-
nutes to  the  number  sought,  4 minutes,  which  add  to
the  declination  of  $ 17°,  as  the  Sun  is  increasing


38


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


in  declination,  and  the  Sun’s  declination  will  be  22®
54',  and,  as  he  is  in  a southern  sign,  it  is  south.

Example  2. — To  find  the  Moon’s  declination  in  the
nativity  of  the  Hon.  Miss  Byron,  look  for  the  Moon’s
longitude  T 5°  39'  in  the  Table.  Opposite  the
longitude  of  5 degrees  of  T?  under  the  column  of
5 degrees  south  latitude  (nearly  the  latitude  of  the
Moon),  are  found  2°  36' ; and  in  the  same  column  op-
posite 6 degrees  are  found  2Q  12',  the  difference  is
24  min. ; then  say,  If  60  min.  (one  degree)  give  24,
what  will  39  minutes  give  ?

60  : 24  : : 39

24

156

78

60)936

Answer  15.36,  or  15  min.  36  seconds  minus.

Next  look  for  the  difference  between  5 degrees  of
latitude  and  6 deg.  opposite  the  5th  degree  of  longi-
tude : this  will  be  found  to  be  55 ; then  say.  If  60
give  55,  what  will  11  (the  Moon’s  latitude  over  and
above  5 degrees)  give  ?

60  : 55  : : 11

55

55

55

60)605

Answer  10.5  plus.


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.  39

Then,  as  the  difference  for  the  minutes  of  longi-
tude is  minus , and  the  difference  of  the  minutes  of
latitude  is  plus , subtract  one  from  the  other.

15'  36,/  minus
10  5 plus

And  you  will  have,  diff.  5 31  minus , to  be  taken
from  the  first  number  2°  36'  which  is  opposite  5 deg.
longitude,  and  in  the  column  of  5 deg.  latitude.  As
the  seconds  are  over  30,  call  this  correction  6 min.,
which,  taken  from  2°  36',  leaves  the  Moon’s  true
declination  2°  30;,  which  is  south , since  the  Moon,
though  in  a northern  sign  by  longitude,  is  still  south
of  the  equator  by  reason  of  her  great  south  latitude.

Observe . — If  both  corrections  be  plus , or  both
minus , add  them  together  to  find  the  true  correction,
which  if  plus  add  to,  and  if  minus  take  from  the
number  opposite  to  the  even  degrees  of  longitude  and
latitude  which  the  planet  has  just  passed.

3d.  The  Right  Ascension.-— -This  is  found  in  Wil-
son’s Tables  by  the  same  process  as  the  declination :
if  less  than  180  degrees  it  is  north,  and  if  it  exceed
180  degrees  it  is  south.  It  is  counted  from  the  be-
ginning of  T,  and  is  the  measure  of  a plain  sphere
or  circle,  which  passes  over  the  meridian  once  in  24
hours ; and,  as  it  amounts  to  360  degrees,  it  follows
that  1 hour  is  equal  to  15  degrees,  and  one  degree
being  the  equivalent  to  one-fifteenth  part  of  an  hour,
is  equal  to  4 min.  in  time.  Hence  it  follows,  that  an


40


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


error  of  4 mil*,  only  in  the  supposed  time  of  a birth
will  cause  an  error  of  one  entire  degree  in  the  right
ascension  of  the  meridian.  And  as  all  the  aspects
of  the  planets  to  the  meridian  or  to  the  ascendant
are  measured  by  right  ascension,  the  error  of  only
one  minute  in  noting  the  time  of  a birth  will  cause
an  error  of  15  minutes  of  a degree,  or  one  quarter  of
a degree  in  the  arc  of  direction ; and  as  the  time  of
events  is  ascertained  by  the  right  ascension  of  the
Sum,  which  increases  about  one  degree  in  one  day,
and  as  one  day  after  birth  answers  to  one  year  of
life,  the  result  is,  that  an  error  of  one  minute  in  the
time  of  a birth  will  cause  an  error  of  a quarter  of  a
year  in  the  expected  time  of  an  event.  This  causes
predictions  to  be  incorrect  as  to  time,  unless  the  es-
timated time  of  birth  be  scrupulously  exact,  or  the
true  time  be  found  by  comparing  the  arcs  of  direc-
tion with  some  events  which  have  occurred  to  the
native.

4th.  The  Meridian  Distance. — This  is  found  by
taking  the  difference  between  the  A. 11.  (right  ascen-
sion) of  the  mid-heaven  and  the  planet,  if  it  be  above
the  horizon  ; and  the  difference  between  the  A.R.  of
the  cusp  of  the  4th  house  or  north  meridian  (called
also  the  lower  heaven),  if  the  planet  be  below  the
horizon.  The  A.R.  of  the  lower  heaven,  or  4th
house,  is  found  by  adding  180  degrees  to  A.R.  of  the
mid-heaven  or  10th  house,  and,  if  it  exceed  360  de-
grees, take  that  number  from  it.


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.  41

Example . — To  find  the  meridian  distance  of  Sa-
turn in  the  nativity  of  Lord  Byron’s  daughter  : —

A.R.  Saturn  . . 3 IP  17'

A. R.  of  the  Meridian  . 273  19

Saturn’s  Meridian  dist.  37  58

6th.  The  Semi- Arc. — This  is  the  half  of  the  planet’s
duration  above  or  below  the  horizon,  and  may  be
measured  in  hours  and  minutes,  or  in  degrees  and
minutes  of  a degree.

Rule  1. — Seek  in  the  Table  of  Ascensional  Dif-
ference for  the  elevation  of  the  pole  (which  means  the
latitude  of  the  country)  where  the  native  was  born,
and  opposite  to  the  declination  of  the  planet  will  be
found  the  ascensional  difference.

Rule  2. — Bear  in  mind  that,  if  tib^^lanet  have  no
declination,  it  is  on  the  equator,-?midFmust  be  just  12
hours  (or  180  degrees)  above  the  Earth,  and  the  same
space  below.  But  if  it  have  declination,  it  must  have
ascensional  difference,  which  is  the  extent  of  time  (if
turned  into  time)  it  will  be  above  6 hours  in  passing
from  the  horizon  to  the  meridian,  or  less  than  6
hours  in  so  doing.  If  taken  in  degrees,  it  is  the  ex-
tent above  or  beneath  90  degrees,  which  it  describes
in  passing  from  the  horizon  to  the  meridian.

Rule  3.— -If  the  planet  be  above  the  Earth,  and  in
north  declination,  add  the  ascensional  difference  to
90  deg.  to  find  its  semi-arc ; and  if  it  be  in  south  de-


42


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


clination*  subtract  the  ascensional  difference  from  90
degrees  for  its  semi  arc.

Rule  4.— If  the  planet  be  below  the  Earth  in  north
declination*  subtract ; but  if  it  be  in  south  decli-
nation, add  the  ascensional  difference  to  90  deg.  to
find  its  semi-arc.

Note. — Having  found  its  semi-arc*  either  above  or
below  the  Earth*  you  may  find  its  other  semi-arc  by
subtracting  the  one  you  have  from  180  degrees.

Example  1.— What  is  the  semi-arc  of  Saturn  in
the  Hon.  Miss  Byron’s  nativity? — Saturn  is  above
the  Earth*  and  in  south  declination ; he  is  a shorter
time  above  the  Earth  than  below ; therefore  his  asc.
diff.*  which  is  found  under  the  pole  or  latitude  of
London  51°  32'*  and  opposite  Saturn’s  declination
18°  57/  to  be  25°  36'*  is  to  be  taken  from  90°,  which
leaves  64°  24'  for  his  semi-arc  diurnal.

Example  2. — The  Sun’s  asc.  diff.  under  the  same
latitude  and  22°  547  declination  is  32°  5'*  which*
taken  from  90°*  gives  57°  55'  for  the  Sun’s  semi-arc  ;
this  doubled  is  115°  50'*  and  turned  into  time  is  7
hours  43  min.  20  seconds*  the  time  of  the  Sun’s  stay
above  the  Earth.

These  are  the  only  data  required  to  proceed  to
calculate  the  arcs  of  direction*  by  which  not  only  the
nature  of  the  events  which  shall  befall  the  native  may
be  foreseen*  but  also  the  period  when  they  shall  oc-
cur (to  within  a few  days)  may  be  undoubtedly  ascer-
tained.


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.  43

For  the  purpose  of  reference  we  will  here  give
them  all  in


A Speculum  ( or  Table  of  Data ) in  the  Nati-
vity of  Lord  Byron's  Daughter .


a

O'

s «

O

o>

c

aJ

3

a

v

Right

scensi

a a

13

S3

1

Remarks.

s

ft

<1

Sq

0 /

21.35  S

o /

27.16

The  Moon,  though

¥

0.4  N

246.3

60.8  D

above  the  Earth,
apparently  by  her

h

0.51  S

18.57  S

311.17

37.58

64.24D

longitude,  is  in  re-
ality under  the  ho-

U

1.8  N

rizon,  owing  to  her

11.12  S

210.27

62.52

75.34D

great  latitude : she
is,  in<  fact,  farther

$

0.25N

8.23N

18.42

74.37

79.19N

from  the  horizon
than  Mars,  as  will

O

* *

22.54  S

256.35

16.44

57.55D

be  found  by  taking
her  meridian  dist.

2.35N

86°  4*  from  her  se-

?

9.36  S

210.17

63.2

77.43D

mi-arc  93°  9/ ; the
diff.,  which  is  al-

2

1.11N

19.7  S

238.24

34.55

64.8  D

ways  the  planet’s
dist.  from  he  hori-

D

5.11  S

2.30  S

7,15

86.4

93.9  N

zon,  being  7°
while  the  diff.  of

©

—

2.30  S

81.54

11.25

93.9  N

Mar’s  merid.  dist.
and  semi-arc  is  only
40  42/.

44


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


CHAP.  X.

TO  JUDGE  THE  FUTURE  FATE  BY  THE  FIGURE  OF

THE  HEAVENS  AT  THE  MOMENT  OF  BIRTH.

Remark . — The  word  fate  does  not  here  imply
inevitable  fate ; for  though  the  planets  produce  a
certain  influence  on  the  native’s  affairs,  yet  that  in-
fluence is  capable  of  being  opposed  by  the  human
will9  and  may  by  that  means  be  either  overcome
entirely  or  greatly  mitigated.  If,  however,  it  be  not
attended  to,  but  allowed  its  full  scope,  it  will  then
certainly  produce  its  full  effect ; and  the  reader  must
remember,  that  astrologers,  in  predicting  events,
always  pre- suppose  that  this  last  circumstance  will
be  the  case.

RULE  TO  JUDGE  OF  THE  PERSON.

Consider  the  planets  in  the  ascendant,  if  there  be
any,  and  the  sign  ascending,  and  also  those  planets
which  throw  an  aspect  to  the  cusp  of  the  ascendant ;
and  make  a judicious  mixture  of  these.

Example. — In  the  nativity  of  Lord  Byron’s  Ada,
we  find  the  Moon  and  Mars  ascending,  and  placed
in  T • The  native  will  be  of  moderate  stature,  rather
lean  neck,  &c.,  and  her  eyes  quick  and  darting,  with
a resolute  glance.  She  will  have  some  colour,  occa-
sioned by  Mars ; but  yet  the  Moon  tends  to  give  pale-


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


45


ness  ; and  I have  no  doubt  that  she  has  some  cut  or
mark  in  the  face.  Her  hair  will  be  rather  strong,
and  of  a reddish  tint,  though  the  Moon  again  tends
to  correct  this,  which  is  produced  by  Mars.  The
Sun  is  on  the  cusp  of  the  9th  house,  throwing  a trine
aspect  to  the  ascendant,  and  Saturn,  being  in  the
9th  degree  of  zz,  throws  a sextile  aspect  to  the
ascendant.  The  Sun  causes  a bright  golden-tinted
hair,  and  Saturn  causes  dark  hair : the  result  is,  that
I judge  that  her  hair  is  what  is  called  a bright  auburn
colour,  inclining  to  redness  in  a very  small  degree.
The  words  of  Ptolemy  are,  “ Mars,  ascending,  gives
a fair  ruddiness  to  the  person,  with  large  size ; blue
or  grey  eyes,  a sturdy  figure,  and  a moderate  growth
of  hair.”  He  says,  “the  Moon  generally  contributes
better  proportion  and  greater  delicacy  of  figure.”
Hence,  I conclude  that  this  native  is  a well-made
elegant  girl,  of  extremely  good  carriage.  There  is
a conjunction  of  Venus  and  Jupiter  in  the  figure;
and  I have  observed  this  produces  fine  blue  eyes.
She  has,  then,  in  addition,  beautiful  eyes ; and  I have
no  doubt  is  a fine  specimen  of  the  beauty  of  English
females.

RULE  TO  JUDGE  OF  THE  MIND.

Consider  the  sign  ascending  and  the  planets  in  the
ascendant  (if  there  be  any),  and  those  which  aspect
the  ascendant ; but  consider  chiefly  the  Moon  and
Mercury,  how  they  are  situated,  and  how  they  are


46


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


aspected;  and  remember,  before  judging  of  the  effect
of  any  planet  upon  the  ascendant,  the  Moon  or  Mer-
cury, to  observe  how  that  planet  is  itself  affected  by
aspects  of  other  planets ; because  the  rules  in  Chap:
III  are  to  be  understood  of  the  planets  when  pure
from  the  admixture  of  others.  Every  planet  acts
upon  every  other  its  aspects,  except  the  Moon  and
Mercury,  which  are  purely  passive. — N.B.  g governs
the  intellect,  and  D the  sensual  faculties.

Example . — In  Ada’s  nativity  we  find  Mars  in  the
ascendant  in  trine  aspect  to  the  Sun : this  in  the  words
of  Ptolemy  renders  her  “ noble,  imperious,  irascible,
warlike,  versatile,  and  powerful  in  intellect.”  The
Sun  in  trine  to  Mars,  “ co-operates  to  increase  pro-
bity, industry,  honour,  and  all  laudable  qualities.”
The  Sun  being  in  good  aspect  to  the  ascendant,  causes
a degree  of  pride  or  feeling  of  dignity.  Mars  has
the  zodiacal  parallel  of  Yenus,  which  Ptolemy  says
“renders  the  mind  cheerful,  docile,  friendly,  com-
placent, joyous,  playful,  frank,  delighting  in  songs
and  dancing,  amorous,  fond  of  the  arts  and  of  dra-
matic personation,  * * brave  * * * sensible,  cau-
tious, and  discreet ; * * * quick  in  anger , extra-
vagant in  expence,  and  jealous.”  The  Moon  having
the  conjunction  of  Mars,  will  render  the  native  bold
and  enterprising,  and  the  more  so  as  it  falls  in  the
ascendant.  To  this  the  good  aspect  of  the  Sun  con-
tributes to  add  an  indomitable  spirit,  which,  if  occa-
sion should  offer,  will  display  the  native  to  the  world


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


47


a perfect  heroine.  The  Moon  and  ascendant  being
in  a moveable  sign  will,  however,  add  to  the  versatile
character  of  the  native,  “who  will  be,”  says  Ptolemy,
“susceptible  of  change.”  The  most  remarkable
feature  in  this  nativity,  as  regards  the  situation  of
Mercury,  is  his  trine  aspect  to  the  Moon ; as  good
aspects  between  the  Moon  and  Mercury  are  the  best
evidence  of  intellectual  ability.  The  native  has  un-
doubtedly great  talent.  A farther  proof  of  this  is.
Mercury  being  several  degrees  from  the  Sun,  as  this
planet,  when  within  a few  degrees  (6  or  7)  of  the
Sun,  is  much  weakened.  Mercury  in  conjunction  with
Herschel,  and  the  Moon  in  trine  to  Herschel,  renders
the  native  eccentric  and  fond  of  curious  studies.
The  close  zodiacal  parallel  of  Mercury  with  Saturn
will  tend  to  add  seriousness  to  the  native’s  character,
and,  says  Ptolemy,  she  will  be  “inquisitive,  loqua-
cious, studious  * * mystical  * * improvident,  cunnings
familiar  with  business,  quick  in  perception,  petulant ,
accurate  (in  judgment),  meditative,  fond  of  employ-
ment.”

In  short,  this  is  no  common-place  nativity;  this
scion  of  the  great  Byron  will  inherit  much  of  his
wonderful  mind,  and  be  a shining  star  among  the  fair
nobility  of  England.


48  GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.

THE  DURATION  OF  LIFE.

This  point  sh  ould  be  decided,  if  it  be  the  nativity
of  a child  we  are  about  to  judge,  before  any  other
matter ; as,  if  the  heavens  deny  life,  other  matters
are  of  no  consequence.  The  hyleg  being  supported
by  benevolent  planets  in  conjunction,  parallel,  or
good  aspect,  and  being  at  the  same  time  angular  and
free  from  affliction,  that  is,  the  evil  aspects  of  evil
planets,  is  the  chief  sign  of  life  continuing;  and  in
proportion  as  the  luminaries  and  ascendant  are  well
aspected  by  the  benefics  and  among  each  other,
and  free  from  evil  aspects  of  malelics,  the  benefics
being  in  angles,  will  the  constitution  be  strong;  If
the  hyleg,  the  lights,  and  the  ascendant  be  . all  afflicted,
the  evil  planets  being  angular,  their  ill  aspects  close,
and  there  be  no  assistance  to  the  hyleg  by  the  good
planets,  the  child  will  die  in  infancy  : if  there  be
some  assistance,  but  yet  the  evil  exceed  the  good,
the  constitution  will  be  weak,  and  the  first  train  of
evil  directions  will  destroy.  The  last  aspect  formed
by  the  O and  D is  of  great  importance,  and  must
be  well  considered.

N.B.  Weigh  well  all  the  testimonies  before  you
decide.

Example . — In  Ada’s  figure  of  birth,  the  Sun  G be-
ing in  the  9th  house,  is  the  hyleg.  He  has  the  mun-
dane sextile  of  Jupiter  and  Venus  nearly,  being
within  9°  2T  of  the  $ of  and  11°  14' of  that  of  J .
He  has  also  the  semi-quartile  of  the  benefics  in  the
zodiac,  which  assists  to  strengthen  the  constitution.


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.  49

for  any  aspect  of  the  benefics  has  this  effect,  but
the  good  aspects  most.  The  benefics  being  in  an
angle,  and  in  conjunction  with  each  other,  are  power-
ful, but  their  power  is  something  diminished  by  being
in  □ aspect  to  Saturn.  The  Sun  has  also  the  trine
of  the  Moon  in  the  world,  the  Moon  being  7°  5'  inside
the  ascendant,  and  the  Sun  2°  34'  inside  the  9th,  which
houses  are  4 houses  apart,  a a aspect.  There  is  nothing
more  to  strengthen  the  Sun,  and  as  he  has  nearly  a
□ aspect  of  T? , being  only  7°  2'  off,  and  is  within
9°  10'  of  a parallel  to  Saturn  from  the  meridian  by
rapt  motion,  and  is  in  semi-quartile  to  Saturn  in  the
zodiac,  and  in  zod.  parallel  to  Herschel,  who  is  evil,
though  not  so  much  so  as  Saturn,  the  hyleg  is  cer-
tainly not  very  strong  in  this  nativity.  The  evil  of
Saturn  is  somewhat  abated  by  his  having  a mundane
A to  the  two  benefics.  As  to  the  Moon  and  ascend-
ant, they  are  so  near  that  they  may  be  judged  of
together.  The  presence  of  the  Sun  in  A to  them
both  certainly  strengthens  those  points ; but  Mars
being  in  the  ascendant  and  close  to  the  Moon,  and
Saturn  within  5°  46'  of  a semi-quartile,  and  jg  and
Herschel  near  the  middle  of  the  8th  in  sesquiquadrate
to  the  ascendant,  weakens  both  of  them  extremely.
The  evil  clearly  preponderates,  and  (as  may  be  seen
in  the  table  of  directions)  there  being  many  ill  direc-
tions in  infancy  to  the  hyleg  (the  Sun)  and  to  the
Moon  and  ascendant,  I am  certain  that  this  lady  had
much  ill  health  in  infancy , and  that  she  has  by  no

E


50


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


means  a strong  constitution ; consequently  she  cannot
be  expected  to  be  free  from  many  serious  attacks  of
illness,  and  it  may  be  judged  that  she  will  not  live  to
a great  age.

HURTS,  INJURIES,  AND  DISEASES.

The  ascendant  and  its  opposite,  and  the  planets
afflicting  the  hyleg,  must  be  considered ; and  judgment
must  be  inferred  from  their  general  character.  If
the  Moon  be  afflicted  by  the  Sun,  the  native  is  liable
to  injuries  in  the  eyes,  especially  if  at  the  same  time
she  be  afflicted  by  malefics  and  near  nebulous  stars,
such  as  the  Pleiades.  And  if  the  ©,  being  hyleg,  be
afflicted  by  Saturn,  that  evil  planet  being  angular,  the
native  is  liable  to  die  of  consumption.  If  the  © be
setting  at  birth,  and  in  the  sign  Leo  (particularly  when
in  close  <5  with  Assellus  in  6°  of  Leo),  and  be  afflicted
by  evil  planets,  the  native  is  liable  to  injury  by  fire ;
and  if  the  Moon  at  the  same  time  be  much  afflicted
by  Mars,  and  Mars  be  descending,  the  native  is  ex-
tremely likely  to  be  burned  to  death.  Observe,  that
if  both  © and  D be  afflicted  in  the  ascendant,  the
native  is  liable  to  violent  injuries  or  hurts  ; and  that
if  the  lights  or  afflicting  planets  are  in  or  near  the
7th,  especially  near  the  cusp,  then  considerable  dis-
eases ensue*.

* As  this  work  is  merely  to  teach  the  elements  of  the
science,  the  student  is  referred  to  Ptolemy  (Rook  iii,  chap.  17),
or  to  Wilson’s  Astrological  Dictionary,  for  further  information
on  this  head.


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.  51

Example . — In  the  nativity  we  have  been  consider-
ing the  Moon  being  in  the  ascendant,  in  close  con-
junction with  Mars  (only  1°  34/  distant),  I judge  that
the  native  will  be  liable  to  suffer  some  injury  or
accident  by  a blow  or  cut  in  the  face,  and  may  even
lose  the  sight  of  an  eye,  or  have  to  undergo  a sur-
gical operation.  The  period  when  this  is  most  likely
to  occur  depends  on  the  directions.

DISEASES  OF  THE  MIND.

Observe  the  positions  of  Mercury,  the  Moon,  and
ascendant.  If  these  be  unconnected  with  each  other,
and  be  afflicted  by  Mars  and  Saturn,  these  evil  stars
being  in  angles,  and  no  assistance  given  by  the  be-
nefics,  the  persons  born  will  be  subject  to  epilepsy
or  falling  fits,  and  to  insanity.  If  ^Saturn  be  so
posited  by  day  and  Mars  by  night,”  the  former  dis-
eases will  occur ; but  “ when  Saturn  may  have  domi-
nion by  night  or  Mars  by  day  (especially  if  in  Cancer,
Virgo,  or  Pisces),  the  persons  born  will  become
insane.”  (See  Ptolemy,  Book  iii,  chap.  19.)

Example. — George  the  Third  was  born  at  7h.  46m.
a. Mr,  June  4th,  1738.  Mars  was  on  the  cusp  of  the
meridian,  squaring  the  ascendant,  and  in  zodiacal
square  to  the  Moon.  Mercury  was  conjoined  with
Saturn,  and  neither  the  Moon  nor  Mercury  in  any
aspect  to  the  ascendant,  or  to  each  other.  Under  ill
directions  the  royal  native  became  insane , according
e 2


52


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


io  Ptolemy’s  rule  ; and  but  for  g having*  a $ of  % ,
he  would  have  been  so  much  earlier  in  life.  The
conjunction  of  $ with  Mercury  assisted  also.,  but
being  with  Saturn  and  applying  to  zod.  □ of  $ , she
could  not  prevent  the  disease  entirely.  ( See  the

figure.)

THE  FORTUNE  OF  WEALTH.

The  position  of  the  part  of  fortune,,  the  Sun  and
Moon.,  and  the  aspects  to  these,  must  be  referred  to
for  this  matter.  If  they  be  in  good  position,  that  is,
angular,  and  well  aspected  of  the  benches,  and
among  themselves,  the  native  will  enjoy  much  wealth .
If  they  have  a cadent  situation,  be  under  the  earth,
and  afflicted  by  ill  aspects  of  the  malefics,  without
any  assistance  from  the  benehes,  the  native  will  always
be  poor.  Lf  there  be  a mixture  of  these  circum-
stances, the  native  will  have  a middling  portion  of
riches.

Jupiter  has  most  power  to  give  wealth.  If  he  be
with  the  ©,  and  in  parallel  with  or  good  aspect  to
the  Moon  and  angular,  then  wealth  will  flow  in  upon
the  native  amain.

Saturn,  when  strong,  will,  if  throwing  good  aspects
(not  being  in  conjunction  or  parallel),  give  the  native
wealth  by  agriculture,  buildings,  &c.  and,  if  % assist,
by  inheritance.

Mars  in  the  same  way  gives  wealth  by  military
means.  “ Venus  by  means  of  friends,  especially


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


53


females,  and  by  the  dowry  of  wives.  Mercury  by
the  sciences  and  by  trade.”  The  D with  2(1  in  an
angle  brings  riches ; if  with  T? , poverty.

THE  FORTUNE  OF  RANK.

The  disposition  of  the  luminaries,  and  the  re-
spective familiarities,  exercised  by  the  stars  attending
them,  are  to  be  considered  as  indicative  of  the  degree
of  rank  or  dignity/’  (Ptolemy,  Book  iv,  chap.  3.)
In  addition  to  this  rule  I consider  the  mid-heaven.
If  the  luminaries  be  well  placed  and  aspected,  and
there  be  good  stars  on  the  mid-heaven  or  approaching
thereto,  or  in  good  aspect  to  that  point,  and  the  lu-
minaries be  in  good  aspect  to  each  other , the  native
will  rank  high  in  the  world.  If  the  lights  be  cadent,
and  in  no  good  aspect  to  the  benefics  or  each  other,
and  the  meridian  have  no  good  aspect  of  the  lights  or
benefics,  the  native  never  gains  any  fame  ; and  if
afflicts  the  meridian,  he  meets  disgrace.  If  Mars  be
strong,  and  in  good  aspect  to  the  meridian  and  the
lights,  he  may  gain  martial  fame.  % on  the  mid-
heaven, and  the  Sun  and  Moon  in  * to  each  other,
the  Moon  having  the  A of  If,  is  one  of  the  best  po-
sitions for  rising  in  the  world.  This  was  the  case
with  Arthur  Duke  of  Wellington,  who  rose  by  the
power  of  his  stars  to  the  highest  rank.  I have  never
seen  this  in  any  other  nativity.  % in  the  10th  house,
if  not  much  afflicted,  will  alone  cause  the  native  to


54


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


do  extremely  well  in  the  world.  T?  in  that  house,,  if
not  extremely  well  aspected,  will  bring  him  to  shame
and  beggary.


THE  QUALITY  OF  EMPLOYMENT.

The  planet  nearest  the  Sun  and  that  which  is  in
the  mid-heaven  (or  aspecting),  especially  if  in  fami-
liarity with  the  Moon,  has  most  influence  in  this  ques-
tion. If  Mercury  alone  rule,  he  makes  writers  and
travellers,  merchants,  &c. ; connected  with  Saturn,
he  causes  them  to  “ become  managers  of  the  affairs
of  others."  If  Jupiter  aspect  him,  they  will  be
pleaders,  painters,  &c.  or  hold  office  about  eminent
personages.  Venus  ruling  makes  wine-merchants,
dealers  in  colours,  dyes,  perfumes,  drugs,  &c.,  and
dealers  in  garments  or  apparel.  See. : if  connected
with  Saturn,  she  makes  persons  have  to  do  with
amusement,  players,  jugglers,  &c. : if  with  Jupiter,
persons  attending  exhibitions,  &c. ; and  I believe
priests  who  have  much  personal  decoration  — as  ca-
tholic priests,  bishops,  &c.  and  they  will  gain  by
females.  Mars  ruling  alone  makes  martial  men,  and,
if  in  Cancer  or  Pisces,  naval  men.  The  Sun  joined
with  him,  being  near  the  mid-heaven,  or  in  aspect,
makes  persons  dealing  with  fire  or  metals,  the  latter
especially  if  in  Taurus  or  Leo.  “ If  Mars  be  sepa-
rated from  the  Sun,  he  makes  shipwrights,  smiths,
agriculturists,  stonemasons,  carpenters,  and  subor-


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


55


dinate  labourers,  & cP  “If  Saturn  bear  testimony,
in  addition  to  Mars,  persons  become  mariners,  workers
in  wells,  vaults,  &c.  under  ground,  painters,  keepers
of  cattle,  cooks,  butchers,  &c.”  If  Jupiter  join  with
Mars,  they  will  be  soldiers,  innkeepers,  tax-gatherers,
mechanics,  &c.  If  Mercury  and  Venus  become
joint  arbiters  of  employment,  they  produce  musi-
cians, dancers,  poets,  weavers,  and  painters,  &c.
Jupiter  in  connection  with  them  makes  magistrates
and  senators,  as  also  teachers  of  youth.  Mercury
joint  with  Mars  makes  surgeons,  statuaries,  boxers,
&c.  N.B.  If  Mercury  be  most  powerful,  they  will
be  scientific ; and  if  Mars  be  strongest,  they  will  be
more  violent  or  wickedly  inclined,  and  cruel  in  their
practices.  If  Saturn  join  these  two,  they  will  be
thieves  (especially  if  the  Moon  be  in  ill  aspect  to
Mercury)  and  swindlers ; if  D be  in  ill  aspect  to  $ ,
they  will  be  robbers  or  assassins.  If  Jupiter  join
$ and  $ , they  engage  in  honourable  warfare,  and
are  industrious.  If  Venus  and  Mars  rule  together,
persons  will  be  dyers,  workers  in  tin,  lead,  gold,
silver,  medical  drugs,  and  also  physicians.  Saturn
with  them  makes  undertakers,  grave-diggers,  mutes,
&c.  Jupiter  will  bring  them  support,  by  being
placed  to  govern  over  women,  &c.  and  holders  of
sacred  offices.

If  the  D be  near  the  mid-heaven,  she  causes  many
changes  of  employment ; and  in  Virgo  or  Scorpio,  says
Ptolemy  (to  which  maybe  added  Gemini  and  Pisces),


56


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


and  in  connection  with  $ (and  especially  if  $ be  on  the
mid-heaven),  she  makes  astrologers*.  This  is  the  more
likely,  if  Herschel  be  strong  and  aspected  by  g or
even  D .

Observe . — These  are  merely  the  general  elements
of  the  science  on  this  head  ; and  if  the  learner  would
ascertain  farther  particulars,  he  should  study  Ptolemy
(Rook  iv,  chap.  4).  And  here  let  me  advise  him  to
make  due  allowance  for  the  different  state  of  society
under  which  Ptolemy  wrote ; and  not  trust  to  Mr.
Wilson’s  strictures  on  that  great  philosopher.

MARRIAGE.

As  regards  men,  observe  the  Moon  and  Venus.  If
})  be  found  between  the  eastern  horizon  and  meri-
dian, or  in  the  opposite  quadrant,  she  causes  them  to
marry  early  in  life,  or,  after  they  have  passed  their
prime,  to  women  younger  than  themselves.  If  she
be  in  the  other  quarters  of  the  figure,  they  will  marry
late  in  life,  or  to  women  older  than  themselves.  If
she  be  configurated  with  Saturn,  it  delays  marriage ;
and  if  within  a few  degrees  of  the  Sun,  or  in  evil
aspect  to  the  Sun,  the  same : if  both  these  testimo-
nies concur,  the  D being  at  the  same  time  occidental,
they  never  marry.  If  D be  oriental,  and  especially

* It  is  remarkable  that  $ was  in  the  mid-rheaven  at  the  birth
of  the  late  author  of  the  Prophetic  Messenger,  and  the  author
of  the  True  Prophetic  Messenger,  and  also  of  Zadkiel  the  Seer ;
the  Moon  in  each  case  having  much  connexion  with  J and  y,
and  also  some  other  similar  affections.


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


57


if  angular,,  and  in  aspect  to  many  planets,  they  being
strong,  and  she  be  situated  in  n,  $ , or  X,  they  may
marry  more  than  once.  If  D apply  to  T?  by  aspect,
the  wife  will  be  morose  and  grave;  if  to  l£,  well
conducted  and  economical;  if  to  <£,  bold  and  re-
fractory ; if  to  ? , cheerful  and  handsome  ; and  if  to

, a clever  sensible  woman.  If  $ be  connected  with
It,  I?,  or  $,  the  wives  will  be  provident  and
attached  to  their  families.  If  she  be  connected  with
$ , they  will  be  violent  and  ill-conducted,  especially
if  it  be  by  evil  aspect.  If  the  ])  be  in  good  aspect
to  the  ©,  and  the  © be  not  afflicted,  the  native
marries  a person  of  respectable  connexions.  If  good
planets  be  found  in  the  7th  house,  the  individual
(whether  male  or  female)  is  happy  in  marriage ; and
if  evil  planets  be  there,  the  reverse.  Herschel  in  the
7th  is  evil ; and  if  he  afflict  the  Moon  in  a man’s  na-
tivity, or  the  Sun  in  a woman’s,  he  destroy  s domestic
happiness.— N.B.  This,  however,  is  a secondary
judgment.

For  the  marriage  of  women  regard  the  Sun,
Venus,  and  Mars.  If  the  Q be  oriental,  they  marry
early,  or  to  men  younger  than  themselves  ; if  © be
occidental,  they  marry  late,  or  to  elderly  men.  If
the  Sun  be  angular,  and  in  aspect  to  many  planets,
especially  from  n,  $ , or  X,  they  marry  more  than
once.  Saturn  configurated  to  the  © (if  the©  applies
to  him)  gives  steady  husbands,  but  morose ; Jupiter
gives  honourable,  noble  characters;  Mars  violent.


58


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


rash,  unfeeling  men ; Venus  amiable,  handsome
husbands  ; and  Mercury  clever,  intelligent,  and  pro-
vident characters.  If  ? be  with  T? , or  in  aspect  to
him,  the  husband  will  be  dull  and  laborious ; if  with
%,  just  and  honest ; if  with  $ , rash  men  and  adul-
terous ; if  with  $ , clever,  but  fond  of  change. —
N.B.  If  O or  D apply  to  $ , the  wife  or  husband  will
be  eccentric.  If  the  Q have  no  aspect  with  Mars,
and  Mars  be  weak  in  the  figure,  the  female  native
does  not  do  well  in  marriage ; and  if  O be  in  ill
aspect  to  1?  at  the  same  time,  she  will  be  likely  to
live  single.

Example . — In  the  figure  of  the  heavens  at  Ada’s
birth  we  find  the  © in  A aspect  to  $ , this  planet
being  angular  and  strong ; and  this  is  a proof  that
the  native,  if  she  live,  will  marry.  As  the  O is  occi-
dental and  cadent,  I judge  that  she  will  not  marry
very  early  in  life,  or,  if  she  do,  that  it  will  be  to  a
man  some  years  her  senior.  The  0 has  no  other
application  than  the  A of  $ , and  therefore,  though
he  be  in  f , I judge  that  she  will  never  marry  more
than  once.  The  planet  the  O applies  to  being  $ ,
does  not  promise  a very  good  husband ; but  yet  as
there  is  a benevolent  conjunction  of  % and  $ in  the
7th  house,  I believe  that  the  evil  effect  of  Mars  will
be  corrected;  and  besides,  as  $ has  the  parallel
declination  of  $ , who  is  very  powerful,  being  an-
gular and  joined  with  l£,  the  native’s  husband  will  be
a good  man,  fond  of  his  wife,  and  well  conducted ;


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


59


but  he  may  be  what  is  called  hasty*  and  at  times  a
little  irregular.  $ in  T shews  a man  who  is  very
respectable*  and  probably  one  who  holds  some  high
military  rank.  He  will  be  a tall*  fine-looking  man*
with  bushy*  curling  hair*  reddish ; one  who  is  noble
and  courageous.

CHILDREN.

The  10th  and  11th  houses*  and  their  opposites*
must  be  considered.  If  no  planets  be  in  the  10th  or
11th*  consider  whether  there  be  any  in  aspect  to
them*  or  placed  in  or  aspecting  the  4th  or  5th  houses.
The  ))  * , and  ? give  offspring ; and  O*  $ , and

T?  * deny  children*  or  allot  but  few.  $ acts  accord-
ing as  he  may  partake  of  the  nature  of  the  three  former
or  three  latter  ; and  if  oriental  he  gives  children*  if
occidental  he  does  not.  If  children  are  promised  by
other  planets*  yet  $ or  T?  be  found  in  the  5th  house*
especially  in  SI  or  n&*  the  native  will  lose  many
children,  and  have  much  trouble  by  them.  If  the
benefics  only  be  in  the  5th*  the  native  has  much
happiness  by  his  children.

Example, — In  the  nativity  of  Lord  Byron’s
daughter*  we  find  T?  in  the  11th  house,  and  <£  in  □
aspect  to  the  cusp  of  the  5th : these  are  testimonies
of  no  children ; but  as  % and  $ throw  a ^ to  the
10th*  she  may  have  some  children  born ; but  I judge
that  she  may  hardly  expect  to  have  above  one  who
will  live  to  adult  age.


60


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


TRAVELLING.

The  Sun,,  Moon,  Mars,  and  Part  of  Fortune,  are  to
be  considered.  If  they,  or  the  most  of  them,  be
cadent,  the  native  will  travel.  If  the  © alone  be
cadent,  it  will  cause  many  journies ; but  the  Moon  is
the  chief  significator  of  journeying  and  voyages.

Examples. — In  the  nativity  of  the  Hon.  Miss
Byron,  w(?  find  the  Sun  cadent  in  the  9th,  and  ©
cadent  in  the  3d ; hence  I conclude  that  she  will
take  several  journies  in  the  course  of  her  life,  a,nd
be  rather  given  to  travel.  In  the  nativity  of  this
young  lady’s  celebrated  father,  the  Moon  and  Mars
were  both  cadent  in  the  9th,  and  the  Sun  in  the  3d,
while  the  © was  just  fallen  from  the  7th  angle;  and
he,  it  is  well  known,  spent  most  of  his  days  in  tra-
velling.


THE  KIND  OF  DEATH.

If  the  ascendant  and  the  hyleg  be  well  aspected,
and  if  2£,  § , D , or  g , well  aspected,  be  placed  in
the  8th  house,  the  native  dies  a natural  death.  A
violent  or  remarkable  death  happens  when  both  the
malefics  attack  both  O and  D , or  even  only  one,  and
at  the  same  time  the  ascendant  be  afflicted.  If  an
evil  planet  be  placed  in  the  8th  house,  it  is  an  addi-
tional testimony  of  a violent  death ; but  if  it  be
there  when  the  other  testimonies  do  not  occur,  then


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


61


it  merely  shews  a painful  death.  T?  causes  slow
lingering  deaths,  and,  $ causes  them  to  be  more
sudden.

Rule.— The  nature  of  the  death  is  to  be  judged
of  chiefly  by  the  directions  in  operation  at  the
time : —

Saturn  causes  all  cold  diseases,  coughs,  agues,
rheumatism,  consumption,  dropsy,  &c. ; and  if  violent
symptoms  are  perceived,  he  brings  death  by  blows,
falls,  suffocation,  &c.

Jupiter  brings  death  by  quinsey,  impure  state  of
the  blood,  liver  complaints,  diseases  of  the  lungs,  &c.
If  violence  attend  the  death,  it  may  be  by  sentence
of  a judge.

Mars  causes  death  by  fever,  wounds,  spitting  of
blood,  erysipelas,  childbirth,  &c.  If  by  violence,
he  kills  by  gun-shot  or  swords,  suicide  or  fire .

Venus  produces  death  by  cancer,  scurvy,  dysen-
tery, diabetes  or  wasting  away,  fistula,  and  putrid
diseases.  If  violence  attend,  she  causes  poison.

Mercury  kills  by  fury,  madness,  melancholy,  epi-
lepsy, coughs,  and  obstructions.  If  violence  concur,
he  brings  death  by  accident  in  sport  or  by  robbers.

The  Moon. — When  the  ascendant  or  © be  hyleg,
the  Moon  will  assist  in  causing  death  by  cold  phleg-
matic diseases,  and  if  she  be  placed  in  S3  , tR,  or  K?
by  drowning.

The  Sun  will  assist  to  cause  death  by  his  ill  aspects
to  the  ascendant  or  ]>  if  they  be  hyleg,  and  then  he


62  GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.

acts  like  Mars,  and  if  in  Leo,  will  produce  death  by
fire,  if  other  testimonies  accord.

Observe. — The  benelics  cannot  cause  death  of
themselves;  and  their  □ or  <§>  aspect  will  frequently
save  life  when  they  fall  amidst  a train  of  evil  direc-
tions. But  if  the  influence  is  too  powerful  for  them
to  save,  or  they  be  themselves  vitiated  or  too  weak  to
save,  then  they  assist  to  cause  death  in  the  manner
described.  Herschel  cannot  kill  by  himself,  but  his
ill  aspects  assist  to  destroy  life ; and  where  they
concur,  will  produce  something-  sudden,  singular,  or
extraordinary  in  the  nature  of  the  death.

Rule.— Death  is  always  created  by  a train  of

EVIL  DIRECTIONS  TO  THE  IIYLEG  AND  OTHER  VITAL

points.  And  remember,  that  if  the  hyleg  be  not
afflicted,  the  life  will  not  be  destroyed,  however  evil
the  directions,  and  however  much  they  may  injure
the  health.

Example. — In  the  nativity  of  Ada,  we  find  the
Moon  in  conjunction  of  Mars  in  the  ascending
angle ; and  the  Sun  (hyleg)  applying  to  a parallel  of
Saturn;  thus  we  may  conclude  that  the  native  will
die,  eventually,  of  some  feverish  complaint;  and
though  it  may  carry  her  off  rather  suddenly,  yet  I
judge  that  it  will  proceed  from  natural  causes.  It
is  not  unlikely  that  the  position  of  Mercury  in
the  8th  house  (he  having-  the  declination  of  Saturn,
and  therefore  partaking  of  his  evil  nature)  may  bring
on  the  disease  through  a severe  cold  or  cough,  and


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


63


that  considerable  delirium  may  attend. — N.B.  This
judgment  is  necessarily  only  of  a general  nature  ; as,
according  to  the  rule,  we  must  look  chiefly  to  the
directions  in  operation  at  the  fatal  period.

CHAP.  XI.

TO  JUDGE  OF  THE  EFFECTS  OF  DIRECTIONS.

Rule. — Consider  well  the  general  nature  of  the
planet  casting  the  aspect,  and  also  the  manner  in
which  he  is  situated  as  regards  other  planets  at  birth ;
and  observe,  also,  what  other  directions  are  near  at  the
time ; and  then,  according  to  the  native’s  situation
in  life,  judge  of  the  effect.

1st,  Saturn  to  an  ill  aspect  of  the  ascendant  brings
cold  diseases  and  lingering  complaints;  in  a watery
sign,  danger  of  drowning,  dropsy,  &c. ; in  a fiery  or
airy  sign,  danger  of  falls,  blows,  &c.;  in  an  earthy
sign,  accidents  by  being  crushed  or  bruised,  or
buried  alive.  His  ill  aspects  to  the  M.  C.  cause
injury  to  the  native’s  affairs  by  death  of  relations,
being  wronged  by  elderly  persons,  and  a general
tendency  to  trouble  and  misfortune.  His  ill  aspects
to  the  Sun  produce  similar  effects,  with  much  evil  to
the  native’s  father,  quarrels  with  persons  in  power,
or  with  his  relations,  especially  his  father.  To  the
Moon,  much  mischief  to  the  native’s  health,  and
many  troubles ; his  affairs  go  wrong,  and  he  is  gene-


64


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


rally  unfortunate.  To  the  ©,  loss  of  property  by
various  means,  often  imperceptibly.  The  A or  * of
Saturn  to  the  ascendant  or  the  D renders  the  native
grave  and  steady,  and  these  aspects  to  either  of  the
five  moderators  (viz.  Q,  D,  ©,  ascendant,  and
M.  C.)  will  produce  benefits  by  old  persons,  lega-
cies, &c.  also  by  dealing  in  land  or  houses,  or  with
saturnine  people  or  things.

2d,  Jupiter The  good  aspects  to  either  of  the
moderators  produce  prosperity,  increase  of  wealth,
new  friends,  honourable  employment,  the  birth  of
children,  or  their  settlement  in  life,  and  an  improved
state  of  health  and  much  happiness.  The  semi-
quartile,  □ , § , or  sesquiquadrate,  will  cause  quarrels
with  clergymen,  magistrates,  landlords,  &c.,  losses
in  trade  or  by  travelling,  &c. ; but,  unless  If.  be  ex-
tremely ill  aspected  at  birth,  his  ill  aspects  by  direc-
tion will  not  cause  any  permanent  evil.

3d,  Mars. — His  evil  aspects  produce  accidents  by
fire,  fire-arms,  cuts,  blows,  injuries  by  animals,  &c. ;
also  violent  diseases,  especially  if  it  be  to  the  hyleg,
death  of  relations,  &c.  In  airy  signs  he  causes  falls ;
in  fiery,  fevers,  hurts  by  fire ; in  earthy,  pestilential
complaints;  in  watery,  scalds,  fluxes,  peril  by  water,
and  inflammations.  He  causes  losses  by  robbers,
fraud,  &c. ; and  by  means  of  military  men,  or  persons
in  power,  he  brings  various  injuries.  But  although
his  conjunction  with  O is  reckoned  an  evil  aspect,  it
will  (if  he  be  well  aspected  at  birth)  sometimes  cause


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


65


military  honors,  or  success  in  the  native’s  trade  or
profession,  when  it  is  to  the  mid-heaven.  His  # or
A causes  military  advancement,  the  birth  of  children
(generally  males),  journeys,  and  success  in  trade  or
employment,  especially  if  a surgeon,  chemist,  or  dealer
in  metals.  His  good  aspects  frequently  cause  mar-
riage, especially  in  a female  nativity,  except  those
to  0,  which  give  increase  of  wealth  only.

4th,  The  Sun. — The  Sun  acts  in  a medium  manner
between  the  natures  of  Jupiter  and  Mars.  If  he
come  to  6 of  the  Ascendant,  being  at  birth  well
aspected,  he  may  give  fame  and  reputation,  and  the
native  is  successful  in  all  matters  connected  with
people  in  power.  If  he  be  ill  aspected,  he  is  likely
to  give  disease  in  the  head ; and  if  in  a fiery  sign,  or
if  the  Sun  be  afflicted  by  Mars,  it  causes  fevers.  The
<5  with  the  M.  C.  will  cause  honours,  if  well  aspected
at  birth ; but  if  in  conjunction  with  Mars  at  birth,
he  may  very  likely  cause  evil.  The  O coming  to
<5  with  , will  cause  journies ; and  if  D be  well
situated,  it  gives  some  preferment ; if  otherwise,  it
brings  sickness,  especially  humours  in  the  head,
diseases  in  the  eyes,  &c.  It  frequently  happens  that
the  native  marries  under  this  direction,  especially  if
others  tending  to  produce  marriage  accompany  it ;
but  as  it  generally  makes  him  fickle  and  extravagant,
such  marriages  are  not  fortunate,  unless  D be  very
well  situated  at  birth.  The  good  aspects  of  the  Sun
to  the  Ascendant,  M.  C.,  D , or  0,  also  his  arrival  by


F


66


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


direction  to  his  own  produce  benefits,  preferment,
increase  of  wealth,  marriage,  children,  &c.  If  he  be
well  placed  and  aspected  at  birth,  his  return  to  his
own  declination  will  also  cause  benefits,  good  success,
&c.  His  evil  aspects  cause  disease,  disgrace,  loss
of  friends,  deaths  of  relations,  and  many  evils.  His
arrival  at  his  own  semi-quartile  is  evil:  his  own
square  extremely  so.

5th,  Venus. — Her  good  aspects  produce  health,
and  give  an  inclination  to  enjoy  pleasure  and  amuse-
ment. She  causes  benefits  by  females,  marriage,  the
birth  of  children,  their  settlement  in  life,  &c.  Her
evil  aspects  cause  trouble  by  females  and  by  free
living,  producing  disease  and  discredit,  disappoint-
ment in  marriage,  slander,  and  many  vexations.  If
the  train  of  directions  which  causes  death  have
amongst  it  a □ or  g of  Venus,  and  she  be  evil  at
birth,  it  may  cause  the  native  to  be  poisoned.
The  M.  C.  to  the  § of  $ will  sometimes  cause
marriage,  but  then  it  is  rash  and  attended  with
trouble.

6th,  Mercury.—  The  good  aspects  cause  journeys,
removals,  much  activity  in  business,  and  successful
law-suits.  Also  satisfaction  by  means  of  children
or  young  persons,  literary  characters,  booksellers,
&c.,  and  literary  fame  or  success.  His  evil  aspects
cause  trouble  by  similar  means,  and  also  frauds  by
young  persons,  servants,  &c.  The  situation  of  $
at  birth  must  be  particularly  noted,  especially  those


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


67


planets  he  is  in  zodiacal  parallel  with,  as  lie  partakes
strongly  of  the  nature  of  those  planets  he  is  con-
nected with  by  aspect  or  declination,  and  will  act
accordingly.  If  he  be  evil  at  birth,  and  should  come
to  A or  ill  aspect  of  the  D or  the  hyleg,  he  fre-
quently causes  mental  diseases,  epilepsy,  &c.

7th,  The  Moon. — Her  good  aspects  to  the  Ascend-
ant or  M.  C,  generally  cause  changes  in  life  for  the
better,  long  journeys,  voyages,  removals,  &c. ; to
the  Sun,  they  give  honors  and  emoluments,  profitable
employment,  popular  favours,  &c.  and  marriage ; to
the  0,  the  same,  or  benefit  by  females,  going  to  sea,
&c.;  to  her  own  % or  parallel,  either  in  the  world  or
the  zodiac,  the  same ; but  these  latter  will  depend
on  her  condition.  Her  ill  aspects  cause  the  reverse,
and  if  to  the  hyleg,  will  give  cold,  or  dropsical
diseases;  if  in  a watery  sign,  danger  by  water.
Her  A with  the  O will  cause  fevers  if  the  Sun  be
evil  at  birth,  and  the  Moon  be  hyleg.  It  causes  an
unsettled  state  of  his  affairs,  losses,  many  changes,
journies,  and  much  vexation,  if  the  Sun  be  evil ;
also  diseases  in  the  eyes,  if  it  fall  near  the  Pleiades,
Hyades,  or  other  nebulous  fixed  stars.  If  the  Sun
be  fortunate  at  birth,  it  may  give  marriage  or  pre-
ferment, and  profitable  journies.

8th,  Herschel, — This  planet  is  not  yet  thoroughly
understood.  His  conjunction,  parallels,  or  ill  aspects
produce  evil,  generally  of  an  unexpected,  sudden,  or
uncommon  nature,  but  in  a far  less  degree  than
f 2


68


GRAMMAR  OR  ASTROLOGY.


either  Saturn  or  Mars.  They  very  frequently  cause
the  death  of  relations.  His  good  aspects  produce
benefits  in  the  same  way.

9th,  The  Dragon's  Head  £3  .—This  can  have  no
elfect  on  any  thing  but  the  Moon.  When  she
arrives  at  that  degree  it  was  in  at  birth,  fortunate
events  are  said  to  occur : I am  not  certain  that
they  do.

10th,  The  Dragon's  Tail  £$ . — This  also  can  only
affect  the  Moon.  When  she  arrives  at  the  degree
it  was  in  at  birth,  evil  is  said  to  attend  : I have  seen
only  one  instance,  where  a child  lost  her  father  at
the  time.  It  is  worthy  of  the  student’s  attention.

CHAP.  XII.

OF  MUNDANE  ASPECTS  AND  DIRECTIONS.

The  positions  of  the  planets  as  regards  their
relative  distances  from  each  other  in  the  twelve
houses  produce  another  kind  of  aspects  extremely
powerful  in  their  operation.  If  they  occur  at  birth,
they  act  upon  the  native  all  through  life  ; if  they  are
found  afterwards,  they  influence  him  for  some  weeks
(sometimes  months)  at  that  period  of  life  to  which
their  arc  extends.

A mundane  ^ is  when  two  planets  are  two  houses
apart.  Thus  O on  the  meridian  at  noon  and  % on
the  cusp  of  the  8th  house  are  in  mundane  * . If  0


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


69


be  half  through  the  9th,  and  If.  half  through  the  7th,
they  are  still  two  houses  apart  and  in  mundane  * .
If  © be  on  the  cusp  of  the  9th  and  if.  be  in  the  7th,
he  will,  when  he  arrives  at  the  cusp  of  the  7th,  be
arrived  by  direction  at  the  O’s  : and  if  If.  at  birth
be  just  belowr  the'  7th  and  the  O in  the  9th,  he  will,
when  he  arrives  at  the  same  distance  below  or  past
the  9th  (in  proportion  to  his  semi-arc  as  compared
with  l{.’s  semi-arc),  be  also  arrived  at  l£’s

A mundane  □ is  thfc  distance  of  three  houses  apart.
Thus,  if  D be  rising  at  noon  or  midnight,  when  O
is  on  the  meridian,  they  are  in  mundane  □ , being
three  houses  apart ; the  same  if  D be  setting  at  those
times. — Example:  In  Ada’s  nativity  we  find  y a
short  distance  outside  the  cusp  of  the  9th,  and  T?  a
short  distance  outside  the  12th  house  ; they  are,
therefore,  nearly  in  mundane  □ ; and  as  it  is  an  evil
aspect  they  mutually  increase  each  others  evil.

A mundane  A is  four  houses  apart.  Thus  in
Ada’s  figure  of  birth  the  © being  near  upon  the
cusp  of  the  9th  and  5)  near  the  1st  house  (which  are
four  houses  apart)  we  say  that  the  luminaries  are  in
mundane  A.  The  effect  is  fortunate,  and  upholds
the  native’s  honour  and  character.

A mundane  $ is  six  houses  apart.  Thus,  a star
rising  and  another  setting  are  in  mundane  opposition*

A mundane  semi-quartile  is  one  house  and  a half
apart


70


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


A mundane  sesquiquadrate  is  four  houses  and  a
half  apart.

A mundane  quintile  is  one-fifth  of  two-thirds  of  the
semi-arc  of  the  planet  you  direct  more  than  the  * .

A mundane  biquintile  is  one-tenth  of  the  planet’s
semi-arc  more  than  the  sesquiquadrate.

Remark . — These  mundane  aspects  are  all  measured
by  the  semi-arcs  of  the  planets  ; therefore

A semi- quart ile  is  one-half  of  a planet’s  semi-arc.

A # is  two-thirds  of  ditto.

An  is  an  entire  semi- arc.

A A is  equal  to  a semi -arc  and  one-third  more.

A sesquiquadrate  is  equal  to  a semi  arc  and  a half.

And  observe,  that  whenever  an  aspect  is  measured
between  two  planets,  any  other  aspect  may  be  ascer-
tained, if  it  also  fall  in  the  same  hemisphere,  by
merely  taking  the  requisite  proportion  of  the  semi-
arc of  the  planet  to  be  directed.  Thus,  if  we  know
the  distance  between  two  planets,  that  is  the  arc  of
direction  to  the  conjunction ; then  one-half  of  the
semi-arc  of  the  planet  which  is  directed  added  to  that
will  give  the  arc  of  direction  to  the  semi- quar tile  ; by
adding  one-sixth  part  of  the  semi-arc  to  this  we  have
the  arc  of  direction  to  the  % ; one-third  more  of  the
semi-arc  will  give  the  □,  and  another  third  the  a;
to  which  add  one-sixth  for  the  sesquiquadrate.

N.B.  If  the  planet  directed  should  pass  the  horizon
in  forming  either  of  these  aspects,  that  is,  if  the  arc


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


71


of  direction  should  be  longer  than  the  planet’s  dis-
tance from  the  horizon,  then  its  other  semi-arc  must
be  used  for  those  aspects  which  fall  beyond  the  ho-
rizon. Great  care  is  to  be  taken  to  avoid  errors
by  taking  the  wrong  semi-arc  : this  may  always  be
done  by  observing,  that  if  the  aspect  falls  above  the
earth,  the  semi-diurnal  arc  is  to  be  taken ; and  if
below  the  earth,  the  semi-nocturnal  arc  is  to  be
taken  of  that  planet  which  is  directed.

CHAP.  XIII.

OF  THE  MUNDANE  PARALLELS.

These  are  as  important  as  any  mundane  aspect  in
their  effects,  both  at  birth  and  when  found  by  direc-
tion. They  consist  of  equal  proportional  distances
from  the  meridian ; thus,  if  two  stars,  having  the
same  semi- arcs,  are  at  an  equal  distance  from  the
meridian  on  opposite  sides,  they  are  in  mundane
parallel.

Example.— U O’s  semi-arc  be  60°,  and  he  be  20°
distant  from  the  meridian,  while  D , having  also  the
semi-arc  of  60°,  be  20°  distant  from  the  meridian,
they  are  in  mundane  parallel.  If, however,  the  O be
so  situated  while  the  D has  the  semi-arc  of  120°,  or
double  that  of  ©,  she  will  require  to  be  40°  distant
from  the  meridian,  or  double  the  O’s  distance,  to  be
in  mundane  parallel  with  him.

Example. — In  the  nativity  of  Ada,  T?  is  placed


72


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


in  the  11th,,  at  the  distance  of  37°  58'  from  the
meridian,  his  semi-arc  being  64°  24'.  The  Sun  is  in
the  9th,  approaching  to  a parallel  distance  from
the  meridian  with  Saturn  ; the  © has  the  semi- arc  of
57°  55',  which  is  less  than  that  of  T?  ; therefore,
when  the  Sun  is  at  a distance  of  34°  9'  from  the
meridian,  he  will  be  in  mundane  parallel  with  T? ,
because  the  O’s  semi-arc  bears  the  same  proportion
to  34°  9'  as  T?  ’s  semi-arc  bears  to  his  distance  from
the  meridian,  which  is  37°  58'.


CHAP.  XIV.

OF  THE  PART  OF  FORTUNE.

If  the  ©be  exactly  ascending  at  birth,  the  place
of  © will  be  exactly  that  in  which  the  Moon  is  at
that  time ; therefore,  whatever  distance  the  Sun  is
from  the  Moon  (measured  by  oblique  ascension),  so
far  is  the  Part  of  Fortune  from  the  Ascendant : hence,
to  find  the  right  ascension  of  ©,  observe  the  fol-
lowing

Rule. — Add  90°  to  the  A.  R.  of  the  M.  C.,  and  it
will  give  the  oblique  ascension  of  the  Ascendant.
From  the  oblique  ascension  of  the  Ascendant  subtract
the  oblique  ascension  of  the  Sun  (having  first  added
360°  to  the  former,  if  it  be  less  than  the  latter) ; to
the  remainder  add  the  A.  R.  of  1)  : the  sum  will  be
the  A.  R.  of  © .


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.  73

Example. — In  Ada’s  nativity,  the  A.  R.  of

the  M.  C.  is 2730  19'

To  which  add  90  0

363  19

Subtract 360  0

It  gives  the  oblique  ascension  of  the  Asc.  3 19

Add 360  0

363  19

Subtract  O’s  oblique  ascension 288  40

Remainder  ...» 74  39

To  which  add  D ’s  A.  R 7 15

It  gives  the  A.  R.  of  0 81  54


To  find  the  Situation  of  the  Part  of  Fortune
in  the  Figure  at  Birth .

Rule. — Find  its  distance  from  the  nearest  meridian ;
bearing  in  mind  that  the  0 is  always  under  the
horizon  before  the  full  Moon,,  at  which  time  it  is  on
the  cusp  of  the  7th  house,  and  that  after  full  Moon  it
is  always  above  the  horizon.

Example . — In  Ada’s  nativity  the  0 is  under  the
horizon,  because  the  D had  not  reached  the  full.  The
A.  R.  of  the  meridian  under  the  earth  is  93°  19',  from
which,  if  we  take  the  A.  R.  of  0 81°  54',  the  re-


74


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


mainder  is  1 1°  25',  the  distance  of  © from  the  meri-
dian, which,  as  it  does  not  amount  to  one-third  of
the  semi-arc  of  © (93°  9'),  shews  that  ® is  in  the
3d  house,

N.B.  The  semi-arc  of  © is  always  that  of  the  D ,
if  they  are  both  above  or  under  the  horizon;  but  if
one  be  above  and  the  other  under  the  horizon,  the  ®
will  have  the  opposite  semi-arc  to  D , which  may  be
found  by  taking  the  semi-arc  of  D from  180  de-
grees.

Observation . — -Mr.  Wilson,  in  his  “Dictionary  of
Astrology/5  p.  306,  says  that  the  Part  of  Fortune
“is  really  nothing  but  a phantom  hatched  in  the
figurative  brain  of  Ptolemy,  which  has  no  influence
whatever.”  I certainly  must  demur  to  this  dictum ,
as  I have  found  by  experience  that,  if  calculated  in
the  manner  1 have  here  explained,  and  the  directions
to  it  be  correctly  calculated  also,  and  no  false  direc-
tions made  (such  as  aspects  in  the  zodiac,  which  do
not  apply  to  ©),  there  will  be  found  very  consider-
able eflects.  I respect  Mr.  Wilson  as  a friend  of
truth ; but  I think  that  in  treating  on  Astrology  he
has,  in  some  few  instances,  thought  too  much  of
reason  and  too  little  of  experience.  It  is  true,  that
we  cannot  explain  the  influence  of  ©,  nor  can  we
explain  that  of  any  planet ; but  we  must  remember,
that  “two  bodies,  at  a distance,  will  put  one  another
into  motion  by  the  force  of  attraction  ; which  is  un-
explicable  by  us,  though  made  evident  to  us  by


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


75


experience,  and  so  to  be  taken  as  a principle  in
natural  philosophy.”  These  are  the  words  of  the
great  Locke  ; and  they  justify  our  faith  in  the  influ-
ence of  © if  made  evident  “ by  experience ? though
it  be,  indeed,  “ unexplicable”  by  reason,  in  our
present  state  of  knowledge.

CHAP.  XV.

OF  THE  HYLEG  AND  THE  HYLEG1ACAL  PLACES.

The  hyleg , or  giver  of  life,  is  1st  the  O,  if  found
in  a hylegiacal  place  ; 2d,  the  D , if  she  be  so  found,
when  O is  not ; lastly,  the  luminaries  being  neither
of  them  in  hylegiacal  places,  the  degree  ascending
becomes  hyleg.  The  hylegiacal  places  are  from  5
degrees  above  the  ascending  horizon  to  25  degrees
below  it,  measured  by  oblique  ascension  ; also  from
half  way  between  the  ascendant  and  mid-heaven  unto
5 degrees  beyond  the  cusp  of  the  9th  house;  lastly,
from  5 degrees  below  the  8th  house  to  5 degrees
below  the  7th  or  descendant.

N.B,  The  ascendant  or  ])  receiving  evil  aspects  by
direction  will  at  all  times  be  likely  to  affect  the  health,
whether  hyleg  or  not.  And  if  the  Moon  be  beyond
the  exact  5 degrees  of  any  hylegiacal  house,  yet  if
within  a short  distance,  she  will  cause  a great  deal  of
danger ; and  if  the  hyleg  be  at  the  same  time
afflicted,  though  only  slightly,  the  native  will  very


76


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


probably  die.  It  bas  been  said  that  if  ® be  in  a
hylegiacal  place  when  neither  luminary  is  so  situated,,
it  becomes  hyleg.  I do  not  deny  the  possibility  of
this  doctrine*  though  it  has  never  yet  been  confirmed
by  my  own  experience  ; nor  should  I direct  to  it  as
hyleg,  because  I have  hitherto  found  that  its  chief
effects  were  upon  the  native’s  pecuniary  circum-
stances.


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY,


77


SECOND  BOOK.


CHAP.  I.

ZODIACAL  DIRECTIONS.

The  O,  D * ascendant,  and  mid-heaven,  only  can
be  directed  in  the  zodiac.  The  principle  on  which
these  directions  are  to  be  made  is  the  subtraction  of
the  oblique  ascension  of  the  moderator,  taken  under
its  own  pole,  from  the  oblique  ascension  of  the  place
of  the  aspect  taken  under  the. same  pole.

The  pole  of  the  O or  D is  a certain  elevation  they
have  from  the  meridian  towards  the  horizon ; hence,
if  they  be  exactly  on  the  meridian  they  have  no  pole,
and  the  arc  of  direction  must  be  found  by  right
ascension : hence  also  the  mid-heaven  itself,  having
no  pole,  must  be  directed  by  right  ascension  only.
If  the  O or  D be  exactly  on  the  horizon,  they  will
have  the  polar  elevation  of  the  horizon  itself ; which
is  always  the  latitude  of  the  country.  Hence  the
ascendant,  when  it  is  directed  in  the  zodiac,  must
always  be  directed  under  the  pole  or  latitude  of  the
place  of  birth.

Observe.— The  place  of  the  aspect  or  promittor
must  be  taken  without  latitude  in  all  directions  in
the  zodiac,  except  those  of  the  ])  ; for  when  D is


78


GRAMMAR  of  astrology.


i


directed  to  any  point,  the  latitude  she  will  have
when  she  arrives  at  that  point  must  first  be  ascer-
tained. If  the  D be  directed  to  the  conjunction  of
any  planet,  and  when  she  arrives  at  the  longitude  of
that  point  she  should  have  great  latitude  of  an  oppo-
site nature  to  the  planet,  so  that  there  shall  be  8 or
more  degrees  difference  of  latitude  between  them,
the  direction  will  have  little  or  no  effect.  If,  for
example,  $ have  5 degrees  north  latitude,  and  D
when  she  comes  to  £ of  $ have  5 degrees  of  south
latitude,  then  the  £ will  have  no  power.  If  it
should  be  to  an  8 , however,  then  the  exact  opposite
place  of  J would  have  5 degrees  of  contrary  lati-
tude, and  the  aspect  (if  D had  5°  south  and  ? 5°
north  latitude)  would  be  perfect.  Therefore  we
must  observe  that  if,  on  coming  to  an  § , the  I)  have
extensive  latitude  of  the  same  name  as  the  planet,  the
direction  is  weak.


TO  DIRECT  0 TO  ANY  ASPECT  IN  THE  ZODIAC,
EXCEPT  A PARALLEL.

First.  Find  the  O’s  polar  elevation  from  the  me-
ridian, termed  the  Sun’s  pole,  by  the  following
Rule  1.— -As  O’s  semi-arc  is  to  90  degrees,  so  is
O’s  meridian  distance  to  the  difference  between  its
circle  of  position  and  that  of  the  meridian.


CHAP.  II.


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.  79

Rule  2. — Find  the  difference  between  this  differ-
ence and  ©’s  meridian  distance,  which  is  the  O’s
ascensional  difference  in  his  pole.

Rule  3. — Find  the  logarithm  sine  of  this  ascen-
sional difference ; add  thereto  the  logarithm  co-tan-
gent of  O’s  declination:  the  sum  is  the  logarithm
tangent  of  the  O’s  pole.

Example. — In  Ada’s  nativity  (from  which  we  will
take  all  our  examples),  the  O’s  semi- arc  is  57°  55',
and  O’s  meridian  distance  is  16°  44'.

1st.  Then  add  the  arithmetical  comple-
ment of  the  proportional  logarithm

of  O’s  semi-arc  9.5075

To  the  proportional  logarithm  of  90° . . 3010

And  the  proportional  logarithm  of

O meridian  distance 1.0317

.8402


The  sum  is  the  proportional  logarithm  of
the  difference  of  its  circle  and  that  of


the  meridian 26°  O'

2d.  The  difference  of  the  circles  of  position

is 26°  O'

The  O’s  meridian  distance  , ....  16  44


The  difference  is  O’s  ascensional  differ-
ence in  his  pole


9 16


80


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


3d.  The  logarithm  sine  of  this  ascen-
sional difference  is 9.20691

Add  the  logarithm  co-tangent  of  G’s

declination  22°  54' 10.37426

The  sum  is  the  logarithm  tangent  of

the  pole  of  O = 20°  52' 9.58117

Second.  Ascertain  the  oblique  ascension  of  O
under  his  own  pole,  if  he  be  ascending,  or  his  oblique
descension , if  he  be  descending.  — N.B.  0 is  ascend-
ing from  midnight  till  noon,  and  descending  from
noon  till  midnight.

Rule  1. — Add  the  ascensional  difference  to  the
A.  R.  if  the  declination  be  south , but  subtract  it  from
the  A.  R.  if  the  declination  be  north;  the  result  is
the  oblique  ascension .

Rule  2. — For  the  oblique  descension  do  the  re-
verse : add  the  ascensional  difference  if  the  declina-
tion be  north , subtract  it  if  the  declination  be  south.

Example. — The  0’s  A.  R.  is 256  35

The  declination  is  south , subtract  the


ascensional  difference 9 16

It  gives  G’s  oblique  descension  under

his  pole 247  19


Third.  Find  the  declination  of  the  place  of  the
aspect,  and  look  in  the  tables*  for  the  logarithm  of  its

* These  tables  may  be  had  in  any  common  book  of  navigation,
&c.  with  instructions  for  their  use.


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


81


tangent ; to  which  add  the  logarithm  tangent  of  O’s
pole.  The  sum  will  be  the  logarithm  of  the  sine  of
the  aspect’s  ascensional  difference  under  that  pole.
With  this  ascensional  difference  find  its  oblique
ascension  or  descension,  as  you  did  that  of  O.

Lastly.  Subtract  that  of  O from  that  of  the  aspect,
and  the  remainder  will  be  the  arc  of  direction.

Example . — Direct  the  O to  □ of  ])  in  the  zodiac.
The  D is  in  T 5°  39' : when  O comes  to  5°  39',  he
will  form  a □ aspect  to  the  place  of  D at  birth.

The  declination  of  the  aspect  Vf  5°  39'

is  23°  21/?  its  logarithm  tangent.  . 9.63519

The  logarithm  tangent  of  the  O ’s  pole

20°  52' is . 9.58117

Their  sum  is  the  logarithm  sine  of  the
ascensional  difference  of  the  aspect
under  O’s  pole  9°  28'  . , . . ......  9.21636


Then  from  the  A.  R.  of  V f 5°  39',  which  is  276  9

Subtract  the  ascensional  difference  as  its

declination  is  south . 9 28

It  leaves  the  oblique  descension  of  the

aspect  under  O’s  pole 266  41

From  which  subtract  the  oblique  descen-
sion of  O under  O’s  pole 247  19


And  this  will  be  the  arc  of  direction

of  O □ D in  zodiac. 19  22


82


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


To  those  who  think  the  above  a tedious  operation,
wre  observe,  that  if  the  G’s  pole,  &c.  be  once  found,
in  all  other  of  the  directions  you  have  only  to  go
through  the  last  two  heads  of  the  rule.  But  here
follows

A Method  to  direct  0 in  the  Zodiac  without
recourse  to  Tables  of  Logarithms .

First.  If  the  birth  be  any  where  in  Great  Britain,
it  will  fall  within  the  latitudes  of  50°  and  58°  north.
Then  by  referring  to  the  table  of  poles  of  houses,  at
the  end  of  this  work,  you  will  find  the  poles  of  the  two
houses  between  which  0 may  be  situated.  Find  the
difference  between  these  poles,  also  the  distance  the
G is  situated  from  that  to  which  he  is  nearest.  Then,
to  find  the  G’s  pole,  say.

As  one-third  the  G’s  semi-arc  is  to  the  difference
of  pole  between  the  two  houses,  so  is  G’s  distance
from  the  nearest  house  to  a correction.

Apply  this  correction  to  the  pole  of  the  house  to
which  0 is  nearest,  subtracting  it  from  the  pole  of
the  house  if  0 be  not  past  the  cusp  of  the  house,
but  adding  it  if  0 be  past  the  house  ; and  the  result
will  be  the  pole  of  O very  nearly.

Example. — In  the  nativity  of  Ada  the  0 is  in  the
9th  house,  being  less  than  one-third  of  his  semi-arc
from  the  meridian ; he  is  moreover  very  near  the
cusp  of  the  9th.


GUAM  MAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.  88

Pole  of  the  9th  house  for  lat.  of  London  23  47
Pole  of  the  10th  house 0 0

Difference  of  pole  between  two  houses. . 23  47


As  the  one-third  of  O’s  semi-arc  19°  18'  is  to  the
difference  of  pole  between  the  two  houses  23°  47',  so
is  O’s  distance  from  9th  house  2°  34'  to  a correction
3o  10'.


Thus,,  as  19  18  are

© i

to  23  47,  so  are

0 /

2 34.

60

60

60

1158

1427

154

154

5708

, 7135
1427


1 1 58)2197 58(  189  or  nearb'  190  mi-

1 i nutes  of  a decree,

1105  which  are  3°  10'.


10395

9264


11318

10422


896


84


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY*


This  correction  must  be  subtracted  from  the  pole
of  the  9th;  as  the  ©,  not  being*  one-third  of  his  semi
arc  from  the  meridian,  is  not  past  the  9th  house.


Pole  of  the  9th  house  23  47

Correction  to  be  subtracted  ......  3 10

Pole  of  the  © very  nearly  .......  20  37


N.R  The  true  pole  of  the  © is  20°  52',  so  that
this  method  leaves  an  error  of  15  minutes  of  a de-
gree, which  might  throw  out  the  arc  of  direction  a
month;  and  the  error  in  the  pole  when  the  star
is  near  the  middle  of  a house  may  be  more  con-
siderable.

Second.  Having  the  ©’s  pole.,  find  his  oblique
descension  (since  he  is  descending ) under  this  pole,
by  subtracting  the  ascensional  difference  from  the
A.  R.

N.B.  The  ascensional  difference  for  the  declination
of  ©,  which  is  22°  54'  S.,  gives,  by  Wilson’s  tables,
p.  40  (after  making  proportion),  just  9°  9'.

Then  A.  R.  of  © 266  35

Subtract  ascensional  diff.  (dec.  being  8.)  9 9

Gives  O ’s  oblique  descension  in  his  own

pole  of  20o  37r 247  26

Third.  Let  the  aspect  be  the  □ of  D ; then  as  ])
is  in  °f  5°  39',  the  □ falls  in  VS  5°  39',  the  declination


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY..


85


of  which  is  23°  21'.  Now  find  the  oblique  descension
of  this  aspect:  first*  its  A.  R.  is  276°  9'*  and  its
ascensional  difference  (found  in  the  same  table  as  that
of  O after  making  proportion)  amounts  to  9°  20'.


Then  A.  R.  of  aspect  □ of  D is .276  9

Asc.  diff.  of  aspect  under  pole  of  Q . . 9 20

Oblique  desc.  of  aspect  under  O pole  266  49
Subtract  the  oblique  descension  of  0

under  his  pole 247  26

And  it  leaves  the  arc  of  direction  of  0

□ D zodiac 19  23


N.B.  This  is  sufficiently  correct*  as  it  comes
within  one  minute  of  the  arc  when  worked  by  loga-
rithms* which  is  19°  22'*  as  may  be  seen  at  page  8L

CHAP.  III.

TO  DIRECT  0 TO  A PARALLEL  IN  THE  ZODIAC.

Ride  1.— -Look  in  the  table  of  declination  for  the
declination  to  which  you  desire  to  direct  the  0*  which
you  will  find  in  the  column  marked  0 at  the  top ;
then  note  what  longitude  it  answers  to  in  the  first
column*  and  find  the  A.  R.  answering  to  this  lon-
gitude.

Rule  2. —Find  the  logarithm  tangent  of  the  re-
quired declination  ; add  to  it  the  logarithm  tangent


86  GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.

of  the  pole  of  0 ; the  sum  is  the  logarithm  sine  of
the  ascensional  difference  of  the  aspect  under  that  pole.
Rule  3.— Find  the  oblique  ascension  or  descension,
according  as  the  © is  ascending  or  descending  ; and
from  it  take  the  oblique  ascension  or  descension  of
the  O : the  remainder  is  the  arc  of  direction.

Example.— Required  to  direct  the  Sun  to  the  pa-
rallel declination  of  Herschel,  in  Ada’s  nativity.

The  declination  of  $ is  21°  35'  south,  which  is
the  declination  0 will  have  when  he  reaches  Vf  22°


30',  the  A.  R.  of  which  is  294°  19'.

To  the  logarithm  tangent  of  the  declina-
tion 21 0 357  9.59725

Add  the  logarithm  tangent  of  the  pole  of

0,200  52'... 9.58117

The  sum  is  the  logarithm  sine  of  the  as-
censional difference  of  the  aspect  under
the  pole  of  0,  8°  40'. .......... ..  9.17842


Then  from  the  A.  R.  of  the  aspect 294  19

Take  the  ascen.  difference  as  above  found  8 40

It  gives  the  oblique  descension  of  the

aspect  under  the  pole  of  0 285  39

From  this  subtract  the  oblique  descen-
sion of  0 under  his  pole 247  19

And  there  remains  the  arc  of  direction  of

0 to  a zodiacal  parallel  of  § 38  20


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


87


To  work  the  above  without  Logarithms.

The  pole  of  ©,  as  already  found  by  the  Rule  of
Three,  is  20°  37' ; then  under  this  elevation  of  the
pole,  and  opposite  the  declination  of  y 21°  35',  will
be  found  the  ascensional  difference,  after  making-
proportion,  8°  33'.

From  the  A.  R.  of  the  aspect 294  19

Take  its  ascensional  difference  in  O ’s  pole  8 33

It  leaves  the  oblique  desc.  in  that  pole  . . . 285  46

From  which  take  0’s  oblique  descension

as  found  by  the  tables 247  26


It  leaves  the  arc  of  direction  of  © paral-
lel $ zodiac 38  20


N.B.  The  tables  here  used  are  those  under  the
title  of  “ Tables  to  be  used  in  Calculating  Nativities
compiled  by  the  Author,  and  published  by  Messrs.
Sherwood  and  Co.


88


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY,


CHAP.  IV.

TO  DIRECT  THE  MOON  IN  THE  ZODIAC  TO  ANY
ASPECT,  EXCEPT  A PARALLEL.

First. — As  in  case  of  O*  find  the  D ’s  pole  and
her  oblique  ascension  or  descension  under  her  pole.

1st.  To  find  the  pole  of  ])  > add  the  proportional
logarithm  of  ’s  semi-arc  (taking  its  arithmetical
comp.)  to  the  proportional  logarithm  of  90  degrees^
which  is  30 10,,  and  the  proportional  logarithm  of
D ?s  meridian  distance ; the  sum  is  the  proportional
logarithm  of  the  difference  of  the  circles  of  position.

2d.  Find  the  difference  between  the  meridian  dis-
tance of  D and  the  difference  of  the  circles  of  posi-
tion, and  that  will  be  the  ascensional  difference  of
D under  her  pole.

3d.  Take  the  logarithm  sine  of  the  ascensional  dif-
ference; add  to  it  the  logarithm  co-tangent  of  the
])  ’s  declination  : the  sum  is  the  logarithm  tangent
of  ]) ’s  pole.

Example. — Find  D ’s  pole  in  Ada’s  nativity.

Proportional  logarithm  of  ]) ’s  semi-arc  93°  91  (its

arithmetical  complement) a 9.7139

Proportional  logarithm  of  90  degrees  3010

Prop.  log.  of  ])  ’s  merid.  dist.  86°  41 3204*

Prop.  log.  of  the  difference  — — —

in  circle  of  position 83  10 3353

})  ’s  asc.  diff.  in  her  pole 2 54  log.  sine  of  this  8.70409

Add  log.  co-tangent  ])  dec.  2°30/  ..  11.35991

Sum  is  log.  tangent  of  ]) 's  pole  49°  12'  ........  10.06400


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


89


Second. — 1.  To  find  the  oblique  ascension  of  D
in  her  pole,  add  the  ascensional  difference  if  the  decli-
nation be  south ; subtract  the  ascensional  difference,
if  the  declination  be  northt  to  or  from  the  A.  R.

2.  To  find  the  oblique  descension,  do  the  reverse.

Example . — -A.  R.  of  D 7 15

Declination  south , plus  ascens.  diff.  . . 2 54

Sum  is  oblique  ascen.  of  D in  her  pole  10  9


Third.-- Find  the  oblique  ascension  or  descension
of  the  aspect  under  the  pole  of  ])  ; and  subtract  the
D ’s  oblique  ascension  or  descension  from  it : the
remainder  is  the  arc  of  direction.

N.B.  The  latitude  of  the  D in  the  aspect  must  be
first  noted  to  find  her  true  A.  R.  and  declination
therein.

Example. — Direct  J to  a £ of  $ in  Ada’s  nati-
vity.

Mars  is  in  20°  26'  of  <YS  at  which,  when  the  D
arrives,  she  will  have  4°  45'  south  latitude,  and
3°  34'  north  declination  ; then  add  to  the  loga-
rithm tangent  of  this  declination  ....  8.79470

The  logarithm  tangent  of  the  pole  of  D 10.06400

%

The  sum  is  the  log.  sine  of  the  ascensional

difference  of  the  aspect  in  D ’s  pole  . . 8.85870

Which  is  4°  9'  ■


90  GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.

The  A.  R.  of  20°  26'  with  4°  45 > south  0 ,

latitude  is 20  40

From  which  take  the  ascensional  dif-
ference, the  declination  being  north . . 4 9


The  sum  is  the  oblique  ascension  of  the

aspect  in  pole  of  D . 16  31


Lastly. — Take  from  the  aspect’s  oblique

ascension  in  the  pole  of])  16  31

The  oblique  ascension  of  D in  her  pole,  10  9


The  remainder  is  the  arc  of  direction  of

})  6 $ zodiac  6 22


To  direct  the  > to  Aspects  in  the  Zodiac  (the
Parallel  excepted)  by  common  Arithmetic.

To  find  the  pole  of  D , say.  As  the  one-third  of
the  semi-arc  of  })  is  to  the  difference  of  the  poles  of
the  two  houses  between  which  she  is  situated,  so  is
j)  ’s  distance  from  the  nearest  house  to  the  correction ;
then  apply  this  correction  by  adding  it  to  or  sub-
tracting it  from  the  pole  of  the  house,  according  as
is  past  the  cusp  or  not.

Example . — In  Ada’s  nativity,  as  one-third  of  }) ’s
semi-arc  31°  3'  is  to  the  difference  of  pole  between
the  2d  and  1st  houses,  10°  40',  so  is  ’s  distance


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.  91

from  1st  house  (to  which  she  is  nearest)  7°  5'  to  the
correction  2°  26'.

0 1 0 1 0 I

Thus,  31  3 : 10  40  : : 7 5
60  60  60


1863  640  425

640

17000

2550

1863)272000(146  min.  or  2°  26'.
1863

8570

7452

11180

11178

2


Pole  of  the  ascendant  to  which  D is  nearest  51  31


Subtract  the  correction. ...  2 26

The  D ’s  pole,  very  nearly  49  5


N.B.  This  comes  within  7 minutes,  as  ) ’s  true
pole  is  49°  12'.

Then,  to  find  the  ]) ’s  ascensional  difference  under
this  pole,  look  for  it  under  that  polar  elevation  and
the  Moon’s  declination,  2°  30'.


92


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


The  tables  give  (after  making  proportion)  2°  53
true  to  within  one  minute.

To  the  > ’s  A.  R 7 15

Add  the  ascensional  difference 2 53

And  you  have  D ’s  oblique  asc.  in  her  pole  10  8


Next  find  the  A.  R.  of  the  aspect  (suppose  6 $)
20°  26'  <*r , in  which  ])  will  have  4°  45'  south  lati-
tude,, it  is  20°  40',  and  the  declination  is  3°  34'  north.

The  ascensional  difference  of  this  declination  by
tables  under  the  pole  of  49°  5'  is  4°  7',  which  take
from  the  A.  R.  20°  40',  as  the  declination  is  north,
and  it  leaves  the  oblique  ascension  of  the  aspect
under  3) ’s  pole  16°  33'.

Lastly,  from  the  aspect’s  oblique  ascension  0
under  ])’s  pole 16  33

Take  the  ]) ’s  obi.  asc.  under  her  pole  . ...  10  8

It  leaves  the  arc  of  direction  of  D 6 $ zod.  6 25

N.B.  This  differs  3 minutes  from  that  worked  by
logarithms,  and  will  throw  out  the  time  of  the  event
about  a fortnight ; but  the  student  may  think  himself
very  correct  if  he  can  come  within  a month  in  his
prediction  by  the  primary  directions.  The  secondary
directions  and  progresses,  transits,  lunations,  &c.
will  often  enable  him  to  come  within  a week  of  the
time  of  the  event.


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


93


CHAP.  Y.

TO  DIRECT  THE  MOON  TO  PARALLELS  OF
DECLINATION.

Rule  1. — Look  in  the  Ephemeris  for  the  days  suc-
ceeding the  birth,  and  see  at  what  time  the  D falls
on  the  declination  you  require ; then  calculate  by
proportion  the  latitude  and  longitude  she  will  have
at  that  time.

Ride  2. — Find  the  A.  R.  for  that  latitude  and  lon-
gitude, and  take  from  or  add  to  it  the  ascensional
difference  given  by  the  required  declination  under  the
D ’s  pole  : the  result  will  be  the  oblique  ascension  or
oblique  descension  of  the  aspect.  The  D ’s  oblique
ascension  or  descension  taken  from  it  will  leave  the

ARC  OF  DIRECTION.

N.B.  Find  D ’s  pole  as  taught  in  chap.  iv.

Example — 1 desire  to  bring  D to  a parallel  of
$ ’s  declination  in  Ada’s  nativity.

I find  that  D ’s  declination  on  the  12th  December
is  7Q  22',  and  on  the  13th  it  is  12°  16';  then.  If  the
difference  4°  54'  is  equal  to  24  hours,  what  will  the
difference  between  the  declination  at  noon  on  the
12th,  7°  22',  and  the  declination  of  <£  8°  23',  which
is  1°  1',  amount  to?  Answer  : 4 hours  59  minutes ;
at  which  time,  on  the  12th,  I find  the  X>  is  in  longi-
tude 2 J 36'  # , with  4°  10'  south  latitude.


94  GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.

The  A.R.  answering  to  this  latitude  and  longitude
is  31°  58  .

Then  to  the  logarithm  tangent  of  the

declination  $ 8°  23' 9.16841

Add  the  logarithm  tangent  of  the  D ’s
pole  49°  12' 10.06400

It  giyes  the  logarithm  sine  of  the

aspect’s  ascensional  difference  9°50/=9.23241


Now,  from  the  A.  R.  of  the  aspect 31  58

Take  the  ascensional  difference  under

])  ’s  pole 9 50


It  leaves  the  oblique  ascension  under

X> ’s  pole  22  8

From  which  subtract  the  D 's  oblique

ascension  in  her  pole 10  9


The  remainder  is  the  arc  of  direc-
tion of  3)  to  the  zodiacal  parallel
of  $ 11  59


N.B.  There  are  no  directions  more  powerful  than
the  parallels  in  the  zodiac ; they  merit  the  greatest
attention.  It  is  observed  that  their  effects  are  felt  a
few  weeks  before  the  arc  of  direction  is  complete.

***  To  work  this  direction  by  common  arithmetic,
see  the  rules  in  Chap . iv.


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


95


CHAP.  VI.

TO  DIRECT  THE  ASCENDANT  TO  ASPECTS  IN
THE  ZODIAC.

Rule  1. — Add  90°  to  the  A.  R.  of  the  mid-heaven
at  birth,  and  it  gives  the  oblique  ascension  of  the
ascendant  under  the  pole  (or  latitude)  of  birth.

Rule  2. — Look  in  the  Table  of  Declinations  for
the  declination  of  the  aspect,  which  is  found  in  the
column  marked  0 at  the  top,  opposite  its  longitude.

Rule  3. — Find  the  A.  R.  of  that  longitude  without
latitude.

Rule  4. — To  the  logarithm  tangent  of  the  pole  of
the  1st  add  the  logarithm  tangent  of  the  delination
of  the  aspect:  the  sum  will  be  the  logarithm  sine  of
its  ascensional  difference.

Rule  5. — Take  this  ascensional  difference  from  the
A.  R.  if  the  declination  be  north , or  add  it  thereto  if
the  declination  be  south:  the  result  is  the  oblique
ascension  of  the  aspect  under  the  pole  of  the  country.

Lastly.— 'Subtract  the  oblique  ascension  of  the
ascendant  from  the  oblique  ascension  of  the  aspect,
and  the  remainder  is  the  arc  of  direction.

Example. — Direct  the  ascendant  to  □ I?  in  the
zodiac.

1.  The  A.  R.  of  the  mkLheaven  is  273°  197,  to
which  add  90°,  and  we  have  363°  19' : as  it  is  be-


96  GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.

yond  360°,  deduct  the  circle  from  it,  and  we  have
3°  19'  for  the  oblique  ascension  of  the  ascendant
under  its  pole.

2.  The  □ of  T?  falls  in  8°  36'  of  g > the  declina-
tion of  which  is  14°  23'.

3.  The  A.R.  of  8°  36'  of  g is  36°  12'.


4.  To  the  logarithm  tangent  of  the  pole

of  the  1st  house,  51°  3T 10.09965

Add  the  logarithm  tangent  of  the  de-
clination of  8a  36'  g 14°  23'  ....  9.40900

It  gives  the  logarithm  sine  of  its  ascen-
sional difference  18°  49'  9.50865


5.  From  the  A.R.  of  the  aspect 36  12

Take  the  ascensional  difference,  the

declination  being  north 18  49

It  gives  the  oblique  asc.  of  the  aspect  17  23

Lastly.  From  this  take  the  oblique  as-
cension of  the  ascendant  ........  3 19


The  remainder  is  the  arc  of  the  as-
cendant □ T?  zodiac  14  4


To  work  this  Direction  without  Logarithms .

The  1st,  2d,  and  3d  heads  of  the  rule  are  the  same
as  in  last  example.


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.  97

4th.  Look  in  the  Tables  of  Elevation  of  the  Pole
for  the  declination  14°  23',  under  the  pole  of  51°  31':
it  gives  the  ascensional  difference,  after  making  pro-
portion, just  the  same  as  by  the  logarithms,  18°  49'.
Having  found  this,  proceed  to  the  end  as  above.

N.B.  For  the  benefit  of  the  young  student,  we  will
here  give  the  calculation  from  the  Tables  to  shew
how  it  is  to  be  made.

The  ascensional  difference  opposite  14°  of  decli
nation,  and  under  51°  Elevation  of  the  pole,  is  17°
56' ; under  the  same  pole  and  opposite  15°  of  declina-
tion is  19°  19';  the  difference  for  one  degree  is  there-
fore 1°  23'  of  ascensional  difference.  Then  say.  If  (one
degree)  60'  give  (1°  23')  83',  what  will  23',  the
amount  of  declination  beyond  14°,  give?  Answer:
31  minutes  49  seconds. — Next  find  the  difference  of
ascensional  difference  between  the  pole  of  51°  and
52°;  opposite  14°  of  declination  51°  gives  17°  56',
and  52°  gives  18°  37' ; the  difference  is  4F.  Then
say  again.  If  60'  give  41 ',  what  will  31'  give?  An-
swer: 21  minutes  11  seconds.  Now  add  this  cor-
rection for  the  3T  of  polar  elevation  above  the  even
51°  to  that  for  the  23  minutes  of  declination  above
the  even  14°;  thus:  3F  of  pole  give  -f-  2F  11"
23'  of  dec.  give  -f  31  49

Total + 53  0


This  is  to  be  added  to  the  ascensional  difference


H


98  GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY,
for  the  even  14°  of  declination  and  51°  of  Q


polar  elevation,  which  is 17  56

Add  the  total  correction  0 53


It  gives  the  exact  ascensional  dif-
ference of  the  aspect  with  declina-
tion 14°  23'  under  the  pole  51°  31' . 18  49

A little  practice  will  enable  the  student  to  make
these  corrections  by  a mental  calculation,  by  merely
taking  the  aliquot  parts  of  the  degree.


CHAP,  VII.

TO  DIRECT  THE  MID-HEAVEN  TO  ASPECTS  IN
THE  ZODIAC.

Rule. — Take  the  difference  between  the  A.  R.  of
the  M.  C.  and  the  A.  R.  of  the  aspect  for  the  arc  of
direction.

Example. — Find  the  arc  of  the  M.  C.  □ of  $ in
the  zodiac.

The  □ of  $ falls  in  pf  20°  2 6';  its  A,  R.  is  292  7

Subtract  the  A.  R.  of  M.  C.  273  19


The  remainder  is  the  arc  of  direction  . 18  48


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


99


CHAP.  VIII.

OF  MUNDANE  DIRECTIONS  TO  THE  ANGLES  ;

THAT  IS,  TO  THE  ASCENDANT  OR  M.  C.

These  are  merely  the  divisions  of  the  semi-arcs  of
the  planets : thus,  J is  a semi-quartile ; | a ^ ; the
whole  of  the  semi-arc  a □ ; one  semi- arc  and  ^ of
another  a A ; one  semi-arc  and  a half,  a sesquiqua-
drate,  & c.  A semi-arc  always  bearing  the  same
proportion  to  the  12  houses  as  90  degrees  do  to  the
circle  or  12  signs  of  the  zodiac,  it  follows  that  § of
it  form  a # aspect,  as  § of  90°  are  60°,  a * in  the
zodiac,  &c.  &c.

To  find  the  Arc  of  Direction  to  a Semi-qncir-
tile  of  the  M.  C.

Rule. — The  difference  between  half  the  semi-arc
and  the  meridian  distance  of  the  planet  is  the  arc  of
direction  ; because,  when  the  planet  is  exactly  half
its  semi-arc  off  the  M.C.,  it  is  in  semi-quartile  aspect
to  that  angle.

Example. — I?  semi-arc  is  64°  24" ; half  is  32°  12',
which  taken  from  J?  ’s  meridian  distance  37°  58',
gives  the  arc  of  M C.  to  the  semi-quartile  of  £
5o  46\


100  GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


To  find  the  Arc  of  Direction  to  a * of  M.  C\

Rule. — The  difference  between  the  planet’s  meri-
dian distance  and  § of  its  semi-arc  is  the  arc  of  direc-
tion.

Example. — From  O 5s  meridian  distance  16°  44;
to  § of  its  semi-arc  38°  37',  the  difference  is  21°  537 ;
the  arc  of  direction  of  M.  C.  >{<0.

To  find  the  Arc  of  Direction  to  a □ of  M.  C.

Rule. — The  difference  between  the  planet’s  meri-
dian distance  and  its  semi-arc  is  the  arc  of  direc-

ti0n'  0 ,
Example.— The  semi-arc  of  If  is. .... . 75  34

The  meridian  distance  of  If  is. .... . 62  52

The  diff.  is  the  arc  of  M.  C.  □ if  . . 12  42


To  find  the  Arc  of  Direction  to  a a of  M , C.

Rule.— If  the  planet  be  above  the  Earth,  add  one-
third  of  its  semi-arc  (nocturnal)  to  the  arc  for  its  □
of  M.  Ca  If  under  the  Earth,  the  difference  between
its  meridian  distance  and  § of  its  semi-arc  is  the  arc
of  direction.

Example. — If  being  above  the  Earth,  to

the  arc  of  M.  C.  □ if  . 12  42

Add  J of  the  semi-arc  of  Of  (nocturnal)  34  49


The  sum  is  the  arc  of  M.  C.  a If  . . 47  31


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.  101


INFERIOR  ASPECTS.

To  find  the  Arc  of  the  Quintile  to  the  M.  C.

Rule. — If  the  quintile  be  in  the  7th  house,  take  ^
of  the  semi-arc  from  the  arc  for  the  □ . If  it  be  in
the  12th  house,  subtract  from  £ of  the  semi-arc  the


distance  the  planet  is  from  the  ascendant.

0 1

Example  1. — The  O’s  semi-arc  is  . . . . 57  55

O meridian  distance. 16  44

Arc  of  M.  C.  □ 0 ......  . 41  11

Subtract  ^ of  © semi-arc 11  35

Arc  of  M.  C.  quintile  O 29  36

Example  2. — Semi-arc  of  the  (diurnal)

is  86°  5 V,  of  which  £ is 17  22


Then  17°  22'  is  the  distance  the  D must
be  from  the  ascendant  to  form  the
quintile  with  the  M.  C. ; and  as  ])
is  not  yet  risen,  her  distance  from
the  ascendant  7°  5'  must  be  added
to  it 7 5

Arc  of  M.  C.  quintile  of  the  D .....


24  27


102


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


To  find  the  Arc  of  the  Sesquiquadrate  to
the  M.  C.

Rule . — If  in  the  2d,  subtract  ^ of  the  semi-arc
from  the  arc  for  the  A ; if  in  the  5th,  add  ^ of  the
semi-arc  to  the  arc  for  the  a .

Another  Rule. — Take  half  the  planet’s  semi-arc,
and  find  the  difference  between  it  and  the  planet’s
meridian  distance,  which  will  be  the  arc  to  the  semi-
quartile  of  the  4th  house,  or  sesquiquadrate  of  the
M.  C.

Example. — | of  the  semi-nocturnal  arc  of  % is
17°  24',  which,  added  to  the  arc  for  his  A to  M.  C.
47°  31',  amounts  to  64°  55',  the  M.  C.  to  the  sesqui-
quadrate of  %.

To  find  the  Arc  of  the  Biquintile  to  the  M.  C.

Ride. — To  the  arc  for  the  sesquiquadrate  add  ^ of
the  semi-arc  if  the  aspect  fall  in  the  5th  house,  and
subtract  ^ of  the  semi- arc  if  it  fall  in  the  2d  house.

N.B.  This  direction  is  of  no  consequence  with  the
evil  planets ; it  is  but  weak  with  the  benefics.

To  find  the  Arc  to  the  6 or  $ of  M.  C,

Rule . — If  the  planet  be  ascending , its  meridian
distance  is  the  arc  to  the  6 M.  C.;  and  if  it  be
descending , its  meridian  distance  is  its  arc  to  the  g
of  M.  C.  This  needs  no  example.


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


103


TO  DIRECT  THE  ASCENDANT  IN  MUNDO.

To  find  the  6 or  the  8 of  any  Star  with  the
Ascendant .

Rule.— If  the  planet  be  between  the  4th  house  and
the  ascendant,  the  difference  between  its  semi-arc
and  meridian  distance  is  the  arc  to  the  <5  . If  it  be
between  the  10th  house  and  7th  house,  the  difference
between  its  semi- arc  and  meridian  distance  is  the
arc  to  the  8 •

Example . — Mars  is  between  the  4th  and  0 ,


ascendant,  its  semi-arc  is 79  19

The  meridian  distance  of  $ 74  37

The  difference  is  the  arc  of  direction

of  the  ascendant  <$  $ .........  . 4 42


To  find  the  * or  a of  any  Planet  to  the
Ascendant.

Rule . — If  above  theJSarth,  take  \ of  its  semi-arc
from  its  meridian  distance.  If  below  the  Earth,  and
east  of  the  4th,  tske  its  meridian  distance  from  ^ of
its  semi-arc  ; but  if  west  of  the  4th,  add  its  meridian
distance  to  ^ of  its  semi-arc,  for  the  .

If  above  the  Earth,  and  east  of  the  10th,  add  its
meridian  distance  to  ^ of  its  semi  arc ; but  if  west
of  the  10th,  take  its  meridian  distance  from  J of  its


104


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


semi-arc.  If  under  the  Earth,  take  1 of  its  semi -are
from  the  meridian  distance  for  the  A .

The  quintile  to  the  ascendant  is  of  the  planet’s
semi-arc  from  the  meridian,  either  above  or  below
the  Earth.

The  sesquiquadrate  is  the  semi- quar tile  from  the
M.  C.  if  it  fall  in  the  8th  house ; if  it  fall  in  the  5th,
it  is  the  sesquiquadrate  from  the  M.  C.  or  semi-quar-
tile  from  the  4th  house.

The  semi-quartile  is  the  semi-quartile  from  the
M.  C.  if  it  fall  in  the  lltli ; if  it  fall  in  the  2d,  it  is
the  sesquiquadrate  from  the  M.  C.

The  biquintile  is  of  the  planet’s  semi-arc  beyond
the  middle  of  the  8th  or  semi-quartile  from  the  M.  C.
If  it  fall  in  the  5th,  it  is  of  the  planet’s  semi-arc
to  be  taken  from  the  arc  to  the  sesquiquadrate  of  the
M.  C.

N.B.  The  shortest  way  is  to  find  one  direction  to
the  ascendant  or  M.  C.,  and  then  add  or  subtract  the
portion  of  the  planet’s  semi-arc  to  find  the  others.

Example . — O’s  semi-arc  to  a of  ascendant  is
2°  34*;  add  J of  the  semi-arc  of  O 19°  18',  and  it
gives  21°  52%  for  M.  C.  * 0,  which  is  O’s  distance
from  the  8th  ; add  J again,  and  it  gives  41°  IF,  the
arc  for  M.  C.  □ 0 or  ascendant  § 0.  Take  from
41°  11'  the  £ of  O’s  semi-arc,  it  gives  29°  36'  M.  C.
quintile  0.  Take  \ O’s  semi-arc  from  41°  IT,  and
it  gives  12°  14',  the  M.  C.  semi-quartile  0,  which  is,
of  course,  ascendant  sesquiquadrate  0.


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


105


CHAP.  IX.

TO  DIRECT  O OR  D TO  ANY  ASPECT  IN  THE

WORLD  (EXCEPT  PARALLELS)  BY  CONVERSE

MOTION.

When  O or  ])  above  tbe  Earth  are  moved  onwards
to  form  the  aspect,  from  the  east  towards  the  west,  or
below  the  Earth  from  the  west  towards  the  east,  it  is
termed  a converse  direction.

Rule  I. — As  the  semi-arc  of  the  planet  to  whose
aspect  O or  D is  directed  is  to  that  planet’s  distance
within  or  without  a certain  house,  so  is  the  semi-arc
of  O or  D to  the  second  distance  from  the  house
which  forms  the  required  aspect  with  that  from  which
the  planet’s  distance  is  taken.

Rule  2. — Find  the  apparent  or  primary  distance
from  the  said  house,  and  take  the  sum  or  difference
of  the  two  distances  according  as  the  O or  D falls
short  of  or  passes  the  cusp  of  the  house,  for  the  arc
of  direction.  If  the  aspect  is  formed  before  the
© or  D passes  the  house,  the  difference , but  if  they
pass  the  house  to  form  the  aspect,  the  sum  must  be
taken.

Example  1. — Required  the  arc  of  © □ I?  con-
verse?


106  GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.

As  the  semi-arc  of  T?  64°  24 \ propor-
tional logarithm  (arith.  comp.)  9.5536

Is  to  T?  ’s  distance  from  the  12th  (outside)

4°  58'  proportional  logarithm 1.5592

So  is  the  semi-arc  of  O 57°  55'  prop.  log.  4925
To  the  O’s  second  distance  from

the  9th  outside  4°  28'  1.6053

As  the  O has  to  pass  the  9th  to
form  the  □ , add  the  distance  of
the  O from  the  9th,  which  is
the  arc  of  ascendant  A O . . . . 2 34

The  sum  is  O □ T?  converse ....  7 2

To  those  who  have  not  tables  of  proportional  loga-
rithms,, it  will  be  useful  if  we  work  this  example  by
the  Rule  of  Th  ree .

As  64°  24' is  to  4°  58',  so  is  57°  55' to  the  Ans.  4°  28/.
60  60  60

3864  ”298  3475

298
27800
31275
6950

3864)1035550(268

7728  60,  gives  40.28/,

ttr'Mr  the  same  as  b>r  the

262/5  logarithms.

23184

30910

30712


198


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.  107

Example  2. — Required  the  arc  of  direction  of  D
to  the  □ of  O by  converse  motion  ?

As  the  semi-arc  of  O 57°  55'  proportional

logarithm  (arith.  comp.)  9.5075

To  Q’s  distance  inside  the  9th  = 2°  34',

proportional  logarithm  1.8459

So  is  the  semi-arc  of  the  D (diurnal)  86°  51',

proportional  logarithm  3165

To  the  second  distance  of  ])  inside  the  I2tlr,

3°  51' 1.6699


To  find  the  j)’s  primary  or  actual  distance
from  the  12th,  add  b her  semi-arc  diurnal

to  her  distance  from  the  1st  house 7 5

180°  less  ]>  semi-arc  nocturnal  93°  9'  zz
86°  51', of  which  i.. — 28  57

Moon’s  primary  distance  from  the  12th  zz  36  2

Take  away  her  second  dist.  to  the  12th  zz  3 51

Leaves  the  arc  of  1)  □ O converse 32  11


N.B.  That  semi-arc,  whether  diurnal  or  nocturnal,
must  be  taken  where  the  planet  is  when  the  aspect  is
completed . The  D at  Ada’s  birth  was  under  the
Earth,  but  when  she  formed  the  □ with  the  place
of  © at  birth,  she  was  near  the  12th  house ; of  course
her  diurnal  semi-arc  must  be  taken.


1


108  GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.

To  work  the  proportional  logarithm s,  the  rule  is
to  add  the  logarithms  of  the  2d  and  3d  numbers  toge-
ther, and  take  from  their  sum  the  logarithm  of  the
1st  number,  which  will  leave  the  logarithm  of  the  4th
number.  But  a shorter  method  is  to  take  the  arith-
metical complement  of  the  logarithm  of  the  first  num-
ber, instead  of  the  logarithm  itself ; and  then  add  all
three  logarithms  together,  and  the  result  will  be  the
same.  The  arithmetical  complement  of  a logarithm
is  what  it  wants  of  10.0000.  The  common  way  to
find  it  is  to  take  each  figure  from  9,  beginning  at  the
left  hand,  except  the  right  hand  figure,  which  must
be  taken  from  10.

Example.— What  is  the  arithmetical  complement
of  the  proportional  logarithm  of  J?  ’s  semi-arc  64°
24'  ?

Its  proportional  logarithm  is  4464.  As  there  is
no  index,  the  arithmetical  complement  will  have  9.  in
the  index ; then  4 from  9 are  5 ; and  4 from  9 are  5 ;
and  6 from  9 are  3 ; and  4 from  10  are  6 ; which
will  stand  thus,  9.5536.  If  the  index  amounts  to  10
or  more,  reject  1 0 in  the  index  ; for  instance,  in  the
second  example  of  D □ O converse,  the  logarithm  of
the  D’s  distance  inside  the  12th  is  11.6699,  which
we  call  1.6699,  by  rejecting  10  in  the  index.


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


109


CHAP.  X.

TO  DIRECT  THE  SUN  OR  MOON  TO  ANY  ASPECT
IN  MUNDO  (EXCEPT  THE  PARALLELS)  BY
DIRECT  MOTION.

When  the  O or  D are  supposed  to  remain  fixed  in
the  place  they  were  at  birth,,  and  the  planets  I?,

, $ , ? , or  , are  moved  on  to  form  the  aspect,
according  to  the  regular  motion  of  the  heavens,  the
direction  is  called  Direct  Direction.

Rule  1.— As  the  semi-arc  of  the  O or  D is  to  its
distance  from  a certain  house,  so  is  the  semi-arc  of  the
planet  directed  to  the  second  distance  of  that  planet.

Ride  2. — Add  or  subtract  it  from  the  planet’s  ap-
parent (or  primary)  distance,  according  as  it  passes
or  falls  short  of  the  cusp ; the  result  is  the  arc  of

DIRECTION.

Example  1. —Direct  the  O to  6 T?  by  direct
direction.

As  the  Q’s  semi-arc  57°  55',  proportional

logarithm  4925  (arith.  comp.)  9.5075

Is  to  the  0’s  meridian  distance  16°  44',

proportional  logarithm 1.0317

So  is  the  semi-arc  of  T?  64°  24'  prop.  log.  .4464
To  the  second  distance  of  I?  , past  the

M.  C.. 18°  36' ~ .9856

As  T?  passes  the  cusp  of  the  10th,
add  his  apparent  distance,
which  is  his  meridian  distance  37  58


The  sum  is  the  arc  of  O 6 h D.D.  56  34


110  GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.

N.B.  Having  worked  one  direction,  others  may
generally  be  had  from  it  by  the  proportional  part  of
the  semi-arc  of  the  planet  directed : — 0 ,

Thus,  from  the  arc  of  the  O 6 T?  D.  D.  . . . 56  34
Take  of  T?  ’s  semi-arc  (64°  24')  ......  32  12

It  leaves  the  arc  of  © semiquartile  of  7?  D.D.  24  22
From  this  semiquartile  take  l of  T?  ’s

semi-arc 10  44

It  leaves  the  arc  of  0 * 7?  D.  D 13  38


Example  2. — Find  the  arc  of  i>  □ ]?  D.D.

1.  As  the  semi-arc  of  p,  93°  9'  propor-
tional logarithm  (arith.  comp.)  ....  9.7139
To  dist.  of  D from  the  1st  house,  7°  5'  1.4050
So  is  the  semi-arc  of  7? , 64°  24' ,4464

To  the  second  distance  of  7?  to  the  10th,

4°  54' 1.5653


2.  The  apparent  distance  of  7?  is  his  me-  0 ;

ridian  distance 37  58

From  which  take  his  second  distance  . . 4 54

Leaves  the  arc  of  ])  □ b D.  D 33  4

Taking  l of  J?  *s  arc  from  this 21  28

Leaves  the  arc  of  D * 7?  D.  D 11  36

Taking  ^ of  7?  ’s  arc  from  this. . . . , . . «,  10  44

It  leaves  the  arc  of  D semiq.  7? , D.  D.  0 52


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.  Ill


N.B.  As  this  latter  arc  is  within  one  degree,  it
came  into  operation  in  the  first  year  of  life  ; and  will
act  all  through  life  to  the  injury  of  the  native,  it  be-
ing a radical  position,  by  which  T?  vitiates  the  D .
Its  effects  are  mitigated  by  the  * of  T?  to  D in
zodiac.


CHAP.  XL

TO  DIRECT  THE  SUN  OR  MOON  TO  MUNDANE
PARALLELS  CONVERSE.

These  have  been  already  described  in  Chap.  XIII,
Book  l (which  see).

Rule  1.—  As  the  semi-arc  of  the  planet  to  whose
parallel  q or  D is  directed  is  to  its  meridian  dis-
tance, so  is  O or  D ’s  semi-arc  to  the  second  distance
of  0 or  D from  the  meridian.

Rule  2. — The  difference  between  0 or  D’s  meri-
dian distance  and  second  distance  is  the  arc  of
direction  ; or  if  it  pass  the  meridian  to  form  the
parallel,  the  sum  must  be  taken.

Example  1. —Required  the  arc  of  0 to  parallel  J?
converse.


112  GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.

As  the  semi-arc  of  J?  64°  24 proportional

logarithm  (arithmetical  complement)  . . 9.5536
To  the  meridian  distance  of  T?  37°  58'. ...  6759

So  is  the  semi-arc  of  O 57°  55' 4925

To  the  second  distance  of  0. . . . 34°  9'  .7220


The  O’s  meridian  distance.  ...  16  44

Leaves  the  arc  of  O par.  T?  conv.  17  25


Example  2. — Required  the  arc  of  D parallel  $
converse.

As  the  semi-arc  of  $ 79°  19',  proportional

logarithm  (arith.  comp.)  , 9.6441

To  the  meridian  distance  of  $ 74°  37'  3824

So  is  the  semi-arc  (diurnal)  of  j) , 86°  51'  3165

To  the  second  distance  of  81°  43' 3430


As  the  aspect  falls  above  the  Earth,  the  D ’s  diur-
nal meridian  distance  (found  by  taking  her  meridian
distance  from  180°)  must  be  taken.

0 /

The  D’s  diurnal  meridian  distance  is  ... , 93  56
From  which  take  her  second  distance, ...  81  43


It  gives  the  arc  of  D parallel  $ converse  12  1 3


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


lie


CHAP.  XII.

TO  DIRECT  THE  SUN  OR  MOON  TO  MUNDANE
PARALLELS  DIRECT.

This  is  merely  reversing  the  operation  of  the  con-
verse parallels.

Rule  I. — As  the  semi-arc  of  © or  D is  to  its  me-
ridian distance,  so  is  the  planet’s  semi-arc  to  its
second  distance.

Rule  2. — The  difference  between  the  planet’s  me-
ridian distance  and  second  distance,  or,  if  it  pass
the  meridian  to  form  the  parallel,  their  sum,  will  be

the  ARC  OF  DIRECTION.

Example. — Find  the  arc  of  © parallel  1?  D.  D.
As  the  semi-arc  of  ©,  57°  55'  propor-


tional logarithm  (arith.  comp.)  9.5075

To  ©’s  meridian  distance,  16°  44'  «...  1.0317
So  is  the  semi-arc  of  J?  64°  24' 4464


To  the  second  distance  of  ]?,  18°  3 6'  . . .9856


° /

From  the  meridian  distance  of  J?  .....  37  58
Take  the  second  distance  of  18  36

It  gives  the  arc  of  Q parallel  h D.  D.  =19  22


i


114


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY,


CHAP.  XIII.

TO  DIRECT  THE  SUN  OR  MOON  TO  PARALLELS
IN  MUND.O ;

That  is , to  Parallel  Distances  from  the  Meridian  by  Rapt
Motion , called  rapt  parallels.

This  name  of  rapt  is  an  old  term,  meaning  carried
away ; and  it  signifies  those  parallels  which  are
formed  by  both  the  significator  (as  q or  j are
termed)  and  the  promittor  (as  the  planets
$ , ? , and  $ , are  termed)  being  carried  away  by  the
motion  of  the  Earth  on  its  axis  from  the  places  they
were  in  at  birth,  till  they  come  to  equal  or  parallel
distances  from  the  meridian.

Rule  1. — Add  together  the  semi-arc  of  the  © or
D and  that  of  the  planet,  and  take  half  their  sum.

Rale  2. — Find  the  difference  between  the  A.  R.  of
the  G or  and  that  of  the  planet,  and  take  half
that  difference.

Rule  3.- — Note  the  semi-arc  of  the  body  which
will  be  applying  towards  or  approaching  the  meri-
dian when  the  parallel  is  formed,  and  take  half  of  it.

Rule  4.— Then  say.  As  half  of  the  sum  of  the
semi-arcs  is  to  half  the  semi-arc  of  the  body  applying
to  the  meridian,  so  is  half  the  difference  of  A,  R.  to


JPI  X


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.  115

half  the  second  distance  of  the  body  applying  to  the
meridian,  which  must  be  doubled.

In  other  words,  add  to  the  arithmetical  complement
of  the  proportional  logarithm  of  half  the  semi-arcs
the  proportional  logarithm  of  half  the  semi-arc  of  the
body  which  applies  to  the  meridian,  and  the  propor-
tional iogarithm  of  half  the  difference  of  A.  R.;  the
sum  will  be  the  proportional  logarithm  of  half  the
second  distance  of  the  body  applying  to  the  meri-
dian.

Lastly . — Take  the  second  distance  from  the  ap-
parent distance  of  the  body  from  the  meridian,  and
the  remainder  will  be  the  arc  of  direction.

Example  1. — Bring  the  O to  the  rapt  parallel  of
T?  in  Ada’s  nativity.

To  semi-arc  of  Jp  64  24,  £ of  it  is  32  12  A.R.of  Jp  311  17
Add  semi-arc  of  © 57  55  A.R.  of  © 256  35

2) 122  19  2)  54  42

Half  61  9 p.iog.  (A.C.)  9.5311  Half  27  21
| of  Tp  ’s  semi-arc  32  12  prop.  log. . . . 7474
% of  the  diff.  A.  R.  27  21  prop.  log. . . . 8183

P.  log.  of  ^ the  second  dist.  of  Ip  14°  24/rzl.0968
X 2 ~ —


Second  distance  of  Jp  28  48


116


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


Lastly,  From  the  apparent  or  meridian  Q f

distance  of  T?  37  58

Take  the  second  distance  of  T?  from  the

meridian  28  48


It  leaves  the  arc  of  direction  of  0 rapt

parallel  T?  . . . . 9 10


N.B.  These  rapt  parallels  are  most  powerful  di-
rections, and  never  fail  to  produce  important  effects.
This  direction  it  was  which  caused  the  death  of  the
native’s  noble  and  talented  father,  as  it  will  be  seen
by  the  rules  for  turning  arcs  of  direction  into  time,
that  it  came  up  exactly  at  the  period  of  Lord  Byron’s
death.  All  parallels  act  like  conjunctions ; good
with  good  planets , and  evil  with  evil  planets.

Example  2. — -Required  the  arc  for  the  rapt  paral-
lel of  D to  # . The  body  of  $ is  nearer  the  ascend-
ant than  that  of  D ; and  he  therefore  rises  first,  and
will  form  a parallel  distance  to  the  M.  C.  according
to  his  semi-arc  (diurnal,  as  he  will  be  above  the
Earth),  with  that  formed  by  ])  to  the  meridian  under
the  Earth,  according  to  her  semi- arc.  But  as  the
opposition  of  D will  be  at  an  equal  distance  from
the  I Oth  or  diurnal  meridian,  as  her  body  is  from  the
4th  or  nocturnal  meridian ; and  as  the  rule  requires
the  arcs  used  to  be  both  diurnal  or  both  nocturnal,
we  take  the  § of  D instead  of  the  ])  herself  to  work
with.


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


117


Then  to  the  semi-arc(diurnal)  0 f
of  $ 100  41

Add  the  semi-arc  (diurnal)
of  the  § of  ]) , which  is  her
own  semi-arc,  nocturnal. . 93  9


A.  R.  $ 18  42
Add.... 360  0


378  42

A.R.of  D’sg  187  15


2)193  50  2)191  27

Half..  95  43


Half  96°55'—P.  log.  (A.C.)  9.7311

Half  semi-arc  $ ....  50  20 5534

Half  A.  R 95  43 2743


Half  the  second  distance  49°  43'  ....  5588

x 2 —

The  second  dist.  to  meridian  99  26


A.  R.  of  $■  (with  the  circle) 378  42

A.  R.  of  the  meridian  (diurnal) 273  19


Apparent  or  primary  distance  of  to


meridian * 105  23

Take  away  $ second  distance  99  20

Leaves  the  arc  of  D rapt  parallel  $ . . 5 57


Example  3. — Find  the  rapt  parallel  of  0 to  1L
When  % sets*  he  will  apply  to  the  nocturnal  meri-
dian, and  soon  form  a parallel  distance  with  the  O to
the  diurnal  meridian.  The  opposite  place  of  O must
be  worked  with  as  if  he  were  in  the  3d  house,  as  the
nocturnal  arcs  are  used.


118  GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


To  semi-arc  of  If.  (nocturnal)  104  26  A.  R.  of  If.  210  27

Add  the  semi-arc  of  0 g . . 57  55  A.  R.  of  § O 76  35

2)162  21  2)133  52

Half....  8110  Half....  66  56


To  half  the  sum  of  the  semi-arcs  81°  10'*

proportional  logarithm  (arith.  comp.) . . 9.6541


Add  half  the  semi-arc  (nocturnal)  of  Tf.  as
he  approaches  the  meridian  when  the

aspect  is  formed*  52°  13' 5375

And  the  half  difference  of  the  A.  R.  66°  56 ' 4296

The  sum  is  the  proportional  logarithm  of

half  the  second  distance*  43°  3J' 6212


If.  ’s  second  distance  86  7


The  A.  R.  of  If.  is 210  27

A.  R.  of  nocturnal  meridian 93  19

If. 9 s apparent  meridian  distance.  117  8

Take  away  his  second  distance 86  7

Arc  of  0’s  rapt  parallel  If.  31  1


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.  119


CHAP.  XIV.

OF  DIRECTIONS  TO  THE  PART  OF  FORTUNE.

The  0 is  a fixed  spot  in  the  heavens,  and,  like
the  M.  C.,  it  has  no  motion  of  itself.  Bodies  of  pla-
nets may  be  carried  to  it,  or  form  aspects  with  it ;
but  it  cannot  itself  move  onwards,  either  in  the  zo-
diac or  by  converse  motion  in  the  world.  The  0
therefore  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  zodiac,  and
forms  no  zodiacal  aspects  ; it  is  capable  of  direct
direction  only.  The  0,  D,  or  any  planet,  may  be
brought  to  its  6 or  or  any  other  aspect  in  the
world,  except  the  rapt  parallel.  ( See  Book  II,  Chap .
XIV.)

To  direct  o , > , or  any  Planet,  to  an  Aspect
of  ®.

Rule  1. — As  the  semi-arc  of  0 is  to  its  distance
from  any  house  it  may  be  near,  so  is  semi-arc  of  the
planet  directed  to  the  planet’s  second  distance  to  the
house  which  is  in  aspect  with  the  house  to  which  0
is  measured  from.

Rule  2. — Add  or  subtract  the  second  distance
from  the  apparent,  according  as  the  planet  passes  or
falls  short  of  the  house  ; the  sum  or  difference  is  the

ARC  OF  DIRECTION.

Example . — Required  the  are  of  0 to  A 0 in
Ada’s  nativity.


120  GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.

As  semi-arc  0 93°  9',  proportional  loga-
rithm (arithmetical  complement) 9.7139

Is  to  distance  of  0 from  4th  house,  1 1°  25'  1.1977

So  is  semi-arc  of  0 57°  55'  . 4925

To  0fs  second  distance  past  the  8th  house,
where  he  will  be  four  houses  (a  a asp.)
from© 7°  6'=  1.4041

Add  to  this  second  the  0’s  apparent  =

distance  to  8th  house  or  # M.  C.  21  52

The  sum  is  the  arc  of  0 A 0 ....  28  58

To  direct  any  Planet  to  a Parallel  of  ©.

Rule  1. — As  the  semi-arc  0 is  to  its  meridian  dis-
tance, so  is  the  planet’s  semi-arc  to  its  second  dis-
tance from  the  meridian.

Ride  2.— Take  from  or  add  this  to  the  planet’s
meridian  distance  as  before  for  the  arc  of  direction.

Example. — Bring  0 to  parallel  of  T?.


As  semi-arc  of  ©,  93°  9l 9.7139

To  its  meridian  distance,  11°  25'. . ....  LI 977

So  T?  semi-arc,  64°  24' 4464

Toll’s  second  meridian  distance, 7°  54':izl.3580

0 t

The  meridian  distance  of  1?  is 37  58

The  second  distance  of  J?  to  the  meridian,

when  he  forms  a parallel  to  0 7 54

Arc  of  0 parallel  to  T?  30  4


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


121


CHAP.  XV.

OF  TURNING  THE  ARC  OF  DIRECTION  INTO
TIME,  TO  LEARN  AT  WHAT  AGE  ITS  EFFECTS
WILL  BE  FELT.

This  is  termed  equating  the  arc  of  direction.  It
is  a measure  of  time,  and  depends  on  the  apparent
motion  of  O in  the  zodiac.

Rule. — To  the  A.  R.  of  O at  birth  add  the  arc  of
direction,  which  will  be  the  A.  R.  of  O when  the
aspect  is  complete.  Find  in  how  many  days  and
hours  after  birth  the  Sun  acquires  this  A.  R.,  and
allow  for  each  day  one  year  of  life,  and  each  two
hours  one  month.  To  find  this  time,  look  in  the
Ephemeris  for  the  longitude  answering  to  this  A.  R.,
and  from  the  day  and  hour  when  0 reaches  this
longitude  take  the  day  and  hour  of  birth ; the  differ-
ence is  the  number  of  days  and  hours  after  birth,
which  are  to  be  turned  into  years  and  months,  to
know  the  age  at  which  the  direction  will  operate.

Example.— Required  the  time  of  life  when  the
direction  of  0 rapt  parallel  of  T?  in  Ada’s  nativity
will  be  in  operation.

The  A.  R.  of  0 at  birth 256°  35'

The  arc  of  0 rapt  parallel  1? 9 10


A,  R.  of  0 when  the  aspect  is  complete  265  45


122


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


The  longitude  answering  to  A.  R.  265°  45'  is  f
2 63  7',  and  the  O arrived  at  this  longitude  at  about
half  past  8 o’clock  on  the  evening  of  the  18th  of
Depember  1815.

Then  from  Dec.  18 15  . 18  days,  8J  hours

Take  the  day  and  hour  of  birth  10  days,  1 hour

There  remains 8 days,  7J  hours;

which,  at  the  rate  of  1 year  for  1 day,  and  1 month
for  2 hours,  is  very  near  the  age  of  8 years  and  4
months,  which  was  the  10th  of  April,  1824.  Now
on  the  19th  of  April  1824,  Lord  Byron  (the  native’s
father)  died,  which  shews  the  time  of  birth  to  be
correctly  noted ; as  primary  directions  can  rarely  be
brought  up  to  nearer  than  a month  of  the  time  of  the
event.

CHAP.  XVI.

OF  SECONDARY  DIRECTIONS.

All  the  directions  we  have  hitherto  considered  are
termed  primary  directions  ; and  they  are  found  to
operate  for  several  weeks,  and  sometimes  for  many
months ; especially  the  mutual  aspects  of  O and  D ,
which,  owing  to  their  apparent  magnitude,  generally
come  into  operation,  and  remain  so  for  6 or  8 weeks,
at  least,  before  and  after  the  time  the  direction  is
perfect.  The  directions  of  T?  are  generally  slow  and
tedious,  bringing  a continuation  of  sickness  or  trouble
to  the  native,  according  as  they  may  act.  Those  of


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.  123

Mars  are  generally  soon  over,,  but  sharp  and  sudden
in  their  effects.  Parallels  in  the  zodiac  sometimes
continue  a great  length  of  time  in  operation,  as,  when
they  fall  near  the  tropics,  the  G or  D sometimes  lie  se-
veral days  nearly  in  the  same  declination ; and  the  effect
will  be  to  cause  a certain  chain  of  events  to  befall
the  native,  at  times,  for  7 years  or  more  together.

Secondary  Directions  are  merely  the  aspects
formed  by  the  ])  after  birth,  and  they  are  far  less
powerful  than  primary  directions ; and  if  these  are
opposed  to  them  in  nature  at  the  time,  they  have  little
or  no  effect.  But  if  the  primary  and  secondary  di-
rections agree  in  nature  (for  instance,  if  the  Q were
in  (5  or  parallel,  &c.  of  T?  in  the  primary  and  the  D
in  parallel  of  O’s  declination,  or  in  ill  aspect  to  $ or
Ip,  &c.  in  the  secondary  direction),  the  event  is
generally  shewn  when  the  influence  is  most  powerful ;
viz.  when  the  secondary  direction  is  complete,  se-
condary directions  endure  only  a week  or  two.

To  calculate  Secondary  Directions.

Rule. — Observe  the  day  and  hour  after  birth  when
D forms  any  aspect  either  with  the  ascendant  or
M.  C.  or  her  own  place  at  birth,  or  those  of  O or  any
planet,  and  take  the  day  and  hour  of  birth  from  it ;
the  difference  will  be  the  arc  of  direction.  This  arc
is  to  be  turned  into  time,  at  the  rate  of  1 year  for  1
day,  and  1 month  for  2 hours.  The  Moon  also  forms
aspects  in  the  heavens  after  birth,  independent  of  the
places  in  the  figure  of  birth ; and  these  also  must  be


124  GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.

noted,  and  the  arc  of  direction  found  in  the  same
manner.

Example . — In  Ada’s  nativity  the  ])  comes  to  the
parallel  declination  of  O at  8h.  33m.  p.m.  on  the
18th  of  December,  1815.  And  from  her  birth  that
measures  8 days  7 hours  and  33  minutes,  equal  to  8
years  3 months  and  23  days,  which  is  the  2d  of  April
1824,  within  a fortnight  of  the  time  of  the  death  of
Lord  Byron.  At  9h.  42m.  p.m.,  which  measures  to
19th  of  April,  1824,  the  day  of  the  father’s  death,
she  had  23°  17/  declination ; and  on  that  very  day
she  had  also  23°  17'  declination  at  noon !

CHAP.  XVII.

OF  REVOLUTIONS,  LUNATIONS,  TRANSITS,  &c.

The  Revolution  of  the  Sun  is  his  return  to  his
place  at  birth.  This  may  readily  be  estimated
to  within  a trifle,  and  the  figure  erected  with  the
same  A.  R.  of  M.  C.  as  at  birth,  and  the  places  of
the  planets  marked  in ; and  according  as  the  0,  D ,
Ascendant,  and  M.  C.,  &c.  are  well  aspected  by  the
planets  at  the  time,  will  the  native  be  influenced
during  the  following  year.  If  the  revolution  accords
with  the  directions  operating,  it  gives  them  greater
power,  as  it  is  an  additional  influence  ; if,  however,
there  be  no  close  aspects  at  the  revolution,  it  has
little  effect  either  way.

Example. — In  Ada’s  nativity  G returned  to  the
place  he  was  in  at  her  birth  exactly  at  llh.  30m.  a.m.


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.  125

on  the  10th  of  December,  1823  ; and  here  follow  the
places  of  the  planets  at  that  revolution.


Planet

T?

n

o

?

5

D

kf

8

25

X

n

t

X

Long.

0 1

10  19

0 /

18  20

o /
8 23

o /
24  4

o /
17  40

0 1

1 14

0 /

16  0

0 /

14  12

Dec.

0 1
23  25

0 1
15  0

o /
23  5

0 /

4 18

o /

22  54

0 l

9 30

o /

23  35

o /

2 15

Observe,  that  we  find  % in  parallel  with  O ; but
his  benefic  nature  is  vitiated  by  being-  in  g to  $ ; and
both  g and  y having  the  declination  of  © , do  much
afflict  that  luminary,  and  in  a child’s  natus  tend  to
injure  the  father.  The  Moon  is  separating  from  a A
of  It,  and  applying  to  a close  □ of  © in  the  radix  or
figure  of  birth ; she  is  in  □ also  to  the  place  of  y at
birth : and  having  returned  to  her  own  declination,
she  is  rendered  more  able  to  do  evil ; as  the  Moon
upon  her  own  place  at  any  time  has  more  power  for
good  or  evil,  as  she  may  be  aspected,  than  in  any
other  situation.  The  Q also  is  in  □ to  $ , who  is  more
evil  by  being  in  sesquiquadrate  aspect  to  the  radical
place  of  Saturn:  and,  lastly,  D is  farther  afflicted  by
being  in  close  □ to  $ . All  these  very  evil  positions,
and  some  others  which  I have  omitted  to  notice,  de-
noted much  trouble  to  the  native  that  year;  accord-
ingly in  four  months  after  she  lost  her  father.

Lunations. — The  new  or  full  Moon  immediately
preceding  any  important  event,  will  generally  shew,
by  the  positions  of  the  luminaries  as  regards  the


128  GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.

planet’s  places  in  the  radix  and  at  the  revolution,  the
nature  of  the  events  about  to  follow.

Example. — -The  full  Moon  preceding  Lord  Byron’s
death  was  at  3h.  47m.  p.m.  on  the  13th  of  April,  1824 ;
and  we  find  that  © was  in  23J0  of  the  radical
place  of  $ , the  D being,  of  course,  in  23J0  of  =£=,  the
8 to  8 at  birth  ; $ and  § had  the  same  declination
3^°,  which  is  close  on  that  of  D at  birth,  and  at  the  last
revolution.  D ’s  declination  was  13°  45',  close  to  that
of  T?  at  the  revolution ; © and  g 9°,  that  of  $ at  birth.

Transits.— These  are  the  passing  of  any  planet
over  any  important  part  of  the  radical  figure,  or  the
revolutional  figure,  such  as  the  places  of  the  ©,
D , ascendant,  M.  C.  &c.  Unless,  it  be  within
two  or  three  weeks  of  the  birthday,  transits  over  the
radical  places  have  little  or  no  effect;  but  if  near  the
birthday,  they  are  very  important,  in  subordination
notwithstanding  to  the  directions  at  work.

Example.—  On  the  day  Lord  Byron  died,  D having
just  gone  over  the  □ of  the  place  of  $ and  sesqui-
quadrate  of  T?  at  the  revolution,  is  found  at  noon  of
the  fatal  day  in  10°  4',  exactly  the  place  of  y at  the
revolution ; and  in  parallel  to  g and  $ at  that  time,
and  her  own  dec.  in  the  secondary  direction  23°  17'.

N.B.  The  place  0 has  arrived  at  by  directional
motion  in  the  zodiac  is  also  worthy  of  notice ; as
transits  over  and  in  aspect  to  it  have  important
effects.  For  example,  we  find  that  © has  arrived  at
$ 26°  20'  by  his  motion  in  the  zodiac  at  the  time
this  native  lost  her  father ; as  may  be  seen  by  bringing


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


127


( D to  that  point  by  oblique  ascension  in  his  pole,  as
directed  in  Chap.  11,  Book  II.  Now,  on  the  17th  of
April,  1824,  D passed  that  point  in  the  zodiac,  being
at  the  time  in  □ to  $ ; and  on  the  day  when  the
native's  father  died  the  evil  $ is  found  to  transit  the
□ of  that  very  point,  being  in  26°  107  R.  : his
being  retrograde  added  to  his  evil  nature.

Thus  by  the  primary  direction  of  © rapt  parallel  1? ,
which  measures  exactly  to  the  time  of  the  father’s
death  ; by  the  evil  secondary  direction  of  ))  parallel
O ; by  an  evil  revolution,  in  which  O was  in  □ to  S' ,
and  D in  □ to  O,  $ , and  $ , with  other  ill  testi-
monies ; by  a very  fatal  lunation,  the  full  Moon  on
the  13th  April,  1824,  and  by  violent  transits  over
the  □ of  O’s  place  in  the  zodiac  by  direction,  and
also  of  D over  the  body  of  1$  at  the  revolution,  her
exact  declination  in  the  secondary  direction,  and  y to
that  of  O at  birth,  do  we  find  an  abundant  harvest  of
evidence  in  this  nativity  of  the  wonderful  harmony
and  power  of  planetary  influence.  The  student  may
rely,  that  when  he  meets  with  persons  who  deny  its  ex-
istence, they  have  never  given  it  a fair  examination,
and,  in  all  probability,  no  examination  whatever;  yet
*-c  none  should  condemn  who  do  not  understand  !”
Progresses.— These  are  the  positions  the  D forms
in  her  progress,  by  allowing  one  synodical  lunation  for
one  year  of  the  native's  life ; but  as  they  are  rather
of  a complex  nature,  involving  several  proportions  to
bring  them  out,  and  as  they  are  not  always  im-
portant, I thought  it  better  to  omit  giving  rules  for


128


GRAMMAR  of  astrology.


them  in  this  elementary  work.  But  if  I publish  a
second  edition,  I may  add  these  also.


Planets  Places  when  Lord  Byron  died .


Planet

B

i?

n

$

o

?

2

D

Long.

k?

0 1
15  46

8

0 /
23  35

25

o /

5 19

m
0 1
26  10

0 /
29  21

i£°  r>

-4

8

0 /
7 20

kf
0 1

10  4

Dec.

o /

22  55

o /
16  52

o /
23  30

o /
3 40

o /

11  15

o°

o /
14  2b

o /
23  17

CHAP.  XVIII.

TO  RECTIFY  THE  ESTIMATED  TIME  OF  BIRTH
TO  FIND  THE  TRUE  TIME.

Unless  the  time  of  a child’s  birth  be  accurately
noted  by  an  astrologer,  or  for  astrological  purposes,
it  is  very  likely  to  be  incorrect ; and  as  an  error  of
half  a minute  may  throw  a direction  out  six  weeks,
and  an  error  of  two  minutes  cause  the  direction  to
be  wrong  by  six  months,  it  becomes  important  to
know  how  to  learn  the  true  time  of  birth,  when  we
have  only  what  may  be  termed  the  estimate  time.

To  effect  this  purpose,  erect  the  figure  of  the
heavens  for  the  estimate  time,  and  complete  the
speculum  of  the  planet’s  places  for  that  time;  then,
if  the  birth  be  that  of  a person  who  has  lived  a few
years,  learn  some  two  or  three  important  events
which  have  happened  to  the  native,  and  the  periods
at  which  they  occurred,  and  then  calculate  the  solar
arc  for  each  of  those  periods.


GRAMM  All  OF  ASTROLOGY.


129


To  calculate  the  Solar  Arc.

Rule . — Turn  the  age  at  which  any  event  happened
into  days  and  hours  after  birth,  by  allowing  a day
for  a year,  and  two  hours  for  a month ; add  this
number  of  days  and  hours  to  the  time  of  birth,  and
look  in  the  Ephemeris  for  the  longitude  the  Sun  will
have  arrived  at  at  that  period;  then  find  the  A.  R.
corresponding  to  that  longitude,  and  subtract  the  0
A.  R.  from  it : the  difference  wTill  be  the  solar  arc
required.

Example. — In  the  nativity  of  Ada  we  have  the
estimate  time  as  given  by  Lord  Byron  (see  Chap.
VIII,  Book  1),  which  is  one  hour,  p.m.,  10th  of
December,  1815  ; for  which,  having  erected  a figure
of  the  heavens,  and  found  the  planets'  places,  &c.,
we  will  proceed  to  rectify,  to  find  the  true  moment  of
birth.

The  death  of  the  native’s  father  took  place  on  the
19th  of  April  1824,  at  which  time  the  native  was
8 years  4 months  and  9 days  old.  Call  this  8 years
4 months,  which  will  be  equal  to  8 days  8 hours  of
time  after  birth.

Days  Hour

Time  of  birth  December  1815,  at  10  1

Add  the  time  of  the  father’s  death  8 8


Time  of  the  accident  . . .


...18  9


130  GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.

The  0’s  longitude  at  9 hours  p.m.  on  the  18th  of
Dec.  1815  was  $ 2 6°  9',  the  A.  R.  of


which  is 265°  48'

From  this  take  O A.  R.  at  birth 256  35


There  remains  the  solar  arc  for  the  time

of  her  father’s  death . 9 13


Having  found  the  solar  arc,  see  if  any  direction
falls  near,  the  nature  of  which  corresponds  with  the


nature  of  the  accident,  according  to  the  rules  “To
judge  of  the  Effects  of  Directions”  (Chap.  XI,
Book  I) ; and  then,  if  it  be  a direction  to  any  of  the
angles  or  a rapt  parallel,  you  have  only  to  find  the
difference  between  the  solar  arc  and  the  arc  of
direction,  to  know  the  error  of  the  estimate  time  of
birth.

Example. — Solar  arc  for  the  father’s  death  9°  13'


The  arc  for  0 rapt  par.  I? . . . . . 9 10

Error  in  minutes  of  a degree  0 3


Thus,  if  we  add  3;  to  the  arc  for  the  0 rapt  parallel
Tp , which  is  done  by  taking  3'  off  the  A.  R.  of  the
M.  C.,  we  shall  make  it  correspond  exactly  to  the
solar  arc : hence  it  appears  that  the  time  of  birth  is
given  too  late  by  3'  of  a degree,  which,  when  turned
into  time , are  only  12  seconds;  so  that  the  true  time
of  birth  of  this  young  lady  was  Oh.  59m.  48s.  p.m.
15th  December  1815.


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


131


This  error,  being  so  trivial,  will  cause  only  about
a fortnight  error  in  the  predictions  made  from  direc-
tions to  the  angles ; and  it  will  have  no  sensible  effect
on  the  other  directions,  and  none  at  all  on  those  made
to  0 or  1)  in  the  zodiac.

If,  however,  you  would  be  correct,  add  3'  to  the
arc  of  direction  for  each  rapt  parallel  and  for  each
aspect  to  the  ascendant  or  M.  C.  The  directions  to
the  parallel’s  converse  and  direct  should  be  wTorked
over  again,  as  they  may  require  a correction  ot  5?
each,  equal  to  a month  in  the  native’s  life.

Should  no  direction  to  an  angle  or  rapt  parallel
apply  nearly  (for  it  is  rare  that  births,  if  noted  at
all,  are  not  correct  within  5 minutes),'  you  must  see
whether  any  mundane  parallel  or  other  aspect  applies
to  the  accident ; and  if  you  find  it  does,  but  that  the
error  exceeds  10'  of  a degree  (or,  if  you  choose  to  be
very  correct,  if  there  be  an  error  of  above  2 or  3
minutes  of  a degree),  apply  the  following

Rule  to  find  the  True  Time  of  Birth .

Rule  I.— Reduce  the  mer.  dist.  of  O or  D , which-
ever you  bring  up  the  direction  to,  into  minutes,  by
multiplying  it  by  60,  and  call  it  the  first  position ;
then  add  to  or  diminish  that  mer.  dist.  by  1 degree,
and,  after  reducing  that  also  to  minutes,  call  it  the
second  position ; then  opposite  the  second  position
place  the  error  of  the  arc  of  direction,  multiply  them
k 2


132


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


together,  and  call  the  amount  A.  Work  the  same
direction  over  again  with  the  altered  mer.  dist.
(taking  care  to  add  to  or  lessen  by  1 degree  the  mer.
dist.  of  the  planet  employed  also) ; find  the  error  of
that  arc  of  direction,  and  place  it  opposite  the  first
position.  Multiply  these  also  together,  and  call  the
amount

Rule  2. — If  both  errors  be  greater  or  less  than  the
solar  arc , find  the  difference  between  the  errors,  and
make  it  a divisor ; find  also  the  difference  between
A and  B,  and  make  it  a dividend : the  quotient  will
be  the  true  mer.  dist . of  0 or  D at  the  moment  of
birth,  the  difference  between  which  and  the  amount
of  the  mer.  dist.,  which  was  made  the  1st  position,  is
the  error  of  the  A.  R.  of  M.  C.  at  the  estimate  time
of  birth.

Ride  3. — But  if  one  error  be  greater  and  the  other
less  than  the  solar  arc , take  the  sum  of  the  errors
for  a divisor,  and  the  sum  of  A and  B for  the  divi-
dend; and  the  quotient  is  the  true  mer.  dist.  as
above.

Observe . — When  you  have  gained  the  true  mer.
dist.  of  © or  D by  this  operation,  and  found  how
much  you  have  to  add  to  or  diminish  the  M.  C.  to
ascertain  the  true  A.  R.  of  M.  0.,  turn  that  correc-
tion into  time , and  add  it  to  or  deduct  it  from  the
estimate  time  of  birth,  and  you  will  have  the  true
time  of  birth.  And  observe  also,  that  all  the  direc-
tions you  may  have  worked  to  the  angles,  in-


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY*:  133

eluding  rapt  parallels,  must  be  corrected  by  that
amount*.

Example  — Suppose  the  estimate  A.  R.  of  M.  C.
273°  19',  mer.  dist.  of  © 16°  44',  mer,  dist.  of
I?  37°  58',  and  that  I find  the  arc  of  © to  parallel
1?  D.  D.  to  be  19°  22',  while  the  event  which
[ believe  it  produced  gives  a solar  arc  of  19°  10',  the
1st  error  is  12'  too  great.

Add  1°  to  the  1st  position,  and  the  2d  error  will
be  1°  55',  or  115'  too  little.

1st  Position  16  44  or  1004  X 2d  error  115  B =■  115460
2d  Position  17  44  or  1064  x 1st  error  12  A — 12768

127  ) 128228(1009  or

127  nearly  10L0'.

1228

1143

The  1st  error  is  greater  than  the  solar  ^ 85

arc , and  the  2d  error  less  than  the  f
solar  arc ; hence  the  sum  of  the  two  (.
errors  is  taken  and  the  sum  of  A,  R.  J

The  quotient  1010  divided  by  60  gives  16°  50'  for
the  true  mer . dist.  of  © at  the  time  of  birth;  the
difference  between  which  and  16°  44'  is  6 minutes,
to  be  added  to  the  A,  R.  of  M.  C.  as  estimated;  and
by  turning  this  into  time,  we  have  24  seconds,  to  be
added  to  the  estimated  time  of  birth  to  find  the  true
time  of  birth .

* The  other  directions  must  be  worked  over  again,  and  the
poles  of  0 and  ])  and  the  meridian  distances  corrected.


184  GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.

Observe . — The  best  directions  to  rectify  the  esti-
mated time  of  birth  by  are  those  of  $ , as  the  effects
do  in  general  answer  very  closely  to  the  time  of  the
direction.  Whereas  in  directions  to  Saturn  the  event
may  come  on  slowly,  and  the  direction  may  measure
some  minutes  more  or  less  than  the  solar  arc.  And  I
advise  to  correct  by  accidents  to  the  person,  if  they
can  be  known ; such  as  serious  falls  or  hurts,  sudden
attacks  of  disease,  &c.  The  measles,  scarlatina,  or
small-pox,  are  generally  caused  by  $ , but  sometimes
by  ©,  especially  if  he  be  aspected  by  $ . It  is
generally  found,  that  if  © or  $ come  to  semi-quartile
or  sesquiquadrate  of  the  ascendant  in  the  early  part
of  life,  such  complaints  fall  out  at  that  time.  The
death  of  the  native’s  parents,  if  it  have  occurred,  is
also  a safe  accident  to  rectify  by,  as  it  generally
happens  upon  some  powerful  directions.  But  l re-
commend to  take  at  least  two,  and,  if  you  can,  three
events,  or  accidents,”  as  they  are  termed  by  astrolo-
gers, to  rectify  the  given  time  of  the  nativity  by.  And
bear  in  mind,  that  if  you  do  not  at  length  get  the
true  time  of  birth,  to  within  half  a minute,  you  cannot
possibly  be  correct  in  your  predictions  of  the  time
at  which  many  events  w ill  happen  to  the  native  in  the
course  of  his  existence.


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.  135


CHAP.  XIX.

A JUDGMENT  FOR  MARRIAGE  IN  THE  NATIVITY
OF  LORD  BYRON  S DAUGHTER.

It  may  serve  as  a useful  praxis  for  the  young  stu-
dent, if  we  examine  the  directions  in  this  lady’s  nativity
which  promise  marriage.  They  are  as  follow  : —

D par.  14.  D D.  20°  39'

D par.  % Con.  21  42  ^

M.  C.  * O ...  21  53  >M.  C.  * O 2l°53‘

D par.  ? D.D.22  28  ) A.  R.  of  © 256  35
D par.  ? Con.  23  29


278  28  a.  R.  of  isf

7°  46',  at  which  0
arrives  19d.  17^h.
after  birth, which  will
be  at  the  age  of  19
yrs.  9 mths.

Remarks. — The  above  train  of  directions  will  be
in  operation  from  the  age  of  18  and  6 months  until
that  of  about  21  years,  during  which  the  native  will
be  fortunate,  and  receive  offers  of  marriage;  and
the  most  powerful  direction,  being  M.  C.  * Q>  will
be  the  means  of  effecting  that  circumstance.  If
we  wish  to  ascertain  the  time  nearer,  we  have  only
to  look  what  beneficial  secondary  directions  occur  at
or  near  the  time.  Now,  by  reference  to  the  Ephe-
meris,  I find  that  the  Moon  comes  to  her  own  square ,
which  always  causes  changes,  and  to  * of  % at  10
o’clock  on  the  morning  of  30th  December  1815,  and
to  6 O at  2h.  51m.  p.m.,  which  will  in  all  probability
point  out  extremely  near  the  time  of  the  native’s
marriage.


136  GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


To  enable  the  learner  to  work  these  secondary
directions,,  I shall  here  give  a

Rule  to  calculate  the  Time  d forms  the  Aspects.

Rule  1 . — Take  the  amount  of  the  D ys  motion  in  24
hours,  from  which  subtract  the  amount  of  the  planet’s
motion  (but  if  the  planet  be  retrograde,  add  them),
and  the  difference  or  sum  is  the  D ’s  acceleration.

Rule  2.—' Then  find  how  far  the  D was  from  the
aspect  at  the  noon  previous  to  her  forming  it.  And
say,  If  the  ]) ’s  acceleration  give  24  hours,  what  will
the  D ’s  distance  from  the  aspect  give?  The  answer
is  the  time  after  the  noon  previous,  when  the  aspect
will  be  formed.

Example . — Required  the  time  D forms  a sfc  with
% on  the  29th  of  December  1815  ?

])  ’s  place  at  noon,  30th  Dec 6°  38'*  If. . . 5°  35Y

])  ’s  place  at  noon,  29th  Dec £ 23  58  . . If. . .TTf  5 26

])  ’s  motion  in  the  24  hours * ....  12  40  lf.’s  motion  9

'If.’s  during  the  same  24  hours 9

As  ]) ’s  acceleration 12  31  ...... . .8.8422

Of/s  * at  noon  29  th  5°  ...to  24  0 .8751

])  ’s  place  ditto 23  58  f

]) ’s  distance  from 'If.’s  jfc  11  28  J.... so  II  28  .1.1958


D.  H.  M.  .9131

To  time  of  ^ being  formed 21  59

Add  the  day 29  0 0


29  21  59

From  this  take  the  time  of  birth  10  1 7


Remains  time  after  birth  of  ])  % If.  • • • • • 19  20  52


# To  make  this  subtraction,  borrow  30°,  and  then  from  36°  38'  take
23°  58/


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.  137

This,  at  the  rate  of  a day  for  a year,  is  just  19
years  10  months  and  13  days,  which  age  the  native
attains  on  the  23d  of  October,  1835;  and  as  at  the
age  of  20  years  and  26  days,  or  the  5th  of  January
1836,  the  D is  in  i with  O,  in  the  secondary  direc-
tion, it  is  not  at  all  improbable  that  the  former  of
these  periods  may  be  that  of  the  engagement  being
formed,  and  the  latter  that  of  its  consummation.

I shall  here  give  a few  directions  in  this  fr.ir  lady’s
nativity,  for  the  student  to  practise  in ; and  I advise
him  to  bring  each  up  for  his  own  satisfaction.


DIRECTIONS  IN  THE  NATIVITY  OF  LORD
BYRON’S  DAUGHTER.

0 t Remarks.

D 6 $ Conv.  1 34  | These  came  up  in  early  in-
Asc.  ^ O 2 34  > fancy,  and  would  cause  several
Asc.  S.S.Q.y  2 48  1 slight  illnesses.

Asc.  (5  £ . 4 42  This  measures  to  4 years  and

3 months  ; and  from  that  age  to

4 years  and  6 months  rendered
the  native  subject  to  the  mea-
sles, scarlet  fever,  small-pox,
&c.  I think  it  probable  that
the  native  may  have  taken
the  latter  disease.


138


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


0

Asc.  S.  □ I?  5
D rapt  par.  $ 5


Oaf?  conv.  7
Asc.  6 D .7


O rapt  par.  T?  9


O * 11  D.  D.  9
G d § conv.  9

Q * ? D.D.  11

))  par.  $ zod.  11


i

46  } These  measure  to  the  age  of
57  5 years,  at  which  time  she
may  have  suffered  illness.  But
the  native’s  mother  is  denoted
by  D ,and  no  doubt  she  had  much
trouble  under  these  aspects;
for,  in  the  nativity  of  children,
the  influence  ofdirections,which
do  not  affect  the  health,  falls  on
the  parents  or  guardians,  fa-
mily, &c.

2)  These  came  into  operation
5)  at  six  years  old,  when  I have
no  doubt  the  native  suffered
in  her  health  seriously.  The
influence  lasted  great  part  of
the  7th  year.  And  the  family
(particularly  the  father , who
is  always  signified  by  the  Sun)
were  afflicted  by  domestic  dis-
putes, &c.  &c.

10  This  caused  the  death  of  the
native’s  father,  at  8 years  and
4 months  of  her  age.

21)  1 judge  that  these  caused  the

32)  native  benefit  by  her  father’s
will  being  in  her  favour.

14)  These  are  favourable  to  the
41)  family  affairs;  but  I think  the


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


139


Asc.S  S.Q.O  12  131
Asc.  8 % 12  42)


Asc.  □ ^zod.  14  3)
D □ b zocL  14  48)


Asc.  § ? 14  41)

Od  5 conv.  14  48)


O * zod.  15  36


Asc.  * T?  16  30


latter,  in  her  11th  year,  caused
affliction  to  the  mother  of  the
native.

These,  in  the  12th  year,  I
think,  caused  pecuniary  losses
and  vexations;  not  very  ma-
terial: the  worst  at  near  12
years  old  ; also  ill  health.

At  about  12  years  and  9
months  appears  to  have  brought
illness,  or  some  blow  or  bruise;
and  also  much  trouble  in  the
family,  with  the  death  of  some
relation,  when  about  13  years
old,  or  at  13  and  2 months.

And  all  the  early  part  of  the
14th  year  the  native  appears
to  have  suffered  in  her  health
by  the  effect  of  these  direc-
tions, which  cause  weaknesses
incident  to  young  females,
coughs,  &c.

But  this  good  direction,  at
about  14,  did  greatly  improve
the  native’s  health  and  spirits.

And  at  15  years  of  age  she  be-
came very  grave  and  thought-
ful in  her  demeanour,  and  was


140  GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.

benefited  by  elderly  friends,,
0 f or  received  a legacy,  &c.

O par.  T?  con.  17  25  But  by  this  ill  aspect,  at  15
and  6 months,  and  for  a few
weeks  after,  especially  about
July,  1831,  the  native  appears
to  have  affliction.  I think  she
may  have  lost  a relation  by
death  ; and  her  own  health  was
not  by  any  means  good.

Op.  bD.D.  19  22)  These  two  very  evil  direc-

O □ D zod.  19  22)  tions  come  up  about  the  end  of
May,  1833 ; but  they  will  re-
main in  operation  for  some  time
during  the  spring  and  summer
of  1833.  Indeed,  about  April
they  appear  to  bring  trouble,
as  D came  to  the  parallel  of  h
in  the  second  motion  at  that
time  ; and  I fear  that  the  native
may  have  considerable  illness
and  vexation.  She  will  be  sub-
ject to  some  complaint  in  the
eyes,  probably  from  taking
cold  ; and  she  may  fear  much
trouble  to  a near  friend , pro-
bably the  death  of  such  an  one.

The  train  following  have  been


GUAM  MAH  OF  ASTROLOGY.


141


already  spoken  of  as  likely  to
bring  about  the  native’s  mar-
riage; and  therefore  I shall
0 t name  no  others  but  the
©rapt.par.  ])27  32)  which  I leave  the  student  to
©rapt.par.  $ 27  53)  equate.  They  will  have  a
powerful  effect,  and,  indeed,
are  extremely  dangerous.


142


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


A GLOSSARY  OF  ASTROLOGICAL  TERMS,
APPLICABLE  TO  NATIVITIES.


Affliction. — Any  planet  being  ill  aspected  by  another,  or
being  in  an  unfortunate  situation,  is  said  to  be  afflicted.

Airy  Signs. — n,  and

Ambient.— The  heavens,  when  spoken  of  in  a general  manner.

Angle.— The  1st,  4th,  7th,  and  10th  houses.  When  planets
are  therein,  they  are  more  powerful  than  in  any  other
situation.  Their  order  of  strength  is  10th,  1st,  7th,  4th,

Application. — To  apply.  These  terms  mean  the  approach
of  any  planet  to  the  body  or  aspect  of  another,  or  to , the
cusp  of  any  house.

Ascension,  Right.— The  distance  any  body  or  point  in  the
heavens  is  from  the  beginning  of  the  ecliptic,  or  first  point
of  Aries.  It  is  measured  in  degrees  and  minutes  of  a
degree.  It  is  thus  abbreviated,  A.  R.

Ascension,  Oblique. — If  a star  be  not  on  the  equator,  it
will,  when  it  rises,  form  an  angle  with  that  part  of  the
equator  which  is  rising  at  the  same  time,  and  this  is  called
its

Ascensional  Difference. — This,  added  to  its  right  ascen-
sion (A.  R.)  if  it  have  south  declination,  but  subtracted
therefrom  if  it  have  north  declination,  gives  its  oblique  as-
cension.

Ascendant.— -The  first  house,  or  that  space  between  the
eastern  horizon  and  one-third  of  the  distance  towards  the
meridian  under  the  Earth.

Benefics. — The  good  planets  2f_  and  £ .

Cadent. — A planet  which  has  passed  any  angle,  and  remains
within  one-third  of  its  semi-arc  of  the  cusp  of  that  angle.
The  whole  space  of  the  3d,  6th,  9th,  and  J2th  houses.


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.  143


Circles  of  Position. — An  astronomical  term  used  in  cal-
culating the  polar  elevation  of  any  planet.

Combust.—  Being  within  about  8J  degrees  of  the  ©,  when  the
planet  loses  part  of  its  pow  er  (owing  to  the  burning  quali-
ties of  0),  which  is  transferred  to  that  luminary.  If  the
planet  have  great  latitude,  the  © has  not  much  power  on
it  beyond  the  distance  of  7 degrees.

Converse  Motion  is  that  which  is  caused  by  the  diurnal  ro-
tation of  the  Earth  on  its  axis,  which  makes  the  ©,  J),
<&c.  appear  to  rise,  approach  the  meridian,  set,  &c.  It
applies  particularly  to  the  © and  ]) , when  they  are  car-
ried towards  the  promittors  or  their  aspects.

Cusp. — The  beginning  of  any  house.  Thus  the  eastern  horizon
is  the  cusp  of  the  1st  house;  and  the  meridian,  where  the
© is  at  noon,  is  the  beginning,  or  cusp  of  the  10th  house.

Declination. — The  distance  any  body  is  north  or  south  of
the  equator.  The  © never  has  more  than  23°  28  of  de-
clination, which  is  when  he  is  in  one  of  the  tropics,  antf
is  caused  by  the  pole  of  the  Earth  being  inclined  from  the
plane  of  the  Earth’s  orbit.

Descension. — The  going  down  of  any  body  from  the  meri-
dian above  to  that  below  the  Earth ; for  though  the  © is
lost  sight  of  at  sunset,  he  still  descends  till  he  reaches  the
meridian  at  midnight.

Descension,  Oblique. — The  reverse  of  Oblique  Ascension
(which  see).

Descendant. — The  7th  house,  or  that  space  from  the  western
horizon  to  one-third  of  the  distance  towards  the  meridian
above  the  Earth.

Direction. — The  measuring  the  space  between  the  bodies  or
aspects  of  any  two  planets,  or  that  between  any  two  parts
of  the  heavens,  to  ascertain  at  what  period  of  life  the
promised  effect  will  appear.  This  distance  is  a certain
number  of  degrees  of  the  A.  II.  of  the©,  which,  when


144


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


he  has  passed  over,  the  direction  is  complete.  It  is
called  the  Arc  of  Direction .

Direction,  Secondary. — The  aspects  formed  by  the  Moon
in  the  days  immediately  succeeding  the  birth.  Each  day
between  the  birth  and  the  time  the  aspect  is  formed  is
equal  to  one  exact  year  of  life ; thus,  if  the  ])  form  a
good  aspect  with  If.,  exactly  21  days  after  birth,  the  na-
tive will  feel  its  effects  just  about  his  21st  birthday.

Direct  Motion. — This  is  in  reality  converse  motion,  but  is
so  called  to  distinguish  the  case  of  the  promittors  being
carried  towards  the  bodies  or  aspects  of  the  0 or  ]),
which  directions  are  considered  somewhat  less  powerful
than  those  by  converse  motion.

Diurnal  Arc. — Is  the  length  of  time  that  part  of  the  heavens
in  which  any  planet  is  at  birth  is  above  the  Earth  ; and  it
is  usually  measured  in  degrees.

Earthy  Signs. — y , tip,  and  J^f.

Equation  of  Time.  — Owing  to  the  irregular  motion  of  the
Earth  round  the  Sun,  this  latter  body  does  not  always
come  to  the  meridian  exactly  24  hours  after  its  last  pas-
sage over  that  point ; but  as  all  calculations  in  the  Ephe-
meris  of  the  places  of  the  planets  are  made  for  the  time
the  0 is  on  the  meridian  (or  at  apparent  noon ),  the  watch
will  sometimes  be  several  minutes  before  or  after  noon  at
that  moment.  This  difference  between  the  apparent
noon,  or  that  shewn  by  the  0,  being  on  the  meridian,  and
the  mean  noon,  or  that  shewn  by  a correct  watch,  is  the
Equation  of  Time.  The  amount  to  be  added  to,  or
taken  from,  the  time  shewn  by  the  watch  is  given  for  every
day  in  the  Ephemeris.  If  the  Ephemeris  says,  “ clock
before  0,”  then  take  the  time  mentioned  from  the  time  of
birth;  but  if  it  say,  “clock  after  0,”  then  add  the  time
mentioned  (which  is  the  equation  of  time)  to  the  time  of
birth,  as  shewn  by  fhe  watch.' — Example.  The  Ephemeris


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


145


gives  the  equation  of  time  for  November  2,  1833,  “ clock
after  © 16m.  16s.”  : hence,  if  the  time  of  birth  by  a watch
were  the  2d  of  November,  1833,  at  6 o’clock  p.m.,  the
apparent  time  of  birth  would  be  6h.  16m.  16s.  p.m.,  to
which  time  all  the  planets’  places,  &c.,  and  the  figure  of
the  heavens,  must  be  calculated.

Fiery  Signs.—  <y,  £1,  aad

Figure  of  the  Heavens. — A map  or  picture  of  the  hea-
vens as  they  exist  at  the  moment  any  one  is  born  ; shewing
the  points  of  the  zodiac  rising,  setting,  and  on  the  meri-
dian ; also  those  on  the  cusp  of  each  house,  and  the  situa-
tions of  the  planets.

Houses. — The  divisions  of  the  heavens  which  form  ( □,  or
A ) aspects  with  the  meridian  or  ascendant;  or,  in  other
words,  those  spaces  which  shew  the  one-third  part  of  any
planet’s  semi-arc,  either  above  or  below  the  horizon.
They  are  also  portions  of  oblique  ascension,  consisting  of
30  degrees  each,  or  one-twelfth  part  of  the  whole  circle
of  360  degrees ; being  thus  each  equal  to  one  sign  of  the
zodiac;  and,  like  them,  they  are  twelve  in  number;  and
are  reckoned  from  the  eastern  horizon  towards  the  left
hand,  in  the  order  of  the  signs,  the  ascendant  being  the
1st  house.  (See  figure  2 .)

H y leg. — That  body  or  point  which  is  the  giver  of  life.

H ylegiacal  Places. — The  1st  house,  from  5°  above  to  25°
below  its  cusp  ; the  7th  house,  from  5°  below  to  25°  above
its  cusp;  the  9th  house,  from  5°  outside  its  cusp  to  half
way  between  the  mid-heaven  and  the  ascendant.

Latitude,  on  the  earth , is  the  distance  of  any  place  north
or  south  of  the  equatorial  line  ; in  the  heavens , it  is  the
distance  of  any  body  north  or  south  of  the  ecliptical  line.

Longitude,  on  the  earth  is  the  distance  of  any  place  east  or
west  of  Greenwich ; in  the  heavens , is  the  distance  of  any
body  from  the  first  point  of  the  zodiac  cy%  6°  O'.

Lights  or  Luminaries. — The  ©or]).

L


14(>  GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY,

Lunation.— -The  £,  □ , or  g of  © and  ]) ; also  the  length  of
time  J)  is  going  round  the  ©,  or  round  the  zodiac.

Malefics.—  y,  T?,  and

M.  C.  or  Medium  Cieli,  or  Mid-heaven. — The  meridian
above  the  earth.

Meridian. — That  point  which  is  always  south  (where  Q is  at
noon)  is  the  meridian  above  the  earth ; and  that  point  which
is  always  north  (where  Q is  at  midnight)  is  the  meridian
below  the  Earth.

Meridian  Distance.— The  distance  any  body  is  by  A.  R.
from  the  meridian.

Moderator. — The  0,  ]) , Asc.,  M.  C.  or  0,  because  each
acts  in  a mode  peculiar  to  itself.

Nocturnal  Arc. — The  length  of  time  any  point  in  the
Heavens  is  below  the  Earth,  from  its  setting  till  it  rises
again,  ft  is  usually  turned  into  degrees.

Node. — That  part  of  the  ecliptic  where  a planet  passes  out  of
north  into  south  latitude  is  its  south  node ; that  where  it
goes  into  north  latitude  is  its  north  node.

Occidental,  Oriental. — From  the  4th  house  eastward  to
the  10th  is  oriental;  and  from  the  10th  westward  to  the
4th  is  occidental.  But  © or  ])  are  oriental  between  the
1st  and  10th,  and  its  opposite  quarter,  and  are  occidental
between  the  10th  and  7th  and  its  opposite  quarter.

Parallels,  in  the  zodiac , are  equal  distances  from  the
equator,  or  having  the  same  declination,  whether  of  the
same  name  or  the  opposite.  In  the  world , they  are  equal
distances  from  the  meridian,  in  proportion  to  the  semi-
arcs  of  the  planets  which  form  them.

Polar  Elevation  or  Pole. — The  pole  of  a country  is  its
latitude ; that  of  a body  in  the  heavens  is  a certain  ele-
vation from  the  meridian  towards  the  horizon.

Promittor. — The  planets  y,  Tp,  If.,  $ , 5 , and  g.  If  0
or  J)  are  directed  to  each  other,  the  one  directed  to  may
be  termed  a promittor ; so  if  0,  Asc.,  or  M.  C.,  be


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.  147

directed  to  0 or  ]),  these  become  promittors;  because
they  promise  the  event.

Radical;  Radix. — The  figure  at  birth  is  the  radix  or  root
from  which  every  thing  is  judged ; and  the  term  radical
refers  to  it.

Rapt  Parallel. — Parallels  formed  by  the  motion  of  the
earth  on  its  axis,  where  both  bodies  are  rapt  or  carried
away  by  the  same  until  they  come  to  equal  distances  from
the  meridian.

Rectification. — The  correcting  the  supposed  time  of  birth,
to  find  the  true  time.

Retrograde. — The  backward  motion  which  the  planets  appear
to  have  sometimes,  in  consequence  of  the  position  and
motion  of  the  Earth.

Revolution.— The  turning  round  the  0 by  the  Earth,  which
makes  the  0 appear  to  revolve  and  return  to  his  place  at
birth  once  a year  ; very  near  the  time  of  birth.

Semi-arc. — The  half  the  arc  a planet  would  form  above  the
Earth  if  it  remained  fixed  in  the  zodiac  from  the  time  of
its  rising  until  that  of  its  setting,  is  called  its  semi-arc
diurnal.  The  half  of  the  arc  it  would,  in  like  circum-
stances, forip  under  the  Earth  from  its  setting  until  its
rising,  is  called  its  semi-arc  nocturnal.  If  a planet  were
to  be  on  the  mid-heaven,  and  not  to  move  out  of  its  place
in  the  zodiac,  it  would  set,  and  then  descend  to  the  north
meridian  in  exactly  12  hours,  because  the  Earth  is  12
hours  in  turning  half  round ; consequently  whatever  time
the  planet  took  in  going  from  the  mid-heaven  to  the  horizon,
if  that  time  be  taken  from  12  hours,  it  would  shew  the
time  it  takes  to  go  from  the  horizon  to  the  meridian  below
the  Earth.  Hence,  if  we  know  the  length  of  a semi-arc,
by  deducting  it  from  180°  (which  are  half  the  circle),  we
have  the  other  semi-arc  of  that  part  of  the  heavens.—
N.B.  The  spot  a planet  was  in  at  birth  is  to  be  considered
l 2


148  GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY,

as  the  planet  itself,  because  its  influence  is  fixed  in  that
spot  during  the  life  of  the  native,  however  the  planet
itself  may  move  on  in  the  zodiac,  &c.

Separation. — When  an  aspect  is  past,  the  planets,  &c.  are
said  to  be  separating  from  that  aspect ; and  observe,  that
in  a nativity  the  influence  of  any  aspect  to  the  moderators
is  more  powerful  if  it  be  a few  (8  or  10)  degrees  past,
than  if  it  be  not  yet  formed.

Significator.— This  is  that  body  or  point  to  which  a direc-
tion is  made,  as  it  signifies  the  nature  of  the  direction’s
influence.  This  is  a term  that  has  been  grossly  abused
in  the  science  ; and  might,  perhaps,  be  dispensed  with.

Succeedent. — Those  houses  which  lie  between  the  angular
and  cadent  houses,  viz.  2d,  5th,  8th,  and  11th,  and  planets
in  them.

Superiors  and  Inferiors. — y,  If.,  and  $ are  called
the  former,  being  beyond  the  Earth ; and  § , g , and  ])
are  called  the  latter,  being  between  the  Earth  and  the  0,
The  former  are  far  more  powerful  and  durable,  in  general,
in  their  effects.

Transits. — These  are  the  passing  over  the  place  of  any  mo-
derator or  planet,  or  their  aspects,  either  in  the  radix
or  revolution,  &c.  by  any  other  body.

Watery  Signs. — gs,  Itf,  and  X*

A Description  of  the  Twelve  Houses .

1st.— -This  influences  the  person,  health,  and  character  of  the
native.  Good  planets  shew  a good  constitution  and  bene-
volent disposition;  evil  planets  the  reverse.

2d.  — Influences  in  some  degree  the  property  of  the  native.  If
good  planets  be  there,  they  assist  to  give  wealth,  according
to  their  nature ; evil  planets  the  reverse.


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.  149

3d. — This  influences  the  native’s  journies,  and  his  brethren  or
near  relations.

4th. — This  influences  the  native’s  father,  and  his  property  in
land  or  houses,  his  inheritance,  &c.

5th. — This  affects  his  children,  and  the  good  or  evil  he  may
receive  thereby.

6th. — This  will  shew  something  of  the  nature  of  the  diseases
he  may  be  subject  to.

7th. — This  has  some  influence  on  the  native’s  fate  in  marriage.

8th.— This  points  out,  in  part,  the  quality  of  his  death.

9th. — This  has  something  to  do  with  his  distant  voyages,  and
his  pursuits  in  science,  law,  &c.

10th. — This  has  much  influence  on  his  honor  or  credit,  and  on
his  trade,  profession,  or  employment.

1 1 th. — This  house  will  shew  the  character  of  his  friends,  whether
true  or  false.

12th. — This  is  the  house  of  private  enemies,  and  according  to
the  quality  of  planets  therein  will  the  native  meet  with
persons  to  do  him  secret  mischief.

Observation. — The  student  must  be  cautious  not  to  rely  too
much  on  the  effects  of  the  houses,  asThat  has  been  one  of
the  great  follies  of  the  Arabian  and  old  English  writers
on  the  science.  When  a direction  is  complete,  the  house  in
which  the  body  directed  falls  will  help  to  point  out  the
character  of  the  circumstances  it  will  produce  ; thus,  if
0 or  J)  come  to  an  ill  aspect  with  § in  the  9th,  or  with
^ (he  being  in  evil  aspect  to  g at  birth),  it  may  very
probably  produce  a law-suit.  If  evil  directions  fall  in
the  ascendant,  they  generally  affect  health.


Sunrise.


150


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


Fig.  1.

Noon.

S


N.B.  The  Q,  D , and  planets  rise  at  E,  are  on  the
meridian  at  S,  set  at  W,  and  are  again  on  the  me-
ridian (under  the  Earth)  at  N.  This  appearance  is
produced  by  the  Earth  in  the  centre  turning  round  on
its  axis  once  in  every  24  hours.


Sunset.


East,


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY


151


Fig.  2.


South.


West,


152


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


A.  R.

Fig.  3.  273°  19'


/o


93°  19'

A.  R/  of  N.  Merit! .


N.R.  I am  not  certain  whether  this  birth  took  place
in  London  or  not;  but  if  it  were  atNewstead  Abbey,
the  figure  of  the  heavens  would  be  very  nearly  the
same,  and  the  time  of  directions  very  little  different.


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY


L53


A TABLE  TO  TURN  TIME  INTO  DEGREES  AND
MINUTES,  OR  TO  TURN  DEGREES  AND
MINUTES  INTO  TIME.


Deg.

H.M.

Deg.

H.M.

^eg.

H.M.

peg.

H.M.

Deg.

H.M

Deg.

H.  M.

Min.

M.S.

Min.

M.  S.

Min.

M.S.

Min.

M.S.

Min.

M.S.

Min.

M.  S.

1

0.  4

31

2.  4

61

4.  4

91

6.  4

121

8.  4

151

10.  4

2

0.  8

32

2.  8

62

4.  8

92

6.  8

122

8.  8

152

10.  8

3

0.12

33

2.12

63

4.12

93

6.12

123

8.12

153

10.12

4

0.16

34

2.16

64

4.16

94

6.16

124

8.16

154

10.16

5

0.20

35

2.20

65

4.20

95

6.20

125

8.20

155

10.20

6

0.24

36

2.24

66

4,24

96

6.24

126

8.24

156

10.24

7

0.28

37

2.28

67

4.28

97

6.28

127

8.28

157

10.28

8

0.32

38

2.32

68

4.32

98

6.32

128

8.32

158

10.32

9

0.36

39

2.36

69

4.36

99

6.36

129

8.36

159

10.36

10

0.40

40

2.40

70

4.40

100

6.40

130

8.40

160

10.40

11

0.44

41

2.44

71

4.44

101

6.44

131

8.44

161

10.44

12

0.48

42

2.48

72

4.48

102

6.48

132

8.48

162

10.48

13

0 52

43

2.52

73

4.52

103

6.52

133

8.52

163

10.52

14

0.56

44

2.56

74

4.56

104

6.56

134

8.56

164

10.56

15

1.0

45

3.  0

75

5.  0

105

7.  0

135

9.  0

165

11.  0

16

1.  4

46

3.  4

76

5.  4

106

7.  4

136

9.  4

166

11.  4

17

1.  8|

47

3 .8

77

5.  8

107

7.  8

137

9.  8

167

11.  8

18

1 12

48

3.12

78

5.12

108

7.12

138

9.12

168

11.12

19

1.16

49

3.16

79

5.16

109

7.16

139

9.16

169

11.16

20

1.20

50

3.20

80

5.20

110

7.20

140

9.20

170

11.20

21

1.24

51

3.24

81

5.24

111

7.24

141

9.24

171

11.24

22

1.28

52

3.28

82

5.28

112

7.28

142

9.28

172

11.28

23

1.32

53

3.32

83

5.32

113

7.32

143

9.32

173

11.32

24

1.36

54

3.36

84

5.36

114

7.36

144

9.36

174

11.36

25

1.40

55

3.40

85

5.40

115

7.40

145

9.40

175

11.40

26

1.44

56

3.44

86

5.44

116

7.44

146

9.44

176

11.44

27

1.48

57

3.48

87

5.48

117

7.48

147

9.48

177

11.48

28

1.52

58

3.52

88

5.52

118

7.52

148

9.52

178

11.52

29

1.56

59

3.56

89

5.56!

119

7.56

149

9.56

179

11.56

30

2.  0

60

4.  0

90

6.  0

120

8,  0

150

10.0

180

12.  0

154


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


Explanation  of  the  Table  to  turn  Degrees  and
Minutes  into  Time , or  the  reverse.

Rule  to  turn  Degrees  into  Time.— "Look  in  the
column  marked  deg.  min.  for  the  number  of  degrees
required,  and  opposite  to  them,  in  the  next  column  to
the  right  hand,  will  be  the  hours  and  minutes .

Rule  to  turn  Minutes  of  a Degree  into  Time.—
Look  in  the  column  marked  deg.  min.  for  the  num-
ber of  minutes  required,  and  opposite  to  them,  in  the
next  column  to  the  right  hand,  will  be  the  minutes
and  seconds  cf  time. — N.B.  If  the  degrees  are  above
180,  take  that  number  from  them,  and  find  the  time
for  the  remainder ; then  to  that  time  add  12  hours.

Example. — What  is  the  time  answering  to  49
degrees  and  27  minutes?  The  number  opposite  49
degrees  is  . . . 3h  16m  0s

The  number  opposite  27  min.  is  1 48

Answer  . 3 17  48

Rule  to  turn  Time  into  Degrees , dfc.— Look  op-
posite the  required  hours  and  minutes  for  the  degrees
in  the  column  before  it ; and  if  the  time  be  minutes
and  seconds , that  column  will  shew  minutes  of  a de-
gree.


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


155


A TABLE  OP  THE  POLES  OF  THE  HOUSES  FOR
EVERY  HALF  DEGREE  OF  LATITUDE  IN
GREAT  BRITAIN.


Ascendant,  or
7th  House.

3d,  5th,  9th,  or
11th  House.

2d.  6th,  Sth,  or
12th  House.

0

/

0

/

0

/

50

0

22  :

33

39  :

14

50  :

30

22  :

58

39  :

46

51  :

0

23  :

21

40  :

18

*51  :

31

23  :

47

40  :

51

52  :

0

24  :

12

41  :

24

52  :

: 30

24  :

44

42  :

4

53  :

: 0

25  :

6

42  :

32

53  :

30

25  :

32

43  :

5

54  :

0

26  :

1

43  :

39

54  :

: 30

26  :

30

44  :

13

55  :

: 0

26  :

59

44  :

48

55  :

30

27  :

29

45  :

24

56  :

0

28  :

1

45  :

59

56  :

30

28  :

33

46  :

36

57  :

: 0

29  :

6

47  :

13

57  :

: 30

29  :

40

47  :

50

58  :

0

30  :

15

48  :

27

* The  Latitude  or  Pole  of  London.


156  GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


Explanation  of  the  Table  of  the  Poles  of
Houses.

This  table  will  serve  for  any  place  in  Great  Bri-
tain, for  which  it  may  be  desired  to  erect  a figure  of
the  heavens.  The  1st  column  shews  the  pole  of  the
1st  and  7th  houses,  which  is  always  the  latitude  of
the  country ; the  2d  column  shews  the  pole  of  the
3d,  5th,  9th,  or  11th  houses;  and  the  3d  column  the
pole  of  the  2d,  6th,  8th,  or  ] 2th  houses.  If  the  lati-
tude of  the  place  fall  any  where  between  an  even  de-
gree and  half  degree,  a proportion  may  be  readily
calculated  for  the  difference  : thus,  if  the  latitude  be
that  of  Liverpool,  53°  25',  and  it  be  required  to  find
the  pole  of  the  12th  house,  say.  As  30  miles  are  to
the  difference  between  the  poles  of  the  12th,  for  53
degrees  and  53°  30',  which  is  33  minutes,  so  is  the
difference  of  latitude  25  to  the  difference  of  pole  27  J
minutes,  to  be  added  to  the  pole  of  the  12th  for  «^3
degrees.  Hence  the  pole  of  the  12th  at  Liverpool
is  42°  59J',  which  is  correct  with  that  found  by  trigo-
nometry to  within  half  a minute,  its  true  pole  being
42°  59'.  The  chief  use  of  this  table  is,  to  find  the
polar  elevation  of  the  © and  D ; but  this  may  be
done  more  accurately  by  trigonometry.


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.


157


Rules  to  Calculate  the  Longitude  of  the  Cusps
of  the  Houses , for  persons  not  possessing  a
Table  of  Housesor;  if  the  birth  be  far  distant
in  latitude  from  the  place  for  which  the
Table  of  Houses  is  calculated.

Rule.  1. — The  oblique  ascension  of  the  house  is
found  by  adding  30°  to  the  A.  R.  of  the  M.  C.  for
each  house  distant;  thus,,  30°  for  the  11th,  60°  for
the  12th,  90°  for  the  ascendant,  120°  for  the  2d,  and
150°  for  the  3d.

Rule  2. — Find  the  distance  of  the  cusp  of  the  house
from  T*  or  ; the  former  by  taking  its  oblique
ascension  from  360  if  above  270°,  or  the  latter  by
taking  it  from  180°  if  above  90°.

Rule  3. — Add  the  log.  cosine  of  the  oblique  ascen-
sion of  the  cusp  of  the  house  (reduced  as  by  Rule
2)  to  the  log . co-tangent  of  the  pole  of  the  house :
the  sum  is  the  log . cotangent  of  angle  A.

Rule  4. — If  the  oblique  ascension  be  less  than  90°
from  Aries , add  23°  28'  to  angle  A ; if  it  be  less  than
90°  from  Libra , take  the  difference  between  23°  28'
and  angle  A:  the  result  call  angle  B.

Rule  5.— xAdd  together  the  arithmetical  complement
of  the  log.  cosine  of  B,  the  log . cosine  of  A,  and  the
_ log.  tangent  of  the  oblique  ascension  of  the  cusp  of
the  house  : the  sum  will  be  the  log.  tangent  of  its


158  GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY*

longitude  from  Aries  or  Libra,  according  as  it  was
nearest  to  either  by  oblique  ascension.

N.B.  If  angle  B exceed  90°,  take  the  log.  sine  of
the  excess  above  90°  instead  of  the  log.  cosine,  and
find  its  arithmetical  complement.  And  in  this  case
the  longitude  must  be  reckoned  from  the  opposite
equinox  to  that  of  the  oblique  ascension ; if  the  oblique
ascension  was  measured  from  W',  reckon  it  from
and  if  the  oblique  ascension  was  measured  from
reckon  the  longitude  from  T.

j Example. — If  the  A.  R.  of  the  M.  C.  at  Liverpool
be  273°  19',  what  degree  of  the  zodiac  is  ascending  ?


A.  R.  of  M.  C 273°  19'

Add  90°  for  3 houses 90  0

363  19

A.  R.  ofvOoO'  360  0

Oblique  ascension  of  ascendant 3 19

Log.  cosino  of  3°  19/  9.99927

Log.  co-tangent  of  pole  of  Liverpool  53°  25'  9.87053

Log.  co-tangent  angle  A,  which  is  53°  28'... 9.86980
Angle  A 53°  28'


Add  (the  oblique  asc.  being  nearest  °fi). . 23  28


GRAMMAR  OF  ASTROLOGY.  159

Log.  cosine  angle  B (A  comp.) 0.64573

Log.  cosine  angle  A 9.77473


Log.  tangent  oblique  asc.  from  ^=3°  19'.. .8.76306
Log.  tangent  of  longitude  fromTzi  8°  4r...9.18352

It  will  be  seen  that  the  longitude  of  the  ascendant
differs  only  46'  from  that  of  London  ; which  makes  no
difference,  except  in  bringing  the  D to  the  ascendant
by  second  motion,  as  it  is  the  A.  R.  of  the  M.  C.,  or
oblique  ascension  of  the  ascendant,  and  not  the  lon-
gitude, which  is  used  in  working  directions.


FINIS.


160


Just  Published.,  by  Sherwood  & Co.  Price  5s.  plain,  and
5s.  Gd.  coloured,

RAPHAEL’S

ROYAL  BOOK  OF  FATE :

QUEEN  ELIZABETHS  ORACLE  OF  FUTURE  EVENTS,

A WORK  OF  THE  GREATEST  INTEREST,

WITH  A LARGE  HIEROGLYPHIC  PLATE,

Containing  Sixty-four  Antique,  Quaint,  and  Mystioal  Emblems,
relating  to  Riches,  Love,  Marriage,  Happiness,  Dreams  Foretold,
and  all  subjects  of  Fate , Chance , and  Mortal  Destiny ; with  Five
Thousand  correct  Answers  to  the  most  important  Questions,
shewing  the  future  fate  of  Human  Life,  performed  in  a Simple
and  Pleasing  Manner,  by  the  Artof  Sortiligy,  by  Cards,  and  by
Lots  or  Points,  entirely  divested  of  every  thing  that  can  render
the  subject  abstruse  or  difficult,  being  the  final  part  of  an  ex-
tremely valuable,  rare,  old,  Illuminated  Manuscript  (formetly
belonging  to  the  celebrated  Earl  of  Essex,  who  was  beheaded
for  high  treason  in  the  reign  of  Queen  Elizabeth),  and  which  was
known  to  have  been  consulted  by  the  “ Virgin  Queen,”  and  her
Courtiers,  on  every  momentous  occasion  ;

A RARE  RELIC  OF  OLDEN  TIMES ,

Faithfully  Compiled  from  the  Original'  (which  cost  Twenty
Guineas),  and

Edited  by  RAPHAEL,  the  Astrologer  of  the  19th  Century.
Third  edition , to  which  is  added,

RAPHAEL’S  NATIVITY,  •

By  ZADKIEL  THE  SEER,

Author  of  the  “Grammar  of  Astrology.”


Compton  & Ritchie,  Printers,  Middle  Street,  Cloth  Fair,  London.


m


-


. '%


L


*
