The Greek Commonwealth (Alfred Zimmern, 1911)
==========================================================
The classic English portrait of fifth-century Athens: politics, economy, and thought as one. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (greekcommonwealt00zimm).

THE
GREEK  COMMONWEALTH

POLITICS  AND  ECONOMICS
IN  FIFTH-CENTURY  ATHENS


BY


ALFRED  E.  ZIMMERN

LATE    FELLOW    AND    TUTOR    OF    NEW    COLLEGE,    OXFORD
LECTURER    AT    THE    LONDON    SCHOOL    OF    ECONOMICS    AND    POLITICAL    SCIENCE


OXFORD

AT   THE   CLARENDON   PRESS

191 1


HENRY  FROWDE

PUBLISHER    TO    THE    UNIVERSITY    OF   OXFORD

LONDON,    EDINBURGH,    NEW    YORK

TORONTO    AND    MELBOURNE


TO

THE   TWO
ST.   MARY   WINTON    COLLEGES


2054220


PREFACE

This  book  is  the  result  of  an  attempt  to  make  clear  to  myself
what  fifth-century  Athens  was  really  like.  Most  educated  people
have  their  own  vision  of  ancient  Greece.  I  have  tried  to  convey
mine  in  the  form  of  a  study  of  the  nature,  influence,  and  inter-
action of  two  great  forces  in  Athenian  life.

A  few  words  may  explain  what  has  dictated  this  choice  of
treatment.

It  is  now  generally  admitted  that  neither  an  individual  nor
a  nation  can  be  properly  understood  without  a  knowledge  of
their  surroundings  and  means  of  support — in  other  words,  of
their  geographical  and  economic  conditions.  This  doctrine,
obvious  though  it  seems  to-day,  was  somewhat  slow  in  winning
acceptance  in  connexion  with  the  study  of  ancient  Greece.  The
traditions  of  classical  learning  and  the  lack  of  relevant  evidence
combined  to  keep  Greek  scholars  out  of  touch  with  newer  methods
of  social  inquiry.  But  during  the  last  two  generations,  thanks
mainly  to  the  archaeologists,  this  defect  has  been  steadily  repaired  ;
and  we  now  possess,  and  are  entitled  to  draw  conclusions  from,
a  large  and  increasing  mass  of  information  about  the  economic
side  of  Greek  life.  It  is  this  accumulation  of  new  evidence  which,
more  than  any  other  single  cause,  distinguishes  the  Greece  of
modern  scholarship  from  the  Greece  of  Grote  and  our  grand-
fathers.

Classical  scholarship,  therefore,  on  the  Continent  at  any  rate,
can  no  longer  be  reproached  with  neglecting  the  application  of
modern  methods.  The  special  dangers  to  which  it  is  exposed
to-day,  and  which  determined  my  choice  of  treatment,  lie  rather
in  the  opposite  direction.  There  is,  firstly,  the  tendency  to  over-
specialization  and  one-sidedness,  the  inclination  to  forget  the
wood  for  the  trees.  This  is  a  temptation  which  besets  every
science  at  a  stage  when  knowledge  is  accumulating  very  rapidly;
but  it  is  particularly  insidious  in  such  a  study  as  that  of  ancient


6  TREFACK

Greece,  where  for  the  student  everything  depends  upon  remaining
steadily  conscious,  in  and  through  the  smallest  detail,  of  the
wonder  and  greatness  of  the  whole.  It  is  so  easy,  for  instance,
in  studying  the  Erechthcum  building  inscriptions  to  become
absorbed  in  their  interesting  information  about  work  and  wages,
and  to  forget  that  they  relate  to  the  Erechtheum.  Yet  when
that  is  forgotten  all  is  forgotten.

Books  and  articles  written  in  this  spirit  are  easily  detected  and
can  be  allowed  for  accordingly.  But  there  is  a  second  tendency
to  error,  against  which  it  is  more  difficult  to  guard.  It  arises
from  the  application  of  modern  methods  and  ideas  to  ancient
times  without  a  sufficient  estimate  of  the  difference  between
ancient  Greek  and  modern  conditions.  To  take  an  obvious
instance.  It  has  long  been  clear  to  historians  that  economic
circumstances  had  a  good  deal  to  do  with  the  Peloponnesian
War ;  yet  we  have  no  right  to  pass  from  this  to  an  explanation
of  the  whole  struggle  in  modern  economic  terms.  What  is  mis-
leading in  such  explanations  is  not  the  details  but  the  back-
ground. They  seem  to  be  based  upon  a  wrong  or  at  least  an
inadequate  conception  of  the  normal  economic  life  of  ancient
Greece.  The  only  safe  road  to  the  solution  of  this  and  kindred
problems  is  to  go  back  to  first  beginnings,  to  the  careful  analysis
of  ordinary  ancient  terms  and  processes.  This  must  be  my  excuse
for  the  disproportionate  length  of  the  third  section  of  the  book.

Some  further  explanation  is  perhaps  necessary  as  to  the  atti-
tude I  have  adopted  towards  the  fourth-century  philosophers.
Plato  and  Aristotle  used  often  to  be  regarded,  in  the  comparative
lack  of  other  evidence,  as  first-rate  authorities  upon  the  life  of  the
City  State.  It  is  perhaps  not  even  yet  sufficiently  recognized
that  they  are  not.  They  only  knew  the  City  State  in  the  days
of  its  decline,  and  their  view  of  it  is  coloured  by  their  own
personal  ideas  and  doctrines.  It  is  as  unsafe  to  rely  upon  them
for  the  facts  and  spirit  of  the  fifth  and  preceding  centuries  as  it
would  be  to  rely  upon  Carlylc  and  Ruskin  for  the  facts  and  spirit
of  English  life  before  the  Great  Reform  Bill  and  the  Industrial
Revolution.  The  right  method  is  exactly  the  reverse,  to  apply
the  history  of  the  generation  that  preceded  them  to  the  interpreta-
tion of  their  own  doctrines.  No  interpretation  of  either  the
political  or  the  ethical  theories  of  the  later  philosophers  can  be


PREFACE  7

satisfactory  which  does  not  take  into  account  the  impression
left  upon  their  minds  by  the  social  development  which  I  have
attempted  to  describe.  I  had  originally  planned  to  close  the
book  with  a  section  dealing  with  this  subject — one  of  great
importance  in  the  history  of  European  political  speculation—
but  eventually  abandoned  it  as  beyond  the  proper  limits  of  my
scheme.  I  have,  however,  allowed  myself  occasionally  to  touch
upon  the  subject  in  the  footnotes,  as  a  glance  at  the  Index  will
show.

I  have  tried  to  arrange  the  book  so  as  to  make  it  useful  to
students  with  the  least  possible  distraction  to  the  general  reader.
It  seemed  inconvenient  to  group  the  footnotes  together  at  the
end  of  the  book  or  the  chapters,  but  I  hope  that  their  arrange-
ment in  paragraphs  will  make  it  easy  for  the  general  reader  to
skip  them.  My  ancient  references  are,  so  far  as  possible,  to  well-
known  authors.  Modern  writers  I  have  generally  quoted  either
to  support  some  statement  that  seemed  to  need  confirmation,  or
because  I  thought  the  reference  might  be  helpful  to  the  reader.
I  have  never  referred  to  a  writer  simply  because  I  disagreed  with
him^  and  have  not  troubled  to  multiply  modern  witnesses  when
I  had  good  ancient  testimony  on  my  side.  In  a  work  involving
so  many  decisions  on  points  of  detail  I  cannot  hope  to  have
avoided  errors  of  judgement,  but  I  have  done  my  best  to  play  no
tricks  with  the  evidence.  Indeed,  as  those  who  care  to  look  up
the  references  will  realize,  there  are  comparatively  few  special
points  on  which  I  can  claim  to  have  contributed  anything  novel.

I  have  to  thank  a  great  number  of  friends  for  kind  help  and  en-
couragement, notably  Professor  Gilbert  Murray,  Professor  Myres,
Mr.  Reginald  Coupland,  Mr.  R.  H.  Dundas,  Mr.  Arnold  J.
Toynbee,  Mr.  Richard  Jennings,  Mr.  W.  C.  Barton,  the  Rev.
J.  M.  Murphy,  S.J.,  of  the  National  University  of  Ireland,
and,  last  but  not  least,  my  old  teacher  and  present  colleague,
Mr.  Graham  Wallas.  My  acknowledgements  are  also  due  to  the
authorities  of  the  British  School  at  Athens,  who  by  making  me
an  Associate  of  the  School  enabled  me  to  write  the  greater  part
of  the  book  under  the  pleasantest  and  most  favourable  conditions.

A.  E.  Z.
Oakhill  Drive,
Surbiio?i,  191 1.


CONTENTS


Introductory  Note


PART  I  :  GEOGRAPHY


Chapter

I.     The  Mediterranean  Area
II.     The  Sea

III.  The  Climate

IV.  The  Soil


PART  II :    POLITICS

The  Elements  of  Citizenship
Fellowship,  or  the  Rule  of  Public  Opinion
Custom,  or  the  Rule  of  the  Family
Efficiency,  or  the  Rule  of  the  Magistrate
Gentleness,  or  the  Rule  of  Religion
Law,  or  the  Rule  of  Fair  Play
Self-Government,  or  the  Rule  of  the  People
Liberty,  or  the  Rule  of  Empire

The  Ideal  of  Citizenship
Happiness,  or  the  Rule  of  Love     .


I.

II.

HI.

IV.

V.

VI.

VII.

VIII.


I.
II.

III.

I\'.

\'.

\I.

VII.

VIII.

IX.

X.

XL

XIL


PART  III
Poverty
Use  and  Worn


ECONOMICS


The  Growing  Citv
^\'ork  on  the  Land
Hunting  or  Robbery
Warfare         ....
Colonization

Citv  Economics
Craftsmen  and  Workmen
Retail  Trade

J'ublic  and  Private  Property  .
MonL-y  .....
J'oreign  Trade
Population    ....


PAGE

ro


13

20

32
39


55

65

79

103

121

135
175

193


207
214

222
230
238
246

251
273

280

295
308

319


CONTENTS

Imperial  Economics
Chapter

XIII.     Sea-Power     .

P'ree  Intercourse    .

The  Fellow  Workers

The  Silver-Mines  .

Finance


XIV.

XV.

XVI.

XVII.


PAGE

344
360

375
391
397


CONCLUSION


The  Peloponnesian  War 414


Chronological  Tai;le     .
Note  on  Abbreviations  .
Index  of  Modern  Writers  cited
General  Index        .         .         .         ,


438
444
445
448


MAPS
Attica,  Megara,  and  parts  of  Corinth  and  Boeotia,  with  Vorkshire

to  same  scale      .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .152

Greece  and  adjoining  lands         .         .         .         .         .         .         .at etid


INTRODUCTORY   NOTE

It  is  not  the  purpose  of  this  book  to  tell  any  part  of  the  story
of  Greek  history.  That  lies  within  the  province  of  the  narrative
historian.  Our  object  here  is  a  more  modest  one — to  group
together  certain  facts  and  to  trace  the  course  of  certain  ideas
which  may  help  to  make  that  story  and  the  men  wlvo  acted  in
it  more  intelligible  to  modern  readers.

Greek  civilization  differs  from  our  own  both  in  its  material
environment  and  in  its  feelings  and  ideas.  Our  method  will  be  to
deal  first  with  the  main  features  of  that  environment ;  next  with
the  political  institutions  which  the  Greeks  established  within  it  ;
next  with  their  means  of  livelihood,  that  is  with  their  '  economics '
or  housekeeping ;  and  lastly  with  the  conflict  which  arose,  as  it
has  arisen  in  many  modern  civilized  communities,  between  the
driving  necessities  of  economic  development  and  the  accepted
institutions  and  ideals  of  national  life — a  conflict  which  brought
inward  unhappiness  and  outward  disaster  upon  the  foremost
Greek  community  at  the  very  height  of  her  greatness  and  left  its
mark  upon  the  mind  and  writings  of  the  men  who  laid  the
foundations  of  European  political  thought.

We  shall  thus  be  approaching  Greek  civilization  from  a  direction
contrary  to  that  often  taken  by  modern  writers,  approaching  it
from  the  side  on  which  its  differences  from  our  own  are  most
apparent  and  from  which  its  unique  characteristics  are  most
easily  seized.


THE   GREEK  COMMONWEALTH


Die  Griechen  sind,  wie  das  Genie,  eiiifach  :  deshalb  sind  sie  die  unsterb-
lichen  Lehrer. — Nietzsche.


PART   I.     GEOGRAPHY


Two  Voices  are  there  ;  one  is  of  the  sea,
One  of  the  mountains,  each  a  mighty  voice ;
In  both  from  age  to  age  thou  didst  rejoice,
They  were  thy  chosen  music.  Liberty.


CHAPTER   I

THE   MEDITERRANEAN   AREA^

'H  'EXXas  Tas  5)pas  ttoXXoc  ti  KaWiara  Kf;^/)/;/ieVoj  eXa;^e.

Herodotus,  iii.  io6,
Greece  enjoys  by  far  the  best  tempered  climate.

To  tS>v  'EWrjvaiv  yevos  fxtaeva.  Kara  tovs   tottovs.

Aristotle,  Politics  1327.
The  Hellenic  race  occupies  an  intermediate  situation  geographically.

Greece  is  a  Mediterranean  country,  placed,  as  Aristotle  says,
in  an  intermediate  position,  half-way  between  the  Tropics  and
the  cold  lands  of  the  North.  It  shares  with  the  other  Medi-
terranean lands,  as  compared  with  Europe  beyond  the  Alps  and
Africa  beyond  the  Atlas,  a  distinctive  climate,  distinctive  scenery,
and,  as  a  necessary  consequence,  a  distinctive  mode  of  life.

It  is  the  scenery  which  first  attracts  the  passing  traveller  of
to-day ;  and  so  it  has  been  with  the  invading  hosts  of  all  ages.
From  the  days  before  history,  when  the  first  barbarians  thrust
their  way  southwards,  the  men  of  the  North  have  always  been
susceptible  to  the  peculiar  beauty  of  the  Mediterranean  lands.
To  us  in  the  North,  if  we  are  book-learned  and  home-keeping,
Greece  and  Italy  spell  Athens  and  Rome.  They  are  associated
in  our  minds  with  a  host  of  inherited  ideas,  with  Art  and  Free-
dom and  Law  and  Empire.  They  are  familiar  to  us  as  the
cradle  of  some  of  the  strongest  forces  in  our  national  life,  as  the
first  and  most  congenial  home  of  our  distinctively  Western
civilization.     But  to  the  prehistoric  Achaeans  and  Dorians,  and

*  In  this  and  the  following  sections  I  have  made  much  use  of  Philippson's
Das  Mittelmcergebiet^  a  popularly  written  book  by  a  standard  authority  on
Mediterranean  Geography.  So  far  as  I  know  there  is  no  similar  book  in
English,  although  one  is  greatly  needed.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  Professor
Myres's  inaugural  lecture  on  Greek  Lands  and  the  Greek  People  marks  the
beginning  of  a  new  era  for  English  classical  teaching  in  this  respect.

1246  B


14  GEOGRAPHY  part  i

to  the  Galatians  and  Goths  and  Longbeards  and  Vandals  and
Avars  who  followed  them,  this  abstract  appeal  would  have  had
no  meaning.  Yet  they  too,  in  their  cold  Northern  homes,  heard
the  call  of  the  South,  and  thousands  of  them  obeyed  it.  For
months  or  years  they  pushed  sunwards  with  their  families  and
possessions  and  household  gods,  trusting  in  tribesmen's  tales  of
a  wonderful  land  behind  the  hills.  When  they  emerged  at
length  out  of  the  last  rough  Balkan  defile  and  pitched  camp  one
evening  on  level  Greek  ground  between  the  mountains  and  the
sea,  it  was  the  sheer  beauty  of  this  new  world  which  made
them  feel  that  they  had  found  a  home.  Upon  their  Northern
eyes,  unused  to  a  region  of  sharp  outlines  and  strong  colours,
the  Southern  landscape  worked  like  magic.  They  felt  they  had
come  to  fairyland,  and  that  they  must  stay  there  for  ever.

The  poets  of  their  race,  from  the  bards  of  the  early  invaders,
out  of  whom  our  Homer  grew,  to  Goethe  and  Byron,  Ibsen  and
Browning,  bear  constant  witness  to  this  spell.  Yet  it  is  hard,
except  just  at  twilight  when  the  magic  is  working,  to  feel  quite
at  home  in  fairyland.  Romance  and  Imagination  sway  us  power-
fully at  moments :  but  Habit  and  Affection  are  stronger  forces  in
our  nature  and  are  not  to  be  won  over  by  superficial  enticements.
The  gulf  between  North  and  South  is  too  great  to  be  bridged
in  a  single  visit  or  a  single  lifetime.  It  takes  more  than  one
generation  to  live  a  new  country  into  the  blood.  Our  Northern
poets  who  have  sung  of  the  South  have  sung  as  strangers  and
sojourners :  they  have  been  Romantics  not  Realists,  enthusi-
astic bystanders  rather  than  quiet  inhabitants  going  about  their
business  and  speaking  naturally  of  their  life  and  feelings.  The
spirit  of  the  South  remains  for  them  something  strange  and
picturesque  and  external,  which  attracts  their  wonder  and  curiosity
without  winning  its  way  into  their  understanding  or  laying  its  hold
upon  their  devotion.  And  sometimes  they  are  honest  enough  to
confess  it.  'Oh  to  be  in  England,'  cried  Browning,  letting  pass
before  his  mind's  eye  all  the  dear  familiar  sights  that  he  was
missing —

Oh  to  be  in  England
Now  that  April's  there.
And  whoever  wakes  in  England
Sees,  some  morning,  unaware.


CIIAP.  I         THE    MEDITERRANEAN    AREA  15

That  the  lowest  boughs  and  the  brushwood  sheaf
Round  the  chn-tree  bole  arc  in  tiny  leaf,
While  the  chaffinch  sings  on  the  orchard  bough
In  England — now!

That  tells  us  something  of  what  men  have  to  renounce  when
they  go  southward.  At  the  outset  of  our  journey  it  is  well  to
have  it  brought  to  mind.

Where  even  the  poets  feel  homesick,  plain  men  will  fare  worse.
Often  and  often  must  the  conquering  invader  have  repented  of
having  obeyed  the  call,  and  cursed  himself  for  a  fool  as  he
opened  his  eyes  in  the  morning,  after  a  hot  and  troubled  night,
upon  the  metallic  sky  above  him  and  the  baked  ground  beneath.
It  was  not  for  a  mere  whim  that  many  a  Frankish  baron  of
mediaeval  Greece  abandoned  his  hard-won  domains  and  went
*  home  '  to  die  by  the  Rhine  or  the  Loire.  What  could  be  more
attractive  to  the  possessive  spirit  of  a  Northern  noble  than  to
have  Athens  for  his  very  own  and  to  look  forward  to  leaving
it  to  his  heir?  Otho  de  la  Roche,  first  feudal  lord  of  Attica  and
Boeotia,  had  the  Acropolis  for  his  castle  and  the  Parthenon  for
his  minster.  Yet  he  gave  up  all  in  his  old  age  and  went  back
with  his  sons  to  the  rolling  plains  of  Burgundy.^

If  the  Northerner  who  has  come  and  seen  and  yielded  to  the
spell  cannot  easily  adapt  his  mind  to  Southern  conditions,  it  is
still  harder  for  those  who  can  only  enter  into  contact  with  it
indirectly  through  books  and  pictures.  They  can  only  under-
stand Mediterranean  life  and  the  literature  to  which  it  gave  birth,
whether  in  Greece  or  Palestine,  by  a  deliberate  effort  of  the
imagination.  No  doubt  the  effort  is  worth  making,  but  its  diffi-
culty (especially  for  young  and  untrained  minds)  is  very  great ;
and  in  England,  at  any  rate,  our  educational  traditions  do  little
to  overcome  it.  For  the  uncorrected  imagination  of  the  North-
erner the  olive-groves  of  Colonus  arc  an  English  park  and  the
plane-trees  of  the  Ilissus  a  Thames  promenade,  while  '  Sunium's
marbled  steep  ',  like  the  chalk  cliffs  of  the  South  coast,  runs  down
to  long  stretches  of  tidal  beach.  '

1  Miller,  Latins  in  the  Levant,  pp.  91-2,  cf.  68,  74-  Count  Berthold  of
Katzenellenbogen,  the  Crusader  who  gave  the  signal  for  setting  fire  to
Constantinople,  is  another  instance  of  the  same  home-sickness.  P>oth  their
modest  castles  still  stand.  Otho's  is  La  Roche-sur-Ognon  on  the  Haute-
Saone  :  Katzenellenbogen  looks  down  on  a  little  village  in  Nassau.

B  %


i6  GEOGRAPHY  part,  i

These  mistakes  are  all  the  harder  to  correct  because  the  Greek
poets  who  have  come  down  to  us  seldom  pause  to  describe  the
scenery  of  their  country,  and  are  never  detailed  or  Words-
worthian  in  their  treatment  of  it.  Landscape  poetry,  like  land-
scape painting,  belongs  to  the  reflective  period  in  a  nation's  life,
when  it  has  learnt  to  see  itself  in  its  own  surroundings.  Greek
writers,  at  least  up  to  the  end  of  the  fifth  century,  had  not  yet
fully  entered  upon  this  stage  of  self-consciousness.  Like  all
simple  folk,  they  take  a  knowledge  of  their  scenery  and  sur-
roundings for  granted  in  all  who  listen  to  them.  The  Mediter-
ranean landscape,  like  the  institutions  of  the  City  State,  forms
a  permanent  background  to  Greek  life  and  thought.  Its  influence
is  omnipresent,  but  it  is  seldom  expressed.  It  is  left  to  show
itself,  more  spontaneously  and  truthfully;  in  the  chance  idiom  or
detail  that  slips  out  as  the  setting  of  a  story,  in  what  is  implied
or  hinted  rather  than  consciously  stated,  in  the  many  little  signi-
ficant touches  which  to  the  careful  observer,  of  nations  as  of  men,
are  always  the  surest  and  happiest  revelation  of  character.

Thus  the  traveller  in  Southern  lands,  if  he  is  prepared  to  for-
get all  he  ever  knew  and  begin  learning  it  afresh,  will  constantly
be  discovering  the  real  meaning  of  words  and  phrases  and  meta-
phors which  he  had  been  accustomed  from  his  school-days  to
regard  as  '  classical  tags '  or  romantic  properties,  or  had  perhaps
never  noticed  at  all.  A  man  must  have  overcome  his  first
strangeness  and  grown  used  to  going  up  the  Acropolis  for  his
evening  walk  before  he  can  know  why  Pericles  said  that  his
Athens  '  cheered  the  heart  and  delighted  the  eye  day  by  day '.
He  must  have  stood  on  an  island  peak  after  sunset  before  he  can
truly  understand  the  words  of  Alcman's  evening  hymn: —

The  hills  have  fallen  asleep.

O'er  cleft  and  crag
One  quiet  spreads,
O'er  rocks  that  face  the  deep

And  stony  torrent  beds.^

or  appreciate  the  masterful  subtlety  with  which  Goethe  adapted
it  to  his  Northern  purpose  in  Ubcr  alien  Gipfcln  ist  RnJi.  He
^  Alcman,  Frag.  65,  beginning

ivho\Mn.v   h    ip(U)v  Kopvcfxii  Tf  Ka\  (ficipayyfs,

Trpd)ov(s    T€    Kai   j)(npu8p(U,

where  every  word  should  call  up  a  picture.


CHAP.  I         THE   MEDITERRANEAN    AREA  17

must  have  sailed  through  the  straits  of  Salamis  and  landed  to
look  across  at  the  hills  of  Attica  to  feel  what  Euripides'  hearers
felt  when  the  chorus  sang : —

In  Salamis,  filled  with  the  foaming

Of  billows  and  murmur  of  bees,
Old  Telamon  stayed  from  his  roamhig,

Long  ago,  on  a  throne  of  the  seas ;
Looking  out  on  the  hills  olive-laden,

Enchanted,  where  first  from  the  earth
The  grey-gleaming  fruit  of  the  Maiden
Athena  had  birth.'

But  what  seems  simple  and  obvious  to  the  man  on  the  spot
often  entirely  escapes  the  notice  of  the  Northern  reader ;  or,  if
his  attention  is  directed  to  it,  seems  unnatural  and  mysterious.
The  traveller,  if  he  is  teachable,  gradually  learns  what  to  look
for:  he  is  living  in  the  atmosphere,  and  a  sense  of  the  world  in
which  the  old  books  were  written  settles  on  him  like  thin  dust
and  is  with  him  all  day  long.  When  he  returns  to  his  study  or
class-room  and  takes  up  Sophocles  or  Aristophanes  his  mind  is
alive  with  pictures.  He  can  hear  the  chorus  of  village  elders
holding  forth  by  the  fountain  ;  he  can  almost  smell  the  garlic.
His  stay-at-home  fellow  student  cannot  follow  him  there  without
guidance,  if  he  can  ever  really  follow  him  at  all.  Travellers'
tales,  alas,  are  very  different  from  travel,  and  geography  is  a  poor
substitute  for  personal  experience.  Books  and  lectures  and  lantern
slides  cannot  take  the  place  of  life.  Still,  unless  we  are  to  despair
of  classical  education,  the  attempt  at  guidance  is  worth  making.
Let  us  try,  therefore,  before  describing  Greek  institutions  in  de-
tail, to  make  clear  some  of  the  simpler  features  of  the  world  in
which  the  Greeks  lived. ^

We  are  taught  from  early  youth  to  divide  the  world  into  con-
tinents, and  are  apt  to  think  of  the  Mediterranean,  which  washes
three  of  the  five,  as  marking  a  boundary  line  between  Europe,
Asia,  and  Africa.  We  think  of  Europe  as  '  civilized ',  Asia  as
Oriental  or  stagnant,  and  Africa  as  barbarous  ;  or,  making  the
frontier  one  of  religion    rather   than  of  '  progress ',  we  regard

*  Eur.  Troad.  799  ff.,  tr.  Murray.

"^  Compare  the  parallel  difficulty  of  making,  say,  As  Yon  Like  It  intelligible
to  Indian  schoolboys.


1 8  GEOGRAPHY  part  i

Europe  as  Christian  and  Nearer  Asia  and  Africa  as  Mohammedan.
In  cither  case  we  '  think  in  continents ',  making  the  land  our
centre  of  vision.

This  view  is  natural  enough  in  London,  but  appears  strange  in
Constantinople,  where  business  men  cross  twice  daily,  in  suburban
steamers,  from  one  continent  to  the  other.  It  has  always  been
misleading  from  the  point  of  view  of  physical  geography,  for  the
countries  round  the  Mediterranean  form,  both  structurally  and
climatically,  a  distinct  region  of  the  world's  surface.  But  it  is
historically  and  politically  misleading  also.  Since  the  French
occupation  of  Algiers,  North  Africa  is  no  longer  Barbary ;  and
with  a  Parliament  in  Constantinople  and  a  railway  to  the  Prophet's
Tomb  at  Medina,  Nearer  Asia  can  no  longer  be  called  'stagnant'.
We  are  returning,  in  fact,  to  normal  conditions.  For  to  the
Greeks  the  Mediterranean  area  was  always  a  unity,  and  the
Mediterranean  itself  not  a  frontier,  but  a  highway;  they  saw
the  world  as  'a  rim  of  convergent  coastlands  encircling  the
Midland  Sea^  which  is  Our  Sea  '.  '  Our  Sea  '  or  '  This  Sea '  was
indeed  their  only  name  for  it.  With  the  countries  immediately
round  it  they  were  tolerably  familiar  ;  but  the  /ii7iterlandhtyond,
which  differed  in  climate,  structure,  and  manners,  always  remained
to  them  mysterious.  Herodotus  penetrated  behind  the  true
Mediterranean  region  to  Scythia  and  Babylon  and  inland  Egypt
and  Libya;  so  we  can  see  from  his  book  what  non-Mediterranean
lands  looked  like  when  observed  through  Greek  spectacles.^

This  Mediterranean  area  differs  structurally  from  the  countries
round  it.  It  \%  yoiDigcr  than  they.  A  geological  map  shows  the
greater  part  to  consist  of  chains  of  sharp,  recently  folded  moun-
tains, formed  mainly  of  limestone ;  and  only  in  isolated  patches,
as  in  the  '  blunt  bowheaded  Downs '  round  Constantinople,  does

'  '  Convergent  coastlands '  :  Myres  in  Atif/ifopoiogy  and  the  Classics,
p.  121.  The  reierence  is  to  Hdt.  iv.  36-45.  Herodotus  could  not  understand
(ch.  45)  why  '  the  earth,  being  single,  should  be  divided  into  three  parts
with  names  called  after  women  '.  The  names  Kurope,  Asia,  and  Libya  are
unknown  to  Homer  and  appear  first  in  Pindar  and  Aeschylus  (e.  g.  P.  V.  412).
Compare  Myres's  paper  on  'J'he  Gcograpliical  Aspect  of  Greek  Colonizatio7t,
published  in  I'rocecdini^s  of  the  Classical  Association,  \o\.  viii  (191 1),  where
he  dwells  on  '  the  persistent  Cireekness ',  even  now,  of  the  Mediterranean  sea-
board, and  sliows  how  'in  all  the  chief  functions  of  huuian  life  and  in  all  the
principal  relations  between  its  several  parts'  the  ancient  world,  which  was
even  in  Roman  limes  a  predominantly  Cireek  world,  'faced  inwards  upon  the
shores  of  a  Midland  Sea.'


CHAP.  I  THE    MEDITERRANEAN    AR1:A  19

the  traveller  find  the  tame  contours  to  which  he  is  accustomed  in
England.  This  adds  to  the  grandeur  of  the  scenery :  but  also
to  the  difficulty  of  communications  by  land,  which  is  a  constant
feature  of  Mediterranean  life.  Sometimes,  for  instance,  as  in
Dalmatia,  the  Chile  of  Europe,  a  strip  of  land  is  entirely  cut
off  from  the  regions  behind  the  mountains,  and  leads  a  separate
life  all  through  history.

The  sea  in  its  present  dimensions  is  even  younger  than  the
rocks.  Proofs  of  various  sorts,  amongst  others  the  occurrence  of
fossils  of  dwarf  elephants  in  Malta,  Sicily,  and  Sardinia,  have
convinced  geologists  that  at  some  (geologically)  very  recent
period  there  was  a  great  subsidence  of  land  over  large  parts  of
the  area,  accompanied,  of  course,  by  a  corresponding  encroach-
ment of  sea.  To  this  are  attributed  the  deep  depressions  which
interrupt  the  mountain  chains  at  many  points  and  cause  the
irregular  coastline  and  the  countless  larger  and  smaller  islands
and  sunken  rocks  of  the  Aegean.  The  cliffs  that  rise  out  of  what
Sophocles  called  the  'sea-ravines'  of  the  Cyclades  are  simply
the  continuation,  across  a  submerged  depression^  of  the  mountain
chains  of  the  mainland.  Hence,  too,  the  curious  straits  which
we  find  in  Greek  lands,  which  bear  little  resemblance  to  our
narrow  seas  at  Dover  or  Stranraer.  The  Bosporus,  the  Helles-
pont, and  the  Euripus  are  close  and  intricate  pathways  full
of  twists  and  corners ;  they  have,  in  fact,  been  eroded,  and  are
simply  submerged  river-valleys.  The  famous  Golden  Horn  was
once  a  tributary  stream.^

Moreover,  this  process  of  subsidence  is  not  yet  completed,  as
Calabria  and  Sicily  know  only  too  well.  Mediterranean  man  has
always  been  familiar  with  earthquakes  and  volcanoes.  Herodotus
remarks  it  as  noteworthy  that  in  Scythia  '  if  an  earthquake  takes
place,  either  in  summer  or  winter,  it  is  regarded  as  a  wonder'.
This  found  its  reflection  in  religion  and  literature :  and  terra
firma  to  the  Greeks  was  never  quite  what  it  is  to  us.

But  we  must  turn  first  to  the  sea,  which  deserves  precedence
over  terra  firma  in  Mediterranean  geography.^

'  Sea-ravines,  Trachiniae  100.

"  Hdt.  iv.  28.  Strabo,  57-9,  gives  a  list  of  catastrophes  by  earthquake  and
volcano.  For  the  general  feeling  cf.  Eur.  Bacchae  391,  and  numerous  other
similar  passages.


CHAPTER   II
THE   SEA

<i(pf  yap
arffjiaiv    o  Ti  XP'I  ^^^  (rvfxnpacTaeiv'
oil  yap  7T0T    fpt'is  as  'QKeavov
(^I'Xoy  fO-Ti  (^(fiaioTfpos  aoi.

Aeschylus,  Prometheus  Vinctus  294.

Dwr  hx]  avbpfs  y((opyo\  nai  ov  OaXaaaiot  .  .  .  li^iov  tiv  ti  hpafv ; — Pericles  in
Thuc.  i.  142-3.

How  can  mere  farmers,  with  no  knowledge  of  the  sea,  achieve  anything
worthy  of  note  ?

Every  Englishman  is  familiar  with  '  the  sea ' ;  but  the  sea  of
the  Greeks  is  not  the  sea  that  we  know.  Landlocked  on  all  sides,
as  its  name  implies,  except  for  the  narrow  exits  at  Gibraltar  and
the  Dardanelles,  the  Mediterranean  seems  in  summer  as  gentle  as
an  inland  lake.  Yet  to  call  it  a  lake  is  to  belie  its  possibilities.
It  is  in  fact  double-natured,  sometimes  a  lake  far  better  adapted
to  oars  than  to  sails,  sometimes  an  ocean,  not  adapted,  as  a  timid
Greek  navigator  might  say,  for  either :  or  to  put  it  in  his  own
language,  a  lake  when  the  gods  are  kind,  and  an  ocean  when  they
are  spiteful.  This  double-natured  sea  has  its  own  peculiarities,
some  of  which  have  interesting  bearings  upon  the  life  of  those
who  dwell  round  it.

To  begin  with,  it  is  not  self-sufficing.  It  is  a  warm  inland  sea
subject  to  constant  shrinkage  by  evaporation,  and  its  supplies  of
fresh  water  are  not  enough  to  make  up  the  deficiency.  Only  three
large  rivers— the  Nile,  the  Po,  and  the  Rhone— flow  into  it,  and
there  is  comparatively  little  rain.

If  the  Mediterranean  were  entirely  landlocked,  this  constant
evaporation  would  gradually  dry  up  parts  of  it  altogether  and
reduce  it  to  a  chain  of  salt  lakes,  as  some  geologists  say  it  once
has  been.     As  it  is,  it  is  considerably  more  salt  than  the  outer


CHAP.  II  THE   SEA  21

ocean  and  becomes  increasingly  salt  in  its  more  eastern  portions.
Hence  the  collection  of  salt  in  salt-pans  or  'salt-fixings',  as  the
Greeks  called  them,  is  a  simple  process,  and  a  trade  in  salt  from
the  coast  to  the  saltless  people  of  the  hinterland  went  on  all
through  antiquity ;  salt  was  commonly  exchanged  for  slaves,  so
commonly  that  a  certain  kind  of  cheap  slave  was  known  as
a  'saltling'.  Only  two  of  the  Roman  roads  were  not  called  after
their  constructors  :  the  Via  Latina  and  the  Via  Salaria,  the  old
highway  by  which  salt  was  conveyed  up  the  Tiber  valley  from
Ostia  to  the  interior.^

The  deficiency  of  water  is,  of  course,  made  up  at  both  ends —
from  the  outer  ocean  and  from  the  big  fresh-water  supplies
brought  by  the  Russian  rivers  and  the  Danube  into  the  Black
Sea.  But  the  straits  of  Gibraltar  narrow  to  a  little  over  seven
miles  and  are  comparatively  shallow ;  and  in  antiquity  they  were
a  little  narrower  and  shallower  still.  They  do  not  let  in  nearly
enough  water  to  equalize  the  levels  of  the  Mediterranean  and  the
Atlantic.  The  Dardanelles  and  the  Bosporus  are  still  narrower.
Hence  there  is  a  strong  current  at  both  exits  of  the  Mediter-
ranean, and  this,  together  with  the  rush  of  wind  through  the
straits,  made  both  the  Atlantic  and  the  Black  Sea  passages
difficult  for  seamen  before  the  days  of  steam.

The  Greeks  as  a  whole,  before  the  Hellenistic  age,  knew  little
of  the  Atlantic.^  For  a  long  time  their  knowledge  ceased  abso-
lutely at  Gibraltar  or,  as  the  Greeks  named  it,  the  Pillars  of
Heracles.  The  name  itself  suggests  that  the  early  Greeks  had
only  seen  Gibraltar  from  the  East  :  for  the  long  ridge  of  the
Rock,  throwing  out  a  tongue,  or,  as  the  Greeks  called  it  elsewhere,
a  Dog's  Tail,  into  the  strait,  looks  anything  but  a  pillar  to  seamen
approaching  from  the  West.  Then  stray  traders  were  blown  by
the  Levanter  through  the  funnel  of  the  straits,  past  Trafalgar,

'  Teiresias  in  Od.  xi.  123  speaks  of  inland  people  who  eat  their  food  without
salt.  He  is  probably  talking  (as  a  prophet  should)  not  without  good  informa-
tion :  for  hunting  and  pastoral  people,  who  live  on  meat  and  milk,  do  not
need  salt.  It  is  only  the  eating  of  cereals  that  makes  salt  indispensable.
Hence  even  in  Greece  traditions  survived  of  a  time  when  no  salt  was  eaten,
and  meat  offered  to  the  gods  was  always  unsalted.  For  akinv^Tov  (saltling)
see  Suidas.  Another  word  derived  from  salt  is  salafium  (salary),  originally
the  money  given  to  soldiers  for  salt  with  their  rations.

^  The  name  appears  first  in  Herodotus  (i.  203)  in  the  form  ^  e^w  arriKiav
Tj   ArXaurh  KoXfOixivrj  (ddXacrara),


2  2  GEOGRAPHY  part  i

into  the  bay  of  Cadiz,  and  discovered  the  'virgin  market'  of
Tarshish  on  the  Guadalquivir.  But  beyond  Cape  St.  Vincent
they  knew  nothing  at  all ;  even  Heracles  got  no  further  than
Geryon's  island  in  Cadiz  Bay  ;  '  man  cannot  sail  into  the  dark-
ness West  of  Cadiz;  turnback  the  ship  to  the  land  of  Europe,'
says  Pindar,  as  one  of  his  many  ways  of  breaking  off  a  long  tale.
I  lerodotus  had  heard  stories  of  tin  being  brought  from  the  Tin
Islands,  but  he  could  find  out  nothing  definite.  Moreover  it  is
significant  that  he  tells  us  of  two  different  pioneering  companies
who  found  their  wa)-  to  Tartessus — the  Phocaeans  and  the  Samian
Colaeus.  This  is  probably  not  because,  as  with  the  North  Pole,
there  was  a  competition  for  the  honour  of  discovery,  but  because
the  route  was  so  hazardous  that  communications  had  not  been
properly  kept  up.^

It  was,  however,  not  only  the  difficulty  of  the  Gibraltar  pas-
sage but  the  competition  of  Carthage  which  kept  Greeks  out  of
the  Atlantic.  The  Carthaginians  traded  all  along  the  nearer
coasts  of  the  Atlantic,  both  in  Spain  and  Africa.  They  had
rounded  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  and  sailed  far  into  the  Northern
sea  for  the  tin  of  Cornwall  and  the  Scillies.  A  Carthaginian
account  of  the  West  African  route  is  extant  in  Greek — the  so-
called  Itinerary  of  Hanno.  Rudyard  Kipling  seems  to  have
made  use  of  it  for  his  story  '  The  Joyous  Venture '  in  Puck  of
Pook's  Hill :  it  speaks  of  reaching  an  island  inhabited  by  shaggy
women  who  bit  and  scratched  and  whom  the  interpreters  called
'  Gorillas  '.^

It  was  of  course  to  the  interest  of  the  Carthaginians,  as  of  all
pioneer  sea  powers,  to  keep  their  voyages  secret  and  to  exag-
gerate their  danger.  It  was  a  long  time  before  their  next  rivals,
the   Romans,  found   their  way  to  the   British  tin  mines.     The


'  I'ind.  Xiiii.  iv.  69  (turning  back  from  Cadiz).  But  he  speaks  elsewhere
in  the  same  way  of  the  I'illar  :  Dl.  iii.  44  ;  Nt>n.  ill.  21  (cf.  Eur.  Hipp.  744)  ;
Udt.  iii.  115  (Tin  Islands).  For  Geryon's  island  -.'ide  Udr..  iv.  8;  Hesiod
J hcoj^.  287  and  979  ;  and  for  the  two  explorers  Hdt.  i.  163  ;  iv.  152  {aKi^parov
t'finujHov).     There  is  a  Dog's  Tail  (Kvi'oa-ovpu),  for  instance,  at  Marathon.

'  ".\M'a»»'of  TTf/jirrXoi  r  in  Geograplii  Gracci  Minores  (ed.  Didot).  Its  date
is  probably  between  466  and  450  I!,  c.  For  C.orillas  see  i.  13  with  an  in-
Icresting  note.  C.orilla  Island  is  off  the  coast  of  Sierra  Leone.  The  honour
of  having  first  discovered  Ilngland  probably  belongs  to  Greek  sailors  from
Marseilles,  but  their  city,  which  lived  a  life  quite  apart  from  the  Eastern
Creeks,  was  not  strong  enough  to  keep  others  out  of  the  discovery.


CHAP.  II  TlIK   SKA  2^^

geographer  Strabo  has  an  interesting  passage  about  this  British
trade  and  how  its  monopoly  was  safeguarded  : —

The  Tin  Islands,  he  says,  are  ten  in  number.  .  .  .  One  of  them
is  desert,  but  the  others  are  inhabited  by  men  in  black  cloaks,
clad  in  tunics  reaching  to  the  feet,  girt  about  the  breast  and
walking  with  sticks,  like  Furies  in  a  tragedy.  They  subsist  by
their  cattle,  leading  for  the  most  part  a  wandering  life.  Of  the
metals  they  have  tin  and  lead,  which  with  skins  they  barter  with
the  merchants  for  earthenware,  salt,  and  brazen  vessels.  For-
merly the  Phoenicians  alone  carried  on  this  traffic  from  Gades,
concealing  the  passage  from  every  one ;  and  when  the  Romans
followed  a  certain  skipper  in  order  to  discover  the  market  for
themselves,  the  skipper  purposely  ran  his  vessel  on  to  a  shoal,
luring  the  Romans  to  the  same  fate.  He  himself  escaped  on
a  piece  of  wreckage  and  received  from  the  State  the  value  of  the
cargo  he  had  lost.  Nevertheless  the  Romans  persevered  until
they  discovered  the  passage.

Parallels  to  this  story  could  be  found  in  the  annals  of  early
Dutch  and  English  seamanship,  when  the  passage  into  perilous
and  monopolized  seas  was  being  made  in  the  opposite  direction.'

The  Dardanelles  and  the  Bosporus  were  even  more  difficult  to
navigate  than  the  straits  of  Gibraltar.  Down  both  there  flows
a  strong  current  accompanied  generally  by  a  high  wind.-  In  the
Dardanelles  or  Hellespont,  which  is  considerably  broader  and
a  little  deeper  than  the  Bosporus,  the  current  attains  an  average
speed  of  nearly  two  miles  an  hour  and  a  maximum  of  six  ;  when
Byron  swam  across  at  the  narrowest  point  he  covered  four  miles
to  make  one.  In  the  Bosporus  the  average  is  as  high  as  three,
and  it  beats  round  the  corners  with  such  violence  that  at  some
points  there  is  a  regular  towpath.

Polybius  has  left  us  a  description  of  the  Black  Sea  passage
which  can  be  checked  from  the  sailing  directions  in  the  Pi/o/
published  by  the  British  Admiralty."

In  the   Hellespont  the   main  difficulty  was  to  pass  the  first

^  Strabo,  175-6.  It  was  these  Carthaginian  mystifications  which  were
probably  responsible  for  the  legend  of  Atlantis— a  name  which  still  lives  on
men's  lips,  for  it  is  borne,  appropriately  enough,  by  a  prominent  Greek  news-
paper published  in  New  York.

^  As  Eothen  remarks  (chap,  iii,  ad  iiiit.)  in  language  too  picturesque  to  be
quoted  here.

^  Polyb.  iv.  43-4  (written,  he  says,  to  refute  the  traders'  tales  of  his  day).
Med.  Pilot,  vol.  iv,  pp.  111-18  (ed.  \()0%),  Sailing  Directions  for  Dardanelles,
&c,,  pp.  26  ft".  (Dardanelles),  pp.  94  ft".  (Bosporus).


24  GEOGRAPHY  part  i

corner  by  Cape  Sigeum,  which  Pisistratus  occupied  for  Athens
at  the  very  beginning  of  her  sea  power ;  for  here  the  current
rushes  out  along  the  Asiatic  shore  with  great  velocity,  and  there
are  no  back-eddies  to  counteract  it.  To  this  fact  is  probably
due  the  importance  of  Troy  in  early  times.  When  boats
were  small  they  did  not  attempt  to  round  the  Cape,  but  dis-
embarked in  the  small  bay  opposite  the  island  of  Tenedos  and
carried  their  goods  over  by  land  to  the  bay  just  round  the
corner.  The  hill  of  Troy  is  so  placed  as  to  command  this  land
route,  and  its  chieftains  kept  up  the  road  and  levied  toll  on  all
who  used  it.  Once  inside  the  strait  modern  sailing  ships  'work
up  in  the  eddy,  taking  care  to  tack  short  of  the  main  current,
which  may  be  distinctly  seen',  and,  after  the  narrows,  hugging
the  European  shore  to  avoid  the  prevalent  north  wind,  right  up
to  Byzantium.  Ancient  ships  did  the  same,  except  for  the  tack-
ing :  for  they  suffered  from  the  additional  inconvenience  of  not
being  able  to  sail  into  the  wind,^

The  Bosporus  presents  considerably  greater  difficulties  than
the  Dardanelles  ;  its  winding  channel  extends  for  some  fifteen
miles,  varying  from  a  mile  and  a  quarter  to  half  a  mile  in  breadth,
and  the  current  sets  in  a  zigzag,  sweeping  round  no  less  than
seven  times  from  corner  to  corner.  The  last  of  these  zigzags
sets  from  Scutari  or  Chrysopolis  on  the  Asiatic  shore,  the  spot
where  lo  landed  in  the  myth  and  Alcibiades  established  his
custom-house  in  410,  across  to  Seraglio  Point  at  the  entrance
of  the  Golden  Horn,  under  the  old  acropolis  of  Byzantium,  where
a  wreck  protrudes  out  of  the  current  to-day.  Here  it  is  divided
into  two,  a  small  part  entering  the  Golden  Horn,  but  most  of  it
sweeping  back  again  towards  mid-channel.  But  this  time  it
does  not  set  right  across  to  Chalcedon  opposite,  for  the  land
recedes,  but  into  the  Sea  of  Marmora.     Chalcedon  remains  well

*  Med.  Pilot,  ed.  1908,  vol.  iv,  p.  118,  ed.  1831,  pp.  275  and  280  ;  Polyb.
iv.  44-6.  Of  course  the  current  is  responsible,  as  in  a  river,  for  many
dangerous  shoals.  This  explanation  of  the  importance  of  Troy  was  first
given  by  Hcrard,  Les  Phhticiens  et  VOdyssce,  vol.  i,  pp.  79-82.  Compare
Murray,  Rise  of  the  Greek  Epic,  p.  38  (2nd  ed.,  p.  59).  For  Sigeum  see
Hdt.  V.  94-5.  The  Dardanelles  wind  was  responsible  for  the  Turkish  capture
of  Constantinople  in  1453.  A  relieving  squadron  was  kept  at  Tenedos  for
a  whole  montli.  .See  the  DesI ruction  of  the  Creek  Ki/ipire,  by  Sir  Edwin  Pears
(an  old  Constantinople  resident),  p.  352.  Both  this  and  the  author's  other  work
on  the  Venetian  capture  in  1204  are  full  of  interesting  sidelights  on  the  influ-
ence exercised  by  the  geography  of  this  unique  neighbourhood  on  its  history.


CHAP.  II  THE   SEA  25

outside  its  sweep.  In  fact,  as  Polybius  says,  '  you  always  get  to
Byzantium  whether  you  wish  to  or  not,  but  however  much  you
wish  it  is  very  hard  to  get  to  Chalcedon.'  This  is  true,  as  he
says,  both  of  the  upward  and  downward  voyages  ;  for  the  natural
course  through  the  Propontis  is  to  hug  the  northern  rather  than
the  southern  shore.  On  approaching  Constantinople,  '  should  the
wind  be  unfavourable,  the  current  too  strong,  or  both  united,  you
may  anchor,'  say  the  sailing  directions,  by  the  southern  wall  of
the  city.  So  it  was  not  for  nothing  that  Apollo  called  the
Megarians  blind  when  they  founded  their  colony  at  Chalcedon
in  preference  to  Byzantium.  Prospecting  for  an  agricultural
colony  only,  they  preferred  the  quiet  coves  and  fruitful  shores
of  the  Gulf  of  Ismid,  where  the  villa  dwellings  of  Constantinople
are  spreading  to-day,  to  one  of  the  best  trading  and  strategic
sites  in  the  world.^

Here,  for  the  present,  we  must  leave  the  Eastern  Passage  and
return  westwards.  Two  other  results  follow  from  the  nature  of
the  straits  of  Gibraltar.  They  are  too  shallow  for  the  cold  deep-
sea  water,  which  circulates  from  polar  regions  through  the  oceans
of  the  world,  to  make  its  way  in,  and  the  bottom  temperature  of
the  Mediterranean  is  thus  almost  the  same  as  that  just  below
the  surface.  How  warm  that  is  every  traveller  knows  who  has
disregarded  local  warnings  and  braved  it  when  '  it  is  far  too  cold
to  bathe '.  Here  the  naturalist  would  add  a  section  on  the
curious  effects  of  this  on  the  deep-sea  life  of  the  Mediterranean,
which  we  will  omit.

Secondly,  the  Mediterranean  has  nothing  that  the  Northerner

would  call  a  tide.     It  has  a  small  ebb  and  flow  of  its  own,  which

can  be  measured  everywhere  and  is  just  noticeable  in  some  places,

but  our  big  ocean  tides  scarcely  penetrate  beyond  the  entrance.

The  absence  of  tides  is  convenient  in  many  ways.     It  simplifies

the  use  of  harbours  and  landing-places,  the  construction  of  docks,

*  Apollo,  for  once,  is  convicted  of  plagiarism.  His  advice  to  the  Byzan-
tines to  found  their  city  'opposite  the  blind  men'  is  preserved  in  Strabo
(320)  and  made  a  good  '  foundation  legend '  such  as  every  Greek  colony
needed.  But  unfortunately  Herodotus  (iv.  144)  tells  us  that  the  remark  was
made  by  the  Persian  general  Megabazus,  who  visited  the  city  many  years
after  its  foundation,  adding  that  it  was  remembered  in  the  district.  The
'isthmus'  of  Stamboul  is  the  Bosporus  counterpart  to  Troy:  but  as  'he  site
has  been  continuously  occupied  there  is  no  evidence  that  it  was  a  'fortified
centre  of  exchange'  in  early  times.  Scutari :  Xcn.  Hell.  i.  i.  22.  Southern
anchorage  :  Med.  Pilot,  ed.  1S31,  p.  278.


26  GEOGRAPHY  part  i

and  the  laying  out  of  seaport  towns.  It  is  no  more  difficult  to
put  to  sea  or  put  ashore  in  a  boat  in  the  Mediterranean  than  on
an  English  river.  Small  Greek  boats,  and  even  triremes  and
merchant- vessels,  were  just  run  ashore  and  hauled  up  a  few  feet
out  of  the  water,  ready  for  embarkation.  Hence  the  many
'  Battles  at  the  Ships '  we  read  of  in  Greek  history  and  legend,
in  which,  like  Aeschylus's  brother  at  Marathon,  men  could  get
their  hands  chopped  off  while  hanging  on  to  the  stern  of  a
warship  which  was  being  pushed  into  the  water.  Hence,  too,
a  Greek  port  looks  very  different  from  an  English  one.  There
are  no  high  quays  or  sea-wall  with  a  long  expanse  of  shingle  and
seaweed  below.  Everything  is  much  neater  and  more  closely
packed.  The  villa  dwellers  on  the  Bosporus  can  have  their  bow-
windows  over  the  sea,  and  Aeginetan  fishermen  tumble  out  their
sponges  straight  on  to  the  high  road.  Nausicaa,  who  liked  things
tidy,  thus  describes  the  arrangement  of  her  father's  model  port  in
Phaeacia.  '  There  is  a  fine  harbour  on  each  side  of  the  city ;  the
entrance  between  them  is  narrow,  and  the  curved  ships  are  drawn
up  along  the  road  :  for  each  man  has  a  special  slip  assigned  to
him.'  And  there  too,  she  goes  on,  is  the  market-place,  with  the
stores  of  the  ship  chandlers  and  the  workshops  for  the  oars  near
by.  The  same  arrangement  is  found  to-day  in  many  an  island
port,  where  there  is  just  room  to  squeeze  the  town  between  the
harbour  and  the  hills  ;  and  the  effect  of  neatness  given  by  the
orderly  arrangement  of  the  ships  along  the  low  quay  is  heightened
by  the  sharpness  of  the  coast-line  (as  any  one  will  soon  discover
who  tries  to  pick  his  way,  English-fashion,  '  by  the  beach ')  and
by  the  edging  that  seems  drawn  so  boldly  and  clearly  along  it
where  red-brown  rocks  and  brimming  water  meet.^

( )n  the  other  hand,  a  tide  brings  with  it  advantages  of  its  own
which  the  Greeks  would  have  known  how  to  appreciate.  It
supplies  a  perpetual  motive  power  upon  which  the  seaman  can
reckon  with  complete  assurance  in  order  to  save  himself  trouble:
and  he  can  counteract  it  in  a  moment  by  the  use  of  that  oldest
of  all  brakes,  the  anchor.  Putting  out  to  sea  from  a  windless
harbour  was  always  a  trouble  to  the  Greeks.     They  would  have

'  0(/.  vi.  263-9  (Phaeacia);  Hdt.  vi.  114  (Battle  at  the  Ships),  vii.  198
(tide  in  the  Malian  Gulf).  The  tide  is  also  particularly  noticeable  at  the
Lido  in  Venice.


CHAP.  II  THE    SEA


27


gazed  with  envy  on  the  shipping  that  glides  lazily  with  the  tide
up  and  down  our  northern  estuaries.

However,  if  the  Mediterranean  has  no  tides,  it  makes  up,  to
some  extent,  for  the  deficiency  by  its  currents.  These  the
navigator  has  continually  to  reckon  with,  particularly  in  narrow
waters.  '  Currents  have  more  than  one  way  of  running  through
a  strait,'  as  Strabo  remarks,  and  their  different  peculiarities  were
a  constant  source  of  preoccupation.  The  two  best  known  are
those  at  the  Straits  of  Messina  and  in  the  Euripus.

Scylla  and  Charybdis  present  no  difficulty  to  modern  steam-
ships ;  and  the  little  whirlpool  off  the  harbour  of  Messina  which
has  been  identified  as  Charybdis  can  never  by  itself  have  been
very  alarming.  But  the  currents  set  up  by  the  meeting  of  the
two  seas,  together  with  the  wind,  made  the  passage  an  awkward
one  for  ancient  ships,  and  Thucydides,  who  had  observed  it,  and
always  makes  sense  of  a  legend  when  he  can,  wisely  extends  the
name  Charybdis  to  the  entire  strait.  In  any  case,  Charybdis,
wherever  the  exact  scene  of  her  operations,  made  the  fortune  of
one  of  the  richest  towns  of  antiquity.  For  skippers  who  feared
the  straits,  and  perhaps  too  the  strong  arm  of  the  Chalcidian
colonists  at  Rhegium  and  Messina  who  commanded  them,  pre-
ferred to  deliver  their  Western-bound  goods  in  a  port  on  the
Eastern  coast  and  have  them  conveyed  across  the  toe  of  Italy  by
land.  The  shortest  and  most  convenient  way  of  doing  this  was
up  the  valley  of  the  Crathis  from  Sybaris ;  and  the  wealth  of
Sybaris,  which  became  proverbial,  was  due  mainly  to  her  com-
mand and  use  of  this  '  isthmus '  road,  which  led  across  in  two
days'  journey  to  her  colony  of  Laos  on  the  Western  coast.  Here
the  goods  were  re-embarked  for  the  ports  of  Etruria  on  the
further  West.  That  is  why,  when  Sybaris  had  been  destro}'ed
by  her  neighbour  Croton,  'the  Milesians  of  every  age  shaved
their  heads  and  displayed  marks  of  deep  mourning:  for  these
two  cities  had  been  more  closely  befriended  than  any  others  we
know  of.'  Miletus  was  the  chief  Greek  trading  city  at  that  time.
Manchester  would  be  as  sorry,  though  she  might  show  it  differ-
ently, if  the  Cape  were  in  foreign  hands  and  we  then  lost  control
of  the  Suez  Canal.^

^  Hdt.  vi.  21.  Cf.  Melatiges  d''archcologie  ei  d'histoire,  xxvii.  250  ff.,
describing  the  '  portage ' :  there  was  a  turning  to  Temesa,  and  a  rival  road


28  GEOGRAPHY  part  i

The  currents  of  the  Euripus  at  the  narrows  of  Chalcis  are  the
most  famous  in  the  ^Mediterranean.  The  passage  was^  not  so
broad  as  a  cricket-pitch,  and  the  current,  which  in  a  gale  can  run
at  over  eight  miles  an  hour,  changes  four  times  in  the  twenty-four
hours.  Yet  the  Euripus  was  probably  the  ordinary  road  for
northward  bound  ships  from  Piraeus,  for  the  Eastern  coast  of
Euboea,  in  the  summary  language  of  the  old  pilot,  '  is  rocky,
irregular,  precipitous,  and  destitute  of  harbours ;  therefore  must
always  be  avoided.'  Towards  the  end  of  the  Peloponnesian  War
the  rebellious  Chalcidians  blocked  the  strait  by  building  a  bridge
and  half-filling  the  passage  with  earth — a  severe  blow,  of  course,
to  the  sea  power  of  Athens.  The  bridge  has  stood  in  various
forms  from  that  day  to  this.  Its  permanence  shows  that  the
traffic  between  Euboea  and  the  mainland,  which  the  Athenians
used  to  conduct  in  small  boats  between  Eretria  and  Oropus,  has
in  all  ages  been  as  important  as  the  sea  road  through.^

But  currents,  especially  when  he  had  known  them  from  boy-
hood, were  by  no  means  the  greatest  difficulty  with  which  the
Greek  navigator  had  to  contend.  His  real  enemy  was  ignorance.
We  are  apt  to  reproach  him  for  his  timidity,  and  think  ill  of  him
for  lying  up  during  the  winter  months  ;  but  we  forget  the  narrow
limits  of  his  knowledge  and  experience.  We  should  remember
that  he  set  sail  without  either  map  or  compass  :  that  if  once  he
got  blown  out  of  his  familiar  course  he  could  never  tell  where
he  was,  what  current  he  might  find  sweeping  him  along,  or  what
submerged  prehistoric  peak  he  might  not  encounter.  So  far  as
we  know,  none  of  the  sunken  reefs  in  the  Aegean,  of  which  the
modern  Pilot  is  full,  bore  sea-marks,  and  the  Greeks  were
astonished  when  they  saw  the  Persians  bringing  out  a  pillar  to

from  Siris  to  Pyxos  and  thence  to  Velia  and  Posidonia.  Charybdis ;  Thuc.
iv.  24.  5,  cf.  vi.  2.  4.

'  *  Was '  because  it  has  recently  been  widened  to  1 29  feet,  by  the  blasting
away  of  a  rock  with  a  mediaeval  castle  on  it  in  the  centre  of  the  channel.
The  new  bridge  opens  to  let  vessels  through.

*  Med.  Pilots  ed.  1831,  p.  218  (East  coast  of  Euboea).  For  the  sea  road
cf.  Thuc.  vii.  29.  2;  Aesch.  Ag.  190  (though  why  Agamemnon,  King  of
Argos,  should  have  selected  the  port  of  Aulis  opposite  Chalcis  to  start
from  we  shall  never  know);  and  Hdt.  vii.  173,  viii.  66.  For  the  boat
traffic,  Thuc.  vii.  28,  viii.  95.  2.  Thucydides  did  not  live  to  write,  and
Xenophon  omits,  the  account  of  the  first  bridge,  which  is  only  in  Diodorus,
xiii.  47.  Athens  must  have  held  both  sides  of  the  strait  before  the  revolt  of
Chalcis.


CHAP.  II  THE   SEA  29

set  up  on  the  famous  Myimcx  or  Ant  off  Scialhus.  Map-making'
was  still  regarded  as  a  branch  of  geometry,  and  it  was  not  inclined
to  descend  from  its  diagrams  of  continents  and  big  rivers,  in
which  the  Nile  flowed  parallel  to  the  Danube  and  the  circular
fast-flowing  Ocean  (imagined  as  a  river  with  a  swift  current)
neatly  rounded  off  the  whole,  to  the  laborious  task  of  locating
every  detail  in  a  coasting  voyage.  To  some  extent  this  was  done
by  Itineraries  (nepiTrXoi)  like  that  of  Hanno :  but  probably  these
were  not  widely  used  by  unlettered  Greek  seamen,  who  preferred
to  rely  on  experience  and  oral  guidance  and  tradition.  Hence
the  sea  to  them  was  by  no  means  what  it  seems  to  the  landsman
surveying  it  from  the  cliff — an  unmeasured  expanse  of  navigable
water.  Their  sea  roads  were  as  rigidly  marked  out  to  them,
by  the  limits  of  their  knowledge,  as  land  roads.  They  seldom
ventured  out  of  sight  of  land,  even  when  it  involved  a  long  way
round  :  the  high  road  to  the  West,  for  instance,  went  up  to
Corcyra  and  across  to  the  heel  of  Italy.  So,  too,  they  seldom
ventured  into  strange  seas,  and  when  they  were  blown  there
against  their  will  they  were  quick  to  engage  a  guide.  Naviga-
tion naturally  tended  to  be  a  local  affair,  and  an  Aegean  seaman
knew  as  little  of  the  routes  of  the  Adriatic  as  a  Swiss  guide
generally  knows  of  the  climbs  in  the  Tyrol.^

It  was  only  a  spirit  of  real  adventure  which,  in  the  language  of
the  Funeral  Speech,  '  forced  a  way  into  every  sea ' ;  and  it  was
only  the  larger  sea  powers,  or  Sea  Lords,  as  the  Greeks  called
them,  who  took  pains  to  attract  much-travelled  mariners  to  their
harbours  and  so  brought  distant  seas  within  the  sphere  of  their
trade  and  influence.  Smaller  maritime  communities  lived  in
a  narrower  circle,  and  if  this,  as  was  natural,  gave  them  few
openings  for  legitimate  trade,  they  fell  back  on  piracy  and
wrecking.     So  that  the  history  of  the  Mediterranean  from  Minos

'  Myrmex  :  Hdt.  vii.  183.  The  rock  (which  bears  no  mark  to-day)  was
pointed  out  to  them  by  a  man  of  Scyros.  Probably  the  people  of  Scyros  and
the  other  Sporades  made  fine  play  with  the  Myrmex.  A  few  years  later  the
Scyrians  were  turned  out  of  their  island  by  Athens,  at  the  request  of  the
Amphictions,  for  incorrigible  piracy  (Thuc.  i.  98  ;  Plut.  Cvnon  8,  who  gives
details).  For  sunken  rocks  as  a  metaphor  of.  Aesch.  Ag.  1007,  Euin.  565.
Maps  :  see  the  scene  in  the  Clouds  (206  ff.)  and  Hdt.  ii.  33.  It  is  the  natural
tendency  of  unscientific  man  to  imagine  the  world  much  tidier  and  less
complicated  than  it  is.  Compare  the  early  study  of  astronomy  (Ptolemy's
map  of  the  heavens),  chemistry  (the  four  elements),  political  science  (the
three  forms  of  government),  industrial  organization  (universal  competition
as  against  universal  socialism).

1248  C


3°


GEOGRAPHY  part  i


down  to  the  bombardment  of  Algiers  has  been  a  story  of  the
struggle  between  the  '  bad  men  '  of  the  rocky  islands  and  coast-
lands  and  the  vigilant  policing  of  the  dominant  power.^

But  the  sea  is  not  only  a  means  of  transit  but  a  source  of
production.  In  some  seas  the  latter  element  predominates  :  the
North  Sea  herrings,  the  salmon  of  Norway,  and  the  cod  of
Newfoundland  are  indispensable  to  the  prosperity  of  those  coun-
tries. The  Mediterranean,  however,  has  no  such  staple  fisheries ;
Yarmouth  herrings  are  eaten  to-day  by  the  poor  of  the  Piraeus.
The  chief  Mediterranean  fish  are  the  tunny,  the  anchovy,  and  the
sardine — all  familiar  to  readers  of  Aristophanes.  The  Greeks
caught  them  close  inshore :  they  used  to  watch  from  the  rocks
for  shoals  of  tunny  and  then  put  out  and  drag  for  them  or  har-
poon them  with  tridents.  Readers  of  the  Persae  will  remember
Aeschylus's  description  of  how  the  Persians  at  Salamis  as  they
struggled  ashore  were  knocked  on  the  head  with  oars  '  like
tunnies  or  some  draught  of  fishes '.  But  in  Greek  life  the  fisher-
man plays  a  subordinate  part ;  in  Attica  he  hardly  counts.  We
ha\e  a  picture  of  Attic  fishermen  in  the  Riidens  of  Plautus,  and
from  their  soliloquy  one  may  gather  that  to  an  Athenian  audience
a  fisherman  was  anything  but  a  millionaire."

One  other  Mediterranean  product  is,  however,  worth  a  brief
mention — the  '  purple  '  dye  which  is  obtained  from  a  secretion  of

'  Pilots  (roO  77X01/  r/yf/ioi/ff,  i.e.  guides):  Thuc.  vii.  50.  2  (North  Africa).
Bt'raid,  vol.  ii,  pp.  543  ff.,  thinks  the  geographical  accuracy  of  the  Odyssey,
which  he  has  certainly  shown  to  be  remarkable  as  regards  knowledge  of
winds  and  weather  as  well  as  of  places,  was  due  to  information  derived  from
an  early  Phoenician  or  Cireek  itinerary.  But  he  gives  no  evidence.  The
earliest  known  work  of  the  sort  was  that  of  Hecataeus,  the  sixth-century
predecessor  of  Herodotus.  Thalassocracy  or  sea  lordship:  the  word  is
constantly  occurring  in  the  Greek  historians,  e.  g.  Hdt.  v.  83.  See  Thuc.  i.
8.  3  on  Minos  and  the  island  KdKof-py.jt,  and  Murray's  Greek  Epic,  Appendix  C.

-  The  short  account  of  the  Norwegian  fisheries  in  Demolins,  Comment  la
}oute  crJe  le  type  social,  vol.  ii,  p.  468,  is  so  suggestive  as  to  be  worth  a  refer-
ence. Tunnies:  /V/-jvi£'424,  Ar.  AV/.  313.  The  so-called  '  Party  of  the  Shore'
which  we  hear  of  in  Attica  in  Pisistratus's  time  were  not  fishermen,  but  the
inliabitants  of  the  Paralia  or  Southern  portion  of  Attica.  The  only  places
in  the  (ireek  world  in  which  we  hear  of  a  '  fishing  interest ',  as  at  Grimsby  or
Yarmouth,  are  Tarentum  and  Byzantium  (where  the  current  drove  the  shoals
close  inshore) :  cf.  Ar.  Pol.  1291  b  23.  There  is  a  great  variety  of  fishes  in  the
Bosporus,  as  can  be  seen  in  Abdul  Hamid's  collection  of  them  at  Yildiz.
Poseidon's  trident  (which  he  has  bequeathed  to  the  Britannia  on  our  coppers)
was  originally  simply  a  long  fork,  such  as  is  still  used,  for  spearing  fish.
Afterwards  he  used  it  (as  can  still  be  seen  at  the  Erechtheum)  for  striking
holes  in  the  ground,  and  even  for  goading  his  horses.  English  residents  at
Athens  find  it  useful  as  a  toasting  fork.


CHAr.  II  THE   SEA  31

two  molluscs,  the  pnipiira  and  the  initrcx.  The  ancients  had,  of
course,  no  mineral  d}es,  and  this  therefore  was  the  only  really
firm  dye  which  they  possessed,  and  is  often  contrasted,  in  the
poets  and  elsewhere,  with  the  treacherous  dyes  obtained  from
herbs.  Hence  the  word  'purple'  was  loosely  applied  to  all  the
colours  which  the  creatures  produced,  from  deep  red  to  violet,
and  was  regarded  throughout  antiquity  as  a  great  luxury  and
mark  of  distinction.  As  such  it  was  of  course  forbidden  to  the
Spartans  under  the  regime  of  Lycurgus,  although  the  Spartiatc
uniform  included  a  dark  red  military  cloak  and  Laconia  offered
some  of  the  finest  fishing  grounds.  Herodotus  tells  us  that  when
an  Ionian  ambassador  came  to  Sparta  he  put  on  a  purple  robe
to  secure  an  audience.  The  dye  was  first  discovered  by  the
Phoenicians,  whose  god  Melkart  (so  the  story  went)  noticed  one
day  that  his  dog  had  got  his  nose  red  by  poking  about  among
the  shells.  The  Greeks  learnt  it  from  them  early,  but  it  was
totally  lost  in  the  Dark  Ages  and  only  rediscovered  in  i85(S  by
a  French  investigator,  who  traced  some  violet  stains  on  Minorca
fishermen's  clothes.^

The  question  of  the  nature  of  Phoenician  settlements  in  early
Greece  is  curiously  bound  up  with  the  habits  of  these  little
marine  animals;  for  they  hide  in  the  height  of  summer  and
give  no  good  colour  in  the  spring,  so  that  fishing  is  only  pos-
sible in  the  autumn  and  winter.  As  the  ancients  did  not  go
to  sea  in  the  winter,  it  must  have  been  left  either  to  natives  or  to
strangers  with  regular  establishments  on  the  coast.  Moreover  the
colouring  matter  could  only  be  extracted  while  the  creatures
were  still  alive.  Hence  the  complicated  business  of  preparing
the  dye  had  to  be  undertaken  on  the  spot ;  and  purple  works
can  still  be  recognized  by  masses  of  crushed  shells  throughout  the
tideless  coasts  '^of  the  Aegean.  It  is  highly  probable,  therefore,
that  the  Greeks  were  right  in  believing  that,  before  their  own
maritime  days,  their  coasts  were  studded,  like  those  of  Sicily,
with  little  Phoenician  settlements  on  convenient  islands  and
defensible  promontories.^

1  Hdt.  i.  152.  Spartan  uniform:  Ar.  Pax  303;  maps  and  description  of
the  Laconian  fishing  grounds:  Eerard,  vol.  i,  pp.  4i5ff.  Cf.  also  Darem-
berg  and  SagHo,  s.  v.  PiP'pura.

■  Thuc.  vi.  2.  6  :  cf.  Hdt.  ii.  44  and  Eur.  /.  T.  263  (purple-fishers'  encamp-
ment). Hdt.  iv.  151  mentions  a  purple  fisher  who  had  been  driven  astray
in  a  storm.

C  1


CHAPTER   III
THE    CLIMATE

Av7(u  yiip  TOi  fjiuvai  flat  6iui'  t/iXXo  hi  ndvr    iari  <f)\vapos.

Aristophanes,  Clouds  365.
The  Clouds  are  our  only  goddesses  :  the  others  are  all  vain  talk.

I'l  has  been  said  that  the  British  Islands  have  no  climate,  only
'  weather',  and  certainly  our  climate  is  so  stable  in  essentials  and
so  uncertain  from  day  to  day  that  we  take  it  for  granted  and
ignore  its  general  influence.  The  climate  of  the  Mediterranean
has  for  the  greater  part  of  the  year  exactly  the  opposite  char-
acteristics ;  it  is  fixed  from  day  to  day  but  varies  very  greatly
between  season  and  season.  Hence  its  importance  as  a  social
factor  is  much  more  apparent  and  calculable.

The  three  main  points  to  consider  in  dealing  with  climate  are
wind,  rainfall,  and  temperature.  We  naturally  tend  to  think
of  temperature  first :  for  us  summer  means  (or  ought  to  mean)
hot  weather  and  winter  cold  weather.  But  in  the  South  men
think  less  of  heat  and  cold  than  of  dryness  and  moisture,  and
less  whether  a  wind  is  gentle  or  rough,  or  warm  or  chilling,  than
whether  or  not  it  is  likely  to  bring  rain.

The  Mediterranean  area  is,  climatically  speaking,  a  border-
land ;  it  is  half-way  between  the  tropics  and  the  steady  '  tem-
perate' climate  of  North  and  Central  Europe.  Its  boundaries
are  best  given  in  the  rainfall  maps,  which  mark  off  the  area
of  '  little  rain  in  summer ' :  they  show  that  this  line  mostly
follows,  even  in  its  deviations,  the  limits  of  Greek  colonization,
including,  for  instance,  an  island  of  Mediterranean  climate  in  the
North-West  corner  of  the  Black  Sca,^

Throughout  this  area  it  may  be  said  that  there  is  not  one
climate  but  at  least  two,  the  effects  of  two  different  wind-states

'  This  explains  why  the  Greeks  avoided  the  Adriatic.  See  Philippson,
Map  \'I.     His  limit  of  average  summer  rains  is  four  inches.


CHAi".  Ill  Till'.    CLIMATI-:


3.^


or  conditions  of  atmospheric  pressure.  The  ch'mate  changes,  not
from  day  to  day,  but  with  startling  suddenness  in  spring  and
autumn.  As  Herodotus  remarks,  these  changes  are  very  trying
and  are  the  cause  of  most  ilhiesses.  The  I^thiopians,  safe  in
rainless  Libya,  are  the  healthiest  of  mankind,  and  live  to  120,
because  they  have  no  rainy  season.  Thucydides  was  not  pe-
dantic but  merely  sensible  and  scientific  in  dividing  up  his
history  into  summers  and  winters  instead  of  reckoning  by  ( )lym-
piads  or  priestesses  or  archonships.  Summer  and  winter  arc
real  and  well-marked  divisions.  Kvcry  autumn,  when  the  clouds
collected  on  the  mountains  and  the  first  rains  began,  the  Greeks
put  away  the  comfortable  sunny  open-air  life,  gave  up  fighting
and  sailing  and  lying  out  on  the  warm  stones  discussing  politics
and  philosophy  ;  the  shepherds  came  down  from  the  mountain
pastures  and  the  traders  stayed  in  town  for  their  lawsuits  ;  the
neighbours  dropped  in  to  the  blacksmith's  for  a  chat  round  his
forge  ;  cloaks  and  warm  shoes  were  brought  out  and  every  one
prepared,  if  necessary,  to  shiver  till  the  spring.  To  go  to  sea  in
the  winter  months  was  madness,  and  to  go  to  war,  as  Philip  did,
was,  to  say  the  least,  unsportsmanlike.^

Still,  to  the  Greeks  as  to  hibernating  animals,  winter  was
merely  an  interlude,  and  no  attempt  was  made  to  organize  a
winter  mode  of  life.  Their  institutions  were  arranged  for  summer
conditions.  There  was  as  little  home-life  in  winter  in  their  cold
draughty  houses  as  in  the  hot  summer  evenings.  Work  went  on
as  usual  in  the  country,  for  there  were  olives  to  be  picked,  a  slow
and  toilsome  process  very  cold  for  the  fingers.  The  Parliament  and
the  law-courts  were  still  held  in  the  open  air,  and  Aristophanes'
plays  were  generally  performed  in  January  before  any  foreign
visitors  dared  cross  the  sea.  Dwellers  in  Mediterranean  lands
are  tough  and  hardy,  and  the  Greeks  could  stand  cold,  if  need
be,  as  well  as  most  men.  It  is  only  casual  observers,  \isiting
favoured  spots  like  Corfu  or  the  Riviera,  or  judging  the  activity
of  the  Southerner  by  the  sleeping  forms  in  the  streets  on  a  hot
afternoon,  who  have  spread  the  legend  that  the  '  Latin  races '  are

^  '  It  must  be  the  weather  '  :  Hdt.  ii.  "JT,  iii.  23.  So  Thuc.  vii.  Z-j.  \  :  but
cf.  vii.  47.  2.  Close  season:  Hesiod,  Krga6y^;  Dem.  ix.  50.  Clouds:  cf.
Clouds  1-Ji  ff.  The  smithy  as  '  public  house'  :  Hesiod,  Erga  493  ;  Od.  wiii.
328  ;  Hdt.  i.  68.


34


GEOGRAPHY  part  i


soft.  Xenophon's  Ten  Thousand  survived  the  snows  of  Armenia,
and  many  of  the  highlands  of  Greece  (such  for  instance  as  the
plain  of  Tegea,  where  the  corn  is  not  reaped  till  August)  hardly
enjoy  the  true  warmth  of  the  summer  climate  at  all.  There  is
a  yearly  average  of  five  to  six  days  of  snow  at  Athens.^

The  marks  of  the  summer  in  Greek  lands  are  a  steady  North
wind  and  a  clear  sky.  It  is  a  combination  which  is  strange  to
us ;  for  our  rough  winds  are  mostly  rain-bearers  from  the
Atlantic.  To  see  the  Aegean  tossing  at  midsummer  in  a  '  shin-
ing '  gale  seems  uncanny  to  an  Englishman  unless  he  happens
to  have  watched  the  Fohn  blowing  on  a  Swiss  lake.  But  the
'  Etesian '  or  periodic  winds  (the  Greek  '  trade  winds '),  which
generally  prevail  throughout  the  summer,  at  the  least  from  June
to  September,  are  the  Greek  sailors'  main  stand-by.  When
they  failed,  as  in  the  year  of  the  great  plague,  Greece  became
like  a  tropical  country.  They  blow  so  strongly  over  some
of  the  islands  as  to  interfere  with  the  growth  of  trees  on  their
northern  slopes,  and  Herodotus  is  at  pains  to  refute  the  sug-
gestion that  the  cause  of  the  Nile  flood  in  the  autumn  is  that  the
P^tesians  will  not  let  the  water  out  all  the  summer.  So  the  Cor-
cyraeans  were  urging  quite  a  credible  excuse  when  they  said
that  the  Etesians  blowing  round  the  rough  headland  of  Malea
had  unfortunately  prevented  them  from  being  present  at  the
engagement  of  Salamis.  It  was  this  same  North  wind  off  Malea
which  was  the  beginning  of  all  Odysseus's  troubles.  As  the
Greeks  did  not  go  to  sea  in  the  winter,  they  selected  their
harbours  with  a  view  to  the  North  wind  only ;  hence  many
of  them  face  south  and  are  as  exposed  in  the  winter  as  the  open
sea.  Readers  of  the  Acts  will  remember  how  Paul's  ship  man-
aged, with  difficulty,  to  reach  a  harbour  ironically  called  '  the
P^air  Havens  ',  only  to  find,  as  the  apostle  told  them,  that  they
were  caught  in  a  tiap  and  that  it  '  was  not  commodious  to
winter  in  '.'-

'  Ar.  Ac/i.  505  (ilie  Comedian's  tcte-a-tiic  before  the  tourist  season).

*  No  Etesians  in  430  n.c.  :  Died.  xii.  58.  4,  who  of  course  attributes  the
plague  to  this.  Thucydides  omits  this  and  merely  points  out  that  the  year
had  been  an  unusually  healthy  one  (ii.  49).  Nile-flood  :  Hdt.  ii.  21  ;  Cor-
cyracans  at  Malea  :  vii.  168  ;  cf.  Od.  ix.  80-1  ;  but  Odysseus's  North  wind
was  an  autumn  or  winter  one.  See  Polyb.  v.  5.  3-6  for  the  influence  of
the  Ktesians  on  campaign  plans,  and  Ildt.  vi.  140  for  how  to  get  carried  by
the  Etesians  from  Attica  to  Lemnos.     The  Fair  Havens:  Acts  xxvii.  8-12.


(  iiAi'.  HI  TIII<:   CLIMATl":  3-;

For  in  the  winter  the  winds  blow  from  every  point  of  the
compass  and  cannot  be  relied  upon  from  one  day  to  the  next,
'  a  great  trouble  to  mortals  ',  as  Hesiod  sa}'s.  The  Greeks  had
names  for  them  all  ;  every  variety  in  the  bag  of  Aeolus  was
known  and  discussed,  and  the  local  coast-winds  and  mountain
hurricanes  or  '  snatchers '  (apnviai)  besides.  These  Harpies
were  indeed  the  most  dangerous  and  deceptive  of  all,  for  they
could  tear  down  at  any  season,  and  make  havoc,  as  at  Arginusac,
on  an  August  afternoon,  of  the  well-earned  fruits  of  a  fight.
Coast- winds,  on  the  other  hand,  are  known  and  calculable.  As
the  sea  is  warmer  than  the  land  by  night  and  cooler  by  day,
there  is  a  displacement  of  air  after  sunrise  and  sunset.  In  the
evening  the  breeze  is  off  the  land :  in  the  morning  off  the  sea.
That  is  why  the  wise  Phaeacians  sent  Odysseus  off  in  the  evening
after  supper,  although  the  Greeks  as  a  rule  did  not  like  being  on
board  at  night,  and  why  Telemachus  and  the  suitors,  who  could
rely  on  their  sailors,  both  set  sail  after  sunset.  So  Phormio,
the  best  seaman  Athens  ever  had,  waited  in  the  Gulf  of  Corinth
for  the  local  morning  breeze  to  throw  the  Peloponnesians  into
confusion  and  then  let  his  old  sea-dogs  show  that  experience  and
training  count  for  more  in  warfare  than  all  the  native  manliness
in  the  world.^

Winds  and  rainfall  go  together.  The  rainless  season  in  Greece
lasts  from  the  middle  of  May  to  the  middle  of  September.  In
one  year  out  of  three,  on  the  average,  there  is  no  rain  then  at  all.
In  the  other  two  the  quantity  which  falls  is  very  slight,  Greece,
like  Palestine,  relies  for  its  moisture  on  the  unsettled  weather  of
winter  and  the  big  rainfalls  in  the  autumn  and  spring,  the  '  former '
and  '  latter '  rains  of  the  Bible.  It  is  on  these  seasonal  rains,
this  marriage  of  Earth  and  Sky,  as  legend  called  it,  that  every-
thing depends.  Herodotus,  who  travelled  both  North  and  South
of  the  Mediterranean  rain  zone,  expresses  his  surprise  at  the
local  conditions  in  each  case.  In  Egypt  he  found  a  country
in  whose  annals  it  was  written,  '  In  this  king's  time  rain  fell  at

The  whole  chapter  is  full  of  interesting  detail  and  well  illustrates  the  dangers
of  sailing  in  the  close  season.

^  Hesiod  on  winter  winds  :  T/ieoo.  872.  Night  voyages  in  the  Ot(rssey :
ii.  3S8,  iv.  786,  xiii.  70.  For  the  sailors'  view  of  it  see  Otf.  xii.  279.  Phormio  :
Thuc.  ii.  84.  2.  Contrast  Thuc.  ii.  87.  6  with  39.  i  ;  Thucydides  is,  of  course,
quite  aware  of  the  contradiction,  and  so  was  Pericles.


36  GEOGRAPHY  tart  i

Thebes.'  When  the  Egyptians  asked  him  how  Greece  would
fare  if  Zeus  sent  no  rain,  he  shrugged  his  shoulders  and  replied
with  an  obvious  In  quoque  about  the  Nile.  As  for  Scythia,  '  its
winter  is  different  from  the  winter  in  all  other  places:  for  there
is  no  rain  at  the  proper  lime,  at  least  none  worth  speaking  of,
but  during  the  summer  it  never  leaves  off  raining.'  'AH  other
places'  is  too  confidently  phrased.  Herodotus  was  forgetting  for
a  moment  how  much  country  he  had  left  unvisitcd  and  falling
back  into  the  parochial  ways  of  which  he  was  trying  to  cure
his  audience.'

If  rain  falls  in  this  torrential  manner,  its  effect  must  naturally
be  marked  in  the  behaviour  of  springs  and  rivers.  Indeed  it  is
due  to  this  that  Greece  possesses  practically  no  rivers,  in  our
sense  of  the  word,  at  all.  As  the  Admiralty  /"//<?/ remarks,  with
ill-concealed  irony,  '  The  rivers  that  empty  into  the  Aegean  Sea
are  more  desemng  of  notice  from  their  classical  associations
than  from  their  commercial  importance.'  In  winter  Greece  has
torrents :  in  summer  dry  stony  beds,  with  perhaps  a  trickle  in
the  middle ;  but  rivers  such  as  we  know  which  flow,  in  the  Greek
phrase,  '  equal  themselves  with  themselves,'  all  the  year  round
are  unknown.  Some  of  the  larger  streams  are  deep  enough  to
bathe  in  during  the  summer,  but  the  majority  could  be  mistaken  by
the  unwary  traveller  for  an  unusually  rough  road,  or  sometimes,
when  there  are  oleanders  in  blossom  there^  for  a  very  neglected
garden.  One  of  the  lawsuits  in  Demosthenes  turns  upon  the
question  whether  a  certain  piece  of  ground  was  a  watercourse,
a  public  highway,  or  a  private  garden.  Where  the  rock  is  hard,
the  river  banks  are  steep  and  form  what  Thucydides  calls
a  '  not-to-be-got-out-of '  torrent-bed,  as  the  Athenians  found  in
their  retreat  from  Syracuse ;  while  sometimes  the  river  disperses
its  bull-headed  strength  into  a  wide  and  stony  basin. ^

Three  characteristics,  in  any  case,  all  Greek  rivers  share  in
common.  Firstly,  they  are  not  navigable.  Home-keeping  Greeks
did  not  know  what  a  navigable  river  was.  Herodotus  is  delighted
with  the  navigation  of  the  Euphrates  and  the  Nile,  which  he

'  Cf.  Hdt.  ii.  13,  iii.  10,  iv.  28.  Connected  with  this  is  the  answer  to  the
conundrum, 'Why  have  the  Nile  and  the  Danube  got  different  habits  ?'  (iv.  50).

"^  Torrent-beds :  Dem.  Iv,  esp.  §  13  ;  Thuc.  vii.  84.  4  ;  cf.  iii.  98 :  avfKfiaros
is  the  word  :  most  travellers  in  Greece  know  what  it  means.


CHAP.  Ill  TIII<:    CLIMATE


M


describes  in  great  detail.  Yet  the  Thames-side  dweller  would
hardly  describe  these  as  navigable  rivers,  since  neither  of  them
allowed  small  boats  to  go  up  stream,  and  the  Euphrates  boatmen
had  to  take  donkeys  on  board  to  carry  the  boat  back  by  land.
Roads  and  rivers  were  indeed  connected  in  the  Greek  mind  ;  for
where  there  was  a  river  there  was  probably  a  land- road  too.
Goods  came  dow^n  from  the  North  along  the  big  rivers,  such  as
the  Strymon,  which  flowed  into  the  North  Aegean.  But,  with
the  possible  exception  of  timber,  they  came  by  the  rivers,  not  on
them.  It  was  only  the  rivers  of  Russia  and  Central  Europe
which  were  really  useful  as  beasts  of  burden,  and  it  is  no  wonder
that  Herodotus  extols  them.  There  are  three  special  wonders,
he  tells  his  audience,  in  Scythia :  the  rivers,  the  vast  plain,  and
a  footprint  of  Heracles.^

Secondly,  Greek  rivers  arc  not  easy  to  cross.  In  summer  there
is  no  great  difficulty  in  going  over  stony  torrent  beds ;  but  they
are  very  difficult  to  bridge,  and  become  quite  impassable  in
winter.  Thus  they  were  as  inconvenient  for  land  as  for  water
transport.  A  few  hours'  rain  might  block  an  important  high-
road, as  the  Thebans  found  when  they  marched  on  Plataea  in
two  detachments  on  a  wet  night.  The  first  crossed  the  Asopus
easily :  the  second  was  stopped  and  could  hardly  get  through.
When  a  Greek  river  is  in  flood  there  is  nothing  to  do  but  to
wait,  like  Horace's  rustic,  till  it  has  passed  ;  it  is  the  roaring
bull  which  river-dwellers  often  put  on  their  coins.  The  idea  of
taming  a  strong-flowing  river  and  performing  engineering  feats
with  it,  which  Herodotus  found  prevalent  in  countries  where
streams  flowed  more  steadily,  appealed  greatly  to  his  Greek
imagination,  and  he  makes  the  most  of  the  story-telling  possi-
bilities of  Mesopotamia.^

^  Euphrates:  Hdt.  i.  194,  on  which  see  Myres,  Class.  Ass.  iQll.p.  56.  John
Eldred  saw  the  same  donkey  business  in  15S3  (Hakluyt's  Voyugcs,  Macle-
hose's  ed.,  vol.vi,  pp.  5-6).    Nile:  Hdt.  ii.  96.    Scythian  rivers  :  iv.  48-9,  82.

2  Asopus  :  Thuc.  ii.  5.  2.  See  the  coins  of  Geia  and  Thurii,  and  Soph.
Trac/i.  1 1,  where  Achelous  is  described  as  'sometimes  a  manifest  bull,  some-
times a  shining,  winding  snake,  sometimes  bull-headed  with  a  man's  body '.
Very  different  from  '  Father  Thames'.  River-engineering:  Hdt.  i.  75,  189,
iii.  9,  117.  The  Greeks  could  play  with  springs,  as  we  know  from  the  tunnel
at  Samos  (iii.  60)  and  the  Pisistratid  drains  at  Enneacrounos  ;  but  they  did
not  play  with  rivers  except  when  they  were  so  tame  that  it  was  doubtful
which  way  they  flowed.  For  the  troublesome  river  at  Tegea  see  Thuc.  v.  65.
4 ;  Xen.  Hell.  v.  2.  4  ;  this  mighty  {(vfieyeetjs)  stream,  when  turned  into  the


38  GEOGRAPHY  tart  i

There  is  another  reason  why  the  Greeks  did  not  play  with
rivers.  They  are  too  muddy  to  drink.  The  Greeks  did  not
know  what  a  clean  river  was.  Every  stream,  when  it  flows  at
all,  flows  burdened  with  silt.  Hence  when  the  Greeks  laid  pipes
underground,  they  were  directed,  not  to  lakes  or  rivers,  but  to
the  mountain  springs ;  these  alone  were  pure  enough  to  be  the
resort  of  maiden  spirits.     There  were  no  river-nymphs  in  Greece.

The  fact  that  Mediterranean  rivers  flow  brown  and  muddy  is
more  important  than  it  seems.  For  it  means  that  they  deposit
all  the  silt  at  their  mouths  and  that,  in  a  tideless  sea,  this  is
never  washed  away.  To  quote  the  Pilot  again  :  '  all  [Greek
rivers]  are  obstructed  at  their  entrance  by  shoals,  and  few  will
admit  boats.'  Hence  all  through  the  Mediterranean  the  ports
arc  never  at  river- mouths,  though,  as  the  river-valley  is  a  road,
they  are  often  by  them.  Venice  is  not  at  the  mouth  of  the
Po,  or  Marseilles  of  the  Rhone,  or  Salonica  of  the  Axius,  or
Alexandria  of  the  Nile,  or  Smyrna  of  the  Hermus.  The
alluvial  strips  or  plains  thus  formed  are  of  particular  importance
in  Greece,  but  their  discussion  belongs  to  a  different  section.^

streets  of  Mantinea,  was  so  deep  as  to  wet  the  foundations  of  the  houses.
There  are  remarkably  few  remains  of  old  bridges  in  Greece,  and  several  of
these  are  near  Mycenae  and  pre-Hellenic.

^  Smyrna  has  recently  only  narrowly  escaped  the  silting  up  of  its  gulf,  and
Venice  is  said  to  be  threatened  by  the  steady  filling  up  of  the  North  Adriatic.
See  Thuc.  ii.  102  for  the  conundrum,  '  When  is  a  land  not  a  land  ?  '


CHAPTER   IV
THE   SOIL

T/)»;;^«i',   liW    tiyddij  koi'^iot/xi^oj"  nv  rm  e'yo)  ye
»';$•  ynirjs   bvvafiai   yXi'Kf/jtorf/joi'  nWo   Ihtcrdm.

IIo.\ri!:R,  Odyssty  ix.  27.
Rough,  but  a  mother  of  men,  and  the  sweetest  of  lands  to  me.

By  soil  we  do  not  mean  the  surface  of  the  earth  in  general,
but  only  such  of  it  as  is  neither  too  hard  nor  too  dry  to  nourish
vegetable  life.  The  rocks  of  the  high  Alps  have.no  soil;  and
it  was  only  a  diplomatist  referring  to  an  unequal  exchange  of
territory  who  spoke  of  the  '  rather  light  soil '  of  an  African
desert.

This  seems  a  platitude  in  England,  but  it  is  not  so  in  Greece.
People  sometimes  speak  of  the  '  fertile  South '.  They  do  not
realize  that  there  is  far  more  rock  and  dry  grit  and  far  less
life-giving  earth  in  the  Mediterranean  lands  than  in  North-
western Europe.  Only  a  very  small  proportion  of  the  total
area  of  Greece  is  cultivable,  and  much  of  that  it  would  be  an
exaggeration  to  call  fertile.

In  order  to  understand  how  the  Greeks  lived,  it  is  necessary
to  take  a  general  survey  of  their  country  and  see  to  what  uses  it
can  be  put.  We  might  take  as  the  basis  of  our  classification,
the  description,  or  bird's-eye  view,  given  by  the  chorus  of
Birds  in  Aristophanes.  But  they  seem  to  be  singing  of  Attica
only,  since  they  say  nothing  of  the  forests.  Or  we  might  take
the  picture  of  it  on  the  shield  of  Achilles  in  the  Iliad.  But  this
is  economic  rather  than  geographical,  and  describes  rather  what
people  do  than  the  country  they  live  in.  But  its  plan  of
arranging  Greek  life  in  separate  departments  is  not  so  artificial
as  it  seems.  The  features  of  the  Greek  country-side  can  be  far
more  clearly  defined  and  distinguished  than  those  of  oin-  own.


40  GEOGRAPHY  part  i

and  do  really  correspond,  in  a  measure,  with  the  demands  of
a  symmetrical  design.^

Leaving  Homer  and  Aristophanes,  we  find  modern  geographers
marking  ofif  the  Greek  country  into  four  divisions  :  the  unpro-
ductive, the  forest,  the  pasture,  and  the  cultivable.  Roughly
speaking,  these  divisions  start  from  the  highlands  and  pass
gradually  down  into  the  plains.  This  will  become  clearer  as
we  deal  with  them  in  order.

The  unproductive  area  is  mainly  rock  and  the  weathering  of
rock,  and  now  includes  about  a  third,  and  of  course  the  most
conspicuous  part,  of  the  entire  country.  For  Greece  is  not  fat
and  well-fed  like  England,  but  a  naked  land  with  all  her  bones
showing.  She  is  a  land  of  sharp  forms  and  pure  outlines —
a  land  for  sculptors  and  architects,  for  men  who  could  feel
the  dignity  and  repose  in  the  plain  folds  of  her  mountains,
and  see  perfect  building-sites  in  her  still  unlevelled  rocks.  It
is  not  merely  because  Greece  is  mountainous  that  she  is  bare  ;
few  of  her  peaks  are  above  the  Alpine  level  of  vegetation,  and
in  the  South  vegetation  might  be  expected  to  grow  higher
still.  It  is  because  there  is  not  enough  permanent  moisture
at  any  elevation  to  counteract  the  constant  weathering  that
denudes  the  surface,  as  the  traveller  can  realize  by  comparing
the  bare  sides  of  a  Greek  railway  cutting  with  the  green  walls  to
which  he  is  accustomed  on  an  ordinary  English  journey.  In  the
tropics  men  spend  their  time  weeding  ;  in  England  they  plant
and  tend  ;  in  Greece  they  often  have  first  to  make  the  soil.  And
even  when  it  is  made  its  maintenance  is  often  precarious.  Devasta-
tion or  neglect  may  take  the  life  out  of  it  and  reduce  it  once
more  to  useless  grit.  Hence  the  effects  of  a  really  serious  devasta-
tion, as  in  the  Dccelean  years  of  the  Peloponnesian  war,  are  far
more  lasting  than  with  us.  Attica  never  recovered  from  it,
though  she  recovered  at  once  from  the  desultory  burnings  of  the
first  ten  years.  Where  Nature  has  her  own  way  in  the  North
she  makes  a  tangled  wilderness  ;  over  a  large  part  of  Greece  she
has  made  a  lifeless  desert.  It  is  true  that  men  have  helped  her.
They  have  cut  and  burnt  down  and  are  still  burning  down  the

'  ///W  xviii.  490-589;  rUnh  230  ff. ;  cf.  Clouds  275.  This  threefold
division  is  as  true  of  Palestine  as  of  Greece.  Compare  the  Parable  of  the
Sower,  with  its  '  rock ', '  thorns '  (i.  e.  pasture),  and  '  good  soil '.


CHAP.  IV  THE   SOIL


4'


forests  which  retain  the  moisture  in  their  roots,  thus  hcl|)ini;  the
storms  to  sweep  the  mountains  dry  ;  and  they  have  neglected
the  river-mouths  and  allowed  good  soil  to  remain  swami).  Ikit
even  in  ancient  times,  when  men  were  thriftier,  a  large  part  of
the  Greek  area  was  naked  and  lifeless.  Corn  never  grew  on  the
low  rocky  hill  which  became  the  Acropolis  of  Athens.'

We  pass  from  rock  to  forest.  Here  perhaps  is  the  greatest
outward  difference  between  ancient  and  modern  Greece.  A  hun-
dred generations  of  careless  peasants  have  dealt  with  the  country
since  the  days  of  Plato  and  Pericles,  and  it  seems  probable  that
they  have  been  watching  the  trees  diminishing  all  the  time.
Good  observers  estimate  that  the  area  of  the  country  under  forest
has  actually  been  reduced  by  one-half  in  the  last  thirty  years.
The  peasants  kill  the  trees  by  burning  them  or  by  gashing  the
pine  trunks  to  extract  resin.  The  dry  trees  are  then  removed  for
firewood,  and  the  goats  deal  with  the  young  shoots.  In  this  way
a  hill-side  can  be  cleared  in  a  few  years.  At  the  present  time
there  are  few  forests  left  in  Eastern  Greece,  though  parts  of
North-Western  Greece  and  of  Euboea  are  still  well  wooded,  and
thus  preserve,  far  better  than  the  more  familiar  provinces,  the
outward  aspect  of  Ancient  Greece.^

But  we  must  not  imagine  that  Greece  was  then  a  forest  country
in  the  German  sense  of  the  word.  Goats  have  always  been  goats,
and  their  appetite  for  dry  wood  was  as  vigorous  then  as  now.
One  of  the  lost  plays  of  Aristophanes'  predecessor  l'2upolis
had  a  chorus  of  Goats,  and  a  few  lines  of  their  bleat  about  their
favourite  bushes  have  been  preserved,  showing  that  they  were
already  well  started  on  their  age-long  nibble  up  the  mountains.-*

^  Devastation  of  Attica:  cf.Thuc.  vii.27.4  with //t'//d'«2tvz  Oxyrliync/iiuxn.'^.

-  It  is  very  baffling  not  to  be  able  to  find  out  more  definitely  what  fifth-
century  Greece  looked  like,  but  it  is  a  point  on  which  isolated  bits  of  evidence
count  for  little.  I  append  two.  Sophocles  speaks  of  Suniuni  as  a  '  wooded
promontory'  {Ajax  1217)  :  there  are  no  trees  on  it  to-day.  According  to
Wilamowitz  {Orestie,  p.  228)  the  uKaos  or  clump  of  trees  round  the  shrine
of  a  god  (corresponding  to  the  cypresses  in  Southern  churchyards  to-day)
was  originally  not  planted  but  left  'virgin'  (cf.  Eur.  Jlifp.  74),  while  a
clearing  for  settlements  was  made  round  them.  Later  on,  in  historical  times,
when  trees  had  become  the  exception,  they  were  specially  planted.

^  ap.  Macrobius,  vii.  5.  9;  cf.  the  expression  '  forest  cattle',  e.g.  Eur.  /.  T.
261.  Every  attempt  has  been  made  from  head-quarters  to  restrain  the  Greek
goat  and  his  master,  but  with  no  success.  The  Greek  peasant  seems  to
regard  trees  as  his  mortal  enemies.  Even  in  Plato's  time  Attica  looked  bare
and  treeless,  and  there  were  traditions  about  the  great  trees  which  had  been


42  GEOGRAPHY  part  i

Besides  the  goats  there  were  the  charcoal  burners  to  help  to
thin  the  trees.  The  ancients  burnt  no  coal  and  all  their  fuel
was  wood,  either  dry  or  charred.  So  that  in  the  neighbourhood
of  every  settlement  the  fringe  of  trees  would  be  cut  down,  while
the  goats  would  be  there  to  prevent  them  from  growing  up
again.  Athens  drew  her  fuel  from  the  woods  around  Acharnae,
some  seven  miles  out.

But  though  Athens  had  fuel  enough  at  home,  she  had  not  the
timber  she  needed  for  her  ships.  That  came  mainly  from  the
true  forest  belt  outside  the  Greek  peninsula.  For  the  soil  of
Greece  is  not  capable  of  supporting  such  forest  as  we  know  in  the
North.  The  trees  are  both  smaller  in  themselves  and  grow  less
close  together.  The  majority  of  them  are  evergreens,  and  of
our  familiar  Northern  trees  with  spreading  leaves  none  but  the
plane,  oak,  and  chestnut  are  at  all  common.  A  Greek  forest  is
never  so  thick  that  the  sun  cannot  get  in ;  the  trees  grow,  in
fact,  in  'open  order'.  Moreover,  much  of  what  the  Greeks  call
wood  we  should  rather  call  copse.  The  most  characteristic  wild
Greek  trees  are  really  bushes  :  the  laurel,  the  oleander,  the  prickly
oak,  the  myrtle,  the  juniper,  the  strawberry-tree.  Euripides
needed  to  go  to  Macedonia  to  find  forests  high  enough  to  make
a  dignified  procession  when  '  Orpheus  with  his  lute '  made  the
trees  follow  him.  Indeed  the  Greeks  had  no  proper  word  for
tree.  i/A?;,  which  they  used  of  wild  wood,  refers  to  bushes  and
trees  indiscriminately;  while  8iv8pov,  which  we  translate  'tree',
means  properly  fruit-tree.  Unlike  the  Turks  and  the  English,
they  had  no  particular  love  for  big  trees,  and  would  have  regarded
a  typical  English  park  landscape,  bristling  with  useless  giants,  as
'shaggy'  and  uncivilized.^

Below  or  among  the  forests  on  the  mountain  slopes,  or,  where
the  trees  have  disappeared,  immediatcl}-  under  the  bare  rock,
come  the  pasture-lands.      Pasture  with    us  calls    up  a  picture

cut  down.  See  a  very  interesting  passage,  Critias  in.  But  probably  the
mischief  was  not  very  widespread  till  the  advent  of  the  Gauls  in  the  third
century  h.  c.  with  their  large  herds  of  nomadic  cattle.

Cf.  Eur.  Bacchae  560,  also  677  ff.  (the  messenger's  speech);  there  is
nothing  of  the  German  forest  sentiment  {Waldzaubcr)  in  the  description  of
the  Maenads  on  the  mountains.  The  two  things  are  as  wide  apart  as  is  the
Parthenon  from  a  Gothic  cathedral.  dhSpov  and  vXr; :  Thuc.  iv.  69.  2,  i.  108. 2  ;
Hdt.  i.  193  (where  the  vine  is  a  dtp^jjop)  ;  Od.  xi.  588  (the  'high  spreading
trees '  that  tantalized  Tantalus).


CHAP.  IV  THE    SOIL  43

of  a  lush  green  meadow  on  Ihc  levels,  hedged  in  from  a  field  of
vegetables  or  arable  near  by.  Some  of  our  pasture-land  is  on
moors  or  downs  ;  but  most  of  it  is  amongst  the  cultivable  lantl,
with  which  it  is  continually  rotating,  and  nearly  all  of  it  is  grass.
Not  so  in  Greece.  Pasture  there  is  on  soil  which  is  not  good
enough  to  be  sown  or  planted  ;  it  tends  to  be  a  separate  ring  on
the  shield,  a  separate  region  of  its  own  away  from  the  settle-
ments on  the  plain.  That  is  why  undesirable  infants,  like
Oedipus  or  Cyrus,  were  so  easily  passed  on  by  shepherds  to
another  country.  For  frontiers  'marched  together'  on  the
pasture-lands,  and  the  shepherds  of  Thebes  and  Corinth  spent
their  summer  months  in  company  on  the  upper  slopes  of
Cithaeron,  descending  to  their  respective  countries  in  the  autumn.
That  too  is  why  wars  so  often  began,  well  beyond  the  arm  of
justice,  with  the  stealing  of  flocks.^

Greece  pastured  a  few  cows,  but  mainly  goats  and  sheep,  and,
where  there  were  oak  trees  (as  in  Arcadia),  pigs.  The  goats
clamber  highest  and  find  dry  wood  to  nibble  where  the  slope
seems  almost  bare  ;  and  the  sheep,  too,  find  sustenance  which
ours  would  certainly  disdain.  For  what  the  Greek  mountains
offer  is  mostly  not  grass  but  scrub  or  'dry-stuff'  {(ppvyaya),
all  of  it  stiff  and  hard  and  most  of  it  prickly,  growing  wher-
ever it  can  find  a  hold  in  the  stony  soil.  Even  in  Elysium  the
'  meadows '  are  not  all  green,  but  red  with  spring  anemones  or
ghostly  pale  with  asphodel.^

For  though  Greek  pasture  keeps  the  animals  thin,  it  provides
labour  for  multitudes  of  bees.  The  'dry-stuff'  flowers  unex-
pectedly and  in  abundance,  like  our  English  gorse,  and  Greece  has
always  been  a  land  of  goats'  milk  and  honey.  Honey  indeed
was  a  necessity,  not  a  luxury,  to  the  ancients ;  for  they  had  no
sugar  or  other  sweetening  matter,  and  introduced  hone}',  as  stu-

^  Shepherds  :   Soph.  O.  T.  1136;  Hdt.  i.  no.     Cf.  p.  226  below.

"^  The  asphodel  is  a  sort  of  overgrown  hyacinth  and  is  one  of  the  commonest
scrub  flowers.  To  the  ordinary  Greek  farmer  the  name  conveyed  nothing  of
the  romance  which  our  poets  have  woven  round  it.  The  asphodel  meadow
became"  a  conventional  Epic  phrase  for  the  Eiysian  Fields,  but  Pindar,  in  tiie
beautiful  fragment  of  one  of  his  dirges,  says  of  the  dead  :  'the  fields  outside
their  city  are  scarlet  with  roses'  ((/jot^Ko/jofioir  iv\  Xfi/iwi/eo-crt  ■n^oaa-Tiov  avruiv) :
cf.  Ar.  Frogs  373.  On  the  '  scrub'  see  Myres,  G7cek  Lixnds  and  the  Greek
People,  p.  24,  who  points  out  that,  owing  to  the  absence  of  berry-bearing
plants,  '  the  Greek  world  is,  in  general,  a  jamless  world.'


44


GEOGRAPHY  part  i


dents  of  Homeric  gastronomy  will  remember,  into  the  strangest
mixtures.

In  winter,  of  course,  snow  lies  on  the  high  pastures  and  the
shepherds  come  down  into  the  lower  lands,  on  to  the  borders  and
sometimes  even  over  the  edge  of  the  arable.  That  edge,  the  last
line  on  the  concentric  shield,  is  very  clearly  marked  in  the  rainy
season.  '  Any  one  who  will  go  in  spring-time,'  says  Professor
Myres,  '  and  look  round  from  the  Acropolis  upon  Attica,  will
recognize  that  abrupt  change  from  the  emerald  green  to  the
purple  and  brown  which  tells  where  plain  and  cornland  end  and
the  goats  of  the  mountain  slopes  begin.  And  I  have  seen  along
the  base  of  Taygetus,  along  the  same  economic  frontier,  where
a  track  like  a  coastguard's  path  has  been  worn  by  the  police
patrols,'  in  their  attempt  to  prevent  war  between  Highlanders
and  Lowlanders,  In  the  cold  season,  indeed,  quarrels  arc  in-
evitable, for  the  Greek  levels  are  not  trimly  set  about  with
hedges  to  prevent  the  flocks  from  eating  what  they  should  not  ;
and  goats  used  to  mountain  climbing  will  surmount  most  petty
obstacles.  Hence  it  may  be  observed  that  there  are  fewer
sheep  and  goats  and  more  dogs  per  shepherd  than  with  us,  and
that  the  dogs  are  trained  to  be  very  quick  and  savage.  For  both
shepherds  and  dogs  have  a  good  deal  more  to  do.  Goats,  like
mischievous  children,  cannot  be  left  to  themselves.^

We  have  at  last  descended  to  the  level  of  the  cultivable  land,
which,  with  the  exception  of  the  forests,  forms  the  smallest  of  all
the  four  belts  of  country.  But  it  is  the  most  important  of  all,  for
without  it  Greece  would  hardly  be  habitable,  and  certainly  would
never  have  become  the  home  of  civilization.

The  conformation  of  these  plains  is  important :  for  on  it
depends  much  of  the  political  history  of  Greece.  We  think  of
a  mountainous  country  as  a  land  of  ridges  and  valleys,  running
more  or  less  parallel  and  broadening  out  as  the  streams  grow
larger.  Such,  for  instance,  is  Switzerland,  whose  struggle  for
political  independence  starts  from  the  easy  co-operation  of  the


^  See  Anthropology  and  the  Classics,  p.  165.  Our  hedges  of  course  date
only  from  the  time  when  the  mediaeval  system  was  abandoned  and  arable
and  pasture  intermingled.  The  goats  that  are  milked  from  door  to  door,  as
so  often  in  Southern  towns,  must  often  pasture  amid  the  arable.  Cf.  Od.  x.
82,  xvii.  170.


CHAP.  IV  THE   SOIL


4.')


men  in  the  valleys  round  the  Lake  of  Lucerne.  lUit  in  Greece
the  land  falls,  not  into  valleys,  but  into  plains  or  levels  {-mSia).
Seen  from  above,  the  mountain-ranges  do  not  run  in  straight
lines  but,  very  roughly  speaking,  rectangularly,  enclosing  the
land  into  little  square  boxes.  These  plains  are  generally  en-
tirely flat,  as  flat  as  the  English  Fens,  or,  if  they  rise  at  all,  they
rise  not  at  the  base  of  the  mountains,  but  towards  their  own
centre,  like  upturned  saucers.  They  arc  watered  by  streams
from  the  slopes,  but  these  do  not  flow  down  lordly  valleys  in
easy  stages  to  the  sea,  but  make  their  way  out  as  '  foiled  cir-
cuitous wanderers'.  Sometimes,  like  the  Eurotas  below  Sparta
or  the  Peneus  at  Tempo,  they  escape  into  a  deep  ravine  ;  some-
times, as  at  Stymphalus,  they  carve  a  way  out  underground,  lilce
the  Mole  at  Box  Hill  ;  sometimes,  like  the  famous  river  in  the
Tegean  plain,  which  caused  so  many  disputes,  they  settle  the
matter  by  drying  up  and  disappearing  altogether.

Hence  the  cultivable  land  in  Greece  is  divided  into  compart-
ments well  sealed  against  easy  entrance.  Some,  and  the  most
important  of  these,  are  formed  partly  on  alluvial  soil,  with  one
side  open  to  the  sea.  Such  are  the  Plains  of  Argos,  Athens,  and
Eleusis.  Others,  like  the  plain  of  Sparta,  are  shut  in  by  moun-
tains on  all  sides.  Both  formations  equally  promoted  isolation
in  early  times  ;  for,  before  the  sea  was  policed,  there  were  no
regular  maritime  communications,  and  all  cities  were  built,  like
Athens  and  Argos,  well  away  from  the  shore.  Greek  institutions
and  Greek  patriotism  grew  up  during  long  centuries  of  isolation
in  these  boxes  of  cultivable  land  with  their  rigid  mountain
frontiers.^

It  was  on  the  products  of  these  little  plains  that  the  Greeks
lived,  ever  since  they  had  settled  down  and  ceased  to  be  a  purely
pastoral  and  nomadic  people.  Three  stood  out  above  the  rest
as  necessary  to  human  existence — corn,  \vine,  and  oil,  which  have
been  called  '  the  Mediterranean  triad  '.

Corn  comes  first  in  point  both  of  time  and  necessity.  For
before  men  felt  firm  enough  in  their  homes  to  plant  olive-trees
or  even  vines  they  sowed  corn  for  the  next  harvest,  ready  to  pass
on  when  they  had  reaped  and  prepared  it.     (TlTo<i,  that  is  wheat

'  See  (h-undy's  map  of  Greece  (IM array's  Handy  Classical  Maps)  which
marks  the  plains  at  all  elevations  green.

1246  D


46  GEOGRAPHY  part  i

or  barley,  was  the  staple  Greek  food.  Meat  they  seldom  ate,
except  at  festival  times,  when  the  sacrificial  animals  were  dis-
tributed ;  and  everything  else  that  was  not  airo?  was  regarded
as  dessert  (oylrov).  Persians,  who  were  not  used  to  Greek  meals,
complained  that  there  was  nothing  worth  eating  after  the  flour
course  and  that  they  left  the  table  hungry  ;  and  later  visitors  have
re-echoed  their  complaint.  The  Greeks  ate  flour  food  in  great
quantities  and  in  many  varieties.  As  a  rule  only  the  wheat  was
made  into  bread  :  the  barley  was  kneaded  but  not  baked,  and
eaten  as  a  sort  of  porridge  with  water ;  these  are  the  '  noble
cakes  '  Plato  provides  in  the  spare  dietary  of  his  Guardians  in
the  ideal  city.  The  Greeks  have  never  been  either  gluttons  or
drunkards.  Then  as  now  most  of  them  took  only  two  meals —
lunch  {dpiarov)  towards  midday,  after  half  a  day's  work,  and
supper  (SeiTTvov)  in  the  evening.  But  these  meals,  like  rare  holi-
days, are  all  the  more  needed  when  they  come,  and  the  arrange-
ments of  the  day,  even  in  war  time,  tended  to  revolve  round  them.
There  were  few  Greek  commanders  (outside  the  Epic)  who  could
make  their  men  fight  during  the  usual  luncheon  interval.  When
they  arranged  to  do  so  they  generally  won  a  decisive  victory.^

Every  Greek  city  grew,  or  tried  to  grow,  its  own  corn.  When
the  demand  exceeded  the  supply  and  the  city  was  no  longer
self-sufficient  very  serious  political  difficulties  arose,  as  we  shall
see.  The  corn  is  sown  in  October,  and  reaped  in  May  and  June.
It  is  grown  wherever  the  state  of  the  ground  permits,  and  it  is
not  unusual  to  see  oxen  ploughing  on  little  terraces  of  rock  which
look  far  too  small  and  inaccessible  to  be  worth  the  trouble.
Thucydides,  who  objected  to  dating  by  the  cumbrous  Athenian
months   (for   most    Greek    states  had   different  names  for  their

^  Corn-growing:  Thuc.  i.  2,  2.  Cf.  Hdt.  iv.  42  on  '  How  could  the  Phoe-
nicians carry  enough  fresh  provisions  to  go  round  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope?'
See  Isocr.  vii.  29  on  the  steady  increase  in  the  number  of  festivals  at  which
sacrifices  were  required.  Also  [Xen.]  A//i.  Pol.  (henceforward  referred  to  as
'  Old  Oligarch  ')  iii.  8  and  Thuc.  ii.  38.  Persian  meals  :  Hdt.  i.  133  ;  Ar.  Ach.
77-8.  Cakes  :  Rep.  372  B  :  the  details  are  all  taken  from  daily  life.  Fighting
in  the  luncheon  interval:  Xen.  Hell.  ii.  i.  27  (Aegospotami).  Other
instances  :  Thuc.  vii.  39.  2,  viii.  95.  3  ;  Hdt.  i.  63,  vi.  78.  Compare  the
account  of  the  battle  of  Trebia  (a  winter  battle)  in  Polyb.  iii.  71-2.  Clytem-
nestra  (Aesch.  Ag.  331)  enlarges  on  how  the  Greeks  must  be  enjoying  their
first  good  meal  in  Troy;  cf.  Thuc.  viii.  loi.  2.  One  can  work  or  walk  for
many  hours  in  (ireece  on  an  empty  stomach,  but  when  hunger  suddenly
comes  it  is  quite  paralysing.     Cf.  Murray,  Greek  Epic,  p.  27  (2nd  ed.  p.  47).


CHAi'.  IV  THE   SOIL


47


months),  fixes  his  events  during  each  season,  as  is  natnral  for
country  readers,  by  the  state  of  the  crops.

After  corn,  wine.  It  is  curious  that  the  chief  commercial
importance  of  the  vine  in  modern  Greece  should  not  be  alcoholic
at  all.  The  largest  article  of  export  is  currants  (or,  as  the
Germans  more  correctly  call  them,  Corinths),  a  small  variety
of  grape  which  was  not  known  in  Greece  till  the  fourteenth
century.  In  its  older  forms,  however,  the  vine  has  been  in
Greece  from  the  earliest  times,  and  wine  has  always  been  the
national  drink.  Herodotus  was  surprised  when  he  found  himself
in  a  new  zone  of  drinks,  and  saw  Egyptians  drinking  beer  '  because
they  had  no  vines',  and  Babylonians  drinking  palm-wine.  The
Greeks  were  not  a  drunken  nation,  though  wine  played  a  large
part  in  social  and  religious  life.  They  always  drank  it  mixed,
generally  in  the  proportion  of  three  of  water  to  two  of  wine,  and
they  thought  it  uncivilized  to  take  it  neat.  But  they  could  not
do  without  it.^

The  third  member  of  the  triad  is  the  olive,  the  only  one  of  the
three  which  is  characteristically  Mediterranean.  While  the  vine
grows  as  far  North  as  Cologne  and  Vienna,  and  can  even  grow
in  England,  the  olive  follows  very  closely  the  frontier  of  the
'practically  rainless  summer'.  Hence  its  uses  are  unfamiliar  to
us,  and  it  is  worth  while  to  explain  them.  For  in  Greek  life  the
'little  oil-flask'  was  as  indispensable,  and  as  easily  mislaid,  as
the  umbrella  is  with  us.

Olive-oil  to  the  Greeks  played  three  separate  roles — those  of
butter,  soap,  and  gas.  It  was  used  for  cooking,  for  washing,
and  for  lighting.  No  one  in  Greece  (outside  fashionable  hotels)
eats  butter  ;  bread  and  olives  or  bread  and  goats'  cheese  are  their

'  Drink-zones:  Hdt.  ii.  T]  (but  cf.  ii.  60),  i.  193.  The  Temperance
Question  of  course  assumes  very  different  aspects  in  different  drink-zones—
eTg.  in  Greece  and  Scandinavia.  For  a  thoughtful  Greek  view  see  the  dis-
cussion by  Plato  in  the  Laws  (Book  i),  who  sums  up  (650)  that  wine  'is
a  fair  test  of  character,  and  cheaper,  safer,  and  speedier  than  any  other  ',  and
that  it  is  also  a  '  cheap  and  innocent '  way  of  trainitig  character,  '  if  care  be
taken  in  the  use  of  it.'  The  Greeks  used  the  word  '  drunk  '  far  more  loosely
than  we  do,  at  any  rate  in  our  police  courts.  For  instance,  the  '  inopportune
man  '  in  Theophrastus  '  when  he  is  minded  to  dance,  will  seize  upon  another
person  who  is  7iot  yet  drunk  '.  So  clearly  a  '  drunken  man  '  was  considered
by  no  means  incapable  of  executing  the  complicated  manccuvres  of  a  Greek
dance.  (Theophr.  ix,  Jebb's  2nd  ed.,  which  will  be  used  in  subsequent
references,  p.  ']'].)

D  2


48  GEOGRAPHY  tart  i

'bread  and  butter',  and  Herodotus  thinks  it  necessary,  for  the
information  of  his  readers,  to  give  a  minute  description  of
a  Scythian  butter-making  or  Hterally  '  cow-cheese-making'.  ^
Hence  oil  is  used  in  almost  every  dish,  and  every  Greek  cook
would  be  lost  without  it.  Again,  the  Greeks  used  no  soap,
but  rubbed  themselves  w^ith  oil  and,  if  that  was  insufficient,  put
scents  on  above  it.  Lastly,  if  they  outstayed  the  sun  (which
they  did  far  less  than  we),  they  had  no  other  light  but  oil  or
resinous  torches.  Hence  the  multitudes  of  oil-lamps  in  every
classical  museum.  For  each  of  these  purposes  thrifty  housekeepers
used  a  different  quality  of  oil.  The  olives  were  squeezed  in
presses  :  the  first  squeeze  produced  eating  oil,  the  second  anointing
oil,  the  third  burning  oil,  and,  finally,  the  remainder,  skins  and
all,  was  used  as  fuel.^

'  Hdt.  iv.  2.  Butter  is  probably  simply  ^ov-Tvpoi.  The  Babylonians'
substitute  for  butter  is  Aladdin's  Sesame,  i.  193.

'^  Scents  :  it  must  be  remembered  that  home-spun  clothes,  unlike  ours,  last
a  very  long  time.  Fullers  and  laundrymen  used  a  rough  kind  of  soap  for
getting  out  bad  stains  (hence  the  metaphor  in  Republic  430),  but  oil  was
used,  like  camphor  with  us,  for  keeping  clothes  fresh  (//.  xviii.  595).  Some-
times the  fine  ashes  from  the  hearth  were  mixed  with  oil,  which  made  a  soap
(Ar.  Lys.  470  Schol.).  But  the  Greeks  were  probably  not,  judged  by  our
unprecedentedly  high  English  standard,  a  clean  race.  To  wear  linen  clothes
was  regarded  as  a  luxury,  partly  because  they  required  constant  washing.
Hence  after  a  short  excursion  into  linen  underclothing  even  the  Athenians
reverted  to  woollens,  which  are  not  the  cleanest  wear  in  a  hot  country.
(Cp.  Thuc.  i.  6.  3  with  Hdt.  ii.  37  and  Od.  vi.  64-5.  Berard,  vol.  i,  p.  556,
exaggerates  this  point  in  an  interesting  passage  on  Nausicaa's  clothes-
washing.)  One  of  the  marks  of  Theophrastus's  '  I\Ian  of  Petty  Ambition'
(Jebb,  p.  63)  is  his  excessive  cleanliness.  '  He  will  have  his  hair  cut  very
frequently  and  will  keep  his  teeth  white  ;  he  will  change  his  clothes,  too,
while  still  good,  and  will  anoint  himself  with  unguent.'  On  Greek  washing
arrangements  see  Sudhoff,  Aits  dem  aiitiken  Badewesefi,  with  a  most  attrac-
tive collection  of  vase  illustrations,  showing  e.g.  the  flimsiness  of  the  'wash-
hand  stands '  in  private  houses  and  the  simplicity  of  the  arrangements  in  the
public  baths.  There  were  public  baths  for  women,  too,  whither  they  resorted
perhaps  about  weekly  (p.  63).  We  can  see  towel,  scraper,  oil-flask,  sponge,
but  no  trace  of  soap.  On  a  piece  of  an  Athenian  \'ase  in  the  Louvre  {Louvre
A/huift,  vol.  ii,  Plate  78,  F  203)  there  is  a  women's  swimming-bath,  perhaps
the  well-house  of  the  Enneacrounos  during  certain  hours.  Cf.  also  Lysias,
i.  9,  and  Furtwiingler  and  Reinhold,  Fig.  107,  and  Texi,  vol.  ii,  pp.  237-41,
with  some  interesting  psychology.  The  fourth-century  vase  there  represented
shows  two  women  at  a  washing  basin  which  is  like  a  large  holy-water  stoup.
There  is  another  like  it  on  a  kylix  in  the  British  Museum,  dating  from  about
480.— The  first  'corner'  recorded  in  Greek  history  was  made  by  Thales  the
philosopher,  in  olive  presses.  His  knowledge  of  the  stars  enabled  him  to
predict  a  good  crop,  and  he  bought  up  all  the  presses,  'just  to  show  that
a  philosopher  can  make  money  if  he  likes.'  Ar.  Po/.  1259  a  16.  See  Darem-
berg  and  Saglio,  s.  v.  Olea,  Fig.  5388.


CHAr.  IV  THE   SOIL  49

The  olive  used  to  be  rcgaided  as  a  comparatively  late  comer
into  Greece,  for  legend  spoke  of  how  Athena  introduced  it  into
Attica  at  a  time  when  it  existed  in  no  other  part  of  Greece.  lUit
the  archaeologists  have  corrected  this  idea,  which  may  have  been
due  to  the  slow  growth  of  olive  cultivation.  There  are  clear  signs
of  an  olive  press  in  the  Palace  of  Minos  at  Cnossos,  another  has
been  found  under  the  pumice  of  the  prehistoric  eruption  at  Thera,
and  olive  kernels  are  being  discovered  in  deep  levels  in  Crete.  So
the  olive  may  now  be  regarded  as  indigenous,  and  the  Olympian
'crown  of  wild  olive'  as  a  truly  Hellenic  prize.  The  tree  grows
in  all  parts  of  Greece,  wherever  it  can  find  soil,  up  to  a  level  of
1,800  feet.  But  it  flourished  best  in  Attica,  and  in  Athenian  poetry.
The  olive  is  not  a  big  tree  ;  it  is  not  allowed  to  grow  larger  than
a  pollarded  willow,  and  its  trunk  is  even  more  gnarled  ;  its  charm
lies  in  the  wonderful  shimmer  of  its  leaves,  which  flash  from  grey  to
silvery  white  in  a  sunny  wind.  From  Greece  it  went  the  round
of  the  Mediterranean,  past  Gyrene  and  Magna  Graecia.  It  began
to  be  extensively  cultivated  in  Italy  in  the  first  century  before
Christ.  It  spread  widely  in  North  Africa,  and  we  know  that  at
the  time  of  the  Arab  conquest  there  was  a  '  forest  of  olives '  right
along  from  Tripoli  to  Tangier.^

Greek  and  Roman  writers  have  left  us  directions,  which  can  be
verified  in  Greece  or  Italy  on  a  country  walk,  as  to  the  planting
of  olives.  An  'olive  grove'  is  not  a  forest  but  an  open  orchard.
The  trees  are  planted  tidily  in  rows,  and  on  good  soil  it  is  wise  to
leave  forty  feet  between  each  tree  in  the  row  and  sixty  feet  between
row  and  row.  Thus  there  is  plenty  of  room  to  sow  corn  between
the  trees,  and  the  peasant  has  not  to  choose  between  two  forms  of
cultivation,  but  simply  which  of  the  two  he  is  to  make  his  staple.

As  Virgil  remarks,  the  olive  wants  very  little  looking  after,
beyond  digging  round  the  roots.  Hence,  once  planted  in  a
country,  they  are  a  very  favourite  foim  of  cultivation  ;  for
Southern  man  (and  every  man)  enjoys  sitting  complacently
beneath  his  fruit-trees.  It  is  only  in  the  late  autumn  that  worlc
begins,  in  a  convenient  interval  when  other  crops  give  no  trouble.

^  Olives :  Hdt.  v.  82.  Athena's  first  olive  was  planted  on  the  Acropolis
and  its  first  cutting  in  the  Academy.  Cf.  Wilamowitz,  Aristoieles  iimi  Atlun
(henceforward  referred  to  as  A.  A.),  vol.  i,  p.  240.  See  the  fine  siniile  in
//.  xvii.  53,  and,  of  course,  the  Sophocles  chorus  (O.  C.  694).  Also  Hehn,
p.  III.


50  GEOGRAPHY  part  i

For  the  olives  ripen  later  than  the  figs  and  the  grapes,  and  are
slowly  picked  off,  berry  by  berry,  from  October  to  December.
'  Never  shake  or  beat  an  olive-tree,'  say  the  writers.  There  were
no  rejoicings  at  the  olive  harvest  as  there  were  for  the  vintage.
It  was  as  laborious  as  English  hopping  or  strawberry  picking,
and  hired  labourers  w^ent  out  from  the  city  to  do  it  in  the  familiar
Kentish  way.^

]^ut  there  is  another  important  factor.  It  is  a  long  time  after
they  are  planted  before  olives  come  to  maturity.  They  do  not
bear  a  full  crop  for  sixteen  or  eighteen  years,  and  it  is  forty  to
sixty  years  before  they  are  at  their  best.  As  with  forests,  there-
fore, it  is  difficult  to  introduce  them  except  under  a  strong  central
government  and  with  a  country  population  which  can  afford  to
wait.  This  explains  the  slow  progress  made  in  their  cultivation
in  early  times  and  the  difficulties  that  Solon  and  Pisistratus
experienced  when  the  Athenian  Government  favoured  their
spread.  Probably  they  would  never  have  spread  widely  in
Attica  at  all  had  not  Pisistratus  made  advances  to  the  proprie-
tors out  of  his  own  private  purse.-

Hence,  too,  the  seriousness  of  the  devastation  of  an  olive-
country.  An  olive-yard  well  destroyed  is  not,  like  a  cornfield,
the  destruction  of  a  year's  income,  but  the  destruction  of  capital
as  well.  Sophocles,  writing  in  406,  after  seven  years  of  the  con-
stant occupation  of  Attica  by  the  enemy,  might  bravely  call  the
olive  'self-renewing  and  unsubdued',  carrying  the  minds  of  his
hearers  back  to  how  the  sacred  olive  on  the  Acropolis  sprouted
after  the  Persians  left.  But  the  farmers  who  heard  him  knew  the
hollowness  of  the  words,  and  when  at  the  end  of  the  war  they
left  their  ruined  farms  with  their  charred  olive-stumps  and  went
soldiering  side  by  side  with  their  late  enemies  for  a  living,  they
must  have  felt  a  lump  in  their  throats  as  they  sang  his  chorus
round  their  camp  fircs.^

'  Ulive  pickers  :  Ar.  IVasps  712.  They  are  represented  on  a  vase  in  the
British  Museum,  reproduced  in  Daremberg  and  SagUo,  s.v.  0/ea,  Fig.  5385.
Cultivation  :  Geon^ic  ii.  420.

\  Ath.  Pol.  xvi.'2.

■*  Soph.  O.  C.  699  alluding  to  the  story  in  Hdt.  viii.  55.  For  camp-fire
talk  between  Athenians  and  Spartans  see  Xen.  Anal),  iv.  6.  7-19.  That  the
Peloponnesians  in  Attica  addressed  their  devastation  mainly  to  olive-trees
seems  clear  {inter  alia)  from  the  wording  of  Thuc.  iii.  26.  3  :  '  they  ravaged
what  had  sprouted  in  the  parts  previously  ravaged'  (tu  re  nporfpov  TeTfxrjfxffa


CHAP.  IV  THE   SOIL  51

Modern  geographers  mention  another  department  of  cullivation
in  present-day  Greece — that  of  so-called  sub-tropical  products,
which  require  constantly  irrigated  soil.  The  chief  of  these  arc
cotton  and  tobacco,  both  of  which  are  grown  in  small  quantities
in  the  country  to-day.

This  sub-tropical  cultivation  played  no  part  in  ancient  Greece.
Cotton  they  only  knew  as  a  strange  and  rare  kind  of '  tree-wool ',
and  tobacco,  rooted  as  it  appears  to  be  to-day,  like  coffee,  in  the
life  of  the  Near  East,  they  did  not  know  at  all.  It  is  only  worth
while  mentioning  them  in  order  to  point  out  that  the  systems  of
intensive  cultivation  and  gang-labour  with  which  they  have  else-
where been  associated  are  equally  foreign  to  ancient  Greece.  If
the  Greeks  had  had  sugar  instead  of  honey,  they  might  have  been
turned  from  a  race  of  yeomen  into  a  race  of  planters.  It  is  only
fair  to  add  that,  if  they  had  eaten  rice  instead  of  wheat  and
barley-flour,  they  would  have  saved  their  women-folk  a  great  deal
of  hard  labour  at  the  mill.  But  we  have  already  crossed  the
narrow  line  between  geography  and  economics — between  products
of  the  earth  and  the  use  man  makes  of  them,  and  it  is  time  to
bring  this  section  to  a  close.^

("iTi  e^(^\aaTrjKet)  :  there  would  be  no  point  in  adding  'what  had  sprouted'
in  the  case  of  com,  which  there  had  been  plenty  of  time  to  sow  since  they
were  there  last.  It  was  the  new  olive-yards  which  made  the  Italians  re-
luctant to  go  to  war  when  Caesar  crossed  the  Rubicon  ;  the  first  oil  had
been  exported  from  Italy  three  years  pi'eviously  :  Pliny,  A^.  //.  xv.  i.  3.  The
Law  of  Moses  forbade  the  Jews  to  cut  down  'trees  for  meat'  in  warfare:
Deut.  XX.  19-20,  but  cf.  2  Kings  iii.  19.

^  Cotton  (e'lpiov  duo  ^v\ov  =  German  Bmimiuolle)  :  Hdt.  iii.  47  and  106.
Flax  was  grown  to  a  small  extent  in  ancient  Greece.  In  Thuc.  iv.  26  the
Helots  carried  ground  linseed,  such  as  we  give  to  cattle,  to  the  prisoners  in
Sphacteria.  Hemp  was  not  grown.  It  was  strange  to  Herodotus,  who
found  the  Thracians  using  it  for  clothing  and  the  Scythians  for  vapour  baths
(iv.  74-5).  Of  familiar  garden  products  the  Greek  had  neither  cherries,
oranges,  lemons,  tomatoes,  nor,  till  after  Alexander,  peaches  and  apricots.
The  first  silkworms  were  brought  West  in  536  A.  D.,  though  silk  goods  were
known  to  the  Romans.  The  chief  Greek  fruits  were  figs  (easily  first),  apples,
pears,  and  pomegranates;  cf.  O^/.  xi.  588  (Tantalos)  and  xxiv.  246  (Laertes*
garden).  One  point  about  animals  :  cocks  and  hens,  which  the  Athenians
called  the  'Persian  bird'  (and  the  Romans  the  'bird  from  Gaul'),  came  to
Greece  from  Asia  in  the  sixth  century  B.C.  So  there  was  a  time  in  Greece
when  neither  Asclepius  nor  the  weary  traveller  was  offered  cock  or  'chicken*.
On  all  these  points  see  Hehn,  Kulturpfian::en  und Haustiere  (7th  ed.,  Berlin,
1902),  E.  T.  (of  earlier  edition),  London,  1888.


PART   II.     POLITICS

To?f  /xeV  ai)fia(Tiv  aXXorpicoriirot?  vwip  tvjs  irokfcos  ;^pwi/rnt,
Ttj  8e  yvuifxi]  oiKdoruTji  e's  to  TrpaTTfiu  Ti  vn(p  uvriis.
They  spend  their  bodies,  as  mere  external  tools,  in  the  City's  service,  and
count  their  minds  as  most  truly  their  own  when  employed  on  her  behalf.


Such,  then,  are  the  material  foundations  on  which  Greek
institutions  were  built  up.  Such  is  the  permanent  background
against  which  the  drama  of  Greek  history  was  played  out.  It  is
time  to  introduce  the  characters.  What  manner  of  men  were  they,
and  what  did  they  make  of  the  rough  country  in  which  they
came  to  live  ?

The  greatest  legacy  which  the  Greeks  have  left  to  the  after-
world  is  their  City  State  patriotism.  The  City  State  was  the
centre  and  inspiration  of  all  their  most  characteristic  achieve-
ments, culminating  in  the  great  outpouring  of  literature  and  art
and  practical  energy,  of  great  men  and  great  deeds,  in  fifth-
century  Athens.  The  world  has  seen  nothing  comparable  to  it
either  before  or  since.  When  the  Sovereign  City  passed  away
in  the  fourth  century  before  Christ,  the  emotions  and  affec-
tions which  it  had  kindled  and  fed  passed  away  too,  and  it  needs
an  effort  of  imagination  in  the  modern  man  to  recapture  not  them
but  their  shadow.  Yet  without  some  dim  understanding  of  how
the  Athenian  felt  towards  Athens  the  best  of  ancient  Greece
remains  sealed  to  us.  Let  us  try  to  disentangle  patiently  and
carefully — for  it  is  a  delicate  task  the  several  strands  of  the  tie
which  linked  the  Greek  citizen  to  his  city,  using  geography  and
history  and  all  the  other  helpers  we  can  find  to  play  the  com-
mentator to  that  highest  expression  of  the  art  of  life  in  the  City
State,  the  Funeral  Speech  of  Pericles.


CHAPTER   I

THE    ELEMENTS    OF   CITIZENSHIP

FELLOWSHIP,   OR   THE    RULE    OF    PUBLIC   OPINION
(to  kolvov)

Idem  sentif-e  de  republica  was  with  them  a  principal  ground  of  friendship
and  attachment  ;  nor  do  I  know  any  other  capable  of  forming  firmer,  dearer,
more  pleasing,  more  honourable,  and  more  virtuous  habitudes. — Bukke.

How  would  geographical  conditions  influence  the  dweller  in
Greek  lands?

Life  in  Greek  lands  is  at  once  very  hard  and  very  easy :  or
rather,  dwellers  in  Greek  lands  are  at  once  very  hardy  and
very  easy-going.  The  roughness  and  barrenness  of  the  country,
the  changes  between  the  seasons  and  the  severity  of  the  winters,
promote  the  survival  of  the  fittest,  and  have  made  the  Greeks
of  all  ages  simple,  tough,  and  abstemious.  But  the  long
cloudless  summers  and  the  ease  with  which  life  is  sustained  on
very  little  have  greatly  simplified  the  problem  of  existence.  The
Greek  need  not,  and  does  not,  labour  from  morning  to  night  to
keep  body  and  soul  together.  He  has  never  needed  and  never
liked  sustained  and  monotonous  activity  of  the  kind  which
Northern  workers  and  Northern  economists  tend  to  regard  as  the
inevitable  lot  of  all  mankind.  The  Greek  has  never  known  what  it
is  to  be,  in  the  common  sense  of  the  word;  either  in  his  habits  or  his
ideals,  an  economic  man.  The  Greek  word  for  unemployment
is  '  schole ',  which  means  *  leisure  '  :  while  for  business  he  has
no  better  word  than  the  negative  '  ascholia ',  which  means  'absence
of  leisure  '.  The  hours  and  weeks  of  unemployment  he  regards
as  the  best  and  most  natural  part  of  his  life.  Men  who  live
among  vines  and  olives  fall  naturally  into  this  free  and  irrespon-
sible frame  of  mind.  Nature  ripens  the  fruit,  and  man  has  only  to
wait  and  pick  it.  The  Greeks  always  lived  with  a  fine  margin  of
leisure  ;  and  leisure  is  the  mother  of  art  and  contemplation,  as
necessity  is  the  mother  of  the  technical  devices  we  call  *  inventions '.


55  POLITICS  TART  II

The  Greek  peasant  understood  and  enjoyed  the  plays  of  Euripides
(which  were  as  deep  as  Ibsen  and  as  deHcate  as  Galsworthy),  but
he  had  never  thought  of  so  simple  a  contrivance  as  a  windmill.^

Our  steady  monotonous  economic  activity  mostly  goes  on
indoors,  generally  in  cramped  and  sedentary  postures.  We  do
not  do  this  from  choice,  but  because  the  nature  of  the  climate
and  of  our  work  compels  it.  Most  of  us  would  spend  all  our
time  out  of  doors  if  we  could.  So  would  the  Greeks,  and  there
was  nothing  to  prevent  them.  '  I  never  spend  my  time  indoors,'
says  the  typical  Athenian  in  Xenophon.  '  My  wife  is  quite  able
to  manage  the  household  by  herself,'  and  he  went  out  cheerfully
to  spend  his  day  in  the  fields,  or  the  market-place,  or  the
wrestling-ground,  or  the  law-courts,  or  the  assembly,  or  wherever
else  duty  or  pleasure  called  him.  All  the  chief  institutions  of
Greek  life  took  place  in  the  open.  The  Greek  was  seldom  at
home.  He  only  used  his  house  for  sleeping  and  eating.  You
will  not  find  him  in  his  private  garden :  for  a  Greek  city,  crushed
within  the  circuit  of  its  walls,  had  no  room  for  gardens,  and  what
was  the  use  of  them  with  orchards  just  outside  the  walls?  He
will  be  at  work  or  along  with  the  other  men  in  some  public  place.^

But  supposing  it  rained  ?  Every  self-respecting  city  provided
for  that  by  the  erection  of  colonnades  or  covered  w^alks,  similar  to
those  put  up  in  some  of  our  watering-places  to-day.  Strabo  tells
a  story  of  how  the  inhabitants  of  Cyme  in  Asia  Minor  pledged
their  colonnades  as  security  for  the  repayment  of  a  State  debt.
When  they  could  not  repay,  they  were  prohibited  from  walking

'  Of  course  climatic  conditions  must  be  such  as  not  to  interfere  with  the
right  use  of  leisure.  As  Myres  points  out  {Greek  Lands,  p.  28),  'Aegean
contemplation  differs  from  Indian  in  this,  that  it  is  seldom  too  hot  for  one
to  think  with  a  view  to  action.'

^  Xen.  Oec.  vii.  3.  The  Babylonians  even  had  their  hospitals  in  the  open,
and  Herodotus  (i.  197)  thought  it  a  very  sensible  arrangement,  promoting
the  diffusion  of  useful  medical  knowledge.  It  was  not  general  in  (.reece,
probably  because  the  Greeks  did  not  like  looking  at  sick  people.  I5ut  the
Orestes  of  Euripides  who  lies  ill  in  bed  in  the  yard  outside  his  own  front
door  is  probably  copied  from  the  life.  For  beds  in  the  market-place  see
also  Mark  vi.  56.  Gardens  reveal  a  desire  for  privacy  which  was  foreign  to
the  City  State.  It  is  characteristic  that  the  first  people  to  make  a  regular
use  of  private  gardens,  and  to  look  upon  them  as  indispensable,  should  have
been  the  philosophers.  The  Academy  and  the  Lyceum  were  not  so  much
a  training  for  City  State  life  as  a  substitute  for  it.  Socrates  taught  in  the
market-place  and  in  public  wrestling-grounds  :  Plato  and  Aristotle  '  moved
out  into  the  country  ',


ciiAi'.  T  PUIUJC   OriNION


:)7


in  them.  But  when  it  rained  the  creditors  felt  so  much  ashamed
of  the  city's  ph'ght  that  they  sent  out  the  town  crier  to  remove
the  interdict.  The  men  of  Cyme  could  not  possibly  do  as  wc
should  and  receive  their  friends  in  their  own  houses.  In  the  first
place  there  would  be  women  there  and  they  could  not  talk  at
their  ease ;  and,  secondly,  if  a  Greek  house  is  uncomfortable  in
sunny  weather  it  is  still  more  uncomfortable  in  wet,  for  it  was,  of
course,  not  heated.  Consequently  the  market-place  and  the
covered  walks  were  to  the  Greek  what  his  club  is  to  the  Northern
townsman  :  only  he  used  them  much  more  frequently.  The
Greek  was,  in  fact,  not  a  'family  man',  but,  as  Aristotle  called
him,  a  political  animal,  or  rather,  for  we  are  still  quite  outside  the
sphere  of  politics,  a  '  man  in  the  street '.  But  his  wife,  to  make
up,  was  all  the  more  home-keeping.  For  she  had  food  and
clothes  to  prepare :  nor  was  it  safe  to  admit  her  to  the  free  and
easy  society  of  the  market-place.  So  the  Greeks  regarded  the
man's  club  as  a  law  of  nature.  '  The  god  has  ordained  and  the
law  approves  that  each  should  follow  his  capacity,'  says  Xenophon.
'  It  is  not  so  good  for  a  woman  to  be  out-of-doors  as  in,  and  it  is
more  dishonourable  for  a  man  to  stay  in  than  to  attend  to  his
affairs  outside.'  So  when  Herodotus  found  men  weavers  in  Egypt
and  women  doing  their  own  shopping  and  even  selling  goods  in
the  market-place,  he  felt  himself  to  be  in  a  topsy-turvy  society.
'  A  house,  a  wife,  and  an  ox  to  plough  with  are  the  first  needs  of
life,'  sang  Hesiod  as  a  man  to  men  :  and  Aristotle,  centuries  later,
picked  out  the  sanctified  phrase,  perhaps  because  he  liked  the
order  in  which  the  commodities  were  arranged,  and  made  it  one
of  the  foundation-stones  of  his  political  theory.^

Club-life  promotes  good  fellowship.  The  Greeks,  like  most
peoples  in  similar  climates,  were  sociable  and  gregarious  and
enjoyed  mixing  in  large  companies.  Some  Northerners  think
it  wrong  to  speak  before  they  have  been  introduced.  A  Greek
thought  it  rude  to  let  a  stranger  pass  without  a  welcome,  and
foolish  not  to  gratify  a  natural  curiosity  by  asking  him  his  busi-
ness. The  single  line  question  and  answer  dialogues  (anxo/^vOia)
in  the  Tragedy  when  a  new  character  enters  assume  a  fresh  mean-
ing to  the  traveller  who  has  run  the  gauntlet  of  a  Greek  village.

1  Xen.  Otr.  vii.  30;  I  kit.  ii.  35  ;  Hesiod,  Erj^'-n  405  ;  Ar.  /W.  1052  b  11  ;
Strabo,  622.


58  POLITICS  PART  II

Few  Northern  Sunday-school  boys  are  so  mercilessly  catechized
as  the  casual  stranger  in  Greek  lands.  It  is  part  of  the  club
system,  and  goes  back  to  the  unsettled  days  when  even  pirates
and  brigands  were  not  ashamed  to  tell  the  catechists  their  calling.
Solitude  to  a  Greek  means  what  homesickness  would  mean  to  us.
Having  always  lived  in  a  kind  of  natural  College  they  cannot
adapt  themselves  to  conditions  which  cut  them  off  from  their
fellows.  Hence  when  they  emigrate,  whether,  as  of  old,  to  Sicily
and  Italy,  or,  as  now,  to  the  United  States,  they  go,  '  not  as
single  spies,  but  in  battalions,'  or  rather,  as  Plato  said,  in  swarms,
all  friends  together.  And  when  they  reach  the  other  side  they  are
more  concerned  to  find  social  than  economic  conditions  which
suit  them.  If  one  of  the  two  must  be  sacrificed  it  will  not  be
the  community  life.  If  the  immigrant  can  only  practise  agri-
culture in  a  dreary  American  farm  miles  away  from  the  next
homestead,  he  will  prefer  to  remain  pent  up  in  the  city,  'where
he  soon  forgets  his  cunning  in  regard  to  silk-worms  and  olive-
trees,  but  continues  his  old  social  habits  to  the  extent  of  filling
an  entire  tenement-house  with  the  people  from  one  village.'  A
skyscraper  is  a  poor  substitute  for  a  sunny  market-place,  but
beggars  cannot  be  choosers.^

All  this  has  an  important  influence  on  Greek  political  life.  Fel-
lowship means  Equality,  not  the  fictitious  Equality  which  has
served  as  a  watchword  for  Western  Republics,  but  the  inbred
feeling  which  has  always  found  a  home,  in  common  needs  and
common  intercourse,  at  the  springs  and  the  well-heads,  the  cross-
roads and  market-places,  the  temples,  shrines,  and  mosques,  of
the  Near  East.  There  was  more  true  equality  in  Turkey  under
Abdul  Hamid  than  in  the  United  States  under  Roosevelt.  One
illustration  must  suffice  to  emphasize  what  is  after  all  one  of  the
commonplaces  of  travel.  A  British  officer  is  describing  his
reception  by  a  Turkish  Agha  in  a  small  town  near  the  upper
Tigris : —

An  example  of  that  delightful  spirit  of  true  equality  which  is
inherent  in  Orientals  was  shown  in  the  company  present  at  my
reception — the  Agha  himself,  the  captain   in  command   of  the

^  See  the  whole  chapter  on  'Immigrants  in  City  Government'  in  Jane
Addams's  Nezoer  Ideals  of  Peace,  pp.  62  fif.  Cf.  Thuc.  i.  5.  i  (pirates),  vii.
75.6  (gregariousness)  ;  Plato,  Laws  708  B  (colonization).


CHAP.  I  PUBLIC   OTINION  59

troops,  a  blind  beggar,  a  Christian  shopkeeper,  a  telegraph  clerk,
a  couple  of  servants,  Jacob  (the  writer's  own  servant),  myself,
and,  lastly,  a  butcher  who  came  to  settle  the  price  of  a  sheep  with
my  servant,  which  he  discussed  across  the  Agha  over  a  cup  of
coffee.^

The  scene  is  a  typical  one,  not  least  the  bargain  at  the  end.
A  society  which  needs  no  '  introductions  '  and  knows  no  shyness
has  no  reticences  either.  It  says  what  it  thinks,  as  men  do  in
clubs,  whether  about  money  or  marriage  or  anything  else.

Equality  like  this  is  a  good  basis  for  political  institutions.  It
is  good  for  all  the  men  of  a  community  to  meet  and  talk,  for  they
will  naturally  talk  about  things  of  general  interest.  Now  the
chief  thing  of  general  interest  in  a  small  simple-minded  com-
munity with  a  settled  climate  is  not  the  weather,  or  money,
or  marriage,  but  the  State.  The  State  is  in  fact,  as  the  Greeks
called  it,  to  kolvov,  '  the  common  interest,'  or,  as  the  Romans  said,
'  Res  publica,'  '  everybody's  business.'  If  a  man  talks  about
your  wife  and  daughters,  especially  in  a  clannish  society  like  that
of  Greece,  you  can  tell  him  to  mind  his  own  business.  But  in
politics  every  problem  and  every  personality  is  fair  game.  It  is
one  of  the  privileges  of  club-life  to  have  all  its  questions  threshed
out  in  public — to  fling  everything  '  into  the  midst'  (et?  fxeaov),  as
the  Greeks  said.  Their  great  objection  to  an  absolute  ruler  was
not  that  he  governed  badly— for  they  admitted  that  a  man  who
decided  things  by  himself  might  be  very  efficient — but  that  '  he
kept  himself  to  himself.  To  be  governed  by  an  absolute  ruler
took  all  the  life  out  of  society.  It  reduced  lonians  to  talking
metaphysics,  or,  if  their  tastes  did  not  run  in  that  direction,  to
relieving  the  dullness  of  life  by  paying  excessive  attention  to
their  clothes.  And  indeed  when,  after  Alexander,  the  discussion
of  politics  ceased  to  be  real,  the  men  who  had  something  to
think  about  ceased  coming  to  the  market-place  and  conversation
degenerated  into  frivolities  and  superstition.  The  Athens  of
St.  Paul  is  the  Athens  of  Pericles  with  one  great  interest  taken
out  of  its  life.^

*  Dar-id-Isla»i^  by  Mark  Sykes,  p.  188.

^  Cf.  Hdt.  iii.  80,  82  (the  monarch  o-iywro  Tf  tiv  (3ov\fviiaTa  :  Demosthenes
says  the  same  of  Phihp).  A  king  who  was  easy  to  talk  to  was  considered  to
be  behaving  '  in  an  unkingly  way  '.  See  Hdt.  ii.  173,  where  Amasis  makes
himself  as  accessible  as  an  American  President.  Also  Thuc.  i.  130  (Pausanias's


6o  POLITICS  PART  II

Community  life,  lived  under  these  conditions,  created  the  force
which  we  call  public  opinion.  We  know  it  as  focussed  or  manu-
factured by  the  newspapers  or  in  its  outbursts  at  elections  and
public  meetings.  After  700  years  of  Parliamentary  govern-
ment it  is  a  force  with  which  politicians  have  to  reckon  in
England  :  in  a  lesser  degree  it  exists  in  all  constitutional  coun-
tries. But  we  little  know  the  range  and  intensity  of  its  influence
in  a  community  like  those  of  Greece.  The  political  animal
discussed  everything  that  was  put  before  him.  '  To  say  every-
thing '  {Trappi-jaia)  was  one  of  his  most  cherished  rights,  and  he
exercised  it  in  a  large  and  liberal  spirit,  which  our  public  men
and  even  our  Press  cannot  hope  to  rival.  The  ingenious  way  in
which  Demosthenes  interlards  his  speeches  with  smoking-room
topics  seems  to  us  both  shocking  and  irrelevant,  and  we  cannot
understand  why  contemporary  critics  all  seem  anxious  to  tell  us
that  Euripides'  mother  was  an  apple-woman.  Yet  why,  after  all,
should  the  free-speaking  citizen  refrain  from  '  personal  remarks  '  ?
For  the  game  of  politics  in  Greece,  then  as  now,  consisted  mainly
of  personal  rivalries,  and  everything  that  a  man  did  or  said  or
bought  or  wore  might  be  of  political  consequence.  Athens
prided  herself,  as  opposed  to  other  City  States,  on  the  free
scope  which  she  allowed  to  individual  idiosyncrasies.  Yet  even
in  Athens  Demosthenes  thinks  it  necessary  to  excuse  a  client  for
'  walking  fast,  talking  loud,  and  carrying  a  walking-stick  '.  And
how  strangely  the  words  of  Pericles,  commending  the  freedom  of
Athenian  social  life,  read  to  Englishmen  brought  up  to  believe,
as  a  matter  of  course,  that  '  every  man  may  do  as  he  likes  with
his  own ' !  '  We  have  no  black  looks  or  angry  words  for  our
neighbour  if  he  enjoys  himself  in  his  own  way,  and  we  abstain
from  the  little  acts  of  churlishness  which,  though  they  leave
no  mark,  yet  cause  annoyance  to  whoso  notes  them.'  One  can
imagine  that  Pericles  would  have  had  to  face  more  than  '  little
acts  of  churlishness  which  leave  no  mark  '  if  he  had  tried  to
drive  a  motor-car  through  an  Attic  township.  Really  it  was
not  worth  while  trying  to  get  rich  when  public  opinion  con-
Oriental  manners).  It  is  one  of  the  marks  of  Theophrastus's  'arrogant  man'
that  he  is  'not  likely  to  admit  a  visitor  when  he  is  anointing  himself  or
washing'  (Jebb,  p.  50).  The  lonians  were  always  ahead  of  the  fashion  in
clothes,  as  the  vases  and  monuments  show  :  cf.  Hdt.  iii.  139  (Syloson's  'fancy
waistcoat'  and  what  it  led  to).


(  iiAP.  r  PUBLIC    Ol'INION  6i

trolled  the  use  one  made  of  one's  money.  In  such  a  society  men,
even,  as  Pericles  says,  old  men,  count  honour  better  than  riches.
For  to  have  what  the  Greeks  called  a  good  '  estimation  '  {d^icoai^)
probably  contributed,  more  than  anything  else  which  lay  within
a  man's  own  power,  to  the  happiness  of  his  life.  No  wonder
Greeks  were  tempted  to  think  that  virtue  consisted  not  in  being
good  but  in  '  seeming  good  '.^

Perhaps  the  best  way  of  emphasizing  the  place  of  public
opinion  in  Greek  life  is  by  following  up  the  meanings  of  the
words  connected  with  the  market-place,  where  it  reigned  supreme.
The  original  meaning  of  Agora  is  not  market-place  but  assembly:
for  the  Greeks  were  gregarious  long  before  they  lived  in  towns.
Then  it  means  a  place  of  assembly,  where  meetings  and  trials
were  held,  and  then,  as  life  became  more  complicated,  a  place
for  buying  and  selling.  But  an  Agora  or  public  meeting  can
take  place  anywhere.  When  Odysseus  had  to  settle  a  question
of  policy  on  shipboard  it  was  put  before  the  'assembly'  of  the
seamen  :  and  one  of  the  crew,  Eurylochus,  is  a  perfectly  recog-
nizable leader  of  the  Opposition,  who  succeeds,  on  one  unfortunate
occasion,  in  placing  the  skipper  in  a  minority  of  one.  Readers
of  EotJieii  will  remember  the  chapter  on  Greek  Mariners,  with
the  description  of  the  gloomy  Hydriot  mate  who  acted  as
'  counter-captain,  or  leader  of  the  Opposition,  denouncing  the
first  symptoms  of  tyranny,  and  protecting  even  the  cabin-boy
from  oppression '.  But  'Ayopd  not  only  stands  for  the  debate,
but  suggests  the  closure,  for  it  came  to  be  used  as  a  mark  of  time.
'Ayopds  irX-qOvovcrris,  '  full  Agora,'  means  the  forenoon  before
lunch.  When  they  had  talked  themselves  hungry  they  needed
no  town  clocks  to  send  them  home.  The  verbal  form,  dyopd^eii^,
is  an  almost  equally  interesting  word.  It  means  '  to  frequent  the
market-place ',  '  to  lounge ',  '  to  buy ',  and,  above  all,  in  an  almost
untranslatable  phrase,  'to  disport  oneself  or  'be  in  good  Agora
form '.  When  Democedes  the  Greek  doctor  escaped  from  the
Persian  court  to  his  home  in  Croton,  the  emissaries  from  Darius
found  him,  in  the  centre  of  an  admiring  crowd,  dyopd(ovra.
Some  strange  stories  must  have  taken  root  in  Croton  about  life
at  the  Persian  court  from  those  mornings'  work.  Such  a  society
needed  neither  books  nor  newspapers.  It  picked  up  its  new
^  Thuc.  ii.  37.  2 ;  44.  4  ;  Dem.  xxxvii.  52  ;  PI.  Rep.  365.

1246  E


62  POLITICS  PART  II

ideas,  whether  serious  or  frivolous,  from  Aeschylus  or  from
Democedes,  at  first  hand  by  word  of  mouth. ^

So  far  we  have  been  speaking  of  influences  common  to  most
Mediterranean  lands.  Wherever  life  is  easy  and  open  there  is
a  certain  natural  equality.  The  sun  shines  alike  upon  the  high-
born and  the  low.  Distinctions  of  first,  second,  and  third  class
are  either  unknown  or,  where  they  have  been  introduced,  are
only  maintained  by  constant  effort.  Moreover,  this  equality  will
tend  to  create  a  constant  and  vigorous  public  opinion  and  an
interest  in  public  affairs.

This  is  not  the  same  as  to  say  that  all  the  Mediterranean
regions  enjoy  a  natural  Home  Rule,  still  less  that  they  are
bound  to  develop  some  form  of  popular  government.  These
may  not  be  secured,  and  indeed  are  seldom  secured  together,
except  towards  the  close  of  a  long  and  complex  development.
Towards  this,  as  we  shall  see  in  the  sequel,  many  other  factors
must  co-operate  beyond  the  few  simple  forces  which  we  have  so
far  introduced.  The  history  of  nations  is  not  to  be  written
offhand  by  easy  generalizations  from  their  environment.  Pales-
tine has  fared  very  differently  at  the  hands  of  her  rulers  from
Greece,  and  the  delta  of  the  Nile  from  the  coastlands  of  Asia
Minor.  Still  it  is  true  to  assert  of  all  these  regions  that,  even  if
they  have  not  preserved  their  independence  or  attained  to  popular
government,  they  yet  provide  conditions  which  will  prove  helpful
at  any  time  to  their  successful  exercise.

All  these  conditions  exist  in  Greece :  but  here  their  influence
is  strengthened,  in  contrast  to  other  Mediterranean  lands,  by
physical  characteristics  to  \\'hich  we  have  already  referred.  Nature
gave  to  Greece,  as  to  her  neighbours,  the  tendency  to  equality
together  with  abundant  opportunities  for  the  growth  of  public
opinion,  and  then  intensified  these  forces  by  strictly  limiting  the
areas  in  which  they  could  operate.  Each  little  plain,  rigidly
sealed  within  its  mountain-barriers  and  with  its  population  con-
centrated upon  its  small  portion  of  good  soil,  seems  formed  to  be
a  complete  world  of  its  own.  Make  your  way  up  the  pasture-
land,  over  the  pass  and  down  on  to  the  fields  and  orchards  on  the
other  side,  and  you  will   find  new  traditions  and  customs,  new

Od.   X.    l88    {ayojiJ]v  Befxivoi  fieru   Tracriv    (finov),   xii.    297  ;    Hdt.    ill.    I37
(Democedes)  ;  cf.  another  good  story  in  iv.  78.


ciiAi'.  I  PUBLIC  OPINION  6;^

laws  and  new  gods,  and  most  probably  a  new  dialect.  You  will
be  in  a  new  nation.  For  what  else  is  nationalit)'  but  a  combina-
tion of  all  these?  You  will  find  a  fierce  and  obstinate  national
spirit  that  knows  of  no  allegiance  to  a  sovereign  beyond  its
horizon  and  regards  Home  Rule  as  the  very  breath  of  its  being.
The  Greeks  were  not  painfully  taught  to  value  local  inde-
pendence. They  grew  up  unable  to  conceive  of  any  other  state
of  government.  It  was  a  legacy  slowly  deposited  through  the
long  period  of  isolation  which  intervened  between  the  first
settlement  of  the  Hellenic  invaders  and  their  emergence  centuries
later  as  a  civilized  race.  They  never  themselves  realized,  even
their  greatest  writers  did  not  realize,  how  unique  and  remarkable
their  political  institutions  were.  For  Herodotus  and  Thucydides,
as  for  Plato  and  Aristotle,  men  who  are  not  living  under  Cit}'
State  conditions  are  the  exceptions,  not  the  rule.  It  is  the  basis
upon  which  all  their  feeling  and  thinking  on  political  matters  is
built  up  ;  and,  through  their  genius  and  infection,  it  has  coloured
and  confused  the  political  thinking  of  the  Western  world  ever  since.
It  is  this  isolation  and  intensification  of  local  feeling  which
distinguishes  the  Greeks  from  other  dwellers  in  Mediterranean
lands.  Every  Syrian  or  Arab  township  on  the  Mecca  pilgrimage
route  is  a  club ;  but  its  members  know  that  it  is  not  the  only  or
even  the  best  club  in  the  world.  The  Greek  citizen  grew  up,
like  the  members  of  some  exclusive  and  favoured  institutions,  in
a  different  atmosphere.  English  schoolboys  and  Italian  villagers
sometimes  believe  that  there  is  no  other  school  and  no  other  saint
but  theirs.  Greek  patriotism  fused  the  emotions  of  school  and
family,  of  inheritance  and  early  training,  of  religion  and  politics —
all  the  best  of  boyhood  with  all  the  best  of  manhood — into  one
passionate  whole.  His  city  was  the  only  city,  and  her  ways  the
only  ways.  He  loved  every  rock  and  spring  in  the  folds  of  her
mountains,  every  shrine  and  haunt  within  the  circuit  of  her  walls.
He  had  watched  every  day  from  his  childhood  the  shadow  creeping
slowly  across  the  market-place  and  the  old  men  shifting  their
seats  when  the  sun  grew  too  hot.  He  could  tell  the  voice  of  the
town  crier  from  the  other  end  of  the  city,  and  had  made  a  special
study,  for  private  performance,  of  the  favourite  butt  of  the  comedian
in  his  last  year's  play.  He  knew  every  foothold  and  handhold  on
the  back  way  up  to  the  citadel,  and  all  the  tricks  for  getting  into

E  2


64  POLITICS  PART  II

the  city  after  the  gates  were  locked.  And  of  course  he  was  very
religious.  He  never  forgot  the  festival  of  a  god  or  a  hero,  and
could  tell  you  the  rites,  especially  the  sacrifices,  appropriate  to
each.  He  was  never  tired  of  listening  to  his  father  and  his  uncles
telling  stories  of  raids  and  battles  against  the  men  from  beyond
the  range,  or  to  some  skilful  professional  who  could  work
them  up  into  ballads.  And  when  his  city  brought  forth  not
merely  fighters  and  bards,  but  architects  and  sculptors,  and  all
the  resources  of  art  reinforced  the  influence  of  early  association
and  natural  beauty,  small  wonder  that  the  Greek  citizen,  as
Pericles  said,  needed  but  to  look  at  his  city  to  fall  in  love  with
her.  The  Athenian  had  loved  the  Acropolis  rock  while  it  was
still  rough  and  unlevelled,  when  the  sun,  peeping  over  Hymettus,
found  only  ruddy  crags  and  rude  Pelasgian  blocks  to  illumine.
He  loved  it  tenfold  more  now,  when  its  marble  temples  caught
the  first  gleam  of  the  morning  or  stood  out,  in  the  dignity  of
perfect  line,  against  a  flaming  sunset  over  the  mountains  of
the  West.i

'  Od.  vi.  267  (market-place)  ;  Ar.  Pol.  1326  by  (town  crier);  Hdt.  i.  84,
viii.  53  (back  way  up  Acropolis)  ;  Thuc.  ii.  4.  3  and  Aen.  Tact,  18-19  (tricks
with  bars  and  bolts).

With  the  educational  conditions  described  above  contrast  those  provided
by  cities  of  the  modern  type,  as  described  by  writers  familiar  with  the
growth  and  needs  of  the  youthful  imagination.  See,  for  instance,  the
chapters  on  the  South  London  boy  in  Across  ilie  Bridges,  by  Alexander
Paterson  (London,  191 1),  and  especially  The  Spirit  of  Youth  mid  the  City
Streets,  by  Jane  Addams  (New  York,  1910),  who  shows,  with  poignant
illustrations  out  of  her  own  experience,  how  the  industries,  the  amuse-
ments, and,  in  general,  all  the  habits  of  life  in  a  modern  city  tend  to  crush
out  or  pervert  just  those  moral  qualities  by  which  the  Greeks  set  such
store.  '  It  is  neither  a  short  nor  an  easy  undertaking,'  says  Miss  Addams
(p.  30),  following  Plato,  '  to  substitute  the  love  of  beauty  for  mere  desire,  to
place  the  mind  above  the  senses,'  but  we  have  hardly  yet  realized  the  need
for  making  any  corporate  effort  to  do  so.  See  further,  on  this  point,  the  note
on  p.  362  below.


CHAPTER   II

THE    ELEMENTS   OE   CITIZENSHIP

CUSTOM,   OR   THE    RULE    OF   THE    FA^^LV

(to  TrdrpLov)

Ov  yap  Ti  vvv  ye  Kiix^fS,  <iXX'  dei  TroTf
^TJ  Tnvra,  kovBus  oiBtv  e^  otov  '(fidvr].

Sophocles,  Atitigone  456.
'  Tell  me,  when  was  Custom  born.

Yesterday  or  yester  year  ? '
'  Days  and  years  she  knoweth  not,

She  was  always  here.'

So  much  for  the  influence  of  environment  upon  Greek  institu-
tions. It  is  time  to  turn  to  the  temperament  and  character  of
the  Greeks  themselves.  Environment  will  not  explain  more  than
a  small  part  of  a  nation's  history :  for  the  rest  we  must  explore
the  secrets  of  national  psychology.  It  is  a  more  difficult  and
delicate,  but  a  more  interesting,  inquiry;  for  most  men,  being
men,  find  the  human  more  interesting  than  the  natural  sciences.

What  use  did  the  Greeks  make  of  the  conditions  in  which  they
were  placed  ?  No  two  races  use  the  same  environment  alike.
The  scenery  of  Greece  did  not  alter  between  Homer  and  the
Latin  conquest  of  Constantinople.  There  were  the  same  moun-
tains and  plains,  the  same  summer  and  the  same  Aegean,  to  set
the  same  tendencies  to  work.  The  Parthenon  was  standing
uninjured  on  the  Acropolis.  Yet  the  Frankish  invaders  had  no
ideas  of  organization  except  the  territorial  feudalism  in  which
they  had  been  nurtured,  and  succeeded,  in  their  sturdy  Western
way,  in  applying  the  principles  of  Domesday  and  grouping
Greece,  like  England  or  France,  into  fiefs  and  duchies.  If  they
had  not  done  so,  many  people  would  say  that,  in  the  face  of  the
physical  difficulties,  it  was  an  impossible  thing  to  do.  It  would
not  be  hard  to  point  out  some  who,  knowing  the  earlier  histor)-  of
Greece  and  having  skipped  the  later,  say  so  still. ^

^  See  the  maps  in  Miller,  I'he  Latins  in  the  Levant.  This  and  Sir
Rennell  Redd' s  1  'he  Princes  of  A  chaia  and  the  Chronicies  oJMorea  are  the  t  wo


66  POLITICS  PART  II

When  the  Greeks  entered  Greece  in  numerous  separate  detach-
ments during  the  second  millennium  before  Christ,  they  were  what
we  should  call  savages.  By  the  time  when  Pericles  delivered  his
Funeral  Speech  their  foremost  communities  were,  in  most  essential
respects,  more  civilized  than  ourselves.  Can  we  form  any  idea  of
how  this  change  came  about  ?  The  best  way  of  doing  so  is  to
watch  closely  the  development,  not  of  their  art  and  literature,  or
of  their  inventions  and  sciences,  but  of  their  political  institutions
and  the  ideas  associated  with  them.  For  by  431  the  City  State,
and  the  statesmen  and  '  men  of  action '  who  lived  the  political
life,  had  so  drawn  the  '  men  of  words '  and  the  artists,  Sophocles
and  Aristophanes,  Phedias  and  Mnesicles,  into  their  service,  that
Pericles  can  speak  of  their  works,  which  we  regard  as  models  for
all  time,  as  though  they  were  the  mere  ornaments  and  super-
fluities of  political  greatness.  Aeschylus  to  us  is  a  poet  and
nothing  more.  To  his  contemporaries  he  was  first  and  foremost
a  patriot.  When  he  died  in  Sicily,  this  is  what  men  chose  to
write  on  his  tomb — unless,  as  one  tradition  says,  he  wrote  it
himself  when  he  knew  death  was  near: —

This  tomb  hides  Aeschylus,  Athenian  born,
Euphorion's  son,  amid  far  Gela's  corn —
How  good  a  fighter,  Marathon  could  tell,
The  long-haired  Persian  knows  it  but  too  well.

The  poet  is  swallowed  up  in  the  citizen.  Some  present-day
Hellenists  regard  all  war  as  wicked  and  politics  as  a  'dirty
business '.  But  until  they  understand  how  the  generation  of
Aeschylus  regarded  them  they  have  not  begun  to  understand  the
Greek  spirit.

Greek  history  begins  with  the  migrations  of  peoples  in  Central
and  South-Eastern  Europe  which  resulted  in  the  entry  of  the
Hellenes  into  Greece.  The  incomers  were  'savages'.  But  they
were  far  from  being  the  free  and  innocent  children  of  Nature  to
whom  the  eighteenth-century  philosophers  and  the  men  of  the

most  recent  general  books  in  English  about  mediaeval  Greece.  But  both  are
rather  bewildering  from  their  massof  detail,  and  the  reader  who  knows  Greek
will  enjoy  going  on  to  read  Tke  Chionicle  of  Moj-ea  in  the  original.  It  has
been  admirably  edited  by  Schmitt  (pub.  Methuen,  1904,  with  a  useful  glossary),
and  is  full  of  interest  to  those  who  are  interested  in  the  clash  of  East  and
West.  There  is  a  suggestive  account  of  the  Norman  organization  of  South
Italy  in  Demolins,  Covii/ietit  la  route  cree  Ic  type  social,  vol.  ii,  pp.  313  ff.  -


CHAP.  II  THE   FAMILY  67

French  Revolution  looked  so  wi.stfully  back.  On  the  contr.uy,
the  rights  of  individual  freedom,  as  of  individual  properly-holding,
were  things  utterly  unknown.  A  complex  system  of  social  and
religious  custom,  which  they  never  dreamed  of  questioning,  hedged
them  in  on  every  side.  How  elaborate  this  patriarchal  system  was,
and  how  minutely  and  intimately  it  affected  their  lives  at  every
point,  we  are  only  just  beginning  to  realize  through  the  sympa-
thetic researches  of  the  anthropologists.  It  seems  impossible  to
give  any  general  account  of  it,  laying  stress  on  those  elements
which  survived  and  were  merged  into  the  life  of  the  Athenian
City  State,  without  appearing  to  over-simplify.  Yet  those  elements
are  of  such  importance  to  a  proper  understanding  of  our  subject
that  the  attempt  must  be  made.

The  life  of  the  early  Greeks  was  enclosed,  for  political  pur-
poses, within  what  may  be  described  as  concentric  circles  of
loyalty.  Outside  they  had  the  nation  (or  what  in  Jewish  history
is  called  the  Tribe)  ;  within  that  the  tribe  in  the  narrower  sense;
within  that  the  '  brotherhood  '  or  '  companionship '  of  tent  and
messmates  ;  and  within  that  the  still  narrower  circle  of  the  imme-
diate family.  When  the  fighting-men  of  the  nation  went  out  to
battle  they  went  out,  as  Nestor  reminds  Agamemnon,  not  as  an
undisciplined  horde,  but  '  divided  into  tribes  and  brotherhoods,
so  that  brotherhood  may  bring  help  to  brotherhood  and  tribe  to
tribe '.1

It  was  with  these  inner  circles,  and,  above  all,  with  the  family,
that  the  individual  was  in  closest  touch  in  daily  life ;  and  it  was
here  that  the  Greek  received  his  first  training  in  citizenship.  All
his  life  long,  from  his  initiation  in  early  boyhood,  he  was  wrapped
round  with  the  patriarchal  system,  moving  stiffly  and  timidly  in
a  world  full  of  hidden  fears  and  forces,  clinging  to  beliefs  and
observances   and  taboos  which  to  us  have  long  since   become

'  //.  ii.  362.  The  word  '  tribe  '  is  generally  used  in  English,  by  travellers
and  others,  in  the  Jewish  sense  to  denote  the  Greek  edfos  or  '  nation  '.  We
shall  use  it  in  the  Greek  and  Roman  sense,  as  there  is  no  other  English  word
to  render  (j)v\r]  (in  its  strict  use)  and  iribus.  Each  of  the  '  twelve  Tribes '  of
Israel  was  a  Greek  '  nation '.  Under  normal  savage  conditions  these '  nations '
seem  to  be  more  or  less  under  the  control  of  the  personage  known  to
anthropologists  as  the  Divine  King  or  the  Medicine  King,  whose  memory
survived  in  Greece  in  many  curious  forms,  e.  g.  in  the  story  about  Ouranos,
Cronos,  and  Zeus  in  Hesiod's  Theogony.  But  this  and  other  features  of
savage  life  lie  outside  our  scope.


68  POLITICS  TART  II

meaningless.  When  the  anthropologists  go  out  hunting  and
bring  us  home  strange  spoils  from  savage  lands,  these  are  apt  to
seem,  to  our  disillusioned  modern  minds,  merely  something  to
stare  at — foolish  and  a  little  uncanny.  Yet  there  is  more  in
us  of  them  than  we  know.  For  many  of  the  roots  of  our  Con-
servatism go  back  to  that  early  life.  When  an  English  family  is
assembled  at  evening  round  the  fireside  it  is  not  often  conscious
of  the  romance  which,  for  the  lover  of  the  past,  will  always  encircle
such  a  gathering.  It  does  not  cast  its  mind  back  to  the  nameless
savages  who  first  established  the  religion  of  the  hearth  and  tamed
the  natural  man  into  acquiescence  in  the  institution  of  monogamy.
The  Greek  saw  clearer,  for  he  had  not  so  far  to  look.  Natural
Radicals  as  they  were,  as  all  men  who  are  fond  of  exercising
their  intellect  on  political  questions  are  tempted  to  be,  they  knew
and  felt  the  difference  between  the  deep-seated  moralities  which
their  ancestors  had  handed  down  to  them  and  the  institutions
which  they  or  their  lawgivers  had  recently  devised.  The  former
they  observed  not  out  of  calculation  but  out  of  '  reverence  ' :  they
were  not  '  fallible  contrivances  of  reason '  but  '  unwritten  ordin-
ances whose  transgression  brings  admitted  shame ' :  and  not  all
the  codes  of  Delphi  and  the  Seven  Sages  were  as  dear  to  them.
For  they  went  down  to  levels  which  reason  had  not  yet  plumbed
and  embodied  the  elemental  unselfishness — the  sense  of  one
human  being's  natural  relation  to  another — which  was  the  germ
of  Greek  citizenship  as  of  all  good  citizenship  since.  Fraternity
sits  ill  on  the  banner  of  the  anarchist ;  there  is  no  true  fraternity
which  does  not  grow,  as  it  grew  in  Greece,  out  of  the  plain
primaeval  emotions  of  friendship  or  family.^

We  can  recover  to  some  extent  the  simple  and  homely  life
these  old  '  savages '  led  with  their  gods  and  their  cattle.  Hesiod
seems  to  preserve  man)'  memories  and  even  phrases  and  nick-
names that  go  back  to  it.  We  know  how,  as  in  the  beautiful
painter's  tradition  of  the  Nativity,  the  animals  formed  part  of  this
early  family  circle.  But  our  best  evidence  is  derived  from  the
ideas  and  practices  of  the  later  Greeks.     There  are  regions  of  life

^  'EcttUi  or  Vesta,  the  Hearth-Goddess,  goes  back  as  early  as  anything  we
know  of  the  Greeks  ;  cf.  Od.  xix.  304  and  the  use  of  '  hearth  '  for  '  family '
(e.g.  Hdt.  i.  176,  V.  72).  Unwritten  Laws  :  Thuc.  ii.  37.  3  ;  Soph.  Afif.  454  ;
O.  T.  863,  with  Jebb's  note.  Cf.  the  use  of  the  word  miTpiov  in  the  historians
and  orators  {rruTpKh'  (cttlv  fjfi'iu,  &€.).


CHAP.  II        '.  THE   FAMILY  69

into  which  the  modern  state  has  hardly  dared  to  intrude,  or.  if  it
has  ventured  in  at  all,  has  crept  in  on  tiptoe.  There  are  solemn
moments  when  the  modern  man  feels  himself  stripped  bare  of  his
citizenship,  when  even  the  statesman  used  to  livint^,  like  a  Greek,
in  the  world's  eye,  retires  into  privacy  and  feels  himself  just
a  man  alone  with  his  God  or  his  kin,  in  a  world  of  .strangers.  At
such  moments,  at  birth,  at  marriage,  and  particularly  at  death,
the  old  patriarchal  system  resumed  its  sway.  The  Greek  was
not  baptized  or  married  or  buried  by  the  Church.  There  was  no
such  thing  as  a  Church  as  distinct  from  the  religion  of  the  family
or  of  the  State  or  of  Hellas.  There  were  no  death-bed  consola-
tions or  hopes  of  a  glorified  immortality.  Nor  did  the  State,
which  embraced  so  much  of  the  sphere  since  annexed  by  the
modern  Churches,  ca.st  its  hallowing  aegis  over  such  moments.
The  Greek  city  kept  no  register  of  births :  it  took  no  account  of
the  young  till  they  were  old  enough  to  be  trained  as  soldiers.
Marriage  was  always  in  Greece;  as  in  Mohammedan  lands,  a
purely  domestic  ceremony.  And  the  dead  the  State  only  cared
for  when  they  had  earned  a  public  funeral,  and  even  then,  as  we
see  from  Thucydides'  account,  it  was  careful  to  allow  full  scope
for  the  ancestral  family  ritual.  The  women,  debarred  from  walking
through  the  streets  in  the  procession,  go  by  themselves  to  the
graveside  to  perform  their  domestic  lamentations.  So  whenever
the  Tragedy,  as  being  Tragedy  it  must,  brings  us  face  to  face
with  the  elemental  facts  of  life,  we  find  ourselves  .suddenly  in  an
atmosphere  of  prehistoric  pieties  and  observances.  To  us  these
long-drawn  ritual  scenes  and  weird  half-savage  plots,  of  which
Sophocles  especially  was  so  fond,  sometimes  seem,  as  they  seemed
to  some  of  the  matter-of-fact  Stoic  philosophers,  tedious  and  even
slightly  absurd.  It  is  our  want  of  imagination.  Orestes  and
Electra  exchanging  alternate  invocations  at  the  barrow  of
Agamemnon,  Teucer  wrangling  with  kings  to  secure  burial  for
his  brother  Ajax,  and  that  last  almost  unbearable  scene  between
the  child-murderess  Medea  and  her  childless  husband — these  do
not  yield  their  full  meaning  until  we  understand  something  of
the  old  patriarchal  world  into  which  they  transported  their
audience.^

'  Murray,    Greek   Epic,  ch.  iii,  and  references  to   Hesiod    (nicknames).
Aesch.  Choeph.  315  ff. ;  Soph.  Ajax  866  (where  a  modern  play  would  end)


70  POLITICS  PART  II

Matricide  and  incest,  the  stories  of  Orestes  and  Oedipus,  are
still  terrible  to  us.  But  let  us  consider  another  calamity  whose
peculiar  sting  has  passed  away :  it  will  bring  us  to  the  heart  of
that  old  world  and  show  how  the  City  State  entered  in  and  took
possession  of  its  holiest  conceptions.  We  have  forgotten,  and
find  it  hard  to  reimagine,  what  '  childlessness ',  as  the  Greeks
called  it,  that  is,  the  absence  of  legitimate  male  offspring,  meant
in  the  religion  of  the  hearth.  There  was  nothing  probably  in  the
whole  range  of  life  which  the  Greek  dreaded  more.  No  one  to
tend  him  in  old  age,  to  close  his  eyes  in  death  and  give  him
ritual  burial,  to  give  the  daughters  in  marriage  within  the  cus-
tomary and  honourable  circle,  to  cherish  the  memory  of  the  dead
and  keep  alive  the  institutions  that  were  so  dear  to  him — in
a  word,  to  '  save  the  hearth  '.  Greek  law  and  custom  are  full  of
curious  vetos  and  fictions  to  avoid  this  most  dreaded  disaster.
Such  was  the  sentiment  which  originated  divorce,  which  allowed
a  childless  widow  to  '  raise  up  seed  ',  in  a  second  marriage,  for  her
first  husband,  which  gave  rise  to  the  facility  and  frequency  of
adoption.  Celibacy,  always  forbidden  in  Greece  by  custom  and
often  by  specific  enactment,  was  regarded  not  only  as  a  misfor-
tune but  as  an  impiety,  and  how  many  expectant  parents  must
have  grieved  over  the  birth  of  a  girl!  All  this  Pericles,  the
friend  of  Sophocles,  knew  and  felt  far  better  than  we  when  it  fell
to  his  lot  to  speak  words  of  comfort  to  an  audience  of  Athenians
bereaved  of  their  sons,  '  Keep  a  brave  heart,'  he  said, '  in  the  hope
of  other  children  :  for  the  new-comers  will  help  you  to  forget  the
vacancy  in  your  own  home  circle  and  will  help  the  city  to  fill  the
gaps  in  her  ranks.'  We  have  no  reason  to  think  these  parents
winced  as  they  listened.  They  had  been  trained  from  the  date-
less ages  to  put  individual  affections  and  sorrows  aside.  In  the
patriarchal  days  the  son  was  made  for  the  hearth,  not  the  hearth
for  the  son.  Now  that  the  hearth  has  become  a  city,  and  its
humble  flicker  a  consuming  fire,  shall  an)'  citizen  dare  think  of
Athens  as  a  respecter  of  persons  ?  Athenians  were  made  for  the
city,  not  the  city  for  Athenians.    Some,  who  have  listened  to  the

to  1419.  There  were  'nonconformists'  in  Greece,  who  made  Judgement
and  Immortality  an  important  part  of  their  official  creed.  But,  speaking
generally,  their  influence  on  Greek  life  is  small,  though  their  influence  on
later  thought,  through  Plato  (who,  as  Nietzsche  puts  it,  'went  to  school  with
the  Egyptians  '  or,  as  some  think,  the  Indians),  is  considerable.


CHAP.  II  THE    FAMILY


71


Sophists,  have  whispered  to  the  contrary,  but  their  tongues  arc
tied  on  a  day  of  burial.'

Sucli  was  the  world  in  which  the  early  Greek  lived  before  he
moved  into  his  historic  abode.  Let  us  now  consider  briefly  this
movement  and  its  results.

In  times  of  disorder  and  migration  the  routine  and  observances
of  daily  life  were  interrupted  and  the  tics  of  tribal  and  national
organization  more  closely  knit.  The  invaders  moved  South,  as
the  legends  tell  us,  not  in  small  bodies  but  in  nations,  planting,
not  a  tribe  here  and  a  tribe  there,  but  generally,  so  far  as  we  can
trace  it,  detachments  of  all  their  tribes  wherever  the  nation
settled.  This  is  the  explanation  of  what  seems  at  first  sight
a  puzzle,  the  common  divisions  on  the  map  of  ancient  Greece.
The  maps  in  ordinary  use  do  not  cut  Greece  up  into  City  States
or  recognize  the  political  divisions  between  one  sovereign  plain
or  valley  and  another,  but  show  much  larger  units.  The  Pelopon-
nese,  for  instance,  is  divided  into  Argolis,  Laconia,  Messenia,
Elis,  Achaea,  and  Arcadia,  and  islands  like  Crete,  Euboea,  and
Lesbos  are  shown  as  single  states.  This  is,  of  course,  profoundly
misleading.  Arcadian  history  is  nothing  if  not  a  record  of  the
quarrels  between  the  states  in  her  several  small  plains.  Crete,  in
historical  times,  had  forty-three  independent  City  States,  Iiuboea
ten,  and  Lesbos  six.  But  these  large  divisions  (which  very  roughly
correspond  to  the  present  provinces  of  the  Kingdom  of  Greece)
are  a  legacy  from  the  early  days  of  the  first  settlement  of  the
immigrants.  Partly,  no  doubt,  they  are  due  also  to  the  previous
organization  of  the  country  into  'kingdoms'  under  '  Mycenaean  '
rulers.  At  any  rate  they  still  sui-vived  in  some  vigour  at  the  time
when  the  Homeric  catalogue  of  the  ships  was  written  ;  and  though
the  whole  history  of  '  mediaeval '  Greece  down  to  the  sixth
century,  and  in  backward  cases  even  later,  was  a  process  of
crystallization  into  City  States,  the  old  names  and  a  breath  of  the
old  tradition  lived  on.     It  was  in  the  religious  sphere,  of  course,

'  Thuc.  ii.  44.  3.  Childlessness  :  Hdt.  v.  48  (diredavf  anais  Bvynripn  fjLoi'Vtjv
Xmup),  vi.  86  fin.;  Aesch.  Choeph.  264,  Ag.  896 ff.  Divorce:  Hdt.  v.  39.
vi.  61.  The  family  organization  which  the  Greeks  found  among  the
'  Mycenaeans  '  when  they  reached  Greece  was  not  patriarchal  but  matriarchal,
and  its  influence  can  be  traced  in  worship  and  legend;  see  Murray,  pp.  73-8
(2nd  ed.,  pp.  96-101)  ;  but  recent  preoccupation  with  Mycenaean  data  has
tempted  scholars  to  exaggerate  the  importance  of  these  pre-Grcek  elements
in  Greek  life.


7a  POLITICS  part  ii

that  it  was  remembered  best.  Men  worshipped  together  as
Boeotians  at  the  All-Boeotian  feast  at  Coronea  centuries  after
they  had  been  fighting  one  another  as  Thebans  and  Plataeans  and
Orchomcnians ;  and  the  goddess  they  worshipped  there,  though
they  knew  her  as  'Athena ',  had  come  with  them  from  the  North.^

When  the  Greek  tribes  entered  Greece  they  had  been  accus-
tomed to  a  nomadic  or  semi-nomadic  life.  They  were  not
wholly  pastoral,  like  Abraham  or  the  Scythians  of  the  Russian
steppe ;  for  they  seem  to  have  used  their  cattle  for  ploughing  as
well  as  for  milk.  But  agriculture  is  compatible  with  a  very  un-
settled mode  of  life.  Like  Herodotus's  Phoenicians  on  their  way
round  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  the  early  Greeks  reckoned  to  stop
just  long  enough  in  one  place  to  sow  and  reap  a  single  harvest.
They  were  too  unsettled  and  insecure  to  think  it  worth  while  to
plant  fruit-trees  or  build  good  houses  or  make  any  other  perma-
nent provision  for  the  future.  Thucydides,  in  the  first  pages  of  his
history,  has  imagined  for  himself,  without  any  of  our  scientific
aids,  this  early  semi-nomadic  economic  stage,  and  modern  in-
vestigation has  done  little  more  than  amplify  his  brief  account.'^

Spiritual  progress  in  Greece  really  begins,  as  Gilbert  Murray
has  pointed  out,  with  the  chaos  of  the  migrations.  The
morality  of  the  Iliad  goes  back  to  a  time  when  men  w^ere  fighting
far  away  from  gods  and  family,  beyond  the  sway  of  the  old
sanctions  of  tribe  and  custom.  Man  finds  himself  for  the  first
time  a  free  agent  in  the  world,  with  no  one  to  control  him  but
other  fighters  as  reckless  and  uncontrolled  as  himself.  '  The  only
powers  over  him  are  the  powers  within  his  own  breast,'  the  con-
ceptions of  duty  and  honour  which  he  somehow  recognizes.  But
this  phase  of  development,  immortalized  in  the  literature,  lasted

'  Cf.  Thuc.  i.  12.3  (migrating  'nations' :  e.g.  'Boeotians  ',  'Tiiessalians') ;
Strabo  411  (the  na/x/3oia)riri)  ;  cf.  Roscher,  s.  v.  Itonia.  On  the  centrifugal
tendency  see  hltyer,  Forsc/iiaij^e/i ,\o\.  ii,  pp.  512  ff.  Two  '  cities'  on  a  small
island  :  Oii.  xv.  412.  Maps  have  been  made  of  (ireece  as  it  appears  from  the
catalogue  of  the  ships:  see  Freeman's  Historical  GeograpJiy  of  Et/ rope,  vol.  ii,
and  Monro's  Jliati,  i-xii.  Thucydides,  who  worked  on  it  as  a  comparatively
trustworthy  historical  document,  had  a  perfectly  clear  picture  in  his  mind  of
what  Greece  was  like  in  this  age  :  he  had  thought  out  for  himself,  for  instance,
such  a  knotty  problem  as  the  relation  between  Diomcd,  who  led  the  men
of  Argos,  and  Agamemnon,  '  King  of  Argos  and  many  islands.'  He  was  not
able,  as  we  are,  to  regard  the  Epic  account  of  the  Trojan  war  as  presenting
a  series  of  literary  rather  than  historical  problems,  and  thus  to  feel  justified
in  taking  it  clean  out  of  his  picture  of  early  Greece.

^  Thuc.  i.  2  ;  Hdt.  iv.  42.


chap.it  the    family  73

but  for  a  few  short  generations  in  the  history  of  Greece.  Early
man  is  never  destined  to  know  freedom  for  long.  New  attach-
ments awaited  the  invaders  in  the  country  of  their  adoption.
Once  they  had  settled  in  Greek  lands,  links  were  slowly  forged  with
the  'Mycenaeans'  whom  they  discovered  in  possession  upon  their
arrival.  Victors  and  vanquished  were  gradually  merged  into  one
race,  and  the  distinctions  between  them,  as  in  England  after  the
Saxon  conquest,  soon  almost  altogether  disappeared.  There  are
conquered  populations,  Helots  and  others,  in  historical  Greece  ;
but  their  condition  was  not  due  to  the  early  migrations  so  much
as  to  social  and  political  causes  that  had  since  intervened.  The
'  mediaeval '  institutions  of  Greece,  and  above  all  of  Attica,  are
the  result  of  a  harmonious  fusion  between  the  patriarchal  system
and  gods  of  the  Northern  immigrants  and  the  vaguer  and  more
unfixed  traditions  of  the  populations  on  whose  lands  and  among
whose  gods  they  settled.^

How  did  the  invaders  settle  on  their  new  lands?  We  have  no
historical  record  for  this  early  time,  only  legend  and  tradition  and
'traditional  books' — poems  revised,  like  the  Jewish  scriptures,
from  generation  to  generation.  But  one  thing  is  quite  clear  both
from  the  books  and  from  survivals.  The  early  Greeks  did  not
live  together  in  towns  but  scattered  about  in  villages.  The
urban  habit  which  we  think  so  characteristic  of  the  Greeks  was  of
later  growth.  The  State  existed,  in  rudimentary  form,  before  the
city.  The  invaders  were  used  to  moving  about  in  bodies  with
flocks  and  herds,  but  they  were  not  used  to  being  packed  close
inside  a  wall.  When  they  found  themselves  in  the  little  plains  of
Greece,  they  went  off  in  parties  to  build  groups  of  huts  wherever
there  was  water  and  good  soil.  In  these  early  centuries  one  must
picture  the  cultivable  areas  of  Greece  not,  as  they  became  later,  as
wide  spaces  of  open  country  with  a  walled  town  in  the  centre,  or
as  dotted  about  with  isolated  farmsteads  like  the  Scottish  lowlands,
but  as  showing  a  definite  number  of  well-marked  villages  each
with  its  land  attached.  To  a  fifth-century  Greek  '  to  live  in  old-
fashioned  style '  meant  to  live  in  open  villages  (/cara  /coj/xay
dT€Lxc(TTovs).     The  people  of  Elis  lived  in  this  way  till  after  the

'  Cf.  Murray,  chap,  ii  (who,  I  think,  makes  too  much  of  the  cjlr/s  of  the
chaos  upon  the  later  history);  Wilamowitz,  Oresiie,  Introduction  to  Choe-
phoroe,  especially  pp.  121-4;  E.  Meyer,  Geschichie  des  Altertwiis,  ii,  §  176
(the  English  parallel).


74  POLITICS  PART  II

Persian  War,  and  many  of  the  backward  peoples  of  North-
western Greece  were  still  so  living  in  the  time  of  Thucydides.
Indeed,  '  to  reduce  a  town  to  villages,'  that  is,  to  destroy  it  and
its  fortifications  and  disperse  the  inhabitants  over  the  country-
side, was  the  severest  penalty  that  a  conqueror  could  inflict.  The
Spartans  were  particularly  fond  of  this  punishment  ;  for  Lace-
daemon  itself  remained  (for  peculiar  reasons)  a  group  of  unwalled
villages.  Xenophon  gives  a  good  account  of  one  of  their  punitive
operations.  When  their  king,  Agesipolis,  had  captured  Mantinea
by  turning  in  the  river  to  wet  the  foundations  of  the  wall  and  houses,

'  he  destroyed  the  wall  and  broke  up  Mantinea  into  four  parts  as  it
was  in  the  old  days.  At  first  the  Mantineans  were  very  angry,
because  they  had  to  destroy  their  existing  houses  and  build  new
ones.  But  when  the  landed  proprietors  found  themselves  living
nearer  their  properties,  which  were  out  by  the  villages,  and  being
governed  by  an  aristocracy,  and  rid  of  the  troublesome  dema-
gogues, they  were  well  pleased  with  the  change.'

This  is  not  quite  an  impartial  account,  for  Xenophon  holds
a  brief  for  the  Spartans,  but  it  shows  how  natural  and  convenient
the  old  system  was  for  a  nation  of  farmers.  The  later  town-
dwellers  had  often  to  walk  many  miles  every  day  to  reach  and
return  from  their  fields,  leaving  before  dawn  and  coming  back
after  dark,  as  late  as  the  gates  were  left  open.  The  same  may  be
observed  in  South  Italy  to-day  ;  and  there  are  no  bicycles,  or
smooth  roads  to  ride  them  on,  to  help  the  peasants  over  the
difficulty.^

Why  then  did  the  Greeks,  as  time  went  on,  deliberately  put
themselves  to  the  inconvenience  of  living  in  towns  ?  We  must
delay  till  the  next  chapter  the  answer  to  this  obvious  question.
But  it  is  worth  while  saying  here  that  (in  spite  of  Aristotle)  not
all    of  them    did.     The    most    new-fashioned    of  them    all,    the

^  Xcn.  Hell.  v.  2.  7,  cf.  Thuc.  i.  90.  i;  v.  4.  3  (returning  after  dark).  Kco^m  :
Thuc.  i.  10.  2,  iii.  94.  4  ;  Strabo,  337  ;  cf.  Meyer,  ii,  §  193.  In  spite  of  these
and  other  passages  Thucydides  does  not  properly  emphasize  the  process  of
centralization  in  the  City  (Synoecism)  as  one  of  the  main  factors  in  the
mediaeval  development  of  ancient  Greece.  This  was  another  difficulty  caused
by  the  Trojan  war,  which  forced  him  to  believe  that  city  life  existed  far  earlier
than  he  would  otherwise  have  put  it.  Hence  in  his  early  chapters  he  speaks
throughout  of '  cities  ' ;  in  one  place,  conscious  of  his  difficulty,  he  calls  them
TTtJXeis-  anixKTToi  kutu  Koofins  oiKovfievai,  as  if  Homeric  (Greece  had  been  full  of
Spartas  ;  cf.  i.  5.  i,  and  especially  i.  9,  2,  on  Pelops  as  a  demagogue.  This
is  probably  why  he  is  betrayed  into  speaking  of  the  Synoecism  of  Athens  as
a  union  of 'cities'  instead  of  villages  (ii.  15.  2).


CHAP.  II  THE   FAMILY


7.5


Athenians,  never  did  so  completely,  at  least  down  to  the  Pelopon-
nesian  War.  Thucydidcs  pauses  to  tell  us  so  in  order  to  empha-
size how  hard  they  felt  it  to  come  into  Athens  at  the  beginning
of  hostilities.

'The  Athenians,'  he  says,  'had  from  early  times  lived  scattered
over  the  country-side  in  groups  of  independent  dwellings  ;  after
the  centralization  of  government  at  Athens  the  old  habit  still
prevailed,  and  right  down  to  the  present  war  the  majority  of
Athenians  were  used  to  living  in  the  country  with  their  wives  and
families.  Consequently  they  were  not  at  all  inclined  to  move
now,  especially  as  they  had  only  just  got  their  buildings  into
repair  after  the  Persian  invasion.'

It  was  forty-eight  years  since  the  Persian  invasion,  years  in
which  civilization  moved  faster  than  ever  before  or  since.  But  in
this  matter  the  historian  treats  time  in  the  lavish  leisurely  spirit  of
the  true  country-dweller.^

One  more  point  we  must  notice  about  these  old-fashioned
villages.  As  the  Mantinean  story  shows,  they  were  not  defen-
sible. They  date  from  a  time  when  there  was  no  regular  warfare
between  state  and  state,  but  only  raiding  and  robbery.  Hence
there  was  no  organized  military  system  to  repel  an  organized
invasion.  Every  man  carried  his  own  weapons,  and  used  them  in
his  own  way,  like  men  over  parts  of  the  Balkans  to-day  or  the
pioneers  in  the  mining  camps  of  Australia  or  the  Far  West.
'  The  whole  of  Hellas,' says  Thucydides,  '  used  once  to  carry  arms,
their  habitations  being  unprotected  and  their  communications
with  each  other  unsafe:  indeed,  to  wear  arms  was  as  much  a  part
of  every-day  life  with  them  as  with  the  barbarians.'  And  he  goes
on  to  say  that  the  Athenians  (although  they  remained  count ry-

'  Thuc.  ii.  i6  (and  15).  The  passage  gains  in  point  when  one  recollects
how  the  artistic  temperament  abhors  systematic  repairs.  Where  a  '  piece  of
string'  will  not  do,  it  prefers  to  design  the  whole  thing  afresh.  Ask  any  one
who  has  employed  a  Greek  or  Italian  joiner.  Although  they  lived  all  over
the  country-side  (eV  toIs  dypo'ts)  the  inhabitants  of  Attica  never  called  them-
selves '  Atticans  '  (on  the  analogy  of  '  Boeotians '  or  '  Arcadians  '),  but  always,
except  in  the  very  outlying  parts,  Athenians.  This  is  almost  certainly  an
unbroken  survival  from  the  Mycenaean  period  (cf.  Thuc.  i.  2.  5,  and  Meyer,
Forschioigeti^  vol.  ii,  p.  516).  Hence  Thucydides,  in  describing  how  Theseus
centralized  Attica,  leaves  unanswered  the  prime  question— Whence  did
Theseus  get  his  authority  ?  He  was  not  chosen  king  like  Deioces  (p.  93  below),
but  appears  armed  with  immemorial  authority  (see  Francotte,  La  Polis
grecque,  Paderborn,  1907,  p.  7).


76  POLITICS  PART  II

dwellers)  were  the  first  Greeks  to  go  unarmed — no  doubt  partly
because  their  country  was  so  little  exposed  to  invasion.^

If  a  raid  occurred  which  was  too  formidable  to  be  repelled  in
this  haphazard  way,  the  early  Greeks  would  leave  their  villages
and  retire  to  an  inaccessible  stronghold,  sometimes  high  up  in  the
mountains,  till  the  enemy  withdrew.  These  fortresses  were  very
different  in  character  from  those  needed  in  the  ages  before  and
after  them.  They  were  not  citadels  so  much  as  refuges.  Thus
the  inhabitants  of  the  plain  of  Argolis  abandoned  the  mound  of
Tiryns,  in  spite  of  its  cyclopean  walls,  and  fled  up  to  the  Larisa
of  Argos,  950  feet  high.  The  people  of  the  isthmus  used  Acro-
corinth,  an  unequalled  tower  of  refuge,  with  a  pure  spring  at  the
very  top,  but  uncomfortably  high  for  a  permanent  home.  The
people  in  the  plain  of  the  Ilissus  and  Cephissus  had  to  content
themselves  with  the  Acropolis.  It  was  not  so  good  a  refuge  as
Acrocorinth,  but  their  turn  came  later.  These  early  strongholds
bore  a  famous  name  :  they  were  called  Poleis  (TroXeiy),  the  word
round  which  later  the  associations  of  City  State  patriotism
gathered.  '  For  this  reason,'  says  Thucydides,  '  the  Acropolis  is
to  this  day  known  to  Athenians  as  the  City.'  Athens,  like
London,  had  a  City  within  a  city.  So  Aristotle  was  talking
good  history  (though  he  may  not  have  known  it)  when  he  said
the  City  had  come  into  being  in  order  to  preserve  life.'-^

But  we  must  not  anticipate  the  process  of  centralization.  So
much  only  was  necessary  as  a  preface  to  the  development  we  are
about  to  trace — the  steady  crystallization  of  Greek  feeling  round
the  City  State.  The  process  was  twofold — both  centrifugal  and
centripetal.  Of  the  former,  the  gradual  break-up  of  the  old
nations  into  smaller  units,  we  have  already  spoken.  What  we
have  now  to  watch  is  the  gradual  snapping  of  the  lesser  loyalties
which  form  the  intermediate  links  between  the  State  and  the
individual,  till  the  citizen  stands,  free  and  independent,  face  to
face  with  the  city.

'  The  city,'  says  Aristotle  in  the  first  paragraph  of  his  Politics^
'  is  the  highest  of  all  forms  of  association  and  embraces  all  the

^  See  Time.  i.  6.  I,  i.  2.  6.

^  Thuc.  ii.  15.  6;  Meyer,  Gesch.  ii,  §  193;  Francotte,  La  Polls  grecque,
p.  106.  The  word  Polites  (the  later  'citizen')  originally  meant  'citadel-
man',  i.e.  look-out  man.  It  is  no  accident  that  Priam's  son  Polites  was  so
employed  (//.  ii.  792).


CHAP.  II  THE   FAMILY


11


rest.'  It  is  easily  said  on  paper,  and  as  glibly  repeated  by  those
who  do  not  make  clear  to  themselves  what  it  means  or  how  seldom
in  history  its  meaning  has  been  realized.  It  is  not  an  easy  thing
but  well-nigh  impossible  to  train  civilized  men,  not  merely  in
the  hour  of  danger  but  in  the  work  and  leisure  of  every  day,  to  set
country  before  wife  and  family,  or  lifelong  companions,  or  fellow-
craftsmen  and  fellow-worshippers,  '  to  bring  the  dispositions  that
are  lovely  in  private  life  into  the  service  and  conduct  of  the
commonwealth,'  to  '  spend  their  bodies,  as  mere  external  tools,  in
the  city's  service,  and  count  their  minds  as  most  truly  their  own
when  employed  on  her  behalf.

This  amazing  result,  to  which  Japan  in  these  latter  days  seems
alone  to  offer  a  parallel,  was  not  achieved  without  a  long  rivalry
between  the  city  and  all  subordinate  claims  on  men's  devotion.
The  conflict,  which  was  being  waged  all  through  the  Greek
middle  ages,  is  obscured  in  the  later  writers,  because  to  them  it
was  a  dead  issue.  Yet  both  the  victors  and  the  vanquished  in
that  forgotten  struggle  contributed  to  the  making  of  Pericles'
perfect  Athenian.^

^  Burke,  Prese?it  Discontefits,  sub /in. ;  Thuc.  i.  70.  6.  Japan,  as  revealed
by  the  intimate  records  of  the  Russo-Japanese  War,  is  the  only  7iational
parallel,  but  there  are  many  professional  parallels.  The  best  is,  perhaps,
the  modern  naval  officer,  especially  on  a  submarine,  whose  daily  and  hourly
training  in  courage  and  self-control  is  lit  up  for  us  in  a  flash  at  moments  of
crisis  or  disaster.  For  Japan  cf.  Uyehara,  The  Political  Development  of
Japan,  1867-1909,  p.  15  :  '  To  a  western  people  of  migratory  nature,  Ego  or
I  is  the  first  of  all  things.  They  say,  "  I  came  out  here,  tilled  the  soil,  and
made  my  home."  The  case  is  quite  different  with  the  Japanese.  The
Kokku-kwa  or  "  country  and  home  "  stand  to  him  before  all  things  :  they  are
to  him  a  higher  and  greater  reality  than  his  "Self".  He  says,  "  It  is  the
country  and  home  that  protected  the  life  of  my  ancestors,  and  will  do  the  same
for  me  and  my  posterity."  Hence  loyalty  to  the  Emperor,  who  is  identical  in
the  mind  of  the  Japanese  masses  with  the  country '  (as  Athena  was  with
Athens),  '  constitutes  the  basis  of  Japanese  morality.'  Hence,  too,  Japan,  like
Athens,  is  quite  capable  of  putting  a  Socrates  to  death. — A  ful|  account  of
the  patriarchal  system  is  given  in  Fustel  de  Coulanges'  La  Cite  antique.
This  well-known  book  was  written  in  1S64,  but  the  first  half  of  it  is  still  the
best  general  account,  not  of  the  City  State  in  itself  but  of  the  lesser  loyalties
out  of  which  it  grew.  It  may  be  worth  while  briefly  suggesting  some  of  the
defects  which  time  has  revealed,  (i)  It  is,  like  many  French  books,  too  tidy
and  logical,  it  simplifies  the  old  world  and  its  beliefs  too  much.  (2)  It  tries
to  deal  with  Greece  and  Rome  at  the  same  time— an  impossible  design  which
survives  from  the  days  when  people  believed  in  a  parent  Aryan  civilization  ;
hence  its  generalizations  sometimes  fall  between  two  stools  and  fit  neither.
'Greece  and  Rome,'  as  a  witty  American  woman  has  recently  said, '  have  in  fact
suffered  the  fatethat,accordingtoMadameCardinal,hasovertakenVoltaire  and
Rousseau  :  II paralt  que  de  leur  vivant  Us  ne  pourraient  pas  se  sentir,  qu'ils

1248  F


78  POLITICS  PART  II

out  passe  leur  existence  a  se  dire  des  sot  Uses.  Ce  it' est  que  depiiis  leur  mort
que  les  deux  font  la  paire'  {The  Lady,  by  Emily  James  Putnam,  p.  39).
(3)  It  greatly  exaggerates  the  influence  of  the  Conservative  as  opposed  to
the  Radical  elements  in  Greek  life.  So  far  as  Athens  is  concerned  its  story
admittedly  ends  with  Cleisthenes  (see  p.  337,  ed.  1906).  It  is,  for  instance,
a  gross  exaggeration,  or  misuse  of  words,  to  say,  as  on  p,  269,  that  ancient
man  never  possessed  liberty  or  even  'the  idea  of  it '.  (4)  It  ignores  one  of
the  most  interesting  sides  of  patriarchal  life,  its  system  of  criminal  law.
Here  it  has  recently  been  supplemented  by  the  work  of  Glotz  {LaSolidarite
de  la  fauiille  dans  le  droit  crijuinel  en  Grece),  who  has  made  detailed  use  of
the  evidence  of  mythology.  His  book  is  a  model  of  the  way  in  which  science
can  extract  truth  out  of  fiction.  See  also  the  same  author's  shorter  work  :
Etudes  sociales  et  juridiques  sur  Pantiquite  grecque.


CHAPTER   III

THE    ELEMENTS   OF   CITIZENSHIP

EFFICIENCY,    OR   THE   RULE    OF   THE    MA(iI.STRATE
{to  ev  ^fjv)

Iw  dfo]  veutTfjxn,  naXniovs  vo^ovi
Kiidnnruaarrdf  kuk  X^P'^^'  «'^fO"^<  /^"v.

Aeschylus,  Eumefiiihs  77S.
Our  fathers  worshipped  in  this  mountain  ;  and  ye  say  that  in  Jerusalem  is
the  place  where  men  ought  to  worship.

We  have  watched  the  Greek  becoming  transformed  from  a
nomad  tribesman  into  a  villager.  We  have  now  to  watch  his
further  progress  from  a  villager  to  a  citizen.

Perhaps  the  chief  external  difference  between  what  is  known  as
the  Middle  Age  of  Greece  and  the  mediaeval  period  in  England
is  that  in  ancient  Greece  mediaeval  man,  whatever  his  occupation,
was  predominantly  a  town-dweller.  There  were  towns  in  England
as  early  as  the  Danish  invasions ;  but  they  never  became  the
homes  of  the  main  agricultural  population.  All  through  our
Middle  Ages  the  mass  of  the  cultivators  lived  scattered  over  the
open  country-side :  the  boroughs,  which  received  charters  and
were  thus  sharply  distinguished  from  the  villages  and  rural  town-
ships, had  no  predominant  connexion  with  agriculture,  and  under
the  influence  of  the  Gilds  became  increasingly  associated  with
commerce  and  industry.  In  the  history  of  mediaeval  Greece  we
find  no  such  distinction.  From  the  earliest  times  we  can  watch
the  working  of  the  forces  that  drove  the  village-dwellers,  what-
ever their  occupation,  into  the  towns.  Already  in  the  Epic,  city
life  seems  to  be  regarded  as  the  natural  mode  of  existence  for
the  mass  of  mankind.  Not  only  the  Phaeacians  and  the  Ithacans,
but  even  the  savage  Laestrygonians  and  the  misty  Cimmerians
of  the  Odyssey  are  confirmed  city-dwellers.  The  centripetal
tendency  thus  early  set  up  remained  uninterrupted  throughout
the  whole  history  of  the  City  State.^

*  Od.  X.  103-8,  xi.  14  ;  cf.  ix.  114,  where  the  Cyclops  stands  as  the  type  of
the  extinct  race  of  independent  patriarchal  fathers.

F  2


8o  POLITICS  PART  II

The  Greek  City,  as  we  find  it  in  the  sixth  or  fifth  century,
towards  the  close  of  a  long  development,  is  thus  ver}-  different
from  the  English  Borough  at  the  end  of  our  own  Middle  Ages.
It  is  in  essence  not  a  marketing  or  manufacturing  centre,  but  an
overgrown  agricultural  village.  It  is  mainly  inhabited,  not  by
shop-keepers  and  craftsmen,  but  by  cultivators  of  the  soil  who
have,  in  the  Greek  phrase,  '  set  up  house  together.'  Its  sacred
calendar  shows  a  round  of  country  festivals.  Its  drama  is  set  in
a  framework  of  country  custom.  Tragedy  grew  (or  the  Greeks
thought  it  grew  ^)  out  of  a  chorus  of  men  in  goatskins  singing  in
honour  of  the  wine  god,  and  comedy  out  of  the  mumming  of  the
vintage  and  the  harvest  home.  The  full-grown  city  never  forgot
its  country  origin,  nor  did  its  citizens  lose  contact  with  the  fields
outside  its  walls.  Everywhere  in  theory,  and  almost  everywhere
in  practice,  the  City  State  remained,  through  all  its  days,  pre-
dominantly agricultural.

It  is  time  to  answer  the  question  already  raised  in  the  last
chapter:  Why  did  the  Greeks  come  in  from  the  villages  to  'set
up  house  together '  ?  -

They  went  to  find  Efficiency.  They  discovered,  in  the  phrase
of  Aristotle,  that  though,  with  a  stronghold  in  reserve,  they  could
live  out  in  the  country,  they  could  only  '  live  well '  in  the  city.
The  formation  of  these  agricultural  cities  is  an  important  factor

'  The  traditional  account,  canonized  by  Aristotle,  of  the  origins  of  Greek
tragedy  has  lately  been  called  in  question  by  Ridgeway,  Gilbert  Murray  and
others,  who  connect  it  with  Tomb  ritual  or  initiation  ceremonies.

^  There  is  a  complete  discussion  of  the  process  of  setting  up  house  together
('  Synoecism ')  in  Greece  in  Francotte's  Polls  grecque,  pp.  95  ff.,  especially
p.  no.  He  points  out  that  there  were  very  great  varieties  of  the  process  in
individual  cases,  and  that  it  did  not  always  denote  an  actual  geographical
migration,  as  the  later  Greek  writers  thought.  Attica  is  a  case  to  the  contrary,
and  there  are  others.  The  main  point  is  the  transference  of  the  seat  of
government  from  the  villages  to  the  city.  But  the  domiciles  were  generally
transferred  too,  and  the  Mantinea  story  shows  how  movable  they  were.  The
Greek  agricultural  town  is,  of  course,  not  a  unique  phenomenon.  One  of  its
most  interesting  counterparts  is  to  be  found  in  Palestine.  '  The  synoecismus
of  Attica  by  "  Theseus"  is  evidently  in  some  sort  parallel  to  the  Deuteronomic
legislation  of  Josiah.  .  .  .  One  of  our  objects  in  tracing  the  history  of  Israel
will  be  to  show  that  it  is  a  record  of  a  City  State  in  the  making.'  This  point
of  view  is  attractively  presented  in  Politics  and  Religion  in  Ancient  Israel,
by  Canon  J.  C.  Todd  (London,  1904),  and,  more  authoritatively,  byWellhausen
in  his  standard  Israelltische  unci  jiidlsche  Geschichte  (6th  ed.,  1907),
especially  ch.  vi,  on  the  old  Jewish  village  life,  and  pp.  134  ff.  The  Temple
summed  up  the  City  State  patriotism  of  Judah  as  the  Parthenon  summed  up
that  of  Attica.


CHAP.  IIT  TIT!-:    CITY    MAGISTRATI-:  81

in  the  development  which  Thucydides  so  well  describes— the
gradual  growth  of  the  material  resources  and  powers  of  the  Greek
States,  culminating  in  the  Persian  and  Peloponnesian  wars.  It  is
not  enough  for  him  or  for  Pericles  that  a  State  should  be  good  or
beautiful ;  it  must  also  be  strong.  The  Persian  war  is  not  a  victory
of  the  weak  over  the  strong,  but  of  the  strong  over  the  incapable.
The  Greeks,  unlike  the  Jews,  have  nothing  qui.xotic  in  their
nature.  They  never  lead  a  forlorn  hope,  unless  they  can  per-
suade themselves  that  it  is  not  forlorn.  It  is  the /^^rirr  of  the  city
which  the  Athenians,  going  about  their  city  and  'falling  in  love
with  her',  behold  embodied  in  her  institutions  and  in  the  monu-
ments of  the  Acropolis.  The  Doric  columns  of  the  Parthenon
still  give  that  sense  of  power  to-day.^

The  most  obvious  reason  for  the  change  is  a  military  one.
Instead  of  retiring  to  their  'city'  whenever  the  need  arose,  they
found  it  safer  and  more  economical  to  go  and  live  by  it  perma-
nently. So  they  came  together  and  grouped  their  dwellings
round  the  foot  of  their  Acropolis,  or,  where  that  was  too  in-
accessible, set  to  and  fortified  another  in  a  more  convenient
situation.  But  they  did  not  yet  go  to  the  trouble  of  defending
their  houses  or  their  fields.  The  wall  was  built  round  the  citadel,
not  round  the  new-formed  city  itself,  which  lay  huddled  just
beneath  it.  It  was  only  later  on,  when  the  city  had  increased  in
size  and  citizens  had  become  more  conscious  of  their  unity  and
the  central  government  of  its  strength,  that  they  called  all  hands
to  the  work,  including  even  women  and  children  if  the  need  was
urgent,  and  swept  a  lordly  circuit  round  all  their  habitations,  and
sometimes  even  round  some  open  fields  besides.  W  hen  the
Persians  landed  at  Marathon,  Athens  was  still  practically  an
open  city.  She  had  no  real  fortifications  except  her  Acropolis
until  Themistocles  had  a  proper  city  wall  built  after  the  Persian
retreat.  Sparta  remained  true  to  the  old  ways  and  never  built
a  wall  at  all.  What  use  would  it  have  been  to  her?  Her  real
enemies,  the  Helots,  had  to  come  in  every  day  to  bring  food  to

^  See  the  argument  of  Phormio's  speech  in  Thuc.  ii.  89.  The  most  recent
authorities  (e.g.  Grundy,  Persian  War,  pp.  2931!.,  and  Macan)  do  not  allow
us  to  regard  even  Thermopylae  as  a  forlorn  hope.  The  unfamiliarity  ot  the
idea  clearly  puzzled  Herodotus  (see  vii.  220-1).  \Vat<  h  the  uses  of  the  words
connoting  power  and  bigness  in  Thucydides,  e.g.  vi.  31,  i.  17  :  "c  I'kccl  e()->'<i
«|«oXo-yfl,  things  on  a  scale  worth  talking  about.


8a  POLITICS  part  ii

their  masters'  mess.  A  city  divided  against  itself  cannot  be  saved
by  a  wall.^

This  tendency  to  acquiesce  in  the  old  methods  of  defence,  even
when  the  new  city  had  far  outgrown  its  citadel,  suggests  that
defence  was  after  all  only  a  secondary  factor  in  its  foundation.
The  real  motive  force  that  drove  men  into  it  was  not  the  need  for
efficiency  in  time  of  war  so  much  as  the  need  for  efJficiency  in
time  of  peace.  They  came  together  not  so  much  for  safety  as  for
Justice.  This  is  the  oldest  and  perhaps  the  strongest  of  the  city's
claims  to  men's  devotion.  It  is  emphasized  again  and  again  in
City  State  writers  of  every  age.  Pericles  gives  it  the  first  place
in  his  eulogy  of  Athenian  institutions.  Plato,  in  the  beautiful
myth  which  he  puts  into  the  mouth  of  Protagoras,  describes  how,
to  the  first  city  dwellers  who  were  ignorant  of  '  the  art  of  city
life',  Zeus  sent  down  Hermes,  'bearing  in  his  hands  Reverence
and  Justice  to  be  the  ordering  principles  of  cities  and  the  bonds
of  friendship  and  conciliation'.^

Like  many  other  myths,  this  mistakes  the  cause  for  the  con-
sequence ;  men  felt  the  need  of  '  the  art  of  city  life '  before  they
lived  in  cities.  But  Plato's  account  of  the  early  city,  whether  in
the  mouth  of  Protagoras  or  of  Socrates,  is  in  its  essentials  historic-
ally true.  Turn  back  to  the  Iliad.  The  old  epic  writer  who
wrought  out  his  sociology  on  the  shield  of  Achilles  shows  us  this
early  city,  as  he  would  like  his  hero  to  picture  it  as  he  goes  into
battle  on  its  behalf.  A  marriage  procession  with  music  and
dancing  and  lighted  torches  and  all  the  old  patriarchal  ceremonial

^  Athenian  wall :  Thuc.  i.  89-93  ;  women  and  children  :  90.  3  (wrongly
bracketed  in  Oxford  text,  cf.  v.  82.  6).  The  question  as  to  whether  Athens
had  a  defensible  city  wall  before  478  has  been  much  discussed.  I  follow
Wilamowitz  {Aus  Kydathen,  pp.  97  ff.),  Dorpfeld,  and  Kornemann  {K/io,
vol.  V,  p.  78).  Dorpfeld  thinks  the  Acropolis  too  was  refortified  after
480,  and  that  the  Periclean  Propylaea  stand  on  the  site  of  the  last  of  the  old
'  Seven  Gates'.  The  old  Acropolis  fortifications  extended  on  the  south  and
west  a  little  beyond  the  hill  itself  (Thuc.  ii.  15.  3).  That  a  wall,  was  not  part
of  the  original  equipment  of  a  city  is  clear  from  Thuc.  i.  8.  3  ('some  of  the
richer  cities  began  to  build  walls')  and  Hdt.  i.  15,  141,  and  163  (a  grateful
Spanish  chieftain  gives  the  Phocaeans  money  to  build  a  wall,  as  an  Indian
rajah  has  had  a  well  sunk  at  Stoke  Row  in  the  Chilterns  as  a  thank-offering
to  his  engineer),  Homor's  Phaeacians  have  only  a  provisional  wall  of  earth
and  wood  (Od.  vii.  44  ;  v.  Berard,  vol.  i,  p.  543).  Cf.  Ar.  Pol.  1330  b  32  with
criticism  of  the  more  old  fashioned  view  in  Plato,  Latus  778  D.

^  Thuc.  ii.  37.  I.  Compare  Polybius's  account  of  country  life  in  Ells,
rendered  possible  by  the  fact  that  the  statesmen  there  had  arranged  for
Justice  to  be  administered  'on  the  spot '.    (iv.  'J2)-  8.)


CHAP,  iir  THE   CITY    MAGISTRATK  83

is  passing  through  the  streets.  The  women  working  in  the  inner
chamber  start  up  at  the  noise  and  stand  staring  from  the  window
or  the  threshold— they  are  not  allowed  to  go  further— as  the
rout  goes  by.  It  emerges  into  the  open  market-place.  But  here
its  progress  is  stayed,  for  there  is  another  crowd  assembled.
Standing  on  tiptoe,  the  revellers  can  see  a  group  of  old  men  with
staves  in  their  hands,  sitting  round  in  a  half-circle  on  the  well-
worn  stone  seats.  Before  them  stand  two  heated  and  angry  dis-
putants: at  their  feet  lie  two  lumps  of  glowing  gold.  What  is  it
all  about  ?  The  story  soon  goes  round.  There  has  been  a  murder,
and  the  dead  man's  representative  refuses  to  accept  the  money
compensation  which  the  murderer's  family  after  due  conclave
decided  to  offer.  So  they  have  submitted  their  case  to  the  '  right
judgement '  of  the  elders  of  the  city.  Then  those  talents  of  gold
are  the  compensation  that  was  offered  ?  The  crowd  is  not  quite
sure.  It  seems  rather  little  for  a  good  man's  life — no  more  than
the  fourth  prize  in  the  chariot  race  at  the  big  funeral  last  year.
Here's  a  friend  with  a  likelier  theory.  They  are  both  so  certain
of  winning  that  they  have  laid  a  wager  on  the  result,  and  the
loser  will  have  to  pay  up  the  money  as  a  fee  to  the  best  spokes-
man among  the  elders.^

Who  are  these  old  men  and  how  do  they  come  to  have  this
authority  ?  Our  friend  in  the  street  will  give  no  help  here.  He
will  only  inform  us  that,  as  every  one  knows,  they  have  the  blood
of  gods  and  heroes  in  their  veins,  and  therefore  know  the  rights
and  wrongs  of  things  far  better  than  common  folk.  For  a  more
lucid  explanation  we  must  go  back  a  little  and  watch  how,  in
the  course  of  a  few  generations  on  Greek  soil,  an  aristocracy  of
capable  city  magistrates  grew  up  among  the  old  equal  patriarchal
families.

*  //.  xviii.  490  fif.  with  Monro's  note  on  1.  507,  also  xxiii.  269 ;  compare  /\i////
iv.  I.  For  Plato  on  the  early  city  see  Prntag07-as  322  C  and  Laws  680 fif.
(where  the  Trojan  war,  as  usual,  confuses  the  development).  The  Rt-publit
does  not  even  pretend  to  be  historical,  but  its  argument  and  the  sub-title
commonly  attached  to  it  (noXiTeia  i)  Trfpi  SikhIov)  embody  the  same  idea.
For  the  proximity  of  the  Seat  of  Justice  and  the  Bazaar  in  early  Athens  see
WURmowitz,  A7^s  Ayd(i//u';i,  pp.  195  fif.  The  fee  is  interesting:  it  is  not  given
to  all  the  justices  on  the  bench,  but  only  to  the  'straightest  speaker'.  It  is  the
lineal  ancestor  of  the  much-abused  fees  which  were  paid  to  the  large  popular
juries  in  fifth-century  Athens.  In  early  times  these  were  called  nfjvTni'da
(Guildhall  Fees),  and  were  paid  by  KwXoK/jeVai  ('  Carvers ')  :  so  it  is  clear
wherein  they  consisted.  The  public  servant  was  counted  worthy  of  his  bread
and  butter.     So  he  was  in  the  fifth  century  (cf.  Meyer,  Gcsc/i.  ii,  §§  209,  225).


84  POLITICS  PART  II

When  the  invaders  entered  Greece,  they  were  used  to  being
patriarchally  but  not  aristocratically  governed.  They  obeyed  the
commands  of  the  heads  of  the  family  or  the  brotherhood  :  they
followed  their  leader  in  time  of  war  and  accepted  the  decisions  of
his  council  of  wise  men  ;  but  they  did  not  regard  one  family  or
brotherhood  or  section  of  the  community  as  any  better  than
another.  This  democratic  tradition  was  adhered  to  in  their
settlement  on  the  soil.  The  cultivable  land  was  divided  into
equal  'lots'  {kXtjpol),  and  every  adult  received  a  share  which  he
held  in  trust  for  his  family  and  his  descendants;  for  private
property  originated  not  in  rights  but  in  duties.  The  family  which
enjoyed  the  temporary  usufruct  of  this  property  included  women,
children,  and  sometimes  a  few  slaves  captured  in  raids,  more  often
women  than  men.  These  'houselings'  [oiK^rai)  had  their  recog-
nized place  and  duties  in  the  home,  into  which,  on  arrival,  they
were  solemnly  initiated  by  the  pouring  of  libations.  They  were
the  lowest  people  in  the  household,  but  their  position  was  in-
finitely preferable  to  that  of  the  *  unhonoured  vagrants '  who  had
no  place  or  lot  in  the  world  at  all.  He  and  all  who  may  be
dependent  upon  him  are,  in  the  world  of  the  Homeric  poems,  the
most  to  be  pitied  of  all  mankind.  Eumaeus,  the  slave  swineherd,
can  afford  to  be  kind  and  patronizing  to  a  wanderer  like  the  dis-
guised Odysseus,  and  one  of  the  suitors  shows  his  charity  by
offering  him  a  job  as  a  wage-earner,  for  board  and  lodging  and
his  clothes,  at  planting  trees  and  making  stone  walls — work  for
which  obviously  he  could  not  spare  the  superior  services  of  a  slave.
The  '  lotless '  man  may  be  trying  to  earn  a  bare  living  on  a  bit  of
land  that  he  has  reclaimed  for  himself;  or  he  may  be  a  beggar  or
exile ;  or  simply  a  rebel  and  a  brigand  with  his  hand  against
every  man.  In  any  case  he  is  '  outside  all  brotherhoods  and  all
binding  customs  and  all  hearths',  and  the  patriarchal  organiza-
tion rides  rough-shod  over  him.  Society  has  no  place  as  yet  for
men  who  '  make  their  own  way  in  the  world '.  But  with  these
exceptions  all  heads  of  families  were  thought  of  as  equal,  and
were  symmetrically  grouped  on  the  land  and  in  the  state  as
a  community  of  equals.  Equal  lands  and  equal  rights  were  deep-
rooted  and  persistent  traditions  of  Greek  life.  All  through  the
history  of  the  City  State,  whenever  a  colony  was  founded,  the
old  equal  arrangement  was  maintained,  whatever  the  inequalities


CHAP.  Ill  THE    CITY   MAGISTRATE  S^

that  had  supervened  in  the  mother  stale.  And  :il  home,  too,  the
dream  of  a  new  sharing-out  of  the  land  never  died  out  of  men's
minds.  In  the  Clouds  of  Aristophanes  some  one  asks  a  pupil  of
the  mock  Socrates  what  is  the  use  of  geometry.  '  Why,  for
measuring  land  into  equal  portions,'  he  replies.  '  Do  you  mean
colonists'  land?'  'No,  I  mean  all  the  land.'  'A  capital  idea,
thoroughly  practical  and  public-spirited.'  *

But  equal  lands  never  remain  equal  for  long — least  of  all  in
a  society  in  which  the  tradition  of  equality  is  strongly  developed.
For  the  Greeks,  unlike  ourselves,  did  not  recognize  the  prior
rights  of  the  eldest  son :  they  divided  their  property  at  death
equally  between  all  their  male  issue.  The  results  of  this  upon
a  society  in  which  land  is  the  chief  form  of  wealth  are  manifest.
In  a  few  generations  there  will  be  a  marked  division  in  the
community,  and  it  will  not  be  long  before  the  more  skilful  or
fortunate  members  have  begun  to  take  rank  as  a  hereditary
aristocracy.^  r

These  are  the  Zeus-born  *  kings '  whom  we  know  so  well  from
the  epic.  They  were  Zeus-born  in  a  very  special  and  peculiar
sense.  In  historical  Greece  every  one  was  in  the  habit  of  claiming
divine  descent  from  the  god  or  hero  to  whom  his  community
was  believed  to  go  back.  Athenians,  for  instance,  claimed  to  be
descended  from  Zeus  through  Ion  the  son  of  Apollo.  But  aristo-
crats disdained  the  pedigrees  of  common  folk  and  traced  them-
selves back  to  the  All-Father  by  lines  of  their  own— some  of

^  Of  course  the  Patriarchal  idea  of  equality  was  modified  by  practical
exigencies.  The  immigrant  nations  had  Kings  and  Witenagemots  {Unui'Kt'ii
and  yepoj/Tf  $),  and  some  families  were  richer  and  more  honoured  than  others.
But  their  aristocracy  was  only  skin  deep  and  kept  for  emergencies.  BnmXfi'f
means  a '  war-leader  '.  See  Meyer,  vol.  ii,  ^  53.  Refs. :  Aesch.  A^:  1035  (Cas-
sandra's initiation  into  the  household)  ;  Od.  xiv.  56  (Eumaeus's  pretty  speech
to  Odysseus),  xviii.  357  (Eurymachus's  offer  of  relief  work),  xi.  490  (to  work
for  a  lotless  man)  ;  //.  ix.  63  {d(ppr']TO)p  ddifxiaros  dfeVrio?) ;  Hesiod,  i^''^'^  602
(don't  engage  hired  labourers  with  young  children) ;  //.  ix.  648,  xvi.  59  {drinnTni
ti(Tc,v(i(jTr]i) ;  Ar.  C/ouds  202  (geometry);  Thuc.  iii.  50.  2  (kX^/joiI,  See  in
Dittenberger's  Sylloge,  No.  933,  a  fourth-century  colonization  mscription,
where  the  colonists  are  still  grouped  under  the  old  Dorian  tribes.

2  Cf.  Hesiod,  Erga  376.  The  Aryan  theory,  and  the  Greek  tendency  to
have  only  one  son,  led  Fustel  dc  Coulanges  astray  on  the  question  of  primo-
geniture;  cf.  p.  90  (ed.  1906)  with  Meyer,  vol.  ii,  §  197.  I  have  followed
Meyer  in  ignoring  the  possible  influence  of  migrations  and  conquests  in  the
rise  of  aristocracy.  I  am  aware  that  this  is  very  probably  to  oversimplify
the  problem  ;  but  in  the  present  state  of  the  evidence  no  other  treatment
seemed  possible  within  the  limits  of  the  book.     See  also  note  on  p.  107.


86  POLITICS  TART  II

them  going  back  a  suspiciously  short  way.  We  know  from
Pindar,  who  wrote  in  the  Saint  Martin's  summer  of  this  aristo-
cratic regime,  how  much  these  pedigrees  meant  to  them  ;  and  old
Herodotus  has  made  many  a  democratic  reader  chuckle  by  telling
how  the  Egyptian  priest  used  simple  arithmetic  to  shame  the
parvenu  aristocrat  Hecataeus  when  he  boasted  of  being  'the  six-
teenth from  a  god '.  These  convenient  fictions,  which  may  in
many  cases  have  been  deliberate  inventions,  seem  childish  to  us,
who  are  inclined  to  be  amused  at  our  College  of  Heralds.  But
the  Greeks  went  to  work  at  their  political  institutions  with
a  radical  thoroughness  in  all  ages.  '  Their  legislators  work  like
architects  with  rule  and  compass  ':  they  like  order  and  symmetry,
councils  of  5.000  and  tribes  made  up  of  '  hundred-ships ',  every-
thing as  neat  and  logical  as  the  plan  of  an  American  city.  So
a  noble  family  without  an  ancestor  must  needs  procure  one,  just
as  when  Cleisthenes  turned  the  four  Attic  tribes  into  ten  he  got
Apollo  to  tell  him  after  what  heroes  he  was  to  name  them.^

In  Homer  and  Pindar,  who  embody  the  great  literature  of  this
period,  we  see  little  of  mediaeval  Greece  but  these  *  kings '  and
their  dependants.  They  have  monopolized  all  the  glamour,  as
they  monopolized  the  authority,  of  their  age.  The  government,
as  Thucydides  says,  '  was  in  the  hands  of  hereditary  kings  with
fixed  prerogatives.'  If  kingship  meant  then  what  it  does  now,
it  would  be  hard,  and  indeed  impossible,  to  explain  how  this
came  about.  A  community  of  patriarchal  families  is  a  bad  basis
for  a  hereditary  monarchy.  But  we  must  be  careful  not  to  widen
the  gap  between  these  '  kings  '  and  their  '  subjects  '.  They  were
only  kings  in  a  very  limited  and  peculiar  sense.  Their  kingship
was  one  which  admitted,  for  instance,  of  degrees :  you  could
speak  of  one  king  as  being  '  more  kingly  '  than  another.  There
were  kings  who  were  poorer  than  many  of  the  commoners  in  their

^  Hdt.  ii.  143;  Plato,  Eiithyd.  302  B  (where  Socrates  is  cornered  over  his
Zfi?  Trarpwoj)  ;  Eur.  Med.  825  :  'Epf;^6'eiSat  and  Qiuiv  n-diSer  (O  Sons  of
Erechtheus  the  olden  Whom  the  high  gods  planted  of  yore  .  .  .)  ;  it  was
a  later  and  more  democratic  Athenian  boast  to  be  'earth-born  '  (ni/rox^ui')  ;
Francotte,  Palis,  pp.  125,  147  ;  IMeyer,  vol.  ii,  §  203.  Meyer  points  out  that
these  '  Zeus-born  kings  '  with  their  superior  pedigrees  seem  to  be  peculiar  to
Greece.  Jewish  and  Arabian  pedigrees  all  go  back  to  the  All-Father  through
the  father  of  the  whole  race,  e.g.  through  Abraham  or  '  Israel',  who  corre-
spond to  the  Greek  Hellen.  No  Benjamitc  or  even  Levite  would  venture  to
claim  special  descent  by  a  line  of  his  own,  like  a  Heraclid  or  a  Neleid.


CHAP.  Ill  THE   CITY   MAGISTRATE  87

city,  and  whose  sons,  some  day  to  be  kings  themselves,  were  not
ashamed  of  working  in  the  fields  or  going  out,  like  David,  with
the  sheep.  When  Athena  went  to  meet  Odysseus  on  his  landing
in  Ithaca,  she  came  in  the  likeness  of  a  young  shepherd,  '  very
delicate  of  countenance  such  as  arc  the  sons  of  kings.'  You
could  tell  a  king's  son  then  from  a  plain  man  when  he  sat  piping
to  his  flocks,  not  so  much  by  his  clothes  as  by  his  face.  So  sang
the  epic  poet,  mindful  as  always  of  his  audience.  But  no  one
would  have  told  the  old  hero  Laertes,  working  away  in  his  garden
in  gloves  and  gaiters,  from  the  plain  peasants  amongst  whom  he
lived.i

Such  touches  as  this  and  a  hundred  others,  concealed  for  the
careless  reader  beneath  the  easy  magnificence  of  epic  diction  or
the  Biblical  English  of  the  modern  translator,  help  to  bring  the
heroes  of  Homer  into  relation  with  the  common  life  of  their  time.
We  were  apt  to  forget,  until  the  paradoxical  common  sense  of
Samuel  Butler  reminded  us,  that  it  is  strange  for  kings  like
Menelaus  to  ask  their  guests  to  bring  their  own  food  with  them,
or  for  princesses  to  look  after  their  brothers'  washing.  The
truth  is  that,  in  mainland  Greece  at  any  rate,  there  was  no  such
wide  separation  as  the  epic  tale  leads  our  Northern  imagination
to  suppose  between  the  nobles  and  the  people.  Except  in  the
sphere  of  law  and  government,  the  old  patriarchal  equality  lived
on,  in  spite  of  all  the  new  influences  of  wealth  and  rank.  In
Lacedaemon,  where  Helen  and  Menelaus  held  high  state,  there
are  hardly  any  traces  of  aristocracy  surviving  in  our  records  at
all.  The  institutions  of  Lycurgus  well-nigh  blotted  it  out  of
Spartiate  life.  Attica  has  its  Whig  families,  its  Philaids  and
Alcmaeonids,  with  all  their  pride  of  descent.  Yet  the  mediaeval
period  laid  the  foundations  for  the  fabric  of  fifth-century
democracy,  which  could  never  have  been  erected  over  a  chasm
of  classes.  It  is  the  familiar  English  analogy— closest  perhaps
to  just  those  Englishmen  who  have  most  loved  Homer — which  is
apt  to  mislead  us.  Our  class  distinctions,  not  between  noble
and  commoner  but  between  '  lady '  and  '  gentleman  '  and  '  man  '
and  '  woman  ',  or,  in  old  English  speech,  between  '  gentle  '  and

*  Od.  xxiv.  226,  xiii.  222,  ii.  77  (cf.  386,  where  Telemachus  borrows  a  ship
from  a  commoner),  ii.  127.  Cf.  Hdt.  viii.  137  (a  queen  who  did  her  own
cooking).


88  POLITICS  PART  II

'  simple ',  are  deeply  rooted  and  of  immemorial  antiquity.  We
are  only  slowly  emerging,  with  painful  self-consciousness,  into
the  free  atmosphere  of  a  real  democracy.  We  have  behind  us
and  still  lurking  in  obscure  corners  of  our  minds,  not  the  simple
and  easy  equality  of  the  patriarchal  village,  but  respectful
memories  of  the  hierarchy  of  the  feudal  manor.  The  Greek
aristocrat  had  not  our  traditions  of  social  exclusiveness,  as  he
had  not  our  economic  resources,  our  first-class  carriages  and
a  hundred  other  luxurious  conveniences,  for  preserving  and
emphasizing  them  :  for  his  chariots,  never  at  home  on  Greek
soil,  were  feeble  substitutes,  and  even  his  boasted  mediaeval
cavalry  could  not  maintain  its  predominance  for  long.  To  under-
stand aright  either  Pindar  the  aristocrat  or  Pericles  the  democrat,
one  the  servant  of  nobles,  the  other  a  noble  himself,  we  must
sweep  away  our  feudal  cobwebs.  The  fifth-century  Athenian
had  indeed  abolished  aristocracy  not  only  in  substance  but  even
in  form.  Pericles  could  trace  his  pedigree  to  Nestor  and  beyond,
and  only  two  generations  back  Pindar  had  written  odes  for  his
family.  But  in  431,  when  he  is  chosen  'for  his  public  estima-
tion' to  give  an  address  over  the  city's  dead,  he  is  for  Thucy-
dides  no  longer  Pericles  the  Alcmaeonid,  but  '  Pericles  the  son
of  Xanthippus  '.  The  Marquis  of  Salisbury  has  become  plain
Robert  Cecil.  By  that  time  Athens  had  done  away,  except  in
the  case  of  a  few  priesthoods,  with  hereditary  titles.^

^  On  Athenian  nomenclature  see  below,  p.  153.  The  Spartan  senate  was
confined  to  aged  Spartiates  from  certain  families  ;  but  this  only  trace  of  the
old  regime  never  appears  as  of  any  consequence.  For  cavalry  cf.  Thuc.  vii.
27.  5  with  Ar. /'^/,  1297  b  18.  To  keep  horses  in  Greece  was  what  tokeep  a  motor
car  is  with  us  (Thuc.  vi.  15.  3).  Samuel  Butler's  The  Authoress  of  the  Odyssey
and  his  translations  of  the  Iliad  diVid  Odyssey  are  too  little  known  books.  His
plain  English  brings  out  numberless  points  which  are  apt  to  escape  our  notice
'  in  their  Greek  dress.  The  passages  referred  to  above  are  Od.  iv.  621,  vi.  64. —
There  is  a  second  source  of  misconception  about  Greek  aristocracy  besides
that  referred  to  abo\'e.  We  confuse  the  aristocracy  of  the  Greek  Middle  Age
and  of  Pindar  with  the  '  oligarchy  '  so  familiar  in  fifth-century  constitutional
strife,  thus  exaggerating  the  depth  and  persistence  of  the  aristocratic  elements
in  the  City  State.  Mediaeval  aristocracy  and  fifth-century  '  oligarchy '  belong
to  quite  different  stages  of  City  State  development.  The  Oligarchs  (who
sometimes  no  doubt  labelled  themselves  '  Aristocrats ')  were  a  political  party
in  a  constitutionally  governed  state.  Their  programme  was  to  limit  the
franchise,  restricting  it,  however,  not  simply  to  nobles  but  to  land  and
property-owners  as  opposed  to  the  poorer  trading  and  industrial  population.
Their  motto  was  a  word  of  which  Homer's  heroes  had  never  heard,  for  it
presupposed  the  existence  of  a  written  constitution  :  their  policy  claimed  to
be  laovofMi,  to  give  '  equality  before  the  law  '.    We  shall  meet  them  again  in


CHAP.  Ill  THE   CITY   MAGISTRATE  «9

Such  then  are  the  nobles  whom  we  saw  ^.ittin*,^  in  all  the
dignity  of  age  and  office,  on  that  Homeric  Judgement-seat.  But
what  of  the  litigants  who  plead  before  them  ?  What  sort  of  men
are  they,  and  what  has  brought  them  to  accept  the  decisions  of
that  tribunal  ?  In  order  to  answer  these  questions  we  must  leave
the  newly  settled  town  and  go  back  once  more  to  the  old  village.

The  legendary  account  of  early  Attica  classifies  the  population
of  that  region  in  three  divisions — nobles,  yeomen,  and  craftsmen.
The  mere  names  should  serve  to  remind  us  that  there  is  another
world  besides  that  with  which  the  poets  of  the  Iliad  and  the
Odyssey  have  made  us  familiar.  Fortunately  it  has  left  us  its
epic  spokesman  too.  Besides  Homer  there  is  Hesiod.  Kings
and  nobles  play  a  very  small  part  in  the  Works  and  Days.  We
are  no  longer  living  at  the  centre  of  government,  passing  our
days  giving  judgements  in  the  market-place,  earning  an  appetite
for  supper  and  hoping  that  Alcinous,  or  some  other  '  king '
amongst  us,  may  offer  us  a  banquet  in  the  king's  hall  or  vary
our  monotony  by  arranging  sports  in  honour  of  a  distinguished
stranger.  We  have  passed  into  a  quieter  world,  where  the  very
word  monotony  is  unknown  and  the  kings  and  nobles  of  the
metropolis  are  seen,  not  as  they  themselves  or  their  poets,  but  as
the  plain  yeomen  saw  them.  It  is  a  toilsome  life,  very  near  to
the  earth,  in  the  poor  and  backward  village  of  Ascra  under
Helicon,  '  a  miserable  place,  bad  in  winter,  unpleasant  in  summer,
never  good  to  live  in.'  The  Muses  to  whom  Hesiod  appeals  for
inspiration  seem  to  have  no  political  message  to  give  us.  They
speak  neither  of  the  old  patriarchal  loyalties  of  tribe  and  brother-
hood, nor  of  the  new  divinely  descended  clans  of  the  noblemen.
They  have  never  heard  of  the  City  State.  Their  citizenship  is
rudimentary.  Yet  it  is  very  real,  and  the  statesman  will  have  to.
deal  with  it  in  due  time.  In  their  little  world  the  bond  between
man  and  man  is  not  tribal  but  territorial,  based  not  on  blood
but  on  situation.  They  have  neither  the  time  nor  the  pride  to
remember  that  they  are  brothers.     They  only  know,  like  the

chap.  V,  where,  having  contributed  their  part  in  the  development  of  the
Periclean  City  State,  they  drop  out  of  the  running.  A  third  source  of  mis-
conception is  no  doubt  provided  by  the  aristocratic  theories  of  fourth-century
philosophers.—'  Gentle  '  and  '  simple '  was  the  true  old  division  in  English
life,  as  opposed  to  '  nobles  '  and  '  people '  in  feudal  societies  on  the  Continent.
See,  e.  g.,  Trevelyan,  Ettgland  under  the  Siuaris,  p.  4.


90  POLITICS  PART  II

humble  peasants  in  Tolstoy's  Village  Tales,  that  they  live  and
work  and  suffer  side  by  side.  It  was  the  modest  Muses  of  Hesiod
who  first  spoke  to  Greeks  of  their  duty  to  their  neighbour.^

Among  simple  men,  far  removed  from  the  seat  of  government,
and  too  poor  and  too  busy  to  stir  outside  their  native  valley,
neighbourliness  takes  the  place  of  citizenship.  It  is  only  the
hurry  and  confusion  and  moroseness  of  modern  life  which  boxes
men  up  in  rows  of  suburban  houses,  too  proud  or  too  shy  to
borrow  a  neighbour's  frying-pan,  or  even  in  common  humanity
to  put  their  blinds  down  for  his  funeral.  The  cottagers  of  Ascra
had  not  much  to  give,  but  they  gave  what  they  could,  and  for
very  shrewd  reasons.

Ask  your  friend  to  a  meal,  but  leave  your  enemy  hungry ;
Never  forget  above  all  to  invite  your  next-door  neighbour :
For  you  know  that  if  things    go  wrong    and    there 's    need  for

help  in  the  village,
Neighbours  come  post  haste  while  kinsfolk  stop  to  put  cloaks  on.

To  have  a  little  coolness  with  your  cousin  does  not  matter,
but  anything  is  better  than  a  bad  neighbour  :  for  the  wiseacres  of
Ascra  know  by  experience  that

Anything    may  happen  to  the  ox   when  you're  on  bad  terms
with  the  neighbour.'"'

And  in  their  meditative  moments,  lying  out  on  the  hill-side  at
midday,  or  gathered  round  the  smithy  fire  on  winter  evenings,  as
they  think  over  what  they  saw  in  the  city  when  they  went  in  years
ago  to  settle  a  dispute,  they  are  glad  that  they  are  still  villagers.
City  life  is  too  dishonest  and  artificial  and  pretentious.  We  have
our  little  quarrels  at  Ascra  which  loom  large  for  the  moment.
A  new  potter  set  up  last  year  at  the  further  end  of  the  village,
and  his  rival's  temper  has  been  unendurable  ever  since.  There
is  trouble,  too,  among  the  carpenters.     The  younger  son  of  the

'  *  Up  in  the  village  '  :  Hesiod,  ir;-^'-^?  639.  'Down  in  the  city':  Od.  xii.
439,  viii.  40.  Alcinous  asks  all  the  other  sceptre-bearing  kings  to  his  palace.
Glotz,  Etudes,  p.  250,  points  out  that  the  palace  here  is  what  the  Piytaneum
was  at  Athens.  Distinguished  strangers  and  benefactors,  such  as  Socrates
claims  to  be  in  his  Apology,  were  entertained  there.  The  intermediate  link
is  supplied  by  the  stated  public  dinners  we  hear  of  at  Naucratis  (Hermias
frag.  2  in  Frag.  Hist.  Grace,  vol.  ii,  p.  80).  At  Cnidos  the  guildhall  where
the  magistrates  messed  was  called  the  baijuopyiov,  or  Public  Servants'  Hall.

2  Erga  342,  348.


CHAP.  Ill  THE    CITY   MAGISTRATE


91


old  man  who  has  the  land  near  the  hero's  barrow  has  just  set  up
a  second  joiner's  shop.  Hephaestus,  he  says,  should  really  be
the  god  for  him,  because  he  has  always  been  too  lame  for  field-
work  ;  but  he  owes  the  blacksmith  so  many  pleasant  hours  that
he  does  not  like  to  interfere  with  his  trade.  Besides,  the  present
carpenter  is  getting  old,  and  never  was  any  good  at  his  craft.
Those  images  he  made  last  holiday  were  a  disgrace  to  the  artistic
traditions  of  the  village.  We  should  never  have  got  inside  Troy
'\{  lie  had  had  the  making  of  the  wooden  horse. ^

All  this  is  very  harassing  sometimes,  especially  after  a  long
day's  work.  But  it  is  better  than  life  in  the  city,  where  men  are
too  grasping  to  settle,  with  their  own  help  and  the  gods',  a  plain
dispute  about  the  ownership  of  a  strip  of  borderland  or  the  mark
on  a  sheep's  back.  They  must  needs  go  to  law  and  spend  most
of  what  they  stand  to  gain  on  fees  to  a  lot  of  kings.

Babes !    who  never  have  learnt  that   a   half  is    more    than   a

whole  loaf;
Never  enjoyed  the  delights  of  a  mallow  and  asphodel  banquet,

which  is  better  and  homelier  far  than  the  high  feeding  and  min-
strelsy up  at  the  palace.^

Yet  these  comfortable  country  methods  had  perforce  to  give  way.
Disputes  cannot  always  be  settled  by  recourse  to  the  gods  and
ancient  custom.  Why  should  the  beaten  party  accept  so  hap-
hazard a  decision?  He  is  a  Greek  who  thinks  for  himself,  and
it  is  in  his  nature  to  accept  nothing  without  a  reason.  He
demands  an  impartial  human  arbitrator  who  can  exercise  his
judgement  with  intelligence  as  well  as  clothe  it  with  authority.
In  olden  days,  when  the  heads  of  families  and  brotherhoods
reigned  supreme,  their  words  were  a  binding  custom  (Oe/xiaTe^)
and  no  member  dreamed  of  disputing  them.  But  when  custom
conflicts  with  custom,  or  when  there  is  a  dispute  between  equals
on  a  question  of  fact,  some  newer  and  higher  authority  is  needed.
There  is  a  call  for  law.  And  who  so  fit  to  interpret  law— it  is
still  interpretation,  for  the  age  of  IsLW-wakers  is  not  yet— as  the
kings  in  whose  veins  runs  fresh  and  strong  the  blood  of  the
All-Father.     To-day  we  are  slowly  rising  to  the  conception  of

^  Erga  493  (note  the  distinction  between  sun-heat  and  fire-heat),  25.    At
this  time  statues  were  made  of  wood  {^6ava):  cf.  Hdt.  v.  82.
2  Ergcc  33-41.


92  POLITICS  PART  II

international  law,  the  only  basis  and  guarantee  of  international
organization.  Let  us  watch  how  the  poet  of  the  Tlicogony,  iti  his
smaller  world,  taught  men  to  take  the  longer  step,  not  from  the
nation  to  the  world  but  from  the  family  to  the  state.  The  words
that  are  falling  from  those  old  men's  lips  embody  not  ancient
right  (OijxLi),  but  something  totally  new  in  Greek   life — justice

(SlKT]).

'  Whomsoever,'  says  the  old  poet,  '  the  Muses,  the  daughters
of  Zeus,  see  fit  to  honour,  beholding  him  sprung  from  the  loins  of
Zeus-born  kings,  upon  his  tongue  they  pour  sweet  dew,  and  forth
from  his  mouth  flow  honey-sweet  words  :  upon  him  all  the  people
gaze  as  he  gives  binding  decisions,  clear  and  just.  This  man,
with  his  knowledge  and  with  sureness  of  speech,  can  abate  in
a  moment  even  the  mightiest  contention.  For  to  this  end  were
kings  granted  wisdom,  that  they  might  bring  redress  in  the
market-place  to  men  of  the  people  who  suffer  wrong,  quietly  and
easily,  persuading  them  with  gentle  words.  As  he  walks  to  and
fro  in  the  city  they  seek  his  favour  as  they  would  a  god's,  softly
and  reverently,  and  his  head  is  high  in  the  assembly.  Such  is
the  holy  gift  of  the  Muses  to  mankind.  For  from  the  Muses,
daughters  of  Zeus,  and  from  far-darting  Apollo,  come  singers  and
harpers  upon  the  earth,  and  from  Zeus,  too,  come  kings ;  and  he
is  blessed  whom  the  Muses  love,  and  sweet  is  the  voice  that
flows  from  his  mouth.'  ^

This  is  the  poet's  account  of  how  a  strong  government  first
arose  among  Greeks.  It  explains  in  the  poet's  way  why  the
mediaeval  Greeks  gathered  in  cities  and  gladly  hearkened  to  their
new  magistrates,  founding  that  tradition  of  '  obedience  to  whoso-
ever is  set  in  authority',  which  remained  an  integral  part  of  the
City  State  tradition  long  after  the  halo  which  encircled  these  early
kings  had  gone  the  way  of  most  other  superstitions.  But  we
have  another  account  in  plain  prose  by  the  prince  of  story-tellers,
in  one  of  those  political  allegories  of  which,  like  Abimelech  and
Menenius  Agrippa  and  other  early  political  thinkers,  Herodotus
was  so  fond.     It  is  entitled  '  How  the  Medes  got  their  Kings ',

'  Hesiod,  Theog.  81-97.  Judges  are  said  to  be  inspired  by  the  Muses
because  they  remember  precedents  :  'full  of  wise  saws  and  modern  instances.'
In  the  same  way  the  Registrars  (keepers  of  archives,  contracts,  &c.)  were
often  called  '  Remembrancers'  iixfiifioves) ;  before  writing  came  into  use  their
memory  was  the  real  State  Archive.


CHAP.  Ill  THE   CITY   MAGISTRATE  93

but  there  is  nothing  Median  in  it  but  the  names.  The  rest  is
pure  Greek,  as  the  audience  slowly  began  to  realize  when  the
story  drew  on  to  its  inevitable  climax  ;  but  the  scientific  modern
reader  must  be  careful  as  usual  to  distinguish  (as  a  good  story-
teller finds  it  so  hard  to  do)  between  designed  and  undesigned
consequences.

'  Now  there  lived  in  Media  a  certain  wise  man  named  Deioccs,
son  of  Phraortes.  This  Deioccs  conceived  a  passion  to  become
king,  and  this  is  how  he  achieved  his  wish.  The  Medes  of  that
time  lived  scattered  about  in  villages.  Deioces,  who  had  already
won  honour  in  his  own  district,  showed  himself  continually  zealous
in  the  promotion  of  justice.  This  he  did,  since  at  that  time  there
prevailed  great  lawlessness  throughout  the  whole  of  Media,  know-
ing that  justice  and  injustice  must  ever  be  enemies.  The  Medes
of  his  own  village,  marking  his  ways,  chose  him  to  be  their  judge  ;
and  he,  being  desirous  of  the  chief  power,  was  clear  and  upright
in  his  judgements.  By  this  means  he  won  no  small  praise  from
the  citizens,  so  that  the  men  from  the  other  villages,  who  had
hitherto  been  oppressed  by  wicked  decisions,  came  gladly  them-
selves to  Deioces  for  judgement,  until  at  last  none  would  go  before
any  other  judge.  As  the  concourse  became  ever  greater  and
greater,  since  men  heard  that  his  decisions  were  rightfully  given,
Deioces,  perceiving  that  everything  was  passing  into  his  hands,
gave  it  out  that  he  would  no  longer  sit  where  he  had  been  used
to  sit,  saying  that  he  would  deliver  no  more  judgements,  for  it  was
not  worth  his  while  to  neglect  his  own  affairs  and  to  sit  judging
for  his  neighbours  from  morning  to  night.  When  after  this,
therefore,  robbery  and  lawlessness  prevailed  far  more  widely  than
ever  before  among  the  villages,  the  Medes  assembled  together  to
discuss  the  affairs  of  their  nation.  And  then,  as  I  suppose,  the
friends  of  Deioces  took  the  lead  in  the  argument.  "  It  is  not
possible  for  us  to  go  on  dwelling  in  the  land  as  it  is  now.  Come,
let  us  set  up  a  king  over  us,  so  that  the  land  may  be  well
governed,  and  we  may  turn  to  our  own  labours,  and  no  longer
suffer  havoc  at  the  hands  of  law^less  men."  By  some  such  words
they  persuaded  them  to  accept  a  kingly  government.  Thereupon,
when  they  put  forward  names  as  to  whom  they  should  set  up  as
king,  the  name  of  Deioces  was  put  forward  and  commended  by
every  man  present,  so  that  at  last  they  agreed  that  he  should  be

1240  G


94  POLITICS  PART  II

their  king.  And  he  bade  them  build  him  a  dwelling  suitable  to
his  kingship,  and  give  him  guards  for  the  security  of  his  person.
When  he  had  received  the  chief  power  he  compelled  the  Medes
to  establish  a  single  city  and,  having  provided  all  things  needful
for  it,  to  think  less  of  the  other  townships.'  *

Here  we  can  trace  every  stage  in  the  growth  of  the  influence
of  state  law.  F"irst  Deioces  is  only  a  casual  arbitrator,  chosen
on  grounds  of  respect  and  reputation,  to  settle  a  chance  quarrel
between  two  fellow  villagers.  In  the  same  way  the  King  of
England  has  occasionally  adjudicated  between  two  lesser  states,
and  disinterested  public  men  are  sometimes  called  in  to
settle  labour  disputes.  Then  the  arbitrator  comes  to  be  generally
recognized  as  a  person  of  guaranteed  impartiality,  and  his
judgement-seat  becomes  the  favourite  place  of  resort  for  dis-
putants in  difficult  cases.  This  is  the  position  of  the  Hague
tribunal  to-day.  Next  Deioces  turns  his  judgement-seat  into
a  court  in  permanent  session,  superseding  all  others  of  the  same
kind.  This  stage  will  probably  be  reached  at  the  next  Hague
Conference.  Lastly,  it  is  transformed  from  a  court  of  arbitration,
to  which  disputants  may,  if  they  wish,  submit  their  case,  to  a  court
of  law  whose  judgements  they  are  forced  to  accept.  At  this
stage  Deioces  becomes  a  tyrant :  for  whether  the  quarrel  ruffled
pride  or  wounded  honour,  or  was  only  a  plain  dispute  on  a  question
of  fact,  men  had  no  choice  but  to  bring  it  to  him.  City  law  has
abolished  fisticuffs,  as  international  law  will  some  day  abolish  war.^

Here  we  might  leave  the  City  State,  efficiently  launched,  with
its  first  strong  governors  at  the  helm,  to  face  the  dangers  that
have  beset  the  government  of  the  few  in  all  ages.  But  there  is
one  more  point  to  be  explained  before  we  can  talk  at  our  ease
with  the  men  in  that  Homeric  market-place  which  first  roused
our  curiosity.  It  concerns  the  most  remarkable  and  difficult  of
the  achievements  of  these  early  magistrates — the  intrusion  of  their
jurisdiction  into  the  sphere  of  what  we  know  as  the  criminal  law\
Aeschylus  wrote  his  Trilogy  to  show  us  what  a  great  advance  of
the  human  spirit  the  first  city  criminal  court  embodied ;  but  we

1  Hdt.  i.  96.

"^  The  pioneers  of  town  life  and  state  justice,  like  Deioces  or  Theseus  (or
the  Roman  Nunia  and  Servius  Tullius),  must  not  of  course  be  confused  with
the  later  '  tyrants',  who  did  all  they  could  to  discourage  town  life  and  send
people  '  back  to  the  land  '.     They  come  much  later  in  the  development.


CHAP,  iir  TIIK    CITY    MAGISTRATE  9;,

are  so  used  to  State  justice  that  \vc  prefer  tlic  iiuirdcr  to  the  trial —
the  Agamemnon  to  the  linmcnidcs — and  think  liis  lesson  an  anti-
climax. It  is  not  so  very  difficult  after  all — once  they  have
lighted  on  the  idea — for  men  to  agree  to  bring  a  simple  ([uarrcl
about  mcnm  and  /////;;/  before  Alcinous  or  Deioccs.  But  when
blood  has  been  shed  or  primitive  taboos  infringed  things  bear
a  different  aspect.  There  are  passions  to  be  slaked  and  ghosts  to
be  appeased  and  rites  to  be  performed,  before  the  deed  is  ex-
piated. An  age-long  custom,  which  even  Apollo  dare  not  disre-
gard, preaches  to  all  the  house  of  the  member  sinned  against  the
bounden  duty  of  vendetta— an  eye  for  an  eye  and  a  life  for  a  life.
If  the  offence  is  committed  within  the  circle  of  the  family  the
family  can  deal  with  it  out  of  its  own  resources.  The  'jurisdiction
of  the  father '  went  on  in  Greece,  as  at  Rome,  side  by  side  with
state  law,  all  through  the  City-State  period,  as  it  still  goes  on  in
China.  'Thou  shalt  not  commit  adultery'  was  in  Greece  not
merely,  as  with  us,  a  command  to  the  conscience,  a  moral  rule
with  the  breach  of  which  the  courts  are  only  indirectly  concerned,
but  a  law.  But  that  law  was  neither  made  nor  enforced  by  the
state.  The  city  was  slow  to  interfere  with  the  inner  doings  of  the
household,  and  even  its  '  Thou  shalt  not  murder '  was  never
applied,  even  in  enlightened  Athens,  to  new-born  infants.^

But  if  the  murderer  is  not  one  of  us,  how  are  we  to  deal  with
him  ?  He  is  outside  our  family  and  brotherhood.  There  has
never  been,  or  there  subsists  no  longer,  any  bond  of  law  or  custom
between  our  people  and  his.  By  the  act  of  murder  he  has  set  up
a  state  of  war.  We  are  not  merely  his  enemies  but  the  enemies  of
all  his  kin,  who  are  collectively  responsible  for  the  evil  he
does.  It  is  war  to  the  bitter  end  between  Orsini  and  Colonna,
between  Montagu  and  Capulet  ;  and  it  is  bound  to  go  on  till  due
expiation  has  been  made  (and  the  debt  is  for  ever  accumulating)
or  till  one  or  other  has  been  rooted  out.  The  sins  of  the  older
generation  live  on.  Their  sons  arc  born,  like  Orestes,  into
a  heritage  of  blood-feud.  '  The  fathers  have  eaten  sour  grapes
and  the  children's  teeth  are  set  on  edge.'

The  Jewish  spirit  fought  a  long  and  bitter  struggle  with  the

^  For  the  list  of  rights  which  made  up  the  palria  potesias  see  Fustel  de
Coulanges  (ed.  1906),  p.  98.  It  died,  of  course,  far  harder  in  Rome  than  in
Athens,  or  indeed  in  Greece  generally.  For  China  see  note  at  end  of
chapter.

G  2


g6  POLITICS  part  li

idea  of  collective  responsibility  ;  and  Aeschylus,  who,  in  his  day,
was  a  reformer  too,  wrote  his  Trilogy  in  order  to  root  it  finally
and  triumphantly  out  of  the  minds  of  his  Athenians.  But  it  was
not  so  easy  to  turn  the  Furies  into  the  kindly  Goddesses  and
conduct  them  in  procession  to  their  new  home  beneath  the  Areo-
pagus. The  criminal  court  on  Ares'  Hill  was  not  set  up  in  a  day.
This  great  and  characteristic  invention  of  Athena — first  of  women
la\v}ers — was  the  fruit  (like  most  '  inventions ')  of  a  long  and
painful  development  of  which  we  have  but  intermittent  glimpses.
The  Greek  spirit  took  centuries  to  shake  off  the  barbarities  of  the
vendetta.

The  Iliad  of  course  is  a  tale  of  vendetta,  an  incident,  as
Herodotus  puts  it,  in  a  long  course  of  reprisals  between  rival
tribes.  But  it  is  a  tale  of  Greece,  not  of  Corsica,  and  gives  us
many  a  glimpse,  as  Gilbert  Murray  has  shown  us,  of  how  its
story  outlived  itself.  We  can  feel  the  breezes  of  humanity  blow-
ing in  to  purify  the  atmosphere  of  the  blood-feud.  We  are  at
a  stage  of  development  at  which  clans  no  longer  fight  till,  in  the
old  Roman  phrase,  they  have  '  extirpated  their  enemies  root  and
branch  ',  but  are  content  to  be  reconciled  after  a  fair  and  chivalrous
ordeal.  And  we  can  watch  in  these  ceremonies  of  peace-making,
where  each  side  reverently  and  tolerantly  accepts  the  pious  usages
of  its  adversaries,  the  beginning,  both  in  the  letter  and  the  spirit,
of  international  law.  For  in  all  societies  in  all  ages  the  law  of
the  larger  unit  tends  to  be  held  in  less  esteem  than  that  of  the
smaller,  and  progress  consists  in  making  the  spirit  of  the  smaller,
with  its  appropriate  ideas  and  customs,  transmute  and  inspire  the
larger.  The  oaths  and  the  libations,  the  sacrifices  and  the
banquets  of  the  Iliad,  are  family  ceremonies  transferred,  as  in  the
peace-making  between  Achilles  and  Agamemnon,  to  a  wider
sphere.  The  two  are  not  born  friends,  they  are  made  friends.
What  makes  them  friends  ?  Partly  the  mere  communion  or
sacrament  of  the  common  meal.  They  have  dined  together  and
like  rival  modern  politicians,  they  can  never  feel  so  bitter  or  mis-
understand or  misrepresent  one  another  so  harshly  again.  It  is
like  the  handshake  between  buyer  and  vendor  in  the  Eastern
bazaar,  when  after  a  long  and  lying  wrangle  they  have  come  to
an  agreement — or  what  the  modern  Greeks  call  a  '  symphony ' — ■
upon  their  price.     But,  more  than  that,  it  is  the  feeling  that  they


CHAP.  Ill  TITE  CITY    I\IAGISTRATI<:


97


have  each  become  'members  of  one  another',  parts  loL;cth(r  of
a  larger  whole.  F"or  the  word  w^e  translate  '  friend  '  or  '  dear  one  ',
the  word  the  Greeks  use  in  these  ceremonies  of  '  making  friends  ',
has  a  subtler  and  more  intimate  meaning.  It  means  not  '  my
friend  '  or  '  my  dear ',  but  '  my  own  '.  When  a  Homeric  hero  talks
of  his  'dear  knees'  and  his  'dear  spirit'  he  is  not  talking  affectedly,
as  we  might  say  '  my  poor  head  '.  He  means  his  own  knees  and
spirit,  which  are,  as  we  say,  '  near  and  dear  to  him  ' — perhaps,
if  he  is  fighting  in  desperate  case,  almost  the  only  things  he  has
left.  'A  Homeric  man,'  says  a  recent  writer,  '  calls  his  wife  or  his
house  "  dear  "  because  they  belong  to  him.  His  heart  has  nothing
to  do  with  it.'  That  is  why  when  Homer  wants  to  say  '  dear  '  in  our
sense  he  is  obliged  to  be  precise  and  say  '  dear  to  my  heart '.  A
stranger,  therefore,  becomes  '  dear  '  only  when,  by  some  ritual
ceremony,  he  has  become  part  of  a  man's  own  society,  or  is  bound
to  him  by  some  definite  agreement.  So  Hector  and  Achilles,
when  they  make  an  arrangement  before  their  duel  as  to  the
disposal  of  the  victim's  body,  are  '  friends '  for  the  moment.
With  such  an  intrusion  as  this  of  the  forms  of  peace  into  the  usage
of  warfare  the  days  of  the  vendetta  were  already  numbered.'

Let  us  watch  it  disappearing.  The  first  resistance  it  met  with
was  not  active  but  passive.  One  day,when  a  murderer  fled  home  for
refuge,  a  Greek  dared  to  say  aloud  'Am  I  my  brother's  keeper?'
The  family  listened  and  thought  it  over — and  refused  to  go  to  war.

1  Iliad  vii.  302  and  Glotz,  Etudes,  pp.  21-2.  Cf.  //.  ix.  115,  where  Aga-
memnon not  only  offers  Achilles  'unlimited  reparation  '  of  a  material  kind,
but  is  prepared  to  compensate  him  for  '  moral  and  intellectual  damaj^es  '
by  '  making  a  clean  breast  of  it '  (as  our  language  expressively  puts  it)  in  the
most  generous  manner.  aauu\ir]v  {II.  ix.  116,  119)  really  needs  a  strong
expletive  to  render  its  full  meaning  in  plain  English  prose.  For  Herodotus
on  the  Iliad  see  i,  chaps.  1-4.  His  fifth-century  mind  cannot  see  why  men
bothered  to  keep  up  the  reprisals  for  the  carrying  ofl'of  lo,  Medea,  and  Helen,
for  '  it  is  clear  they  would  never  have  been  carried  off  if  they  had  not  been
ready  to  go'.  It  is  interesting  to  watch  the  use  made  of  the  conception  of
'dearness'  (^tXoTvs)  in  the  debates  of  the  Peloponnesian  War.  The  natural
relation  between  Athens  and  her  allies  is  one  of  fellow  membership,  as  the
P'uneral  Speech  says  (ii.  40.  4).  It  is  therefore  quite  logical  and  (accepting
Athens  as  Head  of  the  Family)  quite  just  that  the  rebellious  Mytilcncans
should  be  punished  with  all  the  severity  that  a  '  tyrant '  or  master  of  a  house-
hold had  at  his  command.  This  is  how  Cleon  argues,  from  the  high  moral
point  of  view  of  many  masters  before  and  since  (iii.  40).  His  opponent
Diodotus  eschews  moral  arguments  and  the  judicial  traditions  of  the  house-
hold altogether  and  simply  discusses  the  expediency  of  the  proposed  action.
His  speech  is  very  impious,  but  also  very  enlightened.  The  one  thing  it  is
not  is  (what  it  looks  at  first  sight)  cynical.


98  POLITICS  PART  II

Let  him  suffer  for  his  own  act.  As  he  sinned  alone,  let  him  go
forth  alone  to  meet  his  own  enemies.  So  they  closed  the  doors  on
him  and  on  mercy  and  sent  him  to  his  doom.  There  is  only  one
hope  for  him  now — a  new  and  impartial  tribunal.

But  something  more  was  required  to  hearten  patriarchal  man
to  this  act  of  progress  and  impiety.  It  was  supplied  by  the
appearance  of  a  new  religious  theory,  that  of  the  physical  horror
and  infection  of  blood-guiltiness.  It  is  a  novel  idea.  We  do  not
find  it  in  the  Homeric  poems ;  Telemachus  on  his  way  home  from
Sparta  ships  a  murderer  as  a  passenger  without  a  qualm  of  mis-
giving. Like  many  other  novel  doctrines,  especially  in  the  sphere
of  religion,  it  was  at  once  socially  convenient  and  held  with
intense  moral  earnestness.  We  read  the  story  of  Oedipus  and
think  of  the  polluted  beggar-king,  whose  innocent  intentions
Sophocles  is  at  such  pains  to  bring  out,  as  a  primitive  figure,
victim,  as  some  of  the  later  Greeks  held,  of  an  unreasonable
superstition.  It  is  primitive  perhaps  to  us,  but  it  was  not  primi-
tive to  Greece.  The  real  primitive  Greeks,  the  men  of  the  earlier
Iliad,  lived  too  much  in  the  atmosphere  of  feud  and  danger  to  feel
repugnance  at  bloodshed.  The  everyday  happenings  of  one  age
became  the  fairy-tales  of  the  next  but  one.  Herodotus  and  his
fifth-century  audience  were  as  fond  as  the  men  of  the  Iliad  of
hearing  tales  of  murder  ;  but  in  the  stories  that  he  told  them,  as
in  the  Arabian  Nights,  the  murderers  are  not  expected  to  feel
remorse,  because  they  never  really  existed.  Men  had  completely
forgotten  that  in  the  earliest  version  of  one  of  their  favourite
legends  Oedipus  killed  his  father,  married  his  mother,  and  even
after  he  had  made  these  two  dire  discoveries  was  allowed  to  con-
tinue living  among  his  fellow  men  and  to  go  on  ruling  over
Thebes.^

*  Od.  xi.  27 1  ff.  (earliest  version  of  Oedipus  story )  ;  OcL  xv.  222  ff.,  especially
257  (before  the  idea  of  blood-guiltiness  has  arisen) ;  Hdt.  iii.  50-3  (a  tale  of
its  obstinate  survival)..  For  the  conception  of  blood-guiltiness  (tirst  found,
according  to  Glotz,  Etudes,  p.  39,  in  the  second  half  of  the  eighth  century)
see  Wilamowitz's  introductions  to  his  translations  of  the  Euinenides  and  the
Oedipus  I'yrannus.  In  the  latter  he  points  out  how  the  'church-going
Sophocles',  unlike  the  intellectuals  round  him,  held  strongly  to  the  traditional
ideas  of  blood-guiltiness,  yet  emphasizes  throughout  in  every  detail  the  inno-
cence of  Oedipus's  motives.  Herein  precisely  lies  the  tragedy.  Sophocles'
difficulty  is  the  problem  of  suffering,  as  Aeschylus's  is  the  problem  oi  sin.
Familiarity  with  bloodshed  is  apt  to  produce  a  strange  callousness  even
among  men  brought  up  amid  civilized  conditions,  as  any  one  may  observe


CHAP.  Ill  THE   CITY    MAGISTRATl':


99


Between  that  early  talc  of  Oedipus  and  ihc  i^iiy  and  unblushing'
short  stories  of  Herodotus  lies  the  age  of  blood-guiltiness,  when
the  impiety  of  bloodshed  lay  heavy  on  men's  minds  and  insi)ircd
them  with  something  like  a  real  physical  revulsion  against  the
murderer  and  the  homicide.  They  have  stained  their  hands  in
human  life-blood  and  not  all  the  perfumes  of  Arabia  can  wash
them  clean.  They  must  be  cut  off  forthwith  from  the  common
life  of  men,  till  the  god  has  found  them  a  way  out  and  has  cleansed
them  solemnly  from  their  guilt.  We  know  that  stage  of  feeling
about  offences  against  society,  for  it  still  lingers  on  in  our  midst
from  our  own  Middle  Ages.  It  would  not  be  hard  to  point  to
offences  for  which  society  still  preserves  the  mediaeval  bell,  book,
and  candle,  which  are  scandalous  in  general  without  being  blame-
worthy in  the  particular  case.  To  thinking  modern  minds  the
interdict  is  a  barbarous  and  uncivilized  institution.  But  it  is
more  advanced  and  more  humane  than  that  which  it  replaced.
For,  in  the  slow  process  by  which  society  affixes  individual  re-
sponsibility, there  is  a  stage  at  which  '  it  is  expedient  that  one
man  should  die  for  the  people,  and  that  the  whole  nation  perish
not '}

in  the  literature  of  modern  warfare  and  exploration.  There  was  no  sense  of
blood-guiltiness  among  King  Leopold's  Congo  administrators,  many  of  whom
must  have  '  reverted '  to  the  level  of  the  savages  they  oppressed.  This,
together  with  the  mental  habits  of  our  civilized  stay-at-homes,  is  raising  up
serious  difficulties  in  the  colonial  policy  of  modern  democratic  states.  A  city-
dwelling  public  finds  it  easier  to  see  Africa  through  a  haze  of  story-book
romance  than  to  use  its  own  imagination  on  the  facts.  Thus  a  taste  for
exciting  fiction  actually  makes  it  harder  for  a  civilized  democracy  to  govern
an  uncivilized  empire  justly— and  the  better  the  fiction  the  greater  the
difficulty.  This  was  as  true  in  Rome  of  Caesar's  Commentaries,  which,
though  not  fiction,  were  probably  deliberately  written  for  the  'man  in  the
Italian  verandah',  as  it  is  of  Soldiers  Tlirce  and  King  So/omon's  Mi/us.
The  best  of  these  blood-curdling  stories  in  Herodotus  is  *  Rhampsinitus  and
the  Thieves  ',  a  tale  of  fratricide  and  mutilation  and  midnight  meetings,
where  the  hero  ends  by  marrying  the  king's  daughter.  It  is  interesting  as
showing  that  even  Herodotus's  enlightened  listeners  still  felt  uneasy  about
unburied  corpses  ;  it  is  all  in  the  day's  work  to  kill  your  brother,  but  you
simply  must  get  him  buried.  Are  there  any  similar  '  No  thoroughfare '  posts
in  the  modern  reader's  mind  ?  Probably  not,  if  the  subject  is  treated  with
sufficient  absence  of  seriousness.  '  Rhampsinitus  and  the  Thieves'  is  also
interesting  as  revealing  the  germ  of  the  modern  detective  story.  Hut
Herodotus's  audience  had  not  yet  reached  the  pitch  of  sophistication  and
respectability  attained  by  our  modern  city-dwellers  ;  its  natural  sympathies
are  with  the  thief,  who  therefore  defeats  all  efforts  at  detection.

^  See  this  point  of  view  clearly  put,  in  connexion  with  the  familiar  Aga-
memnon murders,  by  Clytemnestra's  respectable  old  father  in  Eur.  Or.  500.
Orestes'  right  course  would  have  been  to  drive  his  mother  out.     To  kill  her


lOO  POLITICS  PART  II

But  if  this  ritualistic  conception  of  crime  is  at  a  certain  stage
expedient,  it  is,  as  we  shall  see  in  a  moment,  still  very  far  from
being  moral.  It  is  not  surprising  that,  then  as  now,  it  should  lend
itself  easily  to  unscrupulous  piety  and  to  the  sophistries  of  priest
and  soothsayer.  If  the  Agamemnon  shows  us  the  stained  and
innocent  figure  of  the  prophetess  Cassandra,  who  shrank  from  the
blood-stained  halls  of  the  son  of  Atreus  as  from  a  charnel  house,
it  tells  us  also  of  the  prophet  Calchas,  who  murdered  or  rather
'  sacrificed  '  Iphigenia.  Thucydides  preserves  a  typical  instance
of  this  ritualism.  Alcmaeon  the  son  of  Amphiaraus  had  killed
his  mother.  Apollo  supplies  him  with  a  prescription  to  cure  his
infection.  He  is  to  search  all  Greece  for  a  land  which  was  not
being  shone  on  by  the  sun  when  the  murder  was  committed.  He
has  wit  enough  to  solve  the  riddle,  and  settles  down  and  lives
happy  ever  after  as  king  of  Oeneadae  on  the  new  alluvial  flats  at
the  mouth  of  the  Achelous.  Herodotus  is  even  more  light-
hearted.  He  tells  us  of  a  Phrygian  who  arrived  at  the  Court  of
Croesus  with  polluted  hands,  having  suffered  a  family  misfortune.
'  O  King,'  he  says,  '  I  am  the  son  of  a  friend  of  yours  and  I  have
had  to  leave  home  because  I  killed  my  brother.'  '  You  are  come
to  friends,'  replies  Croesus, '  among  whom  you  shall  want  nothing.
Take  your  misfortune  as  lightly  as  possible,  and  you  will  find
yourself  best  off.'  ^

But  not  every  one  was  so  fortunate  as  Alcmaeon  in  washing  off
his  infection  and  finding  a  refuge  from  his  murderers.  If  the
murdered  man  is  rejected  by  his  kinsfolk  there  is  as  yet  no
expiation.  The  vendetta  continues.  Only  it  is  war  against  an
individual  instead  of  war  against  a  clan.

It  is  at  this  point,  apparently,  that  the  City  State  and  its
magistrates  first  intervened  decisively  in  criminal  affairs.  We
know  little  of  the  details.  But  one  interesting  document  has
come  to  light  which  reveals  these  early  magistrates  trying  to
grapple  with  their  new  responsibilities.  It  embodies  the  first
City  State  regulations  we  know  of — the  parent  of  those  of  which
Pericles  speaks  at  Athens — '  in  relief  of  those  who  are  being
oppressed  '.     It  is  an  inscription  incised  on  a  thin  plate  of  bronze

only  made  matters  worse.     Interdict  :  Soph.  O.  T.  236  ;  A/tL  203  :  it  issues
of  course  from  the  State,  not  from  the  Church.

'  Thuc.  ii.  102;  Hdt.  i.  35.  The  Odyssey  (xv.  247)  knows  nothing  of
Alcmaeon's  wanderings.     Aesch.  Ai![.  1309,  131 1,  122-59.


CHAiMii  THE    CITY    MAGISTRATE  loi

which  was  discovered  at  Olympia  in  iHHo.  It  runs  as  follows :
'  Peace  and  safety  to  the  fatherland,  the  family,  and  the  fjoods  of
the  accursed  !  If  any  one  has  issued  a  sacred  proclamation
against  a  man  of  Elis  who  is  in  enjoyment  of  civic  rights,  should
the  supreme  magistrate  and  the  kings  fail  to  apply  the  means
of  right,  let  each  of  them  who  have  incurred  the  forfeit  pay  ten
minae  to  the  sacred  treasure  of  Olympian  Zeus.'  Then  follow
some  difficult  details,  and  the  inscription  closes  with  the  words,
*  the  tablet  is  sacred  to  the  gods  at  Olympia.'  ^

The  whole  document  is  only  ten  lines  long ;  but  every  crabbed
Doric  word  in  it  is  precious.  Here  is  the  state  of  Elis  throwing
its  aegis  over  any  Alcmaeon  or  Orestes  among  its  citizens  and
decreeing  penalties  against  its  magistrates  should  they  fail  to
secure  him  a  fair  trial.  Amongst  these  magistrates  is  one  called
a  Sijfxiovpyos  or  public  worker.  It  is  the  same  name  as  the  early
Greeks  applied  to  their  craftsmen — the  smith  who  kept  the  village
in  horseshoes  and  the  potter  who  kept  them  in  water-jugs.  This
inscription  explains  why  we  find  a  magistrate  in  such  company.
He  too  is  a  man  who  performs  public  as  opposed  to  private  ser-
vices, for  he  takes  the  side  of  the  State  as  against  the  tribe  and
the  clan.  The  name  lasted  on  as  a  memory  of  a  great  step
forward  in  Greek  political  life.^

^  *  Laws  in  relief  of  those  who  arc  being  oppressed  '  (the  present  tense  has
puzzled  some  commentators)  are  grouped  with  'unwritten  laws'  in  Thuc.  ii.
37.  5,  For  the  Olympia  inscription  and  full  commentary  see  Glotz,  Solidaritc,
pp.  248  ff.

"^  drjiiinvpy 01  as  magistrates  :  Thuc.  v.  47.  9,  i.  56.  2  ;  /.  G.  A.  112,  471,  544,
and  esp.  506,  where  we  find  a  woman  8tjfiiovpy6i  (at  Aspendos,  second  cent.
H.C.).  Full  list  in  Pauly,s.  v.  8r]fitovpyik  is  derived  from  Srjfxios,  'public',  not
drjfxns  '  people'.  The  distinction  between  public  and  private  duty  is  a  familiar
one  to  the  Greeks  of  this  age  :  e.  g.  Od.  iii.  82  (Telemachus  is  travelling  on
private  not  public  business:  so  iv.  314).  Homer's  '  public  workers '  include
soothsayers,  doctors,Joiners,  poets, singers,  and  heralds,  but  on  consideration  he
rejects  beggars  (Od.  xvii.  383,  xix.  134).  But  the  most  interesting  mention  of
Srjuiovpyoi  is  in  an  inscription  found  at  Mycenae  (given  in  Wilamowitz,  A..1.
vol.  ii,  p.  48)  which  provides  that,  where  there  is  no  magistracy,  certain
UpniJLvijiJLovfs  (i.  e.  religious  officials)  are  to  act  as  judges.  This  suggests  an
obvious  question.  Why  did  not  the  religious  authorities  step  in,  as  in  Israel,
to  act  as  the  interpreters  and  then  the  makers  or  revealers  of  law.'  Why  did
not  Olympia  or  Delphi  become  like  Jerusalem  or  mediaeval  Kome?  Instead
the  whole  development  of  Greek  political  institutions  (with  which,  of  course,
official  religion  was  intimately  bound  up)  was  in  a  secular  direction.  Greek
political  thought  from  Solon  to  Aristotle  was  equally  secular.  They
preferred  laymen  to  priests,  and  thinking  about  this  world  to  getting  rcaciy
for  the  next.


102  POLITICS  PART  II

'  For  this  Olympian  inscription,'  says  the  French  scholar  to
whom  we  owe  its  elucidation^  '  is  of  inestimable  value,  not  merely
for  the  study  of  Greek  law,  not  merely  for  the  study  of  compara-
tive law,  but  still  more  for  its  place  in  the  history  of  the  funda-
mental ideas  on  which  modern  societies  repose.  When  the  great
historian  of  Israel  (Renan)  reaches  in  his  narrative  the  reforms
carried  out  by  the  Hebrew  code  of  622,  after  having  emphasized
the  capital  importance  of  the  rule  abolishing  vicarious  punishment,
he  turns  to  Greece  to  ask  her  what  she  has  at  that  moment  to
set  against  the  dawn  of  justice  which  has  risen  over  Jerusalem.
Well,  Greece  need  not  be  ashamed  of  facing  the  comparison.
She  can  not  only  point  to  the  code  of  Draco,  which  is.  for  all  its
stringency  to  the  individual,  a  milestone  on  the  road  of  progress.
She  can  point  besides  to  this  authentic  document  from  her  past
in  which,  perhaps  in  the  same  year  as  the  men  of  the  East,  the
men  of  the  West  declare  that  they  will  no  longer  see  the  son
punished  for  the  father,  and  proclaim  the  great  principle  of
individual  responsibility.  '"'  The  tablet  is  sacred  to  the  gods  at
Olympia."  Yes,  this  tablet  is  sacred.  For  the  decree  of  the
government  of  Elis  forms,  together  with  the  book  of  Deuteronomy,
a  double  link  in  the  chain  of  gold  which  ends  in  the  Declaration
of  the  Rights  of  Man.'  ^

But  it  is  high  time  we  passed  on  from  rights  to  duties.

'  Glotz,  So/idan'te,  p.  259.  The  transition  from  family  to  state  justice  is
going  on  in  China  at  the  present  moment,  and  it  is  interesting  to  hear  what
it  looks  like  at  close  quarters.  A  well-informed  writer  in  the  Naiion  (Dec.  25,
1909I,  discussing  the  proposed  new  State  Courts  of  Justice  to  be  set  up  there,
remarks  :  '  The  question  faces  us  :  How  far  will  the  Government  be  able  to
enforce  its  penal  code  upon  the  villages,  and  sweep  into  the  new  Courts  of
Justice  forms  of  lawlessness  that  have  been  dealt  with  in  the  villages  by  the
elders  themselves  for  scores  of  generations  ?  The  village  elders  are  really
magistrates  chosen  by  the  heads  of  the  groups  of  families  in  which  they  live,
without  the  intervention  of  either  a  Lord  Chancellor  or  Lord  Lieutenants  of
the  counties,  and  they  sometimes  inflict  death  sentences.  .  .  .  My  impression
is  that  village  justice  which  arises  from  the  all  but  absolute  power  of  the
parent  for  life  or  death  over  children  and  descendants  is  better  than  that  of
the  official  courts.  If  I  were  a  Chinaman  I  should  prefer  trial  by  a  bench
of  great-uncles  and  a  grandfather  to  trial  in  some  of  the  Yamens  into  which
I  have  had  glimpses.'


CHAPTER   IV

THE    ELEMENTS    OF    CITIZENSHIP

GENTLENESS,   OR   THE   RULE   OF    RELIGION

(crco^poavvr])

(TTfpyoi  be  fif  (Ta)(f)f)0(Tvi'n,

Saprjfxa  KtiWia-Tov  OfSiv. — EURIPIDES,  .^ft'dea  636.

Give  unto  us  made  lowly  wise

The  spirit  of  self-sacrifice. — WORDSWORTH.

We  have  seen  how  the  Greeks  gradually  learnt  to  be  citizens
and  to  submit  themselves  to  the  rule  of  authorized  magistrates.
We  have  now  to  examine  the  problems  and  hardships  in  which
their  submission  involved  them,  and  to  watch  their  long  struggle
to  free  themselves  from  the  yoke  that  they  had  thus  accepted.
For  it  was  here  that  the  growing  City  State  gained  an  experience
of  difficulties,  and  acquired  qualities  of  statesmanship,  which  left
a  permanent  mark  upon  her  spirit  and  history  in  the  fifth  centur)-.

The  record  of  civilized  States  seems  to  show  that  no  sub-
division of  the  community,  either  a  dynasty  or  a  rank  or  a  class
or  an  army  or  a  priesthood,  is  sufficiently  well  informed  or  wise
or  tolerant  or  unselfish  to  be  entrusted  for  long,  without  control
or  responsibility,  with  the  powers  and  temptations  of  government.
The  Greeks  learnt  this  lesson  from  their  Zeus-born  aristocracy.
They  were  not,  as  is  often  said,  democrats  by  nature:  they
became  so  by  necessity.  By  nature,  environment,  and  tradition
they  believed  in  equality  and  fraternity.  It  was  a  slow  and  pain-
ful development  which  drove  them  to  self-government.

So  long  as  the  tribunal  of  Deioces  was  only  a  place  of  arbitra-
tion, he  had  every  reason  to  judge  justly,  for  if  his  decisions  were
unfair  he  would  lose  his  custom.  It  is  when  his  authority  became
binding  that  the  temptation  began,  and  the  instrument  of  efficiency
became  the  handy  tool  of  oppression.

We  cannot  trace  the  process  in  detail.  But  we  know  its  con-
sequences. They  are  writ  large  in  the  history  of  seventh-century
Greece.     It  is  with  them  and  the  painful  crisis  they  ushered  in


I04  POLITICS  PART  II

that  our  narrative  records  of  Greek  history  begin.  The  curtain
rises  on  what  the  old  Boeotian  poet  calls  the  Iron  Age — a
generation  of  chaos  and  bewilderment,  when,  not  for  the  first  or
the  last  time  in  the  life  of  the  Greek  nation,  its  institutions  were
no  longer  in  harmony  with  the  natural  bent  of  its  life  and  thoughts.
We  of  the  twentieth  century  know  well  what  such  a  disharmony
means,  for  we  have  it  in  our  midst — misgiving  and  bitterness  on
the  one  side,  suffering  and  rebellion  on  the  other.  But  our  society
is  large  and  complex  ;  we  are  used  to  its  contradictions  and  have
learnt  to  shake  down  together  in  its  confusion.  In  Greece  it  was
different.  The  Greeks  had  yet  to  learn  that  society  is  not  a  work
of  art  and  that  the  perfect  city  is  a  poet's  dream.  Artists  and
thinkers  by  nature,  lovers  of  order  and  reason,  they  asked  for
harmony  in  the  world  without  as  in  the  world  within.  'Order'
and  '  world  '  are  the  same  word  (Koafio?)  in  their  language.  '  The
love  of  man  rises  as  upon  stepping-stones,'  says  the  high  priest
of  this  political  doctrine  in  one  of  his  noblest  passages,  '  from
beautiful  bodies  to  beautiful  institutions  and  from  beautiful  insti-
tutions to  beautiful  ideas,  until  from  beautiful  ideas  it  attains  to
the  idea  of  absolute  beauty  and  at  last  knows  what  the  essence  of
beauty  is  ;  this,  my  dear  Socrates,  is  the  life  above  all  others
which  man  should  live.'  It  is  such  a  life  as  only  an  ancient
Greek  could  dream  of  living.  But  even  he  cannot  do  so  in  a
period  of  transition.

In  seventh-century  Greece  the  whole  scene  is  disordered.  Men
stand,  as  a  poet  complains,  at  the  cross-roads.  Ancient  right
points  one  way  and  newborn  necessity  another.  Some  good  men
are  for  one  road,  and  some  for  the  other.  But  the  greater  part
stand  puzzled  and  unhappy,  looking  in  vain  for  a  living  guide.
Meanwhile  the  brigands  that  lie  in  wait  for  every  society  in  diffi-
culties have  stolen  down  from  the  hills  and  are  looting  the  cherished
store  of  the  caravan.  The  fate  of  the  whole  venture  is  in  peril.
Only  one  thing  can  save  it  and  bring  a  happy  ending — the  inter-
vention of  a  god.^

^  Theognis  911  (cross-roads — I  have,  however,  altered  the  sign-posts);
Plat.  Syvip.  211  (Plato's  '  best  life'  is  above  the  level  of  'beautiful  institu-
tions'; that  comes  of  his  being  a  high  priest  and  not  a  statesman).
Thucydides  has  nothing  to  say  about  this  crisis  in  his  introduction.  It  is
not  part  of  his  subject.  Nor  does  the  author  of  TJie  Expansion  of  England
waste  words  on  the  misery  of  the  Industrial  Revolution.


CHAP.  IV  RELIGION  J05

While  we  are  waiting  for  the  god,  let  us  look  round  carefully
at  the  company.  The  regime  of  the  Zeus- born,  prolonged
through  generations,  has  broken  up  the  growing  City  State  into
two  parties.  It  is  important  to  be  clear  as  to  who  is  in  each.
The  division  is  not  one  between  nobles  and  non-nobles,  or
'  patricians '  and  '  plebeians  ',  for,  if  it  were,  the  nobles  would  soon
go  under.  They  are  not  rich  or  numerous  enough  to  maintain
themselves,  and  their  cavalry  is  not  a  match  for  the  bronze-clad
ranks  of  the  city's  infantry.  Nor  is  it  the  familiar  division  between
rich  and  poor — the  rich  trying  to  maintain  stability  and  the  poor
clamouring  for  revolution.  For  here  it  is  the  rich  who  are  the
radicals,  whilst  men  who  call  themselves  poor  lift  up  their  voices
against  change.  The  true  division  is  not  between  wealth  and
poverty  but  between  old  and  new  forms  of  wealth,  or — for  it  is
almost  the  same  thing — between  town  and  country.

The  breach  between  town  and  country  had  been  widening,  in
the  more  progressive  communities,  all  through  the  Middle  Ages.
Every  generation  increased  the  gulf  between  the  families  who
followed  Deioces  into  the  city  and  those  who  stayed  behind.
Hesiod  writes  for  one  world,  the  poet  of  the  Odyssey  for  the
other.  The  men  of  Ithaca  call  themselves  city  folk  (da-TOL  or
Sfjfio?),  while  Hesiod's  neighbours  were  outsiders  or,  as  the  late
Romans  called  their  village  folk,  Pagans;  the  Greek  name  was
Dwellers-round  (TrepLoiKoi).  Despised  by  all  the  progressive  and
governing  elements,  they  mope  and  languish  in  their  old-world
villages,  and  gradually  sink  into  a  position  of  inferiority  and
dependence.  When  our  narrative  records  begin,  most  of  them
are  not  exactly  slaves,  but,  to  use  the  convenient  South  African
phrase,  in  a  'condition  of  service  or  residence  of  a  servile
character '}

We  cannot  trace  the  various  stages  of  their  decline.  But  it
seems  to  have  been  most  marked  and  rapid  in  the  communities
which  laid  most  stress  on  military  organization— particularly
in  the  Dorian  states  of  the  Peloponnese.  To  the  fifth-century
Greeks  the  Dorians  stood  for  a  great  military  tradition.  Whether
they  really  came  of  a  sturdier  stock  than  the  other  Hellenes  it  is

*  Cf.  the  Homeric  expression  S^/xoy  re  miXty  re  (e.g.  Ot/.  xi.  14).  See
Solon  ii  (ed.  Hiller),  lines  6,  7,  23  ((Jaroi  and  S^/xou  i]y(^lol^{s,  nobk-s  and
demagogues,  on  one  side  against  7ren;^/Joi,  paupers,  on  the  other).


io6  POLITICS  PART  II

still  impossible  to  say ;  but  if  so  we  must  admit  that  some  of
their  outlying  members,  particularly  in  the  West,  showed  marks
of  degeneracy.     Certainly  in  the  big  Dorian  settlements  in  the
Peloponnese  their  natural  bent,  if  such  it  was,  was  confirmed  by
circumstances.   They  were  the  last  comers  among  the  immigrants,
and   the    memory  of  their  community  as  a   body  of  warriors
cleaving  their  way  through   Greece  was  always  lively  in  their
minds.    The  old  gathering  of  equal  and  disciplined  fighting  men,
the  Agora,  which  is  the  only  form  under  which  the  people  appear
in  the  Iliad,  lasted  on  all  through  the  mediaeval  period,  and  was
transformed  at   its  break-up  into  a  democratic  assembly.      In
Sparta  especially  the  military  tradition  was  always  vigorous  ;  her
aristocracy  won  but  a  precarious  foothold  in  the  government^  and
her  foot-soldiers  were  the  first  in  Greece  to  recover  their   pre-
rogatives when  the  transition  came.     We  do  not  know  when  the
five  villages  which  made  up  the  unwalled  city  of  Lacedaemon
were  first  gathered  together  under  Taygetus.     But  they  soon  felt
their  superiority  over  the  scattered  settlements  round  them,  and
the  fear  of  famine  in  their  narrow  valley  drilled  them  early  into
a  career  of  conquest.     Like  the  Romans,  they  pushed  back  their
borders  year  by  year,  dividing  the  land  as  they  took  it  in  equal
lots  among  their  families.    Amyclae,  a  few  miles  down  the  valley,
was  their  Veii ;  next  came  Helos  by  the  sea,  and  next  the  rich
Messenian  plain  over  the  other  side  of  Taygetus.    Finally,  in  the
early  part  of  the  sixth  century,  they  absorbed  the  eastern  sea-
board of  Laconia.    Henceforward  their  only  way  was  northward.
But  here  their  advance  was  stayed  for  good  on  the  mountain
borders  of  Arcadia,  and  by  the  middle  of  the  sixth  century  they
realized  that  they  had  '  bitten  off  as  much  as  they  could  chew '
and  had  abandoned  the  quest  for  new  lands  with  which  to  keep
their  fighters  in  food  and  muscle.^

But  the  men  of  the  city  of  Lacedaemon  were  not  the  only
citizen  fighters  who  reduced  villagers  to  dependence,  although
undoubtedly  they  were  the  most  active  of  all  in  the  work,  and  the
system  that  they  established  the  most  durable  and  barbarous.
There  were  '  outsiders ',  under  various  names  and  no  doubt  with

'  The  Dorians,  as  opposed  to  the  '  lonians ',  are  a  '  greatly  wandering
race':  Hdt.  i.  56,  who  still  has  details  to  give.  <k  •ndkanaTiw  rjivofifjdi},
Thuc.  i.  18.


CHAP.  IV  RELIGION


107


various  histories,  in  most  of  the  growing  Greek  states  at  the  enil
of  the  mediaeval  period.  Argos,  the  premier  Dorian  community,
lorded  it  not  only  over  the  villages  of  her  plain,  but  over  the  hill-
town  of  Mycenae,  the  old  capital  of  the  region,  and  over  Cleonac
and  Hysiae  across  the  mountain  barriers.  The  Kpidaurians  nick-
named their  Dwellers-round  Dustfoots,  the  Sicyonians  theirs
Club-carriers  or  Woolly  l^cars,  and  the  Corinthians  theirs  simply
Brother  Dogs.  Crete  and  Thessaly,  Delphi  and  Ileraclca  in
Trachis  had  their  own  village  dependants  each  with  an  appro-
priate designation.  And  in  Attica  we  know  from  the  first  page
of  Aristotle's  Constitution  of  Athens  that,  when  our  detailed
history  begins,  '  the  poor  were  enslaved  to  the  rich,  they,  their
children  and  their  wives,  being  called  "clients  and  sixth-parters",
for  this  was  the  hire  for  which  they  laboured  on  the  fields  of  the
rich  ;  and  the  land  was  in  the  hands  of  the  few.'  ^

What  exactly  was  this  '  condition  of  service  or  residence  of
a  servile  character'  to  which  these  country  folk  were  reduced?
It  differed  in  different  places,  mainly  according  to  the  nature  of
the  land.  But  in  every  case  it  was  intimately  connected  with
the  loss  or  lack  of  political  rights.  The  principal  reason  why
they  were  slaves  was  because  they  were  not  full  citizens.  They
had  not  yet  discovered  democracy  as  a  safeguard  of  economic
freedom.

Hesiod's  villagers  and  many  others  like  them  lost  their  oppor-

^  See  Wallon,  Histoire  deVesdavagt'  dans  raniiquitc  (2nd  ed.,  Paris,  1S79,
a  thorough  book  but  antiquated  in  treatment),  vol.  i,  pp.  130-4,  for  references
to  these  Kov'mohis,  Kopvvrj(pnpoi,  KaTcavaKocfiopoi,  KvvocfiiXot,  &.C,,  and  their  parallels
in  the  Greek  colonial  communities.  We  know  little  more  of  them  than  their
nicknames,  which  amused  the  later  lexicographers.  For '  Orncates '  as  a  genera!
name  for  Argive  Perioeci  see  Hdt.  viii.  72,  probably  adopted  because  it  was
the  first  important  place  the  Argives  subdued.  Helots  may  owe  their  name  to
Helos  in  the  same  way.  Meyer,  Gesc/i.  vol.  ii,  §  355  (cf.  §  176),  especially
emphasizes  the  fact  that  the  status  of  the  Helots  and  Perioeci  had  nothing  to  do
with  the  original  immigration,  but  was  due  to  later  conquest  from  Lacedaemon.
There  is  no  evidetice  for  any  difference  of  race  or  dialect  between  them  and
the  Spartans.  The  same  is  true  of  the  other  'serf  populations.  In  some
cases  they  may  have  been,  in  large  measure,  pre- Hellenic  by  blood  ;  but  it  is
impossible  to  test  Rury's  statement  {History  of  Greece^  large  ed.,  vol.  i,
p.  157)  that  the  revolutions  which  raised  the  tyrants  to  power  in  Sicyon,
Corinth,  and  Megara  'seem  to  have  been  partly  movements  of  the  pre-
Dorian  population  against  the  dominant  Dorian  families  '.  The  Cretan  serfs
were  sometimes  called  KXripcoral,  i.  e.  men  on  lots.  They  may  be  compared
with  the  conquered  Mytileneans  who  cultivated  their  old  lands,  in  this
case  for  a  money  payment,  on  behalf  of  the  Athenian  lot-holders  or
KXrjpovxoi  :  Thuc.  iii.  50.  2.


io8  POLITICS  PART  II

tunities  by  neglect,  but  did  not  yet  know  themselves  as  inferiors.
Side  by  side  with  them  we  can  observe  at  least  three  varieties  of
official  and  recognized  dependence.  The  first  and  simplest  is  that
of  the  people  who  were  technically  known,  by  a  purely  Pelopon-
nesian  usage,  as  Perioeci  or  Dwellers-round.  These  were  villagers
or  even  inhabitants  of  small  townships,  whose  land  was  not  worth
coveting.  When  the  citizens  of  Lacedaemon,  or,  to  call  them  by
their  own  name,  the  Spartiates,  conquered  and  absorbed  Laconia,
much  of  the  land  that  they  overran  was  too  poor  to  be  divided
out.  So  they  left  it  to  the  villagers.  These  stayed  in  the  same
position  as  before,  only  with  the  added  sense  that  henceforward
they  were  definitely  in  a  position  of  inferiority  and  remained
excluded  from  all  share  in  the  government  of  the  City  State.
Not  that  they  would  ever  have  made  much  use  of  the  privi-
lege of  trudging  into  Lacedaemon  and  voting  in  the  assembly.
They  were  too  busy  fighting  starvation  on  their  miserable
acres.

The  second  variety  is  the  *  serfdom '  which  we  find  in  Laconia,
Crete,  Thessaly,  and  other  places.  To  a  fifth-century  Greek  like
Thucydides  the  status  of  the  Helot  or  the  Thessalian  Pauper
(Trevea-Trjs)  was  indistinguishable  from  that  of  a  bought  foreign
slave.  But  both  the  political  origin  and  the  economic  operation
of  the  system  were  very  different.  The  serfs  of  Laconia  (which
includes  the  fertile  plain  of  Messenia)  and  of  Thessaly,  like  the
Laconian  Perioeci,  are  conquered  villagers  ;  but  the  lands  on
which  they  live  are  no  longer  their  own.  They  have  been  divided
out  in  lots  among  their  citizen  conquerors.  But  the  citizens  have
neither  the  leisure  nor  the  inclination  to  cultivate  them  in  person.
They  are  soldiers  first  and  politicians  second  ;  and  in  these  two
activities  they  have  gradually  forgotten  to  be  farmers.  A  demo-
cratic community  is  always  faced  with  the  big  difficulty  which,
as  we  saw,  faced  Deioces  too,  how  the  individual  citizen  can
combine  public  and  private  work.  The  Spartans  settled  it,  in
a  manner  approved,  strange  to  say,  by  the  moralists  of  the  fourth
century,  by  leaving  their  private  work  undone,  and  using  their
public  authority  to  get  others  to  do  it  for  them.

When  Pericles  boasts  that  the  Athenians  find  time  both  for
public  and  private  work,  he  is  contrasting  them  in  his  mind  with
the  lordly  Spartans  who  spend  their  mornings  drilling  and  their


CHAP.  IV  RELIGION


109


afternoons,  after  the  unappetizing  meal  which  the  IIclols  have
brought  in  to  them  from  their  farms,  hunting  or  boxing  or  making
themselves  beautifuh  The  Helots  were  forced  to  keep  their
masters  in  provisions.  The  arrangement  was  so  drawn  up  that
if  there  was  not  enough  for  their  master  there  was  not  enough  for
them  ;  for  they  were  bound  to  supply  hiin,  as  a  very  jerky  old
poet  tells  us,  with  '  half  of  the  yield  of  the  corn  grown  on  the
soil  that  they  tend  '.  If  a  Spartan  could  not  supply  his  cjuota
from  his  farm  to  the  common  mess,  he  was  disfranchised  till  he
did  so  :  he  had  broken  the  rules  of  the  club.  Presumably  he
retired  to  his  farm,  whipped  his  Helots  into  activity,  and  cum-
bered them  with  his  burdensome  presence  till  they  had  restored
it  to  prosperity.  But  he  would  never  forget  those  misspent
months,  or  how  near  he  had  been  to  total  expulsion.  With  this
memory  in  his  mind  he  would  take  good  care  that  there  were  not
too  many  sons  amongst  whom  the  property  must  be  divided.  Seen
in  this  light,  it  is  not  difificult  to  understand — what  was  such
a  puzzle  to  Xenophon — that  Sparta,  the  most  powerful  and
famous  of  the  Greek  states  of  his  day,  had  also  one  of  the
smallest  citizen  bodies :  or,  as  he  puts  it,  disdaining  even  to
mention  the  dependent  classes,  '  was  one  of  the  least  populous.'  ^
In  all  other  respects  the  Helot,  like  his  fellow  serfs,  lived
pretty  much  as  he  liked — or  rather  as  he  could.  His  master  had
no  power  (as  in  the  case  of  a  slave  near  at  hand)  to  prevent  him
from  marrying  and  having  children,  and,  however  poor  he  was,

*  Xen.  Pol.  Lac.  i.  l  :  on  serfs  as  ordinary  slaves  cf.  Hdt.  vi.  83  (SoCXoi) ;
Thuc.  viii.  40.  2  (olKtrai).  To  supply  his  master  with  {jfxiav  navToi  oaw  Knpnliv
apovpn  0e>i  is  the  Helot's  task  (Tyrt.  Frag.  6).  Though  the  Spartans  Hved
so  simply,  they  seem,  like  the  Montenegrins  to-day,  to  have  paid  a  good  deal
of  attention  to  their  personal  appearance  ;  cf.  Hdt.  vii.  20S ;  Ar.  /W.  1269
b25  {yvvaiKOKpaiovnivoi).  One  of  the  chief  impressions  a  passing  tourist
receives  at  Cettigne  is  that  the  fine-looking  and  finely  uniformed  Montenegrins
whom  he  sees  strutting  about  the  streets  or  drinking  and  smokmg  in  their
back-kitchens  have  nothing  in  the  world  to  do.  Probably  an  Athenian
stranger  would  receive  the  same  impression  at  Sparta.  Perhaps  this  is  what
prompted  Plato  to  his  playful  suggestion  {Pro/agoras  342)  that  they  spent  their
leisure  hours  talking  philosophy— a  passage  which  Pater  adopts  as  the  motto
of  his  beautiful  chapter  on  Lacedaemon  in  Plato  and  Platoinsm.  Not  all  the
languid  charm  of  Pater's  style  can  persuade  us  that  the  young  Spartans  were
'  monastic  '  in  spirit ;  if  he  had  told  one  so  to  his  face  out  of  school  hours,  he
would  probably  have  paid  dear  for  it.  On  the  Thessalians  see  Athcnacus,
xii,  p.  527.  They  had  no  Lycurgus  to  restrain  their  habits.  Hence  tiic
Pharsalians,  for  instance,  are  '  both  the  laziest  and  the  most  extravagant  of
mankind '.

^9is■,  H


no  POLITICS  PART  II

the  youngsters  could  pick  up  a  living  somehow  on  his  own  or  the
neighbouring  farms.  Thus,  while  the  Spartans,  when  there  were
no  new  lands  to  be  won,  aimed  at  keeping  their  population
stationary  and  in  reality  suffered  a  steady  decline,  the  number
of  the  Helots  increased  rapidly,  till  the  disproportion  between
rulers  and  ruled  became  the  central  anxiety  of  Spartan  states-
manship. But  the  serfs  obh'gation  to  feed  his  master  limited  his
freedom  by  keeping  him  tied  to  the  soil.  Moreover,  the  Helot  at
any  rate  had  long  since  lost  his  legal  rights.  He  might  be  '  weeded
out '  any  day  by  the  Spartan  secret  police,  with  the  acquiescence
and  approval  of  the  city  magistrate.  Thucydides  tells  us  without
a  tremor  that  two  thousand  Helots  '  disappeared '  in  this  way
during  the  crisis  of  the  Peloponnesian  War.  It  was  the  only  means
left  of  partly  redressing  the  unequal  balance  which  left  one  Spartan
citizen  face  to  face  with  some  seventy-five  dependants.^

But  there  is  a  third  variety  of  dependence  which  concerns  us
most  particularly.  It  was  the  most  painful  and  degrading  of  all :
for  it  came  swiftly  and  without  warning,  and  affected  principally
the  most  progressive  of  the  Greek  communities,  and  amongst  them
Athens.  It  is  bound  up  with  one  of  the  greatest  advances  in
material  civilization — the  introduction  of  a  metal  currency.

The  early  Greeks  paid  for  their  transactions  in  kind,  or  in  bars
of  metal  of  unfixed  weight.  The  first  currency  stamped  as  bearing
a  fixed  weight  to  serve  as  a  convenient  medium  of  exchange  was

^  Thuc.  iv.  80.  Meyer,  GescJi.  vol.  iii,  §§  263-4,  estimates  the  total  popula-
tion of  Laconia  (including  Messenia)  in  the  fifth  century,  before  the  losses
sustained  at  the  time  of  the  earthquake  in  464,  at  roughly  :

Spartans     12,000  (i.e.  3000-4000  adult  males)

Perioeci       80,000

Helots        190,000

Total: —  282,000-300,000.

For  the  disproportion  between  the  citizens  and  non-citizens  cf.  Xen.  Hell.  iii.
3.  5.  The  Cretan  'serfs'  {tuKeh)  had  certain  customary  rights  which  in  the
age  of  law-making  were  formally  recognized.  For  details  see  commentary
on  the  laws  of  Gortyn  in  Inscriptions  juridic/ues  s;recques,  vol,  i,  p.  423,
especially  the  interesting  tarifif  of  fines  for  ofifences  against  freemen,  freedmen,
serfs,  and  slaves  (p.  419).  But  Lycurgus  did  nothing  similar  for  the  Helots.
Consequently  the  Cretan  outsiders  remain  faithful,  but  the  Helots  are  always
rebelling  (Ar.  Pol.  1272  b  18).  For  the  tariff' compare  our  own  earliest  laws,
those  of  yEihelbert,  which  are  similarly  graded  for  different  classes  of  the
population.  They  consist  of  a  tariff  of  ninety  short  sentences  :  e.  g.  '  If  a  man
strike  another  with  the  fist  on  the  nose — three  shillings';  '  If  the  eye  be  struck
out  let  amends  be  made  with  fifty  shillings,'  &c.


ciiAr.  TV  RKLI(7I()N


I  1 1


issued  by  the  Lydian  kings  in  the  seventh  century.  Like  tlie
plough  and  the  printing-press  it  was  one  of  those  simple  inven-
tions which,  once  discovered,  humanity  cannot  imagine  itself
without.  It  spread  rapidly  to  Greece.  In  the  course  of  one  or
two  generations  all  the  leading  Greek  states,  both  in  Greece
proper  and  in  the  West,  are  coining  their  own  money,  and  every
creditor  is  asking  to  be  paid  his  debts  in  gold  and  silver.

It  .seems  a  simple  change.  But  its  effect  upon  the  villager
is  as  disastrous  as  the  invention  of  the  steam-engine.  It  created
an  economic  revolution  in  the  Mediterranean  communities  com-
parable to  that  from  which  Europe  is  only  just  recovering  (if  she
is  recovering)  to-day.  We  can  watch  it  in  Greece,  in  Palestine,
and  in  Italy,  and  see  the  temper  of  the  sufferers  reflected  in
Hesiod  and  Theognis,  Amos  and  Hosea,  and  in  the  legends  of
early  Rome.

For  consider  what  the  change  means  in  the  life  of  a  peasant
who  is  living  from  hand  to  mouth  on  his  yearly  harvests.  He
used  to  take  his  stuff  to  market  and  exchange  it  for  the  goods  he
needed — wool  for  the  wife  to  spin,  children's  shoes  for  the  winter,
or  tiles  to  mend  the  roof;  or  he  would  pay  the  smith  and  the
joiner  in  kind  for  repairing  his  plough  or  his  cart.  But  now  most
of  them  will  not  accept  his  corn  and  wine  till  he  has  turned  it
into  money.  How  much  is  it  worth  ?  He  has  not  the  least  idea :
for  it  depends  on  factors  outside  his  range  and  which  he  has  no
means  of  controlling.  He  takes  what  the  middleman  gives  him  ;
and  the  middleman  makes  a  living  on  his  commission.  At  the
end  of  the  first  year  he  is  alarmed  to  find  he  has  not  as  much
margin  in  hand  as  usual.  When  the  inevitable  lean  j-ear  comes
he  has  no  margin  at  all.  In  fact  he  cannot  see  his  way  through
the  winter  without  help.     His  only  resource  is  to  borrow.

So  he  applies  to  the  Big  House  (for  the  day  of  the  professional
Shylock  is  not  yet).  The  Well-born  or  Eupatrid  (as  the  Athe-
nians called  him)  is  most  accommodating.  His  heroic  ancestors
used  to  take  their  gold  with  them  to  the  grave,  in  masks  and
such  like.  He  is  delighted  to  have  found  a  better  use  for  it.
Certainly  he  will  keep  him  through  the  winter.  But  of  course  he
must  be  repaid  punctually  next  harvest.  And  he  wants  a  little
extra  as  well  to  make  up  for  what  he  might  have  been  doing
with  his  money  in  the  meantime — say  twenty  per  cent,  for  the  six

H  2


112  POLITICS  TART  II

months.  It  Is  only  fair,  seeing  that  money,  Hke  seed,  multipHes
and  bears  fruit.  The  old  '  garlic-smelling  Acharnian  '  scratches
his  head.  '  Money-breeding  '  {toko?)  seems  an  unnatural  idea,
somehow.  But  it  will  find  its  way  into  current  speech  soon
enough  :  and  he  has  no  head  just  now  to  anticipate  Aristotle  and
Ruskin  in  discussing  the  morality  of  interest.  So  he  agrees.
One  more  detail  before  the  transaction  is  concluded.  Is  he  sure
he  can  repay  ?  The  Eupatrid  has  his  oath,  but  he  wants  some
more  substantial  security.  Can  he  produce  a  friendly  neighbour
to  go  bail  for  him  ?  He  fears  not.  They  have  all  grown  cautious
these  days^ever  since  on  market-day  there  was  a  stranger  from
Laconia,  telling  all  and  sundry  about  the  miserable  state  of  the
peasants  there.  The  wisest  man  in  Sparta,  he  said,  summed  up
the  position  in  five  words — they  never  waste  words  in  Sparta —
'  Go  bail  and  see  ruin.'  They  did  not  believe  him  at  the  time  ;
but  since  he  died  they  have  found  out  how  wise  he  was,  and  now
they  worship  him  as  a  hero.  So  neighbours  are  no  good.  He  is
thrown  back  on  his  own  resources.  What  has  he  got  to  offer  ?
Only  his  land  and  his  labour.  He  had  never  really  thought  of
his  land  as  his  own :  properly  speaking  it  belongs  to  the  family,
to  his  ancestors  and  descendants  as  much  as  to  himself.  Still,
the  neighbours  keep  telling  him  this  is  an  old-fashioned  idea,
and  that  nowadays  land  can  be  bought  and  sold  and  sliced  and
pieced  together  just  like  any  of  the  ordinary  wares  in  the  market-
place. What  will  the  children  do  if  he  has  no  land  to  leave  them
when  he  dies?  And  what  about  all  the  religious  associations?
Well,  necessity  knows  no  religion,  and  his  children  must  pray  for
happier  times.  So  he  consents,  reluctantly,  to  make  a  bargain
about  his  land.  If  he  does  not  repay  next  spring,  let  the  Eupa-
trid take  it  over :  he  will  cultivate  it  as  his  tenant,  and  pay  him
a  sixth  of  the  produce  as  rent.  Done.  He  goes  away  with  his
money,  and  the  Eupatrid  sets  up  an  eyesore  of  a  pillar,  with
letters  on  it,  in  full  view  of  the  house.  He  cannot  read  the  letters
but  he  supposes  they  are  to  keep  him  in  mind  of  his  bargain.^

'  tyyva  rraph  6'  r'ira  is  Chilon's  laconic  advice.  The  British  School  has
recently  discovered  a  relief  bearing  the  letters  (.\)lAi2N  which  formed  part
of  his  shrine  at  Sparta.  On  borrowing  cf.  also  lies.  Erga  394.  On  the
reluctance  to  treat  land  as  an  ordinary  commodity  cf.  Genesis  xxiii.  11,  where
the  children  of  Helh  do  not  like  to  sell  \.\\^  Cave  of  Machpelah  to  Abraham.
Meyer,  in  his  Wirt schdf ill chc  E)iiivickeluiig  dcs  Altertions  (reprinted  in


CHAP.  TV  RELIGION


113


Alas,  hg  needs  no  such  icniinder  !  Lean  years  have  a  way  of
running  in  cycles.  Next  sprini;  the  harvest  is  as  bad  as  its  pre-
decessor, hy  the  end  of  the  year  his  l.uul  is  no  lont;er  his  own,
and  he  has  joined  the  ranks  of  the  'clients'  or  '  sixth-partcrs '.
For  some  time  all  goes  well.  Then  there  comes  a  bad  year,
when  expenses  are  heavy  and  he  cannot  pay  his  sixth  ;  or  per-
haps the  Eupatrid  discovers  him  cheating  over  the  division  of  the
produce.  What  remedy  has  the  landlord  ?  He  could  no  doubt
evict  him.  But,  besides  being  impious,  this  is  to  neither  party's
advantage.  For  the  landlord  could  not  easily  replace  his  tenant,
nor  the  peasant  his  home.  Anything  is  better  than  being  home-
less. What  has  the  peasant  left  to  offer?  Like  the  modern  pro-
letarian, nothing  but  his  labour.  So  he  makes  another  and  still
more  humiliating  bargain.  Unless  his  rent  is  repaid  (of  course
with  interest)  by  next  spring,  the  whole  produce  of  his  labour
shall  henceforward  belong  to  the  PLupatrid.  In  other  words,  he
will  become  his  slave.  And  who  will  keep  his  family  if  the
breadwinner  is  removed  ?  The  Eupatrid  will  keep  them,  pro-
vided they  work  for  his  wife  and  continue  to  give  satisfaction.'

Such,  roughly  speaking,  is  the  history  of  many  of  the  debt-
slaves  whose  bitter  cry  goes  up  in  seventh-century  Greece  and  in
the  prophecies  of  Israel — perhaps  the  bitterest  of  all  forms  of
slavery,  because  its  victims  are  suffering  in  the  midst  of  increasing
abundance.  They  are  like  the  labourers  who  are  driven  out  of
work  by  the  invention  of  new  machinery,  whose  starvation  passes
unnoticed  amid  the  swelling  statistics  of  industry.  Very  often  as
the  years  go  on  they  are  sold  out  of  the  country  ;  their  masters
prefer  to  realize  rather  than  to  have  these  sullen  fellow-country-

Kleine  Schrijten),  first  emphasized  the  parallel  between  Theognis  ami  Amos.
Cunningham's  Western  Civilization  in  its  Economic  Aspects  (especi.illy
pp.73~5)  is  also  worth  a  mention  becaiiseof  its  suggestive  references  to  our  own
mediaeval  period.  See  also  Wilamowitz,  A.  A.  vol.  ii,  pp.  57-S,  esperially  on
the  pillars.  To  correct  any  apparent  over-simplification  in  the  above  account
see  note  on  p.  297  below.

'  The  status  of  the  Attic  sixth-parters  (kKT^iiopoi)  has  been  much  disputed.
I  follow  E,  M.  Walker  (whose  view  is  adopted  by  the  editors  in  the  note  on
p.  14  of  Routledge's  condensed  edition  of  Grote's  History  of  Greece).  lUit
I  differ  from  him  and  agree  with  De  Sanctis, "Ar^cy,  p.  196,  n.  3,  in  regardmg
this  peculiar  tenancy  as  itself  provisional  and  a  badge  of  '  slavery  '  and
'dependence'  (see  Ath.  Pol.  ii),  the  first  step  down  the  abyss.  The
traditional  system  in  Attica,  as  elsewhere,  was  the  peasant  proprietorship
which  Solon  re-established.  Cf.  a  similar  descent  in  two  steps  in  an
interesting  parallel  story  in  Genesis  xlvii.  13  ff.


114  POLITICS  PART  II

men  hanging  about  their  farms.  As  defaulting  debtors  they
have  no  remedy  ;  the  master  who  owns  their  labour  owns  their
bodies,  and  they  are  in  all  respects  like  the  captured  or  kidnapped
foreigners  who  are  now  beginning  to  be  brought  into  the  city  as
slaves  from  abroad.^

Moreover,  the  landlord  himself  is  in  difficulties.  The  economic
crisis  has  not  passed  him  by  untouched.  He  too  needs  money  to
keep  up  his  style  of  living,  and  he  too  pays  his  tribute  to  the
man  with  the  table  in  the  market-place.  He  is  beginning  to
discover,  as  all  landed  aristocracies  discover  at  a  certain  phase  of
development,  that  though  the  land  may  yield  him  a  living  it  will
not  yield  him  a  fortune.  However  extensive  the  lands  he  con-
trols, however  numerous  his  unhappy  labourers,  he  cannot  rival
his  younger  brother  who  has  taken  to  seafaring.  The  bigger  his
property  the  harder  it  is  to  supervise  ;  and,  as  he  remarked  one
day  after  a  disheartening  round  (and  the  remark  was  treasured
up  in  the  family  till  his  great-great-grandson  put  it  in  a  book),
the  best  of  all  animal  foods  is  '  Master's  Eye  '.  His  brother,  on
the  other  hand,  once  he  got  his  ship,  made  a  fortune  in  a  few
years  by  the  simple  process  of  dangling  before  foolish  people
things  that  their  own  country  does  not  happen  to  produce.  In
the  olden  days  we  were  satisfied  with  our  own  country  and
despised  foreign  products.  Now  the  idea  is  abroad  that  all  the
things  most  worth  possessing  come  from  the  ends  of  the  earth.
It  was  clever  of  my  brother  to  exploit  this  innocent  foible,  and
for  the  first  few  voyages  he  did  so  at  the  risk  of  his  life  and  live-
lihood. But  now  that  he  has  amassed  some  money  it  is  time  he
turned  farmer.  He  has  as  much  as  he  needs.  Why  risk  his  life
and  ruin  his  character  and  waste  the  few  short  years  of  life
for  more  ?  ^

'  Solon,  xxxii.  7.

"^  Hesiod,  Erga  618,  686  ;  Theognis,  1202  (dangers  of  trading)  ;  Hdt.  iii.
106  ('  the  most  valuable  things  come  from  the  ends  of  the  earth  ' :  not  having
an  '  economic  mind  '  he  has  not  stopped  to  ask  why).  Effect  of  the  crisis  on
farming:  Hdt.  v.  29  (when  the  Parians  were  called  in  to  settle  the  political
and  economic  crisis  which  had  distracted  Miletus  for  two  generations  they
examined  all  the  estates  and  found  very  few  well-farmed  :  it  is  clear  from  the
account  that  there  were  still  a  fair  number  of  proprietors).  Xen.  Oec.  xii.  20
('  Master's  Eye  ' — the  friend  of  Cyrus  gives  the  remark  a  Persian  colouring,
but  it  is  true  enough  all  the  same).  The  idea  that  landed  property  was  more
respectable  than  any  other  kind  died  hard,  with  the  ancients  as  with  us.
Cf.  Xen.  Oec.  passim  (e.g.  iv.  4);  Ar.  Pol.  1278  a  25  (at  Thebes  you  only


CHAP.  IV  RELIGION  115

The  question  has  often  been  asked  since,  in  many  a  dollar-
ridden  society.  But  these  early  Greek  traders  were  facing  it  fcjr
the  first  time  ;  and  to  us  who  think  we  know  the  answer  there  is
a  charming  ingenuousness  about  their  questionings.  The  queer
thing  about  money,  says  Theognis  over  and  over  again,  is  tliat
you  can  never  have  too  much  of  it.  Herein  it  is  different  from
any  of  the  things  you  can  buy  with  it.  Food,  clothing,  houses,
above  all  wine — there  is  a  limit  to  them  all.  But  to  money  tiiere
is  no  limit.     There  is  only  one  thing  Hke  it,  and  that  is  wisdom.

Two  powers  there  are  against  whom  evermore

Man's  spirit  fights  in  vain.
Riches  and  knowledge.     Seemeth  crammed  thy  store  ?

Greed  whispers  :  '  Pour  again.'
Wisest  of  men,  look  inward  :  lo,  thou  art

Thrall  to  Queen  Wisdom's  will.
Bid  her  begone !  Thou  knowest  in  thy  heart

Thou  lov'st  her  stilk^

No  one  but  a  Greek  could  have  coupled  Wisdom  and  Riches
in  such  a  fashion  at  such  a  time.  You  will  not  find  this  note
in  old  Cato,  shrewd  and  worldly  wise  though  he  was,  still  less  in
Amos  and  Rosea.  Yet  the  traveller  might  hear  it  to-day  in
a  Peloponnesian  village  on  the  lips  of  a  returned  and  discontented
emigrant.  It  bears  all  the  stamp  of  the  Greek  spirit :  its  calm
way  of  sitting  down  to  think  things  over,  its  '  hard  matter-of-
factness  ',  and  its  '  feeling  for  the  best  things  '.  It  is  an  artist's
phrase,  this  last,  but  it  serves  better  than  any  other.  For
Theognis  was  not  a  preacher  or  a  philosopher,  but  only  a  quiet
artist  in  bewilderment.^

become  respectable  when  you  have  been  ten  years  out  of '  business ') ;  and
the  well-known  passage  of  Cicero,  De  Off.  i.  42,  recommending  wholesale
merchants  to  buy  land  and  a  'position '—advice  frequently  taken  even  by
those  unfamiliar  with  the  novus  homo  who  fathered  it.  Of  course  Plato  and
Aristotle  gave  this,  like  so  many  other  conservative  ideas,  a  fillip.
'  Theogn.  11 57.     I  append  the  lines  in  their  native  dress  :—

ovre  yap  civ  tt^uvtov  Bvfiov  lirtpKopiuaii'
w?  8'  nvTo)?  ao(f>iT]v  6  0-0(^0)70x09  oiiK  (iTTo(P(vy(i,

aXX'  (paTUt,  dvpov  S'  ov  bxivuTM  Tiktaai.
I  have  purposely  wavered  between  'Wisdom'  and  '  Knowledge ;,  for  these
older  Greeks,  living  before  the  day  of  universities  and  encyclopaedias,  did  not
know  the  distinction.      It  was  not  till  a  century  later  that  Heracleitus  to  d
a   surprised   world    that    '  A   man   may  learn   and   learn  yet   slay  a  lool
{TTovXvpadir]  i/ooi'  ov  8i(^daKfi.).

^  Drunkenness  is  the  most  simple  and  obvious  temptation  for  a  nation  or


Il6  POLITICS  TART  II

But  the  intrusion  of  the  commercial  spirit  did  more  than  make
men  think.  It  made  them  suffer,  and  it  sent  them  to  the  high
gods  for  redress.  For  the  new  lords  of  the  city,  the  jiarvenu
aristocracy,  who  lorded  it  with  their  money-bags  and  their
'silver-bought  slaves'  over  the  old  country  folk  and  their  tradi-
tions, unlike  the  godlike  judges  of  old,  knew  neither  mercy  nor
justice.  Gold  and  silver  were  in  their  houses,  but,  as  old  Hesiod
said,  it  was  iron  that  was  in  their  hearts.  His  beautiful  lament  is
familiar  to  many  English  readers.  So  let  us  turn  rather  to  its
weaker  counterpart  in  the  elegiac  verses  of  poets  who,  unlike  the
old  Boeotian,  have  come  to  live  in  the  city,  nearer  to  the  seat
of  injustice.

Good  Hope  alone  of  kindly  powers  remains  amongst  us  now^,
All  other  gods  have  fled  away  to  high  Olympus'  brow,
She  of  the  saving  temper  and  Faith  whose  touch  can  bind.
And  Grace   that  makes  life  lovely,  friend  :    but  we  are  left

behind.
No  more  do  men  deal  justly  or  keep  the  plighted  word.
The  immortal  gods  are  far  away :  their  anger  is  not  stirred.
The  good  are  dead  and  buried,  and  no  man  now  feels  awe
For  the  wisdom  of  our  fathers  and  our  ordefed  city  law.

So  sings  one  who  has  watched  the  rise  of  the  '  rights  of
property '  and  of  the  generation  of  business  men.  Here  is
another  cry  from  one  who  has  been  drawn  into  the  current  of  the
new  wealth,  as  he  looks  back,  as  many  a  European  has  looked
back  from  New  York,  on  the  ruined  country-side  from  which  he
is  driven  forth.

The  years  I  dropped  my  pitcher  in  the  clear  dark  village  spring
How  sweet  and  good  the  water's  taste  did  seem.

But  now  the  rains  have  flooded  it,  the  mountain  streams  have
muddied  it,
I'll  drink  another  spring,  a  larger  stream.

It  is  a  typical  metaphor.     We  speak  of  living  under  a  strange

class  with  money  newly  in  its  pocket.  The  Greeks  were  not  drunkards,  but
there  is  a  great  deal  about  wine  in  Theognis  and  Archilochus.  These  early
citizen-soldiers  called  it  their '  breast-plate ',  '  You'll  feel  ever  so  much  lighter
when  you've  got  your  breast-plate  on,'  said  some  wag  at  a  party  {7:  Theognis,
882-4  and  413,  note  that  even  this  wine  is  not  unmixed).  Compare  Arch.fr.  2
and  4  (wine  in  camp  and  on  shipboard)  and  Hosea  and  Amos, />ass/m  {e.g.
Hos.  iii.  i).  The  Romans  at  this  stage  of  development  were  the  grossest
of  all.  Their  magistrates  had  jars  put  at  the  street-corners  to  take  a  drink  from
as  they  w  ent  by.  Sec  Ferrero,.  Greatness  andDecli7ie  ^/7v(?;//^  (E.T.),  vol.  i,  p.  23.


CHAP.  IV  RELIGION


117


sky  ;  but  the  Greek,  whose  city  or  vilhige  grew  up  rouiul  ;i  spring,
by  Peirenc  or  Castalia  or  Dircc  or  Callirrhoc,  speaks  of  'drinking
strange  waters '.'

'The  good  arc  dead  and  buried.'  There  is  no  more  goodness
or  piety  (for  the  two  still  mean  the  same)  among  men.  Nothing
is  left,  as  Hesiod  tells  us,  but  Aidos,  that  vague  sense  of  respect  for
gods  and  men,  and  shame  of  wrong-doing  before  earth  and  skj-,
which  is  the  last  expiring  flicker  of  good  in  bad  men's  hearts.
There  is  no  legacy  here  for  fifth-century  Athens ;  for  this  shame
is  too  vague  and  impalpable  to  be  counted  as  part  of  the  body
politic.  Its  positive  meaning — the  particular  uttermost  wicked-
ness which  it  checks  men  from  committing — varies  from  age
to  age.  The  shame  of  the  Iliad  and  of  the  migrations  was  simpler
and  wilder  than  the  shame  of  Theognis,  as  his  would  seem
meaningless  and  old-fashioned  to  the  age  of  the  Peloponnesian
War.  The  men  of  the  migrations  feel  shame  as  they  fling  away
the  last  shreds  of  patriarchal  custom,  the  contemporaries  of
Theognis  when  they  break  loose  from  city  law.  But  to  Thucy-
dides  shame  is  the  last  sanction  and  safeguard  of  a  whole  s}'stem
of  personal  and  political  morality.  It  is  the  foundation  on  which
Pericles  bases  his  whole  Funeral  Speech.  But  the  foundations
are  not  visible  while  the  building  still  stands.  It  is  only  when
it  has  been  overthrown  in  a  crisis  greater  than  that  through
which  Theognis  passed  that  Thucydides,  in  the  bitterest  section
of  his  book,  makes  a  speaker  think  of  shame — to  make  mock
of  it.2

^  Theognis,  1135  and  959  (the  two  poems  may  be  by  the  same  hand,  but
I  do  not  think  so).  Cf.  Hdt.  ii.  18;  Eur.  Med.tf).  I  append  the  second
poem  from  Hiller's  text : —

"EoTf  [lilv  avTos  '('nivov  anu  Kpi]vr)i  n(\avvhpov,

T]8v  Tl   fiOl   8uK(fl'   K<U  KilXuV  (fJ-fJLeV  vSoif}'

vvf  (5'  t'jHr)  Tf^oXtoTfit,  i^Scop  S'  uvofjLiayeTai  iXvl,
aW)]i  81]  KpliVi]^  jrlofJ-Oi  T;  TTorafJiOv.

The  spring  is  *  dark '  because,  as  one  can  still  see  at  Peirene,  it  is  covered  in
to  keep  it  from  the  sun  and  make  it  a  shady  resting-place.  A  modern
romantic  would  have  been  tempted  to  add  that  there  was  gold  dust  in  the
mud  brought  down.  But  the  'classical'  poet  refrains.  He  only  gives  one
hint  of  his  inner  meaning  in  his  last  word  :  for  men  do  not  drink  from  rivers
in  Greece.  If  they  did,  they  would  drink  mud  in  winter  and  go  thirsty  in
summer.  On  '  silver-bought '  slaves,  first  introduced  at  this  period,  see  the
/ocus  classicits  in  Athen.  265  b.  For  Hesiod's  beautiful  lines  see  Erga  174
and  Murray's  Greek  Epic,  p.  79  (2nd  ed.,  p.  102).  I  follow  C.Iotz  in  referrmg
them  to  this  period.

^  See  V.  III.  3  ■Tr]v  n\(i(TTn  duicpddpova-av  updponruvi  nio-^i'i";*'  :  tlie  phrase  is


:>


ii8  POLITICS  PART  II

But  the  crisis  of  the  seventh  century  has  still  a  positive  message
for  the  fifth.  That  is  why  it  was  necessary  to  describe  it.  For
the  gods  had  not  all  fled  to  Olympus.  One  still  cared  for  the
men  in  turmoil  in  the  cities,  and  showed  them  a  way  of  safety.
It  was  just  when  things  were  darkest  that  the  Delphic  Oracle
began  to  speak.

We  know  Apollo  only  in  the  days  of  his  decline,  when  he  had
sacrificed  his  authority  by  siding  with  the  Persian  invader.
That  was  after  he  had  founded  what  we  may  almost  call  a  church.
In  the  seventh  century  Delphi  was  not  the  seat  of  a  church  but
of  a  gospel ;  and  it  was  a  gospel  to  which  Greece  was  drawn
to  listen.  For  its  good  tidings  were  very  simple — so  simple
indeed  and  so  sensible  that  only  a  Greek  oracle  would  have  dared
proclaim  them — the  duty  of  self-control.  They  are  summed  up  in
two  sayings  of  two  words  each  :  Knoiv  yo?irself  ^iud  Be  moderate.
The  self-knowledge  which  Apollo  preached  to  his  visitants,  and
wrote  up  in  large  letters  over  the  entrance  to  his  sanctuary,  is  not
the  careful  self-analysis  which  Socrates,  misinterpreting  the  god,
as  his  manner  was,  made  the  basis  of  his  philosophical  teaching.
It  was  a  plainer  lesson — merely  that  which  the  Egyptians  taught
their  guests  when  they  brought  in  a  skeleton  to  their  banquets :
'  Know  that  you  are  a  feeble  and  short-lived  creature.  Naked
you  came  into  this  world,  and  naked  you  will  leave  it.  What  is
the  use  of  much  riches,  much  honour,  much  pleasure,  much
anything?  Be  moderate.'  But  how  can  I  be  moderate  while
men  rage  furiously  around  me?  asks  the  worshipper.  'By  Gentle-
ness,' replied  the  god,  using  a  word  which  does  not  bear  translation,
'  by  controlling  your  temper,  by  thinking  good  of  men  and  not
evil,  by  cultivating  thoughts  and  habits  of  mind  which  "  save  "
instead  of  those  that  excite  and  corrode.'  For  this  is  the  mean-
ing of  that  gentleness  or  self-control  {aa)(Ppoavyr])  which  henceforth
ranked  as  one  of  the  cardinal  marks  of  the  Greek  spirit.^

Yet,  in  the  form  in  which  we  know  it,  it  was  no  older  than  the
seventh  century.      It  was  Apollo's  invention.      The  gospel  of

intended  to  remind  the  reader  of  i.  122.  4,  a  very  different  atmosphere.
Nemesis  is  as  shifting  in  its  positive  content  as  AiSco?,  For  the  origin  of  the
meaning  famihar  in  Aeschylus  and  Herodotus  ('  Though  the  mills  of  God
grind  slowly  yet  they  grind  exceeding  small ')  see  Theognis,  659.

'  Cf.  Murray,  Greek  Epic,  pp.  27-8  (2nd  ed.,  p.  48) ;  Hdt.  ii.  78  (Egyptian
banquets)  ;  Plato,  Charm.  164.


CHAP.  IV  RELIGION


119


Delphi  is  indeed  a  new  religion,  like  the  gospel  of  Amos  and
Isaiah.  Like  theirs,  and  that  of  St.  Francis,  it  was  attached  to  an
old  name — for  great  religious  teachers,  like  great  statesmen,  never
build  on  new  ground — but  the  Apollo  of  Homer,  the  god  of  the
silver  quiver  and  the  arrows  of  pestilence,  is  as  remote  from  the
Apollo  of  the  oracle  as  is  the  Yahwch  of  Jael  from  the  ^'ahuch
of  Isaiah.  It  was  a  religion  which  sprang  up,  so  far  as  we  can
tell,  simply  out  of  the  needs  of  the  age.  Its  story,  for  it  had
a  story,  was  simple  enough.  Apollo  was  the  son  of  Zeus  and  the
appointed  mediator,  by  means  of  his  oracle  at  Delphi,  'the  navel
of  the  earth,'  between  the  All-Father  and  helpless  mankind.
But  nothing  in  the  story,  and  no  material  circumstances  in  the
environment  of  Delphi,  explain  the  rapid  rise  of  the  Oracle  till  it
became  for  several  generations  the  greatest  spiritual  force  in  the
Greek  world.  And  not  only  a  spiritual  force,  but  (as  the  two  were
not  yet  dissociated  in  men's  minds)  a  temporal  power  as  well.
It  was  Apollo  to  whom,  as  to  a  Pope,  kings  and  people  came  for
advice,  who  encouraged  and  directed  that  great  impulse  of  colonial
expansion  which,  however  different  in  pretext  and  appearance,
is  yet  in  some  measure  akin  to  the  Crusades;  above  all  it  was
Apollo  who,  as  tradition  affirmed,  not  merely  by  his  preaching  but
by  detailed  suggestion  and  regulation,  helped  some  of  the  most
*  diseased  '  of  Greek  states  to  recover  health  and  strength.  There
were  clever  shufflers  at  Delphi  in  the  fifth  century.  They  were
the  unworthy  offspring  of  men  who,  in  spite  of  their  motto,  did
not  compromise  but  originated.  The  very  names  of  these  early
prophets  have  passed  away.  They  were  content  to  cast  their
work  upon  Apollo,  as  the  bards  were  content  to  cast  theirs  upon
Homer,  Yet  prophets  there  must  have  been,  as  truly  inspired
as  those  of  Israel.  In  spite  of  the  priests  who  succeeded  them
their  work  lived  on :  '  the  fire  of  their  spirit  illumined  and  warmed
the  whole  religious  life  of  the  Hellenes.'  None  of  the  great
names  of  the  greatest  age  of  Greece  but  shows  marks  of  their  in-
fluence, though  Pindar  and  Sophocles,  Aeschylus  and  Herodotus,
Thucydides  and  Euripides,  Plato  and  Aristotle  (to  group  them
roughly  in  couples)  each  let  the  leaven  work  in  the  way  that  best
suited  their  own  genius.  It  is  a  far  cry  from  '  Be  Moderate  '  to
Aristotle's  '  Virtue  is  a  Mean  '  and  Plato's  canonization  of  Apollo
as  the  god  of  his  New  Republic.     But  the  same  '  saving  temper  '


I20  POLITICS  TART  II

is  at  work  in  them  all.  So  too  wc  can  feel  it  in  the  Funeral
Speech,  despite  all  its  superlatives;  and  when,  at  Pericles'  exit
from  the  story,  Thucydides  is  trying  to  sum  up  his  work  in
a  sentence,  this  is  what  came  into  his  mind,  like  a  breath  from
the  older  Delphi :  '  So  long  as  he  held  supreme  authority  in  the
city  in  time  of  peace,  he  led  her  with  moderation  and  fenced  her
with  security.     So  under  him  she  attained  her  greatest  power.'  '

But  it  is  time  to  pass  on  to  Apollo's  more  immediate  achieve-
ment in  the  building  up  of  the  fifth-century  city — his  work
as  a  lawgiver.  For  the  prophets  who  '  speak  out '  at  Delphi,
like  the  prophets  of  Israel,  precede  and  make  straight  the  way
for  written  law.^

*  Thuc.  ii.  65.  5  :  /xfrpico?  here  means  either  '  moderately'  or  'fittingly',
'appropriately' :  both  expressions  recall  the  Delphic  way  of  looking  at  things.
For  Plato's  use  of  Apollo  (which  many  a  Christian  reader  must  have  thought
strange)  see  Rep.  427.  Not  even  the  'city  in  the  heavens'  can  do  without
Apollo's  saving  influence.  For  Sophocles  (who  is  far  nearer  the  seventh-
century  spirit)  cf.  O.  7".  863  fT.  vouiiv  (to  be  ill)  is  the  ordinary  Greek  word  to
denote  internal  trouble  in  a  city.  To  people  who  have  no  medical  science
the  causes  of  bodily  illness  are  no  less  obscure,  often  more  obscure,  than
those  of  social  unrest.

'^  'Prophet'  (npotpTjTrjs)  of  course  means  'one  who  speaks  out',  not  'one
who  predicts  '.  For  the  prophets  of  Delphi  see  Wilamowitz,  Orestie,
Introduction  to  Choephoroe,  especially  pp.  133-4.  For  an  appreciation  of
their  influence  see  the  chapter  on  '  The  Unity  of  Greece '  in  Curtius's  History
of  Greece,  E.  T.,  vol.  ii,  ch.  i  (not  up-to-date  in  its  details).  The  best
monument  to  the  colonizing  influence  of  Delphi  is  Pindar's  Fourth
Pythian  Ode.


CHAPTER  V

THE   ELEMENTS   OF   CITIZENSHIP

LAW,   OR   THE   RULE   OF   FAIR    PLAY
(laoi^o/iia)

'E\(ii0epoi  yap  iovTiS  ov  navra  iXivOfpoi  dm'  eVfiTTt  ytip  (Tf/)t  hfanijrrfi  vupm.

Herodotus,  vii.  104.
Though  free  they  are  not  absolutely  free ;   for  they  have  a  master  over
them,  the  law.

I  will  no  longer  hate  the  government  but  obey  its  commands  willingly,
since  I  feel  sure  they  are  laid  down  for  the  good  of  all  of  us.  The  policeman
1  will  no  longer  regard  as  an  enemy  but  as  a  friend.—  Yiddish-English
Conversation  Manual,  compiled  in  connexion  with  the  Russo-Jewish  Com-
mittee, p.  196.

That  the  Greek  states  recovered  from  the  confusion  causctl  by
the  economic  crisis  of  the  seventh  century  was  due  in  the  main,
as  we  have  seen,  to  the  influence  of  the  Delphic  oracle.  Apollo's
gentle  doctrine  of  self-control  and  moderation  became  an  integral
part  of  Greek  political  life.  But  we  must  be  careful  not  to  exag-
gerate the  rapidity  of  its  working.  Bitter  passions  once  aroused
by  injustice  and  suffering  are  not  easily  assuaged,  and  it  would
be  too  much  to  expect  them  to  die  down  in  Greece  at  the  magic
of  a  single  phrase.  Moreover  the  surest  remedies,  in  the  body
politic  as  elsewhere,  are  not  always  those  which  act  most  quickl}'.
Apollo  was  no  revivalist,  and  he  could  afford  to  wait.

Thus  in  the  majority  of  the  Greek  states  the  recovery  from
chaos  was  slow  and  halting,  and  there  were  many  quarters  where
the  bitterness  was  at  first  too  great  for  Apollo's  message  to  pene-
trate. Between  the  confusion  of  the  seventh  century  and  the
lawgivers  who  followed  upon  it  there  is  a  period  of  transition,
during  which  Greece  was  adapting  herself  to  the  new  economic
conditions  and  accustoming  her  mind  to  the  new  teachings  of
Delphi.  This  period  is  marked  by  the  emergence  of  personal  rule
under  what  are  known  as  the  '  tyrants  '.

In  the  development  which  we  are  tracing— the  growth  of  the
influences  which  culminated  in  the  political  life  of  fifth-century


122


POLITICS  PART  II


Athens — the  tyrants  are  an  interkide.  As  Herodotus  and  Thucy-
dides  both  tell  us,  each  in  his  own  characteristic  way,  they  did
'  nothing  noteworthy '.  They  made  no  special  contribution  to  the
spiritual  development  of  Greece :  for  they  brought  no  reinforcement
either  to  the  corporate  sense  of  the  community  or  to  the  liberty  of
the  individual.  And  in  the  material  sphere  too,  in  spite  of  all  their
grand  designs^  they  were  felt  to  be  an  incubus.  '  The  Athenians,'
says  Herodotus,  who  knew  the  spirit  of  his  adopted  countrymen,
'  when  governed  by  tyrants  were  superior  in  war  to  none  of
their  neighbours  ;  but  when  freed  from  tyrants  became  by  far
the  first.  This,  then,  shows  that  as  long  as  they  were  oppressed
they  purposely  acted  as  cowards,  because  they  were  labouring  for
a  master  ;  but  when  they  were  free  every  man  was  zealous  to
labour  for  himself.'  ^

Yet,  because  of  the  part  that  they  play  in  the  development  of
our  story,  we  cannot  ignore  them  altogether.  For  it  was  they
who  set  before  the  Greeks  in  the  clearest  light  their  need  for
written  law,  and  who  thus  pressed  them  to  apply,  and  to  embody
in  permanent  form,  the  somewhat  vague  and  general  teachings  of
Delphi.

The  rise  of  the  tyrants  is  easily  explained.  The  gathering
discontent  in  the  various  Greek  states  was  bound  to  lead,  sooner
or  later,  to  popular  uprisings.  But  the  oppressed  and  suffering
people  had  no  natural  leaders,  and  the  crisis  was  a  golden  oppor-
tunity for  men  of  vigour  and  ability  to  espouse  the  popular  cause
and  lead  their  party  to  victory.  Once  masters  of  the  multitude,
and  with  the  reins  of  power  within  their  grip,  it  was  not  difficult
for  them  to  maintain  and  regularize  their  position,  and  even  to
hand  on  their  authority  to  their  lineal  successors.  Personal
governments  of  this  sort  were  established  in  the  seventh  and
sixth  centuries  in  numerous  states  of  Greece  and  Asia  Minor,  for
instance  at  Ephesus,  Miletus,  Mytilene,  and  Samos,  at  Corinth,
Sicyon,  Megara,  and  Epidaurus.  Athens,  too,  had  her  tyrants,
although,  as  w^e  shall  see,  at  a  slightly  different  phase  of  her
development.

Most  of  these  'tyrannies'  were,  as  Aristotle  remarks,  'ex-
ceedingly shortlived ' :  the  longest,  that  of  Orthagoras  and  his

^  Hdt.  V.  78  ;  Thuc.  i.  17.  The  wholly  different  account  given  by  Isocrates
{Paneg.  75-84)  must  be  taken  ciii/i  gra7to.


(  iiAr.  \  LAW  ,^^

successors  at  Sicyon,  lasted  barely  a  century.  Its  survival  was
due,  we  are  told,  to  their  exceptional  moderation !  For  the
ordinary  tyrant,  especially  in  the  second  generation,  found  it
impossible  to  resist  the  temptations  of  power,  and  often  yielded
to  them  in  their  grossest  and  most  violent  forms.  It  was  hardly
to  be  expected,  thought  the  Greeks,  that  a  man  entirely  free
from  all  corporate  and  customary  restraints  should  act  otherwise.
'  Indeed,'  asks  a  speaker  in  Herodotus,  who  is  surely  expressing
the  historian's  own  point  of  view,  'how  can  an  autocracy  be
a  well-constituted  government  where  one  man  is  allowed  to  do
whatever  he  pleases  without  having  to  answer  for  his  actions  ?
Even  the  best  of  men,  were  he  granted  such  power,  would  alter
the  train  of  his  thoughts.  Insolence  will  be  engendered  in  him
by  the  advantages  of  his  position  :  and  envy  he  has  already,
implanted  in  him,  as  in  all  men,  from  his  birth.  With  these  two
in  his  soul  he  is  filled  with  every  wickedness;  for  insolence  will
cause  him  to  break  out  into  many  acts  of  wantonness,  and  envy
into  many  more.  One  would  expect  a  man  who  holds  the
sovereign  power  to  be  free  from  envy,  since  he  already  possesses
every  advantage  ;  but  he  is  a  standing  proof  to  the  contrary  in
his  behaviour  towards  the  public,  for  he  envies  the  best  of  those
who  survive  under  his  rule  and  delights  in  the  worst  of  the  citizens.
He  very  readily  listens  to  calumny  and  is  the  most  inconsistent  of
all  men.  If  you  show  him  respect  in  moderation  he  is  oftended
because  he  is  not  sufficiently  honoured  ;  and  if  any  one  pays  him
particular  honours  he  regards  the  flattery  as  offensive.'  There
are  no  definite  accusations  here,  and  the  account  is  consistent
with  an  able  and  successful  administration.  A  ruler  may  be
haughty  and  sensitive  and  capricious  in  his  personal  likings  and
yet  remain  active  and  clear-sighted.  The  whole  tone  of  the
complaint  is  rather  social  than  political.  It  shows  us,  what
many  will  recognize  in  other  spheres,  club-life  at  its  worst,  and
throws  a  lurid  light  on  that  spirit  of  petty  meanness  which  always
lies  ready  below  the  surface  in  all  little  communities.  No  better
soil  could  be  found  for  it  than  was  provided  by  the  conditions
of  Greek  life.  Greece  only  conquered  these  temptations  and
kept  the  air  of  her  cities  sweet  by  keeping  men's  minds  full,  and
their  hands  busy,  with  large  impersonal  issues.^
1  Hdt.  iii.  80;  Ar.  Pol  1315^  '3,  38.


124  POLITICS  I'AKT  II

But  the  speaker  in  Herodotus  has  not  yet  concluded  his  in-
dictment. '  I  proceed  to  mention,'  he  continues,  '  what  is  most
important  of  all.  The  tyrant  changes  the  rights  and  customs  of
our  ancestors,  violates  women,  and  puts  men  to  death  without
trial.'  The  tyrants,  in  other  words,  cared  neither  for  the  imme-
morial rights  of  Greek  life  nor  for  the  city-made  rules  and  precedents
which  had  gradually  grown  up  around  them.  They  trampled
down  both  without  thought  or  discrimination.  They  offended
against  all  the  sanctities  and  cut  men's  holiest  feelings  to  the  quick.

Yet  the  laws  against  which  they  sinned  were  not  laws  to  which
appeal  could  be  made  against  them.  All  men  knew  them  ;  but
they  were  nowhere  to  be  found.  Their  old  interpreters  were
dead  :  and  the  words  of  the  oracle  were  not  clear  enough  to  be
cited  in  the  market-place.  The  times  cried  aloud  for  something
more  permanent  and  definite,  for  some  impersonal  authority,  wise
with  the  wisdom  of  years  and  invested  with  a  perpetual  validity,  to
which  the  citizen  could  make  a  sure  and  triumphant  appeal  in
times  of  distress.  '  The  law,'  says  Aristotle,  '  has  a  compulsory
power,  and  is  at  the  same  time  a  rational  ordinance  proceeding
from  a  kind  of  prudence  or  reason.  And  whereas  we  take  offence
at  individuals  who  oppose  our  inclinations,  even  though  their
opposition  is  right,  we  do  not  feel  aggrieved  when  the  law  bids
us  do  what  is  right.'  What  was  needed  in  the  Greek  states  at
this  time,  both  as  a  stimulus  and  a  safeguard,  was  a  table  of
written  commandments.^

Thus  we  have  reached  at  length  what  seemed  to  the  fifth-
century  Greeks,  looking  backwards,  the  misty  age  of  law-making.
The  art  of  writing  spread  through  the  Greek  world  in  the
seventh  century.  Fortunately  for  Greece  and  for  the  world,  the
need  and  the  opportunity  brought  forth  the  men.  What  Solon
achieved  for  Athens,  the  mysterious  Lycurgus  achieved  for  Sparta,
and  a  host  of  other  lawgivers,  few  of  whose  names  we  know,
achieved  for  many  other  City  States  both  in  the  East  and  in
the  West.  The  fundamental  laws  which  they  established  through
the  greater  part  of  the  Greek  world  formed  the  basis,  well-laid
and  unshakable,  of  the  famous  and  familiar  fifth-century  system
of  government. -

'  Ar.  Eth.  1 1  So  a  21.

^  Lycurgus   is    still    as    mysterious   a  figure   as   he  was   to  Thucydides


ciTAr.  V  LAW


12


It  is  hard  for  us  to  realize  what  part  '  the  Laws  '  played  in  the
life  of  a  fifth-century  Athenian.  We  have  our  constitution,
written  or  unwritten,  and  the  ever-changing  body  of  our
Statute  Law.  But  they  are  remote  from  our  daily  life.  We
do  not  ourselves  enforce  them  or  even  know  them.  We  entrust
their  care  to  others — to  representatives  and  experts  and  their
agents.  Between  us  and  the  enforcement  of  law  stand  the
policeman  and  the  magistrate :  between  us  and  the  making
of  law  stand  Parliament  and  the  Government.  But  in  Athens
there  was  no  such  thing  as  '  the  Government '  as  distinct  from
the  people.

'  Who  is  the  lord  and  shepherd  of  their  flock  ? '  asks  the
Queen-Mother  of  Persia  in  Aeschylus  about  the  strange  Western
people  against  whom  her  son  Xerxes  is  fighting :  and  straight
comes  the  answer,  worded,  not  for  the  Persian  court,  but  for
the  quick  audience  of  Athenians  in  the  theatre  under  the  Acro-
polis :  '  They  are  not  slaves :  they  bow  to  no  man's  rule.'  We
can  almost  hear  the  cheering !  Fifty  years  later,  the  Theseus  of
Euripides,  the  ideal  hero-king  of  Athens,  uses  almost  the  same
words  to  rebuke  the  envoy  of  an  autocrat : —

Nay,  peace,  Sir  Stranger!     Ill  hast  thou  begun,
Seeking  a  master  here.     No  will  of  one
Holdeth  this  land  ;    it  is  a  city  and  free.
The  whole  folk  year  by  year,  in  parity
Of  service  is  our  king.

There  is  no  'Government'  in  Athens,  for  the  people  is  'the
Government  '.^

But  though  the  people  has  no  living  master,  it  is  not  without
control.  The  fifth-century  Athenian  did  not  yet  know,  either
in  his  individual  or  his  corporate  life,  what  it  was  to  live  without
control.  With  all  the  liberty  that  he  enjoyed,  obedience  was
.still  the  law  of  his  being.  Only  the  master  whom  he  acknow-
ledged and  with  whom  he  was  in  close  and  daily  relation,  was
no  human  being  like  himself,  but  the  Laws  of  the  Constitution,
copied  out  on  stone  pillars  so  as  to  be  constantly  before  his

who  takes  especial  pains  to  avoid  mentioning  his  name.     Hut  it  is  now  quite
certain  that  his  work  was  done,  not  at  tlie  very  beginning  of  Spartan  history,
but  at  the  close  of  a  long  period  of  disturbance,  as  Thucydides  suggests
(i.  tS.  I).
'  Aesch.  Pers.  241-2  ;  Itur.  Siippl.  403  ff-  (transl.  Murray).

1246  I


126  POLITICS  PART  II

eyes.  He  obeyed  their  commands  willingly,  for  they  embodied
the  work  of  human  reason  without  the  defects  of  human  caprice.
Their  voice  was  ever  the  same  and  their  commands  were  just.
For  laws  written  out  on  stone  and  handed  down  from  the  past
can  be  no  respecters  of  persons  : —

With  written  laws,  the  humblest  in  the  state
Is  sure  of  equal  Justice  with  the  great,

says  the  Theseus  of  Euripides.  So  Athenians  found  it  easy
to  live  justly  and  peaceably  together  under  the  ruling  principle
of  Solon's  laws.  '  Why,'  says  Herodotus,  '  the  very  name  of
it  is  beautiful — Isonomie,'  '  Fair  Play.'  We  can  understand
now  why  it  was  no  pedantic  scruple  but  the  habit  and  devotion
of  a  lifetime  which  made  Socrates  so  indignantly  reject  his
friends'  suggestion  that  he  should  escape  from  prison.  No  one
was  freer  in  mind  than  he :  }'et,  like  the  Spartans  at  Thermo-
pylae, he  'was  not  absolutely  free':  for  he  'had  a  master  over
him,  the  law  '.^

Only  the  wisest  and  most  successful  of  the  makers  of  these
written  laws  is  known  to  us  as  a  personality,  the  Athenian  Solon.
The  others  are  merely  shadowy '  wise  men  '.  But  we  have  evidence
enough  to  be  able  to  descry  the  general  lines  of  their  work  and
to  recognize  their  peculiar  spirit.  The  pithy  sayings  which  the
after-time  preserved  as  having  fallen  from  the  lips  of  the  '  Seven
Sages  '  bear  the  marks  of  the  healing  influence  of  Apollo.  They
did  not,  like  the  Jews,  call  in  a  god  to  father  their  work  ;  but
they  pursued  it  in  a  frame  of  mind  pleasing  to  the  god  they
worshipped.  Sayings  like  '  It  is  hard  to  be  good,'  or  '  Call
no  man  happy  till  his  life  be  ended  ',  and  many  others  which
we  know  as  current  coin,  from  the  mint  of  the  Sages,  in  fifth-

^  Eur.  Sufpl.  433  fif. ;  Hdt.  iii.  80,  vii.  104  ;  cf.  v.  78,  i,  29  ;  Plato,  Crito  50.
Cf.  Wilamowitz,  Aiis  Kydatheri,  pp.  47  fif.  ;  A.  A,  i.  45.  Plato  and  Aristotle
took  up  again  the  hopeless  quest  for  the  'philosopher-king',  and  the  modern
Anarchists  have  reinvented  '  unwritten  laws  '.  Theseus  knew  better. — '  Fair
Play '  was  the  foundation  on  which  Athenian  self-government  was  built  up  :
hence  it  was  a  natural  battle-cry  for  the  party  which  was  opposed  to  the  exten-
siofi  of  popular  government,  the  '  oligarchs '  or  '  aristocrats  '  referred  to  on
p.  88.  If  Fair  Play  is  secured,  what  need  of  Self-government  or  Empire  ?
Cf.  Thuc.  viii.  97  (the  uXiyapxin  Icropofioi  in  41 1),  iii.  62.  3  (Boeotia,  as  to  which
we  have  recently  secured  the  only  extant  account  of  the  detailed  working  of
an  oXiyopx^^  la-ovofxos  :  see  p.  163  below),  and  viii.  48.  6,  where  Phrynichus
points  out  how  unlikely  it  is  that  such  an  oligarchy  will  really  ensure 'fair
play'  to  all  sections  of  the  population.


CHAP.  V  LAW  1  >-

century  Athens,  testify  to  the  influence  of  the  gentle  and  mellow
and  pleasantly  ironical  wisdom  which  spoke  from  the  sanctuary
at  Delphi.  Its  strangely  simple  and  philosophical  teaching  had
penetrated  deep  into  the  heart  of  the  Greeks :  for  they  had
a  nature  ready  to  receive  it.^

One  feature  we  can  trace  in  the  work  of  all  these  lawgivers —
an  attempt  to  restore  the  unity  of  the  state  by  restricting  the
use  of  wealth.     It  was  the  sudden  discovery  of  gold  and  silver,
or  rather  of  what  can  be  bought  with  gold  and  silver,  which
had  tempted  the  aristocracy   into   injustice.     The   Sages   were
wise  enough  to  see  that  the  best  way  to  cure  the  disease  was,
so  far  as  possible,  to  remove  the  temptation.     Hence  we  find
them  enjoining,  not  only  moderation  of  spirit,  but  sobriety  of
demeanour  and    simplicity  in    outward   appearance,  and   going
so   far  as  they  dared,  and   as  the  independent   spirit   of  their
fellow-countrymen  allowed,  in  legislation  against  luxury.     While
Lycurgus  could  put  all  his  Spartans  in  uniform  and  prescribe
their  daily  menu  and  how  they  were  to  eat  it,  Solon  went  no
further  than  to  limit  an  Athenian  girl's  trousseau  to  three  dresses,
and  to  forbid  hired   mourners  at   funerals  or  the  interment  of
more  than  three  suits  of  clothes  with  the  dead.     But  the  aim  in
both  cases  was  the  same — to  redress  the  inequalities  of  wealth
in  the  state,  not  merely  by  making  just  laws,  but  by  causing  the
rich  to  look  as  much  like  the  poor  as  possible.     Men  were  to  feel
themselves  plain  citizens,  not  nobles  or  dependants.     It  was  the
outward  and  visible  sign  of  the  democracy  that  was  to  come.
Solon  was  wise  enough  to  have  discovered,  two  and  a  half  cen-
turies before  Aristotle,  that  it  is  more  important  to  form  good
habits  than  to  frame  good  laws.^

1  e.g.  Hdt.  i.  30  (Solon  and  Croesus).  Of  course  tliis  stor)'  does  not
record  what  Solon  really  said  to  Croesus,  whom  he  probably  never  met,  but
'what  he  ought  to  have  said'.  In  liook  I  alone  there  are  several  other
'  moral  stories'  which  seem  to  belong  to  this  cycle,  e.g. ' Arion  and  the  I'iratcs,
or  Art's  unexpected  resources'  (ch. 23-24),  'The  Tombof  Nilocris,  or  How  to
hoax  posterity'  (ch.  187),  '  Candaules  and  Gyges,  or  Things  one  had  better
keep  to  oneself  {(TKottinv  tlpu  tu  (<ovtov,  ch.  8) ;  note  the  particular  delight
taken  in  discomfiting  money-grubbers  (as  in  the  Rhampsinitus  story).  Com-
pare Plato,  I'rotas;.  343.

^  Plut.  Solon  21.  The  best  account  of  Solon,  because  it  connects  his  work
with  his  personality,  is  Wilamowitz's  in  A.  A.,  vol.  ii,  pp.  59  "•  Details  in
Gilliard,  (h(elques  n'formes  de  Solon,  Lausanne,  1907.  who  reprints  the
poems  in  a  convenient  form.  With  Solon's  sumptuary  legislation  comp.ire
Mahmud    the    Reformer's    introduction   of  the    fez    for   all   Ottoman    sub-

I  2


128  POLITICS  PART  II

We  have  reached  a  point  in  our  story  when  we  can  affbrd
to  concentrate  our  attention  on  Athens.  So  far  we  have  been
trying  to  understand  those  elements  in  the  Funeral  Speech
which  are  typically  Greek.  From  Solon  onwards  our  com-
mentary is  concerned  with  what  is  pre-eminently  Athenian.
For  henceforward  Athens's  leading  rivals  gradually  drop  out
of  the  running.  All  over  Greece  there  were  lawgivers,  but
Solon  laid  the  best  foundations.  Moreover,  it  is  just  at  this
point  in  the  development  that  Sparta  made  the  great  refusal,
which  caused  her  to  fall  gradually  into  the  familiar  fifth-century
role,  that  of  the  champion  of  reaction.  She  had  not  the
courage  to  extend  her  new  code  of  justice  to  all  who  lived
within  her  borders.  She  established  fair  play,  but  only  for
Spartiates  or  full  citizens;  so  that  her  lawgiver,  instead  of  'cast-
ing his  strong  shield  ',  like  Solon,  '  over  both  contending  parties ',
strengthened  the  one  still  further  at  the  expense  of  the  other,
and  made  a  permanent  division  between  citizens  and  subjects
or  rulers  and  ruled.  This  explains,  of  course,  the  peculiar  and
ferocious  asceticism  of  the  Spartan  code.  It  is  not  the  sober
simplicity  intended  to  reconcile  rich  and  poor  in  a  common
mode  of  life,  but  the  rigid  barrack-room  uniformity  of  a
nation  of  soldiers  encamped  for  ever  as  a  minority  amid  irre-
concilable enemies.  There  is  no  room  here  for  the  gentle
moderation  of  Apollo ;  Sophrosyne  is  interpreted,  not  as  the
'  saving  temper '  of  Solon,  but  as  a  discipline  so  strict  and  in-
human that  no  race  of  human  beings  can  be  loyal  to  it  in
their  hearts.  The  Spartans  are  only  obedient  for  lack  of  oppor-
tunity to  transgress.  '  When  an  Athenian  is  good,'  says  a
Spartan  in  the  Lazvs,  'he  is  very  very  good  :  .  .  .  for  Athenians
are  the  only  people  who  are  good  by  nature,  truly  and  genuinely
good,  without  compulsion,  by  some  happy  dispensation  of  Pro-
vidence.' 'As  for  your  laws,'  says  an  Athenian  speaker  in
Thucydides  to  the  assembled  Spartans,  '  no  city  outside  Sparta
has  any  use  for  them,  and  when  any  of  you  are  outside  Sparta
yourselves  you  do  not  observe  them  ;  but  neither  do  you  observe
those  of  the  ordinary  Greeks.'      Naturally  not:    for  life   in  the

jects.  Any  one  who  has  watched  the  crowd  on  the  Galata  Bridge  or
attended  service  in  a  Turkish  mosque  will  have  been  struck  by  its  levelling
influence.


CHAP.  V  LAW


129


barrack-room  or  the  cloister  (to  misuse  an  id>'llic  word)  affords
a  poor  preparation  to  grown  men  for  the  rough  and  tumble
of  the  world.'

Let  us  examine  then  the  nature  of  the  laws  which  Solon
'commanded  the  Athenians  to  obey',  remembering  that  Sparta's
were  very  different,  but  that  between  Lycurgus  and  Solon  there
was  a  host  of  intermediate  Hellenic  lawgivers  whose  work  approxi-
mated, in  greater  or  less  degree,  to  the  Athenian  standard.-

What  does  fair  play  mean  ?  The  Aristotelian  Constitution
of  AtJiens,  whose  w^-iter,  whoever  he  was,  had  Solon's  poems
to  guide  him,  singled  out  three  of  Solon's  achievements  as
specially  far-reaching.  '  First,  and  most  important  of  all,  he
forbade  men  to  borrow  money  on  the  security  of  their  own
persons.  Secondly,  he  allowed  any  one  who  wished  to  exact
legal  vengeance  for  those  who  were  suffering  wrong.  Third!}',
and  this  is  what  they  say  gave  the  mass  of  the  people  their
greatest  leverage,  there  was  the  appeal  to  the  people's  court  ;
for  once  the  mass  of  the  people  are  masters  of  the  verdict  they
become  masters  of  the  constitution.'  Let  us  take  these  three
points  in  order. '^

When  Solon  was  called  in  to  put  Athens  to  rights  he  did  not
find  himself  with  a  clean  slate,  or  at  liberty  to  compose  a  fancy
constitution  of  his  own.  His  first  duty  was  to  save  Athens  from
the  poverty  and  disorder  into  which  she  had  sunk  through  the
distress  of  the  agricultural  population.  The  poor  were  calling
out,  as  they  always  did  in  Greece  whenever  trouble  arose,  for
a  redivision  of  the  land  into  equal  slices.  The  richer  landowners
were  tired  of  trying  to  work  their  farms  with  debt-slaves  and  were
also  ready  for  a  change.  Solon  saw  it  was  a  case  for  surge r}'.
He  cancelled  at  one  stroke  the  entire  debts  of  the  agricultural
population    by   proclaiming   what   went    down    to    histor}-,    in

^  Thuc.  i.  "JT.  6  ;  Plato,  Laws  642  C.

-  The  best  known  of  these  constitutions  is  that  of  (^ortyn  in  Crete,  dis-
covered in  1884.  Parts  of  it  go  back  to  the  seventh  century,  but  it  was
finally  put  together  in  the  first  part  of  the  fifth.  For  other  lawgivers,  e.g.
Zaleucos,  Charondas,  Pheidon,  cf.  Meyer,  Gesch.,  vol.  ii,  §  360  and  references.
The  constitutional  movement  probably  originated,  like  Greek  poetry  and  philo-
sophy, in  Ionia;  but  all  that  is  left  of  its  Ionian  origin  is  a  broken  stone
pillar  from  Chios.  It  shows  traces,  not  only  of  an  early  written  constitution,
but  also  of  a  popular  law  court.  See  Wilamowitz,  Nord-lonisihc  Stcnic,
pp.  64-71,  Staat  II /id  Gcselhchaft,  p.  78.

'  Ath.  Pol.  ix.  I.


130  POLITICS  PART  II

Pilgriiiis  Progress  language,  as  a  'Shaking  Oft"  of  Burdens'.
He  then  took  steps  to  redeem  the  Athenians  who  had  been  sold
into  slavery  abroad,  using  public  and  any  private  funds  he  could
secure  for  the  purpose,  and  made  it  illegal  for  a  man  to  barter  away
his  personal  liberty  for  money.  The  farmers  were  re-established
as  freeholders  on  their  ancestral  holdings  (though  the  old  tradition
of  inalienability  was  of  course  swept  away),  a  number  of  practical
enactments  were  passed  for  the  improvement  of  agriculture,  and
Attica  was  launched  again  on  her  course,  not  without  more  troubles
ahead,  as  a  land  of  peasant  proprietors.  The  men  whom  Solon
set  on  their  feet  were  the  ancestors  of  the  farmers  we  meet  in
Aristophanes,  who  objected  so  strongly  to  having  to  leave  their
vines  and  olive-trees  to  the  mercy  of  the  Peloponnesians.  They
made  their  country  famous,  in  spite  of  the  poverty  of  its  soil,  as
the  best  cultivated  in  Greece.^

Solon's  two  other  chief  achievements  were  connected  not  with
political  but  with  judicial  administration.  For,  as  we  have  seen,
Solon  was  not  the  founder  of  the  fifth-century  democracy  because
he  gave  the  people  power  in  public  policy,  but  because  he  secured
them  justice  or  fair  play.  If  we  think  of  Athens  in  connexion
with  democracy  rather  than  with  justice,  it  is  because,  through
the  usage  of  centuries,  we  regard  justice  between  man  and  man  in
a  court  of  law  as  a  matter  of  course.  But  in  Athens  at  Solon's
advent  it  was  not  so.  There  were  two  great  changes  to  be  made
before  every  individual  Athenian  could  be  assured  of  fair  play.

^  Solon,  frag,  xxxii  ;  Plut.  So/oii  23  (on  wells,  olive-planting,  beehives,  &.c.) ;
Hellenica  Oxyrhynchia  xii.  4  (cultivation  of  Attica).  It  was  an  act  of  piety  to
ransom  a  fellow-citizen  from  slavery.  Names  like  Au'rafS/jo?  (Lysander)  and
many  others  beginning  in  Auo-i-  attest  the  practice.  GXotz, S o/idan'te ,  pp.  329!?.,
has,  I  think,  disproved  the  view  (based  on  a  careless  reading  of  Ar. /W.  1266
b  17)  that  Solon  limited  the  amount  of  land  a  man  might  hold,  as  is  virtually
done  in  some  cantons  of  Switzerland.  It  was  contrary  to  his  ideas  to  impose
fresh  restrictions  on  trade  in  land  or  anything  else.  That  he  should  impose
restrictions  on  borrowing  was  inevitable,  but  it  led  to  fresh  trouble  none  the
less,  as  we  shall  see,  just  as  the  abolition  of  imprisonment  for  debt,  for  which
Dickens  pleaded,  has  led  to  the  bankruptcy  scandals  of  to-day.  As  a  matter
of  fact,  debt-slavery  was  not  entirely  extirpated  from  Athenian  life.  It,  or
something  very  like  it,  crops  up  again  later.  For  instance,  in  Menander's
He>-o  we  hear  of  a  frcedman  shepherd  who  borrowed  money  in  a  bad  year,
could  not  repay,  and  died  leaving  his  freeborn  children  to  work  off  the  debt.
These  live  in  the  creditor's  household  together  with  his  recognized  slaves,
and  are  described  as  being  '  in  a  sort  of  way  slaves '  {Hero  20  ff.,  Teubner).
Of  course  there  was  borrowing  both  before  and  after  the  troubles  of  the
Solonian  era  :  but  it  was  very  much  more  widespread  just  after  the  introduc-
tion of  money.


CHAP.  V  LAW  ,^,

The  city  must  step  in  finally,  ;is  \\c  have  seen  it  beginning  to
step  in  at  Elis,  to  free  its  members  from  the  tyranny  of  Ics.scr
loyalties  ;  and  her  voice  must  be  clothed  with  the  impartial
authority,  not  of  a  class  or  a  caste,  but  of  the  people.

These  were  the  two  chief  ideas  which  Solon,  following  the
lines  roughly  traced  by  his  predecessor  Draco,  embodied  in  the
Athenian  commonwealth.  Except  in  the  case  of  certain  pecu-
liarly intimate  offences  such  as  parricide,  he  allowed  'any  one
who  wished'  to  set  on  foot  a  prosecution  for  a  criminal  offence.
To  understand  what  this  means  one  must  think  away  the  whole
of  the  modern  state's  apparatus  of  policemen  and  ministers  of
justice,  and  imagine  oneself  back  in  a  world  where  men  weie
slowly  being  schooled  to  accept  a  wider  authority  than  that  of
the  household  and  the  clan.  Solon  was  once  asked  which  was
the  best  policed  city.  'The  city,'  he  replied,  'where  all  citizens,
whether  they  have  suffered  injury  or  not,  equally  pursue  and
punish  injustice.'  His  aim  was  to  make  every  Athenian  feel  and
act  up  to  his  responsibility  for  the  administration  of  justice,  feel
it  as  a  duty  he  owed,  not  as  an  individual  to  a  friend  in  need,  but
as  a  citizen  of  a  free  state.  For  it  is  only  in  a  state  where  men
are  jealous  for  the  maintenance  of  justice  that  the  freedom  of  the
individual  can  permanently  be  secured.  We  can  trace  the  success
of  Solon's  endeavour  in  the  rapid  and  continuous  development  of
the  Athenian  system  of  criminal  law  down  to  the  da)'s  when  we
know  it  best — the  period  of  the  fourth-century  oratois. '

This  is  not  the  place  to  discuss  this  system  in  detail.  But  it  is
worth  noting  that  those  parts  of  it  which  go  back  most  certainly
to  Solon  and  were  the  first  to  be  worked  out  in  greatest  detail
are  those  that  afford  protection  to  the  weak  and  helpless.  '  It  is
probable,  indeed,  that  Solon  began  by  allowing  any  citizen  to
open  a  criminal  prosecution  in  cases  where  the  persons  wronged
were  legally  incapable  or  positively  unable  to  secure  justice  for
themselves,  and  could  not  secure  from  their  families  the  indis-
pensable measure  of  support.  Plutarch  says  that  it  was  to
succour  the  helpless  that  Solon  allowed  any  citizen  to  act  on
behalf  of  a  victim  of  oppression.  The  actions  for  neglect  (KaKcaaim

1  Criminal  prosecutions  undertaken  by  the  state  in  this  way  through  the
instrumentality  of  'any   one    who   wished'    were   known   as    written   suits
(ypacfiai),  because  they  were  the  first  to  be  put  in  written  form,  as  opposed
i  to  StKoi,  civil  suits,  the  sort  of  quarrels  which  we  saw  Deioces  deciding.


132


POLITICS  PART  II


ypa^ai)  are  logically  the  first  in  date.  These  public  actions,
by  which  the  state  took  under  its  wing  poor  or  aged  parents,
orphaned  minors  and  heiresses,  were  always  surrounded  by  an
old-world  atmosphere.  The  prosecutor  appealed  to  the  Archon,
who  had  been  the  chief  magistrate  in  the  city's  earliest  days.
His  suit  was  specially  privileged,  and  the  procedure  specially
simple  and  expeditious.  The  case  was  opened  within  five  days
and  was  the  only  kind  of  suit  which  involved  no  danger  to  the
accuser.  There  was  no  deposit  to  be  made  ;  no  risk  of  a  fine  for
a  frivolous  prosecution ;  not  even  a  time  limit  for  the  pleadings.
The  punishment  in  case  of  conviction  was  loss  of  political  rights.
So  far  from  being  a  violent  usurpation,  a  revolutionary  measure
directed  against  the  rights  of  the  family,  the  power  to  step  in  and
avenge  wrongs  done  to  others  served  at  first  to  protect  the  family
and  to  fill  a  gap  in  its  rights.'  No  doubt  this  is  what  Solon  tried
to  make  it  seem  to  conservative  spirits  at  the  time  ;  but  he  was
probably  wise  enough  to  realize  from  the  first  the  full  conse-
quences that  were  involved  in  bringing  in  the  city  as  the  defender
of  the  helpless.  For  he  was  doing  what  many  social  reformers,
wise  or  unwise  in  their  methods,  are  trying  to  do  to-day :  he  was
associating  the  State  with  ideas  not  only  of  power  but  of  kindness.
No  part  of  his  work  took  firmer  root.  He  succeeded  in  per-
petuating a  tradition  of  mercy  and  generosity  which  to  the
Athenian  of  the  fifth  century  seemed  one  of  Athens's  oldest  and
most  natural  boasts.  Not  only  Sophocles  in  the  Oedipus  Colo-
neiis  and  Euripides  in  the  SnppUccs  but  even  the  inflexible
Thucydides  accept  and  glory  in  it.  If  it  had  not  been  for
Solon,  the  most  bitterly  ironical  passage  of  the  Funeral  Speech
could  never  have  been  penned :  *  in  doing  good  we  are  the
exact  opposite  of  the  rest  of  mankind.  We  secure  our  friends
not  by  accepting  favours  but  b}^  doing  them.'^

But  it  was  no  use  bringing  wrongdoers  before  the  judgement-
seat  if  the  Zeus-born  noble  still  sat  there  to  deliver  'crooked
judgements*.  Solon's  third  and  greatest  achievement  was  to  'make
the  people  master  of  the  verdict '.  We  led  up  to  this  early  in
our  history  by  the  institution  of  the  jury  system.  But  the
Greeks  did  not  care,  if  they  could  avoid  it,  to  work  through  so

^  Glotz,  Solidaritc,  pp.  37 1 -2  expanded  in  Uaremberg,  s.  v.  KtiKwcrecos  ypa^i] ;
Thuc.  i.  2.  6,  ii.  40.  4 ;  Isaeus  iii.  46  ;  Murray,  Euripides,  Introduction,  p.  xxvi.


CHAP.  V  LAW  1^^

small  a  body  of  representatives.  If  the  people  was  to  give  its
verdict,  the  people  in  a  body,  or  at  least  a  large  section  of  the
people,  must  sit  in  judgement.  Of  course,  they  had  neither  the
time  nor  the  knowledge  to  do  so  every  day  or  in  every  case.
The  ordinary  administration  must  still  be  left  to  the  magistrates,
who  had  now  however  a  written  code  and  not  an  unwritten
tradition  to  interpret.  But  in  exceptional  cases,  whcic  the  law
was  not  clear  or  the  decision  hotly  disputed,  Solon  granted  an
appeal  to  a  large  popular  court  of  sex'cral  thousand  citizens —
a  sort  of  Grand  Assize  of  the  nation  sitting  under  open  heaven
by  the  market-place.  The  exact  powers  and  composition  of  this
body,  the  Heliaea  as  it  was  called,  are  not  known  ;  we  only
become  familiar  with  popular  justice  when  the  Heliaea  had  been
split  up  into  the  numerous  courts,  consisting  of  several  hundreds,
instead  of  thousands,  of  judges,  which  we  find  in  the  time  of
Pericles.  We  do  not  know  who  decided  what  cases  should  be
submitted  to  it.  But  Solon  enacted  one  provision  which  made  it
quite  certain  that,  in  case  of  friction,  the  people  had  the  whip-
hand  of  their  magistrates.  He  ordained  that  every  magistrate
when  he  went  out  of  office  should  give  an  account  before  the
assembly  of  the  people  of  his  conduct  during  its  tenure.  With
this  inquisition  before  him  from  a  jealous  constituency  of  natural
hecklers  it  was  not  likely  that  a  magistrate  would  deliberately
incur  popular  displeasure.  The  danger  indeed  was  all  the  other
way.  Although  the  popular  assembly  had  not  yet  realized  its
power,  Solon  had  embarked  Athens,  for  good  or  ill,  on  the  troubled
waters  of  democracy.^

These  were  the  most  momentous  of  Solon's  Laws,  l^ut  there
were  many  more  of  smaller  importance — all  designed  with  the
same  double  object,  to  free  the  individual  from  lesser  tics  and
bind  him  closely  to  the  city.  The  most  significant  perhaps  is
the  enactment  of  testamentary  freedom..  Athenians  were  hence-
forward allowed  to  leave  their  money  as  they  liked,  inside  the
clan  or  out,  '  if  there  are  no  legitimate  male  heirs.'  The  excep-
tion was  of  course  in  practice  more  important  than  the  rule.  But
it  was  not  so  in  principle.     Testamentary  freedom,  even  in  this

^  References  for  Heliaea  in  Busolt,  Gricchische  Gcsthichtc,  vol.  ii  (2nd  cd.),
pp.  283  ff.  Wilamowitz's  attractive  derivation  for  f/Xmui,  'sunny  meeting-
place',  has  unfortunately  not  found  favour.


134  POLITICS  PART  II

qualified  form,  was  a  new  thing  in  the  Greek  world,  and  we  can
watch  its  irresistible  spread  from  Solonian  Athens  to  the  remotest
parts  of  Greece.^

Only  one  more  feature  of  Solon's  work  is  worth  emphasizing,
for  it  points  ahead.  Plutarch  tells  us  that  Solon  gave  facilities
for  acquiring  Athenian  citizenship  to  foreigners  who  were  willing
to  settle  permanently  in  the  country  w'ith  their  families  in  order  to
exercise  some  skilled  manual  trade.  Encouragement  of  immigra-
tion is  not  uncommon  among  growing  communities  in  the  modern
world.  We  are  familiar  with  states  which  advertise  'situations
vacant'  in  the  Press,  like  employers  asking  for  new  hands.  But
the  states  of  the  Greek  world  had  not  been  trained  by  generations
of  competition  to  regard  the  foreigner  as  a  unit  of  labour.  They
were  in  their  nature  select  and  exclusive  corporations,  rigidly
subdivided  into  lesser  and  still  selecter  circles  ;  and  there  was  no
place  in  them  for  outsiders.  Solon's  policy,  therefore,  marks  the
beginning  of  a  far-reaching  change  of  attitude.  Henceforward
newcomers  are  no  longer  to  be  despised,  as  in  the  old  days,  as
'  cityless  vagrants  without  hearth-fire  or  lands',  but  welcomed
as  useful  comrades  and  helpers  in  the  work  of  the  community.
In  other  words,  Athens  was  now  willing  to  accept  new  blood  on
its  merits,  quite  apart  from  questions  of  religion  and  nationality.
We  shall  watch  the  fruits  of  this  policy  in  the  twofold  develop-
ment of  the  next  few  generations,  in  the  increase  of  trade  and
industry,  which  these  landless  immigrants  naturally  exercised,
side  by  side  with  agriculture,  and  in  the  gradual  relaxing  of  the
ties  that  still  bound  the  native-born  Athenian  to  his  clan  and
his  local  district.  In  both  these  directions  Solcwi's  careful  yet
courageous  statesmanship  paved  the  way  for  '  that  amazing
revolutionary  Cleisthenes '.

'■  Giotz,  Solidaritc,  pp.  342-5.  Compare  the  converse,  pp.  359  ff.,  on  the
duties  of  sons  under  Solon's  regime.  Plato's  testamentary  regulations
{Laws  922  ff.)  are  a  good  measure  of  his  old-fashionedness.


CHAPTER    VI

THE    ELEMENTS   OF   CITIZl'NSIIir

SELF-GOVERNMLKT,  OR  THE  RULE  OF  THE  rEOI'Ei:
(Sjj/xoKpaTia)

^Apx')  ""S/J"  Sfi'^fi. — Greek  Proverb.
Office  brings  out  the  man.

'Afxrjxnvov  8e  navTos  avBpos  eKfiaOe'if
\l/vx')f  Tf  Kai  (f)p6vt]fia  Koi  yv<ji>fir]v,  njuv  (iv
af))^ais  Tf   Kill  vi'ifMOKTiP  fVTpi^qs  ffyavfl-

SOPHOCLLS,  A/Uiiio/u-  175-7.
There  is  no  way  to  know  of  any  man
The  spirit  and  the  wisdom  and  the  will,
Till  he  stands  proved,  ruler  and  iawgivc-r.

tr.  WniTKi.AW.

It  is  a  constant  source  of  astonishment  to  hot-headed  Radicals
that  communities  with  an  extended  franchise  should  tolerate
government  by  a  superior  class.  It  seems  only  natural,  when
power  has  been  placed  in  the  hands  of  the  masses,  that  they
should  at  once  make  use  of  it,  particularly  when  it  can  be  used
so  greatly  in  their  own  interest.  Why  any  one  earning  under
thirty  .shillings  a  week  should  vote  Conservative  and  submit  to
the  pretensions  of  a  hereditary  aristocracy  passes  their  under-
standing. Logically,  this  point  of  view  seems  reasonable  enough,
and  Periclean  Athens  .seems  to  give  it  the  confirmation  of  experi-
ence ;  but  in  truth  it  is  contradicted  both  by  the  warnings  of
history  and  by  the  hard  facts  of  political  human  nature.  History
suggests— what  many  an  'advanced'  candidate  has  discovered
to  his  cost— that  it  takes  generations  of  teaching,  not  b\'  argument
but  by  suffering,  before  a  people,  however  politically  gifted,  can
be  induced  to  take  the  trouble  to  govern  itself  The  Athenians
took  to  politics  as  easily,  and  were  as  politically  gifted,  as  any
community  in  history.  Yet  their  acceptance  of  .self-government
was  tentative  and  hesitating.  It  came  late,  and  almost  as  an
after-thought,  in  the  development  of  their  polity.     If  they  could


136  POLITICS  PART  II

have  lived  happy  and  undisturbed  under  any  other  form  of
government,  they  would  as  willingly  have  turned  their  energies
into  other  channels  as  the  '  silent  middle-class  voter '  to-day,  or
their  own  easy-going  compatriots  on  the  coast  of  Asia  Minor.
Careful  political  observers,  who  are  not  blinded  by  catchwords
or  by  the  glamour  of  fifth-century  Athens,  have  known  this  in
all  ages.  Rhodes,  like  Venice,  grew  to  be  the  greatest  port  in
her  sea  without  embracing  democracy.  Her  merchant  princes,
as  Strabo  puts  it,  '  paid  attention  to  the  people '  without  being
democrats,  which  means  that  they  supplied  them  with  food  and
circuses.  '  The  example  of  the  people  of  Taras,'  says  Aristotle,
'  is  especially  deserving  of  imitation ;  they  keep  the  poor  in
a  good  temper  by  sharing  the  use  of  their  property  with  them.
Moreover,  they  divide  all  their  ofifices  into  two  classes,  one  half
of  them  being  elected  by  vote,  the  other  by  lot ;  the  former  to
ensure  good  administration,  the  latter  to  allow  the  people  some
share  in  it.'  The  Tarentines  are  not  the  only  people  who  have
used  dummy  officials  for  their  own  purposes.  The  device  is  as
old  as  Pisistratus  and  as  new  as  yesterday's  caucus.  Those  who
use  it  have  on  their  side  a  factor  that  political  thinkers  too  often
forget — the  dead  weight  of  human  indolence.  It  is  wholesome
for  the  idealist  to  lay  aside  for  a  moment  his  Grote  and  his
Mazzini  and  to  turn  over  the  pages  of  an  election  number  of
Punch.  He  will  then  be  in  a  better  position  to  follow  the  ups
and  downs  of  Athenian  development  from  fair  play  to  self-
government.^

When  Solon  had  made  his  laws  he  went  abroad  for  ten  years,
so  as  to  give  his  constitution  a  fair  run.  When  he  returned  he
found  that  everything  was  once  more  in  confusion.  As  usual,
the  trouble  was  economic.  The  other  parts  of  his  system  had
stood  the  strain  well  enough  ;  we  hear  no  complaints  of  injustice
or  impiety.  The  new  judicial  powers  were  not  only  exercised
but  extended,  and  Conservatives  had  acquiesced  in  the  loosening
of  family  ties.  But  the  village  population  was  unhappy  and
restless.  The  peasants  had  been  put  back  on  their  holdings,
and  plied  with  good  advice  as  to  how  to  manage  their  vines  and
olive-trees ;  but  they  had  no  capital  to  go  on  with  and  of  course
they  could  not  borrow.  The  craftsmen  and  small  traders,  whose
^  Ar.  Pol.  1320  b  9  ;  Strabo,  652  fin.


CHAP.  VT  self-governmi<:nt  137

interests  were  bound  up  with  theirs,  were  equally  cl:imort)iis.
Their  complaints  were  directed,  not  against  Solon  and  his  laws,
but  against  the  city  magistrates  who  administered  them.  The
chief  Magistrates  or  Governors  {dpy^opT^^)  were  no  longer  neces-
sarily members  of  the  nobility.  The  '  old  men  '  of  the  Homeric
market-place  had  gradually  developed  into  a  fixed  number  of
state  officials,  holding  office  for  a  year.  Solon  had  gone  further
by  throwing  open  the  nine  Governorships  or  Archonships  to  all
but  the  poorest  class  of  citizen,  and  allowing  the  citizens,  voting
in  tribes,  to  elect  them.  But  still  the  poor  complained  that  the
aristocracy  were  over-represented  in  the  seats  of  authorit}'.
A  compromise  was  arrived  at  for  a  few  years  by  which  there
were  to  be  ten  Governors,  five  of  whom  must  be  nobles,  three
peasants,  and  two  craftsmen.  Rut  the  trouble  was  too  deep-
seated  to  be  righted  by  any  such  ingenious  balancing.  Discon-
tent grew  more  and  more  fierce,  till  finally  the  state  was  openly
divided  into  three  hostile  parties,  each  prepared  to  fight  for  its
own  economic  and  territorial  interests.  There  was  the  rich
population  living  in  Athens,  the  Men  of  the  Plain,  with  their
city  interests.  There  were  the  Men  of  the  Shore,  that  is,  the
population  living  in  the  country  villages  and  small  ports  of
South- Eastern  Attica,  from  the  settlements  behind  Hymettus
down  to  Sunium.  Thirdly,  there  were  the  Men  of  the  Mountains,
the  poorer  peasants  and  shepherds  and  wood-cutters  and  char-
coal-burners from  the  rough  region  of  Northern  Attica.  It
seemed  for  a  moment  as  if  Theseus  had  attempted  too  much  in
trying  to  make  a  united  nation  out  of  a  territory  larger  than
that  of  any  other  Greek  City  State.  But  fortunately  for  Athens
'  a  man  arose  in  Israel '.  The  Mountaineers  had  at  their  head
a  leader,  Pisistratus,  who  was  not  only  a  friend  of  the  poor  but
also  a  noted  soldier  and  a  man  of  large  private  means  and
influential  connexions.  He  succeeded,  after  some  vicissitudes,
in  making  his  party  supreme  in  the  State,  as  he  had  alrcad\-
made  himself  supreme  in  his  party.  Like  Deioccs.  he  took
a  body-guard  ;  then  he  seized  the  Acropolis,  and  became  abso-
lute master  of  the  country.-

Once  in  power  he   exercised    his  authority  '  constitution;ill\-
rather  than  tyrannically '.     That  is  to  say,  he  respected  constitu-
^  Aih.  Pol.  xiii,  xiv.


138  POLITICS  PART  IT

tional  forms.  In  the  sphere  of  justice  he  made  no  important
changes.  In  the  sphere  of  poHcy  he  allowed  the  old  machinery
to  go  on  working  under  his  own  guidance  and  persuasion.  The
assembly  still  sat,  the  magistrates  were  still  elected  annually  ;
but  it  was  the  tyrant,  with  his  wise  schemes  of  foreign  policy
and  his  connexions  beyond  the  seas,  who  told  the  puppets  how
to  dance.  If  by  the  end  of  the  sixth  century  Athens  was  a  figure
in  international  politics,  if  she  commanded  the  Hellespont,  drew
wealth  from  gold  mines  in  Thrace,  and  had  become  a  resort  of
architects,  poets,  and  sculptors,  she  owed  it  to  the  initiative  of
her  tyrant  and  his  sons.^

But  Pisistratus's  most  durable  achievement  was  his  settlement
of  the  economic  difficulties.  He  solved  them  once  and  for  all
by  advancing  capital  out  of  his  private  fortune  to  the  poorer
landowners,  largely  of  course  his  own  political  supporters.  Once
they  had  margin  enough  to  keep  them  through  lean  years,  or
while  their  trees  were  growing  to  maturity,  their  troubles  were
at  an  end.  There  is  no  more  land  question  in  Attica  till  the
Spartans  came  and  ruined  the  cultivation  one  hundred  and  fifty
years  later.  '  The  Attic  peasant  sat  quite  contented  under  his
vine  and  fig-tree,  and  looked  with  reverence  upon  his  goddess's
gift,  the  olive,  whose  planting  the  State  was  now  promoting,  as
it  had  done  of  old,  so  that  this  most  important  of  home  products
brought  in  more  every  year.  This  result  he  owed  most  of  all
to  the  peace  ;  there  was  no  foreign  enemy  about  to  put  the  axe
to  his  trees.  But  there  was  peace  too  within  the  borders,  and
justice  was  near  at  hand  and  easy  to  obtain.  True,  there  was
a  five  per  cent,  tax  on  his  produce,  and  that  was  a  warning  that
there  was  a  master  in  the  land.  But  the  peasant  could  go  to
the  elections  every  year,  and  every  month  to  the  assembly ;  the
forms  of  self-government  were  preserved  both  in  Parish  Council
and  in  the  Council  at  the  capital,  and  so  he  did  not  mind  voting
for  the  government  candidate.'  One  does  not  need  to  ha\'e
tramped  about  Attica  during  1909  and  discussed  the  veiled
dictatorship  of  the  Military  League  at  well-heads  or  in  sailing
boats,  or  over  bread  and  olives  in  village  coffee-houses,  to  know
how  the  country-folk  acquiesced  in  the  rule  of  Pisistratus.  One
can  imagine  it  for  oneself  from  conversations  about  democracy
^  Ath.  Pol.  xiv.  3,  xv.  2,  xviii.  i  ;  Htlt.  i.  59,  64.


CHAP.  VI  SELF-GOVERXMFA'T


'39


nearer  home.  Even  the  glories  of  self-government  did  nol
wholly  obscure  its  memory,  and  the  peasants  long  looked  back-
to  the  rule  of  Pisistratus  as  to  a  golden  ageJ

But  Pisistratus  died,  and  his  sons  could  not  manage  the  people
so  skilfully  as  their  father.  A  personal  quarrel  led  to  the  murder
of  Hipparchus,  and  embittered  the  mind  of  his  elder  brother
Hippias.  Harmodius  and  Aristogciton,  who  were  concerned  in  it,
were  not,  what  later  legend  made  them,  martyrs  in  the  cause  of
freedom  ;  they  belonged  to  the  tyrants'  own  circle  and  were  not
even  democrats.  But  their  action  did  result,  through  an  unforeseen
chain  of  events,  in  the  expulsion  of  the  tyrants.  IIi[)pias  grew
tired,  as  a  Greek  well  might,  of  ruling  over  an  uncongenial  people.
When  Sparta,  on  the  advice  of  the  oracle,  sent  a  force  against
him,  he  could  easily  have  held  out  on  the  Acropolis  ;  but  he  pre-
ferred to  surprise  both  parties  by  surrendering  his  power  and
with  drawing  to  Sigeum.-

Athens  was  now  '■  free '.  But  who  was  to  rule  her — the  nobles
or  the  people,  the  Plain  or  the  Mountain  ?  Cleisthcncs  the
Alcmaeonid,  the  leader  of  the  popular  party,  who  had  been
mainly  responsible  for  the  oracle's  action  against  Hippias,  made
a  bid  for  power.  But  Isagoras,  head  of  the  Plain,  who  had  con-
nexions with  Sparta,  was  too  strong  for  him.  Isagoras,  however,
was  no  Pisistratus.  He  did  not  understand  the  temper  of  the
growing  nation  that  he  essayed  to  govern.  He  made  a  fatal  mis-
take, which  sufficed  at  length  to  convert  Athens  for  good  to  the
democratic  creed.  He  called  in  a  Spartan  army  to  strengthen
his  hands,  and  proceeded  to  secure  his  regime  by  dissolving  the
popular  council  and  banishing  seven  hundred  families.  This
roused  the  people  to  fury.  They  were  used  to  being  ruled  b\-
nobles,  but  to  have  a  regiment  of  dirty  Spartans  encamped  on
the  Acropolis,  among  the  shrines  and  statues  of  Pisistratus,  was
more  than  they  could  stand.  Cleisthenes  and  the  councillors
called  the  people  to  arms  and  blockaded  the  rock.  For  two  da>s
and  nights  they  sat  watching  every  exit:  on  the  third  the
foreigners  surrendered.     Athens  never  forgot  the  sight  the>-  pre-

'  Wilamowitz,  A.  A.,  vol.  ii,  p.  70  ;  Ath.  Pol.  xvi.  4  (who  says  ten  per  cent,
tax,  but  see  Thiic.  vi.  54.  5).  Pisistratus  made  himself  popular  by  grantmK
exemptions  from  his  tax  when  the  peasants  were  too  poor  to  pay  it.

^  Hdt.  V.  64-5.


I40  POLITICS  PART  11

seated  as  they  came  down  the  slope.     A  century  later  the  chorus
of  old  men  in  one  of  the  plays  of  Aristophanes  rejoices  to  recall —

How  for  all  his  loud  fire-eating
The  old  Spartan  got  his  beating,
And  in  sorry  plight  retreating

Left  his  spear  and  shield  with  me.
Then  with  only  his  poor  shirt  on,
And  who  knows  what  years  of  dirt  on,
All  betowzled  and  besmeared
With  a  bristling  bush  of  beard,

Slunk  away  and  left  us  free.^

Cleisthenes  was  now  master  of  the  situation.  He  had  already
been  leader  of  the  popular  party.  He  had  now  all  the  obstinate
spirit  of  national  independence  behind  him  too.  Athens  felt  her-
self for  the  moment  a  united  nation.  Cleisthenes  w^as  determined
to  make  her  continue  to  do  so.  Like  Solon,  he  refused  to  assume
the  supreme  position.  He  preferred  to  continue  Solon's  work  by
completing  in  the  sphere  of  executive  government  what  Solon
had  achieved  in  the  sphere  of  justice.  Athens  was  already  half
a  democracy  in  spirit ;  he  made  her  wholly  one  both  in  fact  and
in  name.  The  political  constitution  under  which  Athens  flourished
in  the  fifth  century  is  in  the  main,  and  except  for  certain  inevit-
able developments,  the  work  of  Cleisthenes.  This  therefore  is  the
moment  to  pause  and  take  stock  of  it  as  a  whole.

Cleisthenes'  work  falls  into  two  parts,  for  he  reorganized  both
the  local  and  the  central  government  of  Athens.  We  will  con-
sider each  of  these  separately,  keeping  in  our  minds  in  each  case
the  two  main  questions  suggested  by  the  Funeral  Speech :  how
much  power  was  actually  placed  in  the  hands  of  the  individual
common  citizen,  and  how  great  was  the  sacrifice  of  time  and
thought  which  his  public  duties  involved.  For  it  was  Pericles'
boast  that  his  fellow-citizens  found  time  to  do  justice  both  to
public  and  private  responsibilities,  that  they  were  at  once  (what  is
nowadays  considered  impossible)  the  most  active  political  workers
and  the  most  many-sided  individuals  of  their  time.

We  will  take  Athenian  local  government  first.  It  is  the
sphere  of  Cleisthenes'  most  daring  achievement  and  presents
many  features  of  interest.     But  it  is  only  of  late  years  that  its

•  Ar.  Lys.  275  :  Ath.  Pol.  xx,  who,  as  Wilamowitz  says,  gives  the  order  of
events  better  than  Hdt.  v.  72.


CHAP.  VI  SELF-GOVICRNMENT  141

working  has  become  comparatively  clear,  more  throuj^h  the  dis-
covery of  the  Constitution  of  Athens  and  the  acuteness  of  scholars
than  from  the  accumulation  of  inscriptions  :  for  these  small  local
authorities  had  not  much  money  to  spend  on  stone-cutting.  The
system  which  we  are  about  to  describe  was  in  full  working  order  all
through  the  Periclean  period ;  but  men  took  it  for  granted  and
the  great  writers  say  little  of  it.  Thucydides  is  inclined  to  pass
it  over  altogether.  No  one  would  gather  from  the  Funeral
Speech  that  it  existed  at  all,  if  it  were  not  incidentally  men-
tioned in  the  introductory  chapter  that  the  ashes  of  each  dead
soldier  were  laid  in  the  coffin  of  his  '  tribe  '.

The  problems  of  local  government  were,  if  not  peculiar  to
Attica,  at  least  far  more  perplexing  there  than  elsewhere.  This
was  due  both  to  the  unusual  size  of  the  territory,  and  to  the  fact
that,  even  after  political  unification,  the  people  went  on  living  in
villages.  The  difficulties  which  Cleisthenes  had  to  face  were  two
in  number.  Firstly,  how  to  combine  an  efficient  local  administra-
tion with  a  strong  central  government.  Secondly,  how  to
reconcile  in  the  country  the  conflicting  claims  of  family  and
territorial  interest.

Let  us  take  the  second  first,  as  it  is  the  more  old-fashioned
difficulty  of  the  two.

We  have  seen  that,  of  the  lesser  loyalties  which  hampered  the
growth  of  the  City  State  in  the  Middle  Ages,  two  stand  out
prominently.  The  Zeus-born  noble  is  not  wholly  a  patriot,
because  of  his  duty  to  his  clan.  The  poor  villager  is  not  wholly
a  patriot — is  in  fact  hardly  a  patriot  at  all — because  of  his  duty
to  his  neighbour.  Oddly  enough,  it  is  the  ignorant  villager,  as
has  happened  elsewhere,  who  held  the  more  progressive  of  the
two  ideas.  The  blood-tie  of  the  clan  went  back  to  nomadic
days  ;  the  territorial  tie  of  the  village  street  was  young  beside  it.
But  both  were  strong  and  deeply  rooted  principles  and  fought
hard  for  supremacy  in  the  local  government  of  Attica.

Let  us  compare  their  working.  Supposing  Theseus,  or  any
other  chief  magistrate  at  the  head  of  the  central  government,
wanted  money  to  build  ships  to  fetch  Ariadne  from  Crete,  he
could  do  one  of  two  things.  He  could  command  the  head  of  a
clan  or  a  tribe  to  collect  ship-money  from  his  fellow-clansmen,
who  might  be  living  in  various  parts  of  Attica  ;  or  he  could  send

124«  K


142  POLITICS  PART  II

round  the  villages  and  fix  the  responsibility  upon  some  headman
of  his  own  or  the  villagers'  selection.

Obviously,  from  Theseus's  point  of  view,  the  latter  course  was
the  more  convenient.  He  knew  exactly  with  whom  he  was  deal-
ing in  each  case  and  could  make  sure  that  every  village  paid.
Consequently,  as  the  central  government  increased  its  influence,
the  territorial  principle  took  firmer  root,  and  men  became
accustomed  to  think  of  themselves  more  and  more  not  as  clans-
men but  as  parishioners.  These  early  parishes  managed  their
affairs  through  councils,  which  dealt  with  matters  of  parish
interest,  such  as  the  making  of  roads  and  wells,  or  with  business
(no  doubt  generally  financial)  submitted  to  them  from  the  central
government.  The  chairman  of  the  parish  council  or  village  head-
man was  an  important  person,  for  he  managed  the  village  finances
and  saw  to  the  raising  of  the  money.  He  was  known  as  a  Naucraros
or  ship-maker,  because  it  was  generally  for  ships  that  money  was
wanted.  Fleets  cost  more,  and  therefore  tax  the  energy  of  the
central  authority  more,  than  armies,  because  ships  are  more
expensive  to  provide  than  spears  and  shields.  Hence  a  parish  in
Attica  became  known,  from  its  most  important  national  duty,  as
a  Naucrary  or  ship-district.  Every  parish  furnished  one  ship  and
one  sailor  for  each  unit  of  the  fleet :  so  that,  as  the  ships  of
those  days  were  fifty-oared  galleys,  there  needed  to  be  about
fifty  parishes.^

But  fifty  was  a  large  number,  and  some  of  the  ship  districts
were  a  long  way  off;  there  was  an  obvious  danger  lest  the
country  parishes  should  lose  touch  wilh  the  central  government.
This  was  averted  in  early  Attica  in  two  ways.  Firstly,  by  graft-
ing the  naucraries  on  to  the  older  division  by  tribes  and  clansj
to  which  we  shall  recur  in  a  moment.  Secondly,  by  giving  the
village  headmen  them.selves  a  position  in  the  central  government.

^  Aih.  Pol.  viii.  3;  Glotz,  Etudes,  pp.  2436".  (who  takes  ^avKpnpoi  from
Od.  viii.  391  to  mean  ships'  captains);  Wilamowitz,  A. A.,  vol.  i,  p.  96;
Cavaignac,  Etudes  sur  rhistoire  financiere  d'Atlienes  nu  V^  siecle  (1908),
p.  7 ;  and  refs.  in  Daremberg  and  Saglio,  s.  v.  Naukraria.  The  exact
number  of  Naucraries  was  forty-eight.  Perhaps  the  central  government
supplied  the  two  extra  men;  cf.  Eur.  Suppl.  657-S  and  Murray's  note  in  the
Oxford  text,  where  Theseus,  like  the  Macedonian  kings,  has  a  corps  of  Com-
panions apart  from  his  territorial  army.  Parallel  to  the  Attic  '  ship-makers'
are  the 'AftmiTnt  (' very-sailors ')  at  Miletus  and  Chalcis  :  refs.  in  Wilhelm,
Beitrage  zur  <;n'ec/nsclien  Inschriftettkunde,  p.  123  (a  book  which  the
leisurely  student  who  knows  how  to  use  an  index  will  find  full  of  interest).


CHAP.  VI  SELF-GOVERNMENT  14^

Unlike  so  many  other  '  Dwellers- Round ',  they  were  suminoncd'lo
Athens,  to  a  national  '  council '  ;  and  they  sat  in  the  chiefs'  place
{■rrpvravelov)  under  the  presidency  of  one  of  the  city  magistrates
or  '  governors  '.  As  forty-eight  was  too  large  a  number  for  the
convenient  dispatch  of  the  business  that  came  before  them,  they
did  much  of  it  through  a  small  committee  of  four  out  of  their  own
number,  who  were  known  as  '  chiefs  of  the  ship-makers '.  The
exact  relation  between  their  duties  and  those  of  the  city '  governc  >rs '
was  forgotten  later,  and  became  a  subject  of  dispute  among  fifth-
century  writers.  Herodotus  speaks  of  the  chiefs  of  the  shii^-
makers  as  '  managing  Athens '  in  the  seventh  century ;  but
Thucydides,  who  liked  centralization,  corrects  him  and  gives  the
governors  the  foremost  place.^

Let  us  now  turn  to  the  older  and  less  practical  divisions  based
on  blood-relationship.

When  the  immigrants  entered  Attica  and  associated  with  the
native  population,  they  brought  with  them  their  own  grouping.
As  we  have  seen,  they  were  divided  into  families,  '  brotherhoods.'
and  *  tribes',  and  members  of  each  of  these  felt  themselves  united
to  their  fellows,  like  Highland  clansmen,  by  the  tie  of  blood.  This
organization  persisted  all  through  the  aristocratic  period,  and
we  find  it  still  vigorous  and  (like  so  many  Greek  institutions)
symmetrical  at  the  time  of  Cleisthenes.  Ask  one  of  Cleisthenes'
contemporaries  how  Attica  is  divided,  and  he  will  reply,  out  of
the  Statesinaiis  Year-book  of  his  time :  '  Attica  is  divided  into
four  tribes,  twelve  brotherhoods,  360  families '  (as  they  are  no
longer  round  one  hearth  we  had  better  henceforward  call  them
clans)'  and  10,800  citizens  '  (that  is,  there  are  supposed  to  be  thirty
adult  males  to  each  clan).  Press  him  further  and  he  will  add
that  Attica  also  consists  of  forty-eight  parishes  and  twelve  thirds,
so  called  because  three  together  make  up  a  single  tribe.

One  question  immediately  presents  itself.     What  has  become

^  Hdt.  V.  71  ;  Thuc.  i.  126.  Herodotus  has  reasons  of  his  own  for  dis-
sociating the  chief  governor  of  the  time  from  the  mcident  in  question.
Bringing  of  the  '  chiefs  '  to  Athens  from  their  local  '  town  halls  ' :  Thuc.  ii.  1 5
{tv  ^(w\fVTripiov  dnoSfi^as  Kai  TTpuramoj' :  from  which  one  might  too  hastily
conclude  that  'Theseus'  abolished  local  government  in  Attica  altogether).
There  are  probably  parallels  to  this  council  of  village  headmen  in  other
City  States  ;  cf.  refs.  in  Meyer,  Cesc/i.  vol.  ii,  §  233  note,  who  agrees  that  the
npvrdvfis  were  a  standing  General  Purposes  Committee,  as  their  rotating
successors  were  in  the  fifth  century.

K  2


144  POLITICS  PART  II

of  the  division  between  nobles  and  people  or  town  and  country
of  which  we  heard  so  much  ?  Did  the  poor  peasants  in  the
villages,  survivors  in  most  cases  of  the  older  population,  secure  for
themselves,  and  retain  through  the  whole  mediaeval  period,  the
rights  and  privileges  of  *  tribesmen '  side  by  side  with  the  Zeus-
born  aristocracy  which  grew  up  among  the  wealthier  immigrants  ?
This  raises  one  of  the  most  disputed  problems  of  early  Attic
history,  but,  briefly,  the  answer  appears  to  be  that  they  gained
and  kept  the  rights  but  not  the  privileges.  For,  towards  the
close  of  the  mediaeval  period,  when  our  scanty  evidence  begins,
we  find  the  brotherhoods  consisting,  no  longer  of  '  brothers ',  as
their  name  implies,  but  of  what  Wilamowitz  calls  first  and  second
class  members.  The  first-class  members,  out  of  whom  alone  the
chiefs  and  priests  of  the  tribe  are  selected,  are  known  as  yevi/^rai
or  clansmen :  the  others  as  o/xoydXaKre?  (foster-sons)  or  opyecoi/ey
(worshippers).  This  seems  to  show  that,  though  the  nobles,  as
their  power  grew,  could  not  keep  or  turn  the  people  out  of  the
tribes  and  brotherhoods,  they  succeeded  in  putting  them  in  an
inferior  position  there  and  in  keeping  or  turning  them  out  of
the  families  or  clans.  Probably,  as  the  names  of  particular
brotherhoods  and  their  symmetrical  arrangement  seem  to  show,
they  reconstructed  the  whole  organization  to  suit  their  own
pretensions.  The  poor  Athenian,  like  his  wealthier  fellow-tribes-
man, was  an  Athenian  once  and  for  all :  nothing  could  alter  that,
for  he  was  the  child  of  Zeus  and  Apollo.  But  he  did  not  belong
to  one  of  the  '  good  families '  who  traced  their  descent  through
a  noble  ancestor,  and  so  his  humble  lineage  gradually  ceased  to
count  at  all.  While  his  noble  neighbour's  family  was  elevated
into  a  clan,  and  the  noble  himself  into  a  clansman,  the  poor  villager
lost  his  parentage  or  only  remembered  it  in  private  when  he  felt
superstitious  about  his  dead  ancestors.  At  brotherhood  meetings
he  was  taught  to  feel  himself  only  a  sort  of  courtesy  member.
But  he  held  his  ground  :  and  it  was  good  that  he  did,  for  his
status  formed  a  useful  precedent  for  Cleisthenes'  statesman-
ship.^

'  Sec  P'rancolte,  Po/is,  pp.  loff. ;  INIeyer,  vol.  ii,  j^  204  (who  points  out  the
radicahsm  of  these  early  aristocrats  all  over  the  Greek  world  in  constructing
symmetrical  tribes  and  subdivisions  of  tribes) ;  Wilamowitz,  A.  A.,  vol.  ii,
pp.  272  ff.  Early  Attic  history  was  as  obscure  to  fifth-century  Athenians  as
it  is  to  us,  only  they  were  more  easily  put  off  with  names  which  explain


CHAP.  VT  SELF-GOVERXMK NT  145

What  was  the  point  of  this  elaborate  orcranization  into  tribes
and  brotherhoods  with  the  tail  of  clans  attached  to  it  ?  What
happened  at  a  brotherhood  meeting  ?

The  first  thing  that  happened,  as  in  the  House  of  Commons
to-day,  was  prayers,  or  rather,  in  official  language,  orgies  (opyia).
But  it  was  also  the  most  important  thing.  '  Like  all  associations
of  every  sort  in  Greece'  (for  it  was  equally  true  of  gatherings  of
craftsmen  and  traders)  '  its  first  object  was  the  celebration  of
public  worship.'  Only,  of  course,  every  association  had  its  own
special  god  or  hero.  The  patron  saints  of  a  brotherhood  meeting
were  Zeus  of  the  brotherhood  and  Athena  of  the  brotherhood
(Z€V9  (Ppdrpios  Kal  'AO-qvd  (PpaTpia),  and  their  annual  saint's  day
was  called  'the  Feast  of  All-Fathers',  which  Athenians  cele-
brated together  with  their  supposed  Ionian  cousins  over  the  water.
Some  brotherhoods,  of  course,  had  special  saints  of  their  own
as  well.^

What  else  did  they  do?  There  does  not  seem  much  else  to  be
done,  beyond  eating  the  sacrificial  food.  Many  English  associa-
tions have  reached  a  hearty  old  age  on  dining  alone,  even  without
the  elaborate  grace  before  meat  of  a  Greek  brotherhood.  Still
there  was  some  '  public  business '  after  dinner.  Many  brother-
hoods had  land  and  property  to  administer.  We  have  an  inscrip-
tion of  the  Proceedings  of  the  Brotherhood  of  the  Demotionidae
(whose  patron  saint  was  the  hero  Demotion)  which,  under  the
skilful  handling  of  Wilamowitz,  has  been  made  to  throw  a  flood
of  light  upon  brotherhood  meetings.  The  chief  thing  that  the
brothers  did  at  this  period  (the  inscription  dates  from  the  fourth
century,  long  after  Cleisthenes)  was  to  amend  their  own  rules,
particularly  with  regard  to  the  admission  and  expulsion  of  mem-
nothing.  See  Hdt.  viii.  44.  6,ioy<iXn»cr« :  Ar.  /W.  1252  b  18,  who  misunder-
stands the  whole  business.  With  his  head  full  of  the  '  logical  priority  of
the  Polis  he  is  not  interested  in  the  stages  of  its  growth.  In  1280b  37  he
even  says  that  brotherhoods  '  came  into  existence  in  the  cities  :  <ppaT,,uH  .  .  .
eyeVo^To  KaTc\  rhs  7t6Xus.  This  may  be  '  political  philosophy  ,  it  is  certainly
not  history.  ,  ,c  k  1

'  Hdt.  i.  147  ;  Francotte,  pp.  24,  25.  'XnnTopin  =  0/iorrnT(<.)/j.a  (bcnoi.
Ar.  Ac/i.  146) :  but  it  is  noteworthy  that  by  the  fifth  century  the  meaning  ol
the  festival  had  so  far  been  forgotten  that  the  official  derivation  w.is  from
'Andrn  (deceit),  and  a  legend  had  been  made  up  to  account  for  it.  1  he  least
was  held  in  the  autumn,  and  when  there  had  been  fighting  in  the  summer
the  state  funeral  was  held  in  connexion  with  it.  Funeral  speeches  were  thus
delivered  on  '  All  Souls'  Day  '.


146  POLITICS  PART  TI

bers.  It  is  clear,  from  a  comparison  of  their  organization  with
what  we  know  of  other  brotherhoods,  that  in  Attica,  at  any  rate,
a  brotherhood,  like  any  other  association  formally  recognized  by
the  state,  was  left  very  free  to  make  and  alter  its  own  statutes.
The  worshippers  of  Demotion  did  not  have  to  put  up  with  the
Roman  prejudice  against  secret  societies,  which  made  a  prayer
meeting  of  early  Christians  a  breach  of  the  combination  laws.
Athens  had  more  civilized  and  far  more  effective  ways  of  com-
bating lesser  loyalties.^

How  were  these  tribes  and  brotherhoods  spread  over  the
country  ?  Although  membership  went  by  blood  and  not  by
geographical  situation,  still  fellow  tribesmen  and  brothers  would
mostly  be  found  in  the  same  districts.  The  difference  between
the  tribal  and  territorial  division  would  come  to  this  :  that  a
parish  map  of  Attica  would  be  divided  up  into  forty-eight  con-
stituencies with  fixed  lines,  whereas  a  tribal  map,  which  would
alter  of  course,  however  slightly,  from  year  to  year,  would  show
a  number  of  points  marked  in  twelve  different  colours  for  the

'  Wilanio\vitz,^./^.vol.  ii,  pp.  259-79,011  the  Demotionidae.  Cf.  the  eloquent
passage  in  Kenan's  Origines  dii  Chtistiatiisnie,  vol.  ii,  pp.  355-7,  which  is
worth  quoting  at  some  length  because  of  its  bearing  on  very  similar  psycho-
logical problems  to-day.  '  One  of  the  chief  objects  of  Caesar  and  of  Augustus
was  to  prevent  the  formation  of  new  associations  and  to  destroy  those  which
had  been  already  formed.  .  .  .  They  were  forbidden  to  meet  more  than  once
a  month  or  to  concern  themselves  with  any  other  business  than  the  burial  of
deceased  members :  under  no  pretext  whatsoever  might  they  enlarge  their
activities.  The  Empire  was  attempting,  in  desperation,  an  impossible  task.
It  was  trying,  out  of  homage  to  an  exaggerated  idea  of  the  State,  to  isolate
the  individual,  to  snap  every  moral  tie  between  man  and  man,  to  defeat
a  legitimate  desire  of  the  poor,  the  desire  to  press  together  in  a  little  corner
of  their  own  to  keep  one  another  warm.  In  ancient  Greece  the  city  was  very
tyrannical ;  but  in  exchange  for  her  vexatious  demands  she  gave  so  much
pleasure,  so  much  light,  so  much  glory,  that  no  one  thought  of  complaining.
Men  died  joyfully  on  her  behalf;  men  submitted  without  revolt  to  her  most
unjust  caprices.  But  the  Roman  Empire  was  too  large  to  be  a  country.  It
offered  to  all  men  great  material  advantages  ;  it  gave  them  nothing  to  love.
The  intolerable  sadness  inseparable  from  such  a  life  seemed  worse  than  death.
Thus,  despite  all  the  efforts  of  the  statesmen,  the  confraternities  developed
an  immense  activity.  .  .  .  Our  texts  reveal  them  to  us  as  consisting  of  slaves,
of  ex-soldiers,  of  poorer  citizens.  Complete  equality  reigned  there  between
freemen,  freedmen,  and  slaves.  There  were  many  women  members.  At  the
risk  of  a  thousand  petty  annoyances,  and  sometimes  of  the  severest  penalties,
men  wished  to  be  members  of  such  an  association,  where  they  could  live  on
terms  of  delightful  brotherhood,  find  mutual  help  and  encouragement,  and
contract  ties  which  lasted  till  death  and  beyond  it.  .  .  .  That  is  why  Chris-
tianity at  Rome  seemed  for  a  long  time  to  be  a  sort  of  burial  club,  and  why
the  earliest  Christian  sanctuaries  were  the  tombs  of  the  martyrs.'


niAi'.  VI  SELF-GOVERNMENT  ,4;

different  brotherhoods,  where  the  greater  number  of  brothers  ami
clansmen  were  to  be  found. ^

This  was  the  position  when,  at  some  date  before  the  time  of
Solon,  these  two  symmetrical  systems  were  fused.  It  was  not
very  difficult  to  fuse  them,  for  the  four  tribes  were  so  large  that
they  had  practically  come  to  be  considered  as  territorial  divisions.
Except  on  the  border-land,  men  did  not  easily,  in  those  early
agricultural  days,  move  their  dwellings  into  another  tribal  area.
Once  regard  the  four  tribes  as  territorial  and  they  arc  easily
reconciled  with  the  forty-eight  parishes.  All  that  is  needed  is
an  intermediate  link,  corresponding,  on  the  territorial  side,  with
the  three  brotherhoods  in  each  tribe.  This  was  supplied  by
dividing  each  tribe  up  into  three  districts  or  thirds.  These
cannot  have  been  the  same  as  the  brotherhoods,  since  a  third
consisted  of  land  and  a  brotherhood  of  persons  ;  but  they  were
so  nearly  the  same  in  practice  that  later  writers  could  say
they  were.^

The  tribes  and  the  parishes  worked  together  in  harness  for  at
least  a  century  (probably  a  good  deal  longer)  before  the  time  of
Cleisthenes.  While  the  parish  sent  up  its  ship-makers  to  the
city,  the  other  magistrates,  the  governors,  were,  at  any  rate  from
Solon  onwards,  elected  by  the  people  voting  by  tribes — though
their  selection  was,  of  course,  limited  to  candidates  of  a  certain
status.  One  of  Solon's  innovations,  inevitable  with  the  progress
of  trade  and  industry,  was  to  reckon  status  by  wealth  instead  of
by  birth — a  change  which  did  much  to  help  Cleisthenes  in  his
struggle  against  family  feeling.

Such  was  the  organization  during  the  sixth  century,  in  the
troubled  times  preceding  the  supremacy  of  Cleisthenes.  The
root  of  those  troubles,  as  we  have  seen,  was  economic  ;  but  they
had  taken  the  form  of  a  division  of  one  part  of  Attica  against
another,  in  other  words,  of  a  conflict  between  tribe  and  tribe  and
clan  and  clan.  The  movements  in  the  preceding  years  had  been
headed  by  clan   leaders— Pisistratus  of  Rrauron,  IMegaclcs  the

^  Francotte,  p.  29.

=*  The  puzzling  point  about  the  difference  between  reckoning  by  land  and
by  persons,  which  Aristotle's  compiler  overlooked  (Ath.  /'(^/.  frag.  61,  cropped
up  lately  in  the  debates  on  the  new  land  taxes.  Should  the  increment  tax  be
charged  on  a  piece  of  land  which  had  fallen  in  value  and  then  risen  again,
having  changed  hands  in  the  interval,  i.e.  should  the  State  think  in  terms  of
land  or  of  persons  ?    See  Parliamentary  Debates,  July  5,  1909.


148  POLITICS  PART  II

Alcmaeonid,  Miltiades  the  Philaid,  Isagoras,  who  worshipped  the
'  Carian  Zeus',  apparently  a  saint  of  Boeotian  origin.  Cleisthenes
himself  was  an  Alcmaeonid,  but  he  was  first  of  all  an  Athenian.  He
decided  to  break  down  the  local  Baals  who  distracted  his  country-
men, and  make  them,  before  all  things,  Athenians  like  himself

Cleisthenes  was  a  revolutionary,  though  he  knew  also  how  to
construct.  The  time  was  ripe  for  drastic  measures.  He  struck
first  at  the  root  of  the  evil,  the  four  ancient  tribes.  They  and  all
their  associations  disappeared  for  ever.  A  few  generations  later
Athenians  still  knew  their  names,  but  had  not  the  least  idea  what
they  meant.  Nor  have  scholars  yet  been  able  to  discover.  Their
destroyer  replaced  them  so  skilfully  that  nobody  even  wrote
their  epitaph.^

He  also  destroyed  the  parishes,  and  the  name  ship-district
disappears  from  Athenian  terminology.  For  he  wished  to  put
naval  and  military  affairs  entirely  into  the  hands  of  the  central
government.  One  would  not  know  from  Thucydides  that  it  had
ever  been  otherwise."

This  was  all  that  he  destroyed.  The  brotherhoods  he  did
not  touch :  nor  of  course  did  he  interfere  with  the  deep-seated
moralities  of  the  family.  With  the  disappearance  of  the  tribes,
which  had  connected  them  with  the  central  government,  the
brotherhoods  were  left  suspended  in  mid-air.  As  they  had  never
had  any  important  work  to  do,  there  was  no  need  to  attack  them.
To  ignore  them  was  far  more  blighting  to  their  influence  on  men's
lives.  Every  Athenian  still  belonged  to  a  brotherhood,  as  every
Englishman  may  be  supposed  to  belong  to  the  Church  of  England.
He  did  not  become  a  citizen  till  he  was  eighteen,  but  he  was
inscribed  as  a  member  of  his  brotherhood  at  the  Feast  of  All-
Fathers  at  the  first  opportunity  after  he  was  born.  He  was
presented  to  the  '  brothers '  again  at  the  age  of  puberty,  two  years
before  he  came  of  age — ^just  as  young  Englishmen  are  often  '  con-
firmed '  some  time  before  they  cease  to  be  minors  ;  and  he  came

^  The  mysterious  names  are  Hopletes,  Geleontes,  Argadeis,  and  Aigi-
koreis.  All  sorts  of  theories  used  to  be  held  about  them,  e.  g.  that  they
were  like  the  Egyptian  caste-divisions.  Of  the  last  two  Wilamowitz  remarks
{Aus  Kydathefi,  pp.  122-3):  'they  sound  as  if  they  meant  something,  and
probably  once  did,  though  who  shall  guarantee  that  it  would  prove  more
edifying  than  Hogfellows  and  Boarites  (Hdt.  v.  68)  or  Schnuck  Puckelig
Schimmelsumpf  and  Schnuck  Puckelig  Erbsenscheucher  ? '

*  We  actually  know  the  name  of  only  one  ship-district — KcoXih?.


CHAP,  vr  SELF-GOVERNMENT


149


before  them  again  to  offer  a  'wedding  sacrifice',  so  that  the  hrollicrs
might  take  due  note  of  the  domestic  ceremony  of  his  marriage.
All  these  small  observances  were  part  of  the  fifth-century
Athenian's  life.  It  is  a  mark  of  an  y\thenian,  as  Herodotus
still  says,  to  keep  the  All-Fathers'  Days.  But  what  was  their
connexion  with  the  City  State?  Purely  technical,  liy  becoming
a  brother  an  Athenian  was  put  into  touch  with  his  national
ancestors,  Zeus  and  Apollo.  The  fifth-century  Athenian  had  no
great  regard  for  this  connexion.  His  deeper  reverence  was  for
Athena  or,  at  lonely  moments,  when  his  citizenship  dropped  from
him,  for  the  gods  or  saints  of  his  own  hearth.  But  the  constitu-
tion ordained  that,  if  ever  he  was  elected  to  office,  he  must  assure
his  electors  in  the  viva  voce  examination  before  he  entered  upon
his  duties  that  he  honoured  his  two  national  ancestors.  It  was
a  mere  formality  :  still  Cleisthenes  let  it  stay.  It  was  the  only
link  that  still  tied  the  growing  city  to  the  ancient  religion  of  the
brotherhood.

In  all  other  respects  the  state  was  now  cut  off  from  '  the
Church ' :  or  perhaps  it  would  be  truer  to  say  that,  by  being  cut
off  from  the  state,  the  religion  of  the  brotherhood  might  have
become  what  we  call  a  Church,  if  the  Athenian  had  attempted,  as
we  have  been  attempting  since  the  era  of  organized  Christianity,
to  distinguish  between  the  spheres  of  political  and  religious
organization,  and  to  pay  allegiance  to  both.  But  this  was
beyond  his  inclinations  :  and  even  if  it  had  not  been,  there  was
no  other  corporate  power  in  Athens,  outside  the  narrow  circle  of
the  hearth,  which  could  appeal  to  him.  Certainly  the  reh'gion
of  the  brotherhood  had  neither  the  influence  nor  the  inspiration
to  stand  by  the  side  of  Athena.  Hence,  even  if  it  was  not
technically  disestablished  by  Cleisthenes,  it  very  soon  became
so  in  practice.  Fifth-century  Athenians  still  kept  the  Apaturia,
though  they  had  forgotten  what  its  name  signified.  But,  as  time
went  on,  men  began  to  ask  themselves  whether  the  trouble  of
joining  and  attending  a  brotherhood  was  really  worth  their  while.
What  was  the  use  of  it?  The  rules  for  admission  had  gradually
become  so  relaxed— here  again  it  was  Cleisthenes  who  applied
the  thin  end  of  the  wedge— that  anybody  could  join  and  there
were  no  distinctions  between  members  :  for  Athens  had  now
become  very  democratic,  and  one  might  even  perhaps  run  across


I50  POLITICS  PART  II

ex-slaves  amongst  one's  brothers.  And  when  all  was  '  said  and
done ',  the  speeches  and  ceremonial  got  safely  through,  what  did
it  lead  to  ?  So  far  as  the  city  was  concerned  it  was  a  blind
alley,  which  men  only  continued  to  walk  down  for  a  time,  because
it  used  once  to  lead  out  on  to  the  state  high  road.^

So  far  we  have  seen  Cleisthenes  as  a  destroyer.  What  did  he
set  up  instead  of  the  tribes  and  ship-districts  ?

The  first  thing  he  did  was  to  create  new  tribes  ;  for  no
Athenian  could  imagine  Athens  without  tribes,  any  more  than
we  can  imagine  a  borough  without  a  mayor  and  corporation.
They  were  indeed  '  tribes '  only  in  name  :  for  they  were  on
a  territorial  basis.  They  were  really  counties  or  constituencies.
But  to  give  them  a  religious  status  they  were  each  called  after
the  name  of  some  well-known  hero,  the  names  being  selected  by
the  Delphic  oracle,  out  of  a  list  of  a  hundred  submitted  to  it.^

The  old  tribes,  too,  had  been  practically  territorial ;  but  Cleis-
thenes did  more  than  just  draw  the  lines  a  little  differently.  He
adopted  the  daring  device  of  splitting  up  every  tribe  into  three
divisions,  situated  in  the  three  different  parts  of  the  country.
This  enabled  him  to  make  use  of  the  old  thirds,  in  name  if  not
in  fact.  Every  tribe  was  made  up  of  three  separate  thirds  or
territorial  units,  one  of  which  was  situated  in  or  near  the  city,
a  second  in  the  interior  of  the  country,  and  a  third  on  the
coast.  It  is  as  though  every  constituency  in  England  consisted
of  three  parts — one  in  London  or  the  home  counties,  another
in  the  agricultural  midlands,  and  a  third  in  the  industrial  north.
This  was  his  heroic  and  entirely  successful  remedy  (would  it
have  been  successful  anywhere  but  in  Radical  Greece  ?)  for  the
territorial  conflicts  of  the  previous  years.  We  can  determine
roughly  of  what  the  three  zones  consisted.     The  city  zone  in-

*  Francotte,  Polls,  p.  80;  ?'.  Ar.  Pax  416  ff.  Cf.  Ferguson,  Classical
Philology,  1910,  pp.  257  ff.,  who  has  pointed  out  how  'when  politics  ceased,
with  the  Macedonian  suzerainty,  to  monopolize  the  energies  of  the  Athenians,
the  aboriginal  family  associations',  brotherhoods,  &c.,  returned  to  a  promi-
nent place  in  their  lives.

*  There  is  a  still  odder  instance  of  this  device  in  the  Athenian  constitution.
Each  of  the  forty-two  years  of  the  military  age,  from  eighteen  to  sixty,  had
its  own  '  eponymous  '  hero,  and  troops  would  be  ordered  out,  as  it  were,  '  from
Moses  to  Solomon.'  {Atli.  Pol.  liii.  4  and  7.)  The  Greeks  were  curiously  fond
of  such  picturesque  devices.  We  can  barely  make  them  a  success  in  our  street
names  :  and  nobody  thought  the  break  up  of  the  London  County  Council  fleet
of  steamers  an  act  of  impiety  to  the  great  Englishmen  whose  names  they  bore.


ciiAr.  VI  SKLF-GOVERNMRNT  i.-,i

eluded  the  southern  end  of  the  plain  of  Athens  from  Lycabcttus
down  to  the  sea,  and  across  from  Mount  Corydallus  to  Ilymcttus.
The  coast  zone  included  the  whole  of  the  plain  of  Eleusis  up  to
Cithaeron,  and  then  ran  right  round  the  coast  in  a  narrow  strip
(interrupted  at  Piraeus)  to  Oropus  in  the  north.  The  '  interior '
included  all  the  remainder— the  inside  of  South-ICastcrn  Attica
down  to  Laureion,  a  large  piece  of  the  plain  of  Athens,  and  most
of  the  mountainous  country  of  Parnes  and  Pcntclicus.  So  they
might  seem  to  correspond  with  the  old  '  plain ',  '  shore ',  and
'  mountain  ' ;  but  detailed  examination  has  shown  the  correspon-
dence to  be  a  very  rough  one.  Cleisthencs  did  his  best  to  avoid
anything  which  could  reawaken  old  controversies.'

We  will  leave  aside  for  the  moment  the  part  which  the.sc  new
tribes  and  thirds  were  called  upon  to  play,  together  with  their
subdivisions,  in  the  central  government,  as  wc  arc  dealing  first
with  the  local  administration.

Tribes  and  even  thirds  were  obviously  too  large  to  take  over
the  duties  of  parish  councils.  Something  smaller  was  required  in
the  place  of  the  old  ship-districts.  Cleisthenes  supplied  it  in  the
form  of  the  demes  or  'peoples',  which  formed  the  commune  or  unit
of  local  administration  all  through  the  great  period  of  Athenian
history.  He  divided  the  country  up  afresh  into  over  a  hundred
demes — we  do  not  know  exactly  how  many — which  were  roughly
grouped  into  ten  divisions  so  as  to  form  part  of  the  ten  tribes.
These  demes  were  an  entirely  new  creation,  but,  like  the  tribes,
they  had  to  be  given  a  religious  sanction.  Each  demc  was  sup-
plied with  its  own  'hero  founder',  who  thus  gave  it  a  sort  of
shadowy  past  existence.  Sometimes  he  was  the  heroic  ancestor
of  a  local  clan,  adapted  for  the  purpose,  sometimes  an  entirely
new  creation  :  in  the  latter  case  the  personification  occasionally
failed  to  '  catch  on ',  and  we  find  demes  paying  honour  to  a  name-
less hero  chief.  The  best  evidence  for  ail  this  consists  in  the  names
of  the  demes  themselves.  Some,  like  Piraeus,  ?:icusis,  Rhamnus,
are  simply  place-names  :  Rhamnus  means  '  thorn  ',  and,  unlike
Glastonbury,  never  acclimatized  a  saint  to  it.     In  other  cases,

'  Wilamowitz,  A.  A.,  vol.  ii,  pp.  148-68,  who  points  out  that  the  thirds
never  '  caught  on  '  in  the  popular  mind  or  developed  '  heroes  or  sentimental
associations  of  their  own  :  they  were  merely  a  practical  convenienrc.  WM.
Po/.  xxi ;  Hdt.  v.  69  (the  two  /oci  classici  for  Cleisthenes'  work).


152


POLITICS


PART  II


where  the  hero  was  ready  to  hand,  the  deme  was  called  by  his
name  and  sentiment  crystallized  around  it.^

These  new  demes  formed  the  groundwork  of  the  Athenian
state  in  the  fifth  century.  Every  Athenian  was  a  demesman,
and    officially  known    by  the   name  of  his   deme.     Cleisthenes


Attica,  the  Megarid,  and  parts  of  Corinth  and  Poeotia,  with  Yorkshire
on  the  same  scale.

wished  to  secure  that  when  a  man  thought  and  spoke,  in  our
slang  phrase,  of  his  '  people' — the  close  inner  circle  of  his  life —
he  should  think  and  speak  of  his  deme.     '  He  made  those  who


'  Wilamowitz,  vol.  ii,  pp.  149-51.     He  reads  the  much  disputed  passage

of  Herodotus  (v.  69)  5e'K«[;^n]  8e  Kn\  Toiii  8r]fxnvi  KnTfvdjiiv  eh  Tin  0uXd?.  If
Herodotus  really  said  that  there  were  exactly  a  hundred  demes,  he  was
mistaken,  A//i.  Pol.  xxi.  5  says  that  the  demes  were  given  heroic  names
when  there  were  no  place-names  available— just  the  converse  of  what
probably  happened.


CHAP.  VI  SELF-GOVERNMENT  i;,.

lived  in  each  of  the  demes  demesmen  one  of  anotlier,  in  order  to
prevent  their  calling  one  another  b>-  their  fathers  and  so  convict-
ing the  newly  admitted  citizens.  Hence  Athenians  give  their
deme  when  introducing  themselves  one  to  another.'  What
Cleisthenes  attempted  to  do  was,  in  fact,  to  alter  the  Athenian
form  of  surname.  Before  his  time  the  Athenians,  like  so  many
people,  as  for  instance  in  Wales  and  Scotland,  distinguished  one
another  by  their  fathers  :  Herodotus  distinguishes,  for  example,
between  '  Miltiades  the  son  of  Cypselus  '  and  '  Miltiatlcs  the  son
of  Cimon '.  Cleisthenes  tried  to  turn  John  Jones  and  Edward
Edwards  into  John  Montgomery  and  Edward  Radnor,  and  so
to  break  down  all  feeling  of  common  clan  ancestr)'.  He  was
only  partially  successful.  Herodotus  generally,  and  Thucydides
(who  admitted  nothing  between  Athens  and  the  individual)  always,
ignored  the  new  practice,  and  we  distinguish  Thucydides  himself
from  his  less  famous  namesake  by  the  latter's  father  Melesias.  But ,
as  time  went  on,  men  became  more  used  to  the  custom,  and  when,
a  hundred  years  after  Cleisthenes,  there  were  two  prominent  states-
men called  Thrasybulus,  they  were  distinguished  by  their '  people  '
at  Steiria  and  Collytus.  And  everybody,  of  course,  knows  the
deme  of  Demosthenes— Paeania  behind  Hymettus.  The  best
evidence,  perhaps,  is  the  comedy.  In  Aristophanes  the  charac-
ters always  introduce  themselves  to  one  another  by  their  demes :
and  Strepsiades  in  the  Clouds,  when  he  is  being  beaten  by  his
son,  calls  for  help  to  his  '  neighbours  and  relatives  and  demes-
men '}

So  the  deme  maintained  and  even  increased  its  hold  ;  but  only
because  Cleisthenes  submitted  to  what  seems  to  us  a  surprising
compromise.  He  made  membership  of  a  deme  hereditary.  Once
of  Collytus  a  family  was  always  of  Collytus,  even  if  it  went  to
live  at  Steiria.  A  demesman  living  away  from  his  '  people
would  just  count  as  a  '  resident  alien  ' :  he  would  have  no  part
in  the  public  affairs  of  the  deme,  but  merely  be  set  down,  like  an
enfranchised  slave,  or  an  Italian  civis  sine  suffragio,  as  '  dwelhng  '
there.  It  was  a  striking  concession :  and  Cleisthenes  can  only
have  made  it  in  the  expectation  that  the  deme  arrangements
would   be  periodically  revised.     But   fifth-century  Athens   had

»  Wilamowitz,  A.  A.,  vol.ii,  pp.  169  ff. ;  Ath.  Pol.  xxi.  4  ;  Ar.  Clouds  1323.
134  ;  Ach,  406,  1028  ;  Peace  190  ;  Lys.  852  ;   Thesm.  898.


154  POLITICS  PART  II

other  things  to  think  of.  and  for  this  among  other  reasons  the
deme  organization,  like  our  own  local  authorities,  worked  with
varying  success  in  different  parts  of  the  country.^

What  did  these  demes  do  ?

In  local  matters  their  powers  were  very  much  the  same  as
those  of  the  old  ship-districts :  the  mayor  or  demarch  (the  name
and  type — mostly  stout  and  well-to-do — still  survive  in  the
modern  kingdom)  took  over  the  duties  of  the  old  ship-maker.
He  presided  over  the  assembly  of  demesmen  which  managed  the
local  affairs  of  the  neighbourhood,  and  saw  to  the  raising  of  the
rates,  and,  if  necessary,  of  the  taxes.  So  far  as  the  scanty  inscrip-
tions which  their  frugality  has  left  us  reveal,  parish  affairs  in
fifth-century  Attica  fall  into  five  classes  :  the  annual  election  and
examination  of  officials  and  priests,  the  management  of  parish
lands  or  'glebe  ',  'sacred'  affairs  (keeping  up  shrines,  festivals,  &c.),
granting  honours  to  benefactors  (these  of  course  were  always  in-
scribed on  stone),  and  justice.  This  last  was  a  new  category  which
had  come  back  to  the  demes  from  Deioces' judgement-seat  in  the
city.  But  the  judicial  powers  of  the  general  jury,  or  Heliaca,  of
the  demes  were  very  slight :  they  could  only  act  in  purely  local
cases,  and  only  then  when  they  were  specially  referred  to  them.
These  local  courts  evidently  did  not  do  their  work  well,  for  about
fifty  years  later,  following  a  precedent  set  by  Pisistratus,  we  find
the  central  authorities  sending  expert  juries  on  circuit  round  the
demes  to  supplement  them.-

^  Atli.  Pol.  Ixii :  'when  the  demes  got  corrupt.'  Hereditary  demes  are
only  surprising  to  us  because  we  have  grown  accustomed  to  taking  local  ties
so  Hghtly.  Yet  the  general  substitution  of  a  local  for  a  birth  qualification  for
the  '  freedom '  of  an  English  borough  only  dates  from  1835.  Membership  of
the  seventeen  parishes  of  Siena  is  still  hereditary,  although  they  are  so
small  that  families  are  constantly  moving  house  from  one  to  another.  When
the  parish  flags  are  flown  from  the  houses  on  the  day  of  the  big  horse-race
in  the  square,  these  transmigrants  make  themselves  very  noticeable  by
hanging  out  their  hereditary  colours  amid  a  streetful  of  rivals.

^  Pauly,  s.  V.  Aiifj.01,  who  gives  a  full  list  of  all  the  known  demes.  Well-to-do
Demarchs:  Sundwall,  Epigraphischc  Beitriige  zur  sosialpolitisclieti  Geschichte
Athens,  p.  57.  (This  Finnish  writer  has  gone  exhaustively  into  the  per-
sojifiel  of  the  whole  Athenian  administration  and  entirely  dispelled  the
legend,  which  originated  from  Aristotle,  that  Athens  was  wholly  in  the  hands
of  demagogues  either  in  the  fifth  or  the  fourth  century.  A  large  and  constant
proportion  of  the  official  names  belong  to  well-to-do  families,  who  showed
not  the  least  inclination  to  be  '  driven  out  of  public  life ".  This  throws  an
interesting  light  on  the  old  controversy  as  to  the  influence  of  Plato  and
Isocrates   respectively   upon   their   contemporaries.     It    is    clear  that    few


CHAP.  VI  self-govi:rnmkxt  ,  .-5

But  more  important  than  their  local  duties  was  the  position
occupied  by  the  demes  in  the  central  or^^anization,  for  this  is
what  gave  them  their  permanent  place  in  the  Athenian  citizen's
life.

Firstly,  the  deme  kept  the  registers  of  citizenship.  The  State
took  cognizance  of  the  individual  only  through  his  denic.  From
birth  to  eighteen  an  Athenian  was  nothing  to  Athena.  Mc
might  be  a  '  brother ',  but  he  was  not  yet  a  citizen  or  even
a  semi-citizen.  When  he  became  eighteen  he  was  inscribed  on
the  roll  of  his  deme,  like  his  father  before  him,  and  henceforth
he  enjoyed  the  privileges  of  citizenship,  such  as  a  seat  in  the
Central  Assembly,  or  Ecclesia,  and  was  called  upon  for  its  duties,
such  as  military  service.

Secondly,  when  direct  taxation  was  necessary — as  was  only
the  case  in  times  of  emergency — it  was  raised  by  the  demes,
who,  like  our  local  surveyors  of  taxes,  were  in  closer  contact
than  the  central  power  with  the  wealthier  members  of  the
locality.  Here  the  deme  was  merely  carrying  on  the  duties
of  the  old  ship-districts.^

But  the  most  important  work  the  deme  had  to  do  was  to  keep
the  central  state  supplied  with  men  to  do  its  public  work.  We
often  hear  it  laid  down  as  an  axiom  that  Greek  democracy
differs  from  modern  because  it  did  not  use  the  representative
principle.  This  is  of  course  a  complete  mistake :  and  it  could
never  have  won  acceptance  but  for  the  foolish  idea  (to  which
so  many  nineteenth-century  thinkers  gave  currency)  that  the
only  public  work  that  a  democracy  requires  of  its  citizens  is  an
occasional  vote  either  in  or  for  Parliament.     The  Greeks  were

Athenians  followed  Plato  in  despairin-^  of  the  Republic  and  retiring  into
private  life  to  wait  for  more  Utopian  times.)  Circuit  juries  :  At/i.  Pol.  xvi.
5,  xxvi.  3,  liii.  1.  There  were  originally  thirty,  but  when  the  thirty  tyrants
had  made  thirty  an  unlucky  number  they  were  increased  to  forty.  Even  in
their  most  practical  arrangements  the  Greeks  were  apt  to  be  childishly
superstitious.  For  the  demarch  or  village  Bumble  see  the  unkind  remark  in
Clouds  37.

1  As  we  know  from  the  orators,  fourth-century  Athenians  sometimes  con-
cealed their  wealth  in  order  to  evade  ta.xation.  We,  with  our  ^tradiuons  of
'  doing  what  we  like  with  our  own  '  are  much  more  averse  to  the  inquisition
of  local  tax-collecting  officials.  It  is  noteworthy  that  the  super-ta.x  on
incomes  above  ^5,000— a  tax  for  which  the  Greeks  would  certainly  have
used  their  local  collectors— should  have  been  carefully  entrusted  to  a  clasi
of  central  officials.


156  POLITICS  PART  II

not  so  shortsighted.  They  knew  that  government  does  not
consist  of  rights,  irrespective  of  their  exercise,  but  of  something
a  great  deal  more  practical.  A  governor,  whether  amateur  (as
in  Greece)  or  professional  (as  so  often  with  us),  is  a  man  with
a  job  to  perform,  a  man  who  is  not  so  much  engaged  in  exercising
rights  (though  of  course  he  is  only  doing  what  he  has  a  right  to
do)  as  in  carrying  on  public  business.  So^  as  Theseus  has  told
us,  it  was  not  the  Ecclesia,  whether  it  met  weekly  or  monthly,
which  made  Athens  a  democracy :  nor  is  it  Adult  Suffrage  or
the  Referendum  which  will  make  England  one.  Democracy  is
meaningless  unless  it  involves  the  serious  and  steady  co-operation
of  large  numbers  of  citizens  in  the  actual  work  of  government.
No  state  has  ever  been  composed  of  citizens  all  of  whom  have  the
leisure  or  the  desire  or  the  knowledge  to  attend  to  public  affairs.
The  Greek  City  State  differs  from  our  modern  democracies  in
enlisting  not  all  but  merely  a  far  larger  proportion  of  its  repre-
sentatives in  active  public  work.  Whereas  with  us,  however
democratic  our  constitution,  the  few  do  the  work  for  the  many,
in  Greece  the  many  did  it  themselves.  As  the  Funeral  Speech
says  :  '  We  call  our  constitution  a  democracy  because  its  working
is  in  the  hands  not  of  the  few  but  of  the  many,'  or,  to  quote  the
paradox  at  the  close  of  Herodotus^s  eulogy  of  democracy,  '  in
the  many  all  things  are  found.'  Fifth-century  Athens  knew  very
well  that  it  was  a  paradox  :  that  it  was  impossible  in  this  imperfect
world  to  secure  a  fair  share  of  power,  not  merely  for  organized
minorities,  like  the  young  '  aristocrats '  in  Syracuse,  but  for  the
minority  in  a  man's  self  (when  it  is  a  minority),  '  the  little  bit
of  him  that  cares  for  his  country.'  But  the  Greeks  were  practical
people,  unconcerned  as  yet  with  the  metaphysics  of  politics,  and
Cleisthenes'  organization  was  designed,  like  some  of  our  own  recent
social  legislation,  to  sweep  into  the  political  net  just  so  much  of
the  political  talent  and  energy  of  his  Athenians  as  he  could
conveniently  secure.^

Let  us  cast  our  eye  over  the  central  government  of  fifth-century

^  Thuc.  ii.  y].  i  ;  Hdt.  iii.  80  fin.\  cf.  Thuc.  vi.  39.  i.  For  a  modern
measure  designed  with  the  same  object  as  Cleisthenes'  compare  (to  take  but
a  single,  and  non-contentious,  example)  the  Probation  of  Offenders  Act.
Probation  officers  are  generally  unpaid.  Does  the  principle  become  different
when  they  have  their  expenses  paid,  or  even  when  they  are  given  a  small  fee  ?
The  difference  between  amateur  and  professional  is,  after  all,  as  our  cricketers


CHAP.  VI  SELF-GOVERNMENT  1-7

Athens  and  see  how  it  worked.  The  system  \vc  arc  about  to
describe  was  estabh'shed,  in  its  essentials,  by  Clcisthcncs,  thouf;h
Pericles  and  others  made  necessary  and  logical  additions.  \Vc
shall  therefore  omit,  as  not  germane  to  our  purpose,  which  is  to
understand  the  Athenian  of  the  Funeral  Speech,  those  parts  of
his  work,  such  as  his  treatment  of  the  Areopagus,  which  provcil
to  be  of  merely  temporary  importance,  and  concentrate  our
attention  on  its  essentials.  All  through  we  shall  find  it  based  on
two  simple  ideas.  Firstly,  the  people  is,  under  its  own  laws,
sovereign,  and  the  people's  will,  whether  expressed  in  the  assembly
or  the  law  courts,  is,  under  the  law,  supreme  and  responsible  to
none.  Secondly,  as  the  people  has  many  other  things  to  do
besides  to  rule,  its  work  must  be  done  by  representatives,  as
many  as  can  be  conveniently  secured,  subject,  at  stated  intervals,
to  its  own  approval  and  correction.  Complete  self-government
was  the  ideal ;  but  Athenians  realized,  to  adai)t  the  famous
saying  of  Lincoln,  that  you  can  make  some  of  the  people  rule
all  the  time,  and  all  the  people  rule  some  of  the  time,  but  that
you  will  never  get  all  the  people  to  rule  all  the  lime.

Government  consists  of  three  parts,  the  legislative,  the  adminis-
trative, and  the  judicial.  This  is  not  strictly  correct  for  Athens  :
for,  since  Solon,  she  had  her '  laws  '  complete  and  was  not  supposed
to  need  to  make  new  ones.  She  only  did  so,  as  the  Americans
alter  their  constitution,  with  extreme  circumspection.  Her
Parliament  met,  as  our  English  word  implies,  not  to  pass  laws
but  to  discuss  policy.  But  these  discussions  were,  as  Clcon
remarks,  not  mere  academic  debates.  They  ended  in  a  vote
which  was  embodied  in  a  decree :  and  these  decrees  were  really
the  counterpart,  in  the  simpler  and  stabler  conditions  of  Greek
life,  to  our  Acts.^

Let  us  take  the  judicial  side  first,  for  we  have  already  seen  it
at  work  under  Solon.  Cleisthenes  upheld  and  perhaps  even
extended  the  rule  of  the  people  on  the  big  popular  juries  which

know,  only  a  matter  of  degree.  Note  the  proverbial  Greek  remark  about
judging  a  man's  character  :  dpxn  I'lvbpa  del^u,  i.  e,  '  Wait  till  he  is  a  magis-
trate'. It  is  like  our  public  school  '  Wait  till  he  is  a  prefect':  nearly  every
one  became  one  and  had  a  chance  of  '  showing  the  stuff  he  was  made  of  .
It  recurs  in  Soph.Af!/.  175-7,  also  quoted  at  the  head  of  this  chapter,  where,
as  Jebb  says,  the  poet  is  thinking  of  the  Athens  of  his  day.
^  Thuc.  iii.  38.

124S  I,


158  POLITICS  PART  II

were  based,  as  we  saw,  on  the  idea  of  calling  the  people  in  to  act
as  judge  ;  what  we  have  to  note  here  is  how  he  selected  the  jury-
men. Like  ours,  they  lived  scattered  about  the  country.  The
natural  authority  to  collect  them  was  the  deme.  Cleisthenes
arranged  that  the  demes  between  them  should  present  6,000
jurymen  (600  from  each  tribe)  to  the  central  authorities,  who
should  then  draw  lots  as  to  whose  services  were  required.  As  the
population  of  the  different  demes  varied  considerably,  a  system  of
proportional  representation  was  established  between  them.  But
how  did  the  demes  get  their  candidates  ?  They  elected  them,  no
doubt  taking  all  those — if  they  had  room  for  them — who  were
known  to  be  willing  to  serve.  When  the  work  of  the  courts
increased  and  they  sat  more  frequently,  it  was  not  always  easy  to
find  men  who  could  spare  the  time.  Pericles  overcame  this
difficulty  by  paying  every  juryman  a  decent  day's  wage  for  his
services.  They  were  elected  to  serve  for  a  year.  So  every
morning  of  the  year,  except  on  the  numerous  feast-days  (more
numerous,  foreign  litigants  used  to  complain,  than  anywhere  else
in  Greece),  these  6,000  would  trudge  into  Athens,  if  they  lived  in
the  country,  and  present  themselves  at  their  old  judge  Theseus'
temple — unless  Parliament  happened  to  be  sitting  that  day  and
they  were  required  there  instead.  Here  they  would  be  told  if  the
courts  had  work  for  them  :  if  they  had,  lots  would  be  drawn,  and,
unless  they  were  very  unlucky,  they  would  go  off  to  court  in
batches  of  hundreds,  sure  of  their  meals  for  the  day,  to  hear  cases
from  every  part  of  the  Athenian  Empire.  So  far  as  we  know,
they  did  their  work  very  well ;  amid  much  grumbling  on  other
matters  no  complaint  on  the  score  of  corruption  or  unfairness  in
individual  cases  has  come  down  to  us.  No  court  consisted  of
less  than  201  jurymen  and,  as  one  of  these  grumblers  remarked,
so  far  as  corruption  is  concerned,  there  is  safety  in  numbers.^

Let  us  pass  to  administration.  Athens  had  no  permanent
civil  service,  at  least  in  the  higher  branches,  and,  except  for
military  officers  and  for  the  council,  no  man  might  hold  the
same  position  twice.     She  had  professional  policemen  and  clerks

^  Pauly,  s.  V.  tir]\ioi\  Wilamowitz,  A.  A.,  vol.  ii,  p.  96  note,  Sundwall,
p.  69  ;  Old  Oligarch,  iii.  7  ;  Ath.  Pol.  Ixiii  ;  Ar.  Wasps  304  ('  if  the  courts  are
not  sitting,  what  shall  \se  do  for  a  breakfast  ? '  say  the  chorus  :  they  do  not
contemplate  being  done  out  of  it  by  the  lot  :  the  risk  was  clearly  too  trifling).


CHAP.  VI  SELF-GOVERNMENT


'.V;


and  town-criers  ;  but  all  her  important  public  work  was  done  by
a  rapid  succession  of  amateurs.  The  theory  was,  as  Pericles  tells
us,  that  quick  wits  are  worth  more  than  experience  of  routine  :
and  the  best  statesmen  were  those  who,  as  Thucydides  says  of
Themistocles,  were  best  at  '  improvising  policy '  in  emergencies.
These  '  dilettante '  public  servants  held  office  for  a  year  and,  in
the  fifth  century  at  any  rate,  never  as  single  officials  but  as
members  of  a  board,  so  as  to  assist  or  control  one  another.  Sonic
of  them  were  chosen  by  lot,  like  the  jurymen,  out  of  a  list
of  selected  candidates — the  nine  governors,  for  instance,  were
drawn  for  (after  487  B.C.)  out  of  500  candidates  selected  by  the
demes  ;  others,  whose  work  required  more  expert  knowledge,
were  definitely  elected  by  show  of  hands  in  the  Assembly.
Officials  whose  functions  involved  '  matters  of  life  and  deaih  to
the  people',  as  a  grumbler  puts  it,  that  is,  military  and  fmancial
officials,  were  always  elected.  No  officials  were  appointed,  as  so
many  with  us,  on  the  nomination  of  other  ofificials  or  of  'the
government'  ;  for  in  Athens,  as  we  have  heard  Theseus  declare,
there  ivas  no  '  government '  in  this  sense  of  the  word —

The  whole  folk  year  by  year,  in  parity
Of  service  is  our  King.^

But  some  permanent  central  authority  there  must  be.  A
foreign  envoy  coming  to  Athens  must  find  some  one  '  holding  the
seals  of  authority '.  Even  in  the  dead  season,  when  Whitehall  is
deserted,  there  is  some  permanent  secreta.'"y  on  dut)-  in  the
Foreign  Office.  Who  kept  the  machine  of  government  working
at  Athens  ?     Surely  it  cannot  have  been  left  to  the  slave  clerks.

The  real  permanent  force  which  kept  the  machine  working  was
what  was  known  as  the  Council,  a  body  established  by  Solon
and  reformed  by  Cleisthcnes  in  the  place  of  the  old  council  of  the
ship-makers  with  its  General  Purposes  Committee  of  chiefs.  The
Council  consisted  of  500  members  (fifty  from  each  tribe)  who
were  chosen  by  lot,  in  the  same  way  as  the  jurymen,  out  of
candidates  elected,  on  a  proportional  system,  by  the  demes.
These  annual  parish  elections  of  candidates  for  the  council  were
the  most  exciting  political  event  of  the  Athenian  year,  for  the
political  complexion  of  the  council  was,  generally  speaking,  the

'  Thuc.  i.  138.  3  ;  At/i.  Pol.  xxii.  5  ;  Old  Oligarcli,  1.3;  Eur.  Suppl.  406.

L  %


i6o  POLITICS  PART  II

decisive  factor  in  state  policy.  Any  citizen  was  allowed  to
stand,  provided  he  had  not  already  served  twice  as  a  councillor  :
and  in  this  way  a  large  proportion  of  the  citizen  body  found  its
way  by  rotation  on  to  the  council.^

This  '  council '  had  a  twofold  function.  It  had  a  number  of
independent  executive  duties  of  its  own,  which  it  performed,  like
any  other  board  of  officials,  subject  to  the  approval  of  the  people.
But  it  also  served  as  a  standing  representation,  or  General
Purposes  Committee,  of  the  assembly  :  and  as  in  this  its  most
characteristic  function  it  was,  in  theory,  a  mere  section  or  mirror
of  the  people,  the  individual  councillor,  like  the  individual  voter
in  the  assembly,  was  not  called  upon,  as  every  other  official,  to
give  an  account  of  his  stewardship.  The  council  discussed  and
put  into  shape  all  the  business  which  was  to  come  before  its
sovereign,  and  sent  up  the  agenda  in  the  shape  o(  Trpo/SovXev/xaTa
or  council  minutes.  No  decree  could  be  passed  unless  it  had
been  through  committee,  i.e.  unless,  in  Athenian  official  language,
'  it  seemed  good  to  the  council  and  the  people,'  The  council  sat
daily  to  transact  current  business  on  behalf  of  the  sovereign
people  between  assembly  and  assembly,  and  any  one  who  wished
to  have  dealings  with  the  sovereign — from  a  foreign  ambassador
to  a  citizen  with  a  motion  to  move  at  the  next  meeting  of  the
assembly — had  to  appear  before  the  councillors.  For  these  pur-
poses the  council  was  divided  into  ten  sub-committees,  one  for
each  tribe,  each  of  whom  was  on  duty  for  a  tenth  part  of  the
year.  The  members  of  these  sub-committees  were  called  by  the
old  name  of  irpvToiveis  or  chiefs,  and  their  period  of  office  was
known  as  a  prytany.  One-third  of  the  sub-committee  had
always  to  be  in  attendance,  and  from  amongst  it  was  chosen  by
lot  every  day  an  official  called  the  president  (eTriaTciTrjs) ,  who
acted  as  chairman  in  the  council  or  the  assembly.     During  his

'  Acharnae,  the  biggest  of  the  denies  (cf.  Thuc.  ii.  19.  2),  is  known  to  have
suppHed  twenty-two  out  of  the  fifty  councillors  of  its  tribe  (Oeneis)  :  some
small  demes  took  turns  to  send  one  (as  we  find  in  tlie  case  of  Boeotarchs  in
the  newly  found  Boeotian  constitution).  Reckoning  the  citizen  body  at
40,000,  one  citizen  out  of  every  eighty  would  be  a  councillor  at  any  given
time.  Reckoning  thirty  years  to  a  generation,  two  out  of  every  five  would
reach  office.  But  allowance  must  be  made  for  re-elections.  We  have  no
means  of  judging  to  what  extent  the  candidates  generally  exceeded  the  places
and  how  far  the  use  of  the  lot  was  a  reality.  On  the  deme  elections  of  council
candidates  see  Wilamowitz,  A.  A.,  vol.  ii,  p.  iii  note.


CHAP.  VI  SELF-GOVKRNMKNT  i^,,

single  day  of  office  (for  he  was  not  eligible  for  rc-cleclion)  he  had
in  his  keeping  the  keys  of  the  citadel,  the  public  archives,  and
the  state  seal,  and  was  thus  for  twenty-four  hours  the  acting  head
of  the  country.  The  attendance  of  the  whole  sub-committcc  of
fifty  was  necessary  at  every  council  meeting,  that  of  other  coun-
cillors was  voluntary  with  the  exception  of  one  representative
chosen  by  lot  from  each  of  their  nine  tribes.  This  was  a  provision
to  ensure  that,  even  under  the  system  of  tribal  organization  by
'  thirds ',  there  should  be  no  undue  dominance  of  tribal  interests.

But  the  council  had  also  a  large  number  of  executive  functions,
some  of  which  it  had  taken  over  from  the  old  council  of  magis-
trates which  sat  on  the  Areopagus.  For  instance,  it  controlled
finance — after  453  imperial  as  well  as  national  finance — made  all
the  arrangements  for  the  election  or  sortition  of  officials,  and  kept
a  watch,  in  the  case  of  all  civil  officials,  over  the  performance  of
their  duties.  We  do  not  know  how  often  it  met  in  full  session
in  the  council  chamber,  as  opposed  to  the  daily  sittings  of  its  sub-
committee ;  but  its  work  was  sufficiently  exacting  to  keep  the
councillors  in  the  city  for  their  whole  year  and  to  make  it
necessary  for  Pericles  to  make  them  an  allowance  for  their  work,
in  addition  to  the  public  dinners  in  the  new  council  chamber,  or
Round  House  as  it  was  now  called,  to  which  the  'chiefs'  were
entitled  according  to  old  custom.^

We  have  seen  how  the  sovereign  people  judged  and  admim's-
tered  by  delegating  power  to  representatives.  Let  us  watch
Demos  now  in  full  session,  as  he  assembles  in  the  Ecclesia  on
Pnyx  Hill  to  'decide  or  debate,  carefully  and  in  person,  all
matters  of  policy ',  '  holding,'  as  Pericles  says,  '  not  that  words
and  deeds  go  ill  together,  but  that  acts  are  foredoomed  to  failure
when  undertaken  undiscussed.'  These  acts  are  not  merely  feats
on  the  field  of  battle,  but  also  the  decrees  enacted— transformed,  as
Thucydides  would  say,  from  'words'  into  '  deeds '—by  the
sovereign  in  council.

The  nineteenth  century  had  a  great  veneration  for  '  the  voice

1  A^/i.  Pol.  xliii.  2  ff. ;  Daremberg,  s.  v.  ^ov\i],  with  refs.  ;  Wilamowitz,  A.  A.,
vol.  ii,  pp.  95,  106.  Round  House:  Plato,  Apology  32,  with  the  account  of
Socrates'  behaviour  as  a  '  chief,  the  only  office  ol  state  he  ever  hcki.  I  he
old  Athenian  year  consisted  of  twelve  lunar  months  (354  days),  with  an  extra
month  three  years  out  of  every  eight.  So  that  Cleisthencs"  adoption  ol  the
decimal  system  by  dividing  the  year  (calculated  as  360  days)  into  ten  prj--
tanies  involved  '  dethroning  the  moon  as  a  measure  of  time  :  Sla.U  una
(ieselhr/ia//,  p.  98,


l62  POLITICS  PART  II

of  the  people ',  as  if  men  could  all  shout  together  without
deafening  one  another.  When  it  discovered  that,  under  modern
conditions,  nations  cannot  meet  in  council,  it  sanctified  the
election  of  representatives  to  do  the  governing  for  them  ;  and
thus  transferred  its  veneration  from  peoples  to  Parliaments.  The
twentieth  century  is  discovering,  to  its  surprise,  that  the  capacity
of  Parliaments  has  been  over-estimated  :  that,  however  well  they
may  shout,  they  find  it  difficult  to  govern.  Our  modern  demo-
crats might  have  saved  themselves  this  disillusionment  if  they
had  cared  to  listen  to  the  psychologists.  Public  business  is  much
the  same  as  private ;  and  men  are  not  able  to  transact  business  in
hordes.  Large  companies  are  much  the  same  as  small,  only
more  uncomfortable.  No  one  likes  to  sit  for  hours  listening  to
other  men  talking  ;  nor  does  the  situation  become  very  much
more  tolerable  when  hundreds  of  others  are  listening  too.  Hence
the  atmosphere  of  boredom  and  languor  so  conspicuous  (as  seen
from  the  galleries)  in  most  modern  Parliaments  as  in  all  large
committees,  a  vision  of  men  striving  desperately  after  the
unattainable — to  waste  none  of  their  own  time  and  yet  to  follow
conscientiously  the  main  thread  of  the  discussion.  And  hence
the  ever-increasing  tendency  to  concentrate  the  real  power  and
the  real  work  in  more  business-like  quarters — in  the  hands  of
cabinets  and  committees  and  *  civil  servants  '}

'  We  are  still  without  a  book  on  'the  psychology  of  committee  work'  ;
but  the  right  number  to  discuss  a  complex  matter  of  business  is  about  seven,
'  because  that  number  of  men  can  sit  round  a  small  table,  talk  with  each
other  informally,  without  waste  of  words  or  any  display  of  pretence,  provide
an  adequate  diversity  of  points  of  view  and  modes  of  dealing  with  the  subject
in  hand,  and  be  prompt  and  efficient  in  the  discharge  of  business.'  Norton,
University  Adminish-ation,  pp.  64-5.  (Compare  the  latest  experiment  in  our
system  of  government,  the  secret  conference  of  party  leaders.)  So  the  smaller
boards  at  Athens,  consisting  generally  of  ten  persons,  were  really  more  satis-
factory than  the  Council.  When,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Ecclesia,  complex
business  is  only  reported  and  hardly  discussed,  the  exact  size  is  of  less  con-
sequence—those who  are  interested  attend,  the  rest  stay  away.  The  Greeks
were  quite  aware  of  the  defects  of  'a  nation  in  debate'.  How  can  a  mob
govern  ?  was  a  staple  oligarchic  argument.  '  Why,'  says  the  speaker  in
Herodotus's  debate  (iii.  81),  '  it  tumbles  headlong  into  business  like  a  winter
torrent,  upsetting  everything  as  it  goes  along.  It  is  stupid  and  violent  and
there  is  no  use  to  be  made  of  it.'  Hence  oligarchies  dispensed  with  popular
assemblies  and  cariied  on  government  through  councils  alone.  See  the
interesting  constitution,  proposed  for  Athens  in  41 1,  in  Atlt.  Pol.  xxx.  There
is  no  assembly :  instead  the  citizen-body  is  divided  into  four  councils,
each  of  which  governs  for  one  year  out  of  four  :  thus  (according  to  modem
ideas)  three-quarters  of  the  citizen-body  are,  at  any  given  moment,  '  dis-
franchised.'    lUit  this  legislator  was  not  thinking  of 'rights'  but  of  work,  so


CHAP.  VI  SELF-GOVERNMI'.NT  ,6j

The  same  difficulties  were  felt  in  the  Kcclcsia  ;  and  fur  that
reason,  as  we  have  seen,  current  business  was  not  transacted
there.  In  some  states  Parliament  did  not  meet  regularly  at  all,
but  was  only  summoned  from  time  to  time  for  special  emergency
gatherings.  In  Athens  it  met  in  regular  session  ten  times  a  year
(once  a  prytany),  and  though  the  number  of  extraordinary
sittings  gradually  increased  throughout  the  fifth  century  to  three
or  four  during  the  prytany,  even  this  did  not  mean  a  meeting
more  than  once  every  ten  days.  Yet  the  Ecclesia  met  under
more  favourable  circumstances  than  our  modern  Parliaments.
It  is  the  stuffiness  of  our  council  chambers,  quite  as  much  as  the
business  done  there,  which  sends  our  legislators  home  tired  out
after  a  few  hours'  work.  The  Athenian  assembly  came  together
in  the  open  air,  and  yet  not,  for  all  that,  under  conditions  of
physical  discomfort :  for  the  orators  of  Athens  did  not  compel
their  victims,  like  our  park  and  street-corner  gatherings,  to  listen
standing  up.  The  Athenians  came  to  their  popular  assembly
unlike  the  Romans,  in  order  to  think,  not  to  gape ;  and  no  man
(except  a  Socrates)  can  think  hard  standing  upright  for  hours.
On  an  assembly  morning  citizens  would  come  together  soon  after
sunrise,  having  left  their  beds  in  the  country,  or  in  Salamis
across  the  water,  long  before  it  was  light  enough  to  see  their
way  into  their  cloak  and  shoes.  Once  safely  on  Pny.x  Hill  they
would  dispose  themselves  as  they  liked  among  their  friends  and
acquaintances  ;  for  Demos  in  Council  knew  of  no  tribes  or  thirds
or  any  subdivisions  of  his  sovereignty.      There  they  would  sit

he  added  a  proviso  that  if  the  council  so  desired  each  of  its  members  mijijht
bring  in  another  citizen,  some  Pericles  or  Themistocles  whose  services  ihcy
were  anxious  to  keep,  to  assist  in  its  dehberations.  One  year  in  four  seems
a  large  tax  on  time :  but  the  council  was  only  to  meet  one  day  in  (ivc.
There  was  no  pay  attached,  and  any  one  who  came  late  was  fined  a  dr.ichma.
Similarly,  in  the  Boeotian  Confederation  at  the  end  of  the  fifth  centur)'  both
central  and  local  affairs  were  managed  entirely  by  Committees.  P'or  local
purposes  the  restricted  citizen-body  was  divided  into  four  large  committees
working  in  rotation— a  necessary  arrangement,  since  oligarchies  made  no
provision  for  their  public  servants— and  important  matters  were  dcruicd  m
a  full  session  of  all  four.  The  central  federal  council  was  similarly  divided  :
it  consisted  of  660  members,  i.e.  of  four  committees  of  165  each,  fifteen  fmm
each  of  the  eleven  cantons  or  federal  districts.  Within  each  district  the
fifteen  members  were  apportioned,  by  a  system  of  proportional  representa-
tion, between  the  different  townships.  .See  Thuc.  v.  38;  Hcllcniai  Oxy-
rhynchia  xi.  2  ff.,  elucidated  by  C^lotz,  Bulletin  de  CortcspondiUicc  Ilellt'niqut',
xxxii,  271  ff.  ;  cf.  Wilamowitz,  Staai  und  Gcselhcluift,  p.  129.


i64  POLITICS  TART  II

grumbling  and  yawning  and  scratching  their  heads,  going  over
their  olive-trees  or  composing  letters  to  absent  friends,  wishing
they  had  stopped  for  a  mixed  drink  on  their  way  up,  above  all
lamenting  the  square  meal  they  will  not  get  till  to-morrow  (for
it  will  be  too  late  when  they  get  home  to  have  a  supper  worth
eating),  till  the  lazy  townsfolk  stroll  up  from  Athens  and  the
Piraeus,  and,  last  of  all,  the  unpunctual  councillors  come  bustling
through  the  crowd.  Then,  at  last,  when  our  countryman  has
not  a  curse  left  in  his  cjuiver,  prayers  are  announced,  and  the
proceedings  begin.^

All  this  does  not  lead  us  to  expect  to  find  a  full  meeting,
except  on  an  occasion  of  very  exceptional  importance.  Nor  was
it  necessary  that  there  should  be,  provided  the  sense  of  the
whole  people  was  fairly  represented.  For  that,  after  all,  is  what
Parliaments  mainly  exist  for ;  and  as  all  business  concerns  people
as  well  as  things,  Parliaments  will  always  continue  to  be  neces-
sary, however '  expert '  a  task  the  work  of  governing  may  become.
The  duty  of  a  member  of  the  national  assembly  is  not  so  much
to  know  about  things  (though  such  knowledge  is  never  wasted)
as  to  know  about  people,  and  to  keep  the  men  who  are  managing
things  in  touch  with  what  he  knows.  The  danger  in  Athens
was,  of  course  (as  we  can  see  from  the  care  taken  in  the  com-
position of  the  council),  lest  the  urban  population  living  close
at  hand  should  drown  the  voice  of  the  men  from  the  more  distant
country  districts.  We  cannot  tell  what  proportion  of  the  citizens
attended  on  an  average ;  but  the  only  record  we  have  of  an
actual  division  shows  3,461  for  and  155  against,  total  3,616,
a  very  small  proportion  of  the  electorate.  There  was  no  quorum
required  for  ordinary  business.  When  a  decree  was  proposed
affecting  a  single  individual  {v6fx.o9  kn  avSpi)  6,000  must  be  present,
and  in  the  special  case  of  ostracism  a  six  thousand  majority  was
perhaps  needed  for  the  decree  of  banishment  to  be  issued.  But
it  is  certain  that  the  average  attendance  fell  far  below  this  figure.
During  the  later  years  of  the  Peloponnesian  War  it  was  impos-

'  Aristotle  Pol.  1275  bS  (emergency  Parliaments) ;  Ar.  Eccl.  311  ff.,  289  ff.
(early  rising  on  an  assembly  day) ;  Ac/i.  20  (arriving  early  on  the  Pnyx) ;
Lys.  59  (crossing  from  Salamis)  ;  Eccl.  85  (prayers) ;  Theophrastus,  Jebb,
p.  86  (countrymen's  drinks).  All  Greek  Parliaments  sat  sitiifig,  even  the
Spartans  (Thuc.  i.  87.  2  aj/aorryTco).  '  The  House  of  Commons  is  a  place
where  a  man  can  neither  work  nor  rest,'  said  a  well-known  statesman  lately.


CHAP.  VT  si:lf-governmi:xt  16.5

siblc  to  bring  5,000  citizens  together,  however  important  the
business.  After  its  close  it  was  so  difficult  to  secure  a  respectable
quorum  that  payment  was  introduced  for  attendance,  and  the
fee  was  several  times  increased  (perhaps  with  the  decline  in  the
value  of  money)  in  the  course  of  the  fourth  century,  till  it  reached
a  drachma  and  a  half  (about  an  ordinary  day's  wage)  for  the  ten
regular,  and  a  drachma  for  all  exceptional,  sittings.  No  one
was  eligible  for  attendance  till  he  was  twenty  years  old.'

The  Constitution  of  AtJicns  has  given  us  a  glimpse  into  the
conduct  of  Parliamentary  business,  The  agenda  were  drawn
up  by  the  council,  and  circulated  when  notice  of  the  meeting
was  sent  out.  Nothing  could  be  brought  forward  which  ditl  not
appear  in  them.  But  the  meeting  had  the  right  of  selecting  in
w^hat  order  matters  could  be  debated,  and  thus  preventing  the
council  from  burking  discussion  by  putting  down  awkward
subjects  at  the  bottom  of  a  long  list.  Public  business  was
arranged  under  three  heads :  '  sacred,'  *  profane,'  and  *  foreign
aftairs  '.  Business  began  after  sunrise  and  could  go  on  till  dusk  ;
but  no  doubt  the  impatience  increased  as  the  afternoon  wore  on.
Steps  were  therefore  taken  (our  evidence  for  this  dates  from
after  the  introduction  of  pay)  to  secure  that  a  reasonable  amount
of  business  must  be  got  through.  We  hear  of  a  provision  (not
adopted  at  every  meeting)  requiring  at  least  nine  points  on  the
agenda,  three  under  each  head,  to  be  dealt  with  in  the  day.'*

What  was  the  spirit  of  this  assembly  ?  Much  the  same,  as
Nietzsche  has  pointed  out,  as  that  of  the  audience  in  the  theatre.

1  Thuc.  viii.  72.  i.  On  ostracism  see  Carcopino's  exhaustive  essay  in
Melanges  iVhistoire  cmcienne  (Paris,  1909)  and  H.  J.  Cunningham's  criti-
cisms'in  the  Classical  Revieiu,  February  1911.  It  is  still  an  open  ques-
tion whether  the  6,000  votes  were  required  as  a  quorum  or  as  a  majority :
see  Melanges,  pp.  150  fif.,  also  pp.  145-6,  for  reproductions  of  the  four
extant  ostraka  or  potsherds  on  which  the  offending  statesman's  name  was
scratched.  They  all  differ  both  in  shape  and  dimensions,  and  were  not
supplied  to  the  voter  by  the  state,  but  provided  by  him  and  hllcd  in  at
leisure  beforehand.  So,  though  the  actual  voting  was  secret,  an  illiterate
voter  could  get  help  from  his  neighbours.  This  is  clear  from  Plutarch  s
story  of  the  countryman  who  wanted  to  have  his  vote  written  out  against
Aristeides  because  he  was  tired  of  hearing  him  called  the  Just  {V\\^\.Anst.^).
Athenians'  acquiescence  in  the  institution  of  ostracism  shows  how,  as  a  matter
of  course,  they  put  the  city  first  and  the  individual  nowhere.  A  man  was
ostracized  for  no  offence  whatsoever,  but  simply  because  a  large  proportion
of  his  fellow-citizens  thought  he  would  be  better  out  of  the  way.  Now.idays
such  powers  cannot  be  exercised  even  by  schoolmasters.     Cf.  Thuc.  y- 73-  3-

^  Ath.  Pol.  xliii.  4,  Wilamowitz,  A.  A.,  vol.  ii,  p]).  2521!.;  cf.  1  auly.
s.\.  E/cklesia.     Division  list :  Pauly,  p.  2170.


i66  POLITICS  PART  Ti

In  both  cases  men  turned  up  (as  at  Ober-Ammergau)with  a  healthy
'early  morning  feeling',  ready  to  listen  attentively  and  to  judge
fairly,  with  their  perceptions  heightened  and  clarified  by  the
solemnity  of  the  occasion  and  the  natural  grandeur  of  the  scene.
Many,  if  not  most,  of  those  present  had  already  been  councillors,
and  understood  the  nature  and  details  of  the  necessary  business.
So,  on  ordinary  occasions,  when  nothing  special  was  on,  business
was  run  through  sensibly  and  satisfactorily,  'as  the  laws  ordained,'
although  perhaps  (Greeks  being  Greeks)  with  some  little  un-
necessary palaver.  But  on  exceptional  occasions,  when  matters
involving  principle  or  rousing  excitement  were  to  be  discussed,
affairs  assumed  a  different  aspect.  The  business  men  retired  into
the  background,  the  teachers  and  talkers  came  to  the  front,  and
all  Athens  flocked  in  to  listen,  as  at  a  big  debate  in  a  modern
Parliament.  For  questions  of  principle  and  morality  affect  the
responsibility  of  every  citizen,  and  call  upon  him  to  act,  not  as
an  expert,  but  as  a  plain  man.  There  must  have  been  stirring
debates  on  Parliament  Hill  at  the  time  of  the  Persian  -wars  and
later;  but  no  historian  has  recorded  them,  and  only  small  frag-
ments of  their  eloquence  have  come  down  to  us.  We  must  judge
their  character  from  Thucydides,  who  has  condensed  for  us  the
drift  and  arguments  of  several  of  the  discussions  on  the  Pelopon-
nesian  War.  But  the  best  of  his  reports  relate  to  the  time  when
Athens  had  outgrown  her  idealism  and  show  us  the  dangers
rather  than  the  dignity  of  these  great  popular  occasions.  We
see  an  excited  populace,  forgetting  the  common  sense  which  was
the  bedrock  of  its  constitution,  allowing  its  subtle  and  inquisitive
intellect  full  play,  and  turning  an  assembly  intended  to  transact
serious  business  into  a  dazzling  display  of  argument  and  casuistry.
Such  occasions  brought  to  the  fore  a  new  type  of  public  man,
who  had  served  no  apprenticeship  of  responsibility  in  the  business
offices  of  state,  at  best  the  thinker  and  the  moralist,  but  too  often
only  the  accomplished  Parliamentarian  whom  we  know  so  well
from  our  own  newspapers.  The  Ecclesia,  and,  as  we  know
from  Aristophanes,  the  theatre  of  Dionysus  too,  had  its  well-
known  hahitnes^  who  made  themselves  conspicuous,  and  gathered
a  host  of  friends  and  enemies,  by  the  acuteness  of  their  criticisms
and  their  smart  and  ready  way  of  putting  them.  So  that
ministers,  engrossed  in  their  affairs  and  perhaps  a  little  forgetful


cuAr.  VI  SKT.F-G{W1:RNMI-:NT  ifS;

of  their  constituents,  would  come  clown  to  the  assembly  to  find
that  they  had  lost,  in  the  last  week  or  two,  the  snpi)ort  of  their
fellow-citizens,  and  that  men  were  beginning;  to  group  themselves
in  parties  under  the  personal  leadership  of  some  *  watchdog  of
the  people  '  and  master  of  biting  speech.  Then  would  begin  the
long  wrangle,  which  we  know  so  well,  between  the  men  fjf  word>
and  the  men  of  business,  ending  in  the  sulky  challenge :  '  Go  and
take  on  the  job  yourself.'  And  sometimes  the  Parliamentarian,
like  other  critics  and  journalists  since,  picked  up  the  i^love  and
put  the  careful  minister  to  shame.'

Nicias  on  this  famous  occasion  was,  like  I'criclcs  throughout  his
career,  not  a  civil  servant,  that  is  a  civilian  minister,  but  a  sciUlicr.
Soldiering  is  a  no  less  essential  part  of  '  public  work  '  than
inspecting  markets  or  doing  state  accounts.  It  is  necessary,
therefore,  to  examine  how  the  Athenians  succeeded  in  adapting
the  prevailing  methods  of  their  administration  to  this  most
exacting  of  duties.  For  we  are  not  accustomed  to  think  of
generalship,  still  less  of  admiralty,  as  a  business  for  amateurs.

Athens,  of  course,  had  a  conscript  army.  At  Marathon,  as  we
know,  the  Athenians  went  out  to  battle  in  tribes,  led  by  the
generals  or  colonels  of  their  tribe,  who  were  elected  by  the
tribesmen.  Elected  officers  sound  strange,  but  who  else  was
there  to  choose  them?  It  was  a  concession  to  efficiency  that
the  subalterns,  instead  of  being  also  chosen  by  the  rank  and
file,  were  appointed  by  their  superiors.  When  they  had  an
Empire  to  administer  this  tribal  arrangement  was  no  longer
practicable,  for  their  generals  were  no  longer  at  home,  needed
only  for  summer  campaigning  or  for  posting  sentries  round  the
walls,  but  were  required  on  foreign  service,  sometimes  continuous

'  Nietzsche,  JVorks,  vol.  xvii,  p.  303.  After  the  sophists  came  in.  men
began  to  bring  with  them  a  debating-society  atmosphere  (as  Llcon  com-
plained) instead  of  the  old  simple  matter-of-fact  state  of  mmd  eieon,  as
depicted  by  Thucydides,  was,  in  his  coarse  way,  the  worst  sophist  ..f  thein
ail.  The  best  Athenian  Parliamentary  debates  in  1  hucydides  arc  111.  37-40
(ch.  38  on  sophists)  and  vi.  9-23.  Cf.  also  I'lut.  /W.  1 1  for  the  discussion  on
the  use  of  the  tribute-money  after  the  peace  with  Persia:  also  the  hcclcsia,
or  rather  Heliaea,  in  Eur.  Or.  S66ff.,  and  the  part  played  by  the  country-man
(917  ff.) ;  Thuc.  iv.  28.  I  (critics  7'.  ministers).  Cleon  was  a  typical  cham-
pion of  popular  rights '.  Like  some  modem  editors,  he  would  '  take  on  any-
body ' :  and  even  in  the  lower  regions  he  was  expected  to  h.lp  Lmdladics  to
get  their  bills  paid  (Ar.  /^Vogs  569).  In  a  small  society  like  that  ot  --^  l"-e«
city  it  was  not  so  necessary  for  Padiamcnt  to  lay  stress  ..n  us  function  of
expressing  and  keeping  alive  the  conscience  of  the  people.


1 68  POLITICS  PART  II

for  the  twelve  months,  with  fleets  or  garrisons  in  different  parts
of  the  Greek  world.  '  No  enemy  has  ever  met  us  in  full  strength,'
boasts  Pericles,  for  half  of  us  are  on  land,  and  the  other  half  at
sea,  and  '  our  soldiers  are  sent  on  service  to  many  scattered
possessions'.  So  the  leadership  of  the  tribal  regiments  passed
necessarily  out  of  their  hands,  and  was  left  to  inferior  officers
whom  they  appointed.  For  the  generals,  alone  among  higher
Athenian  officials,  the  tribal  bar  was  broken  down.  They  were
allowed  to  be  elected  out  of  the  whole  body  of  the  people.  For
work  of  such  importance,  involving  questions  of  life  and  death
for  the  whole  people,  the  primary  consideration  was  to  secure
the  best  man  :  as  the  Old  Oligarch  remarked  with  a  sneer,  '  the
people  knows  that  it  gains  more  by  being  shut  out  from  these
positions  and  letting  the  most  capable  men  hold  them.'  The
special  qualifications  of  each  elected  general  were  known  and
valued.  Though  they  still  numbered  ten  and  were  in  theory  all
equal,  they  were  sent  abroad  or  kept  at  home  according  to  the
work  there  was  to  be  done  and  the  people's  estimate  of  their
abilities.  The  painstaking,  trusty  man  was  sent  on  distant
service,  where  he  might  have  to  fight  or  negotiate,  at  short
notice,  on  behalf  of  the  city.  The  abler  of  the  ten  were  kept
at  home,  to  help  in  directing  foreign  policy  and  to  be  ready  to
carry  it  out.  All  the  ten  were  in  a  measure  (alone  among
Athenian  officials)  emancipated  from  the  authority  of  the  council ;
they  were  often  compelled  to  take  action  at  a  distance  without
consulting  it ;  and  by  being  subject  to  re-election  they  could
escape  the  ordeal  of  examination.  They  were  the  only  servants
of  the  people  who  were  ever  given  full  power  and  allowed  for
a  time  to  be  '  autocrats '.  But  all  the  worse  was  the  ordeal  if
they  returned  home  defeated  !

Hence  it  was  the  military  officials,  the  men  who  led  the  people
in  emergencies,  who  were  really  the  most  powerful  men  in  the
State,  in  peace  as  well  as  war  time.  It  was  as  General,  not
as  Prime  Minister  or  '  President  of  the  Council ',  that  Pericles
dominated  the  assembly  and  directed  Athenian  foreign  policy
for  more  than  a  generation.  Sometimes  he  went  abroad  at  the
head  of  an  expedition.  But  nearly  all  the  long  months  of  his
thirty  years  of  office  he  spent  at  Athens,  in  touch  with  the
Parliament  whose  moods  he  knew  so  well.     Nothing  could  show


CHAP.  VI  SELF-GOVERNMKNT  ,69

more  clearly,  what  \vc  guessed  at  already  when  we  read  the
epitaph  of  Acsch)'lus,  how  large  a  place  war  held  in  the  life
and  thoughts  of  a  Greek  citi/.en.^

We  have  seen  the  democracy  at  work.  Only  one  thing  remains
now  before  this  long  review  is  ended— to  see  how  many  there
were  to  do  the  work.

Democracy  involves  the  co-operation  of  large  numbers  o[
citizens  in  the  active  work  of  government.  It  means  payment
to  the  state  not  only  in  taxes  but  in  time  and  thought.  Rich
Athenians  gave  free  gifts  of  money  for  ships  or  choruses  or
public  monuments  ;  poor  Athenians  (and  they  were  mostly  poor)
gave  their  widow's  mite — themselves.  How  great  was  the  call
which  their  city  made  upon  them  ?  ^

Great  enough,  by  all  accounts,  to  be  a  serious  element  in  their
lives.  For  the  contrast  between  public  and  private  activity  is
a  familiar  one  in  all  democratic  writing.  Work  with  us  means
always,  unless  stated  to  the  contrary,  our  own  professional  work:
work  in  Athens  might  mean  either  your  own  or  the  State's  unless
you  made  your  meaning  clear.

Ancient  statistics  are  flimsy  things ;  but  it  is  worth  while
trying  to  present  some  definite  figures  to  show  how  this  great
machine  of  democracy  was  managed.  For  the  Constitution  of
Athens  has  lately  given  us  some  fair  evidence  for  our  use."

One  of  the  latest  writers  on  the  population  of  fifth-century
Athens,  Cavaignac,  gives   the  following   estimate  for  431,  the
year  of  the  outbreak  of  the  Feloponnesian  War  : —
Heavy-armed   troops    (comprising   the    first    three

classes  of  Solon's  census) 25-30,000

Light-armed  troops  and  rowers  (fourth  class)  .  2o,oco

Total 45-50,000

•  Thuc.  ii.  59.  3  ;  Old  Oligarch,  i.  3  ;  Xen.  Mem.  iii.  4.  i ;  Meyer  iii.  §  201
with  refs. ;  Wilamowitz,  A.  A.,  ii,  pp.  107  fif. :  General's  responsibility:
Aesch.  Persae  213;  cf.  Nicias's  dispatch:  Thuc.  vii.  11,  4S.  3,  viii.  1.  I.
A  general  could  prevent  the  Ecclesia  from  meeting  (as  Pericles  did  in
431,  Thuc.  ii.  22.  i)  by  calling  out  the  army  (i.e.  in  this  case,  sending
the  citizens  on  sentry-go).  Subalterns:  Lys.  xxi.  10,  steersman,  i_.  e.  navy
subaltern  :  army  subalterns,  as  Wilamowitz  has  noticed  [Aus  KydiUhin,
p.  79),  are  kept  very  much  in  the  background.  In  an  army  managed  un
Funeral  Speech  principles  this  is  not  surprising.  No  state  has  ever  been
freer  from  a  '  military  caste  '.

"^  KuTovp-^'ia  is  probably  derived  from  Xecos  (people).  So  a  Xtiroupydy  was
the  same  as  a  drjfxiovpyos :  only  he  paid  in  money.

'  A/A.  Pol.  xxiv,  discussed  in  Wilamowitz,  A.  A.,  vol.  ii,  pp.  201-11.


I70  POLITICS  PART  II

In  this  estimate  he  includes  the  colonists  or  out-residents  on
conquered  territory  in  different  parts  of  the  Athenian  Empire,
who  were  drawn  from  the  poorer  class,  and  numbered  from
6,000  to  10,000.  Subtracting  them,  we  find  the  resident  citizen
population  of  adult  males  reduced  to  a  maximum  of  44,000,  or
a  minimum  of  35,000.^

Out  of  this  population  of  adult  males  Wilamowitz  reckons
that  7,500,  or  more  than  one  man  out  of  six,  were,  at  any  given
moment,  engaged  on  regular  daily  State  duty,  1,500  as  civil
administrators,  and  6,000  as  soldiers,  sailors,  and  city  police.
This  does  not  include  the  6,oco  judges  who  might  be  called  upon
any  day  during  the  year  for  which  they  were  selected.  If  these
are  added  in  the  proportion  mounts  up  to  one  out  of  four  or  even
one  out  of  three.

These  figures  are  so  startling  that  it  may  be  well  to  give  them
in  detail.

The  Constitution  of  Athens  says  that  '  more  than  20,000  men  '
were  '  eating  public  bread '  ;  that  is,  they  were  either  receiving
state  pay  as  jurymen  and  councillors^  or  being  '  maintained  at  the
public  expense '  as  public  servants  or  benefactors.^

^  Cavaignac,  Etudes  sur  rhistoire  fifianciere  (TAthhies  an  V^  sihte,
pp.  161  ff.  Wilamowitz,  whom  I  follow  in  the  details,  is  inclined  to  put  it
higher,  and  Meyer's  figure  {Fo^scJuingeji,  vol.  ii,  p.  179)  is  55,500  without
the  cleruchs.  But  three  other  recent  writers,  Delbriick,  Fawcus  {J.  H.  S.,
1909),  and  Gernet  {Melanges  iVhistoire  aticiefine,  1909,  p.  283),  agree  with
Beloch  in  putting  it  lower,  between  30,000  and  40,000.  Multiply  by  four  to
turn  fighting-men  into  men,  women,  and  children.  The  above  discussions
are  based  on  Thucydides'  figures  for  fighting-men  (ii.  13).  There  is  very
little  other  evidence;  but  20,000  and  30,000  {diaiivpioi  and  Tpia-nvpioi)  are  ex-
pressions commonly,  almost  proverbially,  used  of  the  citizen-body :  e.  g.
Hdt.  V.  97  ;  Ar.  Eect.  1132  ;  £)em.xxv.  51  ;  Plato,  Synip.  175  E.

"^  See  Wilamowitz,  A.  A.,  vol.  i,  p.  196,  note  20.  Socrates,  it  will  be  re-
membered, suggested  that  he  had  a  claim  to  such  maintenance  :  Plato,  Apol.
36-7.  Regular  pay  for  state  work,  such  as  Pericles  instituted  for  jurymen
and  councillors,  is  not  '  corruption  '  but  a  great  advance  (comparable  to  King
Darius's  fixed  tribute  instead  of  exactions  or  '  benevolences ')  on  the  old
Eastern  system  of  tipping  and  pilfering,  or  the  new  Western  system  of  secret
commissions.  'The  labourer  is  worthy  of  his  hire':  and  Athenians  were
sensible  enough  not  to  be  ashamed  of  receiving  it.  The  effect  of  its  intro-
duction was  not  so  much  to  tempt  poor  men  into  public  life  as  to  compensate
the  moderately  well-to-do  for  their  time  and  trouble  (Sundwall,  p.  18).  But
the  '  old  Eastern  system  '  survived  at  Athens,  as  with  us,  only  more  widely,
for  the  work  of  subordinates.  One  can  see  the  '  inspectors  of  markets '
carrying  off  their  pay,  so  to  speak,  in  paper  bags.  As  Wilamowitz  says :
'  Kapnova 6ui  t'iv  upxn*'  (to  make  your  office  bear  fruit)  is  a  pretty  expression  :
one  only  begins  to  feel  uncomfortable  when  there  is  a  till  concerned.'  The
two  systems  are  mentioned  together  in  the  Old  Oligarch,  i.  3:  'the  people


CHAP.  VI  SELF-GOVKRNMKNT  i;i

These  20,coo  arc  then  said  lo  be  made  up  as  follows:

First:  Jurymen 6,000

Howmcn 1,600

Horsemen 1  200


Council


500


Dockyard  guard 500

Acropolis  guard          ......  50

Home  Civil  Service 700

Imperial  Civil  Service ?  ^c)o  '

Total,  about io,.S5o

These  are  all  apparently  regarded  a.s  civil  officials,  since  the
armed  men  amongst  them  are  either  police  or  reservist.s  not  on
active  service.'-


is  eager  for  the  offices  which  bring  pay  or  help  to  the  folk  at  home  '  (i.  e.
paper  bags).  Of  course  he  and  other  wealthy  people  objected  to  Stale  pay-
ments :  but  that  was  because  he  objected  to  popular  government  altogether.
As  he  says  in  his  opening  sentences,  it  all  stands  and  falls  together.  The
oligarchical  idea  was  '  voluntary  ta.xation  and  unpaid  personal  service'  (toi's
vdo^iacriv  Ka\  toIs  xpijfiacnv  XjjTovfiyeh',  Ath.  Pol.  x.xix.  5)'

'  Number  corrupt  in  MS.     Wilamowitz  estimates  it  at  '  a  few  hundreds  '.

^  The  standing  troop  of  citizen-bowmen  must  not  be  confused  with  the
corps  of  Scythian  state  slaves  who  acted  as  police  at  Athens  from  the  time
of  Pisistratus  onwards,  and  lived  in  tents  on  the  Areopagus.  They  acted  as
police  or  ushers  for  the  Ecclesia,  where  they  must  have  looked  very  much  out
of  place  in  their  native  trousers  (Ar.  Ach.  54  ;  Wilamowitz,  vol.  ii,  pp.  202,  334,
Staat  iind  Gesellscka/t^  103).  The  Acropolis  guards  were,  however,  citizen-
bowmen.  A  fifth-century  inscription  about  the  repairing  of  the  .Acropolis
wall  (Dittenberger,  16)  speaks  of  'three  bowmen-sentries  from  the  tribe  on
duty  in  Council'  {ivpvTovivovvr]^).  There  were  probably  more  than  three  (see
Dittenberger's  note) ;  but  the  tribute-money  may  not  yet  have  been  brought
there.  The  1,200  horsemen  included  (what  corresponded  to  our  mounted
infantry)  horse-archers  (Thuc.  ii.  13.  8).  In  the  case  of  these  standing  horse-
men (as  opposed  to  the  '  knights  ')  the  State  paid  for  the  upkeep  of  the  horses.
One  of  the  duties  of  the  council  was  to  inspect  the  public  horses  (.-////.  Pol.
xlix).  There  were  thus  two  sorts  of  cavalry,  one  with  public  and  one  witi>
private  horses,  one  democratic,  the  other  inclined  to  be  aristocratic.  Tiie
distinction  is  marked  in  the  Parthenon  frieze  where,  out  of  seven^  rows  of
horsemen,  six  are  in  uniform,  each  row  (i.e.  squadron)  different.  Those  in
mufti  are  the  rich  young  'knights'  we  know  from  Aristophanes.  (See  Keil,
Anotiymus  Argentintmsis,  p.  141.)  Despite  the  frieze  and  the  beautiful
riders  on  the  vases,  Athenian  horsemanship  does  not  seem  to  have  been
particularly  good.  Xenophon  gives  it  away  badly  in  his  tract  on  the  iHittcs
of  a  Cavalry  Commander,  e.g.  ch.  i,  §  17,  'the  art  of  leaping  on  to  horse-
back is  one  which  we  would  persuade  the  younger  members  of  the  corps  to
learn  for  themselves,'  &c.,  &c.  (cf.  Wilamowitz,  Aus  Kydathai,  p.  24  note  45.
who  admits  that  things  were  probably  not  so  bad  in  the  fifth  century,  anil
Dakyns'  Introduction  to  his  translation  of  Xenophon's  treatise).  Alexander
was  the  first  great  Greek  cavalry  commander.  We  must  remember  that  the
Greeks  rode  practically  bareback  and  without  stirrups.  It  is  difficult  to
imagine  an  effective  cavalry  charge  of  lancers  without  stirrups.


172  POLITICS  PART  II

Next  comes,  in  a  corrupt  passage,  tJie  peace  cstahlishnicnt  of

ay nied  forces  on  active  service  : —

Army  (heavy-armed  troops)  ......       2,500

Navy  (guardships  and  tributeships)  about     .        .        .       3,500

Total 6,000


Lastly,  benefactors,  subordinate  officials  fe.  g.  prison  warders)
and  others  (not  being  slaves)  maintained  at  '  the  public  expense ',
including,  as  we  see  from  the  concluding  paragraph  of  the
Funeral  Speech,  the  *  orphans '  of  men  who  had  died  on  the
State's  behalf,  say  3,150.

Total  under  the  three  heads 20,000

The  separate  totals  are : —

All  persons  maintained 20,000

Adults  maintained  for  public  work,  about     .        .        .     17^000

These  last  may  be  regrouped  as  follows  : —

Civil  Service  ^  (with  council  and  juries  and  a  few  sub-
ordinate free  officials),  about     .....       7,650

Military  Service  (army  and  fleet,  cavalry-reserve  and
police) 9,350

But  these  figures  by  themselves  do  not  give  a  fair  representa-
tion of  the  working  of  the  Athenian  community.  For  though
one  out  of  every  six  citizens  may  have  been  engaged  as  public
civil  servants,  there  were  in  addition  to  the  slaves,  w^hom  we
must  leave  aside  for  the  present,  a  large  number  of  other  adults
contributing  to  the  resources  of  the  community  who  were  relieved
from  this  tax  on  time.  These  were  the  Resident  Aliens  or
Outlanders  [jxeroiKOL)  who,  although  not  citizens  themselves,
formed  in  every  other  respect,  economically  and,  it  may  almost
be  said,  sentimentally,  an  integral  part  of  the  Athenian  state.
For  they,  and  not  any  'friends'  or  'allies'  outside  were,  as
Nicias  reminded  them  in  the  hour  of  trial,  'the  only  free  partners
with  the  Athenians  in  their  Empire ' ;  and  it  was  but  fitting  that
they  should  form  part,  not  as  a  privilege  but  as  a  right,  of  the
audience  that  listened  to  the  Funeral  Speech.'^

^  For  details  as  to  the  multifarious  duties  of  these  civil  officials  see  Wilamo-
witz,  A.  A.,  vol.  ii,  pp.  202-4.

'^  Thuc.  ii.  36.  4,  vii,  63.  3-4.  For  their  part  in  the  Panathenaic  proces-
sion, sometimes  represented  as  humiliating,  see  Headlam,  f.  H.  6".,  1906,
pp.  268  ff.,  on  Aescli.  Enm.  1028-31  (who  notes  the  use  of  fvcppcov  instead  of
(f)i\os:  cf.  p.  97  above).  The  Outlander  men,  dressed  in  military  red,  carried
sacrificial  vessels  filled  with  cakes,  their  wives  carried  pitchers,  and  their
daughters  parasols.


CHAP.  VI  SELF-GOVERNMENT  i;^

For  though  the  Outlanders  were  exempt  from  some  of  the
civil  ckitics  of  citizenship,  they  took  their  place,  when  called
upon,  in  the  conscript  army,  and  fought  for  Athens  in  the  field
as  readily  as  any  of  her  citizens.  Some  of  them  (not  included  in
the  above  reckoning)  must  have  served  as  rowers  on  the  standing
establishment.  The  adult  male  Outlanders  are  reckoned  at
about  24,000,  of  whom  <S,ooo  were  rich  enough  to  fight  a-s
heavy-armed  troops  and  the  remainder  served  as  rowers  or
light-armed  men.  But  none  of  the  richer  would  form  i)art  of
the  peace  military  establishment.^

It  is  worth  while  returning  for  comment  in  conclusion  to  the
remarkable  words  which  Nicias  addressed  to  the  Outlanders  in
his  army  before  Syracuse,  for  they  throw  light  on  the  nature
and  spirit  of  the  Athenian  community.  '  You  Outlanders,'  he
says,  'are  all  but  Athenians:  and  by  your  knowledge  of  our
speech  and  your  assimilation  of  our  ways  you  have  won  the
admiration  of  Greece.'  By  living  under  the  shadow  of  the
Acropolis,  or  even  at  Piraeus,  they  have  partaken  of  the  spirit
of  Athens.  Pericles  himself  strikes  the  same  note.  '  We  practise
no  periodical  deportations,  like  the  Spartans,  nor  do  we,'  he
goes  on,  '  interfere  with  our  visitors.'  And  again :  'Athens  has
become  the  school  of  Greece.'

All  this  sounds  quite  natural  to  an  admiring  posterity,  but  it
was  Athens  and,  above  all,  Cleisthenes  who  made  it  so.  For
it  marks  the  complete  breakdown,  never  in  Athens  to  be
restored,  of  the  old  exclusive  patriarchal  idea  of  the  State  as
a  corporation.  It  marks  the  recognition  of  a  principle  far  more
valuable  than  free  trade,  and,  in  an  early  and  suspicious  society,
far  more  difficult  to  safeguard,  that  of  free  intercourse  between
men  of  different  peoples.     Athens  was  glad  to  see  her  aliens,

'  The  question  of  the  Outlander  poiDuUition  is  complicated  by  two  ap-
parently conflicting  passages  in  Thucydides  (ii.  13.  7  and  11.  31.  i).  My  total
follows  Clerc,  Lcs  Mctcqiies  athcniens,  p.  373-  His  estimate  for  tlic  army-
approximates  to  that  of  Francotte,  L! Industrie  dans  la  Grice  antique,  ^'p'-.l.
pp.  173  ff.,  who,  however,  omits  the  metic  rowers  (cf.  Thuc.  1.  143-  i  and  vii.
63.3)  in  his  total:  and  his  estimate  for  the  fleet  to  Meyer,  lorschun^cn,
vol.  ii,  pp.  149  fif.,  who  puts  their  army  numbers  much  lower.  See  lurthcr
p.  411  below.  Multiply  by  four,  as  always,  to  turn  hghtmg-men  into  total
population.  The  slaves  will  be  discussed  later.  Their  total  number  of  all  ages
was  between  75,000  (Francolte's  minimum)  and  1 50,000  ( Meyer  s  maximumj.
This  gives  a  total  population  for  Attica,  free  ;ind  slave,  of  maximum  425.000,
minimum  310,000.

1240  M


1 74  POLITICS  PART  II

encouraged  their  coming,  not  merely  for  the  wealth  they  brought,
and  made  them  part  of  her  community.  Cleisthenes,  indeed,
when  he  established  his  new  tribes,  seized  a  golden  opportunity
and  enrolled  many  aliens  as  citizens.

From  the  nature  of  the  case  this  was  difficult  to  repeat.  But
Themistocles,  who  inherited  his  ideas,  and  knew  how  to  apply
them  in  a  wider  sphere,  did  all  he  could  to  encourage  aliens  by
freeing  them  from  burdens ;  and  this  policy  was  continued  all
through  the  fifth  and  fourth  centuries.  For  Athens  needed  her
aliens,  whether  they  were  free  men  or  slaves  (and  many  of  these
aliens  had  begun  life  as  slaves),  to  enable  her  to  sustain  the
great  burden  of  her  responsibilities,  to  supply  her  with  the
resources  in  men  and  things,  in  labour  and  capital,  without
which  her  ideals  must  be  but  empty  dreams.  Many  a  commu-
nity since  has  been  '  kept  going '  by  its  immigrants  ;  but  never
was  hospitality  so  wisely  extended,  for  never  was  the  work
which  the  state  demanded  from  its  citizens  so  arduous  and  so
important.  When  one  citizen  in  four  is  called  away  on  public
sei-vice,  men  may  well  set  a  value  on  every  additional  brain  and
hand.  Even  the  slave,  as  we  shall  see,  shared  in  this  politic
welcome.^

^  Ar.  Pol.  1275  b  36  V^iKjBivT]^  .  .  .  TToXXov?  €0i;XeVfU(Te  ^epovs  Koi  8ov\ovs
IKToiKovi :  the  two  classes  are  ordinary  aliens  and  freed  slaves,  who  became
'  metics  '  on  manumission  ;  that  is  why  we  hear  of  no  '  freedmen  '  at  Athens.
Cf.  Diod.  xi.  43.  3.  Cleisthenes'  reorganization  of  the  tribes  was  not  repeated,
so  there  was  no  further  opportunity  for  the  wholesale  enfranchisement  of
Outlanders.  But  they  enjoyed  the  full  rights  of  local  government  in  the
deme  in  which  they  lived,  and  in  this  way  many  of  them  may  have  crept  on
to  the  citizen  register  in  the  early  part  of  the  fifth  century.  This,  however,
became  impossible  after  a  law  passed  in  451,  limiting  citizen  rights  hence-
forward to  those  '  bom  of  Athenians  on  both  sides '.  When  this  was  made
retrospective  on  the  occasion  of  a  distribution  of  a  present  of  grain  from
the  King  of  Egypt,  5,000  names  were  struck  off:  Plutarch,  Pericles  37,
elucidated  by  O.  Miiller  (cited  p.  333  below),  pp.  815-20.  It  is  wrong  to
regard  this  isolated  measure  as  marking  a  reversal  of  the  Athenian  attitude
to  aliens.  See  pp.  375  ff.,  below.  One  little  fact  to  show  what  a  wonderful
revolution  the  Athenian  attitude  to  Outlanders  implies.  Aih.  Pol.  Iviii.  2
says  :  '  The  duties  the  chief  governor  performs  (i.  e.  as  judge,  arbitrator,  &c.)
for  citizens  are  performed  for  metics  by  the  Polemarch',  that  is,  the  com-
mander-in-chief of  the  city's  early  days.  He  did  not  administer  justice  to
aliens  in  those  days :  he  chased  them.  See  Phillipson,  The  hiternational
Law  afid  Custom  0/ Ancient  Greece  and  Rome  (2  vols.,  London,  191 1,  with
bibliography),  pp.  171  and  199,  with  the  Phaselis  inscription  there  cited,  also
given  in  Hicks  and  Hill,  Greek  Plistorical InscjiptiotiSy  2nd  ed.,  no.  36.


CHAPTER   VII

THE   ELEMENTS   OF   CITIZENSHIP

LIBERTY,   OR   THE    RULE   OF   EMPIRE
(iXcvOepia)

Mwoi  oil  Tov  ^vnrPepovTOS  fifiWov  XoyuTiM  i]  tijs  (Xtvdfimii  twttuttq)  itfitCji  rim

d}(})f\ovfxcv. — Pericles.

Slavery  they  can  have  anywhere.  It  is  a  weed  that  grows  in  every  soil.  .  .  .
Freedom  they  can  have  from  none  but  you.  This  is  the  commodity  of  price
of  which  you  have  the  monopoly.— BuRKE,  O/i  Conciliation  icith  AtncnKt.

We  have  watched  Athens  become  a  democracy.  But  before
our  commentaiy  is  complete  one  last  and  greatest  step  remains
to  be  taken.  We  must  see  her  as  an  L2mpire.  For  the  .Athens
of  the  Funeral  Speech  was  not  an  ordinar}^  City  State  like
Plataea  or  Corcyra,  but  the  metropolis  or  mistress  of  some  I'p
dependent  communities.

The  first  important  thing  that  happened  after  the  expulsion  of
the  tyrants  knd  the  constitutional  settlement  of  Cleisthencs  was,
as  Thucydides  says,  the  battle  of  Marathon.  '  Ten  years  after
that,'  he  continues,  that  is,  just  a  generation  after  Cleisthencs,
'the  Barbarian  came  over  with  his  big  Armada  to  enslave
Greece.  In  this  hour  of  national  danger  the  Lacedaemonians,
as  being  the  strongest  state,  took  command  of  the  Greek  con-
federate forces,  and  the  Athenians,  who  had  decided,  on  the
approach  of  the  Persians,  to  break  up  their  homes  and  leave
their  city,  went  on  shipboard  and  became  sailors.  The  Con-
federates repulsed  the  barbarian  ;  but  not  long  afterwards  they
and  the  Greeks  who  had  thrown  off  the  Persian  yoke  grouped
themselves  into  two  parties,  one  round  the  Athenians  and  one
round  the  Lacedaemonians.  For  these  two  states  had  been
shown  to  be  the  most  powerful  :  the  strength  of  the  one  was
on  land  and  that  of  the  other  in  her  ships.' '

1  Thuc.  i.  1 8.
M  2


I'j6  POLITICS  TART  II

This  brief  paragraph,  carefully  examined,  is  a  full  and  suffi-
cient introduction  to  the  history  of  the  Athenian  Empire.  It
tells  the  tale  of  a  great  material  change,  and  a  still  greater
spiritual  transformation,  in  the  affairs  of  Greece.

When  the  Athenians  sent  twenty  ships  to  help  their  Ionian
kinsmen  in  their  rebellion  and  so  provoked  Darius  to  send  over
a  punitive  expedition,  the  Greek  states  still  seemed  to  them-
selves and  to  the  world  around  them  very  small  and  insigni-
ficant compared  with  the  Empires  of  the  East.  Not  only  the
cringing  priests  at  Delphi,  but  the  common  Greek  citizen  looked
up  with  reverential  awe  to  great  Moguls  like  Croesus  and  Cam-
byses.  Greece  could  never  hope  to  be  so  large  or  so  strong
or  so  rich  or  so  artistic  or  so  generally  refined  and  civilized
as  these  masters  of  millions  of  money  and  dependants.  We
can  see  all  this  reflected  in  the  pages  of  Herodotus,  writing  for
a  public  which  had  found  out,  once  and  for  all,  that  the  glories
of  Xerxes  and  the  wisdom  of  Egypt  were  '  only  wind  and  boast-
ing ',  but  liked  hearing  about  them  all  the  more  for  that.  But
it  needed  real  pluck  for  a  Solon,  a  mere  country  cousin  come
to  town,  not  to  be  dazzled  by  the  treasures  which  a  Croesus
was  able  to  display  to  him.  The  sixth  century  stared  at  the
treasures  ;  but  it  was  not  they  but  their  grandsons  who  dis-
covered what  they  were  worth — that,  as  Pericles  was  fond  of
putting  it,  '  money  does  not  own  men,  but  men  mon6y.'  ^

^  Thuc.  i.  143.  5,  undoubtedly  one  of  Pericles'  own  phrases,  repeated  with
tragic  irony  by  Nicias  in  his  last  speech  before  Syracuse  (vii.  yj.  7)  :  Sopho-
cles had  heard  him  say  it  too  (cf  O.  T.  56-7) ;  Hdt.  i.  50,  where  one  can  hear
the  luscious  voice  of  the  Delphian  priest  pointing  out  the  evidences  of  the
Great  King's  piety.  Herodotus  was  ready  to  give  Egypt  credit  for  the
origins  of  anything,  human  or  divine  (e.  g.  ii.  50) :  even  ape  ancestors  would
not  have  ruffled  his  belief  in  his  own  countrymen.  The  point  was,  what  did
the  chosen  race  do  with  what  it  had,  whether  it  had  got  it  from  home  or
abroad,  from  Prometheus  or  Cadmus  ?  See  this  point  developed  in  Myres,
A?iihfopology  and  the  Classics,  e.g.  p.  151.  'The  treatment  of  Hellenic
civilization  by  Herodotus  stands  in  marked  contrast  with  his  treatment  of
the  civilizations  of  Egypt  and  Outland.  .  .  .  Only  in  Greece  is  there  mastery
of  man  over  nature,  and  that  not  because  nature  is  less  strong,  but  because
Greek  man  is  strong  enough  to  dominate  it.'  Herodotus  believed  in  '  the
transmission  of  culture ',  and  hence  preached  '  the  conception  of  progress  in
civilization'.  In  this  department  Darwin  is  not  a  pioneer  :  he  has  only  taught
our  scholars  to  use  their  eyes.  '  The  Greeks  had  no  word  for  Progress.'
No,  because  the  words  they  used  (e.  g.  fxertiSuXoi',  ncTtnaOov)  were  not  so
misleading.  Cf.  Hdt.  i.  57,  vii.  170.  The  fifth-century  Greeks  had  none  of
the  post-Exilic  Jews'  fear  of  assimilating  foreign  elements.  This  conflict  is
still  being  fought  out  in  Jewry  ;  cf.  a  remarkable  volume  of  essays  by  Achad


ciiAr.  VII  EMPIRE  ,-7

This  change  was  due  to  the  Persian  wars,  above  all  I.,  ihc
repulse  of  the  Armada  at  Salainis.  The  Greeks  did  not  beat
the  Persians  by  a  fluke  or  a  miracle.  Thiicydides  ami  IJic-  men
of  the  fifth  century  are  emphatic  on  that  point,  it  was  not
a  fluke,  because  it  happened  many  times  over,  in  four  or  five
big  battles,  both  by  land  and  by  sea,  in  Greece,  in  A.sia,  and
in  Sicily.  It  was  not  a  miracle,  because  the  gods  had  drawn
a  b)'e  and  were  taking  no  part.  Apollo  tried  hard,  by  explain-
ing and  patching  his  oracles  after  the  event,  to  clear  himself
and  his  fellow  Olympians  of  their  disgraceful  neutrality  ;  but
he  failed.  It  was  the  death-blow  to  his  national  influence,  and
for  the  present  at  any  rate,  to  the  influence  of  supernatural
religion  in  Greek  national  affairs.  It  was  men  and  not  gods
who  won  Marathon  and  Salamis,  and  it  was  men  and  not  gods
who  made  and  sustained  the  Empire  of  Athens.  So  at  least
said  Pericles,  as  emphatically  as  he  could,  con.sidering  that  he
was  speaking,  so  to  say,  in  Church,  True,  he  associated  with
foreign  philosophers  and  was  tainted  with  heresy,  but  he  would
not  have  been  chosen  to  speak  at  the  most  solemn  of  all  the
ceremonies  of  the  Athenian  year  if  men  had  minded  his  being
a  heretic.  Sophocles  at  least  was  above  suspicion  on  the  score
of  piety,  and  his  great  chorus  in  the  Aiitigotic  breathes  the  same
defiant  human  note.  There  were  backwaters  in  Greece  wheie
men  did  not  yet  know  that  the  power  of  the  old  gods  was
broken  ;  but  for  all  the  progressive  and  leading  communities
the  lesson  of  Salamis  was  final.  The  victory  of  Greece  was  not
a  '  crowning  mercy  '  but  a  natural  and  reasonable  development.'

Haam  ('  One  of  the  People',  nom-de-plume  of  a  well-known  Russian  jew),
esp.  one  on  'Imitation  and  Assimilation'  (translated  from  the  orijjinal
Hebrew  into  German  in  A)ii  Scheide^ues^e,  Berlin,  Jiidischer  Verlug,  1904,
pp.  242  IT.).  The  writer  preaches  substantially  the  same  doctrine  as  Hcm-
dotiis.  Cf.  the  tone  of  the  Persian  scene  in  the  Aduiminns  (64(1.1,  ihou^jh
all  Athens  knew  what  a  sham  Persian  masnititence  was.  Conversely,  Pcrsi.in
and  Egyptian  ideas  about  the  (Ireeks  underwent  a  transforniation  loo.
They  used  to  be  known  to  them  simply  as  rough  adventurers,  little  belter
than  Pisidians  and  other  hill-tribesmen.  Now  they  had  become  respectable
and  respected.  .  ,     .        ,

^  Thuc.  ii.  43.  I  avhpf.^  avTu  (KT^ja-avTO  :  cf.  i.  76.  3-  -"^o  '•  73-  '  "i*  "«■'«««'"
T(os  e;(o^e«/  d  KeKn'/Ufda,  Aesch.  Persae  235  ff.  See  the  same  pomt  of  view,  m
a  very  different  mood,  v.  105.  Enlightened  people  never  took  the  oracle
quite  seriously  in  the  fifth  century,  as  we  can  see  from  Herodotus,  though
the  Greeks  were  more  prone  than  we  to  sudden  attacks  of  superstition.  Hut
they  went  on  consulting  it,  because,  as  with  modern  oracles,  it  was  con-
venient to  have  it  on  their  side.     So  they  made  it  as  easy  for  Apollo  as  they


178  POLITICS  PART  II

It  is  impossible  to  describe  what  a  transformation  this  implies.
No  phrases  or  analogies  can  adequately  depict   the   difference
between  the  small   native  communities  on  the  outskirts  of  the
Persian  Empire,  as  the  Greeks  seemed  to  Darius  and  to  them-
selves  at  the   end   of  the   sixth   century,  and    the    pioneers   of
the  civilization  not  of  Europe  or  of  the  West,  but  of  the  whole
of  mankind.      It  is   the   difference,  or  rather   far   greater  than
the  difference,  between  what   modern  Japan  meant  to  an   un-
educated   Russian    before  the    Russo-Japanese    War   and    what
Greece  means  to  ourselves.     For  sixth-century  Greece  was  not
like  one  of  the  small   powers  of  our  own  day,  like  Denmark
or    Switzerland,  with   a    fixed    character   and   tradition    of  her
own.     She   was   still    in    the    making,   still   greedily   absorbing
foreign  elements,  still  ready,  as  we  can  see  from   Ionia,  to  be
swallowed  up  body  and  soul  by  any  stronger  force  which  came
her  way.     She  had  not  yet  found  herself     As  the  philosophers
put  it,  she  had  not  yet  come  to  self-consciousness  ;  or,  to  speak
with  the  preachers,  she  had  not  yet  been  '  born  again '.     The
Persian  wars  woke  her   up.     Henceforward   she  is  the   Greece
we  know.     And  just  because  the  force  that  stung  her  into  new
life  was  not  intellectual  or  religious  or  artistic  but  political,  her
ideals  for  the  conduct  of  that  new  life  were  political  too.    Nothing
else  really  mattered.     There  might  be  Pyramids  in  Egypt  and
hanging  gardens  in  Babylon  :  the  Medes  might  promenade  with
parasols  and  the  Egyptians  wear  clean  linen  every  day.     These
were  only  the  externals  and  ornaments  of  life.     What  mattered
was  that  Greece  was  free  and  powerful  and  could  bestride  the
world   like  a   Colossus,  that  her  citizens  found  their  way  into
every  sea  and  every  land,  leaving  there,  not  temples  or  Pyramids

could.  Instead  of  asking,  '  Shall  I  go  to  war .' '  they  put  it,  '  Don't  you  think
I  ought  to  go  to  war?'  The  answer  no  doubt  depended  on  the  oftertory.
See  Thuc.  i.  25.  I,  iii.  92.  5  (a  reply  which,  though  Thucydides  is  too  in-
different to  point  it  out,  proved  hopelessly  wrong).  Of  course,  till  the  idea
of  Providential  interposition  is  dispelled,  it  is  impossible  not  merely  to  write
history  but  to  think  coolly  about  politics.  Hence  Thucydides'  continual
insistence  on  psychology  and  on  the  necessity  of  statesmen  understanding
human  nature;  cf.  i.  140.  i  with  ii.  59.  3,  and  especially  iii.  45  where,  as
Cornford  has  shown  in  his  Thucydides  Myihistoiiciis,  mythology  is  trans-
formed into  psychology.  For  Science,  like  the  Devil,  can  quote  Scripture
for  her  own  purposes.  Wilamowitz,  A.  A.,  vol.  ii,  p.  64  note,  points  out  that
Zeus  was  not  worshipped  as  'EXcu^e'ptoy  (God  of  Freedom)  at  Athens  till  after
480.  But  the  extra  title  does  not  seem  to  have  increased  the  popularity  of
his  worship.


CHAP.  VII  EMPIRI-:  ,71^

or  books  of  verse  or  story,  but  memorials  of  their  actions  as  men
of  a  proud  and  ruling  race.

It  was  at  Athens  that  the  change  was  felt  most  vividly,  for
Athens  had  suffered  most  to  bring  it  about.  While  .Sparta  had
Hngered  in  her  peninsula  fastness  Athens  had  burnc  the  brunt
of  the  barbarian  attack.  At  Marathon  she  had  discovered,  to
her  own  intense  surprise,  that  the  spear  and  the  shield  could
conquer  the  bow,  even  against  superior  numbers ;  and  ten  years
later,  when  the  odds  were  overwhelming,  she  had  dared  to  face
the  ordeals  both  of  fire  and  of  water.  Her  citizens  had  left  their
homes  and  their  sacred  places,  and  had  stood  on  the  cliffs  of
Salamis  watching  the  flames  lick  the  shrines  of  Pisistratus  on
the  Acropolis  and  make  a  bonfire  of  the  scaffolding  round  their
new  temple  of  Athena.  When  they  came  back  victorious  to
their  ruined  city  it  was  to  a  new  life  and  with  new  ideals.  They
found  the  unfinished  blocks  of  last  year's  projects  lying  about
on  the  Acropolis  ;  but  they  did  not  go  on  with  them  ;  they
built  them  into  the  wall,  with  their  old  fears  and  weaknesses,
where  they  could  make  mock  of  them  daily  as  they  passed  by.
They  were  the  milestones  of  their  old  life ;  and  nothing  so
'  cheers  the  heart  and  delights  the  eye '  as  to  look  down  and
back  over  a  stretch  of  difficult  road.  When  they  had  finished
their  fortifications,  Acropolis  and  City  Wall  and  Piraeus,  and
had  made  sure  of  town  and  port,  they  set  their  hand  to  beautify
their  levelled  citadel  in  the  spirit  of  their  new  career.  P"or  by
that  time  they  had  an  Empire  which  deserved  a  fine  capital  and
could  inspire  artists  to  create  one.^

For  the  confederate  forces  of  4cSo  could  not  remain  a  unit)-.
In  the  heat  of  the  conflict,  when  the  barriers  of  city  patriotism
were  broken  down  and  Greeks  found  themselves  fighting,  to  their
astonishment,  not  against  but  with  their  neighbours,  they  had
dreamed  for  a  moment  of  making  Greece  a  single  state.
'  Surely,'  they  argued  round  their  camp-fires,  '  she  has  all  the
makings  of  a  nation.  What  is  there  between  you  and  me?
We  have  the  same  blood   in  our  veins,  from  Zeus  and   Father

^  Thuc.  i.  69.  5,  73,  74  (contrast  between  Athenian  and  Spartan  behaviour
in  the  Persian  War  and  consequent  difference  in  what  it  i)u\uit,  psychoIo>,'ic-
ally,  to  the  two  parties).  Marathon  (however  great  the  disparity  in  nunibcrs)
was  no  more  a  '  crowning  mercy  '  than  Plassy.  The  blocks  of  the  undnishcd
'pre-Persian '  temple  are  still  in  the  Acropolis  wall  and  visible  to  passers  by.


i8o  POLITICS  PART  II

Hellen.  We  speak  the  same  language,  else  we  could  not  be
chatting,  albeit  with  difficulty,  round  this  fire.  We  worship  the
same  gods,  as  we  remember  when  we  go  to  Delphi  or  Olympia ;
and  we  have  much  the  same  habits  and  understand  one  another's
ways.  When  we  have  finished  with  these  barbarians  let  us  form
a  common  state.'  ^

But  these  dreams  soon  faded  ;  for  what  centuries  have  put
asunder  two  summers'  fighting  cannot  bind  fast.  There  was
quarrelling  even  during  the  fighting,  though  men  made  light
of  it  at  the  time ;  but  when  the  campaigns  were  over  and  the
time  for  reorganization  arrived,  all  the  old  dilTerences  revealed
themselves  and  the  '  Panhellenic  confederacy '  disappeared  into
the  limbo  of  forgotten  things.

Yet  things  in  Greece  could  never  again  be  what  they  had
been  before  the  trial  came.  The  Greeks  had  learnt  that,  though
love  of  country  may  make  men  brave,  it  is  only  organization  that
can  make  them  strong.  Moreover,  for  the  liberated  cities  of
Asia  Minor,  still  technically  part  of  the  Persian  Empire,  and
liable  to  be  dunned  any  day  by  a  satrap  for  tribute,  some  con-
certed system  of  defence  was  urgently  necessary.  Sparta  had
neither  the  men  nor  the  money  to  meet  this  need.  So  she
retired  from  a  position  where,  after  all,  her  famous  land  forces
would  have  been  of  very  little  good  to  her,  and  left  the
field  open  for  the  newly  made  sailors  of  Athens.  Within  half
a  decade,  almost  before  slow  Spartan  wits  had  time  to  grasp
what  was  going  on,  '  the  alliance  of  the  Athenians '  had  been
provisionally  organized,  and  the  first  great  civilized  attempt  to
form  a  state  of  many  cities  was  an  accomplished  fact.^

Like  other  great  things  the  Athenian  Empire  was  the  child
of  necessity,  and  its  creators  did  not  know  what  they  were  doing.
It  had  its  origin  in  an  alliance  drawn  up  between  the  Athenians
and  the  lonians  in  the  familiar  traditional  terms.  '  In  the  third
year  after  the  sea-fight  at  Salamis,  when  Timosthenes  was  chief
Governor,  Aristeides '  (commander  of  the  Athenian  forces)  'swore

'  Hdt.  viii.  144  ;  Plut.  Aristeides  21  (details  of  proposed  permanent  con-
federacy:  their  authenticity  is  denied,  but  why?).

"^  Persia,  who  learnt  nothing  and  forgot  nothing,  quietly  demanded  her  old
tribute  from  the  Greek  cities  in  412  (Thuc.  viii.  5.  5),  sixty-eight  years  after
Salamis.  Spartan  minds,  as  Alcibiades  knew,  moved  very  slowly.  One
had  to  make  their  flesh  creep  before  they  would  take  in  a  new  idea  (cf.  the
improvised  sensationalism  of  the  schemes  in  Thuc.  vi.  90).


i


CHAP,  vii  EMPIRE  iHi

ail  oath  lo  the  lonians  to  have  the  same  friends  and  enemies
as  they,  to  seal  which  they  cast  hnnps  of  lead  into  the  sea.'
How  innocent  it  all  sounds  !  lUit  let  us  see  what  it  implies  and
think  out  the  logic  of  the  situation.'

What  was  the  object  of  the  alliance?  Not  merely  to  be  ready
to  repel  the  Persians  if  they  renewed  the  attack.  This  was  too
tame  a  mood  for  the  men  who  had  just  sent  them  lljiiv.;  ,it
Salamis  and  Mycalc.  Its  watchword  was  not  Defence  but
Freedom.  They  wished  to  push  the  war  into  the  enemy's
country,  to  revenge  and  indemnify  themselves  by  plundering
for  the  losses  they  had  sustained  and  (to  use  a  phrase  familiar  to
the  Athenian  leader-writers  of  to-day)  to  complete  the  liberation
of  their  enslaved  brothers.  They  were  ready  and  eager  to  be
led  to  the  attack."

But  campaigning  costs  money:  for  soldiers  cannot  live  on  plunder
alone,  certainly  not  when  they  are  engaged  in  'liberating*.  And
if  half  the  allies  are  islanders  and  warfare  is  to  be  waged  b}-  sea,
ships  will  be  needed  too.  How  were  these  two  immediate  needs
to  be  met  ?

Few  of  the  members  of  the  new  alliance  had  any  ships  to  ofiler.
Many  of  them  had  lost  their  navies  twice  over  in  the  last  twenty
years,  first  in  the  ill-starred  '  Ionian  Revolt ',  and  then  again,
after  they  had  been  forced  to  beat  up  contingents  against  their
own  kinsmen,  at  Salamis  and  Mycale.  It  was  not  easy  for  them
to  build  new  ones,  for,  unlike  the  Phoenicians,  they  had  not  the
forests  of  Lebanon  just  behind  them.  Moreover,  such  ships  as
they  had  were  not  of  much  use,  for  the  Athenians  had  been
introducing  improvements  in  the  armament  and  construction  of
triremes  with  which  they  had  not  kept  pace.  So,  with  the  excep-
tion of  the  big  islands,  Samos,  Lesbos,  and  Chios,  which  had
a  naval  tradition  to  maintain,  the  allies  gave  up  the  idea  of
supplying  ships  and  were  driven  back  on  to  a  substitute  for  their
share  in  the  enterprise.-'

Nor  were  they  very  anxious  to  give  their  personal  service  on

1  Ath.  Pol.  xxiii.  5.     Cavaignac,  p.  37.  .  ,  .  .

"^  Thuc.  i.  96  ■n-poo-X'JMa  yhp  rjv  diJivmadai  cov  tTTitdnf  8;iuvvTfit  ti/v  0<i(r»X««i
Xcopnu.     Cyprus  was  to  that  generation  of  Greeks  what  Crete  is  lo  this.

"  Details  in  Cavaignac,  pp.  38-41.  Cf.  Thuc.  i.  14-  3-  '^'l>e  new  type  of
trireme  had  170 rowers:  the  older  triremes  (themselves  a  great  improvement
on  fifty-oared  ships)  had  probably  fewer.


l82  POLITICS  PART  II

the  other  allies'  ships,  nor,  if  the  truth  must  be  told,  to  serve  by
their  side  in  the  field.  They  had  never  beaten  the  Persians  in
fair  fight,  like  the  Greeks  across  the  water.  Artemisium  and
Mycale  to  them  called  up  very  different  memories  :  and  at  Lade,
which  might  have  been  their  Salamis,  there  was  no  Themistocles
to  overcome  their  jealousies  and  want  of  discipline.  So  the
Athenians  were  not  over-urgent  in  pressing  them  to  take  the
field.  They  preferred  comrades  more  accustomed  to  the  hard-
ship and  discipline  of  naval  service.^

There  was  one  natural  way  of  settling  these  difficulties.  The
smaller  allies  were  to  pay  the  piper,  while  Athens  and  the  large
islands  could  play  the  tune.  This  was  the  plan  which  was
adopted,  on  the  suggestion  of  Aristeides,  to  settle  the  immediate
needs  of  the  first  campaign.  As  the  island  of  Delos  had  been
fixed  as  the  rendezvous  of  the  allied  forces  the  Delian  temple  of
Apollo  formed  a  convenient  bank,  and  the  first  contributions  were
paid  in  there.  The  scheme  pleased  both  parties,  and  it  was  deter-
mined to  regularize  it.  Aristeides 'the  upright' was  entrusted
with  the  task  of  fixing  a  scale  of  contributions.  '  It  was  a  long
business,  necessitating  much  travelling'  and  (unless  the  Greeks
have  utterly  changed  their  nature)  even  more  tact  than  upright-
ness :  also  '  in  the  absence  of  precedents,  many  difficult  inquiries,
for  only  the  cities  which  had  formed  part  of  the  Persian  Empire
for  some  considerable  time  had  a  census  of  wealth  which  he  could
use  '.  But  by  470  the  work  was  done.  The  total  sum  needed
annually  for  the  operations  of  the  Alliance  had  been  fixed  at
460  talents.  Aristeides  divided  this  out  on  a  proportional  scale
amongst  the  two  hundred  or  so  allies,  and  the  scale  was  faithfully
adhered  to,  as  the  charter  of  membership,  until  Cleon  turned
financier  in  425.^

'  Hdt.  vi.  12.

'^  Ath,  Pol.  xxiii,  5  toi)?  TrptoroD?  (popovs,  the  provisional  contributions  of
478,  not  to  be  confused  with  6  nparoi  cj)6fjos  raxde^s  of  Thuc.  i.  96.  2  ;
Cavaignac,  pp.  42-3  ;  Hdt.  vi.  42  (Ionian  census)  ;  Thuc.  v.  18.  5.  Later
there  were  reassessments,  to  meet  aUered  circumstances,  every  Panathenaic
festival  (i.e.  every  four  years),  made  by  the  Athenian  Council  and  confirmed
by  the  jury  court  (Old  Oligarch,  iii.  5).  In  disputed  cases,  especially  where
large  sums  were  at  stake,  a  specially  large  court  of  1,501  jurymen  was  con-
vened. See  Wilhelm,  Urkutidcti  des  atiischcn  Keiches,  who,  by  adding  on
a  broken  bit,  has  shown  that  the  inscription  quoted  in  Hill's  Sources  for
Greek  History^  ch.  i,  §  76,  reads  ttoXc?  as  i  0oXe  kch  ol  nevTUKuaioi  kuI  ;^i'Aioi
(Taxcaf.


CHAP.  VII  EMPIRF,  ,83

Thus  the  aUies  had,  without  knowing  it,  slipped  into  finiincial
centralization  and  established  the  first  Greek  Imperial  h'xch<j(|ucr.
Moreover,  it  was  centralization  of  a  peculiarly  insidious  kind,  for
the  predominant  partners,  and  especially  Athens,  who  did  most
of  the  work  and  bore  the  chief  responsibility,  did  not  contribute
a  penny  to  the  costs.

Who  controlled  the  spending  of  the  money?  Officially,  of
course,  the  allies  themselves.  For  this  purpose  Ihcy  elected
representatives  to  a  Parliament  at  Delos,  which,  like  the  Kcclcsia
or  any  other  city  assembly,  was  to  discuss  and  decide  upon  all
matters  of  policy.  But  in  practice  little  importance  attached  to
its  deliberations,  for  its  executive  officers,  the  Athenian  generals,
were  themselves  responsible  to  their  own  Sovereign  People ;  so,
if  the  two  sovereigns  decided  differently,  a  deadlock  would  ensue.
The  Imperial  Parliament,  therefore,  could  do  little  more  than
ratify,  or,  if  it  wished  to  be  zealous,  anticipate,  the  decisions  of
the  Athenians.  Moreover,  the  money  itself  was  put  into  the
hands  of  Athenian  officials.  Clearly  it  could  not  be  husbandctl
by  all  the  allies  together.  One  treasurer  would  be  suspect,  but
a  commission  of  ten  was  more  than  enough.  They  bore  an
imperial  title,  '  Stewards  of  the  Greeks,'  but  they  were  Athenians
by  nationality  and  elected  by  the  Athenian  people.^

There  was  another  sphere  where  centralization,  if  it  advanced
more  slowly,  produced  even  more  permanent  effects,  that  of  legal
and  commercial  intercourse.

Technically  speaking,  an  alliance  for  military  purposes  had
nothing  to  do  with  commerce  or  the  administration  of  justice.
Commercial  and  legal  relations  could  only  be  established  by
separate  conventions  between  two  states  for  those  purposes.  The
City-State  tradition  was  that  every  community  should  live  in
haughty  isolation  from  its  neighbours  ;  and  even  in  Ionia  it  was
not  till  a  year  or  two  before  Marathon  that  a  Persian  governor
summoned  representatives  from  the  cities  and  induced  the  lonians
to  establish  conventions  amongst  themselves  and  to  administer
justice  to  one  another  instead  of  settling  ever)thing  by  reprisals.
An  eye  for  an  eye,  or  rather  an  ox  for  an  ox,  or  a  wreck  for

1  avv^dptop,  Diod.  xi.  70.  4  and  Plut.  Aris/.  25  (the  Samians  propose  the
transference  of  the  treasury  to  Athens  in  454-3)-     '  Sophocles  of  Lolonus
was  Steward  in  443.


i84  POLITICS  PART  II

a  wreck,  was  the  morality  handed  down  from  those  of  old  for  use
in  international  affairs.^

But,  side  by  side  with  the  new  military  alliance,  Athens  set  to
work  to  establish  a  network  of  commercial  treaties  between  herself
and  each  individual  member  of  the  league.  This  she  was  able  to
do,  not  merely  because  of  her  newly  won  prestige,  but  because  of
the  acknowledged  excellence  of  the  Solonian  laws  and  institu-
tions under  which  she  lived.  These  formed  a  natural  starting-
point  for  a  process  of  unification  ;  and  as  there  were  scores  and
hundreds  of  different  forms  of  law  and  custom  and  procedure  in
use  among  her  allies,  such  a  process  could  not  but  be  felt  as
a  convenience.  So  the  time  was  ripe,  as  in  Germany  in  the
'sixties,  for  common  action  in  numerous  departments  of  life.

These  commercial  treaties  varied  greatly  in  their  details,
according  to  the  resources  or  prejudices  of  the  other  party  and
according  to  the  date  at  which  they  were  made.  But  certain
general  features  were  common  to  them  all.  By  piecing  together
the  scattered  evidence  w^e  can  watch  the  gradual  encroachment
of  the  predominant  partner  till,  as  Isocrates  put  it,  'she  governed
all  the  cities  by  the  same  laws.'  ^

Let  us  look  first  at  the  sphere  of  civil  jurisdiction.  The  motto
of  the  alliance  was  Freedom.  Athens  was  engaged,  not  only  in
clearing  the  seaboard  of  Persians,  but  in  clearing  the  sea  itself
of  pirates  and  evildoers.  This  was  a  duty  which  had  devolved,
from  time  immemorial,  upon  the  chief  sea-power  of  the  Aegean —
unless,  like  Polycrates,  it  was  itself  piratical.  So  Athens  stood,
not  only  for  freedom  from  the  barbarian,  but  for  freedom  of
intercourse  and  freedom  of  trade  ;  and  it  was  to  the  interest  of
the  allies  to  encourage  her  in  promoting  them.  To  police  the
Aegean  with  her  triremes  was  only  the  first  step.  It  was  an
obvious  corollary  to  add  to  traders'  convenience  by  simplifying

*  Hdt.  vi.  42  (the  Homeric  liyfiv  kui  (/je'yjfi^).

^  Is.  Pa;i.  104.  A  commercial  or  extradition  treaty  was  called  a  ^vfxf:io\ti,
and  a  case  heard  in  connexion  with  one  a  SiVi;  ano  ^vniinXav,  from  the
^vfji^oXn,  '  symbols,'  or  tallies,  which  were  formally  broken  and  exchanged
between  representatives  of  the  two  states,  as,  at  a  still  earlier  stage  of  inter-
national intercourse,  between  individual  'guest-friends  ' :  cf.  Eur.  JA-rt'.  613.
Athens  had  of  course  such  treaties  in  the  fifth  century  with  states  not  in  her
alliance,  cf.  Antiphon,  v.  78.  They  generally  provided  that  the  defendant
should  be  tried  (as  are  foreigners  in  the  Turkish  Empire  to-dayj  by  his  own
countrymen.


CHAP.  VII  i:]\iriRi':


i»5


the  procedure  in  business  disputes.  Athens  was  able,  therefore,
to  insert  in  her  treaties  a  provision  that  all  disputes  arising  out
of  business  contracts  entered  into  at  Athens  must  be  tried  by
Athenian  law  before  Athenian  judges,  thus  removing  the
defendant  from  his  own  native  court.  This  was  accepted  as
early  as  466  by  Chios,  one  of  the  most  independent  of  the  allies.
Smaller  states  acquiesced  in  still  greater  encroachments  on  their
sovereign  jurisdiction  ;  and  in  cases  of  revolt  or  disturbance,  when
opportunity  arose  for  a  clean  sweep,  they  might  wake  up  to  dis-
cover that  it  had  almost  entirely  disappeared.  A  common  plan,
it  seems,  was  to  provide  that  all  disputes  involving  more  than
a  small  sum  of  money — say  ten  drachmas-  must  be  heard  in  the
metropolis.^

In  the  criminal  sphere  the  process  of  unification  was  slower,
for  here  the  sovereign  tradition  was  more  tenacious  and  intimate.
Even  the  tiniest  island  liked  to  manage  its  own  murderers.  On
the  other  hand,  Athens  was  all  the  more  anxious  to  interfere,  for
she  needed  authority  to  protect  her  own  adherents  and  put  down
mutineers.  We  cannot  trace  the  development  in  detail.  It  seems
to  have  begun  with  interference  in  cases  where  loss  of  citizen
rights  was  involved.  Athens  was  called  in,  as  Rome  and  so
many  ambitious  suzerains  have  been  called  in  since,  as  the
champion  of  a  minority  when  party  strife  had  become  acute.
Thus  Athens  interfered  at  Erythrae  in  455-50  to  protect  the
'  democrats '  against  a  party  favourable  to  Persia.  She  seized
the  opportunity  to  give  the  city  a  new  constitution,  enforced  and
defended  by  a  garrison  on  the  citadel.  The  new  government  had
to  swear  not  to  repeal  the  sentence  of  banishment  against  '  those
who  had  fled  to  the  Persians'  without  the  consent,  not  only  of
the  people  of  Erythrae,  but  of  the  Athenians.  They  were  also
forbidden,  in  similar  terms,  to  'drive  out  any  of  those  that
remained '.  In  other  words,  Athens,  not  only  by  her  garrison
but  by  her  civil  jurisdiction,  enforced  the  maintenance  of  the
status  quo.     Her  double  hold  is  emphasized  by  the  mention,  side

'  Meyer,  iii,  §  278  and  note.  See  Hicks  and  Hill,  No.  36  (treaty  with
Phaselis'on  same  terms  as  with  Chios').  Ikisiness  contracts  were  called
^vti(i6\ai(i,  and  cases  arising  out  of  them  ^i'/n,SoXn/(ii  fitVat  ('I  hue.  i.  77)  as
distinguished  from  hUai  ano  $vfil^6\o}v.  But  cf.  on  this  disiiuted  point  Darem-
berg,  s.v.  Ephesis,  note  65,  by  Lecrivain,  whose  promised  further  treatment
under  Syvibolon  has  apparently  been  reserved  for  Tessera  in  the  forthcoming
number.


i86  POLITICS  PART  II

by  side  with  the  commandant  of  the  garrison,  of  '  Overseers ',
imperial  civil  servants  appointed  by  the  Home  Government,  but
paid  by  the  allies,  to  watch  and  report  on  the  state  of  affairs  in
the  cities.  This  shows  how  easy  it  was  for  Athens,  with  her
overwhelming  military  predominance,  to  steal  on  from  position
to  position.  By  446  we  find  her  graciously  allowing  the  people
of  Chalcis  '  to  administer  punishment  according  to  their  own  laws,
as  the  Athenians  do  at  Athens,  except  in  cases  involving  exile
or  death  or  loss  of  citizen  rights  *.  And  by  the  time  of  the
Sicilian  expedition  we  read  in  a  law  court  speech :  '  No  allied
city  is  allowed  to  condemn  any  one  to  death  without  the  consent
of  the  Athenians.'  ^

One  further  point  is  worth  noticing.  The  privileges  extended
to  Athenian  citizens  by  treaty  right  were  everywhere  extended
equally  to  Athenian  'resident  aliens',  those  naturalized  Athenians
who  were  citizens  in  almost  all  but  name.  So  that  the  aegis  of
Athens  was  held  over  men  of  all  bloods  and  languages,  and  one
might  meet  in  any  port  of  the  Mediterranean,  as  one  meets
Maltese  and  Cypriots  and  other  British  subjects  to-day,  men
whose  proudest  boast,  and  sometimes  (it  is  to  be  feared)  safest
excuse  for  wrongdoing,  was  their  connexion  wnth  the  queen
of  the  seas.-

Thus  Athens  had  gradually  formed  herself,  whether  her  pupils
liked  it  or  no,  to  be  'an  education  to  Greece'.  The  process  was
so  gradual,  and  the  control  so  wisely  exercised,  that  the  allies
could  not  easily  put  their  hand  on  any  particular  cause  of  com-
plaint. There  was  plenty  of  grumbling,  especially  when  the
courts  were  overcrowded  with  cases  and  a  round  of  festivals
came  on  to  double  the  arrears.     But  of  practical  grievances  we

'  Hicks  and  Hill,  No.  32  (Erythrae),  40  (Chalcis,  where  there  is  no  mention
of  civil  jurisdiction  :  it  had  already  been  regulated).  On  the  Overseers  or
Imperial  Bishops  {iniaKOTroi)  see  Wilamowitz,  Aus  Kydathen,  p.  75,  who  thinks
they  were  not  appointed  to  single  cities  but  had  dioceses.  They  are  men-
tioned as  ("pxovTfs  in  Thuc.  i.  115.  5  (see  Classen's  note)  :  so  they  worked
in  committees,  not  singly.  If  we  knew  more  about  them  we  could  form
a  safer  estimate  of  the  numbers  of  Imperial  Civilians  (see  p.  171  above).
Antiphon,  v.  47  (murder-cases).  Beginning  of  a  typical  convention  about
jurisdiction  :  Ar.  /h'rds  1035,  same  date  as  Antiphon's  speech.

^  Chalcis  decree  (Hicks  and  Hill,  No.  40,  line  53)  ;  cf.  Wilamowitz,  Aus
Kydathen,  p.  36,  and  Hermes,  vol.  xxii,  p.  249.  There  is,  however,  no
instance  of  Athens  going  to  war  to  avenge  wrongs  done  to  Athenian  subjects
for  non-payment  of  traders'  debts.


CHAP.  VII  EMPIRE  jK;

hear  little  or  nothing.  The  Athenian  courts  did  their  work  well.
The  advantage  of  having  a  sensible  code  to  deal  with  was  too
great  to  be  despised.  Moreover,  surely  it  was  worth  the  expense
to  have  a  fortnight  in  the  capital  and  to  see  how  the  imperial
money  was  being  laid  out  on  the  Acropolis.  So  the  law  courts
brought  sightseers;  the  Parthenon  and  its  great  Vestibule  proved
the  best  of  advertisements  ;  and  the  waggoners  and  the  lodf^'ing-
house  keepers  found  their  own  businesses  more  profitable  than
sitting  still  and  listening  hard  for  their  day's  pay  in  the  courts.
It  is  not  surprising  on  the  whole,  though  the  fact  remains  to  their
credit,  that  the  Athenians  were  able  to  boast,  without  fear  of
contradiction,  before  a  hostile  as.sembly,  of  the  impartiaUty  of
their  justice.  Indeed  they  quickly  grew  accustomed  to  the
judicial  mood,  and  would  put  on  the  judge's  wig  even  when  it
was  wholly  inappropriate.  '  Do  remember,'  begs  a  speaker  in
a  difficult  debate  on  policy,  '  that  you  are  not  sitting  in  a  law
court  thinking  out  what  sentence  these  people  have  deserved,  but
sitting  in  Parliament  to  discover  what  course  is  best  for  your-
selves.' Euripides  makes  a  suppliant  for  Athenian  aid  put  in
a  similar  reminder,  when  Theseus  had  given  him  a  long  lecture
from  the  Bench.  For  Athens  took  her  own  duties,  as  she  took
everything,  very  seriously,  and  did  her  best,  in  an  imperfect
world,  however  complicated  the  problem,  to  mete  out  fair
decisions.  Nor  had  the  teachers  of  rhetoric  yet  appeared  to
cloud  the  plain  citizen's  common  sense  with  their  intellectual
monkey  tricks.^

Athens  had  thus  become  recognized  as  a  model  State  ;  and
Greece  was  in  the  mood  to  adopt  or  imitate  her  ways  in  small
things  as  in  great.  We  can  see  this  in  the  rapid  spread  of
Athenian  weights  and  measures  and  the  Athenian  coinage,  or
of  systems  arranged  so  as  to  work  in  with  them.  Athens  was
standardizing  Greek  coinage  as  she  was  unifying  Greek  law.
She  did  not,  of  course,  compel  her  allies  to  use  only  Attic  money,
or  money  coined  on  the  Attic  standard.  But  she  naturally  pre-
ferred that  contributions  should  be  paid  in  it ;  and  there  were
indirect  ways  by  which  she  could  encourage   it.    It  was  only

'  Old  Oligarch,  i.  17  fin.  (where  Cfvy"?  means  cart-animals,  i.  e.  the  Creek
equivalent  for  cab-horses);  Thiic.  i.  TJ,  iii.  44-  4!  ^U''-  ^»PP'-  -53.
341-2,  575.


i88  POr  JTICS  PART  11

decent  to  pay  Apollo,  and  later  Athena,  in  the  coinage  they
preferred  to  see.  And  as  Athenian  coins  could  always  be  relied
on  for  good  weight,  and  as  the  device  upon  them,  the  famous
owl,  was  so  conveniently  uncouth  that  you  could  tell  it  at
a  glance,  there  was  really  no  need  for  a  compulsion  which  would
have  been  against  the  principle  of  free  exchange.  Example  was
better  than  precept.  Attic  silver  began  to  be  known  and  used
not  only  in  the  Confederacy  but  all  over  Greece  and  among
distant  barbarians.  When  Gylippus,  after  Aegospotami,  kept
back  some  of  the  Spartan  State  booty,  and  hid  it  under  his
roof  tiles,  the  man  who  denounced  him  merely  said  that  there
were  'owls  in  the  potters'  quarter'.  In  fact,  much  as  the
Spartans  hated  strangers,  and  Athenians  above  all,  there  were
a  great  many  such  owls'  nests  all  over  their  city.^

Athenian  influence  was  thus  spreading,  as  Pericles  realized,
far  beyond  the  Aegean  and  the  confines  of  the  Empire.  Her
traders  were  moving  East  and  West,  finding  their  way  into  every
land  and  every  sea,  fetching  goods,  and  paying  for  them  in  owls
or  pottery,  from  the  iron  mines  of  Elba  or  the  caravans  at  Gaza
and  Gyrene.  For  this  also  was  part  of  the  imperial  mission — to
mix  freely  with  all  mankind  and  to  give  of  their  best  to  men  and
nations.  Friendships  were  knit  and  alliances  made  with  Greek,
and  even  with  barbarian,  powers  without  a  thought  of  the  Persians

^  Ar.  Bifds  1040  (weights  and  measures).  Cavaignac,  pp.  177  ff.,  has
shown  that  there  was  no  compulsion  to  pay  tribute  in  Attic  money  till  414,
when  (after  the  loss  of  the  Thracian  mines)  it  was  tried  and  failed.  There
was  no  Athenian  gold  till  406  (Ar.  Frogs  720),  so  the  gold  and  electrum
(i.e.  pale  gold)  coins  of  Lampsacus  and  Cyzicus  were  in  constant  use.  See
Wilamowitz,  Ai/s  Kydathen,  p.  30,  on  why  the  sixth-century  Attic  owl,  re-
produced on  the  cover  of  this  book,  '  remained  untouched  by  the  art  of
Pheidias.'  Any  one  who  has  lived  in  a  country  where  many  ditTerent  kinds
of  coinage  circulate  (though  no  modern  country,  not  even  Germany  before
the  ZoUverein,  could  compare  with  ancient  Greece)  will  appreciate  the  advan-
tages of  a  standard  weight  and  an  easily  recognizable  coin  type.  The
money-changers  along  the  quays  of  Levantine  ports  were  much  the  same
then  as  now.  Many  a  newly  arrived  traveller  has  felt  inclined  to  kick  over
their  tables.  There  are  some  interesting  modern  parallels.  Maria  Theresa
dollars,  dated  1766,  are  still  being  coined  for  use  in  Abyssinia  and  Arabia.
Compare  the  Indian  native  states,  where  the  imperial  and  local  coins  and
stamps  (the  railways  being  imperial  there  is  generally  an  imperial  letter-box
at  the  railway  station)  circulate  side  by  side,  and  standardization  is  proceed-
ing gradually  without  the  exercise  of  compulsion.  The  same  is  of  course
true  of  subordinate  languages,  though,  fortunately,  it  is  easier  to  speak  two
languages  than  to  use  two  coin-systems.  Owls  at  Sparta:  IMut.  I.ys.  16;
Plato,  Ale.  122  E  (Horace's  'vestigia  nulla  retrorsum').


CHAP.  VII  EMPIRE  i^g

or  the  original  object  of  the  league.  I'or  thirty  years  irulccd  the
Persian  War  was  carried  on,  in  a  desultory  manner  and  with
varying  success.  When  peace  was  made  in  448  Cyprus  was
still  '  enslaved  '.  But  in  the  course  of  a  generation  freedom  had
changed  its  meaning ;  and  Pericles  did  not  feel  ashamed  to  make
a  convention  with  the  national  enemy,  or  even  to  receive  for  the
league  and  put  away  in  its  exchequer  the  contributions  of  Carians
and  Lycians.  Athens  had  now  become  an  ICmpirc  just  like
Persia  or  Assyria,  and  she  did  not  blush  to  receive  tribute  from
her  inferiors.  Indeed  she  needed  it  for  the  fulfilment  of  the  work
she  had  to  do  :  and  Pericles,  like  Darius,  was  determined  to
see  that  she  should  secure  and  keep  it.  Already  in  4;'J4,  when
nearly  the  whole  Athenian  fleet  had  been  destroyed  in  Egypt
and  the  Aegean  was  for  a  moment  exposed  to  pirates  and
Phoenicians,  it  was  thought  wiser  to  remove  the  treasury  of  the
allies  from  Delos  to  Athens.  Ostensibly  this  meant  no  more
than  a  change  of  banker,  Athena  taking  the  place  of  Apollo.
But,  practically,  the  result  was  to  remove  it  once  and  for  all  from
the  control  of  the  Confederate  Parliament,  and  to  make  every
one  see  and  feel,  what  they  had  known  in  their  hearts  long
ago,  that  it  was  the  money  of  Athens,  with  which  she  could  do
what  she  liked.  The  world  is  still  blessing  her  for  what  she  did
with  iO

When  peace  was  made  with  Persia  in  448  there  was  indeed  a
small  party  of  '  Little  Athenians '  who  urged  that  the  alliance
should  be  dissolved  and  the  contributions  returned.  Athens  had
no  right  to  spend  the  money  on  herself  'as  a  proud  and  vain
woman  decks  herself  out  with  jewels '.  But  their  protests  passed
unheeded,  and  their  leader  was  sent  into  exile  for  his  troublesome
conscientiousness.  Plain  facts  were  too  strong.  Athens  could  no
more  step  back  than  most  Englishmen  feel  they  can  leave  India.
She  had  woken  up  to  find  herself  an  l^mpirc  and  was  resolved

'  Etruscan  tombs  are  full  of  fifth-century  Athenian  vases.  Samson's  Gaza
(Herodotus's  Cadytis)  altered  its  coin  standard  to  make  it  lit  m  with  that  of
Athens  (Meyer,  iii,  §  85).  Extra-imperial  alliances:  Segesta,  454  ;  Khegium
and  Leontini,  both  433-2  (Hicks  and  Hill,  Nos.  5'.  52)  ;  Naples,  probably
438.  Relations  with  Barbaiiars:  Italian  chief,  Thuc.  vu.  33  (an  Athenian
'consul');  Sicilian  chief,  vii.  i.  4  ;  Thiacian  prince  given  Athenian  citizen-
ship, ii.  29.  5.  Inside  the  Empire  proper  :  see  '  Quota  lists  '  in  Hill  s  ^oitrits,
e.g.  Ai'iKioi  Kal  avvT(X('is  in  that  for  446.  These  lists  do  not  give  the  contribu-
tions themselves  but  only  Athena's  '  commission '.

1246  Is


190  POLITICS  PART  II

to  play  the  part.  So  Pericles  set  about  the  first  avowedly
imperial  piece  of  organization,  and  divided  the  Empire  into
Provinces  for  the  more  convenient  collection  of  tribute.  From
the  year  443  onwards  Athena's  invoices  show  the  names  neatly
grouped  under  five  heads — contributions  from  Ionia,  from  the
Hellespont,  from  Thrace,  from  Caria,  and  from  the  Islands :
those  from  the  Black  Sea  ports,  which  were  not  in  the  original
assessment,  are  separately  classified.  This  money  w^as  what
Athens  lived  on,  and  still  partly  lives  on.  '  It  may  seem
wickedness  to  have  won  it ;  it  is  quite  certainly  folly  to  let  it  go.'^

But  this  is  looking  forward.  For  the  men  of  these  two  genera-
tions of  empire-building  were  not  conscious  of  any  wickedness.
They  w^ere  too  busy  with  their  work.  If  they  stopped  to  think
at  all,  as  they  rested  on  their  oars,  it  was  to  reflect  on  the  joy
of  achievement  and  how  '  all  things  worked  together  for  good  '.
For  this  it  is  which  makes  this  short  half-century  perhaps  the
greatest  and  happiest  period  in  recorded  history.  The  world
was  moving  onwards  with  extraordinary  swiftness,  bearing  on  its
bosom,  like  a  strong  river  in  flood,  all  that  lay  within  its  track.
And  how  much  that  was  !  '  Freedom,  Law,  and  Progress  ;  Truth
and  Beauty ;  Knowledge  and  Virtue ;  Humanity  and  Religion  ;
high  things,  the  conflicts  between  which  have  caused  most  of  the
disruptions  and  despondencies  of  human  societies,  seemed  all  to
lie  in  the  same  direction.'  The  men  who  were  inspired  by  these
greatest  of  human  watchwords  felt  as  yet  no  misgivings.  They
knew  their  work  was  right,  that  it  was  well  and  soundly  laid,  and
that  posterity  would  understand  it.

For,  though  the  material  they  worked  in  was  the  lives  of  men
and  nations,  they  were  still  Greeks  and  still  artists  ;  and  with  the
joyousness  of  the  creator,  whether  in  words  or  institutions,  they
banished  every  whisper  which  could  reason  them  into  unhappiness

^  Thuc.  ii.  63.  2  (Pericles  facing  facts),  ii.  65.  13  (Pericles'  way  of  '  thinking
imperially '  was  to  think  in  figures).  Lovers  of  Thucydides  will  enjoy  trying
to  detect  Pericles'  own  phrases  in  the  speeches  :  epaaTai  TJji  TrdXecor  is  cer-
tainly one  (cf.  Thuc.  vi.  13.  i  Svaepforas,  24.  3,  and  Ar.  Ac/i.  143,  Knights,
732,  1 341).  Another  is  ho^a  aelfj-vrjaros  KaraXfiTTerat  (like  Cicero's  esse  videa-
tur),  ii.  43,  ii.  64.  5.  We  should  understand  the  later  speeches  better  if  we
caught  all  the  ironical  allusions  to  Pericles'  plans  and  phrases.  Plut.  Per.
12  (arguments  of  the  Opposition).  For  the  classified  tribute-lists  see  Hill's
Sources,  pp.  43  ff.,  and  p.  156  (Black  Sea  fragment) ;  also  Cavaignac,  xl-xliii,
who  has  restored  one  in  its  entirety,  eking  out  gaps  from  neighbouring
lists.


ciiAr.  VTi  EMPIRE  i^i

or  break  up,  even  for  a  moment,  the  liarmonious  i>atlcrn  of  their
life.  It  was  indeed  very  illogical  of  Sophocles  to  hymn  eternal
justice  in  his  Oedipus  and  yet  to  take  office  without  a  scruple  as  a
misappropriator  of  imperial  funds.  It  was  very  illogical  of  the
Sovereign  People  to  entice  sister  communities  into  a  league  of
liberty  and  then  to  punish  them  for  their  withdrawal  as  illogical
as  for  Burke,  imbued  with  the  spirit  of  a  later  I^mpire,  to  declare
about  the  American  Colonics  that  '  the  more  ardently  they  love
liberty  the  more  perfect  will  be  their  obedience'.  Hut  such  con-
tradictions passed  unnoticed  by  all  but  a  few  keen-sighted  seers,
not  merely  because  Athens  wished  and  tried  to  champion  free-
dom— this  alone  would  not  have  sufficed  to  seal  the  eyes  of  her
citizens — but  because,  while  they  were  serving  her  with  '  the
fighter's  daring,  the  wise  man's  understanding,  and  the  good
man's  self-discipline',  they  felt  free  within  themselves — free  and
light-hearted  and  confident  and  incapable  of  doing  wrong.'

They  had  neither  the  leisure  nor  the  desire,  any  more  than
eighteenth-century  Englishmen,  to  invent  an  imperial  theory  of
their  own.  But  Thucydides,  writing  when  most  of  what  was
mortal  in  their  work  had  already  crumbled  into  dust,  invented
one  for  them.  It  sounds  absurd  and  vainglorious,  as  imperial
theories  always  do,  to  a  critical  posterity;  yet  if  the  dead
could  rise  from  the  Cerameicus,  or  if  their  grave  reliefs  could
find  voices,  they  would  bear  out,  albeit  with  modesty,  the  analysis
of  their  historian,  'We  are  the  leaders  of  civilization,  the
pioneers  of  the  human  race.  Our  society  and  intercourse  is  the
highest  blessing  man  can  confer.  To  be  within  the  circle  of
our  influence  is  not  dependence  but  a  privilege.  Not  all  the
wealth  of  the  East  can  repay  the  riches  we  bestow.  So  we  can
work  on  cheerfully,  using  the  means  and  money  that  flow  in  to
us,  confident  that,  try  as  they  will,  we  shall  still  be  creditors.  For
through  effort  and  suffering  and  on  m.any  a  stricken  field  we  have
found  out  the  secret  of  human   power,  which  is  the  secret  of

^  Murray,  Euripides,  p.  xxiii.  Sophocles  was  Imperial  Treasurer  in  443,
just  at  the  very  time  when  the  money  began  to  be  used  for  city  purposes.
See  p.  404  below.  The  members  of  the  allied  cities  with  whom  the  Athenians
would  be  chiefly  brought  into  contact  were  the  poorer  classes,  who  served
for  good  pay  as  hired  rowers  on  the  Athenian  triremes  and  were  probably
'as  enthusiastic  for  Athens  as  the  Rhineland  and  Italian  troops  were  for
Napoleon'  (A.  J.  T.).  This  blinded  Athens  to  the  feelings  of  the  wealthier
classes,  who  paid  the  bulk  of  the  tribute.

N  a


192  POLITICS  PART  II

happiness.  Men  have  guessed  at  it  under  many  names  ;  but  we
alone  have  learnt  to  know  it  and  to  make  it  at  home  in  our  city.
And  the  name  we  know  it  by  is  Freedom,  for  it  has  taught  us
that  to  serve  is  to  be  free.  Do  you  wonder  why  it  is  that  "  alone
among  mankind  "  (will  there  ever  be  another  nation  which  can
understand  what  we  mean  ?)  "  we  confer  our  benefits,  not  on
calculations  of  self-interest,  but  in  the  fearless  confidence  of
Freedom ''  ?  *


CHAPTER   \'III


THE    IDEAL   OF    CITIZl-N'SIlIl'

HAPPINESS,  OR  THE  RULE  OE  LOVE
(ivSaiixovia)

KHPY3.        Tlpiiaraeiv  av  ttoAX'  elcodus  fj  Tf  a!]  ni')\i{.
0H2EY2.    Toiyup  novovaa  ttoXXu  ttciXX'  (vBaifiovfl.

Euripides,  SuppUces  576-7.

To  fvdaifxov  to  i\(v6(pov,  tu  8e  (Xevdepov  to  ({'■^vxov  Kpivaura. — Pl'.RICLES.

Was  ist  gut,  fragt  ihr?  Tapfer  sein  ist  gut.— NiETZSCHF,  Zatitthuslta,
Vovi  Kfieg  Kfid  Kriegsvolke,

More  brave  for  this  that  he  hath  ir.ucli  to  love.

Wordsworth,  The  Happy  Warrior.

Only  a  few  words  are  necessary  before  Thucydidcs  speaks
for  himself.

Thucydides  did  not  belong  to  the  two  generations  of  l-lmpirc
builders.  He  was  born  just  after  them,  and  his  personal
memory  went  no  further  back  than  the  peace  of  445.  So  he
shared  the  ideals  of  the  age  with  his  older  contemporaries,  but
in  a  less  instinctive  fashion.  Like  them,  he  knew  that  he  was
living  in  great  times.  But,  more  thoughtful  than  they,  he
desired  to  record  them  ;  for  he  knew,  as  they  knew  if  they  ever
lay  awake  thinking,  that  this  glory  could  not  last  and  that
posterity  would  be  glad  to  read  of  it.  But  he  little  suspected
//iw  brief  the  blossom  would  be,  or  that,  in  his  own  short  lifetime,
he  would  yet  sec  autumn  and  midwinter.'

^  For  Thucydides'  life  see  Mimny's  A/ictait  Greek I.iicratiar  and  (for  de-
tailed evidence)  Classen's  Introduction  to  his  edition.  The  date  of  his  book  is
not  known.  He  was  old  enough  in  431  to  form  a  settled  determination  to  write
a  history  of  the  war  (i.  i),  yet  young  enough  to  learn  '  style  '  from  the  Sophists.
If,  as  I  believe,  he  is  thinking  of  himself  when  he  speaks  of  the  ardent  young
men  in  Athens  in  431  (ii.  8),  he  cannot  have  been  born  much  before  460.
This  agrees  with  ii.  65.  5  (putting  the  comma,  as  in  the  Oxford  text  after
flpr,vj]),  where  he  confines  his  general  verdict  on  Pericles  to  the  later  half  of
his  career.    He  is  very  reserved  about  himself:  e.  g.  he  does  not  say  who  was


194  POLITICS  PART  II

Yet  it  was  in  midwinter,  when  the  Long  Walls  had  been  dis-
mantled and  the  Acropolis  had  housed  a  Spartan  garrison,  that
he  wrote  his  eulogy  of  the  city  in  the  form  (what  form  could
be  more  appropriate  ?)  of  a  speech  over  her  noble  dead.  It
is  not,  of  course,  the  speech  which  Pericles  delivered,  or  even,
as  the  speaker  hints,  the  kind  of  speech  usually  given  on  such
occasions.  There  is  too  little  in  it  about  noble  ancestors,  and
too  much  about  the  present  day.  But  there  is  no  reason  to
doubt  that  Thucydides  had  heard  his  hero  speak,  most  probably
more  than  once,  over  the  city's  fallen  soldiers,  and  could  recall
in  after  years  among  his  most  sacred  recollections,  '  the  cadence
of  his  voice,  the  movement  of  his  hand,'  and  the  solemn  hush
of  the  vast  audience,  broken  only  by  '  the  sobbing  of  some
mother  of  the  dead.'  We  may  feel  with  confidence  that  he
has  given  us,  with  the  added  colour  of  his  own  experience,  not
merely  the  inner  thought  but  much  of  the  language  of  Pericles.
So  that  here  we  can  listen,  as  in  all  fine  works  of  interpretation,
to  two  great  spirits  at  once  ;  and  when  we  have  learnt  to  use  our
ears  we  can  sometimes  hear  them  both,  Pericles'  voice  coming
through,  a  little  faint  and  thin  after  the  lapse  of  years,  above  the
deep  tones  of  the  historian.^

The  speech  is  written,  if  ever  writing  was,  '  not  in  ink  but
in  blood.'  For  with  Thucydides,  more  perhaps  than  with  any
other  great  writer,  there  is  not  a  word  but  tells.  '  You  must
read  and  mark  him  line  by  line  till  you  can  read  between
the  lines  as  clearly  as  in  them.  There  are  iow  thinkers  with
so  many  ideas  brooding  in  the  background.'  All  great  art
is  like  a  ghost  seeking  to  express  more  than  it  can  utter  and
beckoning  to  regions  beyond.  This  is  as  true  in  history,  which
deals  with  nations,  as  in  poetry  or  any  more  personal  art.  That
is  why  the  Funeral  Speech,  written  of  a  small  provincial  city
in   the    untried  youth  of  the   world,  will  always  find  an  echo

responsible  for  his  exile  (v.  26.  5),  or  that  he  was  very  nearly  recalled  in  411
(viii.  70.  i)  :  he  died  not  later  than  396,  probably  after  399,  if,  as  Classen
thinks  probable,  viii.  68.  2  contains  a  covert  reference  to  the  death  of  Socrates.
Pericles  knew  after  the  Plague  that  Empires,  like  men,  fade  and  die  (ii.  64.
3  mirra  yixp  ne(})VKe  Kat  fKuTTovadai).  But  he  does  not  sound  this  note  in  the
earlier  speeches.

^  Wallas,  Hutnan  Nature  in  Politics,  p.  73.  The  Funeral  Speech  which
Athenians  remembered  best  was  that  delivered  by  Pericles  in  439  at  the  end
of  the  Samian  War.


CHAP.  VIII  THE    FUNERAL   SPEECH  igr^

whenever  men  and  nations  are  living  true  to  themselves,  whether
in  the  trenches  of  Mukden  or  in  the  cemetery  of  Gettysburg.
Pericles  and  Abraham  Lincoln  were  not  very  much  alike.  Hut
common  needs  beget  a  common  language ;  and  great  statesmen,
like  great  poets,  speak  to  one  another  from  peak  to  peak.

Let  us  stand  in  the  valley  and  listen  :  ^

(34)  In  the  same  winter,  following  the  law  of  their  fathers,  the
Athenians  held  the  first  public  funeral  of  those  who  had  fallen
in  the  war.  The  ceremony  is  as  follows.  The  bones  of  the
dead  are  exposed  on  a  covered  platform  for  three  days,  during
which  any  one  may  place  his  personal  offerings  at  their  side.
On  the  third  day  they  are  laid  in  ten  coffins  of  cypress  wood,
one  for  each  tribe,  every  man's  bones  in  the  coffin  of  his  tribe  ;
these  are  put  on  carriages  and  driven  to  the  grave.  One  empty
bed  covered  with  a  winding  sheet  is  also  borne  for  the  missing
whose  bodies  were  not  recovered  for  burning.  All  who  so
desire,  whether  citizens  or  strangers,  may  join  in  the  proces-
sion, and  the  women  folk  of  the  dead  are  at  the  graveside
bewailing  them.  The  interment  takes  place  in  the  State  burial
ground,  which  is  situated  in  the  most  beautiful  suburb  of  the
city.  All  Athenians  who  have  died  in  war  lie  buried  there,
except  those  who  fell  at  Marathon  ^ ;  their  valour  was  ad-
judged so  conspicuous  that  the  funeral  was  held  on  the  field
of  battle.  When  the  coffins  have  been  laid  in  the  earth  some
speaker  elected  by  the  city  for  his  wisdom  and  public  estima-
tion delivers  an  appropriate  eulogy ;  after  this  the  gathering
disperses.  This  is  the  customary  ceremonial,  and  it  was  adhered
to  throughout  the  war  whenever  occasion  arose.     It  was  at  the

'  The  quotation  is  from  Nietzsche's  penetrating  chapter  on  _;  \Vliat  I
owe  to  the  Ancients'  (in  '  Gotzendammerung ',  Works,  vol.  viii).  I  he-
extraordinary  resemblance  between  Lincoln's  speech  at  Gettysburg  and
Pericles'  has  often  been  noticed.  The  speech  is  printed  in  Lincoln's  S/>ciJtes
in  the  Everyman  Library.  I  have  translated  from  the  text  prmlcd  m
Wilamowitz's  Greek  Reader,  as  1  prefer  it  to  the  Oxford  text.  I  he  most
important  differences  are  that  Wilamowitz  reads  ^kuv  for  oikuv  \n  37.  i,
iTfpoi  ertpa  in  40.  2,  avroi  for  oi  avroi  three  lines  later,  and  »)^.';/x«»'Oi  for  f/y.)<Ta-
fiivoi  in  42,  four  Imes  from  end.  I  have  mostly  followed  N\  ilaniowitz  s  para-
graphing :  the  bracketed  numbers  mark  the  chapters  m  Thucydides.  have
added  a  few  notes,  some  pointing  to  storms  ahead.  Thucydides  could  not
restrain  his  irony  even  when  Pericles  was  talking.

2  Those  who  fell  at  Marathon  :  The  Athenians  who  fell  at  Flataea  were
buried  on  the  battle-field  too  (Hdt.  ix.  85),  but  this  does  not  count  as  an
Athenian  but  as  an  All-Greek  battle.


196  POLITICS  PART  II

funeral  of  this  first  group  of  fallen  that  Pericles  the  son  of
Xanthippus  was  elected  to  speak.  When  the  moment  came,
he  stepped  forward  from  the  graveside  on  to  a  high  platform
made  for  the  occasion,  so  that  his  voice  might  carry  as  far  as
possible  over  the  crowd,  and  spoke  as  follows  :

(^^)  Most  of  those  who  have  stood  in  this  place  before  me
have  commended  the  institution  of  this  closing  address.  It
is  good,  they  have  felt,  that  solemn  words  should  be  spoken
over  our  fallen  soldiers.  I  do  not  share  this  feeling.  Acts
deserve  acts,  not  words,  in  their  honour,  and  to  me  a  burial
at  the  State's  charges,  such  as  you  see  before  you,  would  have
appeared  sufficient.  Our  sense  of  the  deserts  of  a  number  of
our  fellow-citizens  should  not  depend  upon  the  felicity  of  one
man's  speech.  Moreover,  it  is  very  hard  for  a  speaker  to  be
appropriate  when  many  of  his  hearers  will  scarce  believe  that
he  is  truthful.  For  those  who  have  known  and  loved  the  dead
may  think  his  words  scant  justice  to  the  memories  they  would
hear  honoured:  while  those  who  do  not  know  will  occasionally,
from  jealousy,  suspect  me  of  overstatement  when  they  hear  of
any  feat  beyond  their  own  powers.  For  it  is  only  human  for
men  not  to  bear  praise  of  others  beyond  the  point  at  which
they  still  feel  that  they  can  rival  their  exploits.  Transgress
that  boundary  and  they  are  jealous  and  distrustful.  But  since
the  wisdom  of  our  ancestors  enacted  this  law  I  too  must  submit
and  try  to  suit  as  best  I  can  the  wishes  and  feelings  of  every
member  of  this  gathering.^

(36)  My  first  words  shall  be  for  our  ancestors ;  for  it  is  both

^  Our  sense .  .  .  distrustful  {Wnts  12  to  23).  Steup  has  pointed  out  (Classen's
fourth  ed.,  p.  221)  that  the  thought  of  this  passage  does  not  dovetail  in  with
the  rest  of  the  chapter.  To  '  speak  appropriately '  in  spite  of  the  incredulity
of  the  audience  is  one  thing,  to  '  try  to  suit  the  wishes  and  feeling  of  every
member  of  it '  is  another.  So  he  suggests  that  the  passage  is  a  later  addition.
Pericles''  difficulty  was  to  fit  his  '  advanced  '  ideas  to  the  conservative  atmo-
sphere of  the  ceremonial,  which  he  meets,  for  instance,  by  damning  the
'ancestors'  in  two  sentences  of  faint  praise.  (See  Isocrates'  PatiatJienaicus
for  the  paint  he  might  have  laid  on.)  But  as  Thucydides  read  through  his
first  draft  he  became  conscious  of  Ins  own  difficulty  in  making  his  readers
believe  what  the  Athenian  Empire  had  once  been  like.  So  he  patched  a
preface  of  his  own  on  to  the  brief  opening  remarks  he  had  written  for  Pericles,
but  did  not  quite  hide  the  join.  Thus  read,  the  chapter  becomes  full  of
meaning.  //  is  only  huinati :  a  curious  little  illustration  of  the  glorious  self-
confidence  of  the  fifth-century  Athenian.  Writers  of  modern  '  appreciations  '
do  not  need  to  be  afraid  of  thus  hurting  their  readers'  feelings.


CHAP.  VIII  THE    FUNERAL   SPKIXII  197

just  to  them  and  seemly  that  on  an  occasion  such  as  this  our
tribute  of  memory  should  be  paid  them.  l'"oi-,  dwelling  always
in  this  country,  generation  after  generation  in  unchan^'ing  and
unbroken  succession,  they  have  handed  it  down  to  us  free  by
their  exertions.  So  they  are  worthy  of  our  praises;  and  still
more  so  are  our  fathers.  For  they  enlarged  the  ancestral  i)alri-
mony  by  the  Empire  which  we  hold  to-day  and  delivered  it,  not
without  labour,  into  the  hands  of  our  own  generation  :  while
it  is  we  ourselves,  those  of  us  who  are  now  in  middle  life,
who  consolidated  our  power  throughout  the  greater  part  of
the  Empire  and  secured  the  city's  complete  independence  both
in  war  and  peace.^  Of  the  battles  which  we  and  our  fathers
fought,  whether  in  the  winning  of  our  pow  er  abroad  or  in  bravely
withstanding  the  warfare  of  barbarian  or  Greek  at  home,  I  do
not  wish  to  say  more:  they  are  too  familiar  to  )'ou  all.'*  I  wish
rather  to  set  forth  the  spirit  in  which  we  faced  them,  and  the
constitution  and  manners  with  which  we  rose  to  greatness,  and
to  pass  from  them  to  the  dead  ;  for  I  think  it  not  unfitting
that  these  things  should  be  called  to  mind  at  to-day's  .solemnity,
and  expedient  too  that  the  whole  gathering  of  citizens  and
strangers  should  listen  to  them.

(37)  For  our  government  is  not  copied  from  those  of  our
neighbours  ^ :  we  are  an  example  to  them  rather  than  they  to

^  Complete  i7ide'pendence :  there  is  something  like  a  quibble  licrc  on  tlie
word  'independence'.  Its  natural  meaning  is  economic  independence,  i.e.
a  city  is  '  independent '  when  it  grows  its  own  corn,  wine,  timber  for  shijiping,
flax  for  sails,  &c.  In  this  sense  Athens,  which,  like  England,  was  dependt-nt
for  its  existence  on  foreign  supplies,  was  the  least  independent  city  in  (ircece,
as  is  pointed  out  in  chapter  38.  But  by  the  '  consolidation  '  of  her  Empire,
i.e.  by  exercising  her  sea-power,  she  was  able  to  control  the  trade  in  neces-
saries. Note  the  careful  distinction  between  (ij  Ancestors,  before  Athens
'woke  up',  (2)  the  first  or  Marathon  generation  of  Empire-builders,  (3)  ihe
second  generation  (Pericles'  own),  who  were  rather  traders.  He  omits  to
mention  that  (3)  had  lost  some  of  the  possessions  handed  down  by  (2),  as
the  Quota  lists  show.     They  had  made  up  for  it  by  trade.

"^  Famiiiar  to  you  all:  very  much  so  in  the  autumn  of  431,  with  the
Peloponnesian  army  just  home  from  Attica.  Hence  the  v.ague  expression
(emended  by  some  editors)  '  withstanding  the  warfare  '.  lioth  in  480  and  in
431  Athenians  withstood  the  warfare,  but  not  the  enemy  in  person.

^  Not  copied  from  those  of  otir  neighbours  \  a  reference  to  the  Spartans,
who  were  not  quite  sure  whether  their  constitution  came  from  Crete  or  from
Delphi.  The  next  few  chapters  are  full  of  covert  references  to  Sparta,  the
home  of  Discipline,  where  men  were  afraid  of  Freedom  and  Originality,  and
to  Corinth,  the  home  of  Licence,  where  men  cared  only  for  Riches.  Possibly
a  few  of  the  audience  might  remember  that,  about  twelve  years  before,  some
ambassadors  had  come  from  a  barbarian  city  called  Rome  to  learn  about


igH  POLITICS  part  ii

us.  Our  constitution  is  named  a  democracy,  because  it  is  in
the  hands  not  of  the  few  but  of  the  many.  But  our  laws  secure
equal  justice  for  all  in  their  private  disputes,  and  our  public
opinion  welcomes  and  honours  talent  in  every  branch  of  achieve-
ment, not  for  any  sectional  reason  but  on  grounds  of  excellence
alone.  And  as  we  give  free  play  to  all  in  our  public  life,  so  we
carry  the  same  spirit  into  our  daily  relations  with  one  another.
We  have  no  black  looks  or  angry  words  for  our  neighbour  if  he
enjoys  himself  in  his  own  way,  and  we  abstain  from  the  little
acts  of  churlishness  which,  though  they  leave  no  mark,  yet  cause
annoyance  to  whoso  notes  them.  Open  and  friendly  in  our
private  intercourse,  in  our  public  acts  we  keep  strictly  within
the  control  of  law.  We  acknowledge  the  restraint  of  reverence  ;
we  are  obedient  to  whomsoever  is  set  in  authority,  and  to  the
laws,  more  especially  to  those  which  offer  protection  to  the
oppressed  and  those  unwritten  ordinances  whose  transgression
brings  admitted  shame.  (38)  Yet  ours  is  no  work-a-day  city
only.  No  other  provides  so  many  recreations  for  the  spirit —
contests  and  sacrifices  all  the  year  round,  and  beauty  in  our
public  buildings  to  cheer  the  heart  and  delight  the  eye  day  by
day.  Moreover,  the  city  is  so  large  and  powerful  that  all  the
wealth  of  all  the  world  flows  in  to  her,  so  that  our  own  Attic
products  seem  no  more  homelike  to  us  than  the  fruits  of  the
labours  of  other  nations.^

(39)  Our  military  training  too  is  different  from  our  opponents'.
The  gates  of  our  city  are  flung  open  to  the  world.  We  practise
no  periodical  deportations,  nor  do  we  prevent  our  visitors  from
observing  or  discovering  what  an  enemy  might  usefully  apply  to
his  own  purposes.  For  our  trust  is  not  in  the  devices  of  material
equipment,  but  in  our  own  good  spirits  for  battle.-

the  Athenian  laws,  many  of  which  they  embodied  in  their  own  code  (Meyer,

i'i,  §  370)-

'  This  paragraph  contains  the  only  mention  of  official  religion  in  the  whole
speech.  Note  how  it  is  sandwiched  in  amongst  athletics,  architecture,  and
commerce.

'^  Our  trust  is  not  in  the  devices  of  material  equipnent.  This  seems  to  be
contradicted  by  Pericles'  words,  i.  142.  9:  '  If  anything  is  a  matter  of  skill,  it
is  seamanship';  and  7  :  'You  have  been  practising  seamanship  ever  since
the  Persian  wars  and  are  not  perfect  at  it  yet.  How  can  a  lot  of  farmers
make  any  headway  against  us  on  sea? '  Athenians  got  constant  practice  in
seamanship  in  the  warships  kept  afloat  and  in  the  Merchant  Service  (see
Old  Oligarch,  i.  20  and  Thuc.  iii.  115.  4).


CHAP.  VIII  THE   FUNERAL   SPEIXII  lyy

So  too  with  education.  They  toil  from  early  boyhood  in  a
laborious  pursuit  after  courage,  while  we,  free  to  live  and  wander
as  we  please,  march  out  none  the  less  to  face  the  self-same
dangers.^  Here  is  the  proof  of  my  words.  When  the  Si)artan.s
advance  into  our  country,  they  do  not  come  alone  but  with  all
their  allies  ;  but  when  we  invade  our  neighbours  we  have  little
difficulty  as  a  rule,  even  on  foreign  soil,  in  defeating  men  who  arc
fighting  for  their  own  homes.  Moreover,  no  enemy  has  ever  met
us  in  full  strength,  for  we  have  our  navy  to  attend  to,  and  our
soldiers  are  sent  on  service  to  many  scattered  possessions  ;  but  if
they  chance  to  encounter  some  portion  of  our  forces  and  defeat  a
few  of  us,  they  boast  that  they  have  driven  back  our  whole  army,
or,  if  they  are  defeated,  that  the  victors  were  in  full  strength.
Indeed,  if  we  choose  to  face  danger  with  an  eas}-  mind  rather
than  after  a  rigorous  training,  and  to  trust  rather  in  native  manli-
ness than  in  state-made  courage,  the  advantage  lies  with  us  ;  for
we  are  spared  all  the  weariness  of  practising  for  future  hardships,
and  when  we  find  ourselves  amongst  them  we  are  as  brave  as  our
plodding  rivals.  Here  as  elsewhere,  then,  the  city  sets  an  example
which  is  deserving  of  admiration.  (40)  We  are  lovers  of  beauty
without  extravagance,  and  lovers  of  wisdom  without  unmanliness.
Wealth  to  us  is  not  mere  material  for  vainglory  but  an  oppor-
tunity for  achievement ;  and  poverty  we  think  it  no  disgrace  to
acknowledge  but  a  real  degradation  to  make  no  effort  to  over-
come. Our  citizens  attend  both  to  public  and  private  duties,  and
do  not  allow  absorption  in  their  own  various  affairs  to  interfere
with  their  knowledge  of  the  city's.  We  differ  from  other  states
in  regarding  the  man  who  holds  aloof  from  public  life  not  as
'quiet'  but  as  useless ;  ^  we  decide  or  debate,  carefully  and  in
person,  all  matters  of  policy,  holding,  not  that  words  and  deeds
go  ill  together,  but  that  acts  are  foredoomed  to  failure  when
undertaken  undiscussed.  For  we  arc  noted  for  being  at  once
most   adventurous   in   action    and    most    reflective    beforehand.

'  March  out  none  the  less  :  this  was  just  what  Pericles  would  not  let  theiu
do  until  the  enemy  had  retired  home.  So  he  pulls  himself  up  and  k'vcs
a  rather  weak  explanation  of  what  he  meant.  .

^  Not  as  '  guiet'  but  as  useless  :  these  are  the  Mugwumps  or  small  nnnonty
of  Athenians  who  undertake  no  public  service.  '  Quiet '  {dnpayfioi'ti)  is  what
they  like  to  call  themselves  as  opposed  to  political  '  busybodies  .  but  ine
fifth-century  Athenians  were  proud  of  being  busybodies  (see  Ihuc.  1.  ,0,
and  the  chapter  motto  from  Euripides).


200  POLITICS  PART  II

Other  men  are  bold  in  ignorance,  while  reflection  will  stop  their
onset.  But  the  bravest  are  surely  those  who  have  the  clearest
vision  of  what  is  before  them,  glory  and  danger  alike,  and  yet
notwithstanding  go  out  to  meet  it.  In  doing  good,  too,  we
are  the  exact  opposite  of  the  rest  of  mankind.  We  secure  our
friends  not  by  accepting  favours  but  by  doing  them.  And  so  we
are  naturally  more  firm  in  our  attachments:  ^  for  we  are  anxious,
as  creditors,  to  cement  by  kind  offices  our  relation  towards  our
friends.  If  they  do  not  respond  with  the  same  warmness  it  is
because  they  feel  that  their  services  will  not  be  given  spon-
taneously but  only  as  the  repayment  of  a  debt.^  We  are  alone
among  mankind  in  doing  men  benefits,  not  on  calculations  of  self-
interest,  but  in  the  fearless  confidence  of  freedom.  (41)  In  a  word
I  claim  that  our  city  as  a  whole  is  an  education  to  Greece,  and
that  her  members  yield  to  none,  man  by  man,  for  independence
of  spirit,  many-sidedness  of  attainment,  and  complete  self-
reliance  in  limbs  and  brain.

That  this  is  no  vainglorious  phrase  but  actual  fact  the
supremacy  which  our  manners  have  won  us  itself  bears  testimony.
No  other  city  of  the  present  day  goes  out  to  her  ordeal  greater
than  ever  men  dreamed  ;  no  other  is  so  powerful  that  the
invader  feels  no  bitterness  when  he  suffers  at  her  hands,  and
her  subjects  no  shame  at  the  indignity  of  their  dependence."
Great  indeed  are  the  symbols  and  witnesses  of  our  supremacy,  at
which  posterity,  as  all  mankind  to-day,  will  be  astonished.  We
need  no  Homer  or  other  man  of  words  to  praise  us  ;  for  such
give  pleasure  for  a  moment,  but  the  truth  will  put  to  shame  their
imaginings  of  our  deeds.  For  our  pioneers  have  forced  a  way
into  every  sea  and  every  land,  establishing  among  all  mankind,  in
punishment  or  beneficence,  eternal  memorials  of  their  settle-
ment.'*

'  More  Jir//i  in  ojir  attachments  :  so  much  so  that  the  '  friends  '  cannot
shake  off  the  tie,  but  become  subjects.

^  The  7'epayi)icnt  of  a  debt :  at  the  beginning  of  the  Peloponnesian  War
this  was  being  repaid,  in  the  form  of  tribute,  at  the  rate  of  about  600  talents
a  year.

^  Her  subjects  no  shai/ie  at  the  i7idignity  of  their  dependence.  This  is
Pericles'  theory  of  imperialism.  The  Empire  is  based,  not  on  justice  (as
between  equals)  but  on  sentiment ;  not  on  rights  secured  to  the  other  cities,
but  on  the  admiring  loyalty  they  ought  to  feel.  If  they  do  not  happen  to
feel  it,  he  has  nothing  to  fall  back  upon  but  naked  force.

*  Establishing  in  punishment  or  beneficence  eternal  memorials  of  their


CHAP.  VIII  TIII<:    FUNERAL   Sl'I'lCII  201

Such  then  is  the  city  for  whom,  lest  they  should  lose  her,  the
men  whom  we  celebrate  died  a  soldier's  death  :  and  it  is  but
natural  that  all  of  us,  who  survive  them,  sliould  wish  to  spend
ourselves  in  her  service.  (42)  That,  indeed,  is  wiiy  I  have  spent
many  words  upon  the  city.  I  wished  to  show  tliat  we  have
more  at  stake  than  men  who  have  no  such  inheritance,  and  to
support  my  praise  of  the  dead  by  making  clear  to  you  what
they  have  done.  For  if  I  have  chanted  the  glories  of  the  city  it
was  these  men  and  their  like  who  set  hand  to  array  her.  With
them,  as  with  few  among  Greeks,  words  cannot  magnify  the
deeds  that  they  have  done.  Such  an  end  as  we  have  here  seems
indeed  to  show  us  what  a  good  life  is,  from  its  first  signs  of  power
to  its  final  consummation.^  For  even  wheie  life's  previous
record  showed  faults  and  failures  it  is  just  to  weigh  the  last  brave
hour  of  devotion  against  them  all.'^  There  they  wiped  out  evil
with  good  and  did  the  city  more  service  as  soldiers  than  they  did
her  harm  in  private  life.  There  no  hearts  grew  faint  because
they  loved  riches  more  than  honour  ;  none  shirked  the  issue  in
the  poor  man's  dreams  of  wealth.  All  these  they  put  aside  to
strike  a  blow  for  the  city.  Counting  the  quest  to  avenge  her
honour  as  the  most  glorious  of  all  ventures,  and  leaving  Mope,
the  uncertain  goddess,  to  send  them  what  she  would,  they
faced  the  foe  as  they  drew  near  him  in  the  strength  of  their
own  manhood  ;  and  when  the  shock  of  battle  came,  they  chose
rather  to  suffer  the  uttermost  than  to  win  life  by  weakness.^  So
their  memory  has  escaped  the  reproaches  of  men's  lips,  but  they
bore  instead  on  their  bodies  the  marks  of  men's  hands,  and  in  a
moment  of  time,  at  the  climax  of  their  lives,  were  rapt  away

settlement :  he  is  thinking  chiefly  of  the  seUlements  of  Athenian  citizens
among  barbarians  in  Thrace  and  elsewhere.  Whether  the  barbarians  re-
membered them  kindly  depended  on  the  reception  they  gave  to  the  colonists
on  their  first  arrival.  ,  •  .    •

1  IV/mt  a  good  life  is.  This  is  the  subject  of  Aristotle's  Ethics,  which  is
often  taken  as  giving  the  standard  Greek  view  on  Virtue  or  the  good  life.
But  of  course  Thucydides  is  a  much  better  authority  for  the  fifth-century

*  The  last  brave  hour:  compare  the  parable  of  the  Labourers  in  the
Vineyard.  ,

=>  To  suffer  the  uttermost  rather  than  to  win  life  by  iccak-ness  :  lie  docs
not  pretend  that,  like  the  Christian  martyrs,  they  died  joyfully:  only  tliey
feel  that  they  could  not  die  at  a  better  moment  or  in  a  better  way.  Me  is
describing  what  he  had  himself  experienced,  the  feelings  of  a  heavy-armed
soldier  in  the  long-drawn  moments  just  before  the  close  fighting  began.


202  POLITICS  PART  II

from  a  world  filled,  for  their  dying  eyes,  not  with  terror  but  with
glory.

(43)  Such  were  the  men  who  lie  here  and  such  the  city  that

inspired  them.     We  survivors  may  pray  to  be  spared  their  bitter

hour,    but    must    disdain    to    meet   the    foe   with    a   spirit    less

triumphant.     Let  us  draw  strength,  not  merely  from  twice-told

arguments — how  fair  and  noble  a  thing  it  is  to  show  courage  in

battle — but  from  the  busy  spectacle  of  our  great  city's  life  as  we

have  it  before  us  day  by  day,  falling  in  love  with  her  as  we  see

her,  and  remembering  that  all  this  greatness  she  owes  to  men

with  the  fighter's  daring,  the  wise  man's  understanding  of  his

duty,  and  the  good  man's  self-discipline  in  its  performance — to

men  who,  if  they  failed  in  any  ordeal,  disdained  to  deprive  the  city

of  their  services,  but  sacrificed  their  lives  as  the  best  offerings  on

her  behalf.     So  they  gave  their  bodies  to  the  commonwealth  and

received,  each  for  his  own  memory,  praise  that  will  never  die,  and

with  it  the  grandest  of  all  sepulchres,  not  that  in  which  their

mortal  bones  are  laid,  but  a  home  in  the  minds  of  men,  where

their   glory   remains  fresh   to  stir   to  speech   or  action   as  the

occasion  comes  by.     For  the  whole  earth  is  the  sepulchre  of

famous  men  ;  and  their  story  is  not  graven  only  on  stone  over

their  native  earth,  but  lives  on  far  away,  without  visible  symbol,

woven    into    the   stuff  of  other   men's   lives.     For  you   now  it

remains  to  rival  what  they  have  done  and,  knowing  the  secret  of

happiness  to  be  freedom  and  the  secret  of  freedom  a  brave  heart,

not  idly  to  stand  aside  from  the  enemy's  onset. ^    For  it  is  not  the

poor  and  luckless,  as  having  no  hope  of  prosperity,  who  have

most  cause  to  reckon  death  as  little  loss^  but  those  for  whom

fortune  may  yet  keep  reversal  in  store  and  who  would  feel  the

change  most  if  trouble  befell  them.    Moreover,  weakly  to  decline

the  trial  is  more  painful  to  a  man  of  spirit  than  death  coming

sudden  and  unperceived  in  the  hour  of  strength  and  enthusiasm.

(44)  Therefore  I  do  not  mourn  with  the  parents  of  the  dead

who  are  here  with  us.     I  will  rather  comfort  them.     For  they

'  Not  idly  to  stand  aside  :  this  is  exactly  what  the  Athenians  had  just  been
forced  to  do  during  the  Peloponnesian  invasion  of  Attica.  See  Thuc.  ii.  21.
2,  where  the  same  word  (ntpiopav)  is  used  by  the  younger  men  against
Pericles.  The  word  means  to  look  on  while  others  are  acting — the  peculiar
privilege  of  critics.  It  is  what  the  later  Greeks  (e.  g.  in  the  Roman  age)
were  especially  good  at.


ciiAr.  viir  TIIK   FUNKRAL   Sl'lUa  H  20^

know  that  they  liavc  been  born  into  a  world  of  manifold  chances
and  that  he  is  to  be  accounted  happy  to  whom  the  best  lot  fulls —
the  best  sorrow,  such  as  is  yours  to-day,  or  the  best  death,  such
as  fell  to  these,  for  whom  life  and  happiness  were  cut  to  the
self-same  measure.^  I  know  it  is  not  easy  to  give  you  comfort,
I  know  how  often  in  the  joy  of  others  you  will  have  reminders  of
what  was  once  your  own,  and  how  men  feel  sorrow,  not  for  the
loss  of  what  they  have  never  tested,  but  when  something  that  has
grown  dear  to  them  has  been  snatched  away.  But  you  must  keep
a  brave  heart  in  the  hope  of  other  children,  those  who  arc  still  of
age  to  bear  them.  For  the  newcomers  will  help  you  to  forget
the  gap  in  your  own  circle,  and  will  help  the  city  to  fill  up  the
ranks  of  its  workers  and  its  soldiers.^  For  no  man  is  fitted  to
give  fair  and  honest  advice  in  council  if  he  has  not,  like  his
fellows,  a  family  at  stake  in  the  hour  of  the  city's  danger.^  To
you  who  are  past  the  age  of  vigour  I  would  say :  count  the  long
years  of  happiness  so  much  gain  to  set  off  against  the  brief  space
that  yet  remains,  and  let  your  burden  be  lightened  by  the  glory
of  the  dead.  For  the  love  of  honour  alone  is  not  staled  by  age,
and  it  is  by  honour,  not,  as  some  say,  by  gold,  that  the  helpless
end  of  life  is  cheered.

(45)  I  turn  to  those  amongst  you  who  are  children  or  brothers
of  the  fallen,  for  whom  I  foresee  a  mighty  contest  with  the
memory  of  the  dead.  Their  praise  is  in  all  men's  mouths,  and
hardly,  even  for  supremest  heroism,  will  you  be  adjudged  to  have
achieved,  not  the  same  but  a  little  less  than  they.  For  the
living  have  the  jealousy  of  rivals  to  contend  with,  but  the  dead
are  honoured  with  unchallenged  admiration.^

If  I  must  also  speak  a  word  to  those  who  are  now  in  widow-
hood  on  the  powers  and  duties  of  women,  I  will  cast  all  my
advice  into  one  brief  sentence.     Great  will  be  your  glory  if  you

1  Cut  to  the  self-same  measure.  This  is  exactly  what  Solon  told  Croesus
in  the  famous  parable  (Hdt.  i.  32).

2  To  fill  up  the  ranks.  See  the  population  figures  on  p.  1 70  and  pp.  409  1 1 .
Athena  missed  every  one  of  her  dead.

«  If  he  has  not  .  .  .  a  family  at  stake.  No  one  could  be  a  Councillor  till
he  was  over  30,  when  he  was  almost  certain  to  be  married  ;  and,  according
to  the  orator  Deinarchus  (§71),  no  man  was  allowed  to  speak  in  the  national
Parliament  until  he  had  legitimate  male  issue.  ,  •,  •  j      /  •     f

*  The  jealousy  of  rivals,  &c.  :  this  sentiment  is  used  by  Alcibiadcs  (vi.  10.
5),  in  one  of  his  many  shameless  adaptations  of  Penclean  expressions,  as  an
excuse  for  getting  into  debt  over  horse-races.


204  POLITICS  PART  II

do  not  lower  the  nature  that  is  within  you — hers  greatest  of  all
whose  praise  or  blame  is  least  bruited  on  the  lips  of  men.^

(46)  I  have  spoken  such  words  as  I  had  to  say  according  as  the
law  prescribes,  and  the  graveside  offerings  to  the  dead  have  been
duly  made.  Henceforward  the  city  will  take  charge  of  their
children  till  manhood  :  such  is  the  crown  and  benefit  she  holds
out  to  the  dead  and  to  their  kin  for  the  trials  they  have  under-
gone for  her.  For  where  the  prize  is  highest,  there,  too,  are  the
best  citizens  to  contend  for  it.

And  now,  when  you  have  finished  your  lamentation,  let  each  of
you  depart.

It  is  time  for  us  to  depart  too.  We  have  lingered  too  long  in
the  public  place.  Let  us  follow  the  mourners  as  they  disperse  to
their  separate  homes,  and  watch  them  as  they  resume  the  even
tenour  of  their  lives.  There  is  more  of  tragedy  for  us  there  than
among  the  graves  of  the  soldiers.  These  lived  happy  and  died
happy,  fighting  the  enemies  of  Athena.  But  in  the  contest  which
we  are  going  to  watch  fighting  will  bring  no  joy  and  victory  no
triumph.  For  the  battle  which  Athens  has  now  to  face  is  not
against  the  Lacedaemonians  or  any  hosts  of  armoured  men,  but
against  the  foe  in  her  own  household,  the  desires  and  ambitions
she  herself  has  nurtured.  Shall  she  welcome  them  in  their  fulness
and  seek  to  furnish  them  with  all  they  need?  Or  shall  she  try
to  put  them  from  her,  lest  they  corrupt  her  and  wreck  her  peace  ?
Or,  while  she  is  seeking  a  middle  course,  will  they  lay  her  glory
in  the  dust?

^  Least  bruited:  i.e.  women  should  be  seen  and  not  heard.  This  was  the
ordinary  fifth-century  view  ;  for  citizens'  wives  were  not  citizens,  or  even
resident  aliens.  It  was  only  on  sufferance  that  they  formed  part  of  this
audience.

^  Thuc.  V.  91    'ion  hk  oil  npos  AaKidainoflovs^  rjiMv  6  dyu)i' :  Aesch.  A^.  7 1 7-8.


PART    III.     ECONOMICS

We  are  lovers  of  beauty  without  extravagance.


CHAPTER    1
povi-:rty

II  y  a  deux  sortes  dc  peuples  pauvies  :  ceux  que  la  duicld  du  youvcrnemcnt
a  rendu  tels  ;  et  ces  gens-la  sont  incapables  de  presque  aucune  vcriu,  puree
que  leur  pauvrete  fait  une  partie  de  leur  servitude  :  les  autres  no  sont  pauvres
que  parce  qu'ils  ont  dedaigne,  ou  parcc  qu'ils  n'ont  pas  connu,  les  com-
niodites  de  la  vie;  et  ceux-ci  peuvent  faire  degrandes  choscs,  parcc  que  cctle
pauvrete  fait  une  partie  de  leur  liberte.— MONTESQUIEU,  Esprit  lUs  Lois,
Book  XX,  chap.  3.

T^  'EX\(iSt  Ttfv'iT]  \xlv  viii'i  KOTS  (Tvi>Tpo(})ni  (an. — HERODOTUS,  vii.  I02.

Hellas  and  Poverty  have  always  been  foster-sisters.

One  of  the  most  important  facts  about  life  is  that  human
beings  cannot  get  on  without  food,  clothing,  and  shelter.  Most
modern  men  regard  it  as  the  most  important  fact  of  all,  and
spend  most  of  the  waking  hours  of  a  brief  lifetime  in  trying
to  deal  with  it.  The  Greeks  did  not  agree  with  them.  It  was
too  dull  and  monotonous  and  obvious  to  take  precedence  over  the
other  great  shining  truths  which  life  reveals  to  those  that  seek
them.  But  they  faced  it,  as  they  faced  all  the  facts  of  life,  and
put  it  in  its  place  side  by  side  with  them.  They  even  gave  their
preoccupation  with  it  a  name,  which  has  stuck  to  it  ever  since  ;
they  called  it  Housekeeping  or  I'xonomics.

'  Political  Economy  or  Economics,'  says  its  leading  ICnglish
exponent,  '  is  a  study  of  mankind  in  the  ordinary  business  of  life  ;
it  examines  that  part  of  individual  and  social  action  which  is
most  closely  associated  with  the  attainment  and  with  the  use
of  the  material  requisites  of  well-being.' '  To  this  a  fifth -century
Greek  would  nod  assent,  with  two  reservations.  Why  onhuary
business  of  life?  Is  not  business  done  for  the  community,
drilling  and  fighting  and  sitting  in  judgement,  quite  as  ordinary?
So  he  would  move  to  read  'private'  instead  of  'ordinary*,
'private'  bearing  in  his  mind  a  slight  suspicion  of  eccentricity.
For  he  knew  very  well  that  a  man  who  practises  politics  and

^  Opening  words  of  Marshall's  Principles  0/ Economics.
O  a


208


ECONOMICS


PART  III


ignores  housekeeping,  though  he  may  possibly  starve,  at  least
remains  sane  and  companionable  ;  while  men  who  ignored  the
world  around  them  and  thought  only  of  their  own  four  walls,  were
bound  to  degenerate  into  egotists.  His  other  reservation  would
refer  to  the  or  in  the  opening  words  '  political  economy  or  econo-
mics '.  You  may  keep  house  for  yourself,  or  help  keep  house  for
the  city  ;  but  they  are  not  the  same  thing.  The  one  concerns
individual  action  for  individual  well-being,  the  other  concerns
social  action  for  social  well-being.  Of  course  there  is  a  direct
connexion  between  them  and  even  an  overlapping  of  the  two
spheres.  You  cannot  have  individual  well-being,  as  Pericles  told
the  Athenians  in  his  lecture  on  economics,  when  the  whole  com-
munity is  broken  up,  and  you  cannot  have  social  well-being
in  full  measure  (though  you  may  have  it  in  part)  when  individuals
are  doing  badly.  But  it  will  be  better  for  us  to  follow  the
ordinary  Greek  practice  and  keep  the  two  chains  of  activity
distinct, — to  think  of  Economics  as  the  study  first  of  individual
and  then  of  State  housekeeping,  according  to  its  double  object,
the  attainment  and  use  of  the  material  requisites  of  private  and  of
public  well-being.'

We  have  seen  the  Athenian  as  a  citizen.  It  is  time  to  look  at
him  as  an  earner.  For  we  shall  not  understand  fifth-century
Athens  until  we  know  the  material  requisites  on  which  her  well-
being  rested  and  have  watched  how  they  helped  or  hindered  her
in  living  the  life  of  her  ideals.

But  two  general  warnings  are  necessary  before  we  can  allow
our  imagination  to  draw  the  picture  in  detail.

The  first  concerns  the  incredible  poverty  of  the  world  in  which
we  shall  be  moving.

We  think  of  the  Greeks  as  the  pioneers  of  civilization,  and
unconsciously  credit  them  with  the  material  blessings  and  com-
forts in  which  we  moderns  have  been  taught,  and  are  trying
to  teach  Asiatics  and  Africans,  to  think  that  civilization  consists.

^  Thuc.  ii.  60  (cf.  Soph.  Ant.  187-91),  Pericles  was  fond  of  lecturing  the
Athenians  on  economics.  See  the  lecturer's  trick  {aKf-^aa-df  de)  in  i.  143.  5.
They  let  him  do  it  because  they  knew  he  was  '  straight '  {xp^indrcop  Kpfia-cruv).
i8iaTr]s,  '  private  citizen  '  or  '  a  man  in  his  private  capacity  '  gradually  came
to  mean  the  same  as  Pericles'  dxpuos  or  'useless'  'anti-social'  man.  It
corresponds  to  our  '  egotist '  or  '  monomaniac  ' ;  but  while  the  Greeks  con-
demned a  man  for  ignoring  everything  but  his  household,  we  generally  only
condemn  people  for  ignoring  every  one  but  themselves.


CHAP.  T  POVKRTY


209


We  forget  that  they  were  more  innocent  of  most  of  these  than
the  up-country  Greeks  of  to-day,  or  than  most  I'lnghshmen  were
before  the  Industrial  Revolution.  It  is  easy  to  think  away  rail-
ways and  telegraphs  and  gasworks  and  tea  and  advertisements
and  bananas.  But  we  must  peel  off  far  more  than  this.  We
must  imagine  houses  without  drains,  beds  without  sheets  or
springs,  rooms  as  cold,  or  as  hot,  as  the  open  air,  only  draughticr,
meals  that  began  and  ended  with  pudding,  and  cities  that  could
boast  neither  gentry  nor  millionaires.  We  must  learn  to  tell  the
time  without  watches,  to  cross  rivers  without  bridges,  and  seas
without  a  compass,  to  fasten  our  clothes  (or  rather  our  two  pieces
of  cloth)  with  two  pins  instead  of  rows  of  buttons,  to  wear  our
shoes  or  sandals  without  stockings,  to  warm  ourselves  over  a  pot
of  ashes,  to  judge  open-air  plays  or  lawsuits  on  a  cold  winter's
morning,  to  study  poetry  without  books,  geography  without
maps,  and  politics  without  newspapers.  In  a  word  we  must
learn  how  to  be  civilized  without  being  comfortable.  Or  rather
we  must  learn  to  enjoy  the  society  of  people  for  whom  comfort
meant  something  very  different  from  motor-cars  and  arm-chairs,
who,  although  or  because  they  lived  plainly  and  austerely  and
sat  at  the  table  of  life  without  expecting  any  dessert,  saw  more
of  the  use  and  beauty  and  goodness  of  the  few  things  which  were
vouchsafed  them — their  minds,  their  bodies,  and  Nature  outside
and  around  them.  Greek  literature,  like  the  Gospels,  '  is  a  great
protest  against  the  modern  view  that  the  really  important  thing
is  to  be  comfortable.  The  Comfort  promised  by  the  Gospels '
(and  that  enjoyed  by  the  Greeks,  whether  the  same  or  somewhat
different)  'and  the  comfort  assured  by  modern  inventions  and
appliances  are  as  different  as  ideals  can  be.'  ^

'  F.  C.  Burkitt  in  Essays  on  Some  Biblical  (Jucstions  of  the  Day  (Cambridge,
1909,  pp.  208-9).  Let  the  reader  run  through  the  catalogue  of  a  wholesale
'Stores'  and  ask  himself  how  many  artirles  cr  even  departments  wore
represented  in  antiquity  ;  and  then  consider  what  an  economy  of  thought  this
implies.  There  was  no  fashionable  or  rich  man's  quarter  in  .\lhcns  :  or,  at
least,  we  know  the  name  of  none.  The  gracefulness  of  (.reek  dress  should
not  blind  us  to  its  extreme  simplicity,  only  one  stage  removed  from  the
simplest  dress  of  all,  the  skin  of  a  beast.  A  men's  and  women  s  unc  rr-
garment  (x'rcir)  was  simply  an  'oblong  piece  of  material',  a  foot  longer  than
the  wearer  and  twice  his  width  from  extended  elbow  to  elbow,  fastened  by
a  pin  at  each  shoulder.  The  outer  garment  (<>;rio,.)  was  a  little  longer  and
broader  and  was  not  fastened  at  all.  So  it  could  be  put  on  in  a  number  ol
ways— over  the  head  if  necessary.  ('  It  was  exceptional  for  (.reek  garments
to  be  shaped  or  fitted  to  the  person':  C.  H.  Young,  Amertaw  Journal oj


210  PXONOMICS  PART  III

This  old  Greek  atmosphere  of  poverty  and  discomfort  and
vigilant  thrift  in  small  social  arrangements  is  revealed  to  us  most
vividly  in  the  Characters  of  Theophrastus,  types  taken  from  the
Athenian  life  of  the  fourth  century,  when,  as  Demosthenes  com-
plained, men  lived  so  much  more  luxuriously  than  their  grand-
fathers in  the  fifth.  Here  we  see  the  Athenian  going  about  his
daily  business  with  all  his  small  worries  and  preoccupations  full
upon  him.  What  strikes  the  modern  reader  most  about  the  life  thus
revealed  is  what  Jebb  politely  described  as  its  '  frank  homeliness  '.
The  characters  are,  indeed,  all  of  them  homely,  and  some  of  them
incredibly  narrow  and  petty.  They  are  capable,  for  instance,
of  quarrelling  about  lending  one  another  '  salt  or  a  lamp-wick  or
cummin  or  verjuice  or  meal  for  sacrifice  or  garlands  or  cakes'.
When  a  club-dinner  is  held  at  their  houses,  they  '  secrete  some  of
the  firewood,  lentils,  vinegar,  salt,  and  lamp-oil '  placed  at  their
disposal  for  the  occasion.  When  one  of  their  w^omenfolk  '  has
dropped  a  three-farthing  piece  '  they '  move  the  furniture  and  the
beds  and  the  w-ardrobes  and  rummage  in  the  curtains '.  They
w-eigh  out  rations  to  their  household  using  a  measure  with  the
bottom  dinted  inwards.  They  borrow  a  neighbour's  cloak  and
refuse  to  return  it,  when  the  only  one  they  possess  has  at  last
been  sent  to  the  cleaner's.     We,  too,  have  our  '  Penurious  Man  '

Archaeology,  vol.  iv,  p.  i68,  after  experiments  with  models.)  'Dressing'
was  therefore  a  very  simple  process,  as  we  can  see  from  Homer  (e.g.  //.  ii.  42).
See  Abrahams,  Greek  Dress  (London,  1908),  with  pictures  and  diagrams.
Dwellers  in  the  Near  E!ast  still  have  a  preference  (dictated  by  the  climate)
for  sleeveless  cloaks,  which  either  hang  loose  on  the  back  and  leave  the  arms
free,  or  wrap  close  round  the  whole  body  in  repose.  The  Greek  wore  no
headgear,  except  in  battle  and  on  journeys.  For  the  flimsiness  of  Greek
houses  note  how  the  Plataeans  dug  through  the  party  walls  of  most  of  their
houses  in  the  latter  half  of  a  single  night  without  being  heard  from  the  street
(Thuc.  ii.  3.  3),  and  the  way  in  which,  Japanese-fashion,  the  tiles  and  wood-
work were  conveyed  away  before  the  Peloponnesian  invasion  in  431,  and
stripped  by  the  Boeotians  in  the  Decelean  War  (Thuc.  ii.  14,  vii.  27.  5;
Helhnica  Oxyrhyjichia,  xii.  4).  Greek  houses  were  built  of  sun-dried  brick.
So  were  the  early  temples  (as  can  still  be  seen  from  the  remains  of  the
Heraeum  at  Olympiaj.  That  is  why  it  became  necessary  to  build  out  a
columned  veranda  or  '  peristyle '  to  protect  them  from  the  weather.  It  was
only  public  buildings  which  were  built  with  the  massive  stone  or  marble  blocks
so  familiar  to  us.  For  the  contents  of  a  well-to-do  fifth-century  Athenian
bedroom  see  the  inventory  of  Alcibiades'  bedroom  furniture  (Hicks  and  Hill,
no.  72,  supplemented  by  a  second  fragment  published  in  the  Austrian
Jahreshefte,  vol.  vi,  pp.  236 fT.).  It  includes  everything  from  the  leather
straps  to  form  rough  springs  for  the  mattress  to  the  scent-jars  on  the
dressing-table  and  the  reed  mat  on  the  floor  ;  but  it  is  not  an  imposing  list.
There  is  no  hint  of  washing  arrangements.     Cf.  p.  48  above.


CHAP.  I  P0VI:RTY  :it

and  our  'Avaricious  Man  ',  but  they  do  not  commonly  descend
to  these  levels.  The  difference  between  Thcophrastus  and  our
tales  about  Scotchmen  borrowing  matches  to  save  their  own,  or
grudging  an  extra  halfpenny  on  an  important  telegram,  is  that
the  characters  of  Thcophrastus  are  drawn  from  the  life,  with
hardly  a  trace  of  exaggeration  or  caricature.'

A  simple  comparison  may  serve  to  make  this  point  still  clearer.
It  is  useless  to  attempt  to  bring  the  resources  of  Athens  into
relation  with  those  of  any  of  our  advanced  modern  communities.
The  disparity  would  be  too  great.  But  there  is  one  obvious
mediaeval  analogy.  Athens  was  not  so  rich,  or  nearly  so  rich,
as  her  sister  Venice,  the  State  which,  in  all  history,  she  most
closely  resembles.  Venice,  with  a  population  of  some  40,000
adult  males,  built  St.  Mark's  and  the  Doge's  Palace  and  other
memorials  of  her  greatness.  But  she  did  so  on  the  profits  of  her
trade  and  industry.  She  took  no  tribute,  and  needed  none,
from  the  cities  in  her  sphere  of  influence,  which  she  maintained,
like  Athens,  in  an  almost  unbroken  line  down  the  Adriatic  and
round  Greece  to  Constantinople,  Asia  Minor,  and  Syria.  We
shall  see  in  the  sequel  how  dearly  Athens  paid  for  her  failure  to
do  likewise,  for  her  inability  to  rest  her  greatness  on  the  solid
foundations  of  commerce.^

Ancient  Greek  finance  was  indeed  parochial,  almost  childish,  in
its  methods.  The  Greek  States  passed  with  difficulty  be>-ond
the  schoolboy  stage  at  which  every  bit  of  money  that  comes  in  is
regarded  as  a  windfell,  to  be  spent  gaily  as  the  mood  will  have  it
without  thought  of  the  morrow.  The  first  and  most  obvious  duty
of  the  financial  administration  in  a  modern  state  is  to  get  the
Budget  voted.  The  Budget,  of  course,  has  nothing  to  do  with
money  received  or  spent  in  the  past.  It  makes  provision  for  the
year  to  come,  and  involves  an  estimate  of  the  total  revenue  and
expenditure  to  be  expected  from  all  sources.  Greek  Parliaments
never  had  a  Budget  presented  to  them  at  all.  They  simply
voted  sums  of  money  whenever  occasion  arose,  stating  in  each

1  Thcophrastus,  ed.  Jcbb,  1909,  pp.  4,  121,  123,  131.  '35-  'i"'.'c  ihrcc-
farthing  piece  is  supposed  to  be  lost  in  a  bedroom,  as  the  details  show.
Compare  the  parable  of  the  lost  piece  of  silver  (Luke  xv.  8  -10).

^  Details  in  Cambridge  Modern  History,  vol.  i,  pp.  255-7  fy  Horatio
Brown).  Wordsworth  was  therefore  not  strictly  correct  when  he  spoke  ol
Venice  as  'holding  the  gorgeous  East  in  fee'.


212  FXONOMICS  PART  III

case  where  the  money  was  to  come  from.  The  State  receipts
might  be  lying  in  two  or  three  or  half  a  dozen  different  treasuries,
looked  after  by  different  committees,  these  treasuries  being,  in  the
case  of  Delos,  where  the  inscriptions  enable  us  to  study  the
financial  administration  in  detail,  simply  so  many  jars  bearing  on
each  of  them  a  label  stating  where  its  money  came  from  and  for
what  purpose  it  was  ear-marked.  In  this  way  things  jogged  on
from  year  to  year,  and  no  attempt  was  made — for  there  was  no
one  expert  and  continuous  authority  to  make  it — to  forecast  pos-
sible expenditure  ahead.  The  usual  practice  was  to  make  both
ends  meet  for  the  year  and  then  (unless  the  money  was  sacred)  to
distribute  the  surplus  among  the  citizens.  When,  in  483,  valuable
silver  deposits  were  discovered  atLaureion,Themistocleswith  diffi-
culty persuaded  the  Athenians  to  build  a  fleet  out  of  the  proceeds
instead  of  dividing  them  out,  at  ten  drachmas  a  head,  amongst
themselves.  The  Spartans,  as  might  be  expected,  were  more
primitive  still  in  their  ideas.  When  Corinth  persuaded  them  to
embark  on  the  great  war  with  Athens,  which  was  likely  to  last
many  years  and  involve  a  need  for  ships  as  well  as  men,  '  they
had  no  resources,  either  private  or  public'  Their  treasury  was
empty,  and  they  had  no  means  of  filling  it.  So  they  talked
vaguely  of  getting  help  from  the  treasures  of  Delphi  and  Olympia
(which  they  knew  they  would  not  have  the  courage  to  seize)  and
let  the  Corinthians  build  ships  for  them.  But  even  Corinth  was
only  wealthy  in  a  very  relative  sense.  And  as  for  Athens  under
Pericles,  the  financier  who  always  worked  with  a  margin,  she
never  at  any  time  had  more  than  10,000  talents  (^2,500,000  or
about  i^i 2,000,000  purchasing  power)  in  what  seemed  her  in-
exhaustible treasury  on  the  Acropolis.  And  this,  it  must  be
remembered,  was  not  only  capital  money  but  probably  more  than
the  private  wealth  of  all  her  citizens  put  together.  When  she  had
spent  it  she  was  exhausted.  For  she  could  not,  like  the  meanest
modern  State,  raise  a  loan  to  go  on  with.  There  were  as  yet  no
international  financiers.^

'  The  most  instructive  text  for  ancient  finance  is  Aristotle's  Economics,
Book  II  (on  which  there  is  now  an  excellent  commentary  by  Riezler,  Uber
Fifitinzen  und  Monopole  im  alten  Griechenland,  Berlin,  1907).  Some  of  the
stories  told  of  'clever  ways  of  raising  money'  transport  one  back  to  one's
school  days.  School-boys  have  not  been  unknown  to  sell  their  school-books
second-hand  and  buy  the  necessary  new  ones  on  credit.  This  gives  the  measure
of  many  of  the  author's  devices.    They  depend  of  course  on  '  the  ship  coming


CHAP.  I  POVERTY


»3


All  this  will  serve  to  remind  us — what  the  art  and  literature  of
the  Greeks  and  our  own  treacherous  imaginations  are  constantly
causing  us  to  forget — that  the  pioneers  who  created  our  l"luropean
civilization  were  stricken  by  poverty  all  their  days.  In  all  the
work  they  did  for  us,  and  in  all  they  wished  and  tried  to  do,  they
were  straining  the  tiny  human  strength  of  their  own  unaided
idealism  against  the  heavy  dead  weight  of  material  forces  which
they  could  neither  control  nor  understand.  When  we  feel  tempted
to  reproach  them  with  all  that  they  left  undone,  let  us  rather
remember  the  pluck  and  cheerfulness  and  endurance,  so  charac-
teristic of  the  poor,  with  which  they  maintained  the  unequal
combat.  Let  us  not  require  of  them  overmuch,  or  they  will
return  us  an  evil  answer,  like  the  Andrians  of  old.  When  the
Athenians  invested  their  rocky  island  and  demanded  from  them
heavy  payment,  the  islanders,  says  Herodotus,  made  answer  as
follows  : — '  That  the  Athenians  were  with  good  reason  great  and
prosperous  and  were  favoured  by  propitious  gods  ;  since,  however,
the  Andrians  were  poor  in  territory  and  had  reached  the  lowest
pitch  of  penury,  and  two  unprofitable  goddesses,  Poverty  and
Impossibility,  never  forsook  the  island,  but  ever  loved  to  dwell
there ;  therefore  the  Andrians  being  in  the  possession  of  these
deities  would  give  them  nothing.'  So  might  the  Athenians  answer
us  ;  for  it  was  the  doom  of  Athens  that  Poverty  and  Impossibility
dwelt  in  her  midst  from  first  to  last.  It  is  to  the  immortal  gloiy
of  her  citizens  that,  though  they  were  too  clear-eyed  not  to  behold
them,  they  bravely  refused  to  submit,  either  in  mind  or  in  body,
to  the  squalid  tyranny  which  they  have  imposed  upon  the  great
mass  of  humankind.^

in'.    Themistocles  :  Hdt.  vii.  144;  Ath.  Pol.  xxii.  7.    The  discovery  of  the
deposit  of  Maronea  at  Laurcion  made  all  the  difference  to  Athens,     spartan
finance:  Thuc.  i.  141,  121,  3  (cf-  Ar.  Pol.  1271  b  11  :  'they  have  no  money
in  their  treasury  and  are  bad  at  paying  taxes'):  they  had  no  sccrctancs  o
State  either,  and  had  recourse  to  the  most  childish  methods  for  communicalint,
with  their  officials  at  a  distance.    On  Greek  ear-markmg  as  opposed  to  proper
budgeting  see  Francotte,  Lcs  Finances  tics  cites x^rcctiins  [\c)0()),'^\>.\lin.,
who  does  not  seem  to  be  aware  that  the  government  of  the  Lni  ed  ^>  •"«  s
carried  on  without  a  Budget.    Cf.  Thuc.  vi.  46.  3  on  the  nature  of  the  •'PP-y^^"
resources  of  Egesta.     King  Minos's  system,  in  st'Jl  earlier  days   sectm,
have  been  similar,  as  is  clear  from  the  underground  '  magazines    d'scmerca
at  Cnossos  and  Phaestos.     Thucydides  always  thmks  of  public  and  priNatc
wealth  together  in  reckoning  up  national  resources  :  e.g.  m-  3'-  5-
*  Hdt.  viii.  Ill,  vii.  102.


CHAPTER    II
USE  AND  WONT

Ot  fxfv  yap  Twi>  re  vofiav  aocfjonrepoi  jiovKovrni  (jjaivtcrdai . . ,  ios  tv  (iWois  fin^oniv
ovK  av  drjXoiaavTfS  rrjv  •y/'to/XTjr'  .  .  .  Koi  prj  (v  a>  f]  ttoXis  ^pa^ea  rjcrddan  peydXn
f»;^tooo-erat.— Thucydides,  iii.  2,7  and  40.

Some  men  are  always  seeking  to  be  Radicals  in  the  wrong  sphere  of  activity.
Let  them  apply  their  reason  to  the  attainment  of  high  and  lasting  purposes,
not  of  brief  satisfactions  for  which  the  whole  community  will  pay  dear.

The  Greeks,  as  we  have  seen,  were  far  poorer  and  lived  far
more  simply  than  ourselves.  To  this  initial  difference  in  material
environment  and  possessions  there  naturally  corresponded  a  differ-
ence in  thoughts  and  feelings  and  imaginative  outlook.  Men  who
live  differently  think  differently,  both  about  life  in  general  and
about  money  and  housekeeping  in  particular.  It  is  this  latter
point,  the  Greek  attitude  to  economics,  which  we  have  now  to
examine.  Let  us  begin  our  discussion,  for  once,  not  with  the
common  man  but  with  the  philosophers.

Modern  thinkers,  like  the  Greeks,  are  fond  of  fashioning
Utopias ;  but  the  ideal  society  which  they  rejoice  in  setting
before  us  is  generally  very  different  from  that  upon  which  the
Greek  imagination  loved  to  dwell.  It  is  a  world  swept  and  gar-
nished and  regulated,  stocked  with  every  variety  of  convenience
that  modern  science  can  devise,  cushioned  round  with  insurances
against  all  the  ills  that  flesh  is  heir  to,  in  which  distance  has  been
annihilated,  disease  prevented  or  amply  provided  for,  destitution
probed  to  its  root-causes,  regular  employment  guaranteed  to  all,
and  a  minimum  standard  of  comfort  assured  except  to  the  un-
deserving. Yet  nothing  is  more  certain  than  that  the  vision  of  such
a  society  would  make  no  appeal  whatsoever  to  an  ancient  Greek
thinker  ;  and  that  an  ordinary  Greek  citizen,  if  he  found  himself
set  down  in  it,  would  feel  restless  and  homesick  and  ill  at  ease.
No  lapse  of  time  or  increase  of  familiarity  with  his  surroundings
would  enable  him  to  find  there  ready  to  hand,  as  in  his  old  un-


CHAP.  II  USE    AND    WONT  215

comfortable  home,  that  state  of  happiness  or  blessedness  (tvSai-
fxoi/ia)  which  his  thinkers  set  before  him  as  the  one  object  to  \yc
aimed  at  in  social  organization.

What  reason  can  be  assigned  for  this  difference  of  outlook?
One  reason  at  least,  as  we  shall  see,  is  economic  :  and  that  must
be  our  excuse  for  following  up  a  little  further  the  line  of  incjuiry
just  suggested.  Our  thinkers,  if  we  cross-examine  them,  have  no
better  ideal  to  suggest  than  the  old  Greek  quest  ff)r  happiness.
They  will  admit,  with  Plato  and  Aristotle,  that  the  object  of  the
statesman  and  the  political  thinker  is  to  bring  into  existence  not
a  state  of  organization  but  a  state  of  consciousness,  that  their
ultimate  concern  is  not  with  matter  but  with  mind,  liut  the
changes  and  complexities  of  modern  life  have  called  into  existence
so  many  urgent  inateri  il  problems  that  they  find  it  hard  to  keep
their  attention  fixed  upon  so  ultimate  a  goal.  They  are  daily
and  hourly  tempted  to  accept  as  a  final  ideal  some  working  hypo-
thesis of  the  passing  generation  of  social  workers,  to  acquiesce  in
creeds  and  theories  which  provide  a  solution  for  the  pressing
difficulties  of  the  day,  but  leave  many  of  the  essential  problems  of
social  life  as  far  from  solution  as  ever.  We  live  in  an  age  of
unexampled  economic  expansion  :  Natural  Science  and  the  many
industries  and  organizations  called  into  being  by  Natural  Science
have  attracted,  as  is  only  natural,  the  best  and  most  vigorous
brains  of  our  time;  and  our  thinkers  are  still  so  much  impressed,
and  even  bewildered,  by  the  possibilities  thus  opened  out  to  them
that  they  have  not  yet  recovered  their  steadiness  of  vision.  They
have  not  yet  succeeded  in  schooling  their  imaginations  to  the  fact
that  wealth  and  organization  are  not  ends  in  themselves,  that  it  is
possible  for  a  society  to  go  back  in  happiness  and  real  well-being
with  every  step  in  its  forward  march  in  material  prosperity  and
organization.

The  Greek  imagination  lived  in  a  freer  and  simpler  atmosphere.
The  Greeks  did  not  have  to  dig  painfully  down  through  problem
after  problem  of  material  organization  before  they  reached  the
level  of  ultimate  social  speculation.  When  they  wished  to  discuss
the  perfect  society,  or  rather,  the  perfect  life  for  human  beings  in
society,  they  did  not  have  first  to  settle  such  business  questions  as
whether  the  city  or  groups  of  private  citizens  should  manage  the
gas  and  the  tramways,  or  what  should  be  the  proportion  between


2i6  FXONOMICS  PART  III

direct  and  indirect  taxation.  Their  Utopians  would  have  to  do
without  either  gas  or  tramways ;  but  they  and  their  thinkers
would  be  saved  all  the  preoccupations  that  such  luxuries  neces-
sarily entail.  They  could  leave  on  one  side  as  irrelevant  the
familiar  modern  problems  of  material  organization  and  give  their
undivided  attention  to  '  those  most  interesting  objects  to  be  met
with  in  life,  human  beings  '.  So  they  lingered  over  such  subjects
as  how  to  secure  a  right  relation  between  the  sexes,  or  how  to  find
the  artist  his  proper  place  in  society,  over  the  influence  of  pro-
fessions upon  character,  or  of  environment  and  example  upon  the
young,  discussing  them  sometimes  wisely  and  sometimes  crudely,
but  always  freshly  and  sincerely  :  and  since  it  is  human  problems
alone  that  never  grow  stale,  Greek  speculation  on  these  topics  is
fruitful  and  suggestive  to  us  still.  If  Plato  had  left  the  Com-
munism of  husbands  and  wives  out  of  his  Republic  and  dealt
instead  with  the  nationalization  of  the  trade  of  the  Aegean,  who
shall  say  that  we  should  have  gained  by  the  exchange  ?

Strictly  speaking,  of  course,  there  is  no  such  thing  as  a  problem
of  material  organization.  All  problems,  from  gas  and  tramways
to  education  and  women's  rights,  are  human  problems,  concerned
with  people  rather  than  with  things.  Even  dividends  and  output
would  not  matter  if  there  were  no  one  to  receive  them.  Yet  men
often  act  as  if  they  had  forgotten  this  elementary  truth.  Why  is
this?

Here  we  come  upon  another  characteristic  present-day  difficulty
which  the  Greek  thinkers  were  spared — the  increase  in  the  scale
and  range  of  the  modern  world  and  of  the  sphere  embraced  by
the  modern  thinker.  What  to  Plato  and  Aristotle  were  problems
of  city  life,  bounded  by  the  walls  of  the  country  town  in  which
they  lived,  are  now  removed  for  the  modern  thinker  to  the  wider
and  more  complex  sphere  of  national  and  international  life.  In
other  words,  these  problems  have  not  only  grown  in  scale  but,  by
so  doing,  they  have  changed  in  character.  They  have  lost  the
colour  and  clearness  of  old  days  and  have  become  vague  and
misty  and  impersonal.

It  is  this  impersonality  of  the  world  in  which  their  thought  is
forced  to  move  which  tempts  modern  political  thinkers  to  stop  one
step  short  of  reality,  to  think  in  terms  of  things  instead  of  push-
ing the  problem  further  back  and  thinking  in  terms  of  human


CHAP.  II  USE   AND   WONT  .,7

beings.  An  educational  administrator,  for  instance,  is  inclini:*!.
when  he  discusses  education,  to  think  more  of  desks  and  black-
boards and  apparatus  and  new  buildings  and  teachers'  salaries  than
of  children  and  teachers  ;  or  to  think  of  children  and  teachers,
not  as  individual  living  souls,  but  as  so  much  accumulated  human
material,  as  'cases'  on  an  agenda  paper  or  arithmetical  totals.
The  Greeks  were  not  thus  in  danger  of  losing  touch  with  the  living
world  around  them.  Their  social  discussion  never  outran  tlic
natural  range  of  their  senses  and  emotions  ;  it  was  always  fresh
and  vivid  and  personal,  always  invested  with  the  feeling  of  reality
which  springs  from  a  close  and  evident  relation  between  the  intel-
lect and  the  objects  of  its  thought.

But  it  is  time  to  draw  the  conclusion  towards  which  this
digression  has  been  moving.  This  difference  in  methods  of
speculation  between  the  Greek  and  the  modern  world  is  not  due
simply  to  the  superior  insight  of  the  Greek  thinkers  and  of  the
public  among  whom  they  talked  and  wrote.  It  is  due  partly,  if
not  principally,  to  the  state  of  society  around  them,  to  the  con-
ditions of  daily  life  which  enabled  the  Greek  imagination  to  work
freely  and  naturally  on  human  problems.  '  The  food  of  the  Greek
imagination  was  the  very  antithesis  of  our  own  nourishment.  We
are  educated  by  our  circumstances  to  think  no  revolution  in  appli-
ances and  economic  organization  incredible,  our  minds  play  freely
about  possibilities  that  would  have  struck  the  philosophers  of  the
Academy  as  outrageous  extravagance,  and  it  is  in  regard  to
politico-social  expedients  that  our  imaginations  fail.'  In  their
wildest  flights  of  imagination  about  men  and  women,  the  Gieek
thinkers  could  not  help  keeping  their  feet  firmly  fixed  upon  good
Greek  ground.  While  Sparta,  and  the  revolution  in  human  life
and  manners  which  she  implies,  seem  incredible  to  us,  even  in
spite  of  the  evidence  of  history,  it  is  '  a  motor-car  throbbing  in
the  Agora '  which  would  have  seem.ed  incredible  to  the  men  who
boldly  speculated  about  the  communism  of  wives  and  children.

It  is  wellnigh  impossible  for  us  to  think  ourselves  back  into  the
unearthly  quietness  and  conservatism  of  this  old  Greek  world
which  has  for  ever  passed  away,  into  a  civilized  society  from
which  the  stress  and  hurry  and  complexity  and  ceaseless  change
and  '  progress  '  of  to-day  are  wholly  absent.  Yet  this  is  what  wc
must  do  if  we  would  put  ourselves  in  the  mood  to  understand  the


2i8  ECONOMICS  PART  III

economic  basis  of  Greek  society.  We  must  get  behind  the
Industrial  Revokition,  which  has  altered  the  daily  life  of  ordinary
people  more  profoundly  than  any  other  change  since  recorded
history  began,  behind  wholesale  production  and  machinery  and
the  rush  of  new  patents  and  processes,  back  into  a  sequestered
and  stable  world  where  competition  and  unemployment  are  un-
known terms,  where  hardly  any  one  is  working  precariously  for
money  wages  or  a  salary,  where  life  goes  on  without  visible
change  or  desire  of  change  from  generation  to  generation  and
century  to  century.  The  women  whom  Jesus  watched  daily  grind-
ing by  the  mill-stones  at  Nazareth  were  the  successors  of  unnum-
bered other  families  and  races  of  tired  women  who  had  done  the
same  heavy  work  without  a  word  of  complaint  or  any  hope  of
relief.  An  intelligent  Lancashire  mill-girl  (granted  she  was  sure
of  keeping  her  place)  would  not  tolerate  such  a  life  for  a  day
without  setting  her  wits  to  work  to  think  out  some  labour-saving
contrivance.  Yet  even  the  high-spirited  Athenian  of  the  fifth
century,  so  ready  to  criticize  all  things  human  and  divine,  pulled
at  the  clumsy  oar  of  his  State  galley  without  a  thought  of  fault-
finding or  improvement.^

So  we  must  grow  accustomed  to  living  in  a  different  atmo-
sphere and  under  different  standards.  We  must  take  as  our
economic  watchword  not  Progress  but  Stability.  We  must
minister,  if  we  are  producers  and  traders,  not  to  Fashion  but  to
Custom.     We  must  remember  that  our  city  has  been  living  for

^  I  owe  much  of  the  above  to  H.  G.  Wells,  A  Modern  Utopia,  p.  98,  who
has  written  the  most  suggestive  of  latter-day  Utopias,  partly  because  he  had
allowed  his  imagination  to  run  riot  on  machinery  in  earlier  writings.  As
a  matter  of  fact  twentieth-century  man  is  ceasing  to  be  impressed  by  visions
of  mechanical  progress.  You  must  go  to  India  or  Turkey  or  Morocco  to
find  gramophones  and  cinematographs  properly  appreciated.  The  conquest
of  the  air  is  a  week-end  wonder,  while  human  issues,  like  the  death  of  a  great
popular  figure  or  a  moment  of  national  danger,  can  still  stir  men,  as  of  old,  to
the  depths.  The  reason  for  this  is  not  that  our  imaginations  are  blast'  a.n6.
refuse  to  be  as  impressed  as  they  should,  but  that  we  know  in  our  hearts  that
these  inventions  make  very  little  real  difference  in  our  lives,  and  each  one
progressively  less  than  its  predecessor.  In  these  matters  it  is  'the  first  step
that  counts  ',  the  first  flickering  oil-lamp  in  the  darkness  rather  than  the
latest  electric  light  globe,  the  first  slow  and  irregular  State  post  rather  than
Universal  Penny  Postage  or  cheap  telephones,  the  first  rattling  steam  con-
veyance rather  than  motors  and  turbine-steamers  and  airships.  James  Watt
and  George  Stephenson  were  greater  innovators  than  Paulhan  and  Bleriot,
and  Prometheus  than  Stephenson  or  Watt.  Cf.  an  interesting  chapter  on  '  Le
Nivellement  des  Jouissances'  in  d'Avenel,  Decoiivertes  if/iistoh-e  sociale,
1200-1910,  Paris,  1910.


CHAP.  II  USE   AND   WONT


219


centuries,  ever  since  the  dim  days  of  the  prehistoric  migrations,  in
a  dignified  isolation  of  her  own,  that  she  lias  long  since  learnt
to  be  proudly  self-sufficient,  to  serve  her  own  needs,  to  supply  her
own  luxuries,  and  to  do  everything  in  her  own  way.  She  has  her
own  tricks  for  shaping  and  colouring  pots,  her  own  peculiarities
of  dress  and  shoes,  her  own  traditional  dishes  and  drinks,  her  own
'  school '  of  arts  and  crafts,  just  as  she  has  her  own  dialect  and
way  of  writing  it  and  her  own  gods  and  constitution.  In  fact  she
is  a  little  world  of  her  own  ;  and  if  you  want  to  do  business  there
you  must  not  bring  her  the  wares  of  the  great  world  and  expect
her  to  welcome  them,  but  try  to  fall  in  with  her  own  mood  and
suit  her  own  traditional  taste.  Just  as  in  Turkey  to-day,  where
the  old  barriers  of  isolation  are  beginning  to  break  down,  the
trader  discovers  no  two  cities  alike,  Damascus  a  world  away  from
Aleppo  and  Samsun  from  Trebizond,  so  Athens  and  Thebes,
Argos  and  Corinth  all  had  tastes  and  productions  as  varied
and  conservative  as  theirhistory  and  traditions.  Even  dull-witted
Sparta  had  her  own  pots  and  shoes  and  her  own  special  black
broth.^

But  surely  the  people  in  our  Greek  city  were  men  like  ourselves
and  subject  to  the  same  human  impulses  and  weaknesses  ?  Surely
the  blood  of  the  '  economic  man  '  ran  in  their  veins,  and,  like  all
sensible  people  to-day,  they  desired  to  be  rich  ?

That  is  just  the  point  where  the  older  Greeks  differed  most
profoundly  from  ourselves,  or  rather  from  the  interpretation  of

^  The  so-called  '  Cyrenaic'  pottery  is  now  known,  from  the  excavations  of
the  British  School,  to  be  Laconian  ware.  One  of  the  most  curious  illustralions
of  Greek  Conservatism  in  small  things  may  still  be  observed  in  the  doorways
of  the  Propylaea.  Door-jambs  were  traditionally  made  of  wood  :  so,  even  m
a  building  made  of  marble,  they  had  still  to  be  in  the  old  material,  and  the
marble  was  cut  away  to  make  room  for  the  wood.  Where  Art  was  concerned
the  Greeks  set  their  minds  to  work ;  but  not  otherwise.  With  us  art-forms
become  modified  by  material  changes :  travelling  by  tram  turns  the  mimls  of
our  writers  to  producing  magazines  and  short  stories.  In  Greece  tlicy  bet  ainc
modified  by  changes  in  the  spiritual  sphere  :  it  was  what  Aeschylus  and
Sophocles  had  to  say  which  transformed  the  character  of  the  C.reck  chorus.
This  is  what  makes  Greek  art-forms,  despite  their  apparent  stiffiicss  and  con-
ventionality, so  truly  original,  while  ours,  despite  our  freedom  of  choice,  sjcem
so  artificial  and  unsatisfactory.     Because  we  produce  according  to  the  laws


'Imitation,  ch.  vii.      Many  Englishmen  who  have  experienced   both   will
hink  of  their  Public  School  as  a  home  of  Custom  and  their  Lnivcrsity  a^


/

th

a  seat  of  Fashion


220  ECONOMICS  PART  III

the  modem  man  given  by  some  of  his  nhieteenth-century  leaders.
The  older  Greeks  did  not  want  to  be  rich  for  the  sake  of  riches.
They  were  too  sane  and  well-balanced  to  harbour  such  a  desire.
One  of  the  central  facts  about  their  life,  expressed  over  and  over
again,  in  their  art  and  conduct  and  institutions,  was  their  sense  of
harmony  and  proportion.  They  had  overcome  the  wild  passion
of  the  child  or  the  savage  for  '  too  much '.  They  only  desired
riches  when  they  had  convinced  themselves  that  riches  were
necessary  to  social  well-being.  They  knew,  as  some  Eastern
peoples  know  still,  that  '  a  pennyworth  of  ease  is  worth  a  penny  ',
and  that  it  is  not  worth  while  spending  two  pennyworths  or  more
of  worry  and  effort  to  attain  it.  They  had  sense  enough  to  cor-
relate the  values  of  wealth  and  well-being.  '  The  richest  of  men
is  no  more  happy  than  he  who  has  a  sufficiency  for  a  day,  unless
good  fortune  attend  him  to  the  grave  so  that  he  ends  his  life  in
happiness.  Many  men  who  abound  in  wealth  are  unhappy  ;  and
many  who  have  only  a  moderate  competency  are  fortunate.  He
that  abounds  in  wealth  and  is  yet  unhappy  surpasses  the  other
only  in  two  things  ;  but  the  other  surpasses  the  man  who  is  wealthy
and  unfortunate  in  many  things.  .  .  .  He  enjoys  the  full  use  of
his  limbs,  he  is  free  from  disease  and  misfortune,  he  is  blessed  with
fine  children  and  a  fine  body,  and,  if  in  addition  to  all  these  things
he  shall  end  his  life  well,  he  is  the  man  you  seek  and  may  justly
be  called  happy.'  So,  according  to  Greek  tradition,  spoke  the
sage  to  the  millionaire,  in  words  that  were  never  forgotten.  The
older  Greeks  tried  to  be  faithful  to  the  doctrine  that  Solon
preached,  and,  judged  by  any  modern  standard  of  comparison,
they  were  faithful  indeed.  What  drove  them  into  economic
activity  and  into  the  development  we  shall  have  to  trace  was  not
simply  our  senseless  greed  for  more,  a  kind  of  insatiable  craving
which  would  have  run  counter  to  some  of  their  deepest  instincts,
but  the  sober  conviction  that  they  needed  wealth  for  the  purposes
of  their  civilization.  In  other  words,  civilization,  which  means  not
yachts  and  motor-cars  but  a  refined  and  many-sided  and  effort-
loving  society,  costs  money,  and  money  cannot  be  had  without
economic  activity.  So  there  is  a  point  in  the  growth  of  every
developing  society  when  it  is  driven  by  its  own  needs,  however
reluctant  it  may  be,  into  the  atmosphere  of  money-getting,  with
all  its  attendant  temptations  towards  wrong  standards  of  living.


CHAiMi  USE   AND   WONT  -i

This  is  what  happened  to  the  Greeks,  and,  above  all,  to  Athens,
just  at  the  culminating  point  of  her  greatness.  But  we  .sha.l  do
well  to  remember,  when  we  feel  inclined  to  reproach  her  with  un-
scrupulous dealing,  both  the  lofty  objects  for  which  her  riches
were  deliberately  sought,  and  the  tranquil  and  harmonious  con-
servatism of  the  world  of  high  thinking  and  plain  living  out  of
which  she  was  just  emerging.  It  is  not  for  us.  with  our  modem
comforts  and  our  modern  business  motives,  to  cast  the  first  stone.'

*  Hdt.  i.  32  (Solon  and  Croesus).  One  testimony  to  tlie  general  level  of
happiness  among  the  Greeks  is  the  uncommonness  of  suicide,  (irceks  only
killed  themselves  when  they  felt  they  had  incurred  some  public  disgrace,  like
Ajax  or  Phaedra ;  cf.  Thuc.  ii.  92.  3.  See  on  this  point  Westermarck,  1  he
Origin  and  Development  of  Moral  Ideas,  vol.  ii,  pp.  247  ft".


CHAPTER    III
THE    GROWING    CITY:    WORK    ON    THE    LAND

To   Se  TrXelarou  yevog  twv  dvdpoinav  (irro  T»/y   yrjs  ^//  Koi  twp  iiiiipav  Kapwoov, —

Aristotle,  Politics  1256.

Most  of  mankind  get  their  living  from  the  land  and  from  cuUivated  plants.

We  turn  then  to  our  examination  of  the  fifth-century  Athenian
as  an  earner  and  a  housekeeper,  and  of  the  economics  or  house-
keeping of  fifth-century  Athens.  What  we  have  to  ask  is,  firstly,
how  did  the  fifth-century  Athenian  make  his  Hving  as  a  private
individual  ?  secondly,  how  did  the  Athenian  State  support  itself?
what  was  the  economic  basis  of  its  civilization  and  achievements?

These  questions  are  easily  asked  ;  but  they  are  not  so  quickly
answered.  Just  as,  in  order  to  understand  the  politics  of  the
Funeral  Speech,  we  had  to  go  down  to  the  political  foundations
of  Greek  society,  building  up  the  City  upon  the  Tribe  and  the
Empire  upon  the  City,  so,  in  order  to  understand  the  economy
of  Athens  at  the  opening  of  the  Peloponnesian  War,  we  must  go
back  to  the  economic  foundations  of  Greek  society,  to  the  origins
and  development  of  the  City  State,  and  to  its  ordinary  humble
working  citizens,  and  so  build  up,  layer  by  layer,  the  economics
of  the  Athenian  Empire.

Let  us  go  back,  then,  once  more,  with  Thucydides  for  our  guide,
to  the  beginnings  of  Greek  society,  to  the  days  before  the  Greeks
had  settled  down  into  the  routine  of  City  State  life.  We  shall
find  here  some  elements  in  their  economy  which  remained  stable
and  persistent,  and  others  which,  with  advancing  civilization,  they
were  able  later  to  discard  or  to  develop.  But  all  of  them,  as  we
shall  see,  will  prove  of  importance  in  our  inquiry.

Thucydides  has  left  us,  on  the  first  page  of  his  book,  a  vivid
imaginative  sketch  of  the  economic  life  of  the  earliest  Greeks  in
their  scattered  villages  just  after  the  chaos  of  the  great  migra-
tions.    '  It  is  evident,'  he  says,  '  that  in  ancient  times  the  country


CHAI\  III  WORK    ON    Till.    LAND


21')


now  called  Ilcllas  had  no  settled  poi)iilati()n  ;  on  the  contrary,
migrations  were  of  frequent  occurrence,  the  several  tribes  readily
abandoning  their  homes  under  the  pressure  of  superior  number.*..
Without  commerce,  without  safe  communications  either  by  land
or  sea,  cultivating  no  more  of  their  land  than  they  required  for
bare  subsistence,  destitute  of  capital,  never  planting  their  land
with  fruits  (for  they  could  not  tell  when  an  invader  might  not
come  and  take  it  all  away,  and  when  he  did  come  they  had  no
wall  to  stop  him),  they  thought  little  of  shifting  their  dwellings,
and  consequently  neither  built  large  cities  nor  attained  to  any
other  kind  of  greatness.'

There  is  very  little  here  which  is  common  to  the  .society  of
Periclean  Athens.  It  is  Greek  life  reduced  to  its  barest  elements.
There  is  no  trade,  no  travelling,  no  vine  and  olive,  no  security,
not  even  organized  warfare  from  a  settled  citadel  ;  yet  one  per-
manent element  stands  out.  These  men  made  their  living,  so  far
as  they  made  it  at  all,  and  did  not  merely  rob  it,  by  cultivating  the
soil.     They  lived  by  the  land.

This  is  the  one  abiding  fact  about  the  economy  of  the  Greeks,
from  their  earliest  days  down  to  the  fifth  century  ;  and  therefore,
at  the  risk  of  anachronism,  it  is  necessary  to  deal  with  it  here,  at
the  very  outset  of  our  inquiry.  There  were  many  possible  ways
in  which  a  Greek  could  make  a  living,  but  there  was  only  one
which  seemed  entirely  natural  and  traditional — work  on  the  land.
The  Greek  writers  who  discuss  the  question  of  livelihood  (and,
in  spite  of  what  is  often  said,  Greece  did  produce  'economists')
are  unanimous  upon  this  subject.  All  of  them  preach  work  on
the  land.  No  other  occupation  which  fills  the  family  store,  says
Xenophon,  in  his  glowing  eulogy  of  the  farmer's  life,  is  at  once
so  pleasant  and  so  healthy,  and  so  worthy  of  a  free  man.  Agri-
culture, says  Plato,  is  a  more  natural  art  than  politics  itself,  for  it
'co-operates  with  Nature',  like  m.cdicinc  and  physical  training.
And  Aristotle,  heedless  of  the  life  of  the  steppe  and  the  forest
and  the  fiord,  actually  regards  agriculture  of  the  Greek  .sort  as  the
normal  life  of  all  mankind.  Be  that  as  it  may,  it  was  at  any  rate
the  right  and  proper  occupation  for  the  Greek  father  of  a  family.
Ever  since  his  ancestors  had  cstabli.-hcd  themselves,  centuries
back,  in  their  little  enclosed  plains  and  valleys,  and  gradually
dropped,  as  Thucydides  describes  for   us,    from   the  old   scmi-

V  2


224  ECONOMICS  PART  III

nomadic  life  into  settled  and  stationary  ways,  he  had  been  used
to  thinking  of  himself  as  attached,  first  as  a  member  of  a  tribe
or  brotherhood  and  then  as  a  father  of  a  single  household,  to
a  definite  piece  of  land  from  which  he  drew  his  living.  Greek-
civilization  is,  hi  a  sense,  urban  ;  but  its  basis  is  agricultural,  and
the  breezes  of  the  open  country  blow  through  the  Parliament  and
the  market-place.  The  landed  tradition  is  the  strongest  and  most
persistent  force  in  the  inherited  social  economy  of  Greece.^

It  is  necessary  to  emphasize  this  in  order  to  understand  to
the  full  how  fundamentally  different  their  economy  is  from  ours.
It  is  not  our  cloistered  Hellenists  and  city-dwellers  but  our
shepherds  and  yokels  who,  in  their  daily  occupations  and  habits
of  housekeeping,  touch  most  nearly  the  ancient  Greek — not
merely  the  Greek  of  the  unsettled  early  days  and  of  the  quiet
middle  ages,  but  the  alert  and  enterprising  citizen  of  fifth-century
Athens.  '  Let  me  make  my  meaning  clear  by  two  widely
separated  quotations.  Every  one  recalls  the  passage  in  the
Odyssey  where  Homer  describes  the  founding  of  the  city  of  the
Phaeacians  :  first  they  build  the  walls  of  the  city,  then  they
divide  the  land  into  holdings.  Centuries  and  centuries  later,  in
the  Attic  comedy,  one  of  the  characters  is  expounding  the  popular
demands.  He  asks  for  the  latest  news :  has  there  been  a  par-
tition of  lands  in  a  colony  ?  Always  this  idea  of  landed  property  !
Thousands  of  things  have  changed  since  Homer.  The  love  of
the  Greeks  for  the  land  has  remained  the  same.  Go  to-day  into
the  recesses  of  the  Ardennes  and  you  will  still  find  some  of  these
children  of  the  soil.  You  will  meet  the  old-fashioned  peasant,
systematically  ignorant  of  everything  connected  with  commerce
and  industry,  an  aristocrat  and  a  conservative  in  his  own  peculiar
way,  protesting  against  every  novelty,  and  adding  year  by  year
to  his  ancestral  store.  An  Athenian  of  two  thousand  years  ago
would  have  understood  him  ;  to-day  he  is  but  the  last  survivor  of
a  vanishing  race.'  ^

At  first  sight  the  Belgian  writer  may  appear  to  be  exag-
gerating. But  when  we  look  closer  we  shall  see  that  his  judge-
ment is  a  true  one.     For  we  must  not  think  of  work  on  the  land

^  Xen.  Oec.  v;  Ar.  Pol.  1256 a 38  ;  Plato,  Laws  889  ;  cf.  743  and  Hesiod,
lirga  683.

-'  Francotte,  L Industrie  dans  ia  Gfcce  aniigiie  (Brussels,  1 901),  vol.  ii,
P-  53-


CHAP,  iir  WORK    ON    TIIK    LAXD  >>-,

as  it  is  practised,  in  these  da\'.s  of  machinery  ;\m\  orgnni/.ation.
by  restless  immigrants  round  Winnipeg,  or  even  by  up-to-date
farmers  and  market-gardeners  nearer  home.  We  must  think  of
it  as  what  it  was  until  but  a  few  years  ago,  the  most  stable  and  con-
servative of  all  economic  occupations.  The  trader  and  the  manu-
facturer rely  upon  their  own  skill  and  enterprise,  and  can  transform
and  diversify  what  they  handle.  The  shepherd  and  the  farmer
wait  upon  Nature's  pleasure,  and  look,  not  to  improvements  in
method,  but  to  favouring  skies  and  kindly  gods.  They  learn  to
be  patient  and  contemplative,  and  pleased  with  the  day  of  small
things  ;  they  form  in  every  society  the  great  bulwark  of  Use  and
Wont.  The  Greeks,  being  by  tradition  shepherds  and  farmers,
were  brought  up  conservatives.

There  is  another  reason  why  it  is  not  easy  for  us,  approaching
him  as  economists,  to  understand  the  Greek  farmer.  He  did  net
want  to  grow  rich.  He  worked  on  the  land  for  a  livelihood  and
for  his  city,  not  in  the  hope  of  high  prices  and  an  ultimate  fortune.
His  object  was  to  provide  for  his  household  and,  if  need  be,  to
help  to  provide  also  for  the  community  ;  but  he  had  no  thoULjht
of  amassing  wealth.  The  great  landed  fortunes  so  familiar  to  us
from  the  eighteenth  century  were  unknown  in  Greece  ;  or  if  not
entirely  unknown,  so  abnormal  and  odious  as  to  fall  outside  the
limits  of  a  general  picture.  If  a  Greek  citizen  owned  what
seemed  a  disproportionately  large  amount  of  the  land  of  the
community,  the  public  opinion  of  the  market-place  clamoured
that  it  should  be  taken  away  from  him  and  '  redivided  '.  If
a  trader  or  a  craftsman  was  over-wealthy  nobody  com[)Iained,antl
perhaps  nobody  knew.  At  any  rate  his  being  rich  did  not  appear
to  make  others  poorer.  But  in  a  small  City  State,  where  land  was
visibly  limited  in  amount,  every  additional  acre  to  the  large  pro-
prietor seemed  clearly  to  mean  an  acre  less  for  the  small  men
So  the  Greek  farmer  had  every  reason,  both  from  tradition  and
policy,  to  eschew  the  dreams  of  avarice  and  develop  the  other
sides  of  his  nature.  His  pleasant  household  and  old  farm  build-
ings and  the  familiar  gods  of  the  near  fields  and  springs,  together
with  the  orderly  rows  of  gnarled  olives  which  his  great-grand-
father planted,  meant  more  to  him  than  all  the  riches  his  cosmo-
politan younger  brother  might  be  bringing  home  from  the  Western
seas.     For  his  philosophic  aim  (however  little  he  might  know  it)


326  ECONOMICS  PART  IT!

was  to  be  a  harmonious  nature,  witli  every  part  of  his  being
working  together  for  good.'

How  did  the  Greek  draw  his  living  from  the  land  ?

Under  settled  City  State  conditions  he  had  three  sources  of
livelihood  :  pasture,  tillage,  and  fruit.  Of  the  shepherd  we  have
already  spoken.  His  life  was  at  once  the  most  traditional  and
the  most  harmonious  ;  for  it  was  the  life  of  his  earliest  ancestors,
and  was  the  most  completely  removed  from  the  influence  and
interests  of  the  city.  Only  one  small  economic  tie  kept  him  in
touch,  on  his  high  pastures,  with  the  City  World  below.  He  had
not  enough  to  eat  unless  he  filled  his  store  from  the  lowlands.
A  goat-herding  population  cannot  subsist  'wholly  on  the  produce
of  its  own  goats,  as  seems  to  be  possible  on  the  grassland  with
the  herders  of  horses '.  The  shepherd  and  his  family  reeded
bread  as  well  as  milk  and  cheese :  and  it  was  this  that  saved
them  from  becoming  nomads,  like  their  Scythian  brothers  further
North.  If  times  were  unsettled  they  came  down  from  the  high-
lands and  stole  it ;  but  as  the  City  State  extended  its  strong  arm
they  learnt  to  barter  for  it  with  milk  food,  for  which  the  men
below,  as  they  grew  in  numbers,  had  an  ever-increasing  need.
Yet  even  when  he  was  thus  incorporated  in  the  economy  of  the
City  State,  the  shepherd  continued  to  lead  a  life  apart,  the  most
old-fashioned,  and  also,  as  Aristotle  says,  the  laziest  of  Greek
mankind  ;  for  shepherds  '  get  their  subsistence  without  trouble
from  tame  animals,  and  since  their  flocks  have  to  wander  from
place  to  place  in  search  of  pasture,  they  are  compelled  to  follow
them,  cultivating  a  sort  of  living  farm  '.  No  doubt  Greek  shep-
herds, whether  they  were  slaves  or  citizens,  were  as  open  and
courteous  then  as  now,  and  as  eager  for  the  latest  news  of  doings
in  the  city.  The  shepherds  of  the  Oedipus  Tyranmis,  whom  we
know  so  well  as  Messengers  in  other  plays,  still  accost  the  modern
traveller  with  that  fran'c  and  dignified  speech  and  bearing  which
the  English  reader  so  often  regards  as  a  mere  tragedy  pose.  But
the  main  body  of  them,  who  spent  the  summer  months  on  the
high  mountain  pastures,  were  so  removed  from  city  life  that  they
remained  outside  and  unaffected  by  the  economic  development
we  have  to  follow.     Only  when  war  broke  out  and  their  frontier

'  See  I  wan  Miiller,  Griechische  P7ivataltertiinie}\  p.  236,  on  the  prosperity
of  the  Athenian  agriculturist  in  the  fifth  century,  owing  to  the  increased  popu-
lation of  Attica.     Yet  no  hxrge  landed  fortunes  were  made.


<^nAP.  Ill  WORK    ON    Till-.    LAXn  i-

pastures  became  unsafe,  did  they  come  down  into  the  plain  and
join  the  ranks  of  their  fellows,  if  so  entitled,  as  citizen  soldiers.*

Fruit  and  tillage,  the  orchard  and  the  ploughed  field,  belong
together,  and  are  looked  after  from  one  hearthfire  by  the  pro-
prietor. So  far  as  we  can  tell,  tillage  everywhere  predominated  :
for  the  tradition  was  that  every  state  must  provide  its  own  grain.
Even  where,  as  in  fifth-century  Attica,  the  growth  of  population
had  made  this  plainly  impossible,  more  corn  was  probably  raised
than  oil,  and  the  country  dwellers  at  any  rate  bought  little  food
from  the  town.  In  the  time  of  Pericles  probably  at  least  one-
third  of  the  corn  consumed  in  Attica  was  homegrown,  and,  in
spite  of  other  interests,  the  soil  of  Attica  was  the  best  farmed  in
Greece.  Those  who  know  how  sterile  it  is  will  appreciate  the
labour  spent  on  it  by  these  Athenian  farmers  who  had  so  much
else  to  do  and  to  think  about."

To  whom  did  the  land  belong  and  by  what  tenure  was  it  held  ?

Nearly  all  of  it  in  the  normal  Greek  State  was  in  the  hands  of
small  proprietors,  who  worked  the  soil  themselves.  We  are  not
concerned  here  with  serfdom  such  as  existed  in  Sparta  and
Thessaly.  That  was,  as  we  have  seen,  an  abnormal  condition,
the  result  of  a  distorted  development.   The  overwhelming  majoril)*

*  p.  47  above.  They  served  at  Athens  as  light-armed  troops,  not  as  rowers.
For  an  extant  letter,  probably  from  a  shepherd,  see  pp.  278-9  below.  Myres,
Greek  Lands,  p.  26.  For  the  economic  dependence  of  the  highlanders  on  the
lowlanders  see  Xen.  Hell.  vi.  i.  9,  an  interesting  passage  :  '  Since  Thessaly
is  very  flat,  all  the  tribes  round  it  (i.e.  in  the  mountains)  are  subject  to  it,
when  there  is  a  strong  government  in  power  :  nearly  all  of  them  are  javelin
men.'  The  connexion  of  thought  is  not  clear,  at  first  sight,  to  a  northern
reader.  The  speaker  means  that  because  Thessaly  is  very  flat  (i.e.  unsuitcd
for  guerrilla  tactics,  javelin-throwing,&c.),  and  well-policed,  therefore  the  high-
landers  cannot  steal  their  food,  and  must  needs  barter  for  it,  i.  e.  a(  knowledge
the  supremacy  of  the  lowland  State.

^  Hellenica  Oxyrhynchia,  xii.  5  :  Attica  /cn(9'  vjTfp^o^fiv  j^ijo-kijto  koI  fiitm-
novrjTo  :  it  is  added  tliat  no  expense  was  spared  on  the  farm  buildings.  These
farmers  were  mostly  small  men,  'Zeugites'  like  Aristophanes'  Dicaeopolis.
This  is  clear  from  Thuc.  ii.  16:  for  further  evidence  see  Guiraud,  /.d  rrofriete
foticiere  en  Grece,  pp.  392-3.  The  New  Historian's  description  of  .Attica  refers
to  the  period  between  421  and  414,  rt/Ar  the  devastations  of  the  IVloponnc-
sian  invasions.  It  would  seem  therefore  as  if  Attica  produced  more  com
than  oil,  for  a  country  consisting  predominantly  of  olive-yards  could  hardly
have  recovered  so  quickly.  This  seems  to  be  confirmed  by  some  fourth-century
evidence  in  Dem.  xx.  31,  and  by  the  calculations  of  Meyer,  For.uhunijeti,
vol.  ii,  pp.  189  ff.  So  the  passage  in  the  papyrus,  only  recovered  m  1906,
certainly  does  a  good  deal  to  justify  or  at  least  explain  Pericles'  policy  in
exposing  Attica  to  devastation.  See  also  the  note  on  p.  50  above.  On  methods
of  tillage  see  Iwan  Muller,  p.  237.  The  Greeks  knew  nothing  of  the  rotation
of  crops,  so  half  the  corn-land  was  always  lying  fallow.


238  ECONOMICS  PART  ITI

of  the  Greek  States,  like  Athens  from  Solon's  day  onwards,  were
cultivated  by  freeholders.  They  worked  the  land  with  their
households,  dividing  up  the  estate  at  death  among  their  sons.
This  acted,  as  it  does  in  France,  as  a  check  on  the  population,  at
any  rate  until  new  outlets  were  provided  for  a  livelihood.  Nearly
every  citizen  in  an  ordinary  Greek  State  was  a  landowner,  whether
the  piece  he  owned  was  large  or  small,  enough  to  live  on  or  only
to  starve  on.  When  in  403  it  was  proposed  at  Athens,  the  leading
commercial  state,  to  limit  the  citizenship  to  owners  of  land  or
houses,  we  are  told  that  only  5,oco  citizens  would  have  been
excluded  by  the  law,  and  most  of  these  were  probably  returned
colonists.  So  that  even  in  the  confusion  of  the  Peloponnesian
War,  when  the  economic  basis  of  Athenian  society  was  being
shaken  to  its  foundations,  the  men  who  had  shouted  for  Cleon
and  sailed  to  Sicily  for  plunder  felt  somehow  the  happier  for  the
possession  of  a  little  plot  of  their  own,  however  worthless.^

Tenancy,  in  our  sense  of  the  word,  was  therefore  practically
unknown  in  Greece.  Out  of  the  numerous  inscriptions  preserved
which  deal,  in  one  way  or  another,  with  land,  there  are  only
'  a  very  small  number  of  contracts  made  between  individuals '.
When  a  Greek  is  a  tenant  at  all  he  is  a  tenant  for  a  public  body :
he  is  cultivating  land  for  the  State  or  for  a  god  or  for  some
brotherhood  or  association ;  in  other  words  he  is  doing  for  the
landlord  what  the  landlord  is  unable  to  do  for  himself.  A  great
number  of  such  inscriptions  have  come  down  to  us.  It  is  worth
while  quoting  one,  to  give  an  idea  of  how  the  system  worked.  It
relates  to  a  piece  of  land  which  belonged  to  the  town  of  Poiessa
(Grassland)  in  the  island  of  Ceos,  and  runs  as  follows  : —

Gods  !
Land  belonging  to  the  City  of  Poiessa.
§  I.  The  occupier  is   to  pay  on  the  tenth  of  the  month  of
Bacchion  30  drachmas  ;  if  he  does  not  pay  he  must  leave.

'  Wilamowitz,  A.  A.,  vol.  ii,  p.  227  (comment  on  Lys.  xxxiv :  vtrodfai.^).
The  most  typical  countryman  in  Greek  literature  is  the  kind  old  peasant  in
Euripides'  Elecira,  who  is  drawn  from  the  Peloponnesian  freeholders  of  his
day  (cf.  Thuc.  i.  141.  3).  Like  Dicaeopolis  and  Trygaeus  he  is  much  more
characteristic  than  Ischomachus,  the  hero  of  Xenophon's  Oecofionnats.
Ischomachus  is  an  exceptionally  large  landowner,  one  of  the  ?mall  number
of  knights  or  horse-breeders  who  are  rich  enough  to  do  the  State  the  extra
service  of  providing  it  with  a  small  force  of  cavalry.    Cf.  note  on  p.  171  above.


ciiAr.  Ill  WORK    ON    TIIR    T.AXD  229

>^  2.  He  is  to  bring  his  money  to  Poiessa.

§  3.  He  is  to  give  back  the  house  in  good  repair  and  with  the
roof  on.

§4,  He  is  not  to  cut  down  the  fruit  trees.'

'  Inscripiioiis  juridiqucs grecqucs,  i,  p.  253  (cf.  the  whole  scrlion,  espcrially
p.  250);  also  Dittenberger.  no.  532,  cf.  nos.  531-6.  The  only  formal  treatise
on  Greek  agriculture  we  possess  is  the  volume  called  (leoponini,  in  twenty
books  dealing  with  the  different  departments  of  agricultural  life.  It  was
drawn  up  about  A.  D.  800,  and  consists  of  extracts  from  numerous  writers,
mainly  Greek,  of  very  different  date  and  experience.  It  is  full  of  information,
some  of  it  queer  and  magical:  the  following  from  Book  XI 11,  cli.  x\  (On
Household  Fleas)  is  as  interesting  as  any.  *  If  ever  you  come  into  a  pl.ire
where  fleas  abound,  cry  Och,  Och  [oix,  ^x^^  "^nf^  ^^^)'  "'"  ""^  touch  you.'


CHAPTER    IV
THE    GROWING    CITY:    HUNTING   OR   ROBBERY

Ol  ij.(i>  yap  dno  drjpai  C^(rt,  Kui  dr'jpns  erepoi  erepai,  olnp  ol  p.iv  ano  XtjCTTfias.

Some  men  live  by  hunting,  which  is  of  different  kinds :  some,  for  example,
are  pirates. — Aristotle,  Politics  1256.

Work  on  the  land  Is  the  traditional  Greek  way  of  earning  an
honest  livelihood,  and,  since  we  are  building  up  the  economy  of
the  Greek  city  from  its  lasting  foundations,  it  necessarily  stands
first.  But  it  is  not  the  most  natural  way  for  men  with  ordinary
human  impulses,  whether  primitive  or  advanced,  least  of  all  for
the  Greeks,  who  disliked  monotonous  activity.  They  needed  to
be  broken  into  it.  It  took  unnumbered  generations  of  social
training  to  teach  them  patiently  to  acquiesce  in  earning  a  humble
farmer's  livelihood  by  the  sweat  of  their  brow.  Some  bold  spirits
in  every  generation  refused  to  be  taught  at  all,  and  preferred  a  life
of  adventure,  with  the  risk  of  sudden  death  or  slow  starvation,  to
the  dull  round  of  trivial  labours  imposed  on  them  by  society.
These  men  lived  by  hunting.

In  the  early  days,  just  after  the  great  migrations,  when  the  land
was  still  only  partially  settled  and  cleared,  there  was  plenty  of
good  hunting,  both  of  beasts  and  men.  Men  went  hunting  singly
and  in  hordes,  greedy  for  good  prey,  and  it  mattered  little  to
them  whence  their  store  was  replenished — whether  with  boar's-
meat  from  the  forests,  or  with  sheep  or  goats  from  across  the
range,  or  with  the  carefully  tended  produce  of  some  thriftier
neighbouring  race.  There  were  as  yet  no  rights  or  laws  or
customs  outside  the  morality  of  the  tribe.  Where  every  one  is
afraid  of  robbery  every  one  goes  armed,  and  feels  justified  in
using  his  weapons  against  an  outsider,  for  other  purposes  than
mere  defence,  when  opportunity  offers  or  poverty  drives.  Even
in  the  fifth  century,  Thucydides  tells  us,  '  many  parts  of  Hellas
still  follow  the  old  fashion,  the  Ozolian  Locrians,  for  instance,  the


rHAP.  TV  HUNTINC;    OR    KOHin-'.m'  231

Aetolians,  the  Acarnanian.s  and  that  district  of  the  mainlaiul  ;
and  the  custom  of  carrying  arms  is  still  kept  up  amonj;  these
mainlanders  from  the  old  hunting  and  robbing  habits.  For  all
the  Greeks  used  at  one  time  to  carrj'  arms,  as  their  houses  were
unprotected  and  their  communications  with  one  another  unsafe.'
No  wonder  that,  as  we  have  seen,  it  was  not  yet  worth  their  while
to  plant  their  land  with  fruit  trees,  because  you  never  could  tell
when  some  tribe  of  hunters,  who  preferred  to  '  live  upon  their
neighbours',  'might  not  come  down  and  take  it  all  away'.'

All  through  the  history  of  early  Greece,  before  city-made  law
had  learnt  to  exercise  its  full  powers,  these  hunters  and  robbers
are  continually  crossing  our  path.  The)'  are  the  central  figures
in  the  opening  chapters  of  Thucydides'  history,  for  they  were  the
one  ever-present  terror  of  the  early  unwalled  cities.  It  was  on
their  account,  for  instance,  that  cities  were  usually  planted  a  safe-
distance  inland,  to  secure  them  from  sudden  a.ssaults  by  the  cor-
sairs who  might  dart  round  the  near  promontory  or  .slip  over  at
night  from  the  rocky  island  across  the  bay.  For  it  was  b)-  .sea
especially  that  these  old  robbers  plied  their  trade,  which  became
more  highly  skilled  and  more  adventurous  with  every  forward
step  in  local  knowledge  and  communications.  '  The  early  Hellenes
of  the  coastlands  and  islands,'  says  Thucydides.  '  and  some  bar-
barians, too,  as  communication  by  sea  became  more  common,
turned  into  regular  robber  bands,  with  their  leading  men  at  their
head,  partly  from  love  of  gain  and  partly  to  support  their  helpless
dependants.  They  would  fall  upon  the  unwalled  cities  of  those
days — mere  collections  of  villages— and  sack  them  ;  indeed,  this
was  the  main  source  of  their  livelihood,  no  disgrace  being  yet
attached  to  it,  but  even  some  glory.  This  is  shown  by  the  honour
with  which  some  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  continent  still  regard
a  successful  marauder,  and  by  the  question  that  \\c  find  the  old
poets  representing  the  people  as  cvcr)'where  asking  of  voyagers


'  Thuc.  i.  5.  3,  2.  2.  The  Aetolians  were  still  'living  upontlieir  neighbours
in  the  time  of  Polybius,  leading  a  'greedy  and  beast-like  life  regarding
nobody  as  one  of  themselves  but  every  one  as  thcirnatural  foe  :  1  olyb.  iv.  3.
There  was  very  little  hunting  of  wild  animals  in  historic  (,rcecc,for  the  scrub
harbours  none,  and  good  forest  land  was  rare.  See  Xenophon  s  little  book
Ofi  Huniino;  which  is  mainly  concerned  with  hunting  hares  (on  big  game,
only  to  be"  had  outside  Greece,  see  chap.  xi).  and  Mahaffy.  J  roi^r.ss  of
Hellemsm  in  Alexamiei's  Empire,  p.  9,  on  how  Xenophon  enjoyed  the  good
hunting  provided  by  the  Persian  governors  in  Asia  Minor;  also,  p.  Go,  on  tne
Macedonian  (as  opposed  to  the  Greek)  type  of  sporting  countr)-  gentleman.


232  ECONOMICS  PART  TII

"  Are  you  pirates,"  as  if  those  who  were  asked  would  have
no  inclination  to  disclaim  the  suggestion  or  the  questioners
to  reproach  them  with  it.  The  same  robbery  went  on  also  by
land.'  ^

But  as  the  growing  City  State  became  more  powerful,  it  learnt
how  to  extend  its  strong  arm  over  the  haunts  of  the  robber  folk.
It  explored  and  cleared  their  mountain  fastnesses — those  great
limestone  caves  so  common  in  Greece,  sometimes  mere  indistin-
guishable slits  in  the  hillside,  but  leading  down  through  difficult
ways  into  high  and  spacious  halls.  Here,  where  the  robbers  of
old  had  lived  and  caroused  and  carved  altars  to  their  gods,  quiet
citizens  from  below,  shepherds  with  their  flocks  in  the  summer
pastures,  now  met  to  talk  and  pipe  and  sleep,  or  even,  as  we
know  by  writing  found  scratched  on  the  wall  or  on  the  potsherds
strewn  about  the  floor,  to  worship  Pan  or  the  Nymphs  or  some
other  peaceful  power.  And  the  sea-robbers,  too,  had  to  leave
their  old-established  hiding-places.  The  rocky  island  across  the
bay,  with  its  one  little  cove,  so  convenient  for  small  boats,  and  its
famous  spring  of  clear  water,  became  just  an  extra  piece  of  the
city's  pasture-ground,  very  useful  in  winter  when  there  was  snow
on  the  heights.  No  need  to  keep  dogs  there,  for  the  island  was
so  small  that  it  was  itself  a  natural  tether.  And  the  larger
islands  or  coast  towns,  which  had  lived  by  robbing  and  wrecking,
submitted  in  their  turn.  For  their  livelihood  was  gone,  and  'the
love  of  gain ',  as  Thucydides  says — in  other  words,  the  pinch  of
poverty — '  would  reconcile  the  weaker  to  the  dominion  of  the
stronger '.  Only  some  bold  spirits  resisted  and  moved  farther
afield,  where  as  yet  city  law  could  not  follow.^

Thus  the  gap  slowly  widened  between  the  adventurer  and  the
honest  citizen.  The  mighty  hunters  of  old  days,  once  the  pride
of  their  small  communities,  were  cut  off  from  the  society  of  the
growing  city,  and  became  recognized  outcasts.

^  Thuc.  i.  5.  There  is  still  glory  attaching  to  the  profession  when  it  is
carried  on  upon  the  old  lines.  In  1910  there  was  still  at  large  in  the  vilayet
of  Smyrna  a  noted  Robin  Hood  who  was  extremely  popular  among  the
peasants,  both  because  of  his  skill  in  defying  the  forces  of  the  law  and  of  his
considerate  choice  of  his  numerous  victims.

'■^  Thuc.  i.  8.  3.  For  my  view  on  the  historical  interpretation  of  this  part  of
Thucydides  see  p.  72  above.  For  an  account  of  one  of  these  caves,  the  Cave
of  Pan  near  Vari  in  Attica,  see  American  J 010-71  al  of  Archaeology,  vol.  vii,
pp.  263  ff.,  with  photographs  of  the  rude  stone  altar  and  reliefs  on  the  rock.


CHAP.  IV  HUNTING   OR   ROBBERY


«^3


Although  our  main  concern  is  with  the  city  and  its  regular
inhabitants  and  earners,  wc  must  pause  to  look  a  little  more
closely  at  some  of  these  adventurers.  For  the  spirit  of  their
calling  lived  on  into  fifth-century  Athens, and  we  shall  find,  as  we
go  on,  that  it  has  an  important  bearing  upon  our  subject.  These
independent-minded  outcasts  were  the  earliest  and  truest  repre-
sentatives in  the  old  Greek  world  of  the  '  economic  man  '.  Whereas
the  respectable  city  farmer  worked,  as  we  have  seen,  for  a  liveli-
hood, the  buccaneer  went  out  for  big  prizes,  and  when  he  made
a  lucky  haul  could  feast  and  clothe  himself  like  a  king.  His
profession  remained,  until  its  more  profitable  avenues  were  closed,
the  one  way  of  becoming  really  wealthy,  of  amassing  treasure
and  dependants,  which  this  early  world  provided  for  the  private
individual  or  groups  of  individuals.  Many  of  its  members  went
about  with  the  equipment  of  petty  kings,  and  it  is  probable  that
the  question,  'Are  you  a  pirate?'  really  meant  not  'Arc  you
a  robber  or  a  peaceful  traveller  ? '  but  '  Are  you  here  on  a  public
or  a  private  venture  ? '  In  either  case  the  sudden  and  unwelcome
visitor  was  out  to  '  convey  ',  but  the  one  would  be  warfare  and  the
other  merely  robbery.  Sometimes  the  question  would  be  a  little
difficult  to  answer.^

Under  what  conditions  did  the  corsair  earn  his  livelihood?
Fortunately  Homer  has  told  us  enough  about  him  to  enable  us  to
watch  him  at  work.  Instead  of  the  plough  and  the  spade  he  has.
as  his  instrument  of  production,  his  ship,  which,  whoever  made  it
or  whoever  was  its  first  owner,  by  now  counts  as  the  joint  pos-
session of  all  the  partners  of  the  venture.  The  Argo  belonged  to
all  the  Argonauts  alike.-

1  Cf.  Od.  iii.  82,  iv.  314  ;  Find.  01.  xiii.  69  ;  Hdt.  v.  63  {«?«  .'^iV  ,rr,iXa>  nT*
M^xo^l^).  How  thin,  even  in  the  fifth  century,  was  the  hne  between  warfare
and  private  buccaneering  may  be  seen  by  a  careful  study  of  Brasidas  o,)cra-
tions  in  Macedonia  and  Thrace  (e.g.  Thuc.  iv.  124  ff.),  and  by  the  cquuocal
position  of  the  Spartan  contingent  sent  to  help  the  '^p""ge''.^>'''"=^-,  .^''•/^'
Xenophon  describes  Alexander,  tyrant  of  Pherae  as  'an  unholy  '""bbcr  both
by  land  and  sea ' :  Hell.  vi.  4.  35-  I'olycrates  of  hamos  was  "juch  the  sa.nc
He  designed  a  ship,  only  too  well  known  to  the  Athenian  naval  police,  «h  ch
combined  speed  and  'belly'  for  plunder  in  an  unprecedented  degree  \\  hen
they  captured  the  island  the  Athenians  branded  the  Samians  «ith  the  mark
of  its  peculiar  design  (Hdt.  iii.  39  ;  I'lut.  Per.  26).

•'-  I  infer  this  from  the  constant  insistence  on  a  fair  (though  not  an  equal)
division  of  the  profits.     Strictly,  of  course,  the  ship  belonged  to  t^  ,n^^^^^^^^^
fitted  out  the  venture;  the  Argo,  therefore,  to    ason  who  as  '^  t«"<-l  "^/'^^
story  says,  went  in  his  lonely  old  age  to  live  with  his  old  ship,  noNv  rotimt,  on


234  '  ECONOMICS  PART  III

•  This  ship  is  small.  She  needs  to  be,  for  every  evening  she  is
pulled  on  shore,  where  she  serves  the  pirates  as  a  house,  a  citadel,
or  a  rampart.  Her  crew  is  seldom  less  than  twenty  or  more  than
fifty.  As  the  old  epic  epithet  tells  us,  she  is  hollow,  that  is  to  say,
undecked.  Her  hold  is  open,  there  is  no  semblance  of  a  quarter-
deck or  of  a  cabin.  She  is  a  boat  pure  and  simple,  in  spite  of
her  length.  Only  at  each  extremity  there  is  a  small  raised  plat-
form with  a  barrier,  but  the  space  below  these  two  platforms  is
open  like  all  the  rest  and  forms  a  continuation  of  the  ship.  On
the  "forecastle"  stands  the  watch;  on  the  poop  the  captain  and
the  pilot  have  their  place.  They  are  no  more  sheltered  than  the
rest  against  wind  and  rain,  but  their  relative  elevation  protects
them  from  the  waves  and  the  spray.  The  body  of  the  ship  is
occupied  by  the  rowers,  seated  on  little  transverse  benches.
Down  its  whole  length  runs  a  sort  of  central  track  or  "  bridge  ",
along  which  movement  is  possible  when  it  is  not  encumbered
with  merchandise.  This  is  stowed  as  best  it  can  be  under  the
rowers'  benches,  in  the  "  hollow  "  of  the  vessel,  or  under  the  front
and  back  platforms.  In  the  centre  there  is  a  sort  of  hole  for  the
mast.  When  the  wind  is  favourable  the  mast  is  fixed  in  the  hole
and  attached  by  ropes  in  front  and  behind,  perhaps,  too,  at  the
sides.  Sailing  is  in  its  infancy ;  the  wind  is  not  made  use  of
unless  it  is  behind  or  almost  so.  When  the  mast  is  no  longer
needed  it  is  unfixed,  taken  out  of  its  hole,  and  laid  in  the  middle
of  the  ship.  For  provisions  the  crew  generally  take  flour  and
wine  ;  but  water  must  also  be  fetched  from  time  to  time,  since
rowing  is  thirsty  work  and  wine  will  not  do  as  the  only  drink.
When  the  time  comes  for  fighting,  the  rowers,  or  at  least  a  part  of
them,  are  transformed  into  fighting-men.  They  fight  from  the
two  castles,  which  are  more  favourable  positions  than  the  centre
of  the  ship.  In  short,  the  Greek  ship  is  not  a  comfortable
abode ;  but  this  disadvantage  loses  force  when  it  is  remembered
that  almost  every  night  its  inmates  can  sleep  on  shore.  Night
voyages  are  rare,  and  the  leaders  run  the  risk  of  raising  their
men  against  them  if  they  call  upon  them  for  this  exceptional
hardship.'  ^

the  shore.    (Eur.  Medea  1 386  and  Murray's  note.)    But  probably  each  member
of  the  crew  had  by  custom  a  small  share  in  the  winnings.

*  From  La  Greceancienne,  by  G.  d'Azambuja,  Paris,  Bureaux  de  la  Science


CHAP.  IV  HUNTING    OR   RORHKRY  ^V'.

Rut  in  spite  of  its  discomforts  it  is  a  highly  ailmclivc  hfc,  more
attractive  by  far  than  earning  a  respectable  livelihood,  under  ihc
tutelage  of  fellow- tribesmen  and  neighbours,  in  the  stuffy  plain.
There  is  continual  excitement— then,  as  now,  a  perpetual  cravinj^
among  all  who  have  once  tasted  it— and  every  fresh  day  round
every  headland  the  possibility  of  untold  treasure.  The  prize,
when  it  came,  was  divided  out  strictly  in  a  democratic  spirit  of
equality;  for,  in  the  simple  code  of  the  corsairs'  morality,  murder
and  robbery  counted  for  nothing,  but  an  unfair  division  was  the
gravest  of  social  offences.  When  Agamemnon  cheats  Achilles  of
a  favourite  girl  captive  the  whole  fabric  of  this  primitive  society
is  loosened,  and  an  Iliad  of  tragedy  may  ensue.  Their  methods
of  production  may  be  peculiar,  like  those  of  some  lavish  modern
millionaires,  but  custom  prescribes  that  their  methods  of  distribu-
tion shall  be  scrupulously  respectable.^

But  it  is  weary  work  as  the  years  go  on  and  the  muscles  grow
stiff  to  tug  for  ever  at  the  oar,  or  to  live  winter  and  summer  in
mountain  fastnesses.  So  even  pirates  and  highwaymen  tended  to
settle  down  after  a  time  and  lead  normal  Greek  lives.  Some-
times, if  they  dare  not  go  to  their  own  city,  they  look  out  for
a  fresh  home  where  they  can  live  unmolesting  and  unmolested,
with  no  questions  asked.  In  this  way;  for  instance,  Messina  was
first  occupied  by  pirates  from  Cumae  in  Italy.  Similarly  respect-
able in  his  old  age  was  Odysseus's  old  grandfather  Autolycu.s,
who  had  a  reputation,  the  poet  tells  us,  for  'surpassing  all  man-
kind in  stealing  and  the  use  of  the  oath  :  Hermes  himself  had  taught
him  how  '.  And,  after  all,  the  heroes  of  the  Trojan  War,  who  are
at  such  pains  to  come  back,  after  ten  years  over  one  venture,  to
their  sorrowing  wives,  are  little  better  than  bandits.  For  how,  as
Thucydides  pertinently  asks,  did  they  keep  themselves  all  those


^  v.^.c...,,^  ^. .  ^ arlypi

I'Odyssce,  vol.  ii,  ch.  i;  also  vol.  i,  pp.  379  ff-.  on  female  passengers,  for  whom
a  ship  so  constructed  offered  little  accommodation.  Hence  Clytcmncstra
taunts  Agamemnon  and  Cassandra  with  silting  side  by  side  on  the  rmvcr^
benches  :  Aesch.  Ag.  1442.  Eumaeus's  nursemaid,  on  a  smiilar  expedition.
tumbled  down  into  the  hold  and  broke  her  neck  :   Od.  xv.  479-

»  11.  i.  122  ff.;  Od.  ix.  42,  X.  43-  The  Frank  corsairs  of  the  sevenlcenlh
century,  as  Berard  points  out,  led  a  much  more  disciplined  life.  Ihcy  laii
regular  ofificers  on  board,  not  elective  magistrates,  and  mutiny  was  treatcrt  as
such.     So  it  was  by  Sir  Francis  Drake.


23<5  ECONOMICS  part  hi

years?  Much  in  the  same  way  as  the  strangest  rulers  Athens
ever  had,  the  Catalan  Grand  Company,  who  settled  down  to
govern  Attica  and  attend  service  in  the  Church  of  St.  Mary  on
the  Acropolis  after  some  merry  years  of  making  a  living  out  of
the  Thracian  Chersonese  opposite  Troy.^

These  epic  adventurers  were  gradually  scattered  and  thinned
out  by  the  vigilant  policing  of  the  sea  powers ;  and  by  the  fifth
century,  when  Athens  kept  watch  over  the  Aegean,  their  great
days  were  over.  Yet  they  still  reappeared  whenever  opportunity
offered,  and  the  security  of  which  Athenians  boasted  remained
relative  rather  than  absolute.  Travelling  in  Greek  times  was
always,  according  to  modern  standards,  unsafe.  Even  in  fifth-
century  Athens  itself  there  was  the  well-known  footpad,  nicknamed
Orestes,  to  set  upon  you  as  you  picked  your  way  home  through
the  dark  streets  after  a  party.  And  at  sea  the  enemies  of  the
ruling  power  were  quick  to  improvise  as  corsairs.  How  common
and  natural  a  profession  it  was  may  be  seen  by  the  stratagem
adopted  by  some  Megarians  on  one  occasion  to  admit  the
Athenians  into  their  walls.  They  pretended  to  be  privateers,  and
so  got  leave  every  evening  to  have  the  gates  opened  in  order  to
carry  through  their  boat  on  a  cart  to  the  seashore,  bringing  it
back  again  before  daylight.  As  soon  as  the  strong  hand  of
Athens  was  removed  the  craft  renewed  their  activity,  and
played  hide  and  seek  with  the  lesser  sea  powers  all  round  the
Archipelago.2

But  it  is  time  to  leave  them  to  their  devices :  if  we  follow  them
further  we  shall  find  ourselves  encroaching  upon  other  branches
of  housekeeping.  P'or  who  shall  draw  the  exact  line  where
robbery  stops  and  legitimate  warfare  and  even  commerce  begin  ?
Between  stealing  and  commandeering  and  *  peacefully  persuading  '
to  sell  there  are  the  thinnest  of  partitions :  and  even  the  modern

^  Thuc.  vi.  4.  5  (Messina),  i.  il  (Trojan  War  commissariat)  ;  Od.  xix.  395
( Autolycus).  For  the  amazing  history  of  the  Catalans  see  Rennell  Rodd,  vol.  ii,
p.  66  :  also  pp.  138  ff.,  a  characteristic  story  of  how  one  of  these  grizzled  and
tender-hearted  old  murderers  carried  a  royal  Infant,  cradle  and  all,  through
infinite  perils  to  his  grandmother  in  Spain.  They  would  be  glad  to  know
that  Spanish  is  still  talked  in  the  little  ports  of  the  Chersonese,  though  not
their  Spanish  and  by  no  descendants  of  theirs.

^  Thuc.  iv.  67.  3  ;  cf.  ii.  67.  4  and  69.  For  '  Orestes'  see  Birds  1491.  He
was  no  isolated  figure;  cf.  Xen.  Mem.  ii.  I.  15  raty  b^oi%  tvQa  nXe'ia-roi
ddiKoiivTai,


CHAP.  IV  HUNTING    OR    ROBRF.in'


337


variant,  pcaccfull}'  persuading  to  buy  or '  opening  a  virgin  niarkel ',
is  sometimes  strangely  like  them.  In  any  case,  all  these  activities
carry  our  attention  beyond  the  subject  of  this  chapter,  the  early
hunters  and  robbers,  whether  by  land  or  sea.  Let  us  now  pass
on  to  examine  how  the  growing  city  learnt  to  enlist  and  use  this
hunting  instinct  to  promote  her  own  national  purposes.


CHAPTER    V

THE  GROWING  CITY:    WARFARE

AXX  ,  d)  ScoKparej,  tvparou  eari  Koi  utto  noKefiioov  rrjv  noXiv  nXovri^fiv,

Nr]  Ai'a  (T(f)6tpa  y ,  iav  Tis  avrau  Kpf'iTTCcv  fj'  rJTrav  8e  utv  Koi  to.  opra  npoaairn-
^oKoi  av. — Xenophon,  Memo7-abilia  iii.  6.  7.

But,  Socrates,  it  is  possible  to  procure  wealth  for  the  State  from  our
foreign  enemies.

Yes,  certainly,  you  may,  if  you  are  the  stronger  power  ;  but,  if  not,  you  stand
to  lose  even  what  you  have  already.

H  TToXe/iiKi)  (pvcTfi  KTrjTiKi]  TTCOf  ((TT(u,  T]  bit  xprjadai  rrpos  re  tu  drjpia  Ka\  rav
ap6pa)nci)v  oaoi  necfyvKores  (ipxecrOai  pfj  deXovau',  as  (pvaei  tiKaiov  toitov  optu  top

TToXe/uoi/. — Aristotle,  Politics  1256.

War  is  strictly  a  means  of  acquisition,  to  be  employed  against  wild  animals
and  against  inferior  races  of  men,  who,  though  intended  by  nature  to  be  in
subjection  to  us,  are  unwilling  to  submit  :  for  war  of  such  a  kind  is
just  by  nature.

For  many  centuries,  as  we  have  seen,  the  growing  City  State
gained  slowly  in  prosperity,  bringing  the  distant  lands  under  culti-
vation or  pasture  and  consolidating  its  authority  over  men's  minds
and  lives.  Outside  her  were  the  landless  adventurers,  infesting
the  narrow  seas  and  barring  the  mountain  passes  ;  but  within
her  well-marked  borders  the  farmer  and  the  shepherd,  and  the
craftsman  and  small  trader  beside  them,  were  serving  the  State
and  preparing  themselves  for  self-government.  We  have  now
reached  the  point  in  our  rapid  sketch  of  the  economics  of  the
growing  City,  where,  after  centuries  of  isolation,  the  old  seclusion
is  interrupted  and  the  states  of  Greece  began  to  be  brought  into
relation  with  their  neighbours.

The  change  was  due  to  very  simple  and  natural  causes.
Greece  is  by  nature,  as  we  have  seen,  a  poverty-stricken  country.
Her  bare  hills  and  plains  provide  in  themselves  food  for  but
a  small  population.  Under  the  rude  methods  of  cultivation  then
in  use,  a  time  was  bound  to  come,  in  every  City  State  area,  when
the  land  could  yield  no  more  increase.     It  became  peopled  up  to


CHAP.  V  WARFARE  2^9

its  natural  limits.  If  the  slightest  mischance  occurred,  if  the
rains  came  late  or  a  sudden  storm  spoilt  the  harvest,  the  State
would  be  face  to  face  with  famine.  This  point  seems  to  have
been  reached  in  the  development  of  the  leading  City  States  in
the  eighth  or  seventh  century  before  Christ.  On  an  carh'cr
page  we  watched  some  of  the  consequences  to  which  this  led
in  the  sphere  of  politics  or  citizenship.  1 1  ere  we  arc  concerned
only  with  its  economic  results.^

When  population  presses  upon  subsistence,  and  there  is  not
enough  food  to  go  round,  there  are  only  two  immediate  remedies
— less  people  or  more  food,  to  send  away  emigrants  or  to  bring  in
supplies  from  outside.  Leaving  the  question  of  emigration  aside
till  our  next  chapter,  let  us  turn  to  the  question  of  fresh  supplies.

How  is  the  food  to  be  procured  ?  It  cannot  be  bought,  for
there  is  nothing  to  buy  it  with.  There  are  as  yet  no  surjjlus
products  or  manufactures.  It  must  be  hunted  or  stolen,  '  led  off
or  carried  off,'  as  the  Greek  phrase  ran.  In  other  words,  the
city  must  make  her  peace  with  the  hunting  instinct  and  learn  to
use  it  in  her  service.     She  must  learn  how  to  conduct  war.

War  is  a  threadbare  subject  in  our  pulpits  and  newspapers.
But  to  understand  its  normal  place  in  City  State  society  we  must
forget  all  that  we  have  ever  heard  or  read  about  either  its  wicked-
ness or  its  romance.  To  the  early  Greeks,  as  to  many  of  the
Balkan  highlanders  to-day,  it  did  not  seem  either  wicked  or
romantic,  but  was  simply  an  exciting  and  not  unusual  way  of
spending  some  weeks  in  early  summer,  a  traditional  part  of  the
national  economy  and  of  the  citizen's  public  service.  For  between
Greek  and  modern  Western  warfare  there  are  clear  and  vital  dis-
tinctions ;  and  it  is  doubly  necessary,  both  for  the  understanding
of  history  and  for  sound  policy  to-day,  that  they  should  be
widely  recognized.

War  in  the  modern  world  serves,  or  is  supposed  to  serve,  two
separate  functions.  It  is  firstly,  since  society  is  ultimately  based
on  force,  an  ultimate  way  of  settling  national  differences,  the
trump-card  of  the  'national  honour'  when  reason  and  good
temper  have  failed,  the  stern  arbitrament  which  men,  conciucred
in  body  if  not  in  spirit,  must  perforce  accept,  for  the  time  at
least,  as  decisive.     For  these  purposes  war  has  long  been  rccog-

*  See  pp.  Ill  ft",  above.
Q  2


240  FXONOMICS  part  hi

nized  by  thinkers  and  statesmen  (to  use  an  American  statesman's
phrase)  as  a  'ferocious  folly' — a  stupid  and  clumsy  expedient
unworthy  of  our  civilized  life.  For  civilized  nations — peoples,
that  is,  who  have  acquired  the  self-respect  which  is  second  nature
to  all  true  nationalities — cannot  regard  such  an  arbitrament
as  final.  Such  peoples  fight  not  for  material  but  for  moral
issues,  not  to  avoid  tribute  and  save  their  purses,  but  for  homes
and  liberties  and  customs  and  all  their  intimate  associations.
War  can  decide  no  moral  issues.  England,  for  instance,  might
conceivably  be  conquered,  but  she  could  not  be  held.  Men
speak  idly  of  war  as  'clearing  the  air'  like  a  thunderstorm.
Napo'eon,  by  the  time  he  reached  St.  Helena,  knew  better  :  that
the  sword,  as  he  moaned,  settles  nothing,  nothing.  You  may
annex  a  province  and  secure  her  loyalty  with  fortresses,  or  humble
a  proud  people  so  that  they  long  for  revenge,  or  poison,  with  the
bitterness  of  persecution,  a  wellspring  of  young  ideas  ;  but  you
will  decide  no  spiritual  conflicts.  For  though  you  may  think
the  battle  is  being  fought  out  with  the  latest  artillery  on  the
plains  of  Troy,  it  is  up  on  Olympus,  far  from  the  roar  of  the  guns
and  the  crash  of  musketry,  that  the  gods  are  weighing  the  com-
batants in  their  scales.  In  the  third  or  fourth  generation  you
shall  know  the  All-Father's  verdict.

But  there  is  another  function  claimed  for  warfare.  Modern
wars,  we  are  told;  should  no  longer  be  regarded  as  religious  or
moral — these  considerations  may  be  waived — but  as  predomi-
nantly economic  ;  they  are  simply  an  extension  to  the  national
sphere  of  the  jostling  competition  of  modern  life.  Individuals
who  have  been  bargaining  against  foreigners  in  the  market-place
adjourn  as  soldiers  to  the  battlefield  to  continue  the  debate.
Modern  nations  fight,  not  for  provinces  but  for  profits,  for  the
virgin  market  and  the  protected  plantation.

This  conception  of  war  is  often  claimed  by  its  advocates  as
characteristically  modern.  In  the  Middle  Ages,  we  are  told,
men  fought  for  religion  :  nowadays  they  fight  for  trade.  In  fact,
of  course,  it  is  war  in  its  oldest  and  crudest  and  most  thoughtless
form.  It  is,  as  some  of  its  more  outspoken  advocates  have  realized,
simply  the  old  state  brigandage  of  the  Homeric  chieftains  and
state  pirac}'  of  King  Pol}xrates,  dressed  up  in  a  new  guise  to  suit
our  struggle-for-life  philosophies.     It  is  war,  as  Aristotle  described


CHAP.  V  WARFARi:  -^1

it,  as  a  *  means  of  acquisition  '  and  '  a  species  of  luiiiiinii  .  (  »nly
it  is  carelessly  transferred,  without  any  attempt  to  realize  the
consequences,  to  the  infinitely  complex  field  of  modern  inttr-
national  economy.  Under  our  sensitive  system  of  credit-built
finance,  when  Berlin  and  New  York  respond  to  every  shock
or  shadow  of  shock  in  London  or  Paris,  there  is  at  least  a  pre-
sumption that  the  old  doctrine  of  warfare  should  be  revised.
Certainly  it  can  no  longer  be  carried  on  in  the  same  easy  con-
fident buccaneering  manner  ;  for  we  know  by  experience  that
it  touches  the  lives  and  fortunes  of  millions  of  non-combatants,
the  workman  and  the  taxpayer,  the  shareholder  and  the  house-
wife, as  surely  and  as  closely  as  the  fighters  themselves.  There
are  few  things  in  public  life  more  disastrous  and  demoralizing
than  the  misplaced  lightheartcdness  which  treats  serious  issues  as
a  game.  The  fifth-century  Athenian  was  prone  to  the  same  fatal
mistake,  although  with  far  greater  ground  for  excuse.  So  it  is
worth  while,  in  order  to  understand  both  the  economy  of  ancient
Greece  and  our  own  daily  paper,  to  watch  the  history  of  the  part
played  by  warfare  in  the  life  of  the  older  Greeks.'

Let  us  turn  back  once  more  to  Thucydides.  In  one  short  but
emphatic  sentence  he  takes  us  through  the  long  c[uict  centuries
of  isolation.  Then,  with  a  brief  reference  to  colonies,  he  plunges
into  his  favourite  subject  of  the  improvement  of  communications,
especially  by  sea.  He  tells  us  of  the  earliest  navies,  dating  from
the  end  of  the  eighth  century  and  the  early  seventh,  and  of  their
successors  down  to  the  fifth.  Then  he  proceeds  as  follows  :
'  The  Greek  navies  of  the  period  that  we  have  traversed  were
what  I  have  described.  All  their  insignificance  did  not  prevent
them  from  being  an  element  of  the  greatest  power  to  those  who

^  For  a  good  discussion  of  the  economic  conditions  under  which  modern
warfare  is  carried  on,  see  'Hie  Great Ilhision  by  Norman  .\nRcll  (Lcndon.  l<>io).
The  illusion  in  question  is  the  common  belief  that  warfare  between  highly
organized  modern  peoples  can  be  economically  profitable  to  the  victor.  To
put  the  author's  doctrine  in  its  simplest  form:  if  an  invading  army  were  to
loot  the  Bank  of  England,  for  every  pound  tak(  n  from  its  cellars  ihcinvadcrs
would  lose  a  thousand  through  the  general  shock  to  credit.  He  has  thus
caused  a  startling  transposition  of  forces  in  an  ancient  controversy.  Hic
advocate  of  war  becomes  the  '  sentimentalist '  whilst  the  '  practical  man  is
ranged  on  the  side  of  peace.  It  is  important,  however,  to  remember  that
opinions  and  impulses  (especially  collective  impulses)  do  not  automatic-illy
pass  away  by  being  proved  to  be  unreasonable,  or  (.ven  unprofitable  bcc
also  the  article  on  '  Finance  in  Time  of  War '  in  the  (huirUrh  R,-i- cu;  Oct.
1910,  which  gives  approximate  figures  of  the  necessar)-  cost  of  a  motlern  war.


242  ECONOMICS  PART  III

cultivated  them,  alike  in  revenue  and  in  dominion.  They  were
the  means  by  which  the  islands  were  reached  and  reduced,
especially  by  states  that  had  not  sufficient  land  of  their  oivn.
Wars  by  land  there  were  none,  none  at  least  by  which  dominion
was  acquired.  They  were  all  simply  border  contests  between
neighbours,  but  of  distant  expeditions  with  conquest  for  object  we
hear  nothing  among  the  Hellenes.  .  .  .  What  fighting  there  was
consisted  merely  of  local  warfare  between  rivals.'  ^

Here  we  see  clearly  both  the  objects  and  the  methods  of  this
old  Greek  warfare.  Its  object  was  to  secure  'revenue  and
dominion ',  in  other  words,  land  and  supplies.  Its  methods  by
sea  were  to  reach  and  to  occupy  cultivable  islands,  driving  out
or  imposing  tribute  on  the  existing  population  ;  by  land,  across
the  range,  where  annexation  was  impossible  and  tribute  could
not  be  extorted,  to  make  raids  over  the  border  and  carry  off  what
could  be  found.

Once  the  city  had  discovered  this  easy  means  of  enrichment,
she  created  the  military  and  naval  organization  which  would
enable  her  either  to  pursue  it  herself  or  to  defend  herself  against
her  neighbours  ;  and  once  this  organization  was  created  men
were  certain,  as  we  know,  to  feel  inclined  to  put  it  to  use.  Prac-
tically every  Greek  state  had  its  conscript  army  of  heavy-armed
footsoldiers,  ready  to  be  called  out  at  need,  and  many  of  them —
including  Athens  from  a  very  early  time — had  trained  seamen
ready  for  their  galleys  as  well.  From  the  days  of  those  early
expeditions  described  by  Thucydides,  war,  or  rather  State  robbery,
became  a  recognized  part  of  City  State  life  and  economy.  '  It
belonged  to  the  particular  life-force  of  the  City  State,'  says
a  recent  German  writer,  '  to  live  on  the  products  of  other  men's
labours.  This  impulse  did  not  disappear  until  the  possibilities
of  satisfying  it  were  diminished.'  Glaucon,  the  ingenuous  young
man  in  \\\q.  Memorabilia  ofXenophon,  regards  it  as  the  first  and
most  natural  source  of  income,  '  to  procure  wealth  for  the  city
from  her  foreign  enemies.'  For  the  customs  which  grew  up
in  this  ancient  warfare,  no  doubt  out  of  the  brigandage  which
preceded  it,  secured  to  the  victor  the  whole  property  of  the
vanquished  ;  and  we  shall  have  occasion  to  see  later  how  Greek

Thuc.  i.  15.     The  translation  is  practically  Crawley's  (Temple  Classics),
except  in  the  important  sentence  w  hich  I  italicize,  where  he  has  blundered.


CHAP.  V  warfarp:  >,,

financial  arrangements  oflcn  depended  on  the  application  of  ihc.so
customs.  The  harder  the  struggle  for  existence  became  for
a  City  State,  the  more  closely  did  its  wars  approximate  to  free-
booting  expeditions.  We  shall  not  understand  the  imperial
position  of  fifth-century  Athens  unless  we  bear  this  temjjtation
very  constantly  in  mind.^

We  can  watch  many  of  these  freebooting  expeditions  in  the
pages  of  Herodotus.  Two  must  suffice  here — one  by  land  and
one  by  sea.  The  first  concerns  Athens  and  one  of  her  most
illustrious  names.  '  Through  the  victory  of  Marathon,'  says
Herodotus,  '  Miltiades,  who  was  before  highly  esteemed  among
the  Athenians,  still  more  increased  his  reputation.  When,  there-
fore, he  asked  of  the  Athenians  seventy  ships  and  troops  and
money,  without  telling  them  what  country  he  purposed  to  invade,
but  saying  that  he  would  make  them  rich  if  they  would  follow
him,  as  he  would  take  them  to  a  country  whence  they  would
easily  obtain  abundance  of  gold, 'the  Athenians,  elated  by  tlie.-c
hopes,  granted  him  the  ships.  Miltiades  took  the  troops  and
sailed  against  the  island  of  Paros,  alleging  as  a  pretext  that  the
Parians  had  provoked  hostilities  by  sending  a  galley  with  the
Persians  to  Marathon.  This  was  his  pretended  reason  :  but,  in
fact,  he  had  a  private  grudge  against  the  Parians,  because  L)sa-
goras,  son  of  Tisias,  a  Parian,  had  spoken  ill  of  him  to  Hydarnes
the  Persian.  He  arrived  with  his  forces  and  besieged  the  Parians,
who  were  driven  within  their  walls  ;  Miltiades  sent  a  herald  in  to
them  with  a  demand  for  a  hundred  talents,  saying  that  if  they  did
not  give  him  that  sum  he  would  not  draw  off  his  army  until
he  had  destroyed  them.  The  Parians  never  entertained  the
thought  whether  they  should  give  Miltiades  any  money,  but
devised  means  by  which  they  might  defend  the  city  ;  and,  in
addition  to  other  plans,  raised  the  wall,  in  several  of  the  most
exposed  parts  of  the  city,  during  the  night,  to  twice  its  former
height.  Up  to  this  point  of  the  story  all  the  Greeks  agree.'
Here  the  tale  becomes  confused.  A  Parian  priestess  seems  to
have  told  Miltiades  to  do  something  which  resulted  in  his  hurting
his  leg  by  leaping  over  a  wall  in  the  dark.       In  any  case,  he

1  Riezler,  Ober  Finanzen  mid  Moiwpolc  in  CricihcnLuui,  PP-  6S-9.  For
Glaucon  see  the  chapter  motto.  The  very  word  for  enemy  (»x^>'<'j)  means
'  outsider',  as  opposed  to  ^eVof,  '  stranger  '  or  guest-friend.


244  ECONOMICS  part  hi

eventually  '  sailed  home  again  in  a  bad  plight,  neither  bringing
money  to  the  Athenians  nor  having  reduced  Paros,  but  having
besieged  it  for  six  and  twenty  days  and  ravaged  the  island  '.^

The  story  dates  from  the  early  part  of  the  fifth  century,  but
the  sea-raid  of  which  it  gives  so  vivid  a  picture  is  of  the  sort  that
must  constantly  have  been  going  on  between  coastlands  and
islands  all  through  the  days  of  the  growth  of  the  City  State.
But  this  particular  incident  has  a  further  interest,  for  it  throws
forward  an  ominous  shadow  on  the  path  of  our  special  inquiry.
There  was  as  yet  no  Athenian  Empire  when  Miltiades  sailed
to  Paros.  But  the  Empire,  when  it  came,  did  not  forget  the
methods  found  so  convenient  by  the  City  State.

The  other  story  hails  from  the  Peloponnese.  When  King
Croesus  sent  for  help  to  Sparta,  about  the  middle  of  the  sixth
century,  he  received  none  because  'at  that  very  time',  says
Herodotus,  'the  Spartans  themselves  happened  to  have  a  quarrel
with  the  men  of  Argos  about  a  tract  of  land  called  Thyrea  ;  for
this  Thyrea,  which  properly  belongs  to  the  territory  of  Argos,
the  Spartans  had  seized.  .  .  .  The  Argives  having  advanced  to
the  territory  which  had  thus  been  taken  from  them,  both  parties,
upon  a  conference,  agreed  that  three  hundred  men  on  each  side
should  join  battle,  and  that  whichever  party  was  victorious  should
be  entitled  to  the  disputed  territory.'  In  the  event,  two  Argives
were  left  alive  and  one  Spartan  ;  but  the  Argives,  thinking  them-
selves victorious,  ran  home  with  the  news,  leaving  the  Spartan  to
strip  the  corpses  of  the  Argives  in  the  old  Homeric  fashion  and
carry  their  arms  to  his  camp.  Whereupon,  of  course,  the  battle
was  renewed  next  day.-

There  is  one  special  point  of  interest  in  this  famous  story.
It  bears  the  mark  of  a  curious  transition  in  our  subject.  It  deals
with  a  border  struggle  of  the  old  familiar  kind,  such  as  went  on,
between  citizens  and  outcasts  and  between  State  and  State,  all
through  the  period  which  we  have  been  considering.  But  the
struggle  is  no  longer  carried  on  in  the  old  unscrupulous  buccaneer-
ing spirit.  There  has  been  a  change  in  methods.  Fighting  is
now  conducted   according  to  a   certain  fixed  code.     It  has  an

^  Hdt.  vi.  132-5.

^  Hdt.  i.  82.  Compare,  in  this  connexion,  the  Boeotarch's  speech,
Thuc.  iv.  92.


CHAP.  V  WARFARE  24 r,

elaborate  etiquette  of  its  own.  It  is  no  longer  ,1  fierce  scramble
in  which  'all  is  fair  '.  It  is  a  game  which  is  played  according  to
rules.  It  has  become  in  fact  a  sport  as  well  as  a  '  means  of
acquisition  '.

But  war  as  a  sport  carries  us  beyond  the  limits  of  this  chapter.
For  it  belongs  properly  to  a  time  when  the  old  crude  methods  of
robbery  were  no  longer  so  indispensable  to  the  life  of  the  City
State,  when  men  could  afford  to  be  chivalrous  because  they  had
discovered  other  means  of  satisfying  their  immediate  needs.  I'or
the  present  we  must  pass  on  to  the  growing  city's  second  remedy,
the  safety-valve  of  emigration.


CHAPTER    VI

THE    GROWING   CITY  :    COLONIZATION

Kat  §17  K.ai  TO  ye  reXoy,  cif  fnL\v(Tis  v7T€p^ii\\ovcra  i]fJ.lv  tvoXltcov  avfi^aiv']  Km
anopay^fv,  to  TTokaioi'Trovvndpxfi  fjLri)(avr]pn,  (KTropni)  dnoiKioiv. —  Pl\TO,  La7i'S  740.

Last  of  all,  if  there  be  an  excess  of  citizens  and  we  are  at  our  wits'  end,
there  is  still  the  old  device  of  sending  out  a  colony.

We  have  seen  that  the  growing  Greek  States  were  faced,  in
the  eighth  and  seventh  centuries,  with  the  problem  of  over-popu-
lation in  its  acutest  form.  Of  the  two  obvious  forms  of  relief —
less  mouths  or  more  supplies — the  latter  was  the  easier  and  more
natural.  But  it  was  also  the  less  satisfactory.  For,  as  Socrates
told  his  young  pupil,  you  may  certainly  '  grow  rich  upon  the
foreigner  ...  if  you  are  the  stronger  power  ;  but,  if  not,  you  stand
to  lose  even  what  you  have  already '.  Greece  was  therefore
gradually  driven  back  upon  the  more  difficult  remedy,  the  drastic
purge  of  emigration.  As  Plato  puts  it,  in  the  kindly  conserva-
tism of  his  old  age :  '  when  men  who  have  nothing,  and  are  in
want  of  food,  show  a  disposition  to  follow  their  leaders  in  an
attack  on  the  property  of  the  rich,  these,  who  are  the  natural
plague  of  the  State,  are  sent  away  by  the  statesman  in  as  friendly
a  spirit  as  possible ;  and  this  dismissal  of  them  is  euphemistically
termed  a  colony.*  By  a  deliberate  effort  of  state-craft,  encouraged
at  every  point  by  the  healing  influence  of  Delphi,  the  activities
that  were  running  riot  at  home  were  diverted  into  a  great  coloniz-
ing impulse.  In  the  course  of  these  two  centuries  the  Mediter-
ranean, from  Spain  to  the  Crimea,  was  girdled  with  a  ring  of
cities  sent  out  from  Greece  and  Asia  Minor.^

It  is  these  circumstances  of  their  origin,  rather  than  the
character  of  the  Greek  race,  which  explain  the  profound  and
characteristic  differences  between  ancient  Greek  and  most  modern
forms  of  colonization,  between  ancient  Marseilles,  for  instance,

*  Cf.  p.  119  above.  Plato,  Laws  735-6;  Thuc.  i.  12.  4  (where  the  Black
Sea  colonies  are  omitted  and  the  foundation  of  the  Ionian  cities  is  much
post-dated).


CHAP.  VI  COLONIZATION


U7


and  the  modern  Greek  quarter  in  New  York.  A  Greek  coloniz-
ing expedition  was  not  a  private  venture  of  individuals  or  groups
of  individuals,  but  embodied  a  carefull)'  organized  scheme  of
State-promoted  emioration.  A  Greek  colony  was  not  founded
by  a  few  pioneers  and  then  gradually  built  up  by  band  after  band
of  subsequent  stragglers,  but  planted  once  and  for  all.  in  its
proper  form  and  numbers,  by  a  swarm  going  out,  like  bees,  with
a  Queen  or  Head-eolonist  of  their  own.^

Once  planted,  the  colony  became,  of  course,  a  full-fledged  city,
leading  a  new  and  independent  life,  associating  much  or  little,
according  as  it  felt  inclined,  with  its  metropolis.  To  describe
that  life,  so  far  as  it  had  characteristic  features  of  its  own,  docs
not  fall  within  the  strict  limits  of  our  subject  ;  the  Greek  colonial
communities  are  only  important  to  us  for  the  part  they  played  in
connexion  with  fifth-century  Athens.  But  a  few  words  are  neces-
sary, if  only  to  clear  away  misconceptions.

A  Greek  colony  was  not  primarily  a  trading  centre.  The
basis  of  its  economy  was  agricultural,  as  with  the  citie.s  of  the
homeland.  It  was  only  through  the  chances  of  later  develop-
ment that  some  of  them,  like  some  of  their  parent  cities,  attained
commercial  importance.  The  men  who  went  out  to  form  their
citizen-body  shared  the  old  agricultural  tradition :  indeed,  ihcy
were  mostly  dispossessed  cultivators,  who  had  been  crjing  out  at
home  for  a  '  redistribution  of  lands  '.  And  our  inscriptions  show
us  this  redistribution  taking  place,  only  on  barbarian  soil.  '  Ten
land-distributors  shall  be  chosen,  one  from  each  tribe  ;  and  they
shall  divide  up  the  land,'  say  the  regulations  that  have  come
down  to  us  for  an  Athenian  colony  in  Thrace.  Our  only  other
set  of  regulations,  for  a  colony  on  the  island  of  Curzola  in  Dal-
matia,  goes  into  closer  details.  '  Those  who  are  the  first  to
occupy  the  land  and  fortify  the  city  are  each  to  receive  as  a
special  portion  a  site  for  a  house  within  the  fortified  enclosure,
with  the  portion  of  land  belonging  to  it  ;  and  of  the  land  outside
the  city  each  man  is  to  receive  three-quarters  of  an  acre  as  his
first  share,  besides  his  proportion  of  the  land  which  will  still
remain  to  be  divided.  The  men  of  the  parties  that  arrive  later
shall  each  receive  an  acre  of  the  land  that  still  remains  to  be
divided.  The  following  occupied  the  land  and  fortified  the  city.'
^  Plato,  Laws  708,  who  compares  over-population  to  a  state  of  sietjc.


248  ECONOMICS  part  ill

Here  follow  the  names  of  the  first  settlers,  arranged  according  to
the  'tribes'  of  the  mother- country.^

These  two  inscriptions  are  all  that  remain  to  show  us  in  detail
the  care  and  organization  that  was  directed  to  the  founding  of
a  Greek  colony.  But  we  know  from  Herodotus  the  pains  that
were  taken  to  select  a  good  site,  and  how  Apollo  was  called  in,
not  only  as  a  healing  power  for  moral  influence  and  support,  but
as  a  source  of  useful  information  for  the  details  of  the  proposed
settlement.  Men  went  to  Delphi  with  a  string  of  business
inquiries,  and  every  statesman  in  Greece  knew  the  chief  questions
to  be  asked.

Plato  in  the  Laics  and  Aristotle  in  the  Politics  have  both
embodied  the  main  conditions  of  the  model  colony — plenty  of
water  and  good  land  for  corn  and  vine  and  olive,  timber  for  ships,
a  good  harbour,  a  town  site  not  too  near  the  sea,  and,  above  all,
tame  natives,  willing  and  anxious  to  do  field-work  if  their  masters
will  secure  them  against  aggression.  But  the  fourth-century
philosophers  are  only  copying  the  traditional  prospectuses  that
have  come  down  through  many  generations  of  Greek  agricultural
life.  You  will  find  the  archetype  in  Homer,  on  the  lips  of
Odysseus,  when  he  describes  to  Alcinous  his  last  bivouac  before
meeting  the  Cyclops,  in  an  island  full  of  woods  and  soft  meadows,
ploughland  and  vine-land,  with  unnumbered  goats  in  its  rugged
glens,  but  which  in  all  the  long  days  has  never  known  seed-time
or  ploughing  and  is  just  calling  out  for  men.-

Here  we  must  leave  our  colonists  till  we  meet  them  again
when  we  go  out  on  a  voyage  with  the  Athenian  trader.  For  it
is  time  to  pass  on  to  another  stage  of  our  inquiry.  Colonization
begets  intercourse  and  intercourse  begets  commerce.  We  hav^e
in  fact  reached  the  point  in  the  economic  development  of  the  city
at  which,  even  with  colonization  for  a  safety- valve,  the  old  self-
sufficient  economic  life  is  no  longer  possible.  Strictly  speaking,
indeed,  we  have  already  passed  that  narrow  barrier.  For  how
can  Apollo  issue  his  sailing  instructions,  or  our  colonists  know

^  Hicks  and  Hill,  no.  41  ;  Dittenberger,  No.  933.  Brea  was  founded  in  the
fifth  centurj',  Curzola  in  the  fourth.  In  general  see  Meyer,  ii,  §  284  and  note,
who  points  out  how  scanty  our  detailed  evidence  about  Greek  colonization  is.
There  was  no  Greek  Hakluyt  to  collect  the  early  voyages.

^  Od.  ix.  116  ff.;  Hdt.  iv.  155  ff.;  Xen.  Anab.  vi.  4.  3  ff.  (showing  that
Xenophon  had  a  practised  eye)  ;  Plato,  Laws  704  fif.,  740;  Ar.  Pol.  1327  a,
I329a26,  I330a26ff.  (tame  natives).


CHAP.  VI  COLONIZATION


249


round  which  headland  lies  their  home,  unless  adventurous  fore-
runners have  already  explored  the  field,  unless  some  *  j-oun^j
light-hearted  master  of  the  waves  '  has  already  braved  Phoenicians
and  natives  and  won  his  way,  after  an  Odj'sscy,  through  uncharted
seas,  to  the  harbour  of  his  choice  ?  These  pioneers,  part  pirates,
part  dealers  with  the  '  shy  traffickers  '  of  the  hinterland,  some-
times an  organized  soldiery,  sometimes  explorers  or  wandering
scholars  just  going  out  'to  have  a  look  ',  arc  at  once  the  creators
and  the  creatures  of  a  new  era  of  city  economy.  The  natives
who  watched  them  labouring  shoreward  from  the  blue  distance
and  brought  their  treasures  down  to  the  beach  for  exchange  at
the  recognized  meeting-place,  often  dimly  wondered  what  drove
them  so  far  abroad  from  their  homes  and  gods.  l''uripidcs,
'  most  tragic  of  poets,'  has  taken  the  question  from  their  lips,
and  given  it  to  a  band  of  captive  women  longing  for  the  sight  of
a  face  from  home.

A  flash  of  the  foam,    a  flash  of  the  foam,

A  wave  on  the  oarblade  welling.
And  out  they  passed  to  the  heart  of  the   blue  :
A  chariot  shell  that  the  wild  winds  drew.
Is  it  for  passion  of  gold  tJicy  come,

Or  pride  to  viake  great  their  divelliiig  ?

They  could  not  tell,  nor  could  the  wanderers  themselves.
Through  good  or  evil,  gain  or  suffering,  victory  or  disisler,  like
the  Elizabethans  after  them,  they  followed  the  gleam.

For  sweet  is  Hope,  yea  to  much  mortal  woe
So  sweet  that  none  may  turn  from  it  nor  go,

Whom  once  the  far  voice  calleth.
To  wander  through  fierce  peoples  and  the  gleam
Of  desolate  seas,  in  every  heart  a  dream :
And  these  she  maketh  empty  die,  and.  lo,

To  that  man's  hand  she  falleth.'

'  Eur./,  r.  407ff.  (transl.  Murray);  Hdt.  iv.  196  (shy  traffickers).  Ht^i
Kar  I'unopiav  Kal  Knrh  Otcopiau  (-combining  business  with  siKht-secmg  )  IS  the
Greek  voyager's  account  of  himself:  ^t/t.  Pol.  xi.  I  ;  Is.  xvii.  4  :  cf.  Hdl.  111.
139;  Thuc.  vi.  24.  3.  Plato,  who  thout^ht  travel  bad  for  people,  had  yet  .i  weak-
ness for  the  wandering  scholar,  having  been  one  himself.  So  they  are  the  only
people  he  allows  to  go  abroad  unhindered.  Ordinary  cuuens  may  only  tnivcl
when  they  are  over  forty,  and  then  only  on  State  business :  and  when  li.ey
come  home  they  shall  teach  the  young  that  the  institutions  of  other  states  are
inferior  to  their  own  '  {Lcnvs  951).     U  is  a  curious  fact  that,  accord.ny:  f.  the


25©  ECONOMICS  PART  III

traditional  dating  of  the  'foundation  stories',  the  earhest  Sicihan  colonies,
beginning  with  Naxos  and  Syracuse,  were  founded  some  time  before  those  in
Magna  Graecia.  Yet  Magna  Graecia  was  on  the  sea-road  to  Sicily  (which
was  via  Corcyra),  and  presented  some  excellent  agricultural  sites.  It  is
probable,  therefore,  that  the  dates  we  have  are  in  some  cases  not  those  of  the
foundation  of  the  colony  but  of  the  first  trading  settlement  (efinopiou),  perhaps
of  the  first  time  a  party  of  men  were  left  behind  during  the  winter.  This
is  supported  by  the  fact  that  Syracuse,  and,  more  particularly,  Naxos,  are
by  no  means  the  most  natural  sites  for  an  agricultural  colony.  Naxos  under
Etna,  as  seen  after  rounding  Spartivento,  was  a  natural  point  to  steer  for,  and
Syracuse,  or  rather  the  '  off-lying '  island  Ortygia  (such  as  passing  traders
loved  :  Thuc.  vi.  2.  6),  was  welcome  for  its  fresh-water  spring,  Arethusa,  a  few
yards  from  the  shore,  at  its  extreme  outward  edge.  Compare  the  account
in  Hdt.  iv.  151  ff.  of  the  way  in  which  Cyrene  was  colonized  from  Thera
through  information  supplied  by  a  purple-fisher.  These  early  trading  visitors
came  without  wives  or  families  or  gods  or  institutions.  They  were  as  different
from  the  later  colonizing  swarm  as  the  Hudson  Bay  trappers  from  the
ordinary  Canadian,  or  the  early  Vikings  from  the  Normans.  They  are,  in
fact,  not  immigrants  but  migrants.  Myres  {Proceedings  of  Classical  Associa-
tion, 191 1,  p.  67)  has  offered  another  solution  of  this  difficulty.  He  thinks
the  early  colonists  passed  by  Magna  Graecia  because  '  Magna  Graecia  was
preoccupied  by  the  survivals  of  an  earlier  regime,  dating  back  to  the  late
Minoan  Age '  :  but  this,  as  he  admits,  is  only  a  suggestion.


CHAPTER    VII
CITY   ECONOMICS:    CRAFTSMEN   AND   WORKMEN

Your  labour  only  may  be  sold  ;  your  soul  must  not.— Ruskin,  Tinu-  ,ind
Tide,  §  8 1.

With  the  Greeks  every  handicraft  was  an  art :  with  the  Romans  every  art
was  a  handicraft. — Marquardt.

So  far,  in  this  economic  sketch,  our  attention  has  been  fixed
upon  a  process  of  growth.  We  have  watched  the  isolated  Greek
states,  with  their  purely  agricultural  econom}',  faced  with  the
inevitable  pressure  of  population  upon  subsistence  and  findino-
a  heroic  remedy  in  a  wholesale  process  of  colonization.

After  this  necessary  bloodletting  follows  a  quieter  period,
marked  by  a  consolidation  of  economic  forces  upon  a  new  and
broader  basis.  We  are  coming  into  the  daylight  of  history,  to
the  City  State  which  we  know,  not  only  from  the  regretful  eulogies
of  Plato  and  Aristotle  but  from  the  poets  and  historians— to  the
economy  which  immediately  underlay  the  fifth-century  Empire
of  Athens.  It  seems  advisable  for  us,  therefore,  to  change  the
method  of  our  inquiry  from  the  dynamic  to  the  static  :  to  use
this  natural  halting-point  in  order  to  make  a  survey  of  the
economic  features  of  the  historical  City  State.  We  shall  only  be
able  to  do  so  in  rough  and  general  terms,  for  the  evidence  must
be  collected  from  widely  scattered  fields.  But  without  some  such
account  it  is  impossible  to  understand  the  economic  problems  that
confronted  fifth-century  Athens.  We  shall  follow  the  arrange-
ment suggested  in  a  previous  chapter,  dealing  first  with  individual
and  then  with  public  housekeeping,  first  with  the  Athenian  as  an
earner,  and  then  with  the  political  economy  of  the  Athenian  state.
In  this  way  we  shall  pick  up  and  put  into  their  proper  setting
a  number  of  important  factors  which  ha\e  nccessaril>-  been
omitted  in  the  rough  sketch  of  the  previous  pages.


252  ECONOMICS  PART  III

So  far  we  have  only  encountered  one  kind  of  Greek  earner,  the
man  who  made  his  living  out  of  the  land,  the  natural  nursing
mother  of  all  mankind.  We  have  now  to  set  beside  him  the
other  types  of  earner  which  grew  into  importance  during  this
period  of  consolidation.  The  first  and  greatest  of  these  is  the
craftsman,  or,  as  we  should  call  him  to-day,  the  skilled  industrial
worker.

We  shall  need  to  exercise  our  imaginations  before  we  make
his  acquaintance,  for  there  is  very  little  in  common  between  the
working  of  skilled  industry  as  we  know  it  and  its  working  in
Greece.  In  the  first  place  it  occupied  with  the  Greeks  a  position
of  relative  unimportance.  With  us  manufactures  are  the  chief
and  most  obvious  form  of  national  wealth,  and,  when  the  advocates
of  agriculture  bid  us  place  the  land  side  by  side  with  them,  they
remind  us  that  it  is  our  'greatest  industry'.  In  Greece  the  land
was  indisputably  supreme.  The  normal  citizen  did  not  look  be-
yond Mother  Earth  for  a  living  ;  and  when  industry  pushed  its  way
in  as  a  possible  livelihood,  it  was  only  as  subordinate  to  her  para-
mount position.  In  the  state  of  nature,  as  the  Greeks  imagined
it,  every  family  of  farmers  supplied  their  own  needs — made
their  own  ploughs  and  pruning-hooks,  spun  and  wove  their  own
clothes,  built  and  repaired  their  own  houses,  composed  their  own
poetry,  and  mixed  their  own  black  draughts  when  they  were
taken  ill.  If  we  are  to  believe  a  certain  school  of  economic
historians,  this  was  what  the  Greeks  went  on  doing  all  through
their  history.^

No  doubt  this  happy  state  of  self-help  never  really  existed.
We  know  from  the  specimens  in  our  museums  that  even  the  flint-
knapper  must  have  been  a  professional ;  and  as  far  back  as  our
records  reach,  in  Greece  as  in  Palestine,  we  find  the  craftsman
beside  the  farmer,  not  only  Tubal-cain,  the  shoesmith  and  metal-
worker, but  also  Jubal,  who  played  the  harp  during  the  winter

^  Cf.  Meyer,  '  Die  wirtschaftliche  Entwickelung  des  Altertums  '  (reprinted
in  Klelne  Schriften^  1909))  who  deals  faithfully  with  Rodbertus  and  his  modem
followers.  Their  theory  is  only  worth  mentioning  because  it  has  mingled
with  the  general  stream  of  contemporary  ideas  to  reappear,  for  instance,  in
socialist  and  other  addresses  on  industrial  evolution.  Meyer  himself,  by
speaking  of 'capitalism  '  in  ancient  Greece  without  sufficiently  defining  what
he  means,  has  given  the  key  to  another  equally  misguided  school  of  popular
writers,  who  detect  everywhere  in  Greek  life  the  familiar  conflicts  of  modern
industrialism.


CHAP.  VII       CRAFTSMEN   AND   WORKMi:x  2'y\

evenings.  But  it  remains  true,  none  the  less,  that  these  early
farmers,  with  their  wives  and  dependants,  accomplished  within  the
household,  especially  in  the  sphere  of  clothing,  much  that  in  our
own  day,  and  even  in  later  Greek  days,  was  sent  outside  to  the
paid  specialist  as  a  matter  of  course.  For  industry  in  its  origin
was  simply  specialism.  A  man  was  lame  or  blind  and  no  use  for
field  work  ;  so  he  devoted  himself  to  the  forge,  which  demanded
a  strong  body  and  brawny  arms  but  did  not  tax  the  legs,  or,  if  he
had  the  memory  and  the  aptitude,  took  to  reciting  and  improving
ancient  songs.  So  the  community  became  enriched  with  a  local
Homer  and  Hephaestus.  Soon  it  became  an  accepted  thing  that
it  was  foolish  to  waste  valuable  family  time  on  making  ploughs
and  pots  and  baskets  which  the  craftsmen  could  do  far  better  and
more  quickly,  or  even  to  risk  a  valuable  life  without  calling  in  ex-
pert advice  about  drugs  and  herbs.  By  the  beginning  of  the  sixth
century  it  was  well  recognized  in  Athenian  society  that  when
a  man  possesses  a  certain  skill  he  will  naturally  employ  it  as
a  means  of  livelihood.  Solon  gives  us  a  brief  list,  in  one  of  his
poems,  of  some  of  the  skilled  earners  of  the  Athens  of  his  day.
Besides  the  trader  and  the  skilled  farmer,  who  was  now  busily
engaged  in  mastering  the  secrets  of  olive-culture,  he  mentions
metal-workers,  weavers,  poets,  or  rather  reciters,  diviners,  and
doctors.  The  list  is  by  no  means  exhaustive,  for  he  has  left  out
at  least  two  very  important  classes,  the  workers  in  stone  and  clay.
But  it  is  full  enough  to  serve  as  a  useful  introduction  to  our
inquiry.  For  it  reminds  us  how,  if  we  are  to  understand  Greek
craftsmanship  and  the  joyful  spirit  which  inspired  it,  we  need  to
revise  and  enlarge  our  current  conception  of  labour,  sweeping  out
of  our  minds  many  lurking  prepossessions  due  to  the  narrow
specialism  and,  above  all,  to  the  class  distinctions  of  modern  life.
The  Greeks  never  recognized  any  distinction  between  a  craft  or
'  trade  '  and  a  '  profession  '.^

For  these  modern  distinctions,  if  once  we  .stop  to  consider  them,

^  Solon,  xii.  41  ff.  (49  does  not  refer,  as  sometimes  stated,  to  mining).  P'or
Jubal  and  Tubal-cain  see  Genesis  iv.  20  and  Giotto's  representations  of  this
early  society  on  the  base  of  his  Campanile.  Some  of  the  early  cniftsmen
were  prisoners,  like  Democedes,  the  doctor  at  the  Persian  court  (Hdt.  m.  123,
129).  Thus  Epeios,  the  maker  of  the  famous  wooden  horse  (m  the  /tU/c
Iliad),  was  probably  a  captive  Epeian  (a  tribe  which  became  extinct  Liter,
when  another  origin  was  invented  for  him).


254  ECONOMICS  part  iii

are  unreal  and  meaningless.  The  real  distinction  in  this  sphere,
as  our  forefathers  knew,  is  between  the  man  within  the  gild  or
brotherhood  who  possesses  certain  definite  knowledge,  with  the
trained  capacity  to  use  it,  and  the  man  who  possesses  none,  or,  to
put  it  boldly,  between  the  artist  and  the  common  labourer.  In
those  earlier  days  all  men  who  knew  the  joy  of  creation,  whether
with  hand  or  brain,  ranked  as  '  poets '  or  '  artificers '  (woLrjTai,
Teyvirai),  and  were  accepted  as  fellow-craftsmen.

If  we  have  unlearnt  this  truism  and  allowed  our  painters  and
our  authors,  our  doctors  and  our  mechanics,  each  to  relapse  dull-
eyed  into  the  separate  groove  of  his  '  trade  '  or  '  profession  ',  it  is
because  we  have  lost  the  old  happiness  which  kept  the  sense  of
a  common  purpose  fresh  in  the  craftsman's  mind.  Our  modern
industrial  system,  with  an  ingenuity  so  wicked  that  one  might
almost  believe  it  to  be  deliberate,  has  contrived  to  take  the  joy
out  of  craftsmanship,  and  so  to  choke  up  the  very  springs  of  art.
It  has  replaced,  wherever  possible,  the  delicate  skill  of  the  human
hand  by  inhuman  machinery,  and  the  independent  thought  of  the
human  brain  by  'soulless  organization'.  It  has  removed  the  maker
or  producer  from  all  association  with  the  public  for  whom  he  works,
and  substituted  a  deadening  'cash-nexus'  for  the  old  personal  rela-
tionship or  sense  of  effort  in  a  corporate  cause.  Above  all,  it  has
taken  from  him  his  liberty,and  forced  him  to  work  for  a  master  who
is  no  artist,  and  to  work  fast  and  badly.  It  has  turned  Solon's
weaver  into  a  maker  of  shoddy,  his  minstrel  into  a  journalist,  and
his  diviner  (if  not  his  doctor)  into  a  dispenser  of  quack  remedies.
If  we  are  to  understand  aright  the  craftsmanship  of  the  Greeks,
we  must  think  ourselves  back  into  a  freer  air,  such  as  blew
through  the  homes  of  our  own  English  workers  until  close  on  the
Industrial  Revolution.  It  is  natural  for  human  beings  to  enjoy
using  their  own  best  faculties.  Men  never  felt  that  enjoyment
so  keenly,  or  put  so  much  high  effort  into  its  attainment,  as
in  the  workshops  of  ancient  Greece.  If  you  seek  a  proof,  go  and
look  through  the  shelves  of  our  Greek  museums.  There  is
hardly  an  object  that  they  made,  however  rude,  but  bears  on  it,
sometimes  faintly,  sometimes  with  speaking  clearness,  the  touch
of  the  spirit  of  Art.'

'  It  is  unfortunate  that  Greek  craftsmen  speak  to  us  only  through  their
works.     They  have  left  us  none  of  the  songs  which  they  surely  used  to  sing


CHAP.  VII       CRAFTSMEN    AM)    \VOkK.M|.:\  255

Under  what  conditions  did  these  Greek  craftsmen  work?  In
answer  to  this  question  we  will  take  two  typical  branches  of  crafts-
manship,  one  outdoor  and  one  indoor,  our  information  as  to  which
enables  us  to  watch  the  work  going  on.  Leaving  aside  the
tanners  and  the  lyre-makers,  the  jewellers  and  blacksmiths  and
glass- workers,  about  whom  we  know  all  too  little,  let  us  pay  a
brief  visit  to  the  stone-cutters  and  the  potters.  With  the  exercise
of  due  caution  what  we  learn  from  them  may  be  presumed  also
of  their  fellow-craftsmen  in  other  spheres  of  activity.*

The  Greek  temples  and  public  buildings,  together  with  all  the
works  of  art  that  they  contained,  are  the  most  famous  surviving
monuments  of  Greek  craftsmanship.  Fortunately,  we  have  now
sufficient  evidence  from  inscriptions  to  watch  some  of  them  in  the
building.

The  stone-masons  and  sculptors  who  made  and  adorned  the
temples  and  sanctuaries,  the  colonnades  and  armouries,  and  other
public  buildings  of  Greece,  were  not  State  servants.  They  were
private  craftsmen,  such  as  Socrates,  whose  time  was  in  their  own
hands.  On  ordinary  days,  when  the  State  did  not  call  for  their
services,  they  worked  in  their  own  stoneyards,  with  four  or  five
young  apprentices,  cutting  those  formal  inscriptions  and  carving
those  quiet  gravestone  scenes  that  we  know  so  well  from  our
museums.  But  when  there  was  a  public  building  to  claim  their
craftsmanship,  they  accepted  State  employment  for  the  time
being,  working  under  an  arrangement  with  the  State  Overseers  or
Special  Commissioners  of  Public  Works.  Sometimes  the  master-
mason  became  simply  a  foreman,  and  his  workmen  were  paid
direct  by  the  State,  although  he  still  retained  control  over  them
at  their  work.  More  often  he  remained  a  small  contractor,  under-
taking the  work  himself  and  accepting  all  responsibilit)'  for  its
performance.      Some  of  the  contracts  made  in  this  form  are  prc-

over  their  tools.     All  we  have  is  three  lines  of  an  old  mill-catch  :
Grind,  mill,  grind,
For  Pittacus  did  grind
Who  was  king  over  great  Mytilene.

{Anth.  Lyr.  'Carmiiui  Popul<iria'  46.)
(Compare  the  song  of  the  well-diggers  in  Numbers  xxi.  17-18.)    There  is
nothing   like  the   beautiful  Ceylon   potters'  song,  which  takes  the  worker
through  every  stage  and  process  of  his  beloved  work.

1  Bliimner,  Techtwlogie  t/tid  Terminologie  dcr  Geu'crbe  und  Kiinsti  bft
Grieclien  und  Ro/neni  {Lt\^z\^,  1875-86),  collects  all  the  evidence  alx^ut  the
crafts  (though  not  about  the  craftsmen).

R  2


256  ECONOMICS  part  tii

served,  and  show  how  jealously  the  city  watched  over  the  work  it
gave  out  to  its  contractors.  '  He  shall  work  continuously  .  .  .
working  with  a  sufficient  number  of  craftsmen  according  as  the
nature  of  the  craft  admits  (/cara  rfji'  T^xvrjv),  not  less  than  five,  and
if  he  disobey  any  provision  written  down  in  the  agreement  or
be  discovered  executing  bad  work  {KaKoreyvoiv  rt)  he  shall  be
punished  by  the  overseers,  as  he  shall  seem  to  them  to  deserve,  for
not  doing  according  to  the  written  agreement ;  and  if  any  of  the
workmen  employed  under  him  be  discovered  executing  bad  work,
let  him  be  driven  out  from  the  work,  and  no  longer  take  part  in
it ;  and  if  he  disobey  this  sentence  he  shall  be  punished,  together
with  the  contractor  .  .  .  and  if  the  contractor  injure  any  sound
stone  in  the  course  of  his  work,  he  shall  replace  it  at  his  own  ex-
pense without  interruption  to  the  work,  and  shall  remove  the
spoilt  stone  out  of  the  temple  enclosure  within  five  days,  or  the
stone  shall  become  sacred  property  .  .  .  and  if  the  contractors
have  any  dispute  amongst  themselves  upon  anything  written  in
the  agreement  the  overseers  shall  decide  it.  .  .  .'  ^

Here  we  can  see  plainly  what  kind  of  men  these  ancient  con-
tractors were,  and  how  different  from  the  modern  organizer  of
hired  labour  who  is  called  by  the  same  name.  The  Greek  con-
tractor is  himself  a  workman,  who  works  by  the  side  of  his
labourers,  and  is  liable  to  punishment  for  their  careless  work  or
his  own.  He  has  neither  the  capital  nor  the  labour  to  undertake
the  whole  building  or  even  a  considerable  part  of  it.  He  is  simply
a  master-mason,  working  together  on  the  same  job  with  a  number,
perhaps  scores,  of  other  master-masons,  proud  to  be  able  for
a  time  to  make  the  Acropolis  their  stoneyard,  and  to  leave  the
mark  of  their  craftsmanship,  and  that  of  the  craftsmen  whom  they
have  trained,  upon  a  great  city  monument.  There  is  no  competi-
tion here  to  keep  the  rival  builder  out  of  the  job,  and  no  rivalry
for  big  winnings.  Indeed,  so  little  capital  have  these  contractors,
and  so  incapable  are  they  of  meeting  any  larger  demand  upon

^  Dittenberger,  No.  540,  11.  11,13,  S^i  42  :  the  building  is  a  temple  of  Zeus  at
Lebadea  :  the  date  1 75-171  B.C.  But  the  same  system  and  similar  provisions
appear  in  all  the  extant  inscriptions.  See  Dittenberger,  ii.  537  ff.  (aedifica-
tiones).  For  the  Overseers  {firia-TaTai)  see  Francotte,  Industrie,  vol.  ii,
pp.  63-4,  and  the  whole  section  on  public  works.  At  Athens  at  the  time  of
Pericles'  building  schemes  they  numbered  three  or  more,  and  stayed  in  office
for  more  than  one  year,  probably  till  the  building  with  which  they  were
concerned  was  completed.


CIIAI'.  VII       CRAFTSMEN    AND   WORKMKN  257

their  resources,  thai,  when  a  city  sucidenly  embarked  upon  a  work
that  required  an  exceptional  supply  of  labour,  she  had  to  send  oul
recruiting  agents  to  bring  in  contractors  and  workmen  from  abroad.
Neither  in  Athens  nor  elsewhere  do  we  find  any  traces  of  unem-
ployed skilled  labourers.  The  danger  was  all  tiie  other  way :
that  cities  would  lack  the  labour  necessary  to  carry  out  their
designs.  Thus,  when  the  citizens  of  Argos  decided  that,  like
Athens,  they  needed  long  walls  down  to  the  sea,  they  had  to
send  to  the  Athenians  for  extra  workers  in  wood  and  stone.
The  rough  labour  they  could  raise  at  a  pinch  with  women,
children,  and  household  slaves;  but  these  skilled  employments,
with  their  inherited  craft-methods,  they  could  not  so  easily
improvise.^

This  should  serve  to  prepare  our  minds  for  what  will  be  for
modern  readers  the  most  remarkable  feature  of  the  Athenian
building  inscriptions,  because  we  have  been  taught  by  our  econo-
mists to  regard  it  as  impossible — the  appearance  in  them  of  slave-
masons  doing  the  same  work  and  receiving  the  same  pay  as  the
freemasons.  The  fact  is  that  in  an  ambitious  city,  anxious  to
build  great  public  monuments — in  a  city,  as  we  should  say,  with
a  rapidly  expanding  building  industry — there  was  a  constant
need  for  fresh  labour  to  fill  the  ranks  of  the  craft.  The  deficiency
was  not  easily  supplied  out  of  the  free  population  in  other  walks
of  life,  for  the  movement  of  expansion  affected,  in  some  degree,
almost  every  branch  of  livelihood.  It  was  therefore  supplied
from  abroad.  Athens  in  the  sixth  century,  and  still  more,  as  wc
shall  see,  in  the  fifth,  filled  up  her  crafts  with  foreign  apprentices.
Some  of  them  were  free  resident  aliens  who  had  been  attracted  to
Athens,  others  were  slaves  who  had  received  a  more  pressing  invi-
tation. The  point  that  we  have  here  to  notice  is  that  both  these
classes,  whatever  their  legal  status,  were  admitted  into  the  craft,
and  are  found  working  there  on  the  same  terms  as  the  citizens.
An  analysis  of  the  payments  made  by  the  State  for  the  building
of  the  Erechtheum  in  409  shows  that  wages  were  paid  for  the
work  of  27  citizens,  40  free  Outlanders,  and  i.',  slaves.  We  can
confirm  these  figures  by  confronting  them  with  two  other  sets  of
Attic  accounts  dealing  with  the  building  of  a  sanctuary  at  Klcusis  in

'  Thuc.  V.  82.  5.  For  labour  recruiting-agents  Hpt«v)  see  Krancottc.
vol.  ii,  p.  S3.     Compare  Hiram's  help  to  Solomon,  1  Kings  v.  6  ..ntl  lb.


258  ECONOMICS  PART  III

the  years  329-328  and  319-31 H.  These  two  sels,  when  put  together,
show  36  citizens,  39  resident  aliens,  12  strangers,  and  2  slaves  at
work,  besides  57  other  names  which  are  too  indefinite  to  be  put
into  any  category.'^

These  slaves  and  other  non-citizens  (no  doubt  many  of  them
freedmen)  are  working  not  only  at  the  same  trade  but  at  iden-
tically the  same  tasks  as  the  citizen  workmen.  In  the  case  of
the  Erechtheum,  for  instance,  one  piece  of  work  dealt  with  in  the
inscription  is  the  fluting  of  the  columns.  Each  column  is  being
fluted  by  a  squad  of  from  four  to  six  workpeople,  directed  by
their  foreman  or  master-mason.  All  of  them,  including  the
foreman  master,  are  paid  at  the  same  rate.  Citizens  and  non-
citizens,  slaves  and  free  men,  seem  inextricably  mixed.  In  one
case  the  foreman  is  actually  a  slave  ;  in  another,  a  master  who
acts  as  foreman  brings  two  slaves  of  his  own  and  another  hired
from  some  one  else  for  the  occasion.  All  receive  the  same
wage,  one  drachma  a  day,  or  about  four  shillings'  purchasing
power.  Indeed,  as  Francotte  remarks  :  '  The  ordinary  wage  for
all  categories  of  workers '  on  the  Erechtheum  '  from  the  architect
to  the  day  labourer,  for  free  men  as  for  slaves,  is  a  drachma
a  day  '.^

This  is  indeed  only  what  we  should  expect  in  a  society  which
cared  truly  for  art,  if  the  theories  of  Aristotle  and  others  had  not
confused  our  imaginations.  All  true  artists  are  democratic  in
spirit,  for  a  common  interest  in  good  work  breaks  down  all  unreal
distinctions.  To  the  Athenian  craftsmen  their  slaves  were  not,
as  Aristotle  called  them,  '  living  instruments,'  but  simply  '  fellow
workers ',  additional  hands  brought  into  the  family  workshop  to
help  the  masons  and  the  potters  to  fulfil  the  city's  needs.  Of
course  the  lawyer-like  Aristotle  is  technically  correct :  the  slave
remained  a  Thing,  not  a  Person,  and  could  not  assert  a  legal
claim  to  the  wage  that  he  earned.     But  we  shall  see  in  a  later

1  /.  G.  i.  324  analysed  by  Francotte,  vol.  ii,  pp.  205-7.

^  Francotte,  vol.  i,  p.  316.  The  slave  was  not  entitled  to  keep  this  or  any
other  money  that  he  might  earn  (e.g.  by  shopkeeping).  His  master,  the
slave-lord,  farmed  him  out  (as  a  landlord  might  a  piece  of  land)  for  what  he
could  make  out  of  him,  and  pocketed  the  proceeds,  which  were  known  as  the
'  slave-rent '  (an-o^opd).  But  in  practice  such  slaves  were  able  to  keep  a  fair
proportion  of  their  earnings,  out  of  which  they  hoped  ultimately  to  buy  their
freedom.  See  pp.  386-8  below.  Slaves  working  'on  their  own'  were  known
as  x^l"-^  otKovvTfs  (Dem.  iv.  36).  On  purchasing  power  see  note  on  p.  406  below.


CHAP.  VII       CRAFTSMEN    AND    WORKMEN  a;,^

chapter  how  his  position  in  the  household  economy  unci  his  daily
activities  in  private  life  reacted  upon  his  legal  status.'

Those  fluted  columns  are  still  in  [losilion  supporting  the  entab-
latures for  which  they  were  made.  Time  has  not  rohlx^d  them
of  their  beauty,  or  dulled  the  delicacy  of  the  work  which  those
ah'ens  and  slaves  put  into  them.  But  it  is  time  to  leave  the
Acropolis.  Let  us  go  down  now  to  visit  some  fricndl)'  poller  in
the  Cerameicus.  We  need  not  look  for  a  large  unsightly  modern
factory.  We  shall  probably  find  him  in  his  own  home,  like  an
industrial  cottager  of  to-day,  with  his  children  and  a  handful  of
other  young  workers  to  help  him.  The  home  was  used  for  so
little  else  that  there  was  no  objection  to  using  it  as  a  workshop,
and  there  was  no  reason  for  adding  to  the  working  expenses  by
occupying  another  building.  This  workshop  or  'school'  (as  wc
have  learnt  to  say  of  Italian  painters),  or,  as  the  French  neatly
describe  it,  the  'atelier  patronal ',  was  hardly  ever  on  a  large
scale.  Twelve  in  all,  says  a  French  writer,  was  about  the  proper
number.  The  vase-painters  have  left  us  many  pictures  of  the
homely  interior  of  the  potter's  shop,  with  all  the  various  processes
going  on  in  close  juxtaposition.  Wc  can  sec  the  master  working
as  in  the  stoneyard,  side  by  side  with  his  apprentices,  super-
intending and  encouraging  their  own  efforts  at  craftsmanship.  I  low
successfully  they  did  so  may  be  judged  by  the  fact  that,  among
the  thousands  of  extant  specimens  which  fill  so  many  museum
shelves,  '  two  painted  vases  exactly  identical  do  not  exist.'  Yet
Duris  and  Euphronius  and  their  many  nameless  fellow  workers
were  not  in  their  own  day  counted  among  the  immortals.  They
were  only  honest  workmen  who  had  trained  eye  and  hand  by
a  long  and  persevering  apprenticeship,  till  they  knew  what  really
good  work  was  and  enjoyed  the  supreme  eflbrt  of  doing  it.  The
vases  they  turned  out  were  not  ornaments  or  curios  for  the  col-
lector—the Greeks  had  never  heard  cither  of  collectors  or  of
curios— but  objects  for  daily  use.  But,  since  they  were  made  for
Greeks,  they  needed  to  be  as  beautiful  as  they  could  make  them,
well-shaped,  well-glazed,  and  well-painted,  or  they  would  not  be
counted  serviceable.^

1  '  Fellow  workers  ' :  Xen.  ^fem.  ii.  3.  3,  an  incidental  passage  but  all  the

^'"^Se°e'pottier's  Duris  and  the  Painters  of  Greek  Vases  [Va^^\x%\^  transLilion,
1909),  with  illustrations,  especially  p.  25.    Of  course  some  branches  of  crafts-


26o  ECONOMICS  part  iii

Within  these  humble  workshops,  as  among  the  builders  up  on
the  Acropolis,  there  were  no  social  barriers.  Each  man  did  his
best  and  was  fitly  honoured,  and,  in  due  course,  rewarded  for  what
he  did.  Many  of  the  apprentices  in  the  sixth-century  Athens,
and  perhaps  the  majority  a  century  later,  must  have  been  slaves
or  born  in  slavery.  We  know  that  even  among  the  masters
several,  and  among  them  some  of  the  most  famous,  such  as
Brygos,  were  not  Athenians  or  even  Greeks  by  birth.  Yet
neither  from  the  paintings  nor  from  the  inscriptions  can  we
discern  any  difference  of  treatment.  Down  in  the  potter's  work-
shop, as  up  on  the  Acropolis,  slave  and  free  craftsmen  ate  the
same  food,  worked  the  same  hours,  and  wore  the  same  working
clothes,  or,  when  the  work  was  hot  and  dirty;  mutually  agreed  to
discard  them.^

The  craftsman  needed  no  capital  beyond  the  simple  utensils  of
his  craft  (which  the  vase-paintings  show  us,  as  in  a  Holbein
picture,  hanging  up  on  the  wall  when  not  in  use).  For  the
materials  that  he  used  were  seldom  costly  and  were  generally
provided  by  the  customer  who  gave  him  the  order.  Just  as  you
took  your  own  cart  or  plough  to  the  joiner's  or  the  blacksmith's
to  be  mended,  so  you  took  your  own  leather  to  the  cobbler's,  and

manship  were  more  mechanical  than  others.  There  was  not  much  room  for
individuality  in  the  making  of  shields  and  spears,  and  it  is  in  this  department
that  we  find  the  largest  workshops.  That  of  Lysias  and  his  brother  is
generally  said  to  have  had  a  hundred  and  twenty  workpeople  ;  but  it  is
doubtful  from  the  passage  (Lys,  xii.  19)  whether  the  120  slaves  there  men-
tioned were  all  so  employed.  If  so,  it  was  more  than  three  times  as  large  as
any  other  Greek  workshop  we  know  of.  That  of  Demosthenes'  father  with
33  comes  next.  But  both  these  date  from  a  period  when,  as  we  shall
see,  the  best  Greek  habits  of  work  were  in  decline.  Francotte  [Industrie,
vol.  ii,  p.  21)  seems  to  have  shown  that  big  workshops  were  found  not  to  pay
so  well  as  small  ones.  '  Whatsoever  thou  doest,  do  it  with  all  thy  might,'  was
the  fifth-century  spirit  in  the  workshop,  as  in  public  affairs.  Socrates  preached
it  too  (Xen.  Mem.  ii.  8.  6).

'  On  the  equal  treatment  of  slaves  and  free  men  in  workshops  see  Guiraud,
La  Main-d'a'uvre  industrielle  dans  la  Gtrce  ancienne,  p.  197,  and  Pottier,
Dun's,  p.  10.  The  name  Duris  itself  is  not  Athenian,  although  it  is  not,  like
so  inany  other  artists'  names,  barbarian.  It  used  to  be  held  that  the  naked
or  very  scantily  dressed  figures  of  potters,  blacksmiths,  and  others  on  vase-
paintings  were  '  conventional '  :  but  on  at  least  one  vase  there  is  a  tunic
hanging  up  on  the  wall.  See  Daremberg  and  Saglio,  Fig.  2969,  s.  v.  Fen-uvi.
The  fact  is  that,  like  the  Avaricious  Man  in  Theophrastus,  they  cannot  and
will  not  afford  two.  (The  ancients  wore  no  nightdresses.)  Other  master
painters  of  slave  origin  were  Scythes,  Colchos,  Thrax,  Lydos,  Sicanos,  Sicelos,
and  Amasis,  who  was  the  first  Attic  vase-painter  to  sign  his  name  (Pauly,  s.  v.
Aulas  is  .


CHAP,  vii       CRAFTSMEN    AND    \V()RKMl-:\  i^i

(if  an  Oxford  vase  may  be  trustcdj  stood  up  on  his  tabic  while
he  cut  it  to  the  shape  of  your  foot,  and,  if  you  were  extravagant
and  your  wife  and  daughters  had  turned  lazy,  or  your  women-
slaves  been  given  their  freedom,  your  own  wool  to  some  outside
wool-worker.  The  craftsman,  in  fact,  was  not  a  trader  but  simply
what  the  Greeks  called  a  technites,  which  means  '  artist ',  without
any  of  our  grand  or  Bohemian  associations.  It  was  not  his  busi-
ness to  buy  materials,  but  to  work  them  up  and  make  Ihcni
serviceable.  This  saved  him  from  having  to  keep  a  large  slock,
and  you  from  the  complications  that  arise  from  paying  a  number
of  different  profits.^

The  craftsman,  therefore,  lived  in  close  touch  with  the  public
for  whom  he  performed  services,  not  separated,  like  the  modem
workman,  by  a  host  of  distributors  and  intermediaries.  It  was
on  the  direct  appreciation  of  the  citizens  that  he  depended  for
a  livelihood.  Hence  he  took  care  to  set  up  shop  in  the  heart  of
the  city,  where  he  could  easily  be  reached  and  would  easily
attract  notice,  generally  close  to  the  market-place,  where  the
public  promenaded  up  and  down.  Every  craft  had  its  own
quarters,  in  a  special  Row  amid  the  maze  of  streets.  Just  as  in
Old  London,  when  you  turned  off  Cheapside,  you  found  >-ourscir
in  Bucklersbury  or  Wood  Street,  or  in  Ironmonger  or  Leather
Lane,  so,  in  an  old  Greek  city,  as  you  dawdled  away  from  the
Agora  into  the  shady  back  alleys,  you  could  tell  by  the  noise  or
the  smell,  by  the  clanging  of  the  hammer,  the  grating  of  the  saw.
or  the  pungent  odour  of  the  tanncr>',  into  whose  domain  )-ou
were  intruding.  You  strolled  past  the  open  doors  of  the  little
workshops,  crowded  in  friendly  rivalry  one  next  the  other,  and,  if

1  For  the  Oxford  cobbler  vase  see  Journal  of  Htllenic  Stioius  1908.
Plate  30,  and  Beazley's  commentary.  For  professional  '  wool-work '  done  by
women  see  an  interesting  article  by  Tod  in  the  Annual  of  the  lintish
School  at  Athens,  1901-2,  p.  204,  and  cf.  pp.  335-6  below.  I  he  women
in  ■  his  inscriptions  are  frced-womcn  often  workm^  by  arrangement  tor
their  former  masters.  Lovers  of  Socrates  will  remember  how  he  advise.!
an  unfortimate  friend,  who  was  burdened  during  troubled  times  by  an  influx
of  sisters,  cousins,  and  nieces,  to  set  them  to  work  makmy  clothes,  and  hou,
when  his  advice  was  adopted,  '  they  went  on  workmR  during  lunch  and  ngh
up  to  supper  time,  and  became  cheerful  instead  of  surly.  lUit  for  this  xasl
and  unusual  industrial  experiment  money  had  to  l>e  l^orrowcd  to  buy  the
apparatus  and  the  wool.  See  Xen.  Man.  ii.  7.  Sun.larly,  when  I^cmocedes
the  famous  doctor  emigrated  because  he  could  not  stand  his  father  s  temper
he  had  a  hard  struggle  because  he  had  no  proper  surgical  mslrumcnts.  and
was  too  poor  to  procure  them  (Hdt.  iii.  131  '•


262  ECONOMICS  PART  III

you  were  feeling  contemplative  or  inclined  for  a  chat,  you  could
drop  in  and  watch  your  friend  the  artist  at  his  work.  Socrates,
himself  a  stone-cutter  by  trade,  was  particularly  fond  of  spending
his  abundant  leisure  in  this  way:  while  he  was  enticing  his
craftsmen  friends  into  discussions  and  puzzling  them  with  awkward
questions,  he  was  storing  up  in  his  mind  that  host  of  useful
images  and  illustrations  which  we  know  so  well  from  Plato's
Dialogues.  One  of  his  shoemaker  friends,  called  Simon,  took
the  trouble  to  write  down  his  conversations  in  a  book  called
Leather  Talks,  and  so  became  the  first  Boswell.  It  was  in  these
humble  workshops  that  he  learnt  what  it  is  for  a  man  really  to
"know  his  job',  and  realized  how  little  the  average  politician
knew  of  his,  as  the  Greeks  conceived  it — the  creation  of  a  city
which  should  be  as  perfect  a  work  of  art  as  a  good  shoe  or
a  good  plough  or  a  good  glass  vase.  Modern  statesmen  have
still  similar  lessons  to  learn  in  the  same  quarter.  For  •  while  our
glass-makers  proceed  by  \agorous  and  confident  processes  to  exact
results,  our  statesmen,  like  the  glass-makers  of  ancient  Athens,
still  trust  to  empirical  maxims  and  personal  skill '.  So  hard  is  it,
as  Socrates  knew,  to  keep  the  art  of  government  up  to  date.^

The  modern  tourist  at  Athens,  when  he  walks  down  Shoe  Lane,
that  last  sur\-ival  of  the  ancient  Bazaar  in  a  city  of  modern  shops,
where  you  can  hardly  pass  for  the  masses  of  shoes  hanging  out
on  either  side  of  the  narrow  street,  while  their  proprietors  are
busy  inside  their  little  workshops  making  additions  to  the  store.
wonders  at  the  unpractical  arrangement  by  which  all  these  com-
peting cobblers  live  next  door  to  one  another.  If  they  were
liWng  in  an  English  town,  they  would  spread  themselves  carefully
out  and  be  at  pains  to  leave  at  least  a  stone's  throw  between  com-

*  Graham  Wallas,  Human  JWiture  in  Poliizcs,  p.  115.  This  book  marks,
as  it  seems  to  me,  the  first  practical  attempt  to  do  for  modem  politics  what
Socrates  did  for  Greek,  to  explain  to  our  pohtical  craftsmen  the  nature  and  use
of  their  tools.  Writers  enough  have  told  them  what  they  are  or  should  be
working /i'r ;  but  they  have  forgotten  to  remind  them  what  they  are  working
■XL'ztk.  No  wonder  modem  democracy-  has  had  its  disappointments.  The
w-onder  is  that  it  sur\-ives  at  all.  For  Bos  well-Simon  see  Diogenes  Laertius,  ii.
123 ;  for  Socrates  in  the  workshop  Xen.  Mem.  iii.  10  and  il  ;  he  goes  suc-
cessi\-ely  to  a  well-known  painter,  a  sculptor,  and  a  breastplate-maker.
Compare  Plato,  Apclogy  22,  The  \"ase-paintings  often  show  visitors  in  the
workshop,  .\gora  loafers  who  were  glad  to  get  out  of  the  sun.  See  Lysias.
xxiv.  20.  On  the  workshops  round  the  Athenian  Agora  see  Wilamowitr.  A  us
Kydaikifi,  pp.  204  ti.


CHAP.  VII       CRAFTSMKX    AND    W^ukMi^N  263

peting  shop  and  shop.  The  answer  to  the  puzzle,  of  course,  is
that  these  old-fashioned  craftsmen  are  not  competitors  at  all.
They  are  fellows  and  comrades,  members  of  the  same  honoured
craft  or  gild  and  possessors  of  the  same  art  or  secret— of  the
same  '  mystery '  or  metur,  as  the  French  still  call  it.  There  is
work  enough  for  all :  and.  if  any  one  suftcrs,  it  b  rather  the
public  for  want  of  craftsmen  than  the  craftsmen  for  want  of
a  public.  In  time  of  war  or  famine  the  craftsmen  suffered,  of
course,  as  Pericles  said,  together  with  the  whole  nation  ;  but  in
the  stability  oi  industrial  processes  they  did  not  suffer  together
as  a  class. ^

Because  economic  life  was  stable,  craftsmen  could  feel  them-
selves to  be  comrades,  and  because  they  were  comrades  they
could  help  to  keep  life  stable.  Every  art  and  craft  had  its  own
Association,  not  a  Trades  Union  or  Employers'  Association  such
as  we  know  them,  but  a  union  of  men  who  understood  one
another  and  were  drawn  close  together  b>-  the  same  daily  effort
and  the  practice  of  the  same  art.  The  Greek  diacro?,  or  band
of  associates,  was  a  social  and  religious,  not  an  economic  form
of  grouping.  Its  members  did  not  need  to  *  protect  their  own
interests  '.  for  these  were  sufficiently  protected  by  custom  and  the
constitution  of  society  ;  when  they  felt  anxious  about  them  they

^  Thuc  ii.  60.  2-3.  Practically  the  only  unemployed  cA/jj  the  Greek  world
had  to  deal  with  were  the  mercenary'  soldiers  and  rowers  di>t^'^ •'  '  >.ftcr
a  long  war ;   but  this  was  a  founh-centurv*  problem,  due  to  of

citizen  armies,  and  was  indeed  one  of  the  evil  effects  of  the  develoj^  vre

tracing.  Isocrates  recommends  the  Macedonian  conquest  of  .Asia  tor  the
purpose  of  establishing  Unemployed  Farm  Colonies  (v.  120,  cf.  viii.  24).
Alexander  took  his  advice  almost  to  the  letter  and  planted  Greeks  as  far  Fast
as  Cabul.  But  the  fact  that  there  were  so  many  thousand?  of  i:r  '.ttv-hed
Greeks  shows  how  completely  the  Feloponnesian  War  and  <  ^  es

had  undermined  the  stable  fabric  of  City  State  life,  the  re..  «

which  we  are  trying  to  describe.     The  Greek  words  for  '  co;  .  in

the  abstract  and  aywv  in  the  concrete)  have  no  special  comn  •:«,

but  denote  contests  of  skill.  '  since  with  the  Greeks  rivalry  in  c .  <.  "■'■

of  life,  even  in  art  and  learning,  took  the  fotm  oi  a  contest."  as
anecdotes  and  inscriptions.     See  Soph.  O.  T.  380-2  ;  W  ilhelm.  •'

griechischen  Inschriftcnkundc,  pp.  40-2  (potters'  contest) :  anc  t*

competition   in   Austrian  Jahreslufte,    vol.    viii,    pp.    133-4-  ^»^

given  for  '  handicraft ',  for  the  best  instruments,  for  the  best  or^  ^al

writing,  and  the  best  answer  to  a  set  question.     We  con  see  t  ow

eas>-  it  would  be  for  the  old  free  contest  to  fade  away  into  a  mere  compulsory
examination  test.  It  only  needed  a  change  of  ^p.-.t.  Ti.t  at  t.c  t:Tr;e^o*
these  inscriptions  (which  are  late)  the  contests  "^

a  burden,  as  is  clear  from  the  fact  that  Public  F.  ••'«

appointments,  entered  for  them.


a64  ECONOMICS  part  hi

could  go  as  citizens  to  the  assembly.  They  did  not  need  to  raise
prices,  for  they  were  working  not  for  riches  but  for  honour  and  a
livelihood,  and  prices  were  fixed  by  immemorial  custom.  In  their
little  professional  conclaves  they  merely  did  honour  to  their  god  or
hero  or  founder,  the  metal-workers  to  Hephaestus,  the  doctors  to
Asclepius,  the  epic  poets  and  reciters  to  Homer,  and  then  *  talked
shop'  about  the  mysteries  into  which  they  had  been  initiated.^
For  the  craft-secrets  that  they  discussed  were  really  mysteries.
The  outer  world,  and,  above  all,  the  State,  had  no  concern  with
them.  There  was  no  State  regulation  of  skilled  industry,  for
there  were  no  industrial  abuses — not,  at  least,  in  the  sphere  with
which  we  are  here  concerned.  Nor  were  there  State-granted
patents.  Knowledge  was  either  free  for  all  men  or  religiously
confined  to  the  craft  and  handed  down  and  added  to  from
generation  to  generation.  So  the  craftsman  was  honoured  not
merely  as  a  maker  of  beautiful  things  but  as  the  member  of
a  school,  the  guardian  of  an  ancestral  tradition :  almost,  only  the
terms  are  too  romantic  for  the  matter-of-fact  Greek  world,  as
a  wizard  or  a  wonder-worker.  So  many  streams  of  thought  and
feeling  widely  separated  in  modern  life  are  united  in  the  Greek
idea  of  craftsmanship  or  tcchne.-

'  For  Greek  forms  of  association  see  Ziebarth,  Das griechischc  Vereinswesen
(Leipzig,  1896),  who  has  conveniently  collected  the  inscriptions  about  them,
from  the  philosophers'  schools  (the  nucleus  of  the  first  European  University)
down  to  silversmiths  (as  we  know  from  the  Acts)  and  municipal  slaves  (who,
according  to  Aristotle,  should  have  been  far  too  stupid  to  form  one).  There
is  now  a  larger  work  on  the  same  subject,  Geschichte  des gricchischen  Vereins-
luesefis,  by  F.  Poland  (Leipzig,  1909).  We  must  beware  of  calling  these
associations  '  gilds  ',  in  the  mediaeval  sense  of  the  word  :  they  exercised  no
control  OAer  their  members  or  would-be  members  ;  every  one  at  Athens  was
free  to  exercise  any  craft  or  calling  that  he  chose.  This  explains  why  slaves
found  it  so  easy  to  develop  their  gifts.

"  For  State  regulation  see  Guiraud,  AIain-(f(£UV7-e,  p.  198.  He  can  only
find  two  laws,  one  at  fastidious  Sybaris,  relegating  noisy  workshops  to  the
suburbs,  and  another  at  humanitarian  Athens,  inflicting  the  death  penalty  on
any  one  who  employed  a  free-born  child  to  turn  a  mill-stone.  See  Deinarchus,
i.  23,  where  it  appears  that  a  miller  was  actually  put  to  death.  This  shows
how  strongly  public  opinion  must  have  felt  on  the  subject.  Slaves,  of  course,
were  safeguarded  against  assault,  &c.,  by  the  ordinary  law,  particularly  so  at
Athens  ;  cf.  Glotz  on''  Les  esclaves  et  la  peine  du  fouet  en  Grece'  {Coittpies
refjdus  de  P Academic,  1908,  pp.  571  fF.),  who  believes,  with  good  reason,  that,
except  under  very  exceptional  circumstances,  slaves  were  not  allowed  to
receive  more  than  fifty  strokes  from  the  rod,  corresponding  to  the  fifty
drachma  limit  in  the  case  of  ordinary  fines.  This  enactment  seems  to  have
been  peculiar  to  Athens,  w  ho.  Iiere  as  elsewhere,  was  more  humane  in  her
laws  than  the  rest  of  Greece.


CHAP.  VII       CRAFTSMKX    AND    WORKMEN'  26.<-,

So,  as  Solon  has  already  siig^rcstcd  to  us,  craftsmanship  in
Greece  covered  a  far  wider  sphere  than  that  which  we  arc
accustomed  to  associate  with  '  industry  '  to-day.  Kvcrybody
who  had  some  special  skill  or  art  by  which  he  earned  his  livinp,
whether  by  '  rendering  service  '  or  '  producing  commodities  ',  was
accounted  a  craftsman,  from  the  poet  who  '  built  the  lofty  rhyme  '
and  the  doctor  who  could  mix  herbs  or  perform  operations  down
to  the  tanner  and  the  cobbler.  City  State  life  was,  in  fact,  demo-
cratic ;  and  we  ought  not  to  be  surprised,  though  in  fact  we  arc,
when  we  find  doctors  and  sculptors  and  schoolmasters  being  paid,
like  masons  and  joiners  and  private  soldiers,  at  the  customary
standard  rate.  They  all  earned  a  decent  livelihood,  which  was
all  that  they  asked  for  in  pay.  They  prefer  to  take  the  '  rise '
that  the  modern  craftsman  would  demand,  in  honour  and  public
estimation,  or,  if  the  city  felt  particularly  grateful,  in  a  golden
crown  and  a  public  banquet.^

Indeed,  it  was  very  seldom  that  they  worked  for  wages  at  all,
because,  as  the  London  clerk  said  of  his  summer  holiday,  it  inter-
fered so  much  with  their  daily  habits.  They  worked  as  wage-
earners  for  the  city  when  the  need  arose  :  for  they  were  her  citizens
and  trained  to  do  her  bidding.  But  who  were  they,  as  free  men,
that  they  should  work  for  wages  from  their  equals  ?  '  Such  an
arrangement  would  have  put  the  craftsman  almost  in  the  position
of  the  slave.  His  aim  in  life  was  very  different:  to  preserve  his
full  personal  liberty  and  freedom  of  action,  to  work  when  he  felt
inclined  and  when  his  duties  as  a  citizen  permitted  him,  to  har-
monize his  work  with  all  the  other  occupations  which  filled  the
life  of  a  Greek,  to  participate  in  the  government,  to  take  his  seat

1  For  the  doctor  as  a  'practical  artist'  (x«(poT«Vrjt)  see  Soph.  Ttiich.  looi
and  Jebb's  note.  As  in  the  potter's  shop  so  in  the  dispensary  there  were
both  free  men  and  slaves.  See  Plato,  Laws  720,  who  says  that  slave-
practitioners  were  much  more  rough-and-ready  in  their  methods,  ^^o^'o"^
were  probably  paid  at  the  standard  labourer's  rate,  in  spite  of  the  high
bidding  among  different  cities  for  the  services  of  Democedcs  (Hdt.  111.  131).
who  was  not  an  ordinary  doctor  but  one  of  the  social  lions  of  the  day.  (bee
Pohl,  De  Graecorwn  Mcdicis  Piiblicis,  p.  68.)  The  figures  slowly  rise  after
the  end  of  the  fifth  century,  partly  owing  to  the  decline  in  the  value  of  money  :
and  this  provided  an  opportunity  for  the  inevitable  tendency  to  distinguish
between  higher  and  lower  kinds  of  work.  These  distinctions  are  not  alw.iys
according  to  our  notions.  Curious  readers  may  consult  Dittenbcrgcr,  no.  523,
where,  in  a  school  at  Teos,  the  music-master  is  paid  nearly  three  tunes  as
much  as  the  '  games-master  '.  For  honours  to  a  cr;iftsnvin  see  Dittenbcrgcr.
ii.  545.     Greeks  preferred  golden  crowns  to  titles.


266  ECONOMICS  part  hi

in  the  courts,  to  join  in  the  games  and  festivals,  to  break  off  his
work  when  his  friends  called  him  out  to  go  to  the  market-place
or  the  wrestling  school,  or  when  his  colleagues  in  the  craft  were
holding  a  dinner — all  of  them  things  which  were  incompatible
with  a  contract  at  a  fixed  wage  '.^

So  it  is  not  altogether  impossible  to  understand  whence  arose,
in  decadent  days,  the  false  idea  that  the  Greeks  of  the  great  age
regarded  manual  labour  as  degrading  ;  though  it  is  still  difficult
to  explain  how,  with  the  Parthenon  before  their  eyes,  men  can
believe  so  still.  It  is,  of  course,  grotesquely  untrue,  as  could  be
seen  at  a  glance,  if  there  were  no  other  evidence,  from  the  names
they  gave  to  those  who  exercised  it.  They  called  them  '  manual
artists'  [•^iipoTe^vai)  or  'public  workers'  (Srjfxiovpyoi),  a  title  ap-
plied also  to  magistrates,  who,  too,  performed  what  was  regarded
as  an  indispensable  public  service ;  or  '  lords  of  the  hand '
{^eipa)vaKT€s),  a  name  which  must  surely  have  been  struck  out,  in
the  envy  of  the  moment,  by  some  wistful  bystander  at  the  potter's
wheel  or  the  blacksmith's  forge.  In  truth  they  honoured  manual
work  far  more  than  we,  who  are  only  just  beginning  to  discover
the  secret  and  mutually  helpful  connexions  between  the  workings
of  hand  and  brain.  But  they  insisted,  rather  from  instinct  than
from  policy,  on  the  duty  of  moderation,  and  objected,  as  artists  do,
against  doing  any  more  work  than  they  needed  when  the  joy  had
gone  out  of  it.  Above  all,  they  objected  to  all  monotonous
activity,  to  occupations  which  involved  sitting  for  long  periods  in
cramped  and  unhealthy  postures,  especially  in  a  hot  and  vitiated
atmosphere.  It  was  these  occupations,  those  of  our  respectable
clerks  and  secretaries  of  all  grades,  rather  than  of  our  rough-clad
artisans,  which  they  regarded  as  '  menial '.  '  It  is  quite  right,'
said  Xenophon,  a  typical  Greek  in  his  prejudices,  '  that  cities
should  rate  them  low  ;  for  they  injure  the  bodies  of  those  who
spend  their  time  on  them,  by  compelling  them  to  remain  indoors

1  Salvioli,  Lc  Capitalisme  dans  le  nionde  antique,  Paris,  1906,  p.  148.
I  have  altered  a  word  here  and  there,  as  the  passage,  and  the  work  as  a  whole,
deal  with  Rome.  But  the  book  is  full  of  suggestion  for  Greek  students  also.
Compare  Socrates'  objection  to  being  paid  for  talking  to  people,  i.e.  for  teaching:
he  regarded  such  an  arrangement  as  selling  himself  into  slavery  (Xen.  Mei>?.  i.
2.  6).  Moreover,  it  would  probably  not  pay,  according  to  Greek  ideas,  from
the  pupil's  point  of  view,  because  a  paid  teacher  is  less  likely  to  feel  that  he  is
a  friend,  and  'nobody  ever  received  any  education  from  a  man  he  did  not  care
for'  (i.  2.  39).


CHAP.  VII       CRAFTSMEN    AND   WORKMKN  267

and  sedentary,  and  sometimes  even  to  spend  all  day  by  the  fire'
Art  cannot  be  produced  under  those  conditions  when  joy  is
absent ;  and  if  it  could,  it  would  hav^e  destroyed  in  its  coming  to
birth  what  the  Greek  regarded  as  a  still  greater  work  of  art,  the
human  body.  This  was  the  origin  of  the  Greek  feeling  against
'  menial  employments  '.  Its  real  significance  has  been  obscured  by
later  writers,  who  took  a  current  prejudice,  widened  its  range,
and  transformed  its  meaning,  till  almost  every  method  of  earning
a  livelihood,  from  teaching  philosophy  downwards,  ceased  to  be
respectable,  and  no  forms  of  activity  remained  worthy  of  a  free
man  beyond  contemplation  and  politics  and  fighting.  Small
wonder  that  scholars  nursed  on  these  theories  fell  into  the  habit
of  assuming  that  the  Greeks  fed  solely  on  honeydew  and  dr.ink
the  milk  of  Paradise.^

Yet  society  cannot  get  on  without  a  basis  of  unpleasant  and
monotonous  labour.  There  are  regions  of  social  work  which  can
never  be  made  artistic  and  only  with  difficulty  jo)-ful,  where,  with
all  the  willingness  in  the  world,  the  best  that  can  be  aimed  at
is  often  a  mere  humdrum  conscientiousness.  There  are  pitchers
to  be  filled,  dinners  to  be  cooked,  clothes  to  be  made  and  mended
within  the  household.  There  is  rough  work  to  be  done  outside,
in  the  heat  of  the  sun,  digging  and  lifting,  pulling  and  pushing
and  carrying,  very  aggravating  to  men  accustomed  to  finer  and
more  congenial  forms  of  activity.  How  was  all  this  necessary
common  labour  managed  in  our  society  of  artists  ?

Some  of  it,  as  we  shall  see,  did  not  get  done.     Societies  which

dislike   irksome   work  must   be   content   to  live   in   a  slovenly

manner,  and  there  are  regions  of  Greek  life  into  which  it  is  wiser

not  to  pry.     Still,  even  in  the  most  neglectful  City  State,  there

remained  work  enough  to  be  done  by  a  number  of  those  workers

1  Xen.  Oec.  iv.  2  is  the  locus  dassicits  for  ["iwavalx.  It  was  very  wrong  of
Plato,  for  instance,  to  gibe  at  the  sophists  for  taking  money  for  teaching  virtue,
when  he  himself  happened  to  be  rich  enough  to  do  without  it.  I  he  later
philosophers,  especially  when  they  came  under  the  influence  of  wcii-to-do
Roman  patrons,  pushed  the  prejudice  against  menial  work  to  terrible  lengths.
They  thought  the  connoisseur  a  greater  man  than  the  creator.  '  \\  ho  does  not
admire  the  Olympian  Zeus  of  Phidias?  And  yet  who  would  care  to  be
Phidias?'  says  one  of  Gallio's  friends  in  the  cxcelleni  sketch  of  that  society
by  Anatole  France  {Siir  la  Pierre  Blanche,  p.  43)-  He  is  echoing  Lucian,
Sojiimum,  ch.  9.  We  are  justly  in  revolt  against  this  form  of  conceit,  and
the  old  academic  theory  of  'culture'  with  which  it  has  been  associated.  1  He
result  is  that  we  tend  to  forget  how  much  truth  lay  concealed  in  the  original
fifth-century  prejudice.


268  FXONOMICS  part  hi

who  earn  their  living,  as  Plato  put  it,  by  '  hiring  out  their  bodily
strength '.  Let  us  briefly  put  together  what  we  can  find  out
about  them.^

For  the  work  within  the  household,  the  pitchers  and  the  dinners
and  the  clothes,  a  few  words  must  suffice.  In  the  great  majority
of  cases  it  was  performed  by  members  of  the  family.  While  the
father  and  sons  are  out  in  the  fields,  the  wife  and  daughters  are
spinning  and  weaving  and  cooking,  and  picking  their  way,  with  a
pitcher  balanced  on  their  head,  up  and  down  the  stony  track  to
the  city  well-house.  Xenophon  has  set  forth  for  us  with  charm-
ing frankness,  in  his  delightful  pamphlet  on  housekeeping,  the
attitude  taken  up  by  a  Greek  husband  and  master  towards  his
newly  wedded  young  wife.  The  case  he  gives  us  is  not  a  typical
one,  for  the  girl  was  the  daughter  of  rich  parents  and  had  been
brought  up  with  unusual  care.  But  it  is  too  instructive  to  be
passed  over.  She  comes  to  her  husband  '  not  yet  fifteen  years  of
age.  All  her  life  she  has  been  carefully  watched  over,  so  that  she
has  hardly  seen  anything  or  heard  anything  or  even  said  any-
thing '.  '  When  I  had  tamed  her,'  says  her  husband,  '  and  she  had
overcome  her  shyness  and  would  talk,  I  asked  her,  "Tell  me,  my
wife,  have  you  yet  thought  over  why  I  have  received  you  into  my
house  and  why  your  parents  gave  you  to  me :  for  I  know  even
you  must  recognize  that  a  large  choice  was  open  to  me ! " '  After
this  hopeful  prelude  he  proceeds  to  instruct  her  in  her  new  re-
sponsibilities as  a  housewife  and  future  mother,  laying  particular
stress  upon  the  duty  of  setting  a  good  example.  She  is  to  lead
the  way  in  tidiness  and  punctuality,  in  modesty  and  simplicity,  in
obedience  to  her  master's  will  and  uncomplaining  perseverance  in
tedious  and  unpleasant  tasks.  For  upon  her  rests  the  joint  re-
sponsibility with  her  husband  of  '  increasing  the  prosperity  of  the
house  '?

1  PL  Rep.-^jl.

^  Xen.  Oec.  vii.  5  ff.,  iii,  x  et  passim.  See  Mrs.  Putnam's  The  Lady,  p.  300,
for  an  interesting  comparison  between  Xenophon's  model  housewife  and  '  the
lady  of  the  slave-states '  in  the  days  before  emancipation.  '  Each  was  the
chief  executive  of  a  large  and  motley  community,  in  duty  bound  to  enforce
the  laws.  .  .  .  Each,  doubtless,  if  not  overtaxed,  derived  satisfaction  from  the
performance  of  important  work  bearing  directly  on  the  welfare  and  happiness
of  those  she  loved  best ;  but  neither  could  be  called  a  free  woman.  In
the  case  of  the  Greek  lady  we  see  this  plainly  enough.  No  sentiment
had  arisen   in  her  day  to   mask  the  issue.     If  she  was  constrained  to  an


CHAP.  VII       CRAFTSMEN   AND   WORKMEN  i6g

Amongst  the  duties  assigned  to  the  young  housewife,  one  on
which  great  emphasis  was  laid  was  the  wise  management  of  shivcs.
For  in  the  larger  cities  which  could  afford  to  keep  imp(jrlcd
workers,  a  certain  proportion  of  the  more  prosperous  families
would  keep  household  slaves  ;  and  the  housewife,  like  the  crafts-
man, had  to  learn  how  to  train  them.  When  they  had  been  pro-
perly trained,  and  if  they  were  kindly  and  tactfully  treated,  they
would  relieve  the  housewife  and  her  daughters  from  some  of  their
more  irksome  tasks.  Very  touching  is  the  relation,  as  we  see  it
in  the  tragedy  and  on  the  gravestones,  between  a  good  housewife
and  her  servants.  Some  of  them  even  came  by  long  service  to
occupy  respected  and  honourable  positions  in  the  life  of  the  house-
hold. The  trusty  Paidagogos  or  children's  attendant,  who  accom-
panied the  boys  of  the  family  out-of-doors,  is  a  familiar  figure  in
Greek  life :  and  so  is  the  faithful  old  nurse,  whom  we  know  both
from  the  Hippolytus  and  the  Mcdca.  But  this  tempts  us  into
regions  which  we  must  leave  for  a  later  chapter.^

Let  us  now  turn  to  the  men's  drudgery,  to  the  rough  common
labour  that  forms  the  indispensable  basis  of  even  the  simplest
society.  Even  in  a  Greek  city,  which  dispensed  with  so  many
conveniences,  there  must  be  some  one  to  make  roads  and  walls,
to  fell  trees  and  quarry  stone  and  extract  the  ore  from  the  hill-
side. And  in  a  society  of  artists  there  must  be  some  one  to  bring
to  the  workshop  and  the  stoneyard  the  materials  in  which  they
work.  Without  the  help  of  the  general  labourer  the  craftsmen  of
Greece  were  as  helpless  as  our  own  more  specialized  societies.
Plutarch  makes  this  very  clear  for  us  in  his  account  of  the  labour

exacting  profession,  no  one  obscured  the  fact  by  calling  her  a  queen  or,  with
a  much  stronger  connotation  of  leisure,  an  angel.'

'  Eur.  Alt.  192  ff.  is  a  touching  passage  illustrated  on  many  funeral  reliefs.
In  an  average  Greek  city  the  proportion  of  families  which  kept  household
slaves  was  probably  not  large.  For  example,  in  hfth-century  IMataca  wc
hear  of  household  slaves  taking  part  in  the  street-fighting,  but  there  is  no
further  mention  of  them  when  the  non-combatants  arc  specified.  { Ihuc.  ii.
4. 2,  70.  3,  cf.  78.  4.)  But  the  subject  is  one  on  which  it  is  impossible  to  speak
with  assurance.  In  early  Athens  the  girls  went  to  the  well  themselves,  because
'  neither  the  Athenians  nor  the  other  Greeks  at  this  time  had  sl.ives  ,  s;iys
Herodotus  (vi.  137).  In  his  plays  about  town  households  Aristophanes  makes
the  slaves  play  a  prominent  part ;  but  not  in  the  Acharnums  or  the  /  <».r.
Cf.  also  Aristotle,  Pol.  1323  a  5  ;  Ar.  Eccl.  593-  It  is  estimated  by  Mr.  Charles
Booth  that  only  eleven  per  cent,  of  the  population  of  London  belong  to  the
servant-keeping  class  {Life  and  Labour  in  London,  final  voluinc,  p.  6).
Paidagogos  :  Plato,  Lysis  223  (where  two  of  them,  flushed  with  wine,  tjrc.iK
into  their  native  language,  i.  e.  they  were  not  bom  in  the  household).

1246  S


270  l^XONOMICS  PART  III

employed  on  the  Acropolis  buildings.  First  he  enumerates  all
the  craftsmen  whose  services  were  requisitioned :  '  the  different
materials  such  as  stone,  brass,  ivory,  gold,  ebony,  and  cypress
employed  carpenters,  masons,  brass- workers,  goldsmiths,  painters,
turners,  and  other  craftsmen.'  Then  he  passes  on  naturally
to  the  transport  labourers.  '  The  conveyance  of  them  by  sea
employed  merchants  and  sailors  and  steersmen,  and  by  land
wheelwrights,  drivers  of  ox-wagons  and  horse-carts,  rope-makers,
leather-cutters,  road-makers,  and  iron-founders,  and  every  craft
had  a  number  of  these  lower  unskilled  labourers  ranged  in  proper
subordination  to  it,  like  soldiers  under  a  general.'  ^

It  is  hard  for  us  to  realize  how  heavy  and  wearisome  such
labour  was  in  the  days  before  cranes  and  steam-rollers  and  all
our  labour-saving  contrivances.  Some  vivid  records  survive  to
remind  us  what  it  was  like.  On  a  fourth-century  inscription  from
Eleusis  we  can  read  full  details  about  the  transport  of  the
materials  for  an  important  monument.  The  work  comprised
three  stages :  first  the  preparation  of  the  road  from  the  quarry  to
the  city,  which  had  to  be  paved  with  grooved  stones,  with  sidings
at  intervals ;  next  the  making  of  waggons  heavy  enough  to  hold
the  stone  blocks  ;  and  lastly  the  process  of  transport  itself.  This
is  done  by  means  of  ox-waggons.  Each  pair  of  oxen  costs  four
drachmas  and  half  an  obol  per  day  ;  the  transport  takes  three
days  for  a  distance  of  thirty  miles.  To  drag  a  single  block  thirty
to  forty  pair  of  oxen  are  needed.  Each  block  therefore  costs  the
State  from  three  to  four  hundred  drachmas.  When  we  read  this
and  then  look  at  the  vast  masses  of  stone  used  in  the  great  State
buildings  at  Athens,  we  begin  to  realize  how  much  straining  man-
power and  brute-power  was  expended  on  their  construction.  The
men  who  manned  those  ox- waggons  may  have  been,  as  Plato  said
(though  it  may  be  doubted),  '  hardly  on  the  level  of  intellectual
companionship,'  but  they  accomplished  .work  of  which  no  modern
machine  need  be  ashamed.  The  road  they  made  from  the  quarries
may  still  be  seen,  with  its  grooves,  on  the  slope  of  Pentelicus,  and
at  intervals  along  its  upper  course  there  still  stand  by  the  wayside
vast  derelict  blocks  of  half-hewn  stone  which  they  failed  to  carry
further.^

1  Plut.  Pt-r.  12.

-  1-rancotte,  vol.  ii,  p.  86  (from  /.  G,  i.  834  c).   The  men  employed  seem  all


CHAP.  VII      CRAFTSMEN    AND    WORKMEN  271

Work  such  as  this  was  costly,  and  could  only  be  undertaken  by
cities  which  had  command  of  large  means.  But  there  was  a  great
deal  of  rough  work  which  was  necessary,  whether  the  city  could
pay  for  it  or  no.  How  did  an  ordinary  city,  for  instance,  build  its
walls  and  towers?  In  the  only  way  possible  under  the  circum-
stances, by  a  process  of  conscription.  Just  as,  wiien  war  iiad  been
declared,  there  was  a  call  to  arms,  and  the  citizen  gave  up  iii>
daily  work  and  went  to  join  his  regiment,  so,  when  there  wa^
urgent  public  building  or  digging  to  be  done,  there  was  a  call  to
work,  and  all  hands  sallied  forth  to  help,  as  at  an  ICnglish  hay-
making. That  is  how  the  walls  of  Athens  were  built  in  47s  and
the  walls  of  Argos  in  417,  women,  children,  and  household  scrvant.s
joining  in  the  work.  A  better  instance  still  is  given  by  Herodotus.
The  whole  population  of  Cnidos,  a  Greek  city  in  Asia  Minor,
turns  out  to  wall  off  the  isthmus  which  separated  them  from  the
mainland,  in  order  to  fortify  their  city  against  an  imminent
Persian  attack.  'And  as  ihcy  worked  in  a  great  bod>',  the
workers  appeared  to  them  to  be  subject  to  unrea'-onable  and
possibly  heaven-sent  injuries  in  every  part  of  their  body,  and
particularly  in  their  eyes,  owing  to  the  splitting  of  the  stone.  So
they  sent  a  message  to  Delphi  and  asked  what  was  hindering
them.  And  the  priestess  (so  at  least  the  Cnidians  say)  replied
to  them  in  verse  as  follows :  "  Do  not  fortify  your  isthmus,  or
go  on  digging.  If  Zeus  had  wished  it  to  be  an  island  he  would
have  made  it  so."  '  So  the  Cnidians  ceased  building  and  sur-
rendered to  the  Persians  without  a  struggle.^

This  typically  Greek  story  will  illustrate  better  than  any  accu-
mulation of  further  evidence  the  attitude  which  the  Greeks  always
felt  tempted  to  adopt  towards  unpleasant  and  monotonous  forms
of  labour.  It  explains  why  a  Greek  would  rather  lie  in  the  sun
with  nothing  to  eat  than  work  underground  in  a  mine,  and  why
there  were  thus,  as  we  shall  see,  certain  forms  of  employment

to  be  free  men.  Cf.  Ar.  Frogs  167,  where  the  trusted  slave  suggests  th.it
some  one  else  should  be  hired  (i.  e.  probably  a  free  man)  to  carry  the  hcav>'
luggage  instead  of  himself.  ,   c  ,  ■       u

1  Hdt.  i.  174.  Cf.  Thuc.  i.  90.  3,  v.  82.  6  (call  to  work) ;  and  cf.  Dittcnbcrger,
no.  529  for  a  typical  State  call  of  this  sort.  After  all.  the  sapper  is  still
accounted  a  soldier.  The  story  of  the  hasty  building  of  the  walls  of  Athens
in  479,  during  Themistocles'  absence  at  Sparta,  which  used  to  be  denounced
as  a  'technical  impossibility',  has  now  been  vindicated  by  the  archaeologist*  .
see  Cavaignac,  pp.  itJ-iy,  and  cf.  Busolt  in  Kiio  v,  pp.  =55  "•

S  2


272  ECONOMICS  PART  III

which  were  handed  over,  whenever  possible,  to  slaves,  freedmen,
and  resident  aliens.  Yet  it  would  be  a  pity  to  leave  the  impres-
sion that  men  in  Greece  had  not  discovered,  or  did  not  relish,  the
satisfaction  that  comes  of  honest  labour  well  performed.  The
old  garlic-smelling  charcoal-burners  of  Acharnae  enjoyed  to
the  full,  we  may  be  sure,  their  rough  work  in  the  woods  of
Parnes.  They  can  speak  to  the  reader  for  themselves  through
the  lips  of  Aristophanes.  Let  us  turn  instead  to  their  obscurer
comrade  in  labour,  a  woodman  like  they,  but  a  Phrygian  by
blood  and  a  slave  by  origin.  When  the  Peloponnesian  army
invaded  Attica  in  the  spring  of  431  one  of  the  first  skirmishes
that  occurred  was  at  a  place  called  Phrygia,  near  Acharnae,
a  little  settlement  of  Phrygian  woodcutters.  Some  of  these  seem
to  have  taken  part  in  the  fight,  and  one  of  them,  the  head  of  the
community. (if  we  may  take  him  at  his  own  word),  lost  his  life  in
the  engagement.  Here  is  his  epitaph,  breathing,  if  ever  headstone
did,  the  spirit  of  a  strong  man  ashamed  neither  of  his  origin,  nor
of  his  work,  nor  of  his  position  in  his  adopted  country — a  welcome
voice  for  the  nameless  thousands,  who  lived  and  worked  in  the
same  spirit  but  have  '  left  no  memorial ' :

'  Mamies,  son  of  Orymas,  who  ivas  the  best  of  the  Phrygians  in
the  broad  lands  of  A  thcns,  lies  in  this  fine  tomb  ;  and  by  Zens
I  never  saiv  a  better  ivoodman  than  myself.  He  died  in  the
zcar.'  ^

^  Best  given,  with  commentary,  in  Wilhelm,  Beitrdge  zur  griechischen
Inschriftenkunde,  pp.  35-7.  The  stone  is  a  healthy  (and  perhaps  an  inten-
tional) correction  of  the  common  opinion  about  the  Asiatics  resident  in  Attica,
canonized  by  Aristophanes  in  the  Knights  (cf.  Eur.  ^/c.  675).  It  runs  as
follows  :

<l>pu'y&)i'  oy  apiaros  iyevar  e-

V  fvpv)(opoi(Tiv   Adrjvins  Mdv-

vr}s  'Opvfiaios,  o  iJ.vrjp.a  rdS  e'cr-

Tt  KoKou'  Kal  p.a  At   ovK  (idop

ffiuvTO  afidvco  vXoTOfJiOP.
(V  Tcoi  TToXf'/iCot  dnedav(v.


CHAPTER   VIII
CITY   FXONOMICS:    RETAIL   TRADK

'EotI  x^pof  (V  fifat]  TJj  TToXt  (IrroSfSf-y/itVof  «'?  toi>  avWtyn  fit  tat  (iXXi)Xou(  u/jrvrr«r
€^airaT(ocri. — KiNG  Cyrus  in  Herodotus  i.  153.

The  fair  and  the  market,  those  wise  institutions  of  our  forcfatiurs,  and  with
regard  to  the  management  of  which  they  were  so  scrupulously  careful,  bring
the  producer  and  the  consumer  in  contact  with  each  other  ...  the  shop  and
the  trafficker  keep  them  apart  ...  the  fair  and  the  market  lay  cvcr>-thing
open. — COBBETT,  Rjiral  Rides,  vol.  ii,  pp.  257-9  (ed.  1885).

So  far  we  have  been  concerned  with  shepherds  and  farmers
and  robbers  and  craftsmen,  with  men  who  earn  a  h'vclihood  for
themselves  and  their  household  by  making  or  taking  things,  or
by  sitting  by  while  Nature  makes  things  grow  on  their  behalf.
All  of  them,  except  the  robber,  are  producers:  and  as  the  robber
is  so  often  a  farmer  or  a  fisherman  in  difficulties,  'eking  out,'  tis
Aristotle  said,  *  the  deficiencies  of  one  employment  by  another,'
he  may  almost  count  as  one  too,  and  at  any  rate  lakes  rank
among  the  respectables.  But  we  now  come  to  a  class  of  hou.sc-
kecpers  against  whom  the  Greeks  always  maintained  a  prejudice,
chiefly  because  they  are  not  producers  at  all,  but  middlemen,
living  in  an  '  unnatural '  way  by  distributing  and  exchanging  the
products  of  other  people.^

Yet  it  is  clear  enough  that  society  cannot  get  on  without
them.  '  Supposing,'  says  Plato,  '  that  a  husbandman  or  an
artisan  brings  some  product  to  market  '  (on  his  way  in,  pcrhap.s,
to  sit  in  Court  or  in  Council), '  and  he  comes  at  a  tiine  when  there
is  no  one  to  exchange  them  with,  is  he  to  leave  his  calling  and
sit  idle  in  the  market-place?  Not  at  all;  he  will  find  people
there  who,  seeing  the  want,  undertake  the  office  of  salesman.'
But,  of  course,  thinks  the  philosopher,  recalling  amongst  other
things  his  aesthetic  objection  against  people  who  sit  .still  all  day
long,  '  no  one  will  earn  his  living  in  this  way  if  he  can  help  it.'
So  he  proceeds,  following  a  natural  Greek  train  of  reasoning  to

'  Ar.  Pol.  1258b;  cf.  Dem.  xxv.  46  (a  typical  passiiRCJ.


274  ECONOMICS  part  tti

lay  it  down  that  '  in  well-ordered  states  they  are  commonly
those  who  arc  the  weakest  in  bodily  strength  and  therefore  of
little  use  for  any  other  purpose.  Their  duty  is  to  be  in  the
market-place  and  to  give  money  in  exchange  for  goods  to  those
who  desire  to  sell,  and  to  take  money  from  those  who  desire  to
buy '.'

This  sounds  as  harmless  as  it  is  elementary  to  the  modern
reader,  in  a  world  of  shops  and  a  nation  of  shopkeepers.  But
it  is  by  no  means  harmless  in  the  philosophers'  eyes :  Greek
retail  traders,  they  found  by  experience  (and  many  a  modern
will  bear  them  out),  were  no  better  than  they  ought  to  be,  and
instead  of  accepting  this  as  inevitable,  or  merely  as  material  for
standard  witticisms,  as  we  have  learnt  to  do  with  the  effect  of
modern  professions  upon  character,  they  looked  about  for  a
reason.  They  found  it  in  the  association  of  retail  trading  with
moneymaking.-

For  the  retail  traders,  when  one  comes  to  think  of  it,  were
almost  the  only  people  in  a  Greek  city  who  were  continually
handling  coin,  and  were  thus  peculiarly  exposed  to  the  tempta-
tion of  reckoning  wealth  or  happiness  in  that  fallacious  medium.
Their  days  were  spent  in  a  perpetual  haggling  over  small  change,
till  theyl'came  to  think  that  everything  in  life  could  be  bought,
and  that  there  was  nothing  too  great  to  be  expressed  in  terms
of  money.  They  forgot,  as  a  witty  Jewish  writer  has  said,  that
'  the  small  change  for  a  Napoleon  is  not  equal  to  a  Napoleon  ',  or,
as  the  apostle  put  it  to  his  business  friends  at  Corinth,  that  the
Word  of  God  cannot  be  administered  retail.''

However,  we  will  see  for  ourselves.  Let  us  make  sure  that
Parliament  is  not  sitting,  and  then  attach  ourselves  to  some  party

^  V\d.io,  Rep.  371.

^  The  neglect  to  study  the  effect  of  the  different  modern  professions  upon
character,  when  we  are  always  insisting,  and  rightly,  upon  the  importance  of
a  '  character-forming '  education,  is  one  of  the  strangest  lapses  due  to  the
sway  of  nineteenth-century  economics.  Yet  we  know  perfectly  well,  as  the
Greeks  did,  that  men's  and  women's  characters  are  not,  as  parents  and
schoolmasters  seem  to  assume,  '  formed '  and  petrified  by  the  time  they  are
ready  to  begin  earning  their  living.  It  seems  a  pity  to  study  (and  in  some
cases  to  counteract)  the  physical  effects  of  occupations  and  to  ignore  the
mental,  or  to  study  the  psychology  of  abnormal  types,  such  as  criminals  or
'  saints',  and  to  ignore  the  professional  man.

^  2  Cor.  ii.  17  OX)  KanrjKeiovTii  riv  Xdyoj/,  translated  'corrupting',  i.e.  adul-
terating. The  Napoleon  epigram  is  Zangwill's,  addressed  to  ihe  Zionists  in
1905,  after  Herzl's  death.


CFIAP.  VIII  RKTAII.     rRADI'  27%

of  countrymen  ridincr  in  on  their  mules  to  town;  or  bclttr  still
get  a  lift  on  some  country  cart  filled  with  wineskins  or  heavy
produce,  and  so  rumble  in  alon;^  rough  roads  to  the  city  gates
and  then  through  a  labjrinth  of  mud-hrick  houses  and  busy
workshops  till  we  emerge  on  to  the  broad  market-place  where
our  retail  dealers  are  at  work.  They  will  be  so  hard  at  work.
slaves  and  free  men  together,  swearing  and  protesting  over  their
bargains  and,  in  the  intervals  between  them,  ruining  what  voice
they  have  left  by  their  stentorian  yells  (on  the  best  towncricrs'
model),  that  it  is  useless  to  think  of  going  to  them  for  informa-
tion, which  moreover  would  cost  far  more  than  it  would  be
worth.     It  will  be  better  to  use  our  eyes.'

The  general  plan  of  the  market-place  is  a  rough  square.
Along  two  sides  of  it  there  are  colonnades,  open  towards  the
market-place,  with  brightly  coloured  paintings  on  their  inner
walls,  depicting  some  battle-scene  between  the  gods  and  the
giants,  or  between  the  citizens  and  their  next-door  neighbours
on  the  other  side  of  the  range.  As  the  sun  is  not  yet  high,  they
are  still  empty,  but  no  doubt  they  will  fill  up  with  loiterers  later
on.  Already  men  are  beginning  to  stream  out  from  the  narrow
lanes  that  here  and  there  interrupt  their  covered  walks.  Down
there,  as  we  know,  for  we  have  just  come  past  them,  are  the
workshops  and  studios  of  the  barbers  and  potters  and  other
craftsmen.  On  the  other  two  sides  arc  public  buildings,  on  the
one  a  temple  with  a  big  altar  and  a  number  of  statues  and  votive
offerings  in  front  of  it,  on  the  other  the  Prytaneum  or  Govern-
ment building,  where  the  President  for  the  da}'  and  other  officials
have  their  meals  and  sleep,  and  perhaps  a  prison  and  a  public
treasury  as  well.  About  half  the  area  of  the  square  is  kept  free
and  open  for  the  general  public,  who  arc  already  beginning  lo
come  together  for  their  morning's  chatter.  The  other  half  is
filled  with  an  inextricable  confusion  of  .'•tails  and  booths  and
boards  and  wickcrwork  and  sunshades,  and  every  variety  of
temporary  erection,  roughly  arranged,  if  the  word  can  be  used
of  such  a  chaos  of  men  and  wares  and  such  a  b.ibcl  of  voices,


1  The  market  at  Athens  was  closed  during  the  sitting  of  the  I-.cclesia  and
a  scarlet  rope  drawn  round  it.  See  .Ar.  At/i.  21-2.  Shive  shopkeepers  were,
of  course,  common  in  the  larger  cities.  They  were  allowed  .1  jKrcent.igc  on
what  they  made.


376  ECONOMICS  part  hi

in  'rows'  and  'circles',  according  to  the  nature  of  the  goods
being  sold  on  or  under  or  round  them.  The  greater  part  of
these  consist  of  foodstuffs,  which  cannot  be  sold,  like  boots  and
pots,  at  the  place  where  they  are  produced,  and  so  have  to  come
to  market :  flour,  and  perhaps  some  baked  bread  as  well,  vege-
tables and  cheese,  honey  and  fruit  and  garlic,  wine  to  be  de-
canted from  pig-skins,  meat  (for  those  who  can  afford  it)  freshly
slaughtered  and  still  staining  the  pavement  with  its  blood,  and
fish  on  great  slabs  of  shining  marble.  As  we  approach  the  fish-
stalls,  a  perspiring  busybody  pushes  his  way  through  the  crowd,
ringing  a  bell  with  all  his  might.  This,  we  are  told,  is  one  of
the  Clerks  of  the  Market,  and  the  bell  is  to  open  the  fishmarket.
No  need  to  tell  us  this :  the  sudden  reinforcement  of  noise  and
pushing  are  sufficient  evidence,  not  to  speak  of  the  choice
specimens  of  fishmongers'  Attic  which  begin  to  be  wafted  to
our  ears.  We  retire  in  search  of  a  more  refined  and  rarefied
atmosphere,  and,  hurrying  past  the  sinister-looking  money-
changers with  their  annoying  habit  of  clinking  a  coin  on  their
table,  find  ourselves  among  a  crowd  of  young  dandies  round
the  perfumes  and  frankincense.  A  new  cargo  from  Arabia  via
Egypt  reached  port  only  yesterday,  and  here  are  subtle  and
exotic  scents  such  as  the  city  never  knew  before.  But  the  prices
asked  are  too  high.  We  will  wait  a  day  or  two  till  the  first  rage
has  passed,  and  trust  to  luck  that  the  cargo  is  larger  than  the
dealer  swears.  Avoiding  the  slave-market,  being  in  no  mood
for  an  exhibition  of  naked  humanity,  we  move  on  to  the  humble
book-stalls,  hidden  away  by  themselves  in  the  quietest  corner
of  the  market,  and  here  we  find  friends  who  will  keep  us  busy
discussing  Our  Savage  Ancestors,  with  the  latest  items  from
Scythia,  or  Tragedy  versus  Comedy,  with  intelligent  anticipa-
tions of  next  playday,  till  it  is  time  to  go  to  lunch.^


'  Cf.  Paus.  vi.  24  :  We  do  not  know  to  what  extent  the  Athenian  practice
of  keeping  Parliament  Hill  and  Market  Square  distinct  was  adopted  in  other
cities.  Plato  and  Aristotle  are  anxious  to  keep  the  two  separate,  not,  like  the
Athenians,  from  motives  of  convenience,  but  for  moral  reasons.  See  Politics
1 331  a  30  and  Laws  849  for  their  grandfatherly  regulations.  In  Laws  917
Plato  actually  forbids  bargaining  and  insists  on  'fixed  prices',  which  would
have  spoilt  all  the  fun.  In  the  fourth  century  and  later,  the  public  buildings
(colonnades,  Src)  in  and  round  the  market-place  became  grander  and  the
whole  scene  less  untidy.  For  details  see  Wachsmuth,  Siadt  Atheii,  ii,
pp.  443  fif.     For  a  market-place  in  a  country  township  see  Dittenberger.


CHAP.  VIII  RETAIL   TRADE  277

A  scene  like  this,  the  reader  will  rellcct,  calls  lor  a  ^ood  deal
of  regulation,  and  the  Clerks  of  the  Market  fully  earn  their
perquisites.  It  is  worth  while  encroaching  for  a  moment  into
the  domain  of  State  management  to  inquire  into  their  duties.
It  will  show  us  how  hard  the  city  tried  to  let  every  one,  so  far
as  was  compatible  with  citizen  duties,  earn  his  own  living  and
conduct  his  own  private  business  in  his  own  way.

The  chief  duty  of  the  Clerks  was  to  keep  the  market  in  order,
and  put  down,  if  not  quarrelling — that  would  be  Utopian— at
least  its  more  dangerous  and  unseemly  developments.  The)'  had
also  to  inspect  weights  and  measures,  to  prevent  adulteration,
and  to  collect,  not  themselves  but  through  tax  farmers,  the  rent
for  stalls  and  booths.  We  catch  a  glimpse  of  them,  in  the  pages
of  Xenophon,  weighing  cottage  loaves  and  guaranteeing  the  top
and  bottom  to  be,  as  declared,  of  equal  weight.'

It  was  also  their  business  to  protect  the  citizens  from  famine
prices  in  the  case  of  absolutely  necessary  articles.  But  no  attempt
was  made — though  under  similar  economic  conditions  it  is  often
made  elsewhere — to  settle  prices  generally.  In  a  small  almost
self-sufficient  community,  where  there  is  only  one  market  and
transport  to  another  centre  is  expensive  and  difficult,  grand-
fatherly  governments  are  often  tempted  to  fix  lists  of  fair  prices.
The  Greek  market  authorities  never  exercised  this  natural  power
except  under  very  special  circumstances.  They  preferred  to
leave  buyer  and  seller  free  to  settle  it  out  by  '  persuasion ',  or
by  the  natural  economic  tendencies  which  operate  so  speedily
among  sellers  of  perishable  wares  in  a  hot  climate.  It  was
against  their  instincts  to  interfere  with  private  bargaining.  As
Pericles  said— and  this  example  from  the  market  gives  an  added
meaning  to  the  words— '  we  give  free  play  to  all  in  our  jniblic

no.  431,  arrangements  for  a  new  market-place  at  Sunium.     (.reck  nicn  tiid
their  own  marketing,  unless  they  could  aflford  to  keep  a  slave.     Since  free
women  never  went  shopping,  their  husbands  had  to  do  it,  even  when  they
were  on  sentry-duty  :  Ar.  Lys.  555-64.    Kor  the  procedure  in  the  s lavc-m.»rket
see  the  vivid  description  in  Lucian's  BiW  n^xW.r.     This  reads  like  a  «.!«  .  "i
auction  sale,  but  in  reality  it  is  simply  an  ordinary  sale  under  the  usu.i
ditions  of  Greek  publicity  [v.  Pauly,  s.  v.  Amtio).     This  publicity  en
Greek  retailers  to  dispense  with   all   our  apparatus  of  advertisement,  lor
advertising  is  simply  '  salesmanship  plus  publicity  '.     Our  skilled  advertiser*
try  to  hit  us  in  the  eye  from  the  hoarding  or  the  ncwspajK-r  with  the  same  kind
of  appeal  as  the  old  Greek  salesman  shouted  into  the  passing  customer  s  car.
1  Xen.  Syvip.  ii.  20,  where  Socrates  is  compared  to  a  cottage  loal.


278  FXONOMICS  PART  III

life,  and  carry  the  same  spirit  into  our  daily  relations  with  one
another'.  And  when  we  get  the  worst  of  a  bargain  (so  we  may
read  into  his  next  sentence)  we  take  our  beating  in  good  part
and  '  have  no  black  looks  or  angry  words  for  our  neighbour  '.^

There  is  in  the  Berlin  Museum  a  small  tablet  of  lead  with
a  few  rows  of  much-worn  characters  upon  it.  It  is  the  earliest
existing  Greek  letter.  It  dates  probably  from  the  end  of  the
fifth  century  before  Christ,  but  is  very  similar  in  substance  to
the  letters  we  write  twenty-three  centuries  later  ;  it  is  about
making  a  good  bargain.  Here  it  is,  restored  in  its  entirety  from
the  most  desperate  illegibility  by  the  almost  uncanny  skill  of
Professor  Wilhelm :

Carry  to  the  Potters  Market,  and  deliver  to  Nausias  or
Thrasycles  or  my  son.

Mnesiergos  sends  his  love  to  all  at  home  and  hopes  this  may
find  them  ivell  as  it  leaves  him.

Please  send  me  a  rug,  either  a  sheepskin  or  a  goatskin,  as  cheap

'  For  Clerks  of  the  Market  cf.  Ar.  Ach.  896,  where  Dicaeopolis  sets  up
a  private  market  of  his  own  and  is  his  own  clerk.  For  a  typical  inscription
on  their  duties  see  Dittenberger,  no.  503,  where,  at  the  fair  connected  with
a  festival,  they  have  general  instructions  to  prevent  the  inhabitants  from  being
too  extortionate,  and  to  provide  medical  attendance  for  the  crowd.  In  Greece
to-day  local  authorities  have  the  power  to  draw  up  a  list  of  prices,  and  I  have
seen  such  a  list  affixed  to  the  gate  of  a  South  Italian  town.  But  the  only
evidence  I  can  find  for  a  tariff  for  ofdmary  goods  (i.e.  where  neither  moral
and  'sumptuary'  considerations  nor  special  necessities  come  into  play)  is
a  reference  in  Plautus,  Miles  Gloriosus  727,  where  the  Roman  adaptor
probably  goes  'just  wrong'.  Plautus  and  Terence  must,  of  course,  be  used
as  evidence  of  Athenian  life  as  cautiously  as  we  should  use  English  adapta-
tions of  French  plays  as  evidence  for  modern  Paris.

See,  further,  the  important  third-century  inscription  from  Delos  discussed  in
Bullett?t  de  Correspondn7ice  iiellctiiquc,  xxxi,  46  ff.  (which,  it  must  be  remem-
bered, is  concerned  with  a  crowded  sanctuary),  and  the  Greek  and  mediaeval
analogies  there  collected.  It  concerns  the  sale  of  fuel,  and  its  numerous  pro-
visions are  all  designed  to  secure  the  general  public  from  fraud  and  extortion.
For  instance,  merchants  are  not  allowed  to  go  back  upon  their  prices  when
once  they  have  fixed  them.  But  we  need  not  conclude  from  this  and  a  similar
regulation  for  the  Athenian  fish-market  (and  from  Plato's  veto  referred  to
above)  that  the  City  State  authorities  insisted  on  'fixed  prices'  in  general.
But  what  was  and  still  is  an  abuse,  to  be  stopped  by  the  authorities  if  they
can,  is  for  the  merchant  to  tell  each  customer  that  prices  are  fixed  when  in
reality  they  go  up  and  down  according  to  the  apparent  wits  of  the  buyer.
Just  possibly  it  is  simply  this  which  is  referred  to.  In  any  case  Delos  was
not  an  ordinary  City  State,  nor  were  fuel  and  fish  (a  favourite  article  with  the
Athenian  poor)  ordinary  commodities.  The  inscription  is  also  interesting  for
the  light  it  throws  on  Greek  custom-house  arrangements  and  the  meaning
of  the  'exemption'  granted  to  certain  merchants.  See  also,  in  this  con-
nexion, Dittenberger,  no.  936.     For  famine  regulations  see  p.  359  below.


CHAP.  VTTT  RETAIL   TRADF.  279

as  you  can  get  it,  and  not  wit/i  tJic  hairs  on,  and  some  stroiif^  shoe-
soles  :  I  ivill  pay  sonic  time}

^  Jahresltef/e  des  osterr.  arch,  his/.,  \oI.  vii,  pp.  94  fT.  liy  what  happy
accident  the  tablet  has  been  preserved  Wilhehn  cannot  say.  It  was  primed
first  in  a  collection  of 'Attic  curse-inscriptions',  similar  little  thin  plates  of
lead  which  were  laid  in  graves:  and  perhaps  it  may  have  been  mistaken  fi.i
one  of  them  and  so  became  entombed  itself.     It  rims  as  follows  :

^fpev  Is  Tov  KtpafjL-

ov  Toy  )(VTpiK6v'

anoboi'oi  8e  'Snvaiai

fi  QpacrvKXtji  f]  ff"  viui'

Mvrjaifpyos

fTreerreXf  rots  oiKoi

Xnip(v  Kn\  vyunvfv

(cat  avTos  ovto)s  e^aaxf  (Xf'

^Ttyacrpa  ft  rt  jioXfiTTe

aTTonep^frai  tj  coas  i]  8i(f)dep(is

U)S  fi/rfXeaTUTdi  K(ii  pi)  atavpuTtn

Kfii  KnTvparn  '.    ti'Xiiv  (iTTofiaWci).
A  similar  letter  has  lately  turned  up  in  Russia  (probably  from  Olbia)  and
is  published  by  Wilhelm  in  Jalncshcfte,  vol.  xii,  pp.  118  fT.:  it  is  a  Httlc
younger  than  its  companion,  dating  certainly  from  the  fourth  century  it.c.
The  opening  formula  is  practically  the  same :  rok  fV  (Akuh  \inpt\.v.


CHAPTER   IX

CITY    ECONOMICS

PUBLIC   AND    PRIVATE   PROPERTY

Knivh  Tu  (plXcop.

Friends  have  all  things  in  common. — Greek  Proverb.

Afl  yiip  nas  fiev  elvai  icoivd,  oXas  S'  iSia. — ARISTOTLE,  Politics  1 263.
There  should  be  full  legal  rights  for  the  individual,  combined  with  customary
common  use  by  the  community.

We  have  watched  the  Greeks  going  about  their  private  busi-
ness within  the  h'mits  of  their  city  unaided,  and,  for  the  most
part,  unhindered  by  her  rule.  It  is  time  to  turn  to  the  city
herself  and  inquire  how  she  watched  over  her  private  citizens.
For  if  by  the  fifth  century  the  city  had  become,  as  we  have  seen,
the  supreme  element  in  their  lives,  she  must  have  had  her  atti-
tude and  policy  towards  economic  questions  also.  So  we  leave
the  Greek  as  a  worker  to  go  back  to  him  once  more  as  a  citizen
in  council,  and  cross  the  frontier  which  separates  private  from
political  economy.

It  was  a  tradition  and  a  boast  of  Greek  cities  to  be  sovereign
States  wholly  independent  of  foreign  claims.  Their  fierce  love
of  independence  had  been  nourished  by  centuries  of  isolation,
and  was,  as  we  have  seen,  one  of  the  strongest  forces  in  the
national  life.  But  we  shall  be  merely  following  the  bad  example
of  so  many  nineteenth-century  traders  and  pioneers  if  we  inter-
pret this  sentiment  in  a  strictly  political  sense.  It  was  in  origin
and  essence,  in  Greece  as  elsewhere,  every  whit  as  much  eco-
nomic as  political  :  for  politics  and  economics,  State  government
and  State  housekeeping,  arc  to  simple  people  (as  they  should
be  to  us)  merely  two  aspects  of  the  same  thing.  So  it  provided
what  was  for  centuries  the  bedrock  of  Greek  economic  policy.
If  a  State  was  to  be  independent  it  must  not  only  govern  itself
in  its  own  way,  but  also  feed  and  clothe  itself  in  its  own  way.
It  must  not  only   manage  its  own   affairs  but  supply  its  own


CHAP.  IX     PUBLIC  AND  PRIVATK  PROPKRTY  381

needs.  Home  Rule  and  Self-sufficiency  {avTovofiia  and  avrdp.
K€ia)  are,  in  the  traditional  Greek  view,  almost  convertible
terms.  How  strong  was  the  tradition  may  be  seen  by  the  way
it  lingered  on,  years  after  Greek  traders  had  begun  pouring
in  goods  from  East  and  West,  in  the  political  economy  of  the
philosophers.^

So  that  long  before  the  Greek  city  was  faced  with  the  ques-
tion (which,  as  we  shall  see,  became  so  urgent  in  fifth-ccntury
Athens)  of  how  to  add  to  the  national  resources  from  beyond
her  own  borders,  she  had  evolved,  in  harmony  with  her  political
development,  a  good  working  doctrine  of  how  to  manage  and  use
those  which  she  had  inherited.

What  was  that  working  doctrine?  What  was  the  attitude
of  the  normal  Greek  city  towards  what  we  call  private  pro-
perty ?

Very  different,  we  may  be  sure,  from  our  own,  for  the  eco-
nomic, like  the  political,  institutions  of  the  Greeks  had  grown
up  from  roots  very  different  from  those  of  Western  lands  to-day.
If  we  wish  to  understand  them,  there  is  a  whole  thicket  of
prejudices  to  be  cleared  away  from  our  minds.  Wc  must  think
ourselves  back  into  a  world  in  which  public  ownership,  and  even
complete  communism,  seem,  to  serious  people,  more  natural  and
satisfactory  and  in  harmony  with  the  past  than  the  'absolute
rights  '  of  the  individual  property-owner,  in  which  it  was  the
Conservatives  and  reactionaries  who  were  preaching  the  doc-
trines of  William  Morris's  A^ezus  from  Noivherc  and  the  senti-
mental Socialists,  while  it  was  the  Radicals  who  were  timidly
beginning,  not  indeed  to  proclaim,  but  to  act  upon  the  doctrine
which  still  survives  among  our  Rip  Van  Winkles  that  a  free-
born  citizen  may  '  do  what  he  likes  with  his  own  '.  It  was
a  world  in  fact  which,  so  far  as  economic  theories  are  concerned,
was  moving  in  exactly  the  opposite  direction  from  our  own,  not
from  anarchy  to  regulation,  but  from  social  control  to  individual
freedom.

For  the  Greeks  set  out  from  a  different  starting-point.  In
their  early  world  of  tribes  and  brotherhoods  and   families    no

^  See  Aristotle's  fancy  picture  of  the  origin  of  the  city  (/W///Vj  1253a  24
to  53a),  all  leading  up  to  'Self-sufficiency'  which  'is  the  end  and  the  J>cM  .
Plato's  Critias  seems  to  have  been  |)lanncd  on  the  same  text.


282  ECONOMICS  PART  III

one  thought  of  his  own  '  rights '  or  questioned  the  claims  of
society.  Practically  everything  that  he  had  belonged  to  his
kin.  He  would  not  claim  his  own  life  for  himself,  if  they  asked
it  of  him  in  time  of  need.  Why  should  he  dream  of  claiming
his  house  or  his  field  or  his  cattle?  They  were  indeed  his  own,
for  he  needed  them  daily  and  could  not  live  without  them.
He  had  made  them  his  own  by  making  use  of  them,  and  his
chief  claim  upon  them  was  that  no  one  else  could  use  them,
like  the  bow  of  Odysseus,  so  well  as  he,  the  father  of  the  family
or  head  of  the  clan.  But  if  it  fell  to  him  therefore  to  administer
the  family  wealth,  this  did  not  bring  with  it  any  rights  over  its
bestowal.  He  could  not  give  them  away  and  so  beggar  his
dependants,  or  will  them  away  to  strangers  when  his  life  in-
terest in  them  ended.  He  held  his  wealth  in  trust  for  the  little
society  round  him  :  and  if  it  belonged  to  him,  as  head  of  the
family,  rather  than  to  them,  this  was  simply  because,  in  the
slow  evolution  of  generations,  it  had  been  discovered  that  private
ownership,  in  this  limited  and  primitive  form,  was  better  for  the
community  as  a  whole.  Property  held  in  this  way  did  not
involve  rights  ;  it  simply  bestowed  duties.  It  was  the  tradi-
tion of  Greek  economic  policy — and  nowhere  was  the  Greek
practical  genius  seen  more  happily  at  work — to  bestow  these
duties  upon  those  best  qualified  to  perform  them  and  in  such
a  manner  as  to  call  out  their  best  powers  in  doing  so.^

Hence  the  double  thread  which  we  find  running  through  the
economic  as  through  the  political  development  of  Greece.  Just
as  the  Greek  citizen  gained  in  individuality  and  personal  freedom
in  proportion  as  his  ties  to  the  city  were  more  closely  knit,  so
the  Greek  property-owner  grew  in  zeal  and  enterprise  as  he
became  increasingly  conscious  of  the  larger  society  in  which  he
was  working,  and  of  the  purposes  for  which  the  city  required
his  wealth.  It  was  the  policy  of  the  city  to  place  no  new
restrictions  on  his  freedom,  and  gradually,  as  we  saw  in  the
legislation    of  Solon,   to   withdraw   all    traditional    fetters    that

^  We  need  not  discuss  the  vexed  question  as  to  whether  the  Greeks  had
ever,  in  prehistoric  days,  actually  lived  in  a  state  of  communism.  The  fact
that  it  has  seemed,  both  to  Greek  and  modern  writers,  the  'logical'  starting-
point  for  their  economic  evolution  is  sufficiently  significant.  But  Spartan
institutions,  on  which  Plato  and  others  have  relied  for  this  theory,  were  not
really  primitive  but  a  case  of  perverted  development.     See  p.  io8  above.


CHAP.  IX     PUBLIC  AND  PRTVATl-.  PROPKRTV  2H3

interfered  with  the  free  exercise  of  effort.  Ikil  every  increase
in  freedom  meant  an  enlargement  of  patriotism:  the  duties  ilial
used  to  be  paid  to  the  family  ur  the  clan  were  now  paid  to
the  city,  which  united  all  these  lesser  loyalties:  and  if  he  was
now  free  to  give  away  his  riches  as  he  liked,  and  even,  within
limits,  to  bequeath  them,  he  was  willing,  nay  eager,  that  the
city  should  ever  be  the  first  to  profit  by  his  generosity.  She
had  a  claim  upon  his  wealth,  as  she  had  upon  his  time.  We  have
seen  that  he  gave  her  far  more  than  a  tithe  of  his  working  hours.
His  wealth  was  as  freely  and  as  generously  lavished.  As  the
Corinthians  remarked,  with  all  the  bitterness  of  unsuccessful  trade
rivals,  the  fifth-century  Athenians  were  so  enterprising  in  busi-
ness that  they  had  '  little  opportunity  for  enjo)'ing,  being  always
engaged  in  getting  ',  but  also  so  eager  as  citizens  that  '  their  only
idea  of  a  holiday  is  to  do  their  duty,  and  they  are  sorrier  for
themselves  for  being  out  of  public  life  than  over  the  most
laborious  private  enterprise  '.^

The  Greek  city,  then,  in  its  policy  towards  private  propcrt}-,
bore  this  double  development  instinctively  in  mind  ;  and  its  most
characteristic  institutions,  particularly  at  Athens,  show  how  eager
it  was  to  preserve  and  intensify  the  traditions  of  personal  freedom
and  generosity.  For,  if  a  man  was  in  the  habit  of  giving  freely
of  his  wealth  to  the  city,  he  would  be  willing  to  serve  her  also
in  person,  and  to  sacrifice,  if  need  be,  his  life,  as  Pericles  put  it,
on  the  city's  subscription  list.^

So  it  is  not  difficult  to  see  why  the  Greek  democracies  always
shrunk,  unless  they  were  driven  to  it  by  necessity,  from  direct
taxation.  It  was  regarded  as  derogatory  to  the  dignity  of  a  free
citizen.  Resident  aliens  and  frcedmcn  might  pay  a  poll-tax  and
be  thankful  for  the  privilege ;  but  the  citizen  must  be  left  free
to  help  the  city  in  his  own  way.  Every  kind  of  indirect  tax  he
was  indeed  willing  to  pa>',  taxes  in  time  as  well  as  in  money  ;
but  the  only  direct  contribution  he  made  as  a  citizen  .to  the
State's  resources  was  by  preference  a  free  gift,  or  what  was
called  at  Athens  and  elsewhere  a  'liturgy'  or  'public  work'.

1  Thuc.  i.  70.  8  ;  cf.  ii.  65.  7  on  Thucydides'  view  of  the  icmpuuon  of  pur-
suing '  private  gains  '.  .,„,•,,••    .i_

T,7  TToXei)  KuXXiaTuv  efxivov  nfJoUfxa/oi,  1  hue.  n.  43.  1.


284  ECONOMICS  PART  III

A  large  part  of  the  public  expenses  of  the  Athenian  State,  the
mounting  of  its  plays,  the  equipment  of  its  ships,  the  arrange-
ments for  its  games  and  festivals,  its  chariot  and  horse  and  torch
races,  its  musical  contests  and  regattas  both  in  city  and  town-
ship, were  defrayed  by  private  citizens,  who  came  forward
voluntarily,  and  took  pride  in  vying  with  their  predecessors
or  with  a  crowd  of  rivals  in  their  performance  of  the  task.  '  It
was  by  free  gifts  that  the  Athenians  armed  the  fleets  which  were
so  long  supreme  on  the  seas,  by  free  gifts  that  they  formed  the
choirs  which  performed  the  dances  and  recited  the  songs
"  taught "  them  by  Aeschylus  and  Sophocles,  Euripides  and
Aristophanes.'  There  is  perhaps  no  other  institution  in  City
State  life  which  brings  one  more  vividly  into  touch  with  the
intimacies  of  its  working.  Lysicrates  the  '  choir-provider '  is
awarded  the  prize  for  the  best  choir  in  a  boys'  singing  com-
petition, and  is  so  pleased  that  he  erects  the  monument  which
is  still  standing  in  the  '  Street  of  Tripods '  to  commemorate  the
event :  just  as  members  nowadays  present  (though  seldom  in
rivalry)  books  or  pictures  or  challenge  cups  to  institutions  in
which  they  feel  a  close  personal  interest.  To  talk  of  taxes
in  such  an  atmosphere  is  a  blunder  as  well  as  a  sacrilege,
for  a  tax  is  a  payment  which  leaves  a  man  poorer :  a  '  liturgy  '
leaves  him  richer.  He  still  possesses  what  he  has  given,  and
yet  has  added  to  the  common  store.  For,  to  quote  Pericles
again,  '  national  greatness  is  more  for  the  advantage  of  private
citizens  than  any  individual  well-being  coupled  with  public
need.'  These  are  the  platitudes  of  the  Greek  theory  of  public
finance,  and  only  the  complexity  of  the  modern  state  and  the
wide  dispersion  of  private  wealth  prevent  them  from  seeming
platitudes  still. ^

For  here  we  have  lighted  upon  an  important  difference
between  Greek  and  modern  feeling  which  has  unlooked-for
bearings  upon  Greek  economic  life.  Wealthy  Englishmen,  too,
tend  to  have  a  conscience  about  their  expenditure  ;  but,  owing

'  Thuc.  ii.  60.  2.  The  other  quotation  is  from  Daremberg  and  Saglio,
s.  V.  Leitow-gia^  which  gives  details  of  its  incidence.  It  does  less  than  justice
to  the  '  trierarch ',  who  not  only  fitted  but  manned  and  commanded  (or  hired
a  commander  for)  the  bare  hulk  handed  over  to  him  by  the  State.  The
institution,  though  characteristically  Athenian,  is  found  all  over  Greece.
Details  in  Pauly,  s.  v.  Choregia,


CHAP.  IX     PUBLIC  AND  PRIVATE  PROPKRTV  28^.


J


to  our  feudal  origins,  it  acts  in  a  different  way.  Our  EntjUsh
tradition  is  to  lay  stress  upon  right  expenditure  as  a  i)rivatc  and
personal  matter,  a  duty  that  a  man  owes  to  his  rank  and  posi-
tion. A  rich  man  likes  to  keep  the  control  of  his  riches  wholly
within  his  own  hands,  to  give  lavishly  out  of  his  superfluity,  but
in  his  own  way  and  to  his  own  causes.  He  remains,  in  fact,  in
other  men's  eyes  and  in  his  own,  a  baron  or  a  '  magnate '  rather
than  an  ordinary  private  citizen  a  little  more  fortunate  than  his
fellows.  The  Greek's  feeling  was  very  ditTerent  and  his  standard
of  giving  therefore  very  much  higher.  When  Lysias  tells  us  of
a  citizen  who  has  given  an  average  of  7,000  drachmas  a  year  (.say
;^i,300  purchasing  power)  for  nine  years,  we  must  not  reckon
his  wealth  by  our  own  paltry  standard  of  well-to-do  gcnerosit)'.
We  must  measure  it  rather  by  the  standard  of  the  poor,  of
the  widow  who  will  spend  half  the  leavings  of  the  breadwinner
of  the  family  upon  his  funeral  and  headstone,  or  of  the  devotees
of  working-class  causes  who  will  stint  themselves  in  food  and
clothing  to  build  a  meeting-hall  or  run  a  newspaper.'

But  here  we  are  concerned  not  so  much  with  the  feeling  that
prompted  this  constant  stream  of  generosity  as  with  its  effect
upon  the  economy  of  the  city  which  it  enriched.  It  produced
what  is  to  us  an  entirely  unfamiliar  relation  between  public  and
private  riches,  between  the  resources  of  the  city  and  the  private
resources  of  the  citizens.  In  a  community  so  poor  as  an  ordinary
Greek  State  the  city  not  only  tends  to  possess  far  larger
permanent  resources  (quite  apart  from  her  annual  revenue  from
gifts  and  taxes)  than  any  individual  citizen,  but  may  easily,  with
her  public  lands  and  temple-treasures,  be  wealthier  than  all  her
individual  citizens  put  together.  The  great  increase  in  modern
resources  has  fallen,  not  to  governments  or  Churches  or  public
bodies,  but  to  individuals,  and  this  has  led  to  a  relative  as  well
as  to  an  absolute  change.  It  has  upset,  once  and  for  all,  the  old
Greek  equilibrium  between  public  and  private  resources.  Private
wealth  has  always  covered  a  larger  area  than  public  :  the  .Stale
or  township  or  temple  is  one  and  the  citizens  or  worshippers  arc

'  It  has  often  been  observed  that  rich  Americans  give  more  generously  to
public  objects  than  rich  EngHshmen.  Wliat  is  more  interesting,  perhaps
is  that  they  have  a  different  feeling  about  giving,  just  as  they  would  have
a  different  feeling  about  selling  part  of  their  estates  or  retrenching  on  the
hounds.


286  ECONOMICS  part  hi

many.  A  park  is  smaller  than  10,000  back  gardens  and  a  town-
hall  than  10,000  parlours.  But  the  balance  was  redressed  in
an  old  Greek  city  by  the  beauty  and  magnificence  of  her  own
courts  and  buildings.  It  is  still  held  true  in  a  few  old-world
centres,  though  the  buildings  are  more  often  cathedrals  than  town-
halls.  Stambul  spreads  over  countless  acres,  but  whether  he
approach  from  the  Bosporus  or  the  Marmora  the  traveller's  eye
will  rest  first  on  the  mosques  which  crown  its  heights  ;  only
when  he  lands  and  tries  to  reach  them  will  he  realize,  with
a  sense  of  contrast  strange  to  the  Western  mind,  how  modest
and  ramshackle  are  the  wooden  dwelling-houses  which  lie
huddled  around  their  spacious  enclosures.  Fifth-century  Athens
presented  a  similar  and  indeed  more  striking  contrast.  You
would  gaze  with  admiration,  says  Demosthenes,  on  her  temples
and  colonnades,  her  armouries  and  her  dockyards,  and  on  those
immortal  buildings  upon  her  Acropolis  which,  as  you  passed  to
and  fro  in  the  city,  flashed  over  the  edge  of  the  rock  on  every
side  ;  but  when  you  asked  for  the  house  of  Themistocles  or
Cimon  or  Aristeides  or  any  other  of  the  great  ones  whose  names
were  on  all  men's  lips,  you  would  find  that  men  hardly  knew
it,  and,  when  you  reached  it  at  last,  that  it  was  just  like  their
next  door  neighbour's — a  plain  villa  of  sunbaked  brick.  Their
real  wealth,  in  fact,  was  not  laid  up  in  their  own  houses  where
moth  and  rust  do  corrupt  and  thieves  break  through  the  flimsy
party  wall  and  steal,  but  was  shared  with  their  fellow-citizens  and
embodied  for  all  to  enjoy  in  the  works  of  their  artists.  For
such  a  society,  however  poor,  wuU  know  how  to  use  the  talents
of  its  architects  and  sculptors  and  painters.  It  may  be  without
wealthy  patrons  ;  but  its  public  will  have  the  zeal  and  its  artists
the  inspiration.  Whereas  a  society  in  which  men  live  in  finely
decorated  private  houses  but  have  learnt  to  grumble,  like  Demos-
thenes' Athenians,  about  the  rates,  will  neither  plan  immortal
works  nor,  for  all  its  improvements  in  technique,  raise  up  from
among  its  members  the  school  of  artists  to  perform  them.^

^  Dem.  xiii.  28.  Looking  across  from  the  Pnyxto  the  building  right  in  face
of  him,  he  speaks  of  'these  Propylaea'.  Pericles'  idea  for  the  Acropolis
seems  to  have  been  to  have  a  building  looking  out  over  each  of  the  three
brows.  The  relation  between  public  and  private  wealth  at  Athens  is  dis-
puted ;  but  it  is  generally  agreed  that  there  was  a  fair  equilibrium  between
the  two.     Polybius,  ii.  62.  7,  says  that,  at  a  valuation  taken  in  378,  no  doubt


CHAP.  IX     PUBLIC  AND  PRIVATE  PROPKRTV  287

This  suggests  a  natural  question.  If  the  Stale  played  so  large  a
part,  not  only  politically  but  economically,  not  only  by  the  public
work  which  it  conimaiidcd  but  by  the  wealth  which  it  p(»sscs.s<.d.
in  the  life  of  its  citizens,  why  did  it  not  extend  a  fuller  control
over  their  working  activities?  Why  did  it  not  secure  for  itself
and  directly  administer,  as  in  a  democratic  state  it  must  surely
have  been  tempted  to  do,  all  the  private  wealth  within  its  borders?
Why,  in  other  words,  did  not  Athens,  like  her  rival  \'enicc  in
later  days,  set  the  world  an  example  of  municipal  socialism  ? '

One  easy  answer  to  this  question  has  already  been  given.
Athens  never  felt  less  like  adopting  a  socialistic  system  than  she
did  in  the  fifth  century,  for  she  was  moving  steadily  away  from
communism  and  State  regulation  towards  unfettered  freedom  of
individual  action  and  enterprise.  But  this  is  at  bottom  not  a
satisfactory  explanation,  for  if  the  Athenian  had  earned  his
living  as  a  municipal  official  he  would  have  felt  not  less  but  more
free  than  as  a  private  wage  earner.  In  Athens,  at  any  rate,
socialism  would  not,  as  the  modern  assertion  glibly  runs,  paralyse
effort  and  enterprise,  for  the  Athenian  never  worked  so  well  or
put  so  much  hard  individual  thinking  into  his  business  as  when
he  was  working  for  the  city.  We  must  look  below  this  surface
argument  for  a  reason.

The  real  reason  why,  in  spite  of  the  predilection  of  Plato  and
other  writers  for  a  socialist  system,  Athenians  managed  their

a  time  of  depression,  the  total  private  capital  wealth  of  Attica,  including
land,  houses,  and  movable  property,  was  estimated  at  5,750  talents  (less  than
;^7, 000,000  purchasing  powerj,  a  figure  rouj^hly  confirmed  by  Dem.  xiv.  ly
(6,000  talents).  This  figure,  about  si.\  times  the  annual  tt-i'tniie  of  the
Athenian  Empire,  is  so  astonishingly  low  that  attempts  ha\e  been  made  to
explain  it  away ;  but  the  latest  opinions  regard  it  as  correct,  with  a  liberal
margin  for  error,  fraud,  and  dissimulation  (Lecrivain  in  Darcmbcrg,  s.v.
Eisphora\  Wilamowitz,  JsVrt(7/ /^//</  Gesellschaft,  p.  in).  Cavaignac,  p.  125,
gives  reasons  for  estimating  the  private  wealth  cf  Athens  in  427  at  20.000
talents.  We  have  no  means  of  estimating  the  total  wealth  of  the  fifth-ccntur)'
Athenian  State  in  lands,  mines,  treasure,  &c.  The  total  wealth  of  the  United
Kingdom  is  estimated  at  ^^18-20,000,000,000  {(Juartc-rly  Knifw,  1910,
p.  304),  while  the  Exchequer  revenue  for  the  year  1908-9  was  / 1 5 1 , 500,000,
and  the  money  raised  in  rates  in  England  and  Wales  was  /^59,5oo,ooo.

1  For  the  Venetian  State  trading  fleets  see  Horatio  Brown,  CambtiJgt
Modern  History,  vol.  i,  p.  277.  A  similar  proposal  was  made  by  the  Athenian
author  of  the  curious  and  interesting  fourth-century  treatise  on  Ways  and
Means.  So  it  was  not  for  want  of  ability  to  think  out  practical  applications
of  socialism  that  Athens  refrained  from  it.  Nor  was  it  because  she  did  not
need  the  profits  it  might  have  brought  in.


a88  ECONOMICS  part  lii

affairs  on  such  sturdily  individualistic  lines  was  the  rooted  dislike
of  the  Greeks,  and,  chief  among  Greeks,  of  the  Athenians,  to
discipline  and  organization.  It  was  not  that  they  objected  to
working  in  a  State  system  :  it  was  that  they  objected  to  working
in  any  system  whatsoever.  It  was  their  settled  inclination  and
one  of  their  proudest  boasts  to  remain  amateurs,  to  be  supreme,
as  they  said  of  perhaps  their  greatest  statesman,  in  '  improvising
right  remedies  for  sudden  emergencies ',  and  this  inclination,
strengthened  by  the  sudden  and  startling  successes  with  which
they  emeiged  into  prominence,  grew  with  every  enlargement  of
their  experience,  and  was  not  repressed  but  only  encouraged  into
fresh  masterstrokes  of  improvisation  by  the  growing  complexity
of  the  world  in  which  they  found  themselves  playing  a  part.
Athenian  enterprise  presents  a  picture,  if  ever  there  was  one,  of
the  artistic  temperament  in  action  ;  and  the  artistic  temperament,
as  we  know  from  its  hard  struggle  with  modern  conditions,  shuns,
rather  by  instinct  than  out  of  policy,  the  drudgery  of  office  work,
the  restraint  of  a  '  settled '  position,  and  all  the  discipline  and
regularity  of  organized  service.  These  things  are  for  others  :  and
the  artists  will  not  envy  them  their  rewards.  '  Indeed,'  we  can
hear  them  saying,  after  the  words  of  their  great  leader,  *  if
we  choose  to  face  life  with  an  easy  mind  rather  than  after  a
rigorous  professional  training,  and  to  rely  rather  upon  native
inspiration  than  on  a  State-made  position,  the  advantage  lies  with
us ;  for  we  are  spared  all  the  weariness  of  practising  for  future
appointments,  and  when  we  find  ourselves  in  the  vein  we  are  as
happy  as  our  plodding  rivals.  Let  them  toil  from  boyhood  in
a  laborious  pursuit  after  efficiency,  while  we,  free  to  live  and
wander  as  we  please,  are  ready,  when  the  time  comes,  to  face  the
selfsame  problems.  For  our  trust  is  not  in  the  devices  of  pro-
fessional and  material  equipment,  but  in  our  own  good  spirits  for
city  life.'  ^

Truth  to  tell,  their  material  equipment  was  sadly  defective,
and  called  for  the  best  of  spirits  to  put  up  with  it.  Strange
indeed  is  the  contrast  between  the  city  as  mistress  of  men's  lives
and  as  manager  of  their  affairs,  between  Athens  as  the  source  of
energy  and  dispenser  of  wisdom  and  Athens  as  a  mere  munici-

*  After  Thuc.  ii.  39.     For  Themistocles  the  improviser  see  Thuc.  i.  138.  3.


(iiAP.  IX     PUBLIC  AND  I'RIVATi:   I'ROrKRTV  2H9

pality.  It  would  be  hard  to  credit  some  of  the  facts  if  \vc  could
not  fortify  our  imaginations  by  observing  the  same  piquant  con-
trast in  parallel  surroundings  nearer  home  -in  institutions  which
shed  spiritual  illumination  far  and  wide,  and  are  reluctant  to
put  in  the  electric  light,  which  preach  'a  sound  mind  in  a  sound
body  ',  and  employ  the  best  architects  upon  buildings  devoid  of  the
most  ordinary  conveniences,  which  expend  energy  and  devotion
in  supplying  unrivalled  intellectual  fare  and  will  not  face  the
everyday  problem  of  ensuring  a  cheap  food  supply.  The  Athe-
nians lived  under  the  Acropolis,  as  many  generations  lived  under
the  spires  of  Oxford,  in  'squalid  magnificence'.  So  hard  is  it  for
the  human  spirit  to  do  two  good  things  at  once.

For,  in  spite  of  all  the  talent  at  her  disposal,  asking  for  nothing
better  than  to  do  her  bidding,  her  organization  was  more  primi-
tive than  that  of  our  most  backward  country  town.  Water
indeed  she  had,  thanks  to  the  tyrants  :  although  even  that  almost
indispensable  condition  of  Greek  city  life  was  not  extended  to  the
Piraeus,  which  up  to  the  time  of  the  Great  Plague  relied  wholly
upon  cisterns.  Her  streets  were  narrow  and  crooked,  dirt>-,
unlighted,  and  ill-paved.  She  had  no  sewers,  or  even  cesspools,
and  over  the  whole  department  of  sanitation  it  is  best  to  draw
a  veil.  Most  of  the  police  were  amateurs,  and  the  rest  Scythian
barbarians,  the  laughing-stock  of  freeborn  citizens.  State-paid
detectives  she  had  never  heard  of,  and  their  place  is  taken  by
private  spies  or  '  sycophants '  who,  in  a  society  full  of  tittle-tattle,
create  more  mischief  than  they  discover.  Postmen  we  do  not
expect,  though  the  Persians,  and  later  the  Ptolemies,  had  a
national  post.  But  it  is  a  surprise,  especially  if  we  come  fresh
from  the  national  systems  of  education  in  Plato  and  Aristotle,  to
find  that  the  Athens  of  Pericles  paid  no  attention  whatever  to
her  children  (who  did  not  indeed  become  hers  till  they  reached
their  eighteenth  year),  and  provided  no  national  Bchoolmastcrs
except  the  citizens  who  drilled  the  recruits :  and  these  arc  not
permanent  sergeants  properly  trained  to  do  the  work,  but  elected
from  year  to  year,  and  apt,  as  we  might  expect  in  a  system  where
'to  obey'  is  the  same  as  'to  be  persuaded',  to  win  public
recognition  rather  for  their  amiability  than  for  their  efficiency.
Another  surprise  is  to  find  that  the  city  was  too  lazy  to  collect
her  own  money.     The  imperial  treasur>-,  where  her  ideals  were


290  ECONOMICS  part  hi

vitally  concerned,  was  carefully  looked  after  in  every  particular,
and  if  the  contributions  were  late  there  were  officials  to  hasten
them  in.  But  all  the  mere  municipal  moneys,  the  foreigners'
poll-tax,  the  customs,  the  market  dues,  and  all  the  various
licences,  were  simply  farmed  out  to  'publicans',  who  made  a
profit  on  their  contract.  How  natural  this  arrangement  (which
still  survives,  of  course,  in  many  parts  of  the  East)  appeared  to  the
Athenian  mind,  and  how  great  a  step  forward,  by  contrast,  the
imperial  financial  arrangements  must  have  been,  can  best  be  illus-
trated by  a  detail  accidentally  preserved  for  us.  The  animals
killed  in  the  large  public  sacrifices,  which  took  place  many  times
a  year,  were  not  bought  by  the  city,  or  sent  in  on  a  fixed
arrangement  by  the  tenants  on  the  State  grazing-lands,  but  sup-
plied by  private  contractors,  who  catered  for  the  ceremony  at
a  fixed  rate.^

^  Thuc.  ii.  48.  2  (cisterns),  Dittenberger,  No.  500  (pavements).  On  the
streets  and  general  outward  appearance  of  Athens  see  the  interesting  third-
century  description  in  Heracleides  (Geographi  Graeci  Mitiores,  vol.  i,
pp.  97  fif.  ;  Fragmenta  Hist.  Graec,  vol.  ii,  pp.  254  ff.).  The  Greeks  did
not  go  in  for  artistic  town-planning  till  the  Hellenistic  age.  It  was  one  of
the  results  of  consciously  thinking  about  the  city,  as  the  philosophers  did,  as
a  work  of  art.  The  great  architectural  achievements  of  the  Periclean  age
were  either  religious  or  defensive,  i.e.  in  both  cases  political  not  aesthetic.
What  they  attempted  they  did  perfectly,  but  they  did  not  take  up  large  sites
in  the  thoroughgoing  spirit  of  a  modern  city  architect.  Hippodamos's  rect-
angular plan  of  the  Piraeus  was  not  architecture  at  all,  but  simply  geometry,
and,  as  Wilamowitz  remarks,  '  intolerably  dull '  at  that.  Whatev-er  Pericles',
or  rather  Mnesicles',  plans  for  the  Acropolis  may  have  been,  the  final
arrangements  of  buildings,  largely  dictated  by  traditional  considerations,
would  still  have  looked  haphazard.  The  big  Hellenistic  city,  such  as  Alex-
andria or  Antioch,  a  real  metropolis  in  our  sense  of  the  word,  and  akin  to
our  London  and  Paris,  Vienna  and  New  York,  was  totally  different,  in  form
as  in  spirit,  architecturally,  economically,  and  politically,  from  the  sovereign
municipalities  of  older  Greece.  Details  in  Schreiber,  'Zur  Typologie  der
hellenistischen  Stadtgriindungen'  {Kiepert's  Festschrift,  Berlin,  1898,  esp.
p.  341) ;  Pohlmann,  Die  Ubervolkerimg  der  antiken  Grossstddte  ;  and  Korne-
mann,  '  Stadtstaat  und  Flachenstaat  des  Altertums  in  ihren  Wechselbezie-
hungen'  in  Neite  JaJirbiicher  fiir  das  klassische  Altertitm,  1908,  pp.  233  ff,,
who  points  out  suggestively  (though  he  juggles  a  little  with  the  word  '  terri-
torial') how  the  desire  for  territorial  aggrandisement  ('painting  the  map
red  ')  was  foreign  to  the  City  State  proper  ;  the  form  in  which  the  temptation
presented  itself  to  Greek  statesmen  was  not  annexation  but  robbery.  On
sanitation  see  Ar.  Eccl.  311  ff.  and  Pint.  1184,  which  does  not  refer  (as
suggested  by  Daremberg  and  Saglio,  s.  v.  Latrina)  to  a  public  latrine.  Com-
pare in  that  article  the  disproportion  between  the  Greek  and  Roman  sections.
There  is  no  Greek  evidence,  for  an  obvious  reason.  Few  things  impressed
Greeks  who  visited  Rome  so  much  as  the  Big  Sewer  (Cloaca  Maxima):  v.
Strabo,  p.  235  ;  Dion.  Hal.  iii.  67.  The  Athenians  would  have  been  still
more  astonished  if  they  had  known  of  the  elaborate  and  careful  system  of


CHAP.  IX     PUBLIC  AND  PKIVATK   I'KOI'KRTV  „^,

No  doubt  all  these  things,  Pericles  would  tell  us.  arc  non-essen-
tials on  which  we  ought  not  to  dwell.  We  should  accept  and
enjoy  the  magnificence  and  let  the  squalor  rest  in  peace;  ^o
straight  for  the  big  things,  as  he  did,  and  ignore  all  the  rest.
What  matters  is  the  finished  work  of  Athenian  civilization,  not
the  infinite  petty  obstacles  with  which  it  was  daily  contending.

But  have  we  the  finished  work?  Alas,  Pericles  himself  would
be  the  first  to  shake  his  head.  The  Parthenon  was  finished,  but
Athens  never  achieved  more  than  three-quarters  of  the  Prt>pyl.ica
or  one-half  of  the  Erectheum  ;  and  her  great  building  design  proved
so  hard,  in  its  incompleteness,  for  posterity  to  accept  and  enjoy  that
it  was  twenty-three  centuries  before  men  found  out  what  it  really
was.  The  fact  is  that  Pericles  and  the  men  of  the  great  age  were
dealing  not  only  with  an  unprecedented  movement  of  ideas  but
with  an  unprecedented  set  of  material  facts.  Borne  along  on  Ihe
tide  of  a  great  spiritual  adventure  Athens  miscalculated  the
need  for  careful  thought  about  the  details  of  common  life  ;  and
these,  when  their  hour  came,  arose  in  judgement  against  her.     In

drainage  in  the  prehistoric  palaces  of  Crete.  Athens  seems  to  have  had
simply  a  big  open  drain  or  gutter  which  was  eventually  covered  over  (Mcrkcl,
htgenieurtechnik  im  Altertuin,  p.  452).  There  is,  of  course,  another  side  to  all
this.  As  Mr.  John  Burns  remarked  at  the  opening  of  the  Town-I'lanninj;
Exhibition:  '  There  are  modern  disabilities  from  which  communities  formerly
escaped.  Athens  did  not  have  600  miles  of  railway,  as  London  lias,  on
ugly  viaducts,  creating  culs-de-sac  of  mean  and  poor  streets,  with  500  u^iy
railway  stations  spoiled  by  vulgar  advertisements  ;  it  had  no  gas  works,  and
was  without  the  7,000  public-houses  London  possesses — nearly  all  of  them
at  street  corners,  in  positions  which  ought  only  to  be  occupied  by  banks,
libraries,  post-offices,  and  police-stations.  We  labour  under  the  disadvantage
of  having  all  the  apparatus  of  light,  heat,  smoke,  traction,  and  rapid  com-
munication' {Times,  Oct.  11,  1910).  Sacrificing  by  contract :  Is.  vii.  29.  On
the  tax-farming  arrangements  in  detail  see  Bdckh.  Attischc  Hiiushaltunfi
(1886  ed.),  vol.  i,  pp.  382  flf.  After  413  the  Imperial  tribute  was  fanned  out
too.  The  classical  instance  of  modern  tax-farming  is  IJengai,  where  a  hundred
years  ago  the  land  revenue  collection  was  granted  by  the  British  (iovcrnmcnt
to  certain  tax-farmers  and  their  heirs  in  perpetuity  for  a  fixed  sum.  On
education  see  Aeschines,  i.  9  (Solon's  regulations  controlling  private  schools),
and  esp.  Freeman's  delightful  but  unfinished  Schools  of  Hellas  (where  the
difference  betw-een  fifth-  and  fourth-century  arrangements  is  not  surtkit  ntly
emphasized  :  e.g.  there  was  no  'secondary  education'  at  Athens  duiing  the
first  three-quarters  of  the  fifth  century).  See  also  the  interesting  inscriptions
(none  out  of  them  from  the  fifth  century)  collected  in  Freeman,  pp.  221  3,  and
in  Dittenberger  (Nos.  5 1 8-25).  One  is  praised  ( 5 : i ,  lines  70 ff. )  lor ' preserving
a  spirit  of  friendship  and  concord  among  the  boys  throughout  the  year",  for
remitting  the  fines  they  had  incurred,  and  bringing  them  back  safe  and  sound
from  several  'marches-out'  to  the  frontier.  It  is  only  fair  to  add  ili.it  the
boys  acknowledged  his  many  kindnesses  by  publicly  crowning  him.


292  ECONOMICS  PART  III

the  first  year  of  the  Peloponnesian  War  the  influx  of  population
from  the  country  districts  taxed  her  municipal  resources  as  they
had  never  been  taxed  before.  Here  is  Thucydides'  account  of
how  the  strain  was  met.  '  When  they  arrived  at  Athens,  though
a  few  had  houses  of  their  own  to  go  to,  or  could  find  an  asylum
with  friends  or  relatives,  by  far  the  greater  part  had  to  take  up
their  dwelling  on  plots  of  vacant  ground  and  in  the  temples  and
chapels  of  the  heroes.  .  .  .  Many  also  encamped  in  the  towers  of
the  walls  or  wherever  else  they  could.  For,  when  they  were  all
come  in,  the  city  proved  too  small  to  hold  them.'  The  authorities,
however,  had  no  eyes  for  the  difficulty.  While  the  immigrants
were  'dividing  out  for  themselves  the  space  between  the  Long
Walls  and  a  great  part  of  Piraeus  into  lots  and  settling  there,'  they
were  thinking  of  higher  matters.  '  All  this  while,'  Thucydides
grimly  continues,  'great  attention  was  being  paid  to  the  war  ;  the
allies  were  being  mustered,  and  an  armament  of  a  hundred  ships
equipped  for  the  Peloponnese.  Such  was  the  state  of  preparation
at  Athens.'  The  historian  does  not  waste  words.  Only  those
who  have  endured  the  milder  alternative  of '  being  received  into
a  friend's  house '  in  a  Greek  city  at  time  of  festival,  and  sleeping
with  twenty  or  thirty  other  friends  on  the  floor  of  an  airless  room,
can  measure  the  unhappiness  of  those  to  whom  such  privileges
were  denied.^

Judgement  was  delivered  eighteen  months  later.  There  was
only  one  thing,  Pericles  tells  the  Athenians  in  his  parting  speech,
which  he  failed  to  foresee ;  but  that  one  thing  proved  for  Athens
her  Achilles'  heel.  For  the  Plague,  which  ignored  the  magnifi-
cence and  went  straight  for  the  squalor,  was  the  first  step  in
Athens'  irresistible  decline.  It  took  one  citizen  out  of  four,  and
with  them  not  only  her  resources,  so  carefully  husbanded,  in  men
and  money,  but  her  proud  and  confident  morning  courage.
Athenian  idealism  broke  for  the  first  time  under  the  strain,  and
the  snapped  ties  were  never  again  securely  reunited.  The
memories  were  too  horrible.  '  The  new  arrivals  from  the
country,'  says  the  historian,  sending  our  minds  back  to  the
earlier  passage,  '  were  the  greatest  sufferers.  As  there  were  no
houses  to  receive  them,  they  had  to  be  lodged  in  the  hot  season  of
the  year  in  stifling  cabins  where  the  mortality  raged  without

^  Thuc.  ii.  17.     As  regards  the  Erechtheum  design  I  follow  Dorpfeld.


CHAP.  i\     I'UBLIC  AND  PRIVATI'    PROPI- RTV  293

restraint.  The  bodies  of  dying  men  lay  one  upt.ti  another,  and
half-dead  creatures  reeled  about  the  streets  and  Kalhcrcd  round
ail  the  fountains  in  their  longing  for  water.  The  sacred  places  in
which  they  had  encamped  were  full  of  corpses  of  those  who  had  died
there  just  as  they  were ;  for  as  the  disaster  passed  all  bounds,
men,  not  knowing  what  was  to  become  of  them,  became  utterly
careless  of  everything,  whether  sacred  or  profane.  All  the  burial
rites  before  in  use  were  entirely  upset,  and  they  buried  the
bodies  as  best  they  could.'  Burial  rites,  as  he  expects  us  to
remember,  are  the  Holy  of  Holies  in  Greek  life.  Nothing
remains  sacred  now.'

Yet  even  Thucydides  himself,  most  practical  head  amon^;st  all
the  Greek  writers  who  have  come  down  to  us.  has  not  the  heart
to  reproach  his  Athens  for  neglecting  the  world  of  small  things.
There  is  his  usual  gentle  irony  playing  round  the  confident
sentences  in  which  Pericles  glorifies  the  Athenian  amateur.  But.
looking  back  in  after  years,  he  had  too  great  a  sense  of  what  had
been  accomplished  to  fling  a  gibe  or  a  rebuke  at  what  had  been
left  undone.  When  we  have  seen  the  .Athenian  in  his  own  home
and  known  him  for  what  he  was  by  nature,  careless,  indolent,
and  undisciplined,  a  bad  servant  and  a  bad  master,  we  can  belter
appreciate  what  he  accomplished  abroad  and  for  posterity ;  we
can  realize  what  an  effort  it  cost  Athens'  chosen  'band  of  lovers'
to  respond  to  her  call,  not  only  with  '  the  fighter's  daring  antl
the  wise  man's  understanding  of  his  duty'  but  also  with  'the
good  man's  self-discipline  in  its  performance'.  For  if '  nothing
great  was  ever  done  without  enthusiasm',  it  is  eijually  true  that
nothing  lasting  was  ever  done  without  hard  work.  The  monu-
ments that  Athens  has  left  us,  whether  in  art  or  literature  or  in
her  constitution  and  customs  and  history,  arc  records  of  infinite
pains  in  the  making.  Only  she  spent  tiiem  where  they  were
most  worth  while.  Instead  of  bring  cumbered  with  much
serving  and  organizing  a  model  municipality,  she  chose  to  put
Beauty  before  Security,  to  build  her  temples  on  the  Acropolis
rather  than  lay  waterpipes  to  the  Piraeus.  Yet  for  all  that  wc
know,  as  she  knew  when  it  was  too  late  and  licr  thinkers  began

'  Thuc.  ii.  52,  iii.  87.  3  (plague-losses  :  the  proportion  of  i  :  4  is  dclinitcly
stated  for  the  cavalry,  where  we  should  expect  .1  smaller  morta  ity  than
among  the  general  population),  ii.  64.  i  (the  one  unexpected  event).


394  ECONOMICS  part  hi

planning  those  model  municipalities  which  are  so  like  yet  so
different  from  their  living  originals  —

Not  wholly  in  the  old  Greek  world,  nor  quite
Beyond  it —

yet  for  all  that '  these  things  should  she  have  done,  and  not  left
the  other  undone  '.


CHAPTER    X

CITY   KCONOMICS:     MO\i:V

El  8(  TovT  (iyi/oeir,  on  niiTTH  (i</)o/)/if)  twi/  nntrwv  tan  /ifyi'-rr-;  tt,.-*  \,.7/«iTirf/i..i-,
nav  av  dyporjtrdai. — DeMOSTHLNKS,  xxxvi.  44.

The  more  closely  one  examines  the  basis  of  credit,  the  more  clearly  it
becomes  apparent  that  that  basis  itself  consists  to  a  considerable  extent  of
credit.— Hartley  Withers,  T/w  Meaning  of  Afoury,  p.  264.

We  have  examined  the  relation  between  public  and  private
wealth  in  the  City  State,  and  the  general  attitude  taken  up  by  the
Slate  in  dealing  with  economic  problems.  It  is  time  now  to
examine  into  the  actual  nature  of  this  wealth  and  into  some  of
the  problems  which  arose  in  connexion  with  its  use.

In  every  society,  however  primitive  or  self-sufficient,  there  arc
at  least  a  few  individuals  who  have  more  wealth  than  they
actually  need  for  a  bare  livelihood  and  are  able  to  store  it  up.
It  is  a  natural  human  inclination  to  lay  b)'  for  a  rainy  day  or  for
the  use  of  the  family  when  you  are  gone.  The  man  who  docs
so  is  a  capitalist.  For  capital  is  not  wealth  pure  and  simple,
but  wealth  considered  from  the  point  of  view  of  future  as
opposed  to  present  use.  Such  wealth  in  early  Greece  a.ssumcd  a
variety  of  forms.  We  hear  of  it  in  the  living  form  of  slaves  and
cattle,  a  highly  profitable  investment,  for  living  things  increase
and  multiply  and  pay  dividends  automatically :  we  hear  of  it  in
manifold  treasures,  such  as  fine  linen,  axes,  spits,  and  copper
cauldrons.  But  the  most  usual  form  was,  of  course,  gold  and
silver,  and  especially  gold.  Mycenae,  the  cipital  of  the  army  of
chieftains  who  went  marauding  to  Tro)-,  was  on  men's  lips  for
generations  as  'the  much-golden',  and  the  archaeologists  who
pried  into  her  secrets  have  abundantly  verifietl  the  adjective.
Gold  and  silver,  from  their  rarity  and  glitter  and  the  way  in
which  they  lent  themselves  to  purposes  of  barbaric  adornment,
gradually  came  to  be  recognized  as  wealth  />(ir  cxcclknce.
Even  when  the  lords  of  Mycenae  ceased  from  their  forays  and
their  city  became  a  mere  ordinary  country  town,  gold  and  silver


296  ECONOMICS  PART  III

continued  to  be  regarded,  in  a  world  of  steady  farmers,  as  a  con-
venient measure  of  value.  For  oxen  and  women  and  even
cauldrons  were  not  always  of  the  same  value,  whereas  a  bar  of
gold  was  always  a  bar  of  gold,  and  a  good  solid  lump  of  glow  to
feast  your  eye  on  besides.^

But  lumps  of  gold,  however  attractive  to  look  at,  are  of  no
particular  use  for  trading  purposes  with  people  at  a  distance.
The  fact  that  men  think  of  gold  as  the  natural  form  of  capital,  as
the  way  in  which  a  wise  man  would  naturally  store  his  wealth,
does  not  make  gold  any  the  less  an  ordinary  commodity  like
women,  sheep,  and  cauldrons.  Nor  even  does  the  fact  that  such
lumps  may  be  stamped  with  an  indication  of  their  weight.  Men
and  states  in  Greece  were  collecting  bullion,  and  storing  it  up  as
treasure  in  temples  and  treasuries  or  in  a  corner  of  their  field,
long  before  they  trusted  one  another  sufficiently  to  use  it  as  a
medium  of  exchange.  It  was  only  in  the  seventh  century  B.C.,
when  security  was  beginning  to  be  established  and  communications
had  been  improved,  that  men  began  seriously  to  feel  the  need  of
a  recognized  common  measure  in  their  bargaining.  They  grew
tired  of  the  tedious  job  of  calculating  the  exact  value  of  a
serving-woman  in  ploughing  oxen,  or  of  a  suit  of  armour  in  mules,
and  of  eking  out  any  deficiency  with  some  handy  piece  of
bullion  which  had  to  be  weighed  first  in  the  scales.  So,  instead
of  merely  weighing  and  stamping  their  gold  and  silver  lumps  and
ornaments  of  different  sorts  and  sizes.  States  began  to  reduce
them  to  simple  and  portable  shapes,  and  to  issue  them  to  their

^  The  best  Homeric  passage  is  perhaps  the  familiar  ;^/ji;(rea  x'^^'^f^^'^''}
fKciTofil^oi  ivveafioldiv  of  //.  vi.  236,  where  Glaucus  gives  Diomed  'gold  value
for  bronze,  a  hundred-oxen-worth  for  nine  '.  This  shows  men  reckoning  value
in  oxen  and  in  metals,  and,  what  is  more  curious  still,  both  qualitatively  and
quantitatively.  The  difference  between  gold  and  bronze  is  one  of  quality
(you  could  not  say  off-hand  what  the  ratio  was  between  the  two),  that  between
nine  oxen  and  a  hecatomb  one  of  quantity.  It  is  the  great  merit  of  systems
of  coinage  to  have  forced  men  to  think  quantitatively,  that  is,  carefully  and
precisely,  over  at  least  one  part  of  the  field  of  life.  Thinking  out  the  '  right '
price,  whether  in  an  Eastern  bazaar  or  in  London  and  Manchester,  is  a
delicate  operation  of  thought,  involving,  in  every  case,  a  careful  adjustment
to  the  particular  circumstances.  This  is  what  has  made  economics  an  exact
science:  it  is  because  it  deals  so  largely  with  money,  i.e.  with  measurable
and  ponderable  quantities,  and  with  men  thinking  and  acting  and  being
influenced  in  a  measurable  and  ponderable  manner,  that  it  was  the  first  of
the  human  sciences  to  become  exact  and  scientific.  This,  of  course,  has  in
its  turn  led  it  into  pitfalls,  tending  to  make  it  a  branch  of  mathematics  and
to  obscure  its  interrelations  with  the  other  human  sciences.


CHAR  X  MONEY  a^y

subjects  at  a  recognized  value  for  use  in  their  daily  transactions.
in  other  words,  they  deUbcratcly  selected  the  precious  metals  and
entrusted  them  with  the  monopoly  of  the  work  of  exchange
This  led,  of  course,  at  first,  as  we  have  seen,  to  a  revolution  in
economic  habits,  whereby  the  weaker  and  more  ignorant  went  to
the  wall.  But  it  was  the  first  and  necessary  step  towards  raisintj
the  city,  securely  and  for  good,  out  of  the  old  self-sufficient  stage
of  economic  life.  Coins  were  first  '  struck  and  used  ',  first  issued.
that  is,  as  a  publicly  recognized  medium  of  exchange,  by  the
kings  of  Lydia  early  in  the  seventh  century.  The  first  Greek
state  to  use  them,  a  few  years  afterwards,  was  Aegina  ;  iier  neigh-
bour Argos  had  led  the  way  some  two  generations  before,  in
establishing  a  definite  standard  of  weights  and  measures.  Aegina
is  a  poor  island  with  little  of  its  own  to  sell ;  but  the  Aeginctans
became  distributing  agents  for  all  the  world  around  them.  Work-
ing as  carriers  by  sea  and  as  pedlars  by  land  they  were  for
long  regarded  as  coin-users  and  retail  dealers  par  excdUtice.  The
particular  coin  standard  that  they  adopted  was  for  some  genera-
tions supreme,  and  always  prominent,  in  the  Greek  world  ;  and
their  coins,  with  the  familiar  tortoise  upon  them,  are  still  to  be
found  in  all  parts  of  the  Peloponnese.'

But  the  use  of  a  regular  currency  soon  brought  with  it
new  problems  of  its  own  ;  for  it  involved  states  and  their  rulers
in  peculiar  temptations.  When  Herodotus  tells  us  about  the
first  introduction  of  State  coinage  he  uses  a  much-discussed
phrase.  'The  Lydians,'  he  says,  '  were  the  first  people  we
know  of  to  stamp  and  use  a  current  coinage  of  gold  and  silver.'

'  See  above,  p.  no.  For  primitive  currencies  in  (Ircece  and  elsewhere
see  Ridgeway's  Origm  of  Curnncy  and  ]\\\i:;ht  StaitiLirds,  Cainbridijc,
1892.  For  Pheidon's  Argive  weights  and  measures  see  I'aus.  vi.  22.  2.
I  adhere  to  the  date  there  given,  750  n.C.  On  this  disputed  subject  sec
Pauly,  s.v.  Geld,  and  compare  Lehmann-Haupt  in  Homes  \xvii.  557,  xxxv.
648.  There  is  an  interval  of  six  centuries  (from  King  Ofla  to  Kdward  HI)
between  the  time  when  stamped  metals  are  first  known  to  liavc  been  used  as
a  common  measure  of  value  in  England  and  their  first  use  as  a  trustworthy
medium  of  exchange  for  foreign  trade.  There  is  a  similar  interval  of  many
centuries  in  the  Near  Eastern  monarchies.  '  Dumps  of  precious  metal '  have
been  found  both  at  Cnossos  and  among  late  Mycenaean  remains  in  Cyprus,
showing  '  that  at  least  not  later  than  the  twelfth  century  B.C.  a  niedium  of
currency  forming  the  true  antecedent  stage  to  the  early  coinage  of  Ionia  and
Lydia  had  developed  itself  in  the  Minoan  world'.  See  Evans  in  /.  //.  .V,
191 1,  p.  132,  who  points  out  that  a  very  early  Ionian  elcctrum  coin  recently-
discovered  shows  '  two  confronted  lions  with  a  forepaw  on  the  capital  of
a  column,  as  on  the  lion  (iate  of  .Mycenae.'  Aigina:  Thuc  v.  47.  6;  -Xen.
Hell.  v.  2.  21  ;  cf.  Head,  Historia  Numoruiii,  2nd  ed.,  lyll,  p.  395-


zgS  ECONOMICS  part  in

If  this  means,  as  the  modern  reader  would  assume,  that  they
issued  a  set  of  gold  and  silver  coins,  it  is  not  strictly  true  ;  for  the
coins  that  they  issued  were  of  doi/i  gold  and  silver,  that  is  to  say
of  an  alloy  of  the  two,  known  as  '  white  gold '  or  electrum.  We
have  these  coins  still  on  our  museum  shelves,  and  their  sickly
glimmer,  which  is  to  that  of  a  healthy  English  sovereign  as  the
moon  is  to  the  sun,  is  eloquent  of  the  policy  of  the  authors  of
their  being.^

For  look  more  closely  and  you  will  observe  that,  though  all
are  sickly,  they  are  not  all  alike,  but  wax  and  wane  along  the
shelf  with  various  gradations  of  pallor.  In  fact  the  gold  in  an
electrum  coinage  is  not  a  fixed  proportion  :  it  varies  from  80  down
to  5a  per  cent,  of  the  whole.  This  is  what  made  them  so  con-
venient to  City  State  governments  :  they  could  economize  on  the
gold  and  so,  if  they  went  carefully  to  work,  make  something  out
of  their  citizens  with  every  coin  they  issued.  And  that,  in  fact,
is  the  currency  policy  of  the  self-sufficient  City  State.  The
issue  of  coins  is  a  state  monopoly,  and  it  operated,  like  nearly
all  such  monopolies,  as  an  indirect  tax.^

Actual  electrum  coins  are  indeed  not  very  common,  for  the
Greek  states  preferred  a  silver  coinage.  But  silver  blended  with
lead  and  copper  quite  as  well  as  gold  with  silver,  and  the  Lydian
example  was  the  sort  of  lesson  that  they  would  not  forget.  So
they  habitually  and  shamelessly  debased  their  coinage :  and  even
in  the  fourth  century,  when  inter-state  trade  had  grown  to  a
considerable  volume,  Demosthenes  can  still  declare  that  *  the
majority  of  states  are  quite  open  in  using  silver  coins  diluted
with  copper  and  lead  ' ;  and  even  when  our  extant  coins  are  not
debased  they  are  in  most  cases  under  weight.  It  is  in  fact  an
honest  coinage  which  is  the  exception,  as  we  can  see  not  only
from  the  frequent  use  of  every  kind  of  metaphor  connected  with
bad  coins  but  from  the  expressions  used  to  denote  good  ones.
The  coins  of  Darius,  we  are  told,  were  '  the  purest ',  that  is,  not
necessarily  pure  in  general,  but  purer  than  others.^

^  Hdt.  i.  94,  i.  50;  Soph.  Afi/.  1038.  ^  Pauly,  s.v.  Elektron.

'  Hdt.  iii.  56,  iv.  166  ;  Dem.  xxiv.  214.  Most  Greek  coins  were  cast,  not
stamped :  hence  it  would  be  more  difficult  to  get  the  weight  exactly  right.
Compare  the  uses  of  the  words  Ki^8ij\oi  and  ^acraviCa.  I  owe  this  section  to
Riezler,  Finanzen  und  Motiopole,  pp.  62-3.  For  some  modern  parallels  and
their  effects  see  Ridgeway,   pp.  223-6.     The  Asiatic  monarchies  enjoyed


CHAP.  X  MONEY  399

Civilized  modern  states  do  not  ilchasc  llicir  coins.  Somclimoi
their  coins  or  paper  money  lose  value  in  spite  «>f  themselves.  lUil
their  object  is  always  to  keep  them  up  to  what  they  profess  to
be,  to  maintain  them  at  par  with  their  face  value,  at  par,  that  is,
with  coins  similarly  stamped  in  the  rest  of  the  world.  The
reason  for  this  policy  is  obvious.  It  would  not  pay  motlcrn
States  to  debase  their  coinage,  because  their  coinage  is  not  the
centre  of  their  economic  life.  Their  main  concern  is  with  wealth
itself,  not  with  the  medium  of  its  exchange,  and  in  their  fmancial
policy  they  look  first  not  to  bullion  but  to  credit.  Any  small
gains  they  might  make  by  penny-wise  economies  on  bullion
would  be  lost  a  thousand  times  over  in  the  field  of  credit.
They  would  lose  caste  among  the  nations  ;  their  money  would
sink  in  value  on  the  international  exchange;  and  they  and  every
business  man  who  owned  wealth  in  their  count rj-  would  have  t<J
pay  dear  for  their  low  credit  in  transactions  with  abroad.  In
quarters  open  to  foreign  influences  prices  would  go  up  as  money
had  gone  down,  and  in  the  trading  centres  there  would  be  two
sets  of  prices — such  as  ruled  in  Greece  in  recent  years  for  paper
and  silver — one  for  the  local  and  one  for  the  international  medium
of  exchange.^

How  was  it,  then,  that  the  Greek  states  were  able  to  pursue  this
policy?  The  reason  is  to  be  found,  once  again,  in  their  isolated
situation  and  normal  self-sufficiency.  If  you  are  issuing  a  medium
of  exchange  for  a  strictly  limited  circle  of  users  under  your  own
control,  you  can  issue  it  in  any  form  you  please,  and  force  people
to  use  it,  whether  it  be  in  coffee-tavern  tickets,  or  in  the  brass  disks
such  as  they  use  in  cloak-rooms,  or  in  the  iron  bars  such  as  were

bimetallism,  with  a  fixed  ratio  of  13-3  :  i  between  silver  and  >;old.  (.Sec  Milt.
iii.  95,  who,  however,  omits  the  decimal.)  The  chief  Creek  standards,  i.e.
those  of  Aegina,  Euboea,  Athens,  and  Corinth,  wer.-,  however,  all  mono-
metallic with  a  silver  standard.  Hence  the  author  of  the  ll'-ij's  .in.i  Mfiins
is  quite  right,  as  things  then  were,  in  saying  that  a  glut  m  gold  will  send  it
down  in  value,  but  that  you  cannot  possibly  have  a  glut  m  silver  (iv.  7-'o)
The  Greek  silver  currencies  gradually  disappeared  in  the  fourth  century  J)elore
the  Macedonian  gold  standard.  See  Keil,  Ammymus  Ari^fnttntnus,  271  ft.
1  See  Laws  742,  where  Plato,  who  may  have  come  across  this  system  in
operation  on  his  travels,  but  cannot  have  lived  under  it,  proposes  it  for  his
model  city.  Its  greatest  advantage  is  that  it  prevents  people  from  goin);
abroad  without  leave  from  the  authorities.  He  hopes  to  keep  grown  men
virtuous  by  the  petty  dodges  we  sometimes  adopt  to  keep  schoolboys  from
buying  tobacco  or  tramps  out  of  the  public-house.  Of  course  he  had  never
been  to  Sparta.


300  ECONOMICS  PART  III

provided  for  the  unfortunate  Spartans.  Some  medium  they  must
have,  and  if  iron  bars  are  all  that  they  can  get,  and  are  issued
under  State  authority,  iron  bars  will  circulate,  however  uncom-
fortable for  daily  use.  Sparta  is  an  extreme  instance,  and  her
preposterous  currency  was  deliberately  maintained  in  order  to
hamper  business  ;  her  statesmen  worked,  as  always,  with  dis-
ciplinary rather  than  economic  objects  in  view.  But  the  ordinary
debasement  that  went  on  represents  the  same  stage  of  economic
life.  States  could  debase  their  coins  because  they  knew  and
could  control  all  the  persons  who  would  use  them,  and  so  could
take  steps  to  prevent  themselves  from  losing  '  in  the  long  run '
what  they  were  making  on  their  first  issue.  They  gave  their
citizens  fivepence  and  called  it  sixpence,  but  they  could  prevent
their  citizens  and  the  rest  of  the  world  from  playing  back  the
same  trick  upon  themselves.^

How  could  they  prevent  it  ?  By  all  sorts  of  clever  tricks.
Some  of  them  have  been  preserved  for  us,  and  bring  vividly  before
our  minds  both  how  much  the  Greek  citizen  would  put  up  with
from  his  city,  and — what  we  have  already  emphasized — the
superior  position  occupied  in  Greece  by  State  as  opposed  to
private  concerns.  For  instance,  the  State  would  demand  that
all  payments  to  itself  should  be  made  in  full  weight,  following
the  Babylonian  precedent  of  '  one  measure  for  the  State  and
another  for  the  people '.  Or  it  would  suddenly  call  in  its  coins
and  pay  those  who  brought  them  by  their  actual  weight,  adding
insult  to  injury,  as  the  tyrant  Hippias  did  at  Athens,  by
promptly  reissuing  the  old  coins  with  a  view  to  repeating  the
operation.  Or  they  could  imitate  a  still  harsher  State  treasurer,
Dionysius  of  Syracuse,  supposing  they  found  themselves  in  debt
to  their  foremost  citizens.  He  simply  ordered  his  creditors  on
pain  of  death  to  bring  him  all  the  silver  they  possessed.     When

^  The  iron  spit  currency  which  lasted  on  so  long  at  Sparta  survived  in
name  at  Athens  also  :  in  the  old  days  six  of  these  spits  or  obols  (o^t'hoi)  made
a  handful  or  drachma  (Spa^M';)-  A  bundle  of  iron  spits  about  four  feet  long,
bound  together  with  two  iron  bands,  has  been  found  at  the  Heraeum  at
Argos,  and  confirms  the  old  etymology  of  the  'handful'  of  six  spits.  It
also  confirms  the  legend  of  the  iron  money  at  Sparta.  The  British  excava-
tors there  found  several  of  their  '  lumps'  and  'bars  of  iron'  {B.S.A.  xiii.  173).
Its  use  lingered  on,  for  when  Epaminondas  died,  he  was  so  poor,  Plutarch
tells  us  {Fab.  Max.  27),  '  that  nothing  was  found  in  his  possession  except  an
iron  spit '.


^HAi'.  x  iMONKY  301

it  arrived  he  stamped  every  drachma  piece  with  a  two-drachma
surcharge,  and  so  paid  the  debt  in  their  own  money.  The  writer
of  the  Economics  revels  in  these  stories.  Their  moral  is  always
the  same  :  that  where  a  State  is  omnipotent  over  those  who  use
its  currency,  it  can  easily  exert  its  power  so  as  to  gain  on  its
transactions  with  them.  In  other  words,  there  is  nothing  to
prevent  the  city  from  stealing  its  citizens'  money,  as  there  is  nothing
to  prevent  it  from  stealing  their  lives  in  an  unjust  war.  The  only
difference  is  that  the  ordinary  currency-fraud  acted  so  indirectly
that  democracies  were  slow  to  see  how  they  were  robbin;.,'  them-
selves by  their  own  devices.  When  right  hand  robs  left  it  wants
a  trained  economist  to  mark  the  score.  In  business  it  is  the  gifted
amateurs  who  are  tempted  to  cheat.  It  takes  a  professional  to
find  out  that  to  play  fair  is  the  '  best  policy ' }

Yet  in  process  of  time  they  were  bound  to  discover  it,  for  they
would  learn  it,  not  without  bad  language,  from  the  traders  who
came  to  them  from  more  civilized  centres.  It  is  the  great  advan-
•tage  of  Athens  as  a  mart,  says  the  author  of  the  Ways  ami
Means,  '  that  you  can  get  good  silver  there.  In  most  cities
merchants  are  simply  compelled  to  ship  goods  for  the  return
journey,  for  they  cannot  get  any  money  which  is  any  use  to
them  outside.'  In  other  words,  a  bad  system  of  coinage  made
foreign  trade  almost  impossible ;  the  merchant  would  only  come
when  he  could  exchange  his  goods  for  some  staple  export,  for
the  money-changers  on  his  native  quay  had  no  use  for  out-
landish money.  So  we  see  why  the  states  which,  like  Athens
or  Aegina  or  Corinth  or  Cyzicus,  prided  themselves  on  an  honest
coinage  gradually  extended  its  use  over  more  secluded  parts  of
the  Greek  world.  Even  when  it  was  not  used  up-country,  among
shepherds  and  farmers  who  were  .sh>'  of  the  strange  design,  its
obvious  advantages  made  it  the  only  currency  down  at  the  port.
Gradually  the  government  would  give  up  the  cheerless  task  of

^  [Ar.]  Oec.  1347a  4-11  (Hippias) ;  Head,  Historia  Ntonorum,  pp.  369-/0.
explains  this  story  as  a  'substitution  of  the  light  for  the  heavy  Luboic
standard',  but  points  out  that  by  it  Hippias  'succeeded,  within  his  own
dominions,  in  doubling,  nominally  if  not  actually,  his  own  resources  .  Il
was  in  a  similar  spirit  that  he  confiscated  as  State  property  and  sold
back  to  the  unfortunate  householders  the  'upper  storeys  of  houses,  step*.
fences,  and  doors  that  projected  or  opened  on  to  the  public  street  ;  1349°
27  (Dionysius).  Small  modern  states  sometimes  play  similar  tricks  with
their  postage  stamps,  but  that  is  because  the  collectors  encourage  them.  1  he
■Greeks  had  no  hobbies  of  thi.s  sort,


302  ECONOMICS  part  hi

trying  to  make  its  unwelcome  lumps  of  metal  circulate  among
a  reluctant  population.  One  reason  why  it  had  originally  adopted
them  was  the  expense  and  difficulty  of  getting  good  bullion.
When  it  found  out  its  mistake  it  was  too  late  to  repair  it  by
issuing  good  money  of  its  own.  Athens  or  Aegina  with  their
prestige  were  already  in  possession  of  the  field.  So  the  local
mint  would  stop  working,  the  money-changer  would  have  one
less  bad  coin  on  his  table  and  one  less  shaft  in  his  quiver  of  evil
tricks,  and  the  Greek  world  would  be  one  step  nearer  to  a  national
as  opposed  to  a  purely  municipal  system  of  economy,^

But  compared  with  her  astonishing  advance  in  other  directions
Greece  made  but  slow  progress  in  breaking  down  these  economic
barriers  and  so  facilitating  intercourse.  The  Greek  City  States
never  became  large  trading  communities  in  our  sense  of  the  term :
even  fifth-century  Athens,  under  heraccomplished  financier  Pericles,
who  had  a  better  business  sense  than  any  of  the  older  Greeks  we
know,  did  not  succeed  in  overcoming  the  obstacles  in  her  path.

The  chief  of  these  obstacles  was  of  course  the  elementary  fact
of  the  poverty  of  the  Greek  world.  This  reacted  upon  business
life  at  every  point ;  above  all,  it  made  impossible,  what  is  an
indispensable  condition  of  the  modern  economy,  the  unimpeded
and  healthy  circulation  of  money.  The  City  State  never  learnt,
and  never  succeeded  in  teaching  its  citizens,  to  stop  hoarding
bullion  like  an  old-time  miser  and  to  '  give  it  into  the  bank ',
as  the  Jewish  parable  says,  '  that  I  might  have  required  mine
own  for  usury ' — in  other  words,  to  set  it  in  circulation  for  pur-
poses of  trade  and  enterprise.  Men  preferred  to  wrap  their
talents  in  napkins  and  hide  them  in  fields,  where  they  might,
as  we  are  told,  be  '  enjoyed '  as  much  as  if  they  were  being  used,
and  so  often  remained  as  a  treasure-trove  for  modern  museums.
Even  Aristotle  still  gave  currency  to  the  old  heresy  about  interest.
Yet,  until  money  is  freely  put  out  to  breed,  trade  and  industry
must  languish,  and  the  material  resources  of  a  country  will  remain
insignificant  and  precarious.^

^  Ways  and  Means  iii.  2.  For  the  voluntary  closing  of  local  mints  under
the  Athenian  Empire  see  the  striking  table  in  Cavaignac,  Etudes  sur  I'his-
toire  fina?iciere  d'Aihenes,  pp.  I79ff.  The  'florins'  of  Florence  owed  their
repute  to  the  same  cause  as  the  owls  of  Athens.

'  "^  Ar.  Pol.  1258  b  ;  Ways  and  Means  iv.  7  ;  Matt.  xiii.  44,  xxv.  25  ;  Luke
xix.  12  ff.,  taken,  as  usual,  out  of  the  heart  of  the  life  of  the  day.  Even  so
up-to-date  a  man  as  Themistocles  seems  to  have  hoarded  his  money :  Thuc.


CUAT.  X  IMONKY  30.^

Let  us  look  a  little  more  closely  Into  the  reasons  for  this
obstinate  prejudice  about  bullion,  for  wc  shall  discover  in  the
sequel  that  it  is  vitally  interconnected  with  the  special  object  of
our  inquiry.

Civilized  society,  we  are  told,  is  'ultimately  based  on  force'.
It  is  equally  true  to  say  it  is  ultimately  based  on  bullion.  Fn
both  cases  what  is  meant  is  that,  if  the  worst  came  to  the  woi.st,
we  should  come  up  against  that  naked  fact.  If  the  whole  struc-
ture of  our  religious  and  social  life,  built  up  through  centuries  of
moral  effort,  came  tumbling  about  our  cars,  we  should  have  to
fight  it  out,  with  fists  or  the  latest  artillery  as  the  case  might  be.
So  if  the  whole  structure  of  our  commercial  life  were  to  fall  with
a  crash,  if  everybody  simultaneously  desired  to  reali/.e,  we  should
be  thrown  back  upon  the  raw  bullion  which  is  at  the  base  of  the
solid  foundation  of  our  credit  and  enterprise.  Yet  we  know  very
well,  and  we  do  not  need  our  banker  to  tell  us,  that,  if  this  were
to  happen,  there  would  not  be  enough  bullion  to  go  round.  What
we  are  really  living  upon  is  not  bullion  at  all,  but  confidence  and
credit  and  security,  on  forms  of  wealth  which  can  at  a  pinch  ot
individual  need,  but  could  not  if  the  need  were  universal,  be
transformed  into  bullion.  The  gold  reserve  in  the  Bank  of
England  is  always  there,  like  the  pistols  and  horsewhips  which
our  duelling  neighbours  regard  as  so  indispensable  to  civiliza-
tion. Yet,  as  Demosthenes  said  long  ago, '  if  a  man  is  really  and
truly  ignorant  that  confidence  is  the  best  capital  for  commercial
enterprise  he  must  be  ignorant  of  everything' :  just  as,  if  a  man
is  really  and  truly  ignorant  that  the  habitual  gentleness  and
restraint,  not  the  occasional  violence,  of  the  modern  gentleman
and  citizen  is  the  best  security  for  civilization,  he  must  have
been  asleep  all  his  days.  Now  to  understand  business  life  in
Greece,  and  indeed  in  the  ancient  world  generally,  we  must  think
away  all  this  scaffolding  of  credit  and  confidence,  as  we  must
think  away  our  opportunities  of  obtaining  quick  and  trustworthy
information  about  foreign  firms  and  markets.  The  Greeks  were
never  able  to  live  comfortably,  either  as  states  or  as  individuals,

i-  137-  3-  For  the  state  hoards  of  antiquity  see  Thuc.  ii.  13.  4  and  the  inven-
tory of  the  Parthenon  treasure  (Hicks  and  Hill,  no.  71):  also  2  Kings  xviii.
16,  showing  that  the  temple  at  Jerusalem  was  a  treasure-house  just  hkc  the
Parthenon.     The  Greeks  never  knew  the  difference  between  a  bank  and

a  museum.

U  2


304  ECONOMICS  .  part  hi

under  the  shadow  of  credit.  Business  life  to-day  rides,  as  it  were,
on  pneumatic  tyres  ;  it  is  inflated  with  confidence.  The  Greeks,
as  they  rode,  felt  the  rims  all  the  time.  Society  very  seldom  dared
to  outrun  its  bullion  resources.  If  it  did  it  risked  catastrophe  :
and  once  or  twice  in  ancient  history,  after  periods  of  inflation,
when  wealth  seemed  for  a  moment  inexhaustible,  such  catastrophes
really  occurred,  bringing  with  them  disaster  far  more  widespread
than  any  bank  failures  of  to-day.^

So  that  in  Greece,  so  long,  at  any  rate,  as  the  City  State
system  lasted  and  there  were  no  international  centres  like  Alex-
andria, Antioch,  and  Pergamum,  it  was  always  impossible  for
a  community,  and  mostly  for  individuals  too,  to  live  upon  loans.
Cities  lived  strictly  upon  what  they  had,  which  included  of  course
the  private  property  of  their  inhabitants.  For  the  citizen,  as  we
have  seen,  had  no  rights  against  his  city.  She  was,  or  claimed
to  be,  his  all  in  all ;  and  if  she  asked  for  his  property  at  need,  as
a  free  gift  or  as  a  forced  loan,  the  difference  was  merely  one  of
sentiment.  No  true  Greek  would  dream  of  investing  in  his
city's  funds  and  so  profiting  by  her  need.  And  if  she  could
not  borrow  from  within,  because  she  could  only  take,  neither
could  she  raise  money  from  outside,  either  for  a  profitable  war
or  for  '  reproductive '  public  works.  There  was,  indeed,  no  one
to  borrow  from.  The  great  capitalists  of  the  day  were  public
bodies,  the  Panhellenic  shrines  at  Delphi  and  Olympia  and  the
larger  City  States.  But  sacred  gold  was  taboo,  and  no  State
would  lend,  even  at  high  interest,  to  a  rival.  Nor  was  there  help
to  be  had  from  private  sources.  There  were  no  interhellenic
banking  firms,  no  Fuggers  or  Acciajuoli  such  as  even  our  Middle
Ages  could  provide,  and  such  few  men  as  had  ready  money  to
spare,  mostly  resident  aliens  in  their  states,  who  were  not  allowed
to  buy  land,  preferred  to  put  their  money  in  corn-ships  and
speculate  in  local  famines  rather  than  to  be  creditors  of  a  State
from  whom  they  might  never  be  able  to  recover.  For  if  a  State
refused  to  pay,  who  was  to  bring  her  to  justice  ?     The  creditor

^  Dem.  xxxvi.  44  (for  the  Greek  see  chapter-motto  above).  The  widespread
distress  at  Rome  and  throughout  Italy  at  the  time  of  Catiline's  conspiracy
was  probably  due  to  a  sudden  failure  of  confidence  after  a  period  of  over-
speculation.  See  Ferrero,  vol.  i,  pp.  234  and  319;  vol.  ii,  p.  231  (Engl,  tr.),
and  also  Davis,  The  hifiuettce  of  Wealth  in  Imperial  Roue  (New  York,  1910),
chap,  i,  for  a  vivid,  if  somewhat  imaginative,  account  of  the  business  panic  of
A.D.  33.


CHAP.  X  MONEY  305

could  no  more  expect  his  temporary  city  to  ^'o  to  war  in  order
to  recover  his  debts  than  the  Jews  did  in  the  Middle  Ages.
Moreover,  the  investment,  at  best,  was  more  risky  by  far  than
similar  engagements  to-day  with  the  shakiest  Central  American
communities.  I-'or  there  was  no  knowing,  in  a  world  that  lived
so  near  the  margin  of  destitution,  whether  a  city  might  not  any
year  'take  sick',  as  the  expression  went,  with  a  bad  harvest  or
a  war,  and  need  every  penny  she  possessed,  interest  ami  all,  to
buy  food  at  famine  prices.  Small  wonder  that  the  State  loans
among  our  inscriptions,  which  date  from  a  later  time  than  we  arc
discussing,  are  mercilessly  severe  in  their  terms,  and  that  when-
ever in  the  historians  we  hear  of  a  State  oblii^ation  duly  paid  it  is
obviously  regarded  not  as  an  act  of  business  but  of  virtue.'

•  Ways  and  Means  iv.  9  (take  sick) ;  Xen.  (hr.  x.\.  28,  Mitteiluni^nt  xxxvi,
p.  81  (speculating  in  famines).  Dangers  of  private  banking:  Hdt.  vi.  86.
The  Delphi-Olympia  War  Loan  suggested  in  Thuc.  i.  121.  3  of  course  never
came  off.  These  shrines  never  handed  out  money  unless  compelled,  as  Delplii
by  the  Phocians  in  the  fourth  century.  Their  traditions  made  it  diffuult  for
the  Greeks  to  realize  what  a  'loan'  was.  'Going  after  a  del)t '  in  Homeric
days  was  a  very  informal  i^roceeding,  and  might  mean  merely  'giving  tit  for
tat'.  See  //.  xi.  687,  and  Od.  xxi.  17,  where  Odysseus  goes  'dcbt-collecimg ',
i.e.  seeking  amends  for  a  cattle  raid.  So  x/'<of.  the  word  here  used,  means
'  that  which  one  needs  must  pay '  (Liddell  and  Scott),  a  charmingly  ambiguous
term.  The  instances  of  loans  between  States  are  just  cases  of  helping  a  friend
in  need.  Thus  the  Corinthians  on  one  occasion  lend  the  Athenians,  '  with
whom  they  were  then  close  friends,'  twenty  ships  at^i  or  jOf.  apiece,  'because
by  their  laws  they  were  forbidden  to  give  them  for  nothing  (Hdt.  vi.  89).
Similarly,  the  Spartans  lent  the  Thirty  Tyrants  at  Athens,  who  held  power  by
their  support,  a  hundred  talents,  which  the  restored  Democracy  afterwards
repaid — a  fact  so  remarkable  that  it  was  remembered  for  generations  (Is.  vii.
68  ;  Ar.  Pol.  1276  a  10).  An  instance  of  a  State  loan  is  recorded  by  .Aeschines
(iii.  103).  The  city  of  Oreus  had  given  Demosthenes  a  talent  '  for  scnircs
rendered  '.  '  Having  spent  all  their  money  on  fighting  and  being  altogether
poverty-stricken'  they  ask  it  back,  promising  to  put  up  a  bronze  statue  of
him  in  their  market-place  instead.  Demosthenes  replied  that  '  he  wanted
none  of  their  bronze',  but  that  he  would  let  them  have  it  back  if  they  would
pay  him  one  per  cent,  a  month  on  the  security  of  their  public  revenues  till
they  could  repay  it.  So  they  had  to  pay  twelve  per  cent,  interest  »)n  their
honoranum.  For  the  ordinary  conditions  in  later  times,  when  sue  h  loans  be-
came a  common  matter  of  business,  see  Dittenberger,  No.  517,  dealmg  with  ihc
public  debt  at  Amorgos,  w  ith  notes  and  references.  .Amorgos  borrows  money
from  a  Naxian,  and  pledges  '  the  whole  of  its  public  and  private  pro|)CTty  Ixnh
in  and  outside  the  island'  ;  i.e.  the  creditor  might  seize  any  Amorgian's  ship
on  the  high  seas.  For  the  immensely  greater  wealth  of  the  Alexandrian  and
Pergamene  period,  when  economic  organization  was  no  longer  municipal  but
national,  see  Wilamowitz's  suggestive  note,  unfortunately  hidden  away  in
a  pamphlet  on  a  single  inscription  {Ein  Geselz  von  Smnos,  Hcrlin.  1 904,
p.  12).  The  difficulty  in  those  days  was  not  want  of  capital  but  of  a  Stock
Exchange  to  manipulate  it.  It  lay,  as  it  were,  in  large  reservoirs  of  pubhf
and  private  treasure,  and  there  were  no  proper  means  of  irrigation.    \  inally,  as


3o6  ECONOMICS  part  hi

Much  the  same  difficulties  apply  to  transactions  within  the  city
between  private  individuals.  It  was  always  difficult  to  raise
money,  and  the  arrangements  made  seem,  from  a  modern  point  of
view,  childish  and  unsatisfactory.  We  have  already  seen  what  a
blow  was  struck  by  Solon  at  the  rising  business  community  in
sixth-century  Athens  when  he  made  it  illegal  for  men  to  borrow
on  the  security  of  their  own  persons.  It  was  a  necessary  law,  and
as  such  was  copied  elsewhere ;  still  it  was  an  interference  with
free  contract.  For  men  only  raised  capital  on  themselves  when
they  had  nothing  else  to  offer ;  and  if  you  might  not  risk  slavery
in  order  to  start  a  business,  most  probably  you  were  compelled  not
to  start  it  at  all.  Under  these  circumstances,  borrowing  tended
either  to  become  a  very  expensive  matter,  costing  anything
over  twelve  per  cent.,  or  to  be  done  privately  amongst  friends.
The  most  usual  form  of  security  on  a  business  transaction  was
land  or  houses.  But  this  led  to  a  difficulty,  for  resident  aliens
who,  like  the  famous  Pasion,  were  generally  the  people  with  spare
cash,  were  for  traditional  reasons  not  allowed  to  own  them,  and
this  tended  in  its  turn  to  act  as  a  brake  upon  enterprise,  or  to
send  up  the  rate  of  interest.  So  the  arrangements  were  very
often  of  a  private  and  friendly  character,  suited  to  the  pleasant
fellowship  of  a  Greek  city.  A  number  of  friends  would  club
together  to  form  a  select  private  company,  or  what  was  called  a
common  picnic  {ipavos),  receiving  no  interest  on  their  capital  at
all,  repayment  by  the  director  of  the  enterprise  being  regarded  as
a  debt  of  honour.  Business  relations  seem,  in  fact,  to  have  been
as  friendly  and  informal  as  those  between  the  country  cousin  and
the  friend  who  *  knows  a  good  thing  in  the  city  '.  The  money
often  disappeared  to  the  bottom  of  the  sea  or  into  the  pockets  of
pirates ;  but  as  the  loser  had  his  bit  of  land  in  reserve  it  did  not
make  so  much  difference.     Yet  it  is  strange  to  reflect  that  in  an

he  says,  the  Romans  came  and  stole  it  in  spoil  or  syndicates,  and  the  improved
administration  under  the  emperors  did  not  save  Greek  lands  from  ultimately
sinking  back  into  poverty  and  barbarism.  '  For  under  the  Roman  emperors
there  was  not  only  no  Stock  Exchange,  but  the  banks  of  the  Hellenistic  age
were  allowed  to  lose  their  business.'  There  is  a  good  description  of  the
working  of  these  Roman  Empire-builders  (who  as  far  excelled  their  Greek
predecessors  in  greed  and  ruthlessness  as  they  lagged  behind  them  in  not
knowing  what  to  do  with  their  money)  in  Ferrero,  Greatness  and  Decline  of
Rojne,  vol.  i,  chap,  xviii  (Engl,  tr.,  pp.  303  fif.).  See  also  Davis,  The  Influence
of  Wealth  in  Imperial  Rome.  In  general  see  Riezler,  Uber  Finanzen  nnd
Monopole  im  alten  Grieche/iland,  pp.  56  ff.


CHAP.  X  MONEY


.107


'advanced'  society  like  that  of  Athens,  where  people  were  so
fond  of  subtle  distinctions,  business  life  was  so  priinitive  that,  as
the  dictionaries  tell  us,  men  had  not  yet  learnt  to  distinj^'uish  be-
tween a  free  loan  between  friends  and  an  investment  of  working
capital.^

But  Birmint^ham  and  Manchester  arc  smiling;  at  us.  Ii  is  lime
to  bring  this  chapter  to  a  close.

^  Xpeos  and  8ai>(iov  are  each  used  in  boili  senses.  Sec  Darcmlx-rj;  ami
Saglio,  s.  V.  Foe;/ us ;  Pauly,  s.  v.  Jinifics,  wlio  quotes  Hyperidcs,  v.  9,  on  how
'  debts  of  honour  '  sometimes  came  home  to  roost  (in  tlie  fourth  ccntur)-!  after
a  business  changed  hands.  The  Ecoftonncs  has  a  story  ( 1347  a  i )  of  how  the
city  of  Byzantium  once  sold  some  metic  creditors  the  right  of  owning  the  land
they  had  taken  as  a  security,  in  return  for  one-third  of  the  debt.  In  Kgypt,
according  to  Herodotus  (ii.  136),  men  were  at  one  time  so  hard  up  for  a  form
of  security  that  they  were  reduced  to  pawning  their  fathers'  mummies.  For
an  instance  of  the  'good  thing  in  the  city'  game  see  Lysias,  xix.  25.  .Similar
stories  have  been  heard  in  law  courts  since.  Our  evidence  for  the  rate  of
interest  on  private  investments  at  Athens  is  all  from  the  fourth  century.
Twelve  per  cent,  is  the  lowest  (and  a  not  unusual)  figure.  The  liighcst  is
exacted  by  the  Reckless  Man  in  Theophrastus,  who  lends  money  to  market
people  at  twenty-five  per  cent,  per  day,  and  '  will  make  the  round  of  the  cook-
shops,  the  fishmongers,  the  fish-picklers,  thrusting  into  his  check  the  interest
which  he  levies  on  their  gains '.  The  Greeks  called  him  Reckless  (though  we
should  not)  because  he  had  'no  restraining  sense  of  honour'  (Theophr.  xvi
and  Jebb's  note,  p.  92,  on  Recklessness),


CHAPTER  XI

CITY    ECONOMICS:    FOREIGN    TRADE

Al  fcr^aTuii  K(i)s  TJjS  (UKfOfxtftji  Tii  *:aAAi(rro  eXn;^oi'.- — HERODOTUS,  iii.  Io6.
The  extreme  parts  of  the   inhabited  world    somehow  possess  the  most
excellent  products.

We  are  at  last  in  the  position  to  approach  the  subject  of
foreign  trade,  which  played  so  important  a  part  in  the  life  of
fifth-century  Athens.

The  establishment  of  a  workable,  if  not  wholly  satisfactor}-,
system  of  exchange  enabled  the  leading  City  States,  from  the
seventh  century  onwards,  to  enter  into  business  relations  with
foreign  parts.    Let  us  watch  how  they  did  so.

The  city  of  tiie  seventh  and  sixth  centuries  still  retains  her
old  tradition  of  self-sufficiency.  She  still  feeds  herself  from  her
own  cornlands  and  clothes  herself  with  her  own  wool.  But  she
has  sent  out  colonists  into  far  lands,  and  tales  have  come  back  to
her  of  the  wonders  that  they  have  seen.  It  is  her  curiosity  that
has  been  roused,  rather  than  her  desire  for  riches  or  luxury.  She
would  like  to  enliven  her  daily  life  by  the  novelties  from  over  the
sea.  What  she  hopes  to  gain  by  the  establishment  of  commercial
relations  is  '  new^  ways  of  enjoying  life'.  '  Give  me  the  luxuries  of
life  from  abroad,'  she  said  to  the  trader, '  and  I  will  not  ask  you  for
its  necessities.'  Trade  begins  with  luxuries,  as  habits  begin  with
'quite  exceptional  cases'.  But  it  is  generally  impossible  for
either  of  them  to  end  there.  When  Greece  had  acquired  the
trading  habit  she  never  succeeded  in  throwing  it  off.'

But  she  will  have  some  difficulty  in  forming  the  habit,  for  all
tradition  is  against  her.  In  the  world  on  to  which  she  is  launch-
ing her  trading  ventures  the  hand  of  every  man  and  every  State
is  against  their  neighbour's.  The  would-be  trader  is  mistaken,
now  for  a  pirate,  now  for  an  explorer,  now  for  the  emissary  and

^  Old  Oligarch,  ii.  7.  I  do  not  remember  who  first  inverted  Benjamin
Franklin's  sententious  remark  about  not  asking  for  luxuries.


CHAP.  XI  FOREIGN   TRADl


509


advance  guard  of  an  invading  host.     It  needs  lime  ami  patience
for  him  to  justify  and  confirm  and  rcgulari/e  his  position.'

\Vc  have  .some  inteicsting  j^limpscs  of  this  early  i)criiKl  when
trader,  pirate,  and  na\al  olTiccr  were  merged  into  one.  Foreign
relations  began  with  war  ami  robbery.  It  was  a  recognizcil  ri^jht
that  a  .State  which  had  suffered  robbery  or  wrong  in  the  jKT.son
of  any  of  its  members,  which  had  lost  a  Helen  or  an  lo  or  a
cargo  of  valuables,  should  'exercise  reprisals'  on  its  assailant  or
any  of  its  assailant's  ships  and  members,  till  each  parly  was
exhausted  or  the  wrong  redre.s.sed.  States  lived,  ihal  is,  in  a
state  of  perpetual  vendetta;  and  the  fust  task  of  internationali.sts
was  not  to  preach  peace  and  goodwill  to  a  world  clamouring  for
adventure,  but  to  make  a  few  firm  islands  of  dry  land  amid  an
ocean  of  buccaneering.  So  a  treaty  was  not  (as  we  arc  always
told  nowadays)  an  'additional  guarantee  for  the  peace  of  the
world',  but,  at  this  earliest  stage,  simply  an  arrangement  between
States  to  forego  for  a  time  (there  was  generally  a  time  limit  in
Greek  treaties,  war  being  the  natural  state)  the  pleasure  of
exercising  reprisals  on  one  another,  in  the  interest  of  joint
operations  upon  a  larger  scale.  International  law,  in  (ircece  at
any  rate,  seems  to  have  begun  with  'honour  among  thieves*.
Here  is  an  extract  from  a  convention  between  two  diminutive  City
States,  neighbours  squeezed  side  by  side  into  the  tiny  alluvial
plains  between  the  mountains  of  Locris  and  the  ^'ulf  of  Crisa.
whence  day  by  day  they  watched  with  hungry  eyes  the  rich
pilgrim  boats  as  they  turned  proud !)•  in  round  the  last  corner  to
Delphi.  Woe  to  them  if  on  a  dark  night  they  cut  the  corner  too
fine!  'No  man  of  Oeanlheia,  if  he  make  a  seizure,  .shall  carry
off  a  Chaleian  merchant  from  Chaleian  .soil,  nor  a  Chaleian  an
Oeantheian  merchant  from  Oeantheian  soil  ;  nor  .shall  either
Oeantheian  or  Chaleian  seize  a  merchants  cargo  within  the
territory  of  the  other  cit>-.  If  any  one  breaks  this  rule  it  shall  be
lawful  to  seize  him  with  impunit)-.  The  property  of  a  forei^jner  may
be  seized  on  the  sea  without  incurring  the  penally,  except  in  ihe
actual  harbour  of  the  city.'  The  sting  of  the  treaty  lies,  of  course.
in  the  tail.  Who  would  not  forego  the  delights  of  robbing  a
fellow  Locrian  when  there  were  treasure -.ships  in  the  offing^'

^  See  above,  pp.  249-50.  ,,...».  it  n^-.

2  Hicks  and  Hill,  no.  44-     The  stone  is  in  the  Bniish  Museum.     I  follow


3IO  ECONOMICS  part  hi

So  that  at  this  early  stage  seafaring  trade  was  sometimes  too
risky  a  business,  and  men  preferred  to  do  what  exchanging  they
could  by  land.  We  read  of  '  frontier  markets  '  on  some  boundary
pasture,  where  the  shepherds  would  meet  and  exchange  a  few
humble  luxuries,  the  honey  of  Attica  for  the  pigs  and  vegetables  of
Megara  or  the  fresh-water  fish  from  the  plains  of  Boeotia,  their
sheep-dogs  sleeping  with  one  eye  open  while  the  bargaining  pro-
ceeded. It  was  not  easy,  however,  to  do  much  trading  by  land.
The  country  was  too  rough  and  the  roads  too  bad.  Even  in  the
fifth  century  there  was  hardly  a  cart-road  in  Greece  which  crossed
a  national  boundary.  Merchants  who  travelled  by  land  went  as
pedlars  or  tinkers,  like  the  Breton  onion-sellers  who  traverse
England  to-day  with  their  goods  slung  around  them, '  themselves
their  own  carriers ',  as  the  Greek  phrase  went.  No  doubt  at
Delphi  and  Olympia  and  the  Isthmus,  on  international  occasions,
you  would  see  them  muster  in  force.  But  even  in  these  centres,
whither  such  roads  as  there  were  converged,  the  great  majority
of  the  dealers  who  have  such  wondrous  tricks  to  perform  or  out-
landish novelties  to  sell  have  made  their  way  in  by  sea.^

Riezler's  translation  {Finanzen,  p.  79)  as  against  Meyer  and  Hicks.  Foreigners
may  be  seized  anywhere  except  in  the  other  side's  harbour.  Members  of  the
'high  contracting  parties'  are  safe  on  their  own  soil.  It  is  a  fifth-century
treaty,  so  we  may  suppose  Oeantheia  and  Chaleion  had  been  playing
separately  at  this  game  all  through  Delphi's  palmiest  days.  Oeantheia  is
Gaiaxidhi,  the  first  stop  on  the  steamship  route  from  Itea  to  Patras  :  Chaleion
is  farther  up,  in  a  corner  of  the  gulf.  Compare  Hdt.  i.  i,  vi.  42  ;  Thuc.  v.
115.  I  ;  Dem.  xxxv.  13  and  26,  and  argument  of  xxiv.  Details  in  Pauly,  s.v.
aavKw^  corrected  by  Riezler,  p.  69.  The  right  of  '  asylum  '  granted  by  States
to  one  another's  citizens  was  sometimes  granted  to  individuals  by  special
decree.  Side  by  side  with  this  political  idea  grew  a  religious  idea  of  a<j\)k[n.
Sanctuaries  and  temples  became 'asylums' for  suppliants,  e.g.  for  Opposi-
tion leaders  or  runaway  slaves.  For  some  modern  parallels  to  the  Greek
institution  of  reprisals  see  Dareste,  Revue  des  etudes  grecques,  vol.  ii,  pp.  305  ff.
'  Frontier  *  markets '  (our  '  market '  and  '  march '  are  kindred  words) :
Dem.  xxiii.  39,  quoted  in  Biichsenschiitz,  Besitz  und  Eiwerb,  p.  474,
where  see  some  good  references  also  for  what  Delphi  and  Olympia  must
have  been  like.  Menander  sums  them  up  in  five  words  :  '  crowd,  market,
thieves,  acrobats,  amusements.'  He  omits  a  sixth,  'beggars.'  See  Tenos
any  March  25th  or  August  15th  (old  style).  The  'sacred  ways',  e.g.
through  Phocis  to  Delphi,  on  which  Laius  rumbled  along  in  state  in
a  country  cart,  were  the  only  national  roads  in  Greece.  Who  was  there  to
make  any  others  ?  They  would  only  help  an  invader,  as  Xenxes  was  tempted
to  Delphi:  see  Hdt.  vi.  34;  Soph.  O.  T.  750-3,  122.  Moreover,  they  were
bound  to  remain  unsafe.  The  whole  plot  of  the  Oedipus  Tyrannus  depends
on  the  fact  that  the  Thebans  never  thought  it  worth  while  to  inquire  into
their  king's  murder.  '  Lost  in  the  mountains  :  robbers  of  course ' :  and  they
dismissed  the  subject.     Details  about  sacred  roads  in  Merkel,  Die  higenieur-


CHAP.  XI  FOREIGN   TRADE  311

For,  in  the  Greek  area  al  any  rate,  the  sea  is  the  natural
nicdium  of  travel.  No  one  ean  hvc  in  Greek  lands  without
feeling  as  the  Greeks  did,  that  it  is  the  land  that  divides  and  the
sea  that  unites.  Shepherds  may  scramble  up  the  mountains  and
spend  the  summer  months  together  with  friends  from  beyond  the
range  ;  but  a  wise  man  wishing  to  go  afield  for  his  living  will
launch  his  ship  on  the  smooth  blue  water  and  head  for  mmtic
harbour  across  the  channel.  So  the  Greeks  called  their  mer-
chants '  Cross-channel  men ',  because  they  had  watched  them
flickering  to  and  fro  from  bay  to  bay  and  islet  to  islet,  on  the
softest  of  all  roads,  where  a  man  can  turn  which  way  he  will.  To
travel  by  land  was  in  Greek  eyes  always  a  poor  second-best,  just
as  toiling  at  the  oar  in  a  dead  calm  under  a  hot  sun  is  a  poor
second-best  for  scudding  along  full-sail  before  a  following  breeze.
Not  for  the  Greek  the  slow  and  cumbersome  ritual  of  the  destrl
caravan,  or  the  weary  straining  of  pack-horses  up  the  rock-stnwn
track  to  the  pass.  Nimble  wits  prefer  a  nimble  journey  ;  his  >hip
passed  gently  like  a  butterfly  from  one  halt  to  the  next,  and  he-
arrived  at  his  journey's  end,  whether  in  Spain  or  the  Crimea,
having  lightly  grazed  the  edges  of  half  a  dozen  foreign  lands,
with  the  agreeable  consciousness  that,  through  all  the  weeks  of  the
passage,  his  road  had  never  once  forced  him  to  pass  through  bar-
barian territory.  For  it  is  the  great  merit  of  sea  travel,  as  llor.icc
remarked  long  ago,  that  it  carries  you  into  distant  parts  without
ruffling  your  social  habits.  You  remain,  unless  you  tranship,
among  your  own  countrymen  all  the  time.  And  when  you  arrive,
be  it  at  the  furthest  Greek  colony  by  the  Guadakjuivir  or  the
Don,  you  can  still  fancy  you  are  at  home:  for  the  men  \\h«»
planted  it  carried  their  country  with  them  too.'

technik  tin  Alterlim,  pp.  217  ff.  Pedlars  :  Aesch.  Choeph.  675  («J.T.-^>/f.H.
like  Xanthias  on  his  donkey.  Frogs  251.  The  line  between  the  |K-.!...t
carrying  goods  and  the  wandering  craftsman  (e.g.  tinker)  carr)-ing  t.--.-.  i
a  very  narrow  one,  as  Demolins  points  out  in  his  section  on  Kipsy-c«^on..in)
{Comment  la  route  are  le  type  soaal,  vol.  ii,  p.  78)-  I""'  land  Ir.i.l.-  m
Periclean  Athens  see  Acliarnians  S70.  Its  volume  was  very'  small  comp....  -i
to  the  sea  trade.     There  were  apparently  no  customs-houses  for  it :  A.  /i.  .  1  •

(cf.  Francotte, /•V;w//a'J//t'Ji/A-.>A'''v<V'''''-f>  PP-  '■    l"^-     ,,  .  »   -     ,»,.

>  €U7ropof  =  6  fV  TT.ipo)  from  Tr.puo,.  For  the  mcani.igs  of  A.it«,kk  irAo»«,  llie
proverbial  e.xpression' for  '  second-best ',  see  Liddell  and  bcotl  ;  or  find  out
by  practical  experience.  '  Caelum  non  animum  mut.int  qui  trans  m,irt  jur-
runt '  helps  to  explain  the  nature  of  the  colonial  (Ircek,  then  and  now.  It  u
a  familiar  fact  that  Greeks  and  Italians  hate  going  up  country  in  America


$12  ECONOMICS  PART  III

Our  merchant,  then,  plies  his  trade  by  sea,  carrying  goods  to
and  fro  between  States  whicli  have  given  up  '  exercising  reprisals'
upon  one  another  and  offer  a  safe  asylum  for  his  ship  in  their
harbour.  He  cannot  venture  as  a  trader  (though  he  may  venture
in  other  capacities)  till  he  is  protected  by  treaty-rights,  or  has
secured  some  citizen  who  will  introduce  him  in  the  capacity  of  a
guest-friend.  He  is  therefore  in  a  sense,  although  engaged  on
strictly  private  bu.^iness,  the  representative  of  his  country.  He  is
protected  by  his  nationality  or,  as  we  say,  by  his  flag ;  and
though  at  home  he  may  only  rank  as  a  resident  alien,  and  for  this
very  reason  can  afford  to  stay  so  long  in  foreign  parts,  yet  when
among  Sicels  and  Iberians,  and  even  at  Syracuse  and  Cyprus,  he
bears  himself  proudly  as  a  man  of  Athens.  For  it  is  'because
of  the  greatness  of  his  city '  that  he  has  a  right  to  fetch  goods
for  her.^

Let  us  watch  his  operations  for  a  moment  in  detail,  for  they

because  they  do  not  like  losing  sight  of  the  road  home.  Alexander  was  the
first  statesman  who  succeeded  in  dispelling  this  instinct.  Every  one  remem-
bers how  strongly  it  was  implanted  in  Xenophon's  Ten  Thousand,  and  their
famous  cry,  when  they  emerged  from  the  mountains  of  Armenia  and  saw
the  Black  Sea  below  them  :  '  Thalassa,  Thalassa,'  or  '  Now  we  can  go  home
sleeping'.  For  sea  roads  as  opposed  to  land  roads  see  Old  Oligarch,  ii.  5  :
'  land-travelling  is  slow  work,  and  it  is  impossible  to  take  enough  supplies  for
a  long  journey.'  I  emphasize  the  point  because  Berard  has  confused  it  by
a  careless  statement  of  his  '  law  of  the  isthmus'.  He  is  right  in  holding  that
ancient  traders  often  took  goods  by  land  (i)  to  avoid  a  specially  dangerous
or  troublesome  bit  of  sea,  or  (2)  to  save  an  hour's  heavy  rowing  out  of  port.
That  is,  they  took  roads,  v/ien  specially  made  for  them  by  a  Priam,
Agamemnon,  or  Alcinous,  either  across  an  'isthmus'  (e.g.  to  get  into  the
Dardanelles)  or  from  the  inner  port  to  near  the  point  where  the  wind  begins.
But  this  is  very  different  from  saying  that  the  ancients  always  preferred
'  navigations  minima  '  and  '  routes  de  lerre  maxima  ',  which  is  not  the  case.
See  pp.  24  fF.  above,  and  Les  P/ie'/iiciens  et  rOdyssc'e,  vol.  i,  pp.  68,  178  (with
refs.).  Beyond,  or  rather  behind,  the  Greek  fringe,  caravan  routes  begin  :
witness  the  camels  which,  despite  the  railway,  still  wend  their  way  through
the  streets  of  Smyrna.  The  idea  of  a  country  on  shipboard,  gods  and  all,
was  familiar  to  the  maritime  Greek  communities.  Compare  Hdt.  i.  165,
viii.  62  (the  Athenians  threaten  to  remove  to  Siris) ;  Thiic.  viii.  76.  4-7
(which  is  the  true  Athens,  the  ancestral  city  or  the  movable  camp  ?).

'  Thuc.  ii.  38.  2.  For  commercial  treaties  see  above,  p.  183.  Hdt.  i.  163,
vi.  21  ('the  Phocaeans  '  at  Tartcssus,  '  the  Milesians'  at  Sybaris,  which  does
not  mean,  as  it  would  in  a  Venetian  historian,  that  they  were  trading  in  State
ships).  Compare  the  foreign  settlement  at  Naucratis  (ii.  178),  where,  we  may
be  sure,  no  one  asked  an  '  Aeginetan  '  or  a  '  Milesian  '  who  his  father  had
been.  Concessions  were  granted  to  individuals  or  groups  of  friends,  never  to
large  syndicates  like  those  of  Rome  or  our  own  Chartered  Companies.  There
are  many  surviving  traces  of  similar  trading  settlements  from  our  own  Middle
Ages.  For  instance,  the  long  wooden  sheds  for  the  members  of  the  several
nations  who  traded  in  Norwegian  waters  may  still  be  seen  at  Bergen.


CiiAi'.  XI  FOREIGN   TKAhl  3,^

are  very  different  from  those  of  his  modern  coiiiUcrpart.  Wc  are
accustomed  to  think  of  the  merchant  as  a  man  who  sits  at  home
in  an  office,  directing  by  cable  or  telephone,  from  information
similarly  derived,  either  privately  or  through  the  press,  the
activities  of  innumerable  subordinates  or  dei)endants  in  distant
lands.  At  his  Olympian  nod  from  a  dingy  London  oflfitc  men
gash  rubber-trees  in  South  America  and  load  grain-ships  at  Oticssa,
sweat  in  the  mines  of  South  Africa,  on  the  quays  of  Singajwrc,
or,  to  buy  shares  in  his  company,  in  the  jostling  Stock  l-!xchaii  •-
of  the  money  capitals  of  the  world.  In  station  he  is  ;i  pn\  it-
citizen,  in  power  he  is  an  emperor  or  at  least  an  oligarch;  for  the
ever  closer  interweaving  of  the  economic  interests  and  organiza-
tion of  the  business  world  all  over  the  globe  have  tended  to  con-
centrate power  on  to  the  few  Atlantean  shoulders  that  have
strength  to  meet  the  burden.  Ambition  follows  opportunity  as
water  flow^s  downhill,  and  our  most  ambitious  men  to-day  arc  not,
as  of  old,  generals  and  statesmen,  but  merchants  and  financiers
and  'captains  of  industry'.

In  Greece,  as  wc  know,  that  was  not  so.  Merchants  had  but
little  capital,  since  society  had  but  little  to  offer  them.  Nor,  if
they  had  possessed  it,  would  they  have  known  how  to  u.sc  it.  They
could  not  operate  on  a  large  scale  in  the  absence  of  quick  and
certain  information  from  distant  markets,  or  with  a  staff  of  flighty,
versatile,  unorganizable  Greeks  to  perform  their  orders.  Business
life  in  London  would  be  difficult  if  a  proportion  of  the  office  wa>
always  serving  on  juries.  Yet  a  good  deal  of  Greek  business
must  have  been  done  under  these  conditions  and  attended  to  in
double  shifts.  Operations  were  therefore  confined  to  a  modest
and  restricted  scale,  and,  down  to  the  fifth  century  at  any  rate,
partook  of  the  amateurish  and  improvised  character  of  so  many
other  departments  of  Greek  life.^

Moreover,  as  we  have  seen,  ancient  life  lacked  comforts ;  and
it  is  with  comforts,  rather  than  with  luxuries  or  with  necessaries,
that  the  great  bulk  of  a  big  modern  nation's  trade  is  concerned.
Ourstapleimportsarencithergrand  pianos  and  Old  Masters,  which,

'  The  '  bottomry '  cases  in  Demosthenes'  private  orations  lKrlon^J  of  course
to  a  somewhat  more  comple.v  stage  of  business  life  than  that  «»"*:^>  *«;';;
treating  here.  There  is  no  evidence  for  a  regular  system  of  marmc  msurancc
earlier  than  the  fourth  century.     Cf.  note  on  p.  307  above.


314  ECONOMICS  part  hi

like  King  Solomon's  'ivory,  apes  and  peacocks',  can  appeal  only
to  a  small  class,  nor  the  food  and  clothing  indispensable  to  pre-
vent starvation  and  nakedness,  but  the  long  list  of  articles  (how
long  we  shall  only  realize  when  we  have  a  general  tariff)  such  as
tea  or  watches  or  paper  or  the  linen  or  cotton  for  our  second  shirt,
which  have  become  so  indispensable  a  part  of  our  civilized  daily
life  that  we  have  long  since  forgotten  that  they  are  not  neces-
saries at  all.  To  the  Greeks  such  articles  were  neither  necessaries
nor  comforts :  if  they  had  them  at  all  they  ranked  as  rare  and
expensive  luxuries,  and  the  trader  who  brought  them  had  to
reckon  with  a  public  as  small  and  precarious  as  that  of  our
painters  and  picture-dealers.  Indeed  their  lot  was  even  harder,
for  to-day,  if  in  these  select  branches  of  trade  there  is  no  business
doing,  it  is  not  because  there  is  really  no  money,  but  because  it
is  being  spent  on  other  things,  on  charity  or  super-taxes  or  Monte
Carlo.  In  Greece  trade  would  languish  because  society,  not  as  a
pretext  but  in  very  truth,  '  simply  had  not  got  the  money.'  The
familiar  trade  competition  of  modern  times  rages  between  trader
and  trader  and  between  article  and  article :  in  antiquity  it  raged
between  two  deadlier  foes — the  desires  of  man  and  the  niggardli-
ness of  nature.  It  was  not  so  much  his  fellov/  merchant  in  his
own  or  any  other  line  of  business  that  the  Greek  trader  feared  or
hated :  the  merchant-skippers,  like  fellow  craftsmen,  met  as
brothers  in  a  guild  and  worshipped  '  Zeus  the  Saviour '  at  their
common  altar.  The  dealer  in  perfumes  did  not  rage  blindly
against  the  dealer  in  frankincense,  or  the  slave  importer  from  the
North  against  his  comrade  who  came  with  a  cargo  of  negroes  and
negresses  from  Libya.  These  are  the  fears  and  suspicions  of  our
modern  system,  where  each  man  is  for  himself  and  the  devil  take
the  hindmost.  In  the  Greek  trader's  little  world  men's  appre-
hensions were  very  different.  If  society  was  in  a  better  temper
and  the  trading  community  less  harassed  and  irritable,  it  was
not  because  the  dangers  that  threatened  their  livelihood  were
imaginary  or  far  distant,  or  less  sudden  and  decisive  in  their
working  when  they  came.  What  the  Greek  trader  dreaded  as  he
lay  awake  on  his  poop-castle  and  made  his  course  by  the  stars,
what  he  prayed  all  the  gods  of  the  confraternity  to  avert,  was
some  public  misfortune  common  to  all  his  fellow  traders — war
or  famine  or  earthquake  or  some  fit  of  asceticism  or  stroke  of


CHAP.  XI  FOREIGN    TRADK  ,,5

statesmanship  which   mi^-ht   dry  iii)  at   a   in.Miicnt's  notice  the
whole  stream  of  business.^

With  these  difficulties  in  view  let  us  watch  our  merchant  at  his
work.  He  will  set  sail  from  Athens  or  Corinth  when  the  winUr
storms  are  safely  over,  on  a  '  round  '  ship  of  his  own  or  one  placed
at  his  disposal  by  a  body  of  friends  or  subscribers,  manned  by
a  small  crew  of  some  twenty  citizens  or  resident  aliens,  who  wel-
come the  outing  for  a  change  and  for  a  chance  of  rowing  and
steering  practice— and  perhaps  of  other  things  besidc•>^.  He  will
be  loaded  with  home-grown  oil  of  v.irious  qualities  in  home-made
jars,  both  plain  and  painted,  and  with  a  store  of  cheap  and
tempting  trinkets  which  may  come  in  useful  for  savages.  His
first  destination  is  a  line  of  ports  and  landing-places  in  Italy  or
Syria.  But  he  has  no  fixed  orders  or  programme,  still  less  a
time-table,  and  he  is  quite  free  to  change  his  course  as  the  wind,
or  a  whim,  or  some  opposition  leader  among  the  crew,  or  a  piece
of  news  from  a  passing  boat,  may  chance  to  direct.  When  he
makes  a  port  he  will  sell  what  he  can  and  load  up  with  what
he  can  find,  relying  on  the  local  people  to  tell  him  how  he  is
likely  to  dispose  of  it.  So  he  will  move  about  on  the  familiar
roads  of  the  Mediterranean,  as  a  distributor  or  public  carrier,
making  his  profits  not  so  much  by  his  own  original  cargo  brought
from  home  as  by  the  wares  he  buys  and  sells,  or  the  commissions
he  executes,  among  local  dealers  by  the  way.  He  is,  in  fact,  in
our  phraseology,  skipper  and  shipper  and  merchant  all  thrown
into  one  ;  and  his  business  is  not  in  the  grain  line  or  the  oil  line
or  any  particular  line  of  business,  but  in  anything  that  hapjvns
to  come  handy  to  his  ship.  Being  entirely  his  own  master,  or  at
least  on  his  own  initiative,  with  no  firm  behind  him  or  orders  to
carry  out,  he  can  turn  his  hand  to  whatever  he  likes ;  and  if  trade
is  slack  or  the  sea-police  napping,  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  a
temporary  digression  into  other  walks  of  life.  His  stock-in-trade,
in  fact,  like  that  of  his  predecessor  the  pirate,  is  not  his  cargo  but

'  See  p.  263  above.  Traders' gods  :  /.  (J.  i.  68  Ztit  Swrr),).  i.  34,  35  ('Ara«f,
i.e.  8aifjiovei,  who  are  also  Qtol  trcor^ps).  See  a  longer  inscription  \lv.x  Iitrr.
and  the  merchants  are  Tyrians)  in  Michel,  Ktxual,  no.  998,  or


W


Vilhelm,  Beitrdge  ziir  oricchischeit  hischriJtttikuniU-,  p.  163.  1 1
citizens')  fears  :  Soph.  O.  T.  22  ;  Plato,  Lnii's  709.  'Two  bad  har\ci;:>  ur
a  massacre'  is  the  Western  buyer's  formula  for  cheap  carpets  in  Anatoh.i
to-day.  Good  for  the  Western  bargain-hunter,  but  bad  for  the  local  tr.nder
who  is  trying  to  sell  anything.


3i6  ECONOMICS  part  hi

his  ship,  which  he  plies  on  the  narrow  seas  as  a  cabman  plies  his
horse  and  carriage.  At  the  end  of  the  season,  when  the  days
begin  to  draw  in  and  the  gales  are  due,  he  loads  up  with  a  final
cargo,  the  newer  and  stranger  the  better,  and  so  brings  his  vessel
back  to  port.^

It  is  only  when  he  reaches  home  that  the  merchant  can  discover
whether  he  is  likely  to  sell  his  gathered  store  that  winter,  whether,
in  fact,  he  will  take  rank  among  the  affluent  or  the  needy,  the
honoured  or  the  despised.  It  depends  on  the  olive  crop  and  the
harvest,  on  men's  tempers,  and  on  the  state  of  politics.  His  best
chance  is  that  every  one  should  be  flush  and  cheerful  and  radically-
minded,  ready  to  be  persuaded,  regardless  of  consequences,  into
any  new  and  startling  fashion.  So  he  will  ostentatiously  unload  his
apes  and  ivories  and  negro  slaves  and  such  other  foreign  wonders
as  he  has  managed  to  bring  safe  home,  send  word  round  the  town
by  his  friends,  who  are  used  to  improving  on  the  truth,  and  do  his
best  to  persuade  an  Alcibiades  or  some  other  '  man  of  petty
ambition  '  to  set  the  tone  in  Arabian  wares.     Meanwhile  he  will


'  Old  Oligarch,  i.  20;  Thuc.  i.  143  (mercantile  marine).  The  vnvK\i]pos,
ship-owner  and  skipper  at  once,  was  commoner,  at  least  before  the  fourth
century,  than  the  (poprrj-yo?,  the  dealer  who  carried  his  goods  about  on  some
one  else's  ship.  Aristotle  is  careful  to  distinguish  them,  and  to  distinguish
both  from  the  local  agent  with  whom  they  dealt  at  the  other  end,  whose  work
is  called  Trapfio-raatf  :  Po/.  1258  b  22  ;  cf.  Brants  in  Revue  de  V instruction  pub-
lique  en  Belgiqtie^  vol.  xxv,  pp.  109  ff.  Examples  are  :  the  trader  in  the
Philoctetes  (547),  Colaeus  the  Samian  who  'found'  Tartessus,  Hdt.  iv.  152,
and  apparently  most  of  the  Aeginetans,  who  were  tramps  par  excellefice,
as  their  island  produced  nothing  for  export.  Compare  Laius  952  E.  For
a  typical  voyage  with  its  vicissitudes  read  the  argument  of  Dem.  xxxv.  Just
as  the  trader  often  turned  fighter,  so  the  fighter  might  turn  trader  when  he
saw  an  opening.  See  Thuc.  vii.  13.  2.  The  more  primitive  trade  is,  the
greater  the  hold  of  the  distributor  over  the  producer  in  dealing  with  distant
markets.  Compare  the  way  in  which  village  producers  in  England  were
controlled  by  distributors  in  the  eighteenth  century'  under  the  so-called  com-
mission system.  The  Athenian  potters,  as  P'rancotte  points  out  {Industrie,
vol.  i,  p.  308),  must  have  suflfered  likewise,  as  the  merchant-skipper  was  their
only  link  with  the  Etruscan  market ;  but  Athenian  export  trade  was  never
sufficiently  important  for  the  grievance  to  be  seriously  felt.  An  interesting
record  of  this  trade  is  preserved  in  the  merchants'  marks  on  some  of  the
Attic  vases ;  the  trader  went  into  the  workshop  and  scratched  his  orders  on
to  sample  vases.  These  marks  are  many  of  them  in  Ionian  characters,  and
show  that  previous  to  480,  during  the  most  flourishing  period  of  the  Etruscan
trade,  this  was  in  Ionian  hands  :  we  know  from  Herodotus  (i.  163)  that  the
way  was  opened  by  Phocaeans.  It  was  interrupted  by  the  Persian  war  of
480-79  and  the  Graeco-Etruscan  war  of  474,  and  later  resumed  by  Athenians.
Details  in  Haekl,  Miinchcner  Archdologische  Studien,  1909,  pp.  92  ff.  and  refs.,
to  which  should  be  added  Pettier,  Revue  Archeologique,\o\.  iii  (1904),  pp.45  ff.


CHAP.  XI  FOREIGN   TRADE  3,7

try  hard,  as  a  citizen  who  takes  his  share  in  the  mouldinR  of  pubh'c
opinion,  to  broaden  the  outlook  of  his  fellows  and  break  down
the  lingering  prejudices  of  the  ciders  against  new-fangled  habits."
Thus,  what  the  Greek  importer  had  to  fear  from  the  city  was
not  a  tariff  against  foreign  goods  for  the  benefit  of  the  home  pro-
ducers' pocket,  but  paternal  legislation  for  the  benefit  of  his  soul.
For  the  statesmen  of  the  old  city  had  not  lost  the  instinct  of  self-
preservation,  and  they  knew  that  home-grown  habits  and  virtues
are  apt  to  vanish  with  home-grown  goods.  So  the  trader  knew  to
his  cost  that  they  might  take  it  into  their  heads  to  mete  out  to
any  '  honourable  employment'  such  treatment  as  we  reserve  for
dealers  in  liquor  or  opium.  There  was  a  party  of  puritans  who
saw  in  him,  as  he  marched  gaily  up  the  quay  with  his  tanned  face
and  his  strange  merchandise,  as  pleased  as  a  child  displ.iying
a  new  toy,  only  an  emissary  of  evil  and  a  dealer  in  damnation.
An  old  Jewish  fisherman  (if  indeed  it  is  he)  has  written  a  curse
over  the  trader's  profession,  together  with  a  catalogue  of  his  wares.
Better  for  him  and  for  his  city  the  barley  loaves  and  small  fishes  of
those  who  toil  all  night  and  catch  nothing  than  '  the  merchandize
of  gold  and  silver  and  precious  stones  and  of  pearls  and  fine  linen
and  purple  and  silk,  and  all  sweet  wood  and  all  manner  of  vessels
of  ivory  and  all  manner  of  vessels  of  most  precious  wood,  and  of
brass  and  iron  and  marble,  and  cinnamon  and  odours,  and  oint-
ments and  frankincense  and  wine  and  oil  and  fine  flour  and  wheat
and  beasts  and  sheep  and  horses  and  chariots  and  slaves  and  souls
of  men  '.'-^

*  See  Theophrastus,  vii  (Jebb,  p.  61),  for  the  '  Man  of  Petty  Ambition  '  with
his  negro  attendant,  white  teeth,  Sicilian  doves,  «S:c.  'Also  he  is  very  much
the  person  to  keep  a  monkey.'  The  Greeks  thought  negroes  very  intcrcstinjj-
looking  people  and  were  amused  at  their  woolly  hair,  but  ihcy  show  no  trace
of  'colour-prejudice'.  See  the  nej^ro  heads  used  as  ornaments  on  the  vases
in  the  Austrian  Jahrcshe/te,  vol.  ix,  p.  321,  and  the  Samson-amon|{-the-
Philistines  scene  on  the  vase  in  Furtwangler  and  Kcinhold,  vol.  i,  Kig.  51,
where  a  big  red  Heracles  is  slaughtering  a  lot  of  feeble  hook-nosed  Kgyptians,
some  black,  others  white  (dressed  in  those  famous  'newly-washed'  linen
surplices),  while  a  stalwart  negro  body-guard,  marching  beautifully  in  step,
is  arriving  just  too  late.  The  sentiment  of  the  'colour-bar'  appears  to  be  of
comparatively  recent  origin.  See  the  remarks  in  Lord  Cromer's  Atuunt  and
Modern  Iiiipe7'ialisni,'<^}^.  131-43.

^  AVt'.  xviii.  12.  The  only  protective  measures  we  hear  of  in  Greece  arc
'  sumptuary  laws '  such  as  Solon's,  or  political  or  religious  boycotts  and
taboos  (cf.  Hdt.  i.  160,  v.  88)  and  the  Megarian  Decree.  Sometmics  it  is
a  commodity,  sometimes  the  nationality  of  the  trader,  which  constitutes  the
objection.     Compare  the  way  in  which  the  Turks,  nut  a  trading  people  them-

1246  X


3i8


ECONOMICS  PART  III


selves,  have  lately  used  the  weapon  of  the  boycott  against  the  Austrians  and
the  Greeks.  If  the  Brea  decree  (Hicks  and  Hill,  41 »  had  been  broken  off
a  line  higher  up  we  should  know  what  articles  might  not  be  imported  into  an
Athenian  settlement.  Customs  duties  were  strictly  for  revenue.  Compare
L(z:i's  647.  where  Plato  abolishes  customs  duties  but  af  the  same  time  restricts
imports.  This  sounds  paradoxical  in  our  larger  world ;  but  get  into  a  sufiS-
ciently  homely  frame  of  mind  and  it  is  merely  common  sense.  School  hair-
dressers come  in  without  paying  a  commission,  yet  they  are  not  allowed  to
sell  cigarettes.  And  this  is  not  because  the  masters  grow  tobacco  in  their
back  gardens.  Nor  did  the  Turks  keep  out  the  Austrian  fezes  because  they
wanted  to  make  them  themselves.  Compare  Guiraud.  Propricie  fonciere,
pp.  563-4.


CHAPTER    XII
CITY    ECONOMICS:    POPULATION

Ovbtv  t'oTiv  ovTt  vvpyot  oCrt  vnit

Sophocles,  c.  T.  56-7.

oil  yap  Tcifie  tous  ui/8pay  aXX'  oi  tivdptt  TaiiTa  KToiirrai.—  I'criclcs  in  THL'CYUIDLS.

i.  143-  S-

Neither  walled  town  nor  ship  is  anything  at  all  if  it  be  empty  and  no  men
dwell  together  therein.

P"or  these  things  are  made  for  men,  not  men  for  thcni.

The  statesman  is  concerned  both  with  people  and  with  things.
In  Committee  he  has  often  to  deal,  like  an  engineer  or  a  scientist,
with  dead  masses  of  material  detail  which  only  indirectly  affect
human  beings :  while  in  Parliament  he  has  to  reckon  with  the
living  forces  of  national  life.  The  political  economist,  gauging
and  husbanding  the  resources  of  his  countr\-,  has  the  same  two-
fold task.  He  is  concerned  not  only  with  money-power  but  with
man-power,  not  only  with  the  production  and  distribution  of
material  riches  but  with  the  human  beings  who  produce  and  con-
sume them,  and  apart  from  whom  they  are  of  no  value.  The
problem  of  population  is  now  rightly  regarded  as  one  of  the  most
serious  and  constant  preoccupations  which  every  economist  ha>
to  face.

That  problem,  which  we  now  approach,  is  not  solely  concerned,
as  seems  sometimes  to  be  assumed,  with  questions  aflecting  the
quantity  and  rate  of  increase  of  human  beings  within  the  State.
It  is  concerned  also,  if  not  principally,  with  questions  aflccting
their  quality.  That  is  an  old  and  obvious  doctrine  which  wr  arc
beginning  to  relearn  from  our  eugenists.  The  Greeks  knew  it
long  ago  :  and  in  putting  the  problem  of  population  in  its  due
place  in  our  sketch  of  the  Athenian  economy,  we  shall  therefore
find  ourselves  considering,  not  the  question  of  numbers  only,  but
a  group  of  other  far  more  important  and  difficult  questions  bearing
upon  the  morale  and  character  of  Athenian  social  life.

X  i


320


ECONOMICS  PART  III


But  we  must  begin  our  inquiry  from  the  side  of  quantity,  for  it
was  in  this,  its  most  obvious  and  menacing  aspect,  that  the
population  question  first  appealed  to  the  minds  of  Greek  states-
men. They  found  themselves  face  to  face  with  a  great  practical
difficult)',  the  natural  increase  of  mankind.

It  was  the  same  difficulty  that  stung  Malthus  and,  through
Malthus,  Darwin,  and  which  has  thus  become  familiar,  in  its
theoretical  form,  to  several  generations  of  thinking  men.  But  to
the^e  early  Greek  thinkers  it  was  no  mere  problem  in  biology  or
ethics,  but  an  ever  present  danger  to  the  very  existence  of  the
body  politic.  Nor  had  they  our  scientific  knowledge  or  analogies
to  guide  them.  They  knew  nothing  of  the  age-long  struggle  for
life  among  living  creatures,  or  of  man's  close  physical  relations
with  the  animal  kingdom  ;  they  cared  nothing  for  the  ethical
issue,  for  the  unsleeping  moral  effort  that  raises  and  keeps  man
above  the  level  of  the  beasts.  They  only  knew,  in  their  diminu-
tive city  areas,  that  men  tended  constantly  to  increase,  and  to
increase  faster  than  their  food.  It  was  more  than  a  difficulty  :  it
was  a  terror,  looming  closer  every  year.  With  their  primitive
economy  there  was  little  margin  to  draw  on.  There  was  a  natural
limit  to  the  numbers  of  a  self-contained  City  State.  Patch  after
patch  of  bare  hillside  was  drawn  into  the  area  of  cultivation,
terraced  and  ploughed  and  picked  over  that  it  might  yield  its
wretched  pittance.  But  a  time  came  when  the  pressure  of  popula-
tion upon  subsistence  became  too  great  to  be  withstood,  and  Greek
statesmen  were  forced  to  seek  an  outlet  for  their  people  elsewhere.

The  great  outburst  of  colonization  in  the  eighth  and  seventh
centuries  relieved  the  pressure.  It  never  recurred  again  in  so
acute  a  form  ;  for  the  economic  development  which  followed,
with  the  improvement  of  communications  and  the  growth  of
foreign  trade,  rendered  States  less  wholly  dependent  upon  their
agricultural  resources  and  provided  permanent  activities  for  some
of  their  landless  members.  In  the  period  which  we  are  now  con-
sidering, the  ordinary  Greek  State  was  not  wholly  isolated  or
self-sufficient.  There  is  a  certain  elasticity  in  her  provision  for
the  natural  increase  of  population  ;  and,  however  little  they  may
have  reckoned  on  it,  this  must  be  borne  in  mind  when  we  con-
sider the  attitude  of  her  statesmen  and  thinkers  with  regard  to
this  question.


CHAP.  XIT  porn. A  1  I(  ).\  ^2,

Yet  the  old  terror  still  remained— if  not  in  so  urjjcnt  and
menacing  a  form  as  in  earlier  days,  still  far  more  real  and  con-
stant than  we  can  easily  conceive  under  the  iMtcrnalional  sysicm
of  to-day,  when  we  have  grown  used  to  regarding  population  as
a  fluid  and  mobile  force.  It  remained  as  an  ever  present  cau>c
for  anxiety,  and  we  shall  never  understand  the  attitude  of  Ciiy
State  man  towards  this  and  kindred  subjects  until  wc  have
realized  the  strength  of  the  unseen  holil  that  it  retained  ui)on  his
thought  and  conduct.

It  is  not  easy  for  us  to  do  so,  for  the  Greek  writers  do  not  help
us  to  understand  what  is  in  their  minds.  Superficially  read,  thty
seem  to  overlook  the  difficulty.  They  prefer  to  speak  as  though
population  tended  of  itself  to  remain  stationary,  as  though  there
were  no  such  thing  as  the  natural  increase  of  mankind.  The
whole  organization  of  City  State  society  seems  based  upon  the
idea  that  the  numbers  of  its  membership  remain  fixed.  The  city
is  made  up  of  so  and  so  many  families  and  other  subordinate
divisions ;  and  the  membership  of  all  these  is  numerically  fixed
and  regarded  as  practically  unchanging.  Athens,  for  instance,
before  the  reorganization  of  Cleisthenes,  was  divided  into  four
tribes,  twelve  brotherhoods  and  360  clans,  and  each  of  the  last-
named  was  supposed  to  consist  of  thirty  adult  male  menilx^rs,
making  an  adult  citizen  population  of  10,800.  After  the  changes
introduced  by  Cleisthenes  the  numbers  were  put  up,  and  fifth-
century  Athenians  hesitated  between  20,000  and  30,000  as  the
*  right  figure '.  But  whatever  the  figure  may  be,  it  is  regardedas
constant,  and  as  the  basis  upon  which  the  city  organization  is
built  up.  We  can  sec  this  most  clearly  in  the  arrangements  for
founding  new  cities.  The  statesman's  business  is  to  discover  how
large  a  population  the  new  territory  will  support,  and  then  to
stock  it  up  to  that  limit.  Everyone  will  know  what  that  limit  is;
sometimes  it  is  even  openly  expressed  in  the  name  of  the  new
settlement,  as  in  the  colony  of  Tcn-Thousand-Town  on  the  coast
of  Cilicia.  We  find  the  same  idea  in  Plato  and  Aristotle,  and  it
falls  in  very  well  with  their  general  conception  of  the  city  a«
a  work  of  art,  and  with  their  reluctance  to  allow  elbow-room  for
the  development  of  new  forces.  Plato  finds  the  '  perfect  number  *
for  his  ideal  Republic  by  some  mathematical  rigmarole:  Aristotle
prefers  to  define  it  as  •  the  largest  number  which  sufliccs  for  the


322  ECONOMICS  PART  III

purposes  of  life  and  can  be  taken  in  at  a  single  view  '.  But  both
agree  in  the  necessity  both  for  its  smallness  and  its  fixity.  Few
details  bring  before  us  more  vividly  what  modern  internationalism
means  than  the  contrast  between  these  old  stationary  country
towns  and  the  typical  modern  mushroom  city,  our  Chicagos,
Johannesburgs,  and  Winnipegs.  Such  a  city,  the  Greek  would
say,  is  no  more  a  cit}'  than  the  Titanic  or  the  Maiiretania  is
a  ship.  How  can  you  call  a  thing  a  ship  when  it  is  a  furlong  in
length,  or  a  city  when  you  cannot  hear  the  town-crier  from  the
opposite  end  of  the  town  ?  ^

Yet,  if  they  cared  to  think,  the  Greeks  knew,  as  well  as  we
know,  that  their  ordinary  assumption  was  ungrounded.  Popula-
tion does  not  really  tend  of  itself  to  remain  stationary.  The
conditions  which  they  had  grown  accustomed  to  speaking  of  as
natural  and  necessary  in  civilized  states  were  not  natural  at
all.  They  were  highly  artificial,  due  to  the  operation  of  par-
ticular causes,  some  of  which,  at  any  rate,  were  within  their  own
control.

The  first  and  most  general  was  a  high  death-rate.  It  is  a
familiar  fact  that  medical  science  is  now  steadily  increasing  the
'  expectation  of  life  '  at  all  ages.  It  is  impossible  to  estimate  the
difference  between  the  Greek  death-rate  and  our  own ;  but  it
would  probably  not  be  above  the  mark  to  say  that  in  time  of
peace  it  was  as  high  as  that  of  Turkey  or  Russia  to-day,  that  is  to
say,  perhaps  twice  as  high  as  that  of  the  United  Kingdom.  Poly-
bius,  in  a  remarkable  passage,  rebukes  the  Greeks  of  his  day  for
refusing  to  bring  up  more  than  one  or  two  of  their  offspring,  and
so  leaving  no  margin  for  war  and  disease,and  allowing  their  families
to  become  extinct.  Here  he  clearly  regards  death  before  the
marriage  age  as  a  likely  chance  even  for  children  who  have  been

^  Strabo,673  {Mvpiap8poi),AY.Po/.  1326;  Pl.Tv)?/.  546;  Z^ti'j  740 (5, 040 house-
holds). On  the  accepted  Athenian  figures  seenote  on  p.  1 70  above.  A  good  passage
showing  the  popular  idea  of  fixed  numbers  is  Menander,  Epitrepoiites  548-50,
where  a  character  speaks  of  the  world  as  consisting  of  1,000  cities  containing
30,000  inhabitants  each.  For  the  underlying  assumption  that  States  populate
up  to  the  fixed  limit  of  their  food-supply  see  Hdt.  i.  66  (with  which  compare
Xen.  Pol.  Lac.  i.  I,  showing  how  Sparta's  economics  were  as  foolish  as  her
politics);  Hdt.  i.  136;  Xen.  Hell.  v.  2.  16,  and,  a  most  interesting  passage
in  many  ways  (e.g.  for  light  on  Greek  hotel  life),  Polyb.  ii.  15.  4-7.  'The
Lombard  plain  is  so  rich  that  you  do  not  have  to  bargain  for  your  food  in  the
inns.  Froiii  this  yott  may  judge  (i)  how  populous  the  place  must  be,  (ii)  what
fine  big  men  they  produce,  (iiij  how  well  they  fight.'


CHAP,  xii  rOPLLATION  323

deliberately  picked  out  for  survival.  It  is  dangerous  to  draw  con-
elusions  from  isolated  passages  or  from  general  impressions,  yet  it
is  worth  while  remarking  the  frequency  of  references  in  Greek
literature  to  what  the  Greeks  always  regarded  as  the  most  pathetic
thing  in  their  experience,  the  snatching  away  of  life  untimely  at
the  height  of  its  youth  and  beauty.  The  Greeks,  as  we  know
them,  were  a  robust  and  healthy  race;  but  we  are  apt  to  forget
the  ruthless  selection  which  helped  to  make  them  so.*

A  second  cause  which  must  not  be  overlooked  was  the  preva-
lence of  war.  War  acts,  as  has  been  said,  as  a  process  of  reversed
selection.  It  kills  off  the  best  stocks  and  promotes  the  sur\'ival
of  the  less  fit.  Greek  cities  were  constantly  at  war,  and  were  thus
constantly  requiring  to  fill  up  gaps  in  their  ranks.  True,  the
mortality  in  an  ordinary  engagement  was  not  great ;  but  from
time  to  time  circumstances  arose  when  the  issue  was  graver  than
usual,  when  the  combatants  were  embittered  and  the  fight  was  to
the  death.  Such,  for  instance,  was  one  of  the  wars  of  which
Herodotus  tells  us,  between  the  Spartans  and  the  Argivcs,  when
Cleomenes  surrounded  the  Argives  in  a  sacred  grove  and  burnt
them  to  death,  leaving  Argos  so  destitute  of  men  '  that  their
slaves  had  the  management  of  affairs,  ruling  and  administering
them  until  the  sons  of  those  who  had  been  killed  grew  up '.  City
States  were  always  exposed  to  the  chance  of  these  sudden  deple-
tions, and  it  was  part  of  city  patriotism  to  provide  reserves  against
their  occurrence.  It  was  the  Greek  citizen's  fixed  object,  in
accordance,  as  we  have  seen,  with  the  immemorial  tribal  tradition,
that,  so  far  as  in  him  lay,  no  family  should  fail  to  give  the  State-
its  quota  of  living  souls.  If  temporary  losses  occurred,  parents
'  must  keep  a  brave  heart  in  the  hope  of  other  children,  those
who  are  still  of  age  to  bear  them.  For'  (listen  to  the  ruthless
economist)  'the  newcomers  will  help  you  to  forget  the  gap  in
your  own  circle,  and  will  help  the  city  tu  fill  up  the  ranks  of  its
workers  and  its  soldiers.'^

1  Polyb.  xxxvi.  17.  7.  Compare  Myres,  Creek  Lands  ami  theCrerk  Pr^U,
p  20,  who  points  out  how  '  in  these  apparently  favoured  re,  t

a  physical  control  so  efficient  as  to  make  acchmatizatiun  ex.  >
and  slow ',  and  that  therefore  an  incoming  race,  like  the  majoiuy  ul  tic  L  i:y-
State  Greeks,  must  have  been  exposed  to  severe  selection  by  chmatic  and
other  forces.     Malaria,  which  weakens  rather  than  kills,  is  not  of  importance

^"'^  Thuc.Tta.  3;  Hdt.  vi.  82-3 ;  Thuc.  iii.  73  (a  somewhat  simibr  expedient*,


324  ECONOMICS  part  ill

So  far  we  have  been  dealing  with  causes  over  which  the  in-
dividual statesman  or  citizen  had  no  control.  We  now  pass  to
two  others,  the  operation  of  which  lay  strictly  within  their  own
powers.

The  first  of  these  we  need  not  dwell  on  at  length,  the  relief  of
surplus  of  population  by  settlements  abroad.  Wc  have  already
referred  to  colonization  as  the  means  adopted  to  relieve  the
pressure  of  population  in  the  eighth  and  seventh  centuries.  All
that  needs  to  be  added  here  is  that  this  method  of  foreign  settle-
ment always  remained,  throughout  City  State  history,  a  possible
remedy  in  case  of  need.  The  stream  of  State-aided  emigration
never  wholly  dried  up ;  there  was  never  an  age  when  no  colonies
were  being  sent  out,  from  the  first  rush  of  the  early  navigators
down  to  the  great  revival  of  the  colonizing  impulse  under  the
inspiration  of  Alexander.

We  pass  to  another  set  of  causes,  which  may  be  set  down
roughly  under  the  general  head  of  the  preventible  mortality
among  infants.  It  is  a  difficult  subject :  yet,  if  we  desire  to
understand  Greek  civilization,  we  must  not  turn  away  from  the
evidence,  but  seek  to  place  it  in  its  proper  setting  in  relation  to
the  rest  of  City  State  life.  It  has  not  been  easy  for  admirers  of
the  Greeks  to  admit  that  Greek  theory  and  practice  condoned
the  deliberate  exercise  of  checks  upon  the  growth  of  the  popula-
tion. Yet  the  evidence  shows  us  that  such  was  indeed  the  case.
When  a  child  was  born  it  remained,  by  a  custom  universal,  so  far
as  we  know,  at  least  down  to  the  fourth  century,  within  the  dis-
cretion of  the  father  whether  it  should  be  allowed  to  live.  On
the  fifth  day  after  birth,  at  earliest,  new-born  infants  were
solemnly  presented  to  the  household  and  admitted  to  its  mem-
bership. Up  to  the  time  of  this  ceremony  the  father  had  com-
plete power  of  selection,  and,  what  is  more,  it  appears  that  this
was  quite  frequently  exercised,  particularly  in  the  case  of  female
infants  ;  for  the  provision  of  a  dowry  for  his  daughters  weighed
heavily  on  a  Greek  father's  mind,  and  what  was  easier  than  to
evade  it  by  pleading  inability  at  the  outset?  When  it  was
decided  that  the  infants  were  not  to  be  'nourished'  they  would
be  packed  in  a  cradle,  or  more  often  in  a  pot,  and  exposed  in

Cf.  Hdt.  vi.  27  ;  Time.  vii.  29  (two  big  disasters  to  school  children,  and  the
consequent  loss  to  the  State).


CHAP.  xTi  rorrT.ATTox  3,1.

a  public  place,  the  poor  mother,  no  doubt,  hoping  .ipainst  hoi>c,
like  Creusa  in  the  lou,  that  some  merciful  fellow-citizen  mi^jht
yet  take  pity  on  its  wailing.  It  is  strange  and  horrible  to  think
that  any  day  on  your  walks  abroad  in  a  Greek  city  you  might
come  across  a  '  pot-exposed  'infant, as  the  Athenians  called  them,
in  a  corner  of  the  market-place  or  by  a  wrestling-ground,  at  the
entrance  of  a  temple  or  in  a  consecrated  cave,  and  that  you  might
sec  a  slave  girl  timidly  peeping  round  to  look  if  the  child  might
yet  be  saved,  or  running  back  to  bear  the  news  to  the  br(jken-
hearted  young  mother.  For  though  the  custom  was  barbarous,
and  promoted,  if  not  enforced,  by  a  barbarous  necessity,  the
Greeks  who  bowed  before  it  still  remained  civilized  men  and
women.  '  I  beg  and  beseech  you,'  writes  a  husband  in  a  Greek
private  letter  which  has  lately  returned  to  us  from  the  under-
world, 'to  take  care  of  the  little  child,  and,  as  soon  as  we  receive
wages,  I  will  send  them  to  you.  When— good  luck  to  you— you  boar
offspring,  if  it  is  a  male,  let  it  live ;  if  it  is  a  female,  expose  it,'
The  Athenian,  moreover,  had  a  traditional  abhorrence  of  violence,
and  interfered  when  he  could  on  behalf  of  the  helpless.  If  he  con-
sented to  exercise  his  immemorial  right  over  his  own  offspring,  he
did  so  with  regret,  for  the  sake  of  the  cit>'  and  his  other  children.
because  it  was  more  merciful  in  the  long  run.  We  have  no  right
to  cast  stones  either  at  him  or  his  fellows.  They  were  the  victims
of  social  forces,  like  the  thousands  of  civilized  working  mothers
who  are  forced  to  neglect  their  babies  to-day,  and  the  thousands
of  Western  parents  who,  rightly  or  wrongly,  prefer  a  small  family
to  a  large  one.  Nature  and  Society  between  them  are  hard  task-
masters. It  is  not  for  the  historian  to  judge,  his  dut\'  is  but  t->
understand  and  s}'mpathizc,^

'  OxyrhymJms  Papyri,  vol.  iv,  pp.  243  f.,  reprinted  with  f.icsimilc  in
Milligan's  useful  Selections  from  the  Greek  Papyri.  The  writer  was  at  work
away  from  home:  the  date  is  June  17,  i  B-C  Details  for  the  City  Si.iir
period  in  Daremberg  and  Saglio,  s.  v.  Kx/tositio  and  /fi/an/i<i,/iuw,byi.l'\:.
rewritten  (with  fewer  refs.)  for  his  Etudes  sociales  ct  iurtdii)ues.  I  h.ivc  il
anything,  understated  his  view  of  the  extent  to  which  the  custom  was  .ictu.illy
practised.  'Wherever  we  can  observe  Cireck  manners.*  he  says  \l:lu,iei.
pp.  188-9),  '  our  documents  enable  us  to  trace  this  murderous  custom  .  even
in  fifth-century  Alliens,  which  could  make  better  provision  than  pm-  -  >-•  ■•'--
for  an  expanding  population.  '  Aristophanes,  for  instance,  is
guide  when  he  speaks  of  it  in  a  dispassionate  tone,  quite  incid- ;:  .,_^
a  natural  thing.'  The  references  here  are  to  Fr^^gs  ll.yO.  C/..//.M  53t.  1  ^c
word  for  pot-exposure  is  iyx^T(>iiT^6i.  Mcnander's  plays  arc  full  o{  it  iscc
Four  Plays  of  Menander,  ed.  Lapps,  New  York,  1910),  e.  g.  in  one  scene  of


326  ECONOMICS  PART  III

So  far  we  have  been  dealing  simply  with  the  question  of
numbers.  We  have  seen  that  the  City  State  needed  to  keep  its
population  fixed  or  nearly  fixed,  and  have  been  examining  the
two  kinds  of  checks,  automatic  and  deliberate,  which  were  at
work  to  counteract  the  law  of  natural  increase.  But  our  dis-
cussion has  already  carried  us  into  the  second  division  of  our
subject,  that  of  quality  as  against  quantity.

For  the  checks  of  which  we  have  just  been  speaking  did
not  weed  out  life  indiscriminately ;  they  were  exercised,  however
unscientifically,  upon  a  certain  principle  of  selection.  The  Greek
statesmen  who  acquiesced  in  their  operation  were  not  merely
aiming  at  fixed  numbers  :  they  desired  a  fine  race.  '  It  is  a  very
rare  and  difficult  thing,'  says  Isocrates  in  the  course  of  a  funeral
eulogy,  '  to  have  both  a  large  family  and  a  fine  family.  Yet  this
man  achieved  it.'  The  underlying  thought  in  the  orator's  mind
is  clear.  The  more  children  that  a  man  is  able  to  bring  up  the
better  ;  but  they  must  all  be  fine  children,  worthy  of  the  State  of
which  they  are  to  be  citizens  and  of  the  Greek  race  as  a  whole.
The  Greek  parent  rejected,  except  in  a  few  favoured  instances,  all
who  were  crippled  or  deformed  or  exceptionally  delicate.  Thus
easily  did  Greek  society  acquit  itself  of  the  responsibility  towards

the  Epit7-ep07ites  there  is  a  long  dispute  on  the  question  whether  a  man  who
has  discovered  an  exposed  child,  but  given  it  to  another  man  to  bring  up,
has  the  right  to  the  keepsakes  (yt'co planara)  which  were  exposed  with  it
{(Tvv(KTi6efJieva).  In  spite  of  the  many  plays  in  which  exposed  infants  and
their  keepsakes  play  apart,  Glotz  holds  that  the  proportion  of  exposed  infants
thus  preserved  was  very  small.  They  were  expensive  to  bring  up,  and  it  was
cheaper  to  buy  grown  slaves  from  abroad ;  moreover,  if  they  did  happen  to
be  recognized  by  their  parents,  they  had  by  law  to  be  given  back :  so  they
were  precarious  property.  Tucker,  Life  in  Ancient  Athens  (an  excellent  and
simply  written  little  book  on  Athenian  life),  is  too  optimistic  on  this  point
(p.  1 1 8);  cf.  Wilamowitz,  Staat  nnd  Gesellschaft,  p.  35.  The  only  known
law  against  exposing  infants,  at  Thebes,  is  probably  of  a  later  date  and
not  humanitarian  but  directed  against  the  danger  of  depopulation.  See
Aelian,  V.  H.  ii.  7,  and  compare  Polybius,  xxxvi.  17.  5-8  (referred  to  above,
p.  323).  At  Sparta  infants  faced  a  double  ordeal ;  the  State  weeded  out  some
of  those  sav^ed  by  the  parents.  Plato  and  Aristotle,  as  one  might  expect
from  their  habitual  ruthlessness  towards  the  individual,  approve  and  recom-
mend the  practice  or  its  equivalent,  bringing  in  eugenics  to  reinforce  politics
and  economics  (Plato,  Rep.  459  f!. ;  Ar,  Pol.  1335  b  23).  They  recommend
abortion  and  exposure  in  certain  cases,  but  say  nothing  about  prevention.
Slave-infants  of  course  had  a  more  precarious  chance  than  free,  for  it  always
pays  better  to  buy  than  to  breed  slaves,  as  Cairnes  [Sim'e-powe?-,  pp.  121  ff.)
pointed  out.  Cf  Xen.  Oee.  ix.  5,  and  [Ar.]  Oec.  1344  b  17;  botli  writers
recommend  that  slaves  should  be  allowed  to  bear  children  as  a  special  reward
and  encouragement  after  good  conduct.


<^"AP.  XII  I'oi'L  l.A'linx  j,7

those  who  form  to-day  one  of  the  frmvcst  problems  of  our  social
life.  The  Greek  city  was  the  home  of  the  physically  fit.  Weak-
ness and  infirmity  found  no  easy  entry  there,  and,  if  they  came
at  all,  they  did  not  influence  the  general  tone.  Over  the  whole
of  Greek  life,  as  over  a  modern  residential  University,  there
broods  a  spirit  of  hardness,  almost  of  callousness.  Kude  health
and  physical  energy  arc  all  around  us,  whether  in  flesh  or  in
marble.  The  tenderer  emotions  seem  somehow  out  of  place —
not  mere!}-  the  hush  and  compassion  of  the  sickroom,  but  ihc
everyday  considerateness  and  sympathy  which  are  the  natural
offspring  of  constant  intercourse  between  stronger  antl  weaker.  We
grow  accustomed  to  counting  our  members,  as  every  Greek  did,
in  terms  of  fighting  men,  and  dismissing  the  rest  of  the  popula-
tion, the  old  and  the  women  and  the  children,  as  just  uselcs.s
mouths.  After  all,  thought  the  City  State  statistician,  society,  as
we  know  it,  is  very  evidently  based  on  force,  and  what  can  the
useless  multitude  do  when,  as  may  happen  any  season,  the  enemy
is  at  the  gates  ?  '  A  city,'  says  Thucydides,  '  consists  of  men,
and  not  of  walls  or  ships  with  none  to  man  them.'  Nor  of  women
either,  we  may  add,  filling  in  his  unspoken  thought,  for  what  use
are  women  in  such  a  crisis,  except  just  a  few  to  do  the  cooking?  '

Such  was  the  world  into  which  the  Greek  infant  was  born,  and
for  which  the  anxious  parent  had  to  estimate  its  fitness.  Can  wc
wonder  then  that  the  chance  of  survival  was  greater  for  a  boy
than  it  was  for  a  girl?  If  selection  operated  at  all,  on  however
small  a  scale,  it  seems  to  follow  as  an  inevitable  consequence
that  it  tipped  to  one  side  the  natural  balance  between  the  numbers
of  the  two  sexes.  In  the  turning  of  that  balance  by  some  con-
tinuous and  steady  influence,  however  slight  it  may  be,  lie,  as  wc
know  to-day,  grave  social  and  ethical  consequences.  Let  us
watch  them  in  ancient  Greece,  for  they  belong  strictly  to  our
subject.^

From  such  evidence  as  we  have,  it  seems  to  be  clear  that  in  an
ordinary  Greek  city  there  were  alwa>'s,  among  the  citizen  |)opu-

'  Is.  ix.  72;  Thuc.  vii.  77.  7,  ii.  7S.  3.  When  the  '  useless  muUitudc' of
non-combatants  was  sent  out  of  IMataea  before  the  siege,  1 10  women  were
left  behind  to  do  the  cooking  for  400  men.

2  Take  three  ordinary  Athenian  families  of  which  wc  hapjxn  to  know
something.  Cimon,  Pericles,  and  Socrates  all  had  three  sons,  and.  app.irently,
no  daughters.


328  ECONOMICS


PART  III


lation,  more  boys  than  girls,  and  practically  always,  except
immediately  after  a  disastrous  war,  more  marriageable  men  than
women.  In  other  words  there  were  always  more  than  enough
husbands  to  go  round.  Girls  were  therefore  brought  up  by  their
parents  in  the  certain  expectation  of  wedlock,  and  most  of  them
married,  or  to  speak  more  truly,  were  married,  very  early  in  life.
Fifteen,  we  gather,  was  no  exceptional  age.  Very  few  indeed  of
the  daughters  of  citizens  remained  unmarried.  Antigone  and
Electra,  whose  name  itself  means  'the  Unmated',  make  us  feel
the  tragic  loneliness,  in  the  eyes  of  such  a  true  Athenian  as
Sophocles,  of  independent  womanhood.  True  independence,
indeed,  they  never  possessed.  For  legal  purposes  a  woman
always  remained,  in  Athens  at  any  rate,  under  the  tutelage  of
a  man.  Practically  speaking,  a  Greek  woman  of  the  citizen  class
had  no  alternative  to  marriage.  Let  us  consider  the  social  results
which  follow,  in  the  peculiar  tone  and  temper  of  Greek  life,  from
this  simple  fact.^

The  women  of  the  City  State  world,  like  the  men,  knew
nothing  of  rights  but  only  of  duties,  and  they  accepted  with
willing  cheerfulness  the  duties  that  were  laid  upon  them  by  the
city.  The  first  and  greatest  of  these  was  to  '  save  the  hearth  '  by
bearing  children  for  the  city's  service.  The  men  went  out  to
work  and  to  fight,  to  create  and  defend  the  city's  material  riches  ;
the  women  stayed  at  home,  creating  and  tending  the  rarest  and
truest  source  of  wealth.  Very  jealously  they  were  guarded
within  the  peaceful  shelter  of  the  home,  ringed  round  like  precious
possessions  from  the  touch  of  the  outer  world.  But  when  we  are
tempted  to  smile  at  the  Greek  husband's  insistence  upon  the
strictest  wifely  behaviour,  we  sometimes  forget  how  young  and
careless  and  fiery  was  the  masculine  society  in  the  midst  of  which
he  lived.  Where  man  himself  has  not  yet  learnt  to  check  each
random  impulse  of  his  nature,  we  must  not  expect  him  to  grant
his  women  the  responsibilities  of  freedom.  Greek  wives  and
mothers  lived  very  quietly  in  their  little  oasis  of  domesticity.
They  have  not  spoken  to  us  across  the  ages,  for  they  were  not
skilful  of  speech  or  pen.     But  the  poets  and  artists  have  spoken

'  Cimon's  sister  Elpinice  is  an  instance  of  a  woman  of  the  citizen  class
noted  for  her  independence  of  mind.  She  did  not,  however,  remain  unmarried  :
she  merely  married  exceptionally  late.


for  them.     Let  one  who  has  absorbed  ihcir  message  sj^ak  lo  us
on  their  behalf.

'  For  a  Greek  maiden,'  says  Wilamowitz.  *  her  wedding-day
was  in  truth  the  great  festival  of  her  life.  She  received  a  husband
so  early  that  all  the  feelings  which  to-day  move  a  girl  at  her
Confirmation,  because  they  are  natural  and  justifiable,  were
united  with  those  which  accompany  wedlock.  The  time  of  free-
dom and  play  is  over.  She  brings  her  doll  and  her  ball  to
Artemis,  who  has  watched  over  her  years  of  childhood.  Hcfore
her  lies  a  time  of  seriousness,  of  work  and  self-denial.  I-'orth  .she
goes  from  her  parents'  house,  a  faithful  servant  w  ith  her  for  the
sake  of  her  inexperience  ;  but  all  other  ties  arc  snapped.  She
will  wind  no  more  wreaths  for  the  altars  before  the  old  hou.sc  :
she  will  carry  no  more  offerings  for  her  grandi)arents  lo  the
cemetery  at  new  moon  ;  .she  will  dance  no  more  with  her  play-
mates, or  carry  the  basket  of  the  goddess  in  the  high  festival
procession.  She  will  be  under  the  sway  of  other  hou.se-god.s  ;
she  will  bear  offerings  to  other  graves  :  and  to  Artemis  she  will
cry  not  in  play  but  in  bitter  pain.  She  will  .sit  upon  the  hearth-
stone, as  her  good  mother  used  to  sit,  turning  the  busy  wheel.
ordering  the  maids,  working  and  directing,  rising  up  in  the
evening,  full  of  cheerfulness  and  willing  service,  to  meet  her
returning  husband,  who  is  her  master.'  '

Students  of  Greek  life  have  often  wondered,  especially  in  lhe>c
latter  days,  why,  when  all  the  world  around  them  was  flowering
into  self-expression,  woman  alone  in  the  great  age  of  Greece
remained  shut  out  from  the  new  life.  One  answer,  at  least,  lies
here.  Athens  had  in  her  treasury  things  both  new  and  (»Id.
Much  of  her  greatness  consisted,  as  we  saw  when  wc  studied
her  citizenship,  in  the  ennobling  and  strengthening  of  .some  of  her
most  conservative  social  forces  ;  and  of  these  the  wife  and  the
mother,  the  companion  of  the  hearth  and  joint  pillar  of  the  house-
hold, partook  in  full  measure.  Athens  valued  and  honoured  her
wives  and  mothers,  as  we  can  see  by  a  hundied  tokens,  and  .she
valued  and  honoured  in  them  the  same  qualities  of  service  as  in
her  men  :  self-mastery,  self-forget  fulness,  courage,  and  gentleness.
And,  better  than  patronage,  we  too  can  pa>-  them  honour.  When,
fresh  from  the  jarring  social  conflicts  of  to-day,  we  turn  lo  the
'  Wilamowitz,  Hippolytus  (transl.),  p]).  lo-ii.     Cf.  .\r.  Lys.  641  ff.


33°


ECONOMICS  PART  III


Greek  wife  and  mother  as  she  is  portrayed  for  us,  amid  the  scenes
of  her  daily  Hfe,  upon  the  gravestones  and  the  vases,  we  moderns
feel  instinctively  that,  though  those  grave  and  gracious  figures
may  have  been  lacking  in  knowledge  and  freedom  and  some
of  the  essentials  of  human  dignity,  yet  they  were  fine  and  noble
spirits,  not  unworthy  of  their  city  and  race.

Yet,  if  we  are  honest  with  ourselves  and  with  the  evidence,  we
feel  that  there  is  more  to  be  said.     The  men  of  Athens  did  their
w^ork,  and,  so  long  as  the  city  prospered,  they  were  happy  and
satisfied.    The  women  of  Athens  served  too  ;  but  their  work  did
not  leave  them  wholly  happy ;  for  they  felt,  at  first  vaguely  and
obscurely  and  then  with  gathering  clearness,  that  in  their  service
was  not  perfect  freedom.     It  did  not  satisfy  all  the  cravings  and
instincts  of  their  nature.     So  that,  while,  as  we  have  seen,  the
years  of  Athens's  greatness  were  for  men  one  of  the  happiest
periods  in  the  whole  history  of  the  world,  the  women  who  worked
beside  them  were  restless,  uneasy,  and  perplexed.     Something
was  wrong ;  but  neither  they  nor  the  men  could  lay  their  finger
on  the  evil.     '  At  every  point  where  we  can  test  it,'  writes  one
of  our  keenest-witted  students  of  Greek  life,  '  opinion  in  Greece
was  in  flux  as   to  the  rightful  position  of  woman   in   civilized
society.'     We  do  not   need   Aristophanes,   with    his   up-to-date
pleasantries,  to  underline  the  truth  of  this  judgement  for  fifth-
century  Athens.     It  is  written  clear  for  all  to  see  across  the  whole
life-work  of  Euripides,  from  the  Hippolytus  and  the  Heracleidae  to
the  rebellious  defiance  of  the  Bacchae.     The  women  felt  that  they
too  w-ere  free  Greek  souls ;  they  too  served  the  city  and  gave  her
the  men  she  needed  ;  they  too,  at  need,  laid  down  their  lives  on
her  behalf.      They  were  tired  of  hearing  the  old  traditional  story
of  woman's  weakness  and  subordination.     They  chafed  at  being
shut  out,  as  inferior  beings,  from  the  better  part  of  city  life,  not
only  from  its  active  public  work,  but  from  its  joys  and  refine-
ments, its  music  and  poetry  and  discussions.     In  the  last  quarter
of  the  fifth  century  Athens  witnessed  the  rise  of  a  movement  for
the  emancipation  of  woman  which,  because  it  won  the  heart
of  that  arch-Conservative  Plato,  has  left  an  undying  mark  upon
the  literature  of  the  world.     Yet  it  is  Euripides  rather  than  Plato
who  is  at  once  the  truest  poet  and  most  faithful  thinker  for  their
cause.    Listen  to  the  war-cry  of  his  suffering  women,  which  falls


CHAP.  XII  porn.ATiox  ,^,

upon  modern  cars,  trained  by  now  to  such  discords,  with  a  ^liangc
thrill  of  reminiscence.

Back  streams  the  wave  on  the  ever-running  river  :
Life,  life  is  changed  and  the  laws  of  it  c'crlrod.

Man  shall  be  the  slave,  the  affrighted,  the  low-Iivcr!
Man  hath  forgotten  God.

And  woman,  yea,  woman,  shall  be  terrible  in  .story:

The  tales,  too,  me.seemcth.  .shall  be  other  than  of  yore.

For  a  fear  there  is  that  cometh  out  of  woman  and  a  glory,
And  the  hard  hating  voices  shall  cncompa.ss  her  no  more  !

The  old  bards  shall  cease  and  their  memory  that  lingers
Of  frail  brides  and  faithless,  shall  be  shrivelled  as  with
fire.
For    they  loved    us    not,  nor    knew    us,   and    our   lips  were
dumb,  our  fingers

Could  wake  not  the  .secret  of  the  l)-re.
Else,  else,  O  God  the  singer,  I  had  sung  amid  the  rages

A  long  tale  of  man  and  his  deeds  for  good  and  ill.
But  the  old  world  knoweth — 'tis  the  speech  of  all  his  ages —
Man's  wrong  and  ours:    he  knoweth  and  is  still.*

We  have  been  carried  on  for  the  moment  from  the  .sixth-
century  world  to  the  latter  days  of  the  fifth,  from  the  normal
City  State  to  the  society  of  imperial  Athens.  But  the  digression
was  necessary  for  our  subject,  for  the  unrest  of  which  wc  have
been  speaking  was  the  natural  result  of  causes  which  were  already
silently  at  work  in  the  society  of  a  previous  generation.

What  wTre  those  causes  ?  What  makes  these  fifth-century
women  so  bitter?  They  were  not  sweated  or  over-driven  or
stung  with  the  lash  of  industrialism.    Who,  then,  are  their  task-

^  Medea  410 ff.,  transl.  Murray.     Myrcs,  Anlhropoloi^v  ami  the  Clasiui,
p.  154;  see  also  Bruns,  Fraucnciiuuiiipation  in  WM<v/(Kicl,  i<;ooi,  reprimcd
in  his  Redcn  itttd  Vortragc,  and  \\'ilaiiio\vitz,  Hcriius,  .\.\.\v.  548.     All  agree
in  showing  how  much  hard,  inductive,  rifth-century  thinking  lies  behind  An«o-
phanes'  burlesques  and  Plato's  essays  in  feniinis!!-!.     On  the  argument  th.il  a
woman  cannot  die  for  her  countr)'  see  Mcdca  250,  which  should  h.we  given  it
its  cotip  de grace.     Women  were  admitted  to  the  theatre,  where  they  sat,  a»
Browning  says,  '  Sorted,  the  good  with  good,  the  gay  with  g.iy.'  but  their
husbands  and  guardians  did  not  necessarily  take  them.     S<  •
Etcl.  22  (part  of  which,  however.  Rutherford  brackets  :  the  d  .
there  mentioned  is  unknown)  and  Balaustioii's  Adventiiris,  uiii^..  .u-  .i-.  u..^
in  their  atmosphere  as  they  are  correct  in  their  detail.^.     Women  also  tcxik
part,  of  course,  in  public  ceremonies:  witness  the  Parthenon  I'"  ■       •  >'>  ''  «•
general  question  see  also  Principal  Donaldson's  Woman:  /
influence  in  Ancient  Greece  and  Rome  and  among  the  early  (  /
with  bibliography.


^^2  ECONOMICS  PART  III

masters  ?  What  are  the '  hard  hating  voices  '  of  which  they  speak  ?
Turn  back  to  the  Funeral  Speech.  Pericles  shall  give  the  answer,
for  he  has  put  the  spirit  against  which  they  were  fighting  in  its
classic  form.  '  If  I  must  also  speak  a  word  to  those  who  are  now
in  widowhood  on  the  powers  and  duties  of  women,  I  will  cast  all
my  advice  into  one  brief  sentence.  Great  will  be  your  glory
if  you  do  not  lower  the  nature  which  is  within  you — hers  most  of
all  whose  praise  or  blame  is  least  bruited  on  the  lips  of  men.'
The  words  themselves  are  stinging  enough  to  women  of  soul  and
spirit ;  but  if  we  would  feel  their  full  force  we  must  bear  in  mind
the  speaker's  record.  The  man  who  preached  this  doctrine  to
the  assembled  people  of  Athens  was  at  that  very  time  the  avowed
lover  of  Aspasia  ;  and  Aspasia  was  one  of  the  cleverest  and  best-
known  figures  in  Athenian  society,  the  valued  confidante,  not
only  of  statesmen,  but  of  philosophers.  How  came  these  words,
then,  upon  her  lover's  lips  ?  Whence  this  strange  discrepancy
between  his  preaching  and  his  practice  ?  That  is  the  question
which  we  must  now  make  an  attempt  to  unravel.'

The  explanation  is  that  in  Periclean  Athens  there  were  two
different  kinds  of  free  women.  On  the  one  hand  there  were  the
women  to  whom  Pericles  was  speaking,  the  wives  and  daughters  of
the  citizens  ;  on  the  other  the  alien-born  women,  like  Aspasia  of
Miletus,  to  whom  a  wholly  different  standard  was  applied.  The
division  was  being  formed  all  through  the  period  with  which  we
are  dealing :  its  origin  is  to  be  found  in  the  immigration  of
unattached  foreigners  which  was  the  inevitable  result  of  the
improvement  of  communications  and  the  increase  of  trade.  At
first  Athens  welcomed  them  with  open  arms,  both  men  and
women,  for  she  valued  them  as  fighters  and  as  workers.  To  the
men,  as  we  have  seen,  many  privileges  were  granted  ;  and  it  was
a  natural  policy  to  give  the  women  too  full  entry  into  city  life.
Coming  as  many  of  them  did  from  the  freer  life  of  Ionia,  they
made  a  mark  in  Athenian  society,  and  some  of  the  advanced
spirits  of  the  day  exercised  their  freedom  of  choice  by  taking
Ionian  wives.  *  Among  the  noble  families  in  particular,'  says
Meyer,  '  such  marriages  were  quite  common.     Many  of  the  most

'  Thuc.  ii.  45.  2.  On  Aspasia  and  her  place  in  society  as  an  intellectual
woman  see  ^Ieyer,  Forschungen^  vol.  ii,  pp.  55-56  (as  against  Wilamowitz,
A.  A.,  vol.  ii,  p.  99j,  and  Xen.  Mevi.  ii.  6.  36.


CUAV.  XTi  POPULATION  333

notable  Athenian  statesmen,  Cleisthenes  and  Themistocles,
Cimon  and  his  sons  by  his  first  marriage,'  were  the  children
of  Outlander  mothers.  Athens  was  striding  forward  fast  to
a  conception  of  citizenship  and  society  in  which  all  the  old
traditional  prejudices  of  City  State  life  would  be  broken  down.
She  had  admitted  alien  men  to  the  parish  and  the  city  ;  she  was
now  admitting  alien  women  even  into  the  intimate  circle  of  the
hearth.^

But  here  the  mass  of  the  people  cried  halt  ;  for  they  were  not
yet  ready  for  this  liberalizing  intrusion  upon  the  old  sanctities  of
tribal  life.  To  take  a  wife  outside  the  city  seemed  an  act  of
impiety,  a  dangerous  breach  of  the  old  unwritten  laws.  In  451
this  vague  belief  found  public  expression.  A  law  was  passed
that  in  the  case  of  children  born  subsequently  to  that  date  only
those  of  Athenian  parentage  on  both  sides  should  be  eligible  for
citizenship  ;  and  seven  years  later,  on  the  occasion  of  a  large  gift
of  corn  by  a  foreign  potentate  to  the  Athenian  people,  the  rule
was  made  retrospective  and  many  names  were  struck  off  the
citizen  lists.  The  effects  of  this  measure  upon  those  with  whom
it  professed  to  deal  were  not  very  serious.  The  offspring  of
a  mixed  marriage  was  still  a  member  of  the  parish,  he  still
served  as  an  Outlander  in  the  army  and  the  navy,  and  moved
freely  in  Athenian  society.  But  its  effects  on  the  Outlander
woman  were  disastrous  and  irremediable.  She  was  separated
for  good  from  her  Athenian  sisters,  driven  out  from  her  honoured
place  by  the  hearth,  and  degraded  to  what  was,  strictly  speaking,
the  position  of  a  concubine.  Thus  did  the  liberal-minded  demo-
cracy of  Athens,  by  one  of  those  odd  freaks  of  blindness  which
afflict  great  peoples,  check  the  progress  of  a  powerful  movement
towards  the  consolidation  of  city  life  upon  a  broader  and  better
basis.  It  was  the  same  democracy  which,  in  a  similar  fit  of
puritanism,  and  in  defence  of  the  same  sanctities,  sent  Socrates
to  his  death.2

'  Meyer,  vol.  iv,  §  392.  Cf.  Wilamowitz,  S/aa^  unci  Gesellschaft,  p.  40,  on
how  slow  the  Greeks  were  to  allow  cotwbiwn  to  follow  coiiitnerciuvi.

"^  At/i.  Pol.  xxvi.  3  ;  Plut.  Per.  37.  For  a  full  and  careful  treatment  of  this
whole  subject  see  O.  Mliller,  Untersiicliungc7i  zur  Geschichte  des  attischen
Biirger-  und Eherechts,  in  Fleckeisen's/a/??^;>V.7/^r,  Supplementband  25,  1899;
he  lays  great  stress  on  the  religious  feeling  excited  by  these  questions,  which
can  be  traced  '  like  a  red  thread  '  in  all  the  changes  of  Athenian  law  on  the


334  ECONOMICS  part  iii

Here,  in  this  great  barrier  between  two  sections  of  womankind,
strengthened  and  perpetuated  by  the  decree  of  451,  we  have
reached  one  great  cause  of  the  unrest  of  which  we  have  been
speaking.  Each  of  these  groups  needed  the  other  for  strength
and  encouragement  and  companionship,  for  the  support  that
comes  from  the  mixing  of  experiences  and  the  alliance  of  diverse
natures.  Their  divorce  by  a  rigid  custom,  made,  or  at  least
upheld,  by  men,  brought  unhappiness  upon  both  parties,  for  it
took  away  their  self-respect.

How  was  it  possible  for  the  democracy  to  maintain  such
a  barrier  ?  What  kept  the  two  classes  apart,  not  only  in  law  but
in  fact  ?  Here  we  come  back  once  more  to  the  point  from  which
we  set  out.  One  answer  to  this  question,  at  any  rate,  is  economic.
As  there  were  less  native-born  women  than  men,  hardly  any
of  them  needed  to  earn  an  independent  livelihood.  Most  of  the
few  who  did  so  were  widows.  The  native-born  women  did  not
need  economic  independence,  and  the  struggle  for  economic
independence,  as  we  know,  is  often  the  spur  to  further  claims.  It
was  because  the  Athenian  wife  and  mother  was  economically
secure  that  she  remained  isolated  and  out  of  touch  with  her
alien-born  sisters.  In  the  masculine  sphere  citizens  and  strangers,
with  their  servants  and  apprentices,  formed  a  friendly  and  homo-
subject  (p.  742) :  it  was  religious  sentiment,  not  mere  political  exclusiveness
(as  is  often  said)  which  was  responsible  for  the  limitation  of  citizen  rights  in
451.  The  law  led  to  the  recognition  of  a  'second  legally  recognized  union
between  man  and  woman  ',  called  by  IMiiller  (p.  710)  '  left-handed  marriage '.
The  'left-handed'  wife  stood  midway  in  social  estimation  between  the -yW;
or  mother  of  citizens  and  the  eVaipa ;  but  old  Athenian  law  only  recognized
two  kinds  of  woman  with  whom  a  man  could  live,  wives  and  concubines
(rrnWuKai),  SO  the  left-handed  wife  went  by  the  clumsy  name  of '  concubine
for  bearing  free  children  '  {TTaWaKij  tjv  av  in  eXfid^pots  tt(ii(t\p  exn)^  PP-  729-30 ;
of.  Dem.  lix.  118.  Aspasia,  whom  Pericles  married  after  451,  was  a  'left-
handed  wife  '  of  this  sort  (Miiller,  pp.  814,  823).  The  law  was  relaxed  in  411
by  the  oligarchical  party,  which  was  favourable  to  mixed  marriages.  This
explains  the  reference  in  Fiogs  418  (date  405)  to  the  seven-year-old  citizen
who  had  not  yet  'grown  a  brotherhood'.  Contrast  with  this  Birds  1649  ff.
(date  414).  The  law  was  re-enacted  in  403  by  the  same  popular  leaders  who
condemned  Socrates.  On  the  sanctities  from  which  alien  women  were  to
be  excluded  see  Dem.  lix.  -j-i,-  After  the  Sicilian  Expedition,  when  the  citizen
body  was  so  much  reduced  that  marriageable  girls  could  not  find  husbands,
a  law  was  actually  passed  allowing  double  marriages.  Socrates  took  a  second
wife  in  this  way,  probably  much  to  the  irritation  of  Xanthippe.  She  was  a
destitute  widow  and  the  daughter  of  a  full  citizen,  Myrto,  grand-daughter  of
Aristeides  (Miiller,  p.  795  ;  cf.  Diog.  Laert.  ii.  26  and  Athen.  xiii.  2,  p.  555).
Euripides  is  said  to  have  done  the  same.    See  also  Donaldson,  p.  213.


CHAP.  XII  POPULATION  335

geneous  social  whole.  With  the  women  this  was  not  so  ;  their
lives  and  activities  lay  apart,  and  so  they  developed  on  different
lines.  As  a  result  they  tended  to  become  crystallized  into  two
separate  types — the  household  matron  under  the  tutelage  of
a  husband  or  some  other  male  protector,  and  the  independent
professional  woman,  who  had  indeed  her  '  guardian  '  as  Athenian
law  demanded,  but  kept  him  for  occasional  use,  as  we  keep  our
solicitors.^

From  a  set  of  fourth-century  Athenian  inscriptions  dedicated
by  freedmen  and  freedwomen  we  know  some  of  the  occupations
which  these  professional  women  followed.  No  less  than  thirty-
three  of  the  freedwomen  are  described  as  '  wool-workers  ',  a  term
which  includes  carding,  spinning,  and  weaving,  all  done  in  their
own  houses  ;  a  number  of  others  are  classed  as  market-women  or
retailers,  and  there  is  even  a  female  cobbler.  But  the  chief  and
most  conspicuous  profession  open  to  an  alien-born  woman  in
a  Greek  city  was  to  be  what  was  known  as  a  '  companion '.  It
was  '  companions ',  not  marriageable  girls,  whom  the  young
Athenian  encountered  in  mixed  gatherings,  in  attendance,  per-
haps, on  some  of  the  most  refined  and  distinguished  men  of  the
day ;  for  it  was  by  contributing"  to  the  success  of  these  parties,
from  which  the  native-born  woman  was  rigidly  excluded,  that
they  earned  their  livelihood.  '  We  have  companions  for  the  sake
of  pleasure,'   says  Demosthenes,  making  a  clear  distinction  in

^  For  metic  women's  guardians  see  Frogs  569-70,  and  Wilamowitz,
Hermes,  vol.  xxii,  p.  223.  Widows  :  Ar.  Thesm.  446  ;  also  Iliad  xii.  433.
On  native-born  women  as  earners  see  Dem.  Ivii.  31,  35,  where  one  can  see
how  they  are  marked  personages,  and  also  Xen.  Mem.  ii.  7,  especially  §  10
(quoted  on  p.  261  above)  where  an  Athenian  citizen  is  reduced  to  destitution
because  he  has  to  provide  for  a  number  of  female  relations,  and  it  has
never  occurred  to  him  to  set  them  to  any  useful  work,  such  as  slave-women
do  to  pay  for  their  keep.  Compare  the  same  strange  idea  of  propriety  among
the  American  planters.  '  It  filled  the  planter  with  unfeigned  horror  to  hear
of  the  employment  of  women  in  the  Northern  states  for  useful  purposes.
Thomas  Dabney  was  reduced  to  great  poverty  in  his  old  age  by  his  determina-
tion to  pay  debts  incurred  through  the  bad  faith  of  another.  The  touching
picture  of  the  heroic  old  man  and  his  daughters  giving  up  such  ease  of  life  as
the  war  had  left  them  shows  that  some  illusions  had  survived.  His  chivalrous
nature  (says  his  daughter)  had  always  revolted  from  the  sight  of  a  woman
doing  hard  work,  and  he  could  not  have  survived  the  knowledge  that  his
daughters  stood  at  the  wash-tub.  So  he  did  the  washing  himself,  beginning
in  his  seventieth  year.  So  artfully  is  the  human  mind  composed  that  he  who
had  complacently  employed  women  all  his  life  to  hoe  his  cotton  without  pay
could  not  stand  the  demolition  of  the  lady'  (Putnam,  Tlie  Lady,  p.  321).

Y  3


336  FXOXOMICS  tart  iii

which  there  is  no  hint  of  overlapping,  '  and  wives  to  bear  us
lawful  offspring  and  be  faithful  guardians  of  our  houses.'  If
we  are  to  sit  in  judgement  upon  the  profession  which  earned
its  living  by  giving  '  pleasure ',  we  have  need  to  exercise  both  our
imagination  and  our  charity.  Its  members  were  the  joy-makers
and  entertainers  of  their  little  world,  and  the  qualities  that  it
demanded  were  quite  as  much  social  as  physical.  Their  repartees
and  witty  sallies,  sadly  tawdry  as  most  of  them  seem  when  written
out  on  the  cold  page,  were  remembered  and  treasured  up  like
those  of  the  mediaeval  jesters ;  and  though  Athens  had  no
Shakespeare  to  help  us  to  understand  them  they  must  often  have
felt  as  lonely  and  as  sad  at  heart  as  the  poor  Fool.  If  they  had
been  allowed  the  support  of  their  secluded  sisters  who  could  only
watch  them  wistfull}-  from  their  windows,  as  they  mingled  with
the  men  in  the  streets  and  in  the  market-place,  they  might  have
set  the  intercourse  of  the  sexes,  for  the  first  time  in  histor)%
on  an  intelligent  basis,  and  saved  the  memory  of  Athens  from
a  reproach  of  which  it  is  not  possible  to  clear  her.^

^  Dem.  lix.  122.  Tod,  in  British  Sc/iool  Avniial,  vol.  viii,  pp.  197  ff.  (pro-
fessional women).  As  Mahaffy  {Social  Life  in  Greece,  p.  284)  points  out,
Sappho  still  uses  the  feminine  word  'companion'  without  any  specialized  sense
(fr.  10,  Bergk)  :  it  suffered  much  the  same  degeneration  as  the  English  '  mis-
tress '.  For  a  typical  companion's  career  see  Hdt.  ii.  135  ;  for  their  character  see
Xen.>]/^;;/.  iii.ii  and  the  letter  written  by  one  of  them  to  Demetrius  Poliorcetes,
printed  with  a  German  translation  by  \\'ilamowitz  in  Hcr/iies,  vol.  xliv,  p.  468  :
it  bears  a  third-century  not  a  fifth-century  colouring,  but  it  is  the  nearest  we
can  get.  For  types  of  their  wit,  Athenaeus,  xiii.  Of  course,  as  in  all  pro-
fessions, there  were  good  and  bad,  respected  and  degraded  ;  but  we  must  be
carefuF,  as  the  Greeks  were,  not  to  tar  them  all  with  the  same  brush,  or  to
confuse  fifth-century  Athens  with  Antioch  and  Alexandria,  or  even  with  a  far
less  typically  Greek  centre,  Corinth.  Athens,  for  instance,  had  no  female
temple-slaves,  and  it  should  be  added  that  this  whole  question  was  not  then
complicated  by  the  prevalence  of  venereal  disease.  The  geishas  of  Japan
form  a  type  analogous  to  the  'companions'  of  ancient  Greece,  and  should
help  us  to  do  them  justice.  It  is  certainly  wrong  to  regard  the  fifth-century
Greeks  (as  modern  'Pagans'  tend  to  do)  as  sensualists.  They  were  not
pleasure-seekers  any  more  than  they  were  ascetics.  They  did  not  '  amuse
themselves '  any  more  than  they  did  or  abstained  from  things  '  conscien-
tiously '.  These  are  constrained  and  self-conscious  attitudes.  The  older  Greeks
were  not  self-conscious  about  these  questions  :  one  has  only  to  open  one's
Herodotus  to  feel  quite  certain  on  this  point.  But  it  is  hard  to  state  the
positive  qualities  which  corresponded  to  these  negatives.  The  Greeks  were
somehow  far  more  nlii'c  than  we.  They  possessed  the  gift  of  putting  them-
selves, the  whole  of  themselves,  into  everything  that  they  did,  or  rather  into
everything  that  Nature,  and  social  customs  which  tried  to  harmonize  Nature,
gave  them  to  do.  So,  though  they  '  let  themselves  go '  at  times,  and  found
a  place  in  their  institutions  for  Dionysiac  routs,  yet  Dionysus  always  remained,


CHAP.  XII  POPULATION  337

But  it  is  time  to  return  once  more  to  the  main  thread  of  our
economic  argument.  There  was  another  and  more  indirect
agency  which  tended  to  check  the  growth  of  population — the
comparative  rarity  of  early  marriages  among  men.  The  Greek
citizen  did  not  usually  marry  till  he  was  close  on  thirty,
or  even  beyond  it.  This  practice  was  encouraged  by  public
opinion  and  by  the  thinkers  who  directed  it,  and  was  the  direct
effect  of  the  segregation  of  the  sexes  in  early  manhood  and  of  the
exclusion  of  women  from  the  main  interests  of  a  young  Greek's
life.  The  Greek  city,  like  an  English  college,  was,  for  most
purposes,  a  men's  club  ;  and  it  was  easy  and  natural  for  a  Greek
to  pass  the  threshold  of  middle  age  before  he  became  conscious
of  the  need  for  any  permanent  attachment  beyond  the  companion-
ship of  club-life.  His  youthful  ideals  and  achievements  were  all
shared  with  male  companions^  and  it  was  naturally  upon  them
that  the  romantic  devotion  of  his  budding  nature  was  expended.
Achilles  and  Patroclus,  Orestes  and  Pylades,  Harmodius  and
Aristogeiton,  were  the  types  which  he  admired  and  which  parents
and  statesmen  and  poets  encouraged  and  urged  him  to  admire.
One  of  the  greatest  legacies  which  Greece  has  left  us  is  its  high
conception  of  friendship — of  close  fellowship  for  noble  ends.
Such  attachments  were  cemented  on  the  playground  and  on
military  service,  and  often  sealed  by  death  on  the  field  of  battle.
They  were  as  manly  and  fortifying  as  the  modern  friendships
which,  knit  at  our  boarding-schools  and  Universities,  continue
through  the  vicissitudes  of  divergent  careers,  and  sometimes  make
history.  If  we  are  startled  to  find  that  it  was  such  friendship
that  their  greatest  philosopher  selected  round  which  to  weave  his

as  we  see  him  in  the  vase-paintings,  in  spite  of  his  baser  companions, '  a  model
of  noble  manners.'  So  did  the  Maenads.  Read  Bacchae  677  ff.,  keeping  the
art  parallels  before  your  mind's  eye:  e.g.  the  two  lovely  Maenads  in
Furtwangler  and  Reinhold's  vase-reproductions,  vol.  i,  fig.  44.  What
Euripides  describes  is  not  a  wild  debauch  but  an  early  morning  ritual.  See
Nietzsche's  profoundly  suggestive  remarks  on  this  subject  {Works,  vol.  xvii,
pp.  297-9),  and  compare  Murray's  Euripides,  pp.  lix  ff.  In  the  city,  life  goes
andante,  in  the  measured  step  of  the  Parthenon  frieze  ;  out  in  the  wilds  it  goes
prestissimo;  but  in  both  cases  there  is  an  'early  morning  feeling'  which  is
worlds  away  both  from  puritanism  and  its  opposite.  One  seems  to  stand  on
a  high  narrow  edge  above  two  stuffy  valleys — no  doubt  a  dangerous  position,
but  '  life  itself  is  a  dangerous  thing',  and  a  society,  like  a  man,  must  stand  by
its  own  risks.  Aristotle,  writing  when  this  feeling  had  wellnigh  vanished
from  Greek  life,  crystallizes  it  in  his  uninspiring  doctrine  of  '  Virtue  as
a  Mean '.


338  ECONOMICS  part  hi

discussion  of  love  and  beauty  and  immortality,  we  must  reflect
that  its  exaltation  was  due  to  social  conditions  where  masculine
sentiments  and  interests  held  a  natural  predominance.

If  we  would  know  something  of  the  atmosphere  in  which  this
comradeship  grew  up,  in  which  the  romantic  young  Greek  lived
and  moved  and  had  his  being,  let  us  turn  for  a  moment,  in  con-
clusion, to  the  City  State  in  time  of  war  ;  for,  unless  we  have
seen  the  city  so,  we  shall  know  but  half  of  what  was  in  her  mind.
*  If  one  studies  carefully,'  says  one  of  our  most  thoughtful
modern  writers,  '  the  expression  of  the  Greek  statues  and  the
lesson  of  the  Greek  literature,  one  sees  clearly  that  the  ideal
of  Greek  life  was  a  very  continent  one  :  the  trained  male,  the
athlete,  the  man  temperate  and  restrained,  even  chaste,  for  the
sake  of  bettering  his  powers.  It  was  round  this  conception  that
the  Greeks  kindled  their  finer  emotions.'  What  is  it  for  which
these  athletes  of  the  statues  are  in  training  ?  Not  for  crowns  or
prizes  or  notoriety,  but  in  order  that  they  may  the  better  serve
the  city  and  their  friends,  that  they  may  go  into  battle  ready  and
fit  to  lay  down  life  for  their  sake.^

^  The  '  Holy  Band  '  of  Thebes  consisted  entirely  of  close  comrades  :  and
when  the  dead  were  collected  after  Chaeronea  not  a  man  among  them,  it  is
said,  was  missing.  Yet  opinion  at  Thebes,  we  are  told,  was  lax  about  the
spirit  of  such  connexions.  See  Xen.  Pol.  Lac.  ii.  12-14  and  Plato,  Symp.  182,
Rep.  468  :  also  the  Charuiidcs  and  the  Lysis.  But  all  these  loci  classici
about  Greek  friendship  date  from  the  fourth  century,  and  are  therefore  too
self-conscious  for  our  period.  We  must  remember  this  in  any  judgement  we
may  be  inclined  to  pass  on  the  Greek  attitude  towards  the  abuse  of  the
physical  element  in  such  friendship — the  'black  horse'  of  Plato's  Phaedjiis.
The  modern  feeling  that  regards  such  connexions  as  peculiarly  repugnant  and
unnatural  was,  from  the  conditions  of  their  society,  entirely  absent  from  the
Greek  mind.  No  doubt  this  was  partly  due  to  the  fact  that  the  Greeks  could
not  contrast  with  them,  as  we  can,  a  wholly  different  ideal  of  passion,  round  which
their  best  sentiments  could  concentrate.  But  in  the  fifth  century,  at  any  rate,
they  did  not  think  much  about  themselves:  their  emotions  were  too  fresh  and
quick,  were  too  entirely  without  shame  and  embarrassment,  for  it  to  be  easy
for  them  to  separate  critically  the  good  from  the  bad.  The  subject  is  a  diffi-
cult one,  and  in  such  cases  parallels  are  often  the  most  illuminating  guide.
The  reader  will  find  in  Hahn's  Albancsische  Studien  (Vienna,  1853),  p.  166,
taken  down  from  the  lips  of  a  young  Gheg  Albanian,  who  knew  nothing  of
ancient  Greece,  an  account  of  a  similar  emotional  atmosphere  among  the
Ghegs  of  Northern  Albania.  The  details  and  even  the  phrases  correspond
closely,  in  some  cases  exactly,  to  those  of  Plato  and  Xenophon,  and  the
feelings  described  are  declared,  in  scornful  contrast  to  those  of  the  Turks
and  the  .Southern  Albanians,  to  be  'as  pure  as  sunlight'.  See  also  pp.  147-50
for  two  interesting  Gheg  love-poems.  The  Ghegs,  like  the  Greeks  of  the
Pindaric  circle,  '  have  no  love-poetry  about  woman.'  See  also  Wilamowitz,
Orestie,  pp.  139  ff. ;  Staat  und  Gesellsc/iafi,  p.  91  ;  and  Edward  Carpenter,
7'he  Inlerniediate  Sex,  p.  68  (quoted  above).


CHAP.  XII  POPULATION


339


The  city,  of  course,  was  not  always  at  war.  But  she  was
ahvays  in  training  for  it.  For  war  had  by  now  become  not
merely,  as  of  old,  a  means  of  production  by  robbery,  but  a
natural  form  of  public  service  to  which  all  citizens  were  called.
But  it  was  more  even  than  that.  It  was  a  traditional  and  all-
absorbing  form  of  sport.  It  is  hard  to  realize  in  these  days,
when  fighting  taxes  the  nerves  and  tires  the  limbs  but  has  lost
most  of  its  thrills  and  all  its  animal  excitement,  what  a  fine  sport
it  was  in  the  days  when  men  regarded  it  as  the  great  and  only
game.  A  Greek  city,  as  we  have  said,  was  very  like  a  big  school
or  college,  and  warfare  and  the  training  and  competitions  con-
nected wath  warfare,  were  its  chief  forms  of  physical  exercise.  If
a  young  man  took  a  pride  in  his  body  and  kept  it  hard  and  fit,
if  he  flung  spears  in  the  stadium  and  raced  round  naked  or  in  full
armour,  if  he  went  off  on  long  marches  over  rough  country  in
the  sun  and  bivouacked  at  night  on  the  open  hillside,  or  lay  on
a  bed  of  rushes,  watching  the  moon  rise  over  the  sea,  after  a  hard
day's  rowing,  it  was  all  to  prepare  himself  for  the  big  day  which
might  come  any  spring,  if  the  city  in  council  or  the  men  over
the  range  so  willed  it.  So  he  and  his  friends  lived  in  an  atmo-
sphere of  campaigning.  Their  conversation  ran  on  spears  and
shield-straps  and  camping-grounds,  and  where  to  get  rations  up
in  the  hills,  on  rowlocks  and  catheads  and  undergirding  and  the
boils  and  blisters  of  naval  service  :  on  how  to  ship  horses  in  a
trireme  by  cutting  away  the  benches,  or  how  to  land  on  an
enemy's  promontory  and  make  a  fort  without  tools,  carrying  the
mortar  on  the  bent  back  for  want  of  hods  :  or  how  to  make
a  surprise  attack  on  their  chief  harbour,  sailing  in  with  the  night
wind  and  making  a  bonfire  of  their  bazaar  to  match  the  red  of
early  dawn :  or  whether  it  would  be  fair  and  honourable  and
according  to  the  best  traditions  of  the  old  game  to  entrap  them
into  a  marsh  or  lay  an  ambush  in  a  ravine  or  engage  a  corps  of
wild  men  from  Thrace  to  eke  out  inferior  numbers.  Modern
readers  sometimes  wonder  why  Thucydides  and  Xenophon  deluge
them  with  campaign  details  ;  they  are  apt  to  resent  or  to  smile  at
the  childish  particulars  which  these  grave  historians  are  at  such
pains  to  narrate.  They  should  recall  the  conversations  to  which
they  have  listened,  or  perhaps  contributed,  in  smoking-rooms
and  quadrangles   and    pavilions,    on   yorkers   and  niblicks   and


340  ECONOMICS  part  Hi

ebenezers,  on  extra  covers  and  wing  three-quarters,  and  ask  how
much  of  it  would  be  intelligible,  however  beautifully  written  out,
to  an  inquiring  posterity  which  had  turned  to  other  pastimes.
War  was  as  natural  a  part  of  Greek  city  life  as  games  and  recrea-
tions are  of  our  own.  No  doubt  there  are  differences  of  degree.
You  fought  in  bronze  armour  ;  you  needed  a  high  degree  of
physical  courage  and  self-control,  and,  if  the  luck  was  against
you,  )-ou  might  be  taken  prisoner  or  even  killed.  But  so  it
needs  pluck  to  charge  straight  or  to  face  a  fast  bowler.  In  both
cases  the  object  is  the  same,  to  play  the  man.  and  to  do  the  best
for  your  side.  And  if  killing  men  is  no  longer  sport,  killing
animals  still  remains  so.^

There  was  never  a  period  in  the  whole  life-time  of  the
City  State  when  war  could  be  regarded  as  exceptional.
Either  actual  campaigning  or  war  yesterday  and  war  to-
morrow is  the  natural  state  of  the  Greek  city :  as  Herodotus,
who  knew  their  sporting  temper,  observes,  '  states  must  be  tied
up  very  tight  if  their  agreements  are  to  be  lasting.'  Some  quarrel
arises  which,  in  a  less  inflammable  atmosphere,  or  with  the  troops
out  of  training,  it  would  be  easy  to  compose.  Perhaps  there  is
a  cattle-raid  by  night  on  the  border  farms.  '  Cattle  and  sheep
and  horses  and  copper  pots  are  raidable  stuff',  as  Homer  remarks,
and  heroes  and  even  gods  set  the  example  long  ago.  This  will
lead  to  private  reprisals.  Some  cornfields  are  trampled,  an
olive-yard  gashed  and  burnt,  and  perhaps  a  few  women  and  some
more  cattle  and  sheep  are  mysteriously  missing.  Well  before
daylight  the  marauders,  driving  their  '  man-legged '  and  *  four-
legged  '  loot  mercilessly  before  them,  will  be  safely  back  over  the
border.  The  news  is  brought  into  the  city,  and  a  grave-voiced
herald  is  sent  over  to  complain  and  demand  instant  redress.  He
is  met  by  counter  complaints  and  counter  demands,  and  retires

'  Compare  Thucydiclcs'  account  of  the  sieges  of  Plataea  (ii.  75-9)  and
Syracuse,  and  of  the  exceptionally  stubborn  battle  in  iv.  43-4,  ending  in
212  +  50  dead:  also  of  the  wonderful  machine  at  Delium  (iv.  100.  2);  also
iv.  4,  ii.  93  ;  Xen,  Hell.  v.  4.  20  ;  Ar.  Knights  594-610  and  Thuc.  ii.  56.  2
(horse-transport) ;  Ar.  Peace  347  (beds  by  seashore) ;  Frogs  222,  236  (blisters).
Hence  we  are  so  often  told  of '  record  '  losses  (Hdt.  vii.  170;  Thuc.  iii.  113.
6),  and  '  record  '  teams  (Thuc.  vi.  31.  i,  iii.  17,  v.  74,  vii.  56.  4),  and  of  war's
'  glorious  uncertainty'  (ii.  1 1.  4).  Like  all  other  games,  it  stood  to  be  ruined
by  professionalism.  Compare  Sir  George  Trevelyan's  delightful  essay  on  '  An
Ancient  Greek  War'  (printed  \xi  Interludes  in  Verse  and  Pi'ose,  1905).


CHAP,  xir  POPULATION  341

with  unruffled  dignity  and  sorrow  rather  than  anger  upon  his
tongue.  lie  is  escorted  back  to  the  border  so  that  he  may  not
sec  too  much  by  the  way,  and  before  sundown  on  the  same  day
he  is  back  in  his  own  country.

War  has  been  declared.  The  word  goes  round  the  parishes,
the  farmers  take  shield  and  spear  from  their  places  in  the  corner
b)'  the  corn-bin  and  the  ox-goad,  and  hurry  to  the  parade-
ground,  welcoming,  yet  dreading  (how  well  we  know  the  feeling)
the  familiar  ordeal  of  the  battle-field,  and  hoping  in  their  hearts
that  it  will  all  be  well  over  by  harvest  time.  A  few  days  afterwards
the  two  armies  will  be  aroused  at  early  dawn  and  drawn  up
opposite  one  another  in  the  plain  not  far  from  the  city  gates,  and
their  generals  will  be  whiling  away  the  last  uncomfortable  half-
hour  before  play  begins  with  such  appropriate  arguments  and
exhortations  as  rowing  and  football  captains  know.  If  he  is  an
Athenian  he  will  tell  them  that  brains  are  bound  to  win  and  that
the  superior  numbers  of  the  other  side  only  testify  to  their  ner-
vousness. If  he  is  a  Spartan  he  will  remind  them  that  Spartans
never  say  die  and  that  all  they  have  to  do  is  to  obey  their  trainer's
instructions.  Then  comes  the  call  to  attention,  the  slow  and
steady  march  forward,  '  shields  well  together ' — how  endless  it
seems — a  glitter  of  bronze  in  the  near  distance  (thank  the  gods,
the  sun  is  behind  us),  and  then  the  poising  of  spears,  the  clash  of
shields,  and  the  heavy  thrusting  and  pushing  and  grappling  of  the
melee}

^  Hdt.  i.  74 ;  //.  ix.  406  ;  compare  the  Homeric  hymn  to  Hermes  and
a  rehef  on  the  Sicyonian  Treasury  at  Delphi  ;  Thuc.  ii.  12  (final  embassy),
ii.  89,  iv.  10  (Athenian  battle-speeches),  ii.  87,  v.  9  (Spartan  ditto),  v.  7 1
('  shields  well  together  '  and  the  nervousness  of  the  right-hand  man) :  for  the
iiicU-e  or  'pushing  of  shields  '  see  Thuc.  iv.  96.  2,  Hdt.  vii.  225,  ix.  62  :  for
a  broken  army  in  retreat  see  the  wonderful  picture  of  Socrates  in  Plato,
Symp.  2-2.1.  The  fighting  in  the  J/urd  and  Tyrtaeus  is  confused,  combining
the  champions  of  the  older  independent  style  of  combat  with  the  '  mail-clad
ranks  '  of  the  ordinary  City  State  infantry.  Compare  Trachiniac  507-21
where  similarly,  as  Jebb  says,  '  the  picture  is  not  distinct,'  Heracles  carrying
a  club,  a  bow,  and  the  City  State  weapons,  two  spears.  Greek  history  and
poetry  are  full  of  ordinary  'neighbour-wars':  e.g.  Thuc.  i.  15.  2,  iv.  134,
V.  32.  2  ;  Hdt.  i.  82  ;  Eur.  Siipp.  650  ff.  The  battle  was  in  the  plain  because
the  ordinary  Greek  fighting  man  was  useless  on  rough  country.  He  wore
helmet,  breastplate,  backplate,  and  greaves  of  bronze,  and  carried  a  lance  six
feet  long,  an  oval  shield  three  feet  long,  and  a  sword.  The  famous  mile  run
at  Marathon  was  only  a  '  quick  march  '  ;  cf.  dpofxos  in  Thuc.  iv.  78.  5.  See
on  this  point  Grundy,  Thiicydides  ami  the  History  of  his  Age,  pp.  242-4,  who
writes  from  personal  knowledge  both  of  the  weight  of  Greek  armour  and  of


342  ECONOMICS  part  hi

Such  is  the  game  as  it  was  played  when  States  still  went  to
war  for  extra  supplies  or  extra  money,  before  they  were  tempted
to  make  robbery  their  main  source  of  revenue  or  to  turn  their
farmers  and  craftsmen  into  professional  fighters.  All  the  tradi-
tional rules  of  the  game  show  the  same  spirit  at  work.  There  is
no  attempt  to  annex  or  to  annihilate.  The  enemy  is  at  once
a  sovereign  power  and  a  near  neighbour.  He  will  not  submit  to
annexation,  and  if  you  root  him  out  there  will  be  nothing  to  rob  ;
if  it  is  land  you  want,  far  better  go  among  barbarians,  who  will
not  mind  submitting  tamely  and  becoming  your  serfs.  All  that
warfare  involves  is  a  fair  fight  with  equal  weapons  on  the  plain
before  the  city  walls.  When  it  is  over,  long  before  sundown  (if
it  survives  the  luncheon  interval),  the  victors  will  put  up  a  trophy,
give  back  the  other  side  their  dead,  and  go  off  with  the  spoils
and  with  the  honours  of  the  season.  If  they  are  exceptionally
enraged  they  may  stay  on  for  a  siege.  That  will  ruin  the  other
side's  harvest,  but  will  also  mean  withdrawing  a  number  of  men
from  their  own.  They  will  try  to  take  the  wall  by  assault  and
will  be  repulsed  with  loss ;  their  mines  will  be  uncovered,  their
rams  will  lose  their  noses,  and  the  '  tortoise  men  '  with  their
ladders  will  retire  in  dismay  when  some  one  descries  the  round
edge  of  a  millstone  peeping  over  the  wall  just  where  they  were
preparing  to  scale  it.  Fifty  men  behind  a  Greek  wall — however
much  mud  there  may  be  in  its  composition — even  fifty  women
dressed  up  as  men,  so  long  as  they  do  not  throiv  anything,  are
worth  a  hundred  times  the  number  outside  it,  and  few  are  the
sieges  in  City  State  history  which  ended  triumphantly  for  the
attack.  It  takes  a  city  to  take  a  city,  as  Nicias  said  ;  and  then,
if  you  are  away  from  your  base,  the  tables  may  be  turned  on  you.
The  besiegers'  only  hopes  are  in  starvation  or  treachery,  but  most
cities  are  well  provisioned,  and  the  firebrands  of  the  opposition,
and  even  the  mutinous  slaves,  are  apt  to  feel  a  return  of  affection
for  homes  and  masters  when  they  see  the  enemy  at  the  gates.
So  it  is  probable  that  the  victors  will  count  the  cost  and  desist,
like  the  Persian  governor  in  the  story,  who  was  advised  by  the
mercenary  leader  of  the  Greeks  whom  he  was  besieging  to  'con-
point-to-point  walking  on  Greek  hillsides.  '  The  iron  of  the  Greek  helmet
was  extraordinarily  thick,  and  its  weight  was,  I  should  say,  nearly  double
that  of  the  heaviest  helmet  of  the  mediaeval  period.'


CHAP.  XII  POPULATION  343

sidcr  how  long  the  operations  would  take,  and  then  reckon  up
the  working  expenses.  "  For,"  said  he,  "  I  am  prepared  to
evacuate  the  city  at  once  for  a  smaller  sum  down." '  ^

The  rules  of  the  game  at  sea  arc  similar,  adapted  to  the
altered  circumstances.  Indeed,  in  its  naval  form  it  is  simpler,
safer,  and  more  satisfactory,  for,  as  the  Old  Oligarch  remarks,
you  can  reach  your  destination  on  the  alluvial  plain  without
a  tiresome  march  through  hostile  country,  and  you  can  perform
an  exploit  that  no  land  force  dare  attempt  ;  you  can  '  sometimes
ravage  the  fields  of  a  superior  power,  for  you  can  sail  along
where  there  is  no  defence,  or  only  a  weak  one,  and  then,  when
the  troops  begin  to  muster,  retire  on  to  shipboard  and  put  to  sea '.
So  it  is  clear  that  it  was  not  considered  advisable,  either  by  land
or  sea,  to  risk  an  uphill  fight.  It  sounds  unsportsmanlike,  but  we
must  remember  the  stakes.  If  a  man  was  taken  prisoner  in
a  fight  which  impoverished  his  country,  it  might  be  years  before
his  friends  could  club  together  the  money  for  his  ransom.  In  one
case  we  hear  of  a  man  who  was  only  rescued  by  the  chance  visit
of  an  actor  from  his  own  city  ;  he  had  been  away  from  home  so
long  that  he  had  acquired  a  foreign  accent,  and  his  fellow-citizens
nearly  disowned  him.  But  this,  it  must  be  confessed,  was  not
after  a  battle  with  next-door  neighbours.^

But  it  is  time,  for  the  present,  to  leave  these  sportsmen  to
themselves.  We  shall  come  upon  their  traces  again,  better
organized  and  better  led,  with  bigger  designs  and  bigger  booty,
and  regular  pay  besides,  but  never  again  so  glad  and  confident
as  in  the  ringing  fights  of  the  older  Greece.

^  Thuc.  iii.  46.  3  (nothing  left  to  rob) :  the  best  illustration  of  the  Greeks'
touching  confidence  in  walls  is  their  idea  of  repulsing  the  Persian  army  and
fleet  in  4S0  by  defending  the  wall  across  the  isthmus.  The  best  existing
ancient  walls  are  those  of  Constantinople,  which  were  only  taken  in  1453  after
a  chapter  of  accidents,  though  the  odds  were  1  ^0,000  to  8,000.  Thuc.  vi.  23.  2
(a  city  against  a  city) ;  Ar.  Pol.  1267  a  31  ;  Hdt.  i.  17  ft".,  Thuc.  iii.  102,  4-5.
The  best  authority  on  sieges  is  of  course  Aeneas  Tacticus,  who  knew  every
move  in  the  game,  including  the  fact  that  'you  can  tell  a  woman  by  her
throwing  from  ever  so  far  off'  (xl.  4-5).  Anyone,  however  '  useless ',  could
defend  a  wall,  provided  it  was  sufficiently  high  and  thick  (Thuc.  i.  93.  5-6),  so
it  was  not  necessary  to  keep  heavy-armed  men  in  the  city  for  this  purpose.
Some  cities  drew  their  circuits  wide  so  as  to  include  cornland,  as  is  clear  from
the  existing  remains  at  Messene.     Compare  Jonah  iv.  11.

''•  Old  Oligarch,  ii.  4  ;  Dem.  Ivii.  18.


CHAPTER    XIII
IMPERIAL  ECONOMICS:    SEA-POWER

Tiji'  TToXti'  Tols  naai  napeaKevdanfiei'  koi  e'j  noXfiwv  kih  es  elprjvrjv  avTapKecrTaTrjv. —
Pericles  in  Thucydides,  ii.  36.  3.

People  never  have  had  clearly  explained  to  them  the  true  functions  of
a  merchant.  .  .  .  The  merchant's  function  is  to  provide  for  the  nation. —
RUSKIX,  [//i/o  this  Last,  §§21,  22.

In  our  account  of  the  economy  of  the  City  State  we  have  been
building  up  our  structure,  layer  by  layer,  from  the  simplest
foundations.  We  have  now  introduced  all  the  elements  which
were  essential  to  the  life  of  what  we  have  been  taught  by  Greek
thinkers  to  regard  as  the  normal  or  '  average '  City  State.  The
city  is  equipped  with  husbandmen  and  craftsmen,,  retail  dealers,
and  foreign  traders.  All  that  she  needs  for  bare  existence  she
produces  within  her  own  borders  :  such  extra  luxuries  as  she
requires,  in  order  to  live  as  a  civilized  city  should,  she  can  import
from  abroad.  She  is  neither  too  small  nor  too  large,  neither  too
poor  nor  too  rich.  If  she  were  smaller  she  would  be  dangerously
exposed  to  attacks  from  her  neighbours.  If  she  were  larger  she
would  lose  her  unity  and  be  difficult  to  govern.  If  she  were
poorer  her  citizens  would  not  be  leading  a  civilized  life.  If  she
were  richer  she  would  be  exposed  to  all  the  temptations  of
excess.  She  has  reached  what  appeared  to  the  logical  Greek
mind  to  be  the  limit  of  healthy  expansion.  All  that  seemed  to
remain  for  her  statesmen  was  vigilantly  to  maintain  this  fortunate
equipoise  of  economic  forces.^

Such  were  many  of  the  Greek  cities  at  a  certain  stage  in  their
development.  Such,  for  instance,  was  sixth-century  Athens,
and  such  no  doubt  were  many  other  States  which  lived  so  quietly
and  happily  that  we  know  little  of  their  inner  history.  It  was
a  phase  which  survived  in  men's  memories  to  furnish  a  pleasant

^  Ar.  Pol.  1326  b.


riTAr.  XTIT  SEA-POWK R  345

old-world  pattern  for  the  model  cities  of  the  later  philosophers.
Aristotle  and  Isocrates,  and  Plato  too,  when  he  grew  gentler
in  his  old  age,  looked  back  to  a  time  when  men  were  '  industrious
and  thrifty  and  minded  their  own  business  ',  when  men's  wants
were  such  that  States  were  '  self-sufficient  and  all-producing  ',
and  every  one  lived  '  temperately  and  liberally  in  the  enjoyment
of  leisure  ',  when  the  hardy  virtues  of  asceticism  were  agreeably
blended  with  the  graces  and  refinements  of  a  young  and  growing
civilization.'

These  fourth-century  Utopias  were  in  many  essential  respects,
as  recent  writers  have  shown,  wholly  imaginary  pictures.  But
even  were  this  not  so,  their  authors'  account  of  them  would
be  misleading.  For  they  assume  that  political  forces  can  be
kept  stationary,  that,  once  the  right  mould  has  been  found,  there
is  little  more  for  statesmen  to  do  but  religiously  to  preserve  and
admire  it.  They  make  the  familiar  mistake,  so  natural  to  the
Greek  mind,  of  regarding  the  city  as  a  work  of  art.  They  did
not  stay  to  ask  themselves  why  the  forces  which  had  co-operated
to  produce  so  desirable  a  result  should  consent  to  abate  their
vehemence,  and  become  trustworthy  barriers  against  further
changes.^

We  moderns  know  to  our  cost  that  economic  forces  care
nothing  for  social  harmony  or  'natural  limits',  that,  once  un-
chained, they  are  not  easily  arrested.  Sixth-century  Athens,
with  her  land  problem  solved  by  the  statesmanship  of  Solon
and  Pisistratus,  might  seem  to  the  contemporary  observer,  as
she  seemed  to  conservative  thinkers  two  centuries  later,  an  ideal
picture  of  a  State  comfortably  settled  at  the  happy  ending  of
a  long  and  troubled  course.  In  reality  she  was  at  the  beginning
of  the  bitterest  struggle  in  her  history,  a  spiritual  conflict  fought
out  between  two  of  the  strongest  forces  in  human  society,  which
was   to   bring   her   civilization   to   disaster  at   the   culminating

'  Is.  Areop.,  especially  §§  24fif.,  a  fancy  picture  of  early  Athens;  Ar.
Pol.  1326  b  30.  Plato  preferred  an  austerer  atmosphere  for  his  Republic,  and
turned  to  Sparta  for  his  model.

^  For  a  good  criticism  of  fourth-century  Utopianism  see  Meyer,  v,  §  921,
where  the  '  inner  contradiction '  attending  all  such  attempts  is  pointed  out,
viz.  that  '  it  assumes  an  advanced  urban  civilization  as  its  basis '.  The  well-
to-do  '  educated  townspeople  '  of  the  fourth  century,  whom  the  philosophers
assume,  and  from  whom  their  hearers  were  drawn,  would  ne\er  stand  the
'  simple  life ',  which  it  was  sought  to  impose  on  them.


346  l-.COXOMICS  part  tti

moment  of  its  greatness.  We  arc  passing,  in  fact,  from  the
economics  of  the  Cit)'  State  to  the  economics  of  Empire.

Throughout  Greek  lands,  wherever  the  new  economic  influences
penetrated,  this  conflict  was  felt,  from  Ionia  to  Aetolia,  from
Sicily  to  the  Crimea.  But  it  was  in  Athens,  at  once  so  tenacious
of  old  traditions  and  so  sensitive  to  new  influences,  that  it  raged
most  fiercely,  and  left  its  deepest  mark  upon  society  and  litera-
ture. Here,  as  we  have  seen,  men's  hopes  were  highest,  and
here  their  failure  came  most  quickly  and  the  disappointment  was
the  most  sharp  and  stinging.  From  the  Funeral  Speech,  spoken
when  all  was  yet  well  with  the  Athenian  Empire,  to  the  Republic
of  Plato,  written  when  even  its  memory  seemed  no  longer  bright,
is  little  more  than  half  a  century.  Between  the  high  hopefulness
of  Sophocles  at  his  zenith  and  the  dark  melancholy  of  the  later
plays  of  Euripides  there  are  not  more  than  a  few  years.  No
other  Greek  city  rose  and  declined  so  rapidly,  or  has  left  so  con-
tinuous and  truthful  a  record  of  the  succession  of  its  mental
states.  Let  us  then,  henceforward,  leave  the  lesser  cities  aside,
and  turn  to  Athens  alone,  as  we  turned  to  her  in  our  account
of  the  progress  of  the  Greek  as  a  citizen,  in  order  to  watch
the  onward  march  of  the  economic  forces  which  we  have
mustered.^

The  previous  chapters  have  shown  us,  one  by  one,  the  elements
which  had  become  essential  parts  of  the  economy  of  Athens
by  about  the  middle  of  the  sixth  century.  WTiat  we  have  now
to  do  is  to  watch  and  analyse  the  new  influences  which  made
themselves  felt  during  the  next  hundred  years,  to  understand  the
forces  which  differentiate  the  Athens  of  the  Funeral  Speech  from
the  Athens  of  Solon  and  Pisistratus.

The  first  step  in  this  development  is  not  difficult  to  trace.  It
is  described  for  us  in  clear  terms  in  Plutarch's  life  of  Solon.
The  land  question  was  in  a  fair  way  to  settlement,  the  seas  were
becoming  secure,  Athens  had  adopted  convenient  weights  and
measures,  and  Athenians  were  becoming  active  traders.  But
they  were  ready  not  only  to  trade  but  to  be  traded  with.     '  The

^  See  p.  128  above,  and  cf.  Murray,  Euripides,  p.  xxi.  The  reader  will  find
a  general  account  of  the  conflict  in  Pohlmann,  Geschichte  des  antiken  So-ia-
lismtis  und  Kommiinismus  (2  vols.,  Munich,  1S93-1901,  especially  vol.  ii),
a  useful  work  in  detail,  but  of  which  Meyer  rightly  says  (v,  §  883,  note*  that
its  ver)'  title  shows  its  author's  lack  of  judgement.


CHAP.  xiTi  SF.A-POWKR  347

city,'  says  Plutarch.  '  was  filled  with  persons  who  assembled  from
all  parts  on  account  of  the  great  security  in  which  people  lived  in
Attica.  Solon  observing  this,  and  knowing  that  most  of  the
country  was  poor  and  unproductive,  and  that  merchants  who
trafific  by  sea  are  not  in  the  habit  of  importing  goods  where  they
can  find  nothing  in  exchange,  turned  the  attention  of  the  citizens
to  arts  and  crafts.  For  this  purpose  he  made  a  law  that  no  son
should  be  obliged  to  maintain  his  father  if  he  had  not  taught
him  a  trade.'  It  was  well  enough  for  Sparta,,  he  goes  on,  who
admitted  no  strangers  and  whose  country  could  feed  twice  as
many  mouths  as  Attica,  to  keep  only  her  Helots  at  work,  to
'set  her  citizens  free  from  laborious  and  mechanical  activities,
and  to  employ  them  in  arms  as  the  only  art  fit  for  them  to  learn
and  exercise.  But  Solon,  adapting  his  laws  to  the  state  of  the
country  rather  than  the  country  to  his  laws,  and  knowing  that
the  soil  of  Attica,  which  hardly  fed  its  own  cultivators,  could  not
possibly  suffice  to  feed  a  lazy  and  leisured  populace,  ordered  that
arts  and  crafts  should  be  accounted  honourable,  and  that  the
Council  of  the  Areopagus  should  examine  into  every  man's
means  of  subsistence  and  chastise  the  idle  '}

The  passage  bears  the  colouring  of  a  later  age,  but  its  facts
are  correct  enough.  It  is  not  true,  as  Plutarch  hints,  that  arts
and  crafts  were  not  '  accounted  honourable  '  till  Solon  made  them
so  ;  but  it  is  certain  that  Solon  did  his  best  to  make  Athens
a  manufacturing  centre.  For  the  prime  need  of  the  country  just
now  was  wealth — wealth  to  set  the  peasant  cultivators  securely
upon  their  feet  again  and  to  assuage  the  bitterness  of  civil  con-
flict. But  the  best  and  quickest  way  of  obtaining  wealth  was
from  outside,  through  the  goods  and,  still  more,  through  the
brains  and  energy  of  foreign  traders.  The  goods  of  course  must
be  paid  for.  But  how  ?  Not  in  landed  produce,  for  Athens  had
little  or  nothing  to  spare,  but  in  manufactures.  But  here  came
the  difficulty.  Raw  materials  indeed  she  had  :  marble  on  Pente-
licus,  silver  at  Laureion,  and  some  of  the  best  potters'  clay  in
Greece ;  but  she  had  few  hands  to  work  them.  So  she  needed
not  only  money  but  men,  not  only  traders  who  came  as  summer
visitors  to  exchange  their  goods,  but-  immigrants  who  would
come  to  stay  and   give  themselves  and  their  arms  and   brains

^  Plut.  So/oh  22.


348  FXONOMICS  part  iit

to  the  economic  service  of  the  city.  So  that  Plutarch  is  put-
ting the  cart  before  the  horse  when  he  says  that  because  the
city  was  filled  with  immigrants  Solon  saw  he  must  start  manu-
factures so  as  to  feed  them.  In  reality,  as  he  tells  us  a  few
pages  further  on,  the  encouragement  of  immigration  was  one  of
the  corner-stones  of  Solon's  policy.  Only  he  wanted  settlers
not  traders,  men  who  would  stay  to  enrich  Athens,  instead  of
mere  '  gold-bugs  '  who  would  make  their  pile  and  go  home.
Plutarch  again  gives  us  the  facts,  though,  not  having  our  modern
analogies  to  guide  him,  he  is  puzzled  about  their  meaning.  '  The
law  about  the  naturalizing  of  foreigners,'  he  says,  *  is  difficult
to  understand,  because  it  forbids  the  bestowal  of  citizenship  on
any  but  such  as  have  been  exiled  from  their  own  country  for
ever,  or  have  settled  with  their  whole  household  in  Athens  for
the  sake  of  exercising  some  manual  trade.'  Plutarch  had  for-
gotten, or  never  realized,  how  hard  it  was  for  an  old-world  city
to  introduce  strangers  into  her  corporation.  But  the  writer
whom  he  is  following  knew  better,  and  inspired  him  to  suggest
the  true  interpretation.  '  This  was  enacted,'  he  goes  on,  '  as  we
are  told,  not  in  order  to  keep  strangers  at  a  distance,  but  rather
to  invite  them  to  Athens,  upon  the  sure  hope  of  being  admitted
to  the  privilege  of  citizenship  ;  and  Solon  imagined  that  he
would  find  faithful  recruits  among  those  who  had  been  driven
from  their  country  by  necessity  or  had  quitted  it  by  free
choice.'  ^

Solon  and  the  statesmen  who  followed  him  succeeded  beyond
all  expectation  in  this  line  of  action.  They  attracted  to  Athens
a  constant  stream  of  immigrants,  and  set  newcomers  and  old
residents  at  work  together  in  developing  and  diffusing  the  national
resources.  The  industrial  effects  to  which  this  led  we  must  leave
to  a  later  chapter.  What  concerns  us  here  is  that  the  very
success  of  their  policy  only  involved  these  statesmen  in  fresh
economic  difficulties.  Attica  was  indeed  growing  richer  under
their  auspices.  But  she  was  also  beginning  to  house  more  mouths
than  she  could  safely  feed.  Her  swollen  population  was  rapidly
outgrowing  her  very  limited  means  of  subsistence.  Athenians
were  being  taught  by  experience  to  disregard  the  old  doctrine

^  Plut.  Solofi  24.  For  the  natural  resources  of  Attica  see  Ways  and
Means ^  ch.  i.


CHAP.  XIII  SEA-POWER  349

that  independence  and  self-sufficiency  must  necessarily  go
together.

No  doubt  it  was  a  great  step  forward  in  practical  political
economy  to  have  discovered  that  a  sovereign  city  could  safely
outgrow  its  own  food-supply.  But  it  brought  with  it  for  Athenian
statesmen  fresh  and  very  harassing  duties.  For  it  threw  upon
them  the  responsibility  of  safeguarding  a  food-supply  from
abroad.  It  forced  them  to  cultivate  foreign  relations,  no  longer
incidentally,  as  of  old,  in  order  to  secure  openings  for  their  traders
whenever  opportunity  arose,  but  definitely  and  continuously  in
order  to  be  sure  of  averting  the  ever  present  danger  of  famine.
Thus  the  new  economic  situation,  created  by  the  attraction  of
immigrant  labour,  entirely  altered  the  conditions  of  national
defence,  and  therewith  the  whole  outlook  of  Athenian  statesman-
ship. In  other  words,  it  gradually  transformed  the  character  of
the  Athenian  State.

To  understand  how  this  happened  we  must  stop  for  a  moment
to  look  more  closely  at  the  question  of  national  defence.  In  the
old  days  a  city  which  could  defend  its  own  fields  and  gather  its
own  harvest  could  rest  in  peace  within  its  walls  in  comfortable
isolation.  Provided  only  that  its  citizen  soldiers  were  ready  to
fight  when  called  upon,  it  did  not  need  to  pursue  any  foreign
policy  at  all.  All  it  needed  was,  tortoise  like,  to  *  keep  itself  to
itself.  Its  policy  might  be  summed  up  in  the  words  which  those
expert  neutrals,  the  Argives,  claimed  to  have  been  addressed  to
them  in  the  year  of  Salamis  by  the  temporizing  oracle  :

Let  the  whole  world  hate  you,

So  the  gods  be  kind  :
Man  your  wall  and  wait  you

Lance  at  rest  behind.^

But  now  those  old  easy  hibernating  days  were  gone  past  recall.
The  city  was  driven  to  adopt  a  new  and  far  more  hazardous
system  of  defence.  Her  strength  lay  no  longer  in  quietness  and
confidence.  She  needed  to  look  abroad  for  her  safety,  to  be
active  as  well  as  vigilant,  and  daring  as  well  as  prudent.  She
had  entered  upon  the  path,  so  dangerous  to  ambitious  nations,
of  Defence  through  Offence.     Her  lines  of  communication  and

^  Hdt.  vii.  148.

1246  Z


35©  ECONOMICS  part  hi

influence  had  gradually  to  be  extended  far  across  the  seas,  from
Euboea  to  the  Thracian  Chersonese,  from  the  Bosporus  to  the
Crimea,  even  from  Crete  and  Cyprus  to  Africa.  For  she  now
depended,  not  for  luxuries  but  for  necessaries,  not  for  her  liveli-
hood but  for  her  life,  upon  the  harvests  of  Egypt  or  Cyprus  or
the  Crimea,  and  on  the  power  to  ensure  their  steady  arrival  in
her  port.  Those  distant  and  vulnerable  lines,  and  not  the  homely
city  square  within  her  walls  with  its  quick  pulsations  of  daily
business,  became  the  main  arteries  down  which  her  life-blood
flowed.  Far  away  they  were  in  strange  and  perilous  seas,  which
many  of  her  citizens  knew  only  by  hearsay,  and  whence,  for  all
the  racing  of  her  galleys,  news  came  brokenly  after  many  weeks
to  the  heart  of  her  Empire.  When  bad  tidings  were  brought,
Athens  could  no  longer,  as  of  old,  assemble  her  sentry-reserve
of 'oldest  and  youngest'  to  march  out  and  relieve  her  field  force
at  some  frontier  fortress.  For  now  her  sentries  were  posted,  not
on  those  old  grey  watch-towers  overlooking  the  Megarid  or  astride
the  Boeotian  passes,  but  in  the  countless  harbours  and  vantage-
points  of  her  new  domain  of  sea.  Those  six  thousand  soldiers
and  sailors,  one  in  seven  of  her  citizens,  whom  we  have  seen  on
permanent  service  on  the  peace  establishment  of  the  Athenian
Empire,  were  not  sent  out  to  fight.  Theirs  was  the  wearier  duty
of  lining  the  roadway  for  the  city's  grain-ships,  or  of  safeguarding
the  money  which  Athens  needed  to  pay  for  their  cargoes.  They
were

No,  not  combatants — only
Details  guarding  the  line,

and  as  they  did  not  die  in  battle,  Pericles,  when  he  spoke  over
the  dead,  could  only  indirectly  acknowledge  their  services.  But
they,  and  not  the  old  men  and  boys  who  still  stayed  behind  to
man  the  frontier  forts  and  city  battlements,  were  the  true
defenders  of  Athens.  One  brief  hour  of  carelessness  in  some  dis-
tant roadstead  and  all  might  be  ruined.  It  was  a  summer  after-
noon's siesta  on  the  brown  sun-baked  banks  of  the  Hellespont
which  betrayed  the  fleet  at  Acgospotami  and  laid  Athens  in  the
dust.  Once  that  streak  of  water  was  in  the  hands  of  her  enemies,
no  Long  Walls  or  watch-towers  or  harbour  bar  at  the  Piraeus,  no
revival  of  the  temper  of  Marathon  or  vows  of  heroic  endurance,


CHAP.  XIII  SEA-POWER  35  [

could  save  the  starving  city.  Lysander  had  Athens  at  his  niercy,
and  he  had  only  to  calculate  how  many  months  or  weeks  the
last  feeble  flicker  of  resistance  would  last.^

These  were  the  realities  of  imperial  politics  in  Athens.  But
men  do  not  easily  face  realities,  and  when,  as  in  this  case,  they
ran  counter  to  so  many  cherished  and  inherited  habits,  both  of
thought  and  of  action,  they  were  slow  to  impress  themselves.
Pericles  acted  in  his  statesmanship  upon  the  new  conception  of
defence,  but  he  never  expressed  it  in  his  speeches — never,  that
is,  in  all  its  naked  and  necessary  ruthlessness.  We  must  go  half
a  generation  forward  to  find  what  have  become  familiar  to  us  since
as  the  commonplaces  of  a  certain  imperial  theory.  '  We  make
no  fine  professions  of  having  a  right  to  our  Empire  because  we
overthrew  the  Barbarian  single-handed,  or  because  we  risked  our
existence  for  the  sake  of  our  dependants  and  of  civilization.
States,  like  men,  cannot  be  blamed  for  providing  for  their  proper
safety.  If  we  are  now  here  in  Sicily,  it  is  in  the  interest  of  our
own  security.  ...  It  is  Fear  that  forces  us  to  cling  to  our
Empire  in  Greece,  and  it  is  Fear  that  drives  us  hither,  with  the
help  of  our  friends,  to  order  matters  safely  in  Sicily.'  To  the
outside  world,  to  the  watchful  eyes  of  all  Greece  and  even  to  all-
seeing  Apollo  at  Delphi,  the  Sicilian  expedition  of  the  Athenians
seemed  an  act  of  wanton  aggression.  In  Athens  it  ranked,  or  she
tried  to  delude  herself  that  it  ranked,  merely  as  a  necessary  step
in  the  safeguarding  of  her  defences.^

But  we  have  been  striding  forward  too  fast  and  peeping  into
the  future.     Let  us  return  to  look  more  closely  at  the  question  of

^  Thuc.  iii.  13.  5  (new  conditions  of  defence),  ii.  18.  2  (an  old  frontier  fort),
viii.  I  and  Xen.  Hell.  ii.  2.  2-5  (bad  news  at  Athens  and  Lysander's
lingering  before  his  attack).  The  whole  colouring  of  the  Funeral  Speech  is,
as  we  have  seen,  conservative,  and  Pericles  confines  himself,  so  far  as  possible,
to  sentiments  appropriate  to  the  old  theory  of  defence.  The  dead  over  whom
he  spoke  were  all,  or  nearly  all,  soldiers,  not  sailors.  This  leads  him  into
some  curiously  unreal  phrases.  See  Thuc.  ii.  39  ;  p.  198  above  and  the  notes
there.  Pericles'  word  to  characterize  the  old  theory  of  defence  was  an-pay/xo-
(TvvT)  ('  non-intervention  ').  It  is  interesting  to  follow  up,  in  Thucydides'
speeches,  the  use  made  of  it  by  Pericles  and  his  successors.  See  Thuc.  ii.  63.
3,  64.  4,  and  the  Corcyraean  appeal  (i.  32  ff.),  and  compare  vi.  18  (both  the
argument  and  the  phraseology  and  iv.  61.  7).  For  the  Athenian  corn-trade
in  the  sixth  century  with  Cyprus  and  Egypt  see  Wilamowitz,  Reden  unU
Vortrdge,  p.  40,  note  i.  It  is  supported  by  Solon's  journey  to  these  countries
and  by  recent  finds  in  Cyprus.

^  Thuc.  vi.  83.  2-3.

Z  1


352  ECONOMICS  part  hi

the  Greek   city's  commissariat,  for   it   forms   the  most   natural
introduction  to  an  analysis  of  the  imperial  economy  of  Athens.

Perhaps  it  would  have  been  more  logical  to  have  examined
into  it  earlier,  for  it  is  a  question  with  which  every  Greek  State,
great  or  small,  had  in  some  form  or  other  to  deal.  To  each  and
all  of  them  famine  was  a  perpetual  danger  against  which  it  was
their  business  vigilantly  to  insure.  Indeed  it  was  through  this
necessity  of  State  insurance,  through  its  interference  in  the  pro-
duction and  distribution  of  corn,  the  most  vital  and  necessary  of
all  the  trades  within  her  borders,  that  the  city  first  became
involved  in  matters  of  economic  policy.  So  long  as  trade  was
concerned  with  luxuries  the  city  left  the  trader  to  himself,  unless
indeed  she  interfered  as  a  censor.  But,  by  a  distinction  which  it
was  as  natural  for  her  to  make  as  it  is  difficult  for  us  to  realize,
necessaries  came  under  an  entirely  different  law.  '  If  one  of  the
ancients  were  to  come  to  life  again,'  says  an  Italian  historian,
'  nothing  would  be  more  incomprehensible  to  him  than  our
modern  corn  duties.'  Russia  and  Canada  nowadays  are  as  eager
to  sell  us  corn  as  anything  else.  We  find  it  hard  to  imagine
(and  writers  who  talk  vaguely  of  '  Athenian  commercial  policy '
have  not  even  tried  to  do  so)  the  difference  between  articles  of
easy  transport  intended  for  a  few  select  citizens  with  money  in
their  pockets,  and  articles  of  bulk  which  are  objects  of  common
need,  but  for  which,  in  proportion  as  they  are  more  needed,  there
will  be  the  less  private  money  to  pay.  The  modern  corn-
importer,  even  when  prices  are  high,  flings  the  corn  upon  our
shores.  In  Greece  the  corn-importer,  like  so  much  of  the  labour,
had  to  be  artificially  attracted  ;  and  it  is  instructive  to  watch
some  of  the  means  that  were  adopted.^

But  first  it  is  necessary  to  point  out  that  the  trade  policy
which  we  are  about  to  describe  does  not  concern  corn  alone.
Corn  was  the  chief,  but  not  necessarily  the  only,  indispensable
import.  There  were  others  not  so  important  in  bulk,  which  were
often  equally  indispensable.  These  varied  of  course,  in  different
places,  according  to  the  policy  and  circumstances  of  the  different
States.  We  find  Delos  legislating  about  fuel  and  fifth-century
Athens  about  cheap  fish.  But  chief  among  them,  at  Athens
at  any  rate,   were  all  the    various  materials    for  ship-building,

*  Ferrero,  Greatness  a7td  Decline  of  Rome  (English  transl.),  vol.  i,  p.  318.


CHAP,  xiii  S1<:A-P0\VI<:K  .35,:;

timber  from  the  tall  and  shapely  pines  of  Thrace  and  Macedonia,
flax  and  hemp  for  sails  and  rigging,  iron  and  bronze  and  wax
and  pitch.  These  various  commodities,  as  the  Old  Oligarch  says,
will  most  likely  be  found  in  different  places,  for  '  where  yarn  is
abundant  the  soil  will  be  light  and  devoid  of  timber.  And
in  the  same  way  bronze  and  iron  will  not  be  products  of  the  same
city.  And  so  for  the  rest,  never  two,  or  at  best  three  in  one
State,  but  one  thing  here  and  another  thing  there.'  All  these,
in  their  several  homes  and  on  their  several  city-ward  roads,  are
the  care  of  the  city's  '  far-flung  battle-line  '.^

Now  let  us  turn  to  the  business  of  the  corn-supply.  Thanks
to  the  inscriptions  and  to  recent  inquiries  we  can  watch  it  at
every  point,  and  we  shall  see  the  State's  finger  at  work  at  every
stage.

Aristotle  tells  us  that  at  Athens,  when  the  citizens  came
together  for  the  Stated  Meeting  of  Parliament  at  the  beginning
of  every  '  Presidency  ',  the  Agenda  contained  the  item  *  Respect-
ing Corn  '.  Ten  times  a  year  the  national  attention  was  officially
directed  to  this  question.  We  shall  see  in  a  few  moments  how,
as  a  State  with  a  large  import  trade,  Athens  proceeded  to
deal  with  it.  But  first  we  must  stop  to  point  out  that  the  same
item  appeared  duly  on  the  Agenda  and  in  the  minds  of  far
smaller  communities.     For  even  if  a  State  was  ostensibly  and

^  Old  Oligarch,  ii.  ii.  For  the  Athenian  timber-trade  see  Thuc.  iv.  io8;
Xen.  Ne//,  v.  2.  16,  vi.  i.  11  (Thrace  and  Macedonia;  cf.  ii.  98.  l),  Thuc.  vii.  25.
2,  vi.  90.  3  (the  woods  of  Calabria,  for  use  in  Sicily),  iv.  52.  3,  i.  i.  25  (Mount
Ida  in  the  Troad).  Compare  the  treaty  between  Macedon  and  the  Chalcidian
coast-cities,  with  its  regulations  for  the  right  of  mutually  exporting  timber.
Note  that  the  coast  States  reserve  to  themselves  the  right  (unlike  the
Macedonians,  who  are  the  weaker  party  to  the  agreement)  to  stop  the  export
of  ship-biiilding  timber  at  any  moment  by  decree.  The  treaty  is  given  in
Hicks  and  Hill,  No.  95  (who  do  not  seize  this  point),  and  Dittenberger,  No.  77,
where  see  note  5  for  further  references.  Athenian  policy,  as  the  Old  Oligarch
points  out,  included  also  the  task  of  preventing  other  States  from  acquiring
ship-building  materials.  Export  of  these  from  Athens  was  prohibited  (perhaps
only  in  war-time)  :  Frogs  362  (cf.  K flights  282  for  the  same  word,  ii-ni^^^i^Ta,
about  the  export  of  food).  One  of  the  great  difficulties  of  Athens's  enemies  in
the  Peloponnesian  War  was  ship-building.  They  found  it  hard  to  get  the
timber— not  to  speak  of  the  labour  difficulty.  Triremes  did  not  require  much
skill  in  designing  and  putting  together,  and  no  pride  seems  to  have  been  felt
in  the  hulk  as  apart  from  the  fittings,  which  were  presented  as  a  free  gift  by
prominent  citizens.  The  difficulty  was  not  the  quality  but  the  quantity  of
labour  required  to  build  a  fleet  in  a  hurry.  On  these  occasions— and  indeed
generally— the  wood  does  not  seem  to  have  been  kept  long  enough  to  be
properly  seasoned.  Cf.  Thuc.  vii.  12.  3,  viii.  i.  3,  and  viii.  15.  I  to  viii.  25.  i
(six  small  squadrons  hastily  built).


.154  PXONOMICS  r-ART  iii

normally  sclf-sufficienl  she  might  be  exposed  to  famine  any  year
by  a  general  or  partial  failure  of  her  crops.  National  commis-
sariat was  therefore,  always  and  everywhere  in  the  City-State
world,  a  matter  of  public  interest  and  state  control.  The  ex-
port of  com  was  never  allowed  to  go  on  unchecked ;  and  care-
ful steps  were  taken,  as  our  inscriptions  prove,  to  keep  open
a  cheap  and  steady  supply  either  wholly  from  within  or,  if  that
proved  insufficient,  from  abroad  through  the  help  of  merchants.
Two  of  these  inscriptions  are  worth  a  mention  here.  A  stone
found  in  Samos  in  1903  gives  some  interesting  details  as  to  how
that  City  State  managed  its  commissariat  in  the  second  century
before  Christ.  Samos  drew  its  supplies,  or  an  important  part
of  them,  from  a  domain  sacred  to  Hera  on  the  mainland.  These
had  been  taken  over  and  farmed,  in  the  usual  way,  by  middle-
men, who  sold  the  grain  at  what  were  regarded  as  exorbitant
prices.  The  Samian  State  therefore  determined  to  take  over
the  management  itself,  and  our  inscription  shows  her  in  the  act
of  regulating  this  business.  She  has  raised  the  necessary  capital
for  working  expenses,  not  by  levying  a  rate  but  by  opening
a  subscription  list,  promising  liberal  interest  (the  exact  figure  has
not  been  recovered)  to  all  citizens  who  will  subscribe.  The
corn  will  then  be  sold  at  a  cheap  rate  to  the  citizens,  or,  to
speak_  more  exactly,  it  will  be  doled  out  at  this  rate  by  the
State  to  all  among  the  poorer  population  who  apply  for  it.
As  the  editors  point  out,  we  have,  in  the  simple  and  necessary
precautions  of  these  little  self-sufficient  municipalities  against  the
ever  present  danger  of  famine-prices,  the  germ  of  the  '  Bread
and  Circus'  policy  of  Imperial  Rome.  When  Rome  came  into
the  domain  of  the  Kingdom  of  Pergamum  she  treated  it  in  the
same  way  as  Samos  treated  her  little  estate  of  Hera.  So  dan-
gerous is  it  when  politicians  arc  too  logical  to  enlarge  their
imaginations  with  enlarged  responsibilities  !  Just  as  Cicero  copied
out  the  political  theory  of  Aristotle,  so  Caius  Gracchus,  with  an
imperial  metropolis  under  his  charge,  took  his  cue  from  the
political  practice  of  the  diminutive  cities  of  Greece.^

*  Ath.  Pol.  xliii.  4  (agenda) :  Wilamowitz  and  Wiegand,  Ein  Gese/s  von
Samos  uber  die  Bcsc/iaffutig  i>on  Broikorn  ous  bffetUlichen  Mitteln  ;  cf.
Hej-mcs,  vol.  x.xxix,  pp.  604  ff.  See  aho  J  (thresh  ef/f,  vol.  x,  pp.  igfif.,  for  an
interesting  inscription  of  the  first  century  r..c.,  in  honour  of  a  Megarian  who,
on  tlic  occasion  of  his  entry  upon  an  office,  'dined  all  the  citizens  and  strangers


CHAK  XIII  SEA-i'C)Vvr:R  355

The  other  inscription  comes  from  Tauromcnium  or  Taormina
in  Sicily — not  yet  then  a  tourist  centre.  Here  we  possess  some
of  the  actual  accounts  of  the  city  over  a  period  of  several  years.
Amongst  them  are  those  of  the  '  corn-wardens ',  who  keep  the
public  granary  and  sell  the  corn  to  the  citizens.  This  corn
comes  into  their  hands  from  two  sources,  partly  from  officials
called  '  corn-buyers ',  whose  business  it  is  to  stock  the  granary  on
the  State's  behalf  by  buying  from  merchants,  and  partly  from
other  officials  called  '  receivers  ',  who  draw  the  produce  from  the
State  lands,  which  are  being  cultivated,  as  at  Samos,  by  private
farmers.  In  time  of  distress,  therefore,  the  responsibility  would
rest  with  the  corn-wardens  (to  whom  the  subordinate  officials
were  themselves  responsible),  who  could  be  called  to  account  by
the  people  for  want  of  foresight  in  making  provision  for  them.^

If  a  small  town  like  Taormina  found  it  necessary  to  employ
no  less  than  three  sets  of  officials  to  be  sure  of  its  commissariat,
what  of  a  large  importing  city  like  Athens  where  the  problem
assumed  so  much  greater  dimensions  ?

Let  us  watch  the  commissariat  policy  of  Athens,  as  her  states-
men watched  it,  from  outwards  home,  from  the  first  shipping  of
the  corn  to  its  sale  in  the  Agora  of  Athens.

The  importing  city's  first  task,  of  course,  is  to  make  a  com-
mercial treaty  with  a  corn-growing  country,  so  that  her  merchants
may  have  a  right  to  take  their  ships  there  to  fetch  it.  Athens's
earliest  connexions  seem  to  have  been  with  Cyprus  and  Egypt.
When  these  markets  were  closed  to  her  by  the  hostility  of  Persia,
their  ruling  power,  she  fought  hard  to  reopen  them.  She  sent
several  expeditions  to  '  liberate '  Cyprus,  and  when  Egypt
seemed  ready  to  throw  off  the  Persian  yoke  she  entered  into
relations  with  a  native  prince,  who  was  prepared  to  grant  her
merchants  '  the  free  run  of  his  country '.  When  these  schemes
broke  down,  she  forced  her  way  through  the  Hellespont  and
the  Bosporus,  and  established  connexions  with  the  princelets  of
South  Russia,  where,  as  Herodotus  says,  men  actually  '  grow
corn  not  to  eat  but  to  sell '.  This  last  relation,  which  was  con-
firmed by  a  personal  visit  from  Pericles,  undertaken  when  the

and  Roman  residents,  and  all  the  slaves  and  their  sons'— very  different  from
the  elaborately  organized  Roman  shows  and  distributions  which  took  their
rise  out  of  these  pleasant  little  City  State  functions.

'  Dittenberger,  no.  515,  especially  note  15.     The  date  is  about  100  B.C.


3./;  KCOXOMICS  f'ART  iir

Bosporus  artery  harl  been  safely  joined  after  the  temporary  re-
volt of  Byzantium,  remained,  for  the  rest  of  the  fifth  century
and  afterwards,  the  main  source  of  the  Athenian  food-supply.
How  important  it  was  may  be  seen  by  the  honours  that  Athens
found  it  politic  to  heap  upon  the  native  princes  who  controlled
it,  honours  at  which  home-keeping  Athenians,  who  did  not
appreciate  the  difficulties  of  managing  restive  protectorates  on
the  frontiers  of  the  Empire,  were  inclined  to  chafe.^

Tcrmission  to  trade  once  secured,  the  two  next  tasks  are  to
jK.-rsuade  merchants  to  go  and  fetch  grain,  and  to  safeguard  the
road  thither.  The  first  of  these  is  not  so  easy  as  it  sounds  ;
for  grain  is  troublesome  to  transport,  and,  moreover,  it  is  far  less
likely  than  the  other  less  bulky  'wonders'  of  the  barbarian
hinterland  tf>  prove  a  profitable  investment.  So  that  the  mer-
chants wanted  managing.  Athens  managed  them,  as  her  manner
was,  by  a  twofold  policy  of  cajolement  and  coercion.  She  wel-
comed her  merchants  with  open  arms  and  was  lavish  of  golden
crowns  and  honorary  decrees  when,  by  bringing  in  a  welcome
cargo,  strangers  had  deserved  her  gratitude.  liut  in  this  sphere,
for  once,  persuanion  was  not  enough,  there  must  be  force  behind
to  back  it  up.

'i'wo  lawH  preserved  in  J)emo.sthencs  show  us  what  form  this
compulsion  took.  'J'he  first  reads  as  follows:  'It  shall  not  be
lawful  for  any  Athenian,  or  any  alien  residing  at  Athens,  or  any
person   under  IJieir  f:ontro]  '  (Athens,  we  sec,  marie  lier  masters

'  TliiK..  i.  V4,  ••  "'M- 2,  i.  1 12.  2  ffiypnis;  ;  Diod.  xi.  71.  4  (li^'ypt) ;  Hrlt.  iv.
17  ;  I'liit.  I'cr.  20  n'f;rif;lcs  in  I'ontus) ;  no  dutr;  is  given,  but  wc  may  cfin-
fiflcntly  connect  it  with  the  events  in  439;  cf.  Thur.  i.  117;  \)v.\x\.  xx.  31  ii.
(native  prinresj.  See  I'rancfjtte,  '  I-e  pain  a  bon  marche  et  le  pain  jjratuit
Han»  )r:H  cit(;s  grecf|iies,'  in  Af/'/any/.'.s  Nirolr,  f,f;neva,  1905,  pp.  135  ff.  In
this  artif  le,  which  shoiilfl  Ik:  rf;priritcfl  in  a  form  less  encumbered  with  other
matter,  there  are  a  number  of  helpful  references.  Its  conclusions  have  been
but  little  affr:cle'l  by  the  recf:nt  and  more  lengthy  treatment  of  a  part  of  the
subject  in  '  I,'Ai>provisionnement  rl'Athtnes  en  ble  au  Vet  au  iv"  siecic ',
by  I,,  (iernet  ^ Mrlnny^rs  (iltisloirc  (incicnnn^  I'aris,  l<jo<j).  ficrnet  has  brought
tfjgeiher  a  commendable  number  of  facts  and  references  ;  but  his  economic
foundalionH  arc  unstable.  For  instan' e,  he  not  only  upholds  the  old  impos-
sibh;  figure  of  3rx;,ooo  slaves  for  Attica  but  fjuotes  with  approval  the
anfi'iualed  heresy  that  economic  crises  in  f ircece  were  apt  to  be  due  to  the
influx  f>f  cheap  f  orn  (\>.  330  note),  i.  e.  that  protective  corn-duties  would  at
times  have  been  beneficial.  'J'his  has  been  definitely  disproved  even  for  the
far  larg«;r  and  looser  circumstances  of  Rome.  Sec  Ferrero,  lirtialness  and
l>i'(.li)ir  of  Rome,  vol.  ii,  Appendix  I,  supplemented  by  Salvioli,  Capitdlisme,
pp.  i^-^ff.


CHAP.  XIII  SEA-POWER  :{57

keep  an  eye  on  the  use  of  their  slaves'  savings),  '  to  lend  out
money  on  a  ship  which  is  not  commissioned  to  bring  corn
to  Athens, — or  anything  else  which  is  particular!)'  mentioned.'
Here  the  last  words  probably  do  not  form  part  of  the  original
law,  but  are  substituted  by  the  orator,  for  the  sake  cf  brevity,  for
a  long  list  of  other  specified  necessaries — such  as  the  ship-building
materials  to  which  we  have  already  referred.  Even  with  this
concession,  the  law  is  stringent  enough,  and  must  have  been  felt
as  a  serious  inconvenience  to  the  trading  community.

The  second  law  is  still  more  drastic.  It  prohibited  any  person
resident  in  the  Athenian  State  from  transporting  grain  direct  to
any  other  harbour  but  the  Piraeus.  The  effect  of  these  two  laws
is  obvious.  No  merchant  could  leave  the  Crimea  or  Egypt
without  grain  in  his  hold,  and  this  would  act  as  a  magnet  to
draw  him  back  to  Athens.  Even  if  he  fell  in  with  a  lucky
famine  by  the  way,  he  would  not  dare  to  touch  the  treasure
which  he  was  carrying  in  ballast :  for  the  one  point  on  which  all
our  three  texts  agree  is  that  the  penalties  for  breaking  this
particular  law  were  severe  *  to  the  uttermost  '.^

The  way  home  was,  of  course,  safeguarded  by  the  general  sea-
power  of  Athens.  But  she  took  more  special  measures  to  make
sure  that  her  commands  were  respected.  At  Sestos  in  the  Darda-
nelles, the  most  dangerous  point  of  her  most  frequented  corn-
route,  she  stationed  a  special  board  of  officials,  the  Wardens
of  the  Hellespont,  to  exercise  control  over  the  passing  ships  and
see  that  they  headed  straight  for  Piraeus.  A  decree  from  the
early  years  of  the  Peloponnesian  War  shows  us  Athens  granting
permission  to  a  small  town  on  the  ]\Iacedonian  coast  to  have  her
corn  conveyed  to  her  direct  from  Byzantium,  instead  of  by  way
of  Piraeus,  and  giving  the  Wardens  instructions  to  facilitate  this
privilege.  The  terms  of  the  inscription  indicate  how  stringent
was  the  ordinary  rule  and  how  great  and  gracious  the  concession.^

'  First  law:  Dem.  xxxv.  51  ;  second:  xxxiv.  37,  xxxv.  50;  Lycurgus, /«
Leocr.  27.

-  Hicks  and  Hill,  Xo.  60,  who  speak  as  though  the  Wardens  were  stationed
at  Byzantium.  Of  course  their  post  was  in  the  Hellespont,  as  their  name
implies,  probably  at  Sestos  (see  Thuc.  viii.  62.  3,  I02.  i  ;  Hdt.  ix.  115)  ;
Pisistratus  preferred  Sigeum  :  Hdt.  v.  94.  We  have  no  means  of  knowing
how  widely  the  privilege  granted  in  the  decree  was  extended.  In  Thuc.  iii.
2.  2  Mytilene  awaits  'archers  and  corn  from  the  Black  Sea',  clearly  coming
direct,  and,  so  far  as  the  corn  was  concerned,  probably  by  leave  of  the
Dardanelles  officials.


358  ECONOMICS  i>art  hi

So  the  corn-ships  sailed  out  of  the  narrows,  turned  South
with  the  current  at  the  point  of  Sigeum,  threaded  their  way
through  the  islands,  passed  close  under  the  cliff  of  Sunium,  with
its  gleaming  temple  overhead,  and  found  themselves  unloading  at
the  Piraeus.  But  the  owners  of  the  cargo  were  not  yet  relieved
from  all  further  regulations.  The  grain  had  to  be  placed  in  the
official  warehouse,  where  a  special  staff  of  ten  inspectors  was
employed  to  ensure  that  two-thirds  of  it  was  conveyed  direct  to
the  Athenian  market.  The  remaining  third,  under  ordinary
circumstances,  the  merchants  were  free  to  re-export.^

One  last  transaction,  and  we  take  leave  of  our  merchant-skipper.
He  has  still  to  dispose  of  his  two-thirds  to  the  local  retailers.
Here  again  he  needs  to  be  careful,  for  the  State  forbids  him  to
sell  more  than  fifty  '  measures  '  to  any  one  dealer.  The  object  of
this  provision  was  clear :  to  keep  the  grain  in  many  hands  and
prevent  any  attempts  to  '  corner  the  market '.  But,  like  many
such  laws,  it  was  liable  to  produce  the  very  results  which  it
wished  to  avert.  For  the  merchant-skipper  was  just  as  much
a  possible  monopolist  as  the  local  retailer  or  miller,  and  if  there
were  only  one  or  two  corn-ships  in  harbour  and  the  city's  store
was  getting  low,  he  could  set  the  retailers  by  the  ears  and  make
them  run  one  another  up  for  the  price  of  their  fifty  measures.
Hence,  on  one  occasion  at  any  rate,  the  law  was  temporarily  set
aside  by  a  courageous  official — that  same  sturdy  old  Anytus  who
had  the  misguided  courage  to  bring  Socrates  to  trial.  Anytus
empowered  the  retailers,  on  his  own  authority,  to  form  a  combina-
tion against  the  importers.  These,  of  course,  made  an  outcry  about
the  illegality  and  engaged  the  best  counsel  of  the  day,  Lysias,  to
plead  their  cause.  His  speech  is  still  preserved,  and  is  an  admir-
able example  of  how  an  adroit  advocate  can  trouble  the  waters  so

'  Ath.  Pol.  li.  4  (fourth-century  evidence  :  in  the  fifth  century  the  duties
of  these  special  inspectors  were  probably  still  administered  by  the  city  Corn-
wardens.  But  the  point  is  that  they  were  performed).  Warehouse :  Thuc.  viii.
90.  5.  Thuc.  viii.  4  (cf.  vii.  28.  l)  speaks  of  Sunium  being  fortified  in  the
winter  of  413-412,  '  to  secure  safety  for  the  corn-ships  on  their  way  round.'
The  fortifications  are  on  the  top  of  the  cliff,  by  the  temple,  so  that  it  is  not
obvious  at  first  sight  what  use  they  would  be.  To  keep  guardships  in  the
neighbouring  small  harbour  would  seem  more  practical.  But  the  '  safety '
spoken  of  is  probably  against  the  weather  and  attacks  from  the  land,  not
against  privateers  :  ships  sailing  by  in  the  winter  could  put  in  and  wait  at
Sunium  in  spite  of  the  Peloponnesian  occupation  of  Attica.  Athens,  in  fact,
was  reduced  to  fortifying  a  sort  of  Pylos  in  her  own  home-country.


CIIAI'.  \ni  SEy\-PO\VKR  <^',g

as  to  conceal  the  real  point  at  issue.  But  he  has  now  at  last  met
with  an  interpreter  who  is  his  match  in  acutcness.and  Wilamowitz
has  succeeded  (far  better  no  doubt  than  Lysias's  opponent  at  the
time)  in  making  us  sorry  for  those  '  poor  devils  '  the  retailers.^

The  warehouse-bargaining  at  length  completed,  the  corn  is
carried  to  market.  But  its  vicissitudes  are  not  yet  over.  Whereas
ordinary  articles  are  merely  under  the  general  supervision  of  the
Clerks  of  the  Market,  there  is  a  special  board  of  Corn- wardens,
at  first  five,  later  as  many  as  twenty  in  number,  to  watch  over  its
sale.  Their  duty  was  not  exactly  to  fix  prices  (though  it  very
nearly  came  to  that),  but  to  secure  fair  play  to  the  general  public.
This  included,  for  instance,  the  right  to  prevent  either  the  millers
or  the  bakers  from  making  too  large  a  profit  ;  the  prices  of  flour
and  loaves  were  to  be  maintained  at  a  level  strictly  in  proportion
to  the  cost  of  the  raw  material.  A  still  more  delicate  duty  was
the  task  of  persuading  the  sellers  of  the  grain  to  keep  to  the
'  established  price  '  and  forego  high  profits  when  a  scarcity  placed
them  within  their  reach.  '  The  established  price  is  the  selling  price
fixed,  so  to  speak,  at  the  Corn  Exchange,  and  the  price  at  which,  at
a  pinch,  the  State  itself  sells  corn.'  '  But  the  State  never  ventures
on  such  an  act  of  violence  as  to  forbid  individual  dealers  to  exceed
it.  All  it  does  is  to  employ  all  possible  means  of  persuasion  to
induce  dealers  to  be  generous  enough  voluntarily  to  adopt  this
price.'  In  fifth-century  Athens,  where  honour  and  public  duty
were  more  to  most  men  than  gold  or  silver,  such  means  were  still
effectual.  Later  on  they  were  not,  as  we  can  see,  if  by  nothing
else,  by  the  multiplication  of  the  ofificials  who  dealt  with  the
corn-supply.2

This  then  is  what  Pericles  meant,  when,  using  the  old  sanctified
Conservative  phrase,  he  told  his  hearers  that  the  city  was  *  most
completely  self-sufiicient  both  for  war  and  for  peace  '.  To  the
casual  listener  the  words  would  suggest  the  creaking  of  the  corn-
wains  as  they  bore  the  harvest  from  the  fields  to  the  granary.
But  Pericles,  as  he  spoke  then,  saw  the  watchers  at  Sestos  and
the  far  lands  of  the  '  Ploughing  Scythians  '.

^  Lysias,  xxii  ;  Wilamowitz,  A.  A.,  vol.  ii,  pp.  374  ft".  The  date  of  the  speech
is  the  early  months  of  386,  just  before  the  signing  of  the  King's  Peace,  with
which  the  high  price  of  corn  had  undoubtedly  something  to  do.

^  Wilamowitz,  y^.  .^.,  vol.  i,  p.  220,  especially  note  67;  At/i.  Pol.  li.  3;
Dem.  xxxiv.  39,  Ivi.  8  (' established  price').  Compare  the  inscriptions  dis-
cussed by  Wilhelm  in  Hermes,  vol.  xxiv,  pp.  148  ft",  and  Ditt.  no.  152.


CHAPTER    XIV

IMPERIAL  ECONOMICS:   FREE  INTERCOURSE

^EnfCTfpxerni  ^u'l  ^fyedm  rrjs  Tro'Xetoy  eV  na<T>]S  y^i  ra  navra. —  Pericles  in
Thuc.  ii.  38.

The  greatness  of  our  City  draws  the  produce  of  the  world  into  our
harbour,

L'effet  nature!  dn  commerce  est  de  porter  a  la  paix.  Deux  nations  qui
negocient  ensemble  se  rendent  reciproquementdependantcs  :  si  I'une  a  interet
d'acheter,  I'autre  a  interet  de  rendre  ;  et  toutes  les  unions  sont  fondces  sur
des  besoins  mutuels.— MONTESQUIEU,  Esprit  des  Lois  xx.  2,

With  b.er  food-supply  assured  Athens  was  free  to  grow.
The  one  great  barrier  in  the  path  of  her  material  progress  was
removed.  She  had  transformed  herself,  by  infinite  pains,  from
a  City  to  an  Empire.  She  had  only,  as  Pericles  said,  to  keep
what  she  had  won,  to  sustain  the  effort  her  fathers  had  made,
and  however  great  she  grew,  she  need  never  fear  starvation.  Her
economic  revolution  was  achieved,  and,  as  with  Western  Europe
at  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century,  all  civilization  seemed
to  lie  before  her.  She  had  done  much  on  small  means,  with
tyrants  to  control  her,  and  only  the  slender  resources  of  Attica
to  draw  upon.  What  would  she  not  accomplish  now,  in  the
flush  of  liberty,  with  the  whole  world  within  reach  to  contribute
to  her  designs  ?  ^

So  her  prospects  seemed  to  Pericles  and  his  fellows,  the  men,
and  the  sons  of  the  men,  who  made  Athens  self-sufficient.  They
looked  forward  to  an  era  of  material  prosperity  and  spiritual
advance,  promoted  and  safeguarded  by  the  armed  peace  of  the

'  There  is  more  than  a  verbal  connexion,  as  the  Funeral  Speech  repeatedly
emphasizes,  between  political  freedom  and  free  trade.  Cf.  Hdt.  v.  66  :
*  Athens  was  great  before,  but  when  she  had  got  rid  of  the  tyrants  she  became
greater  still' :  Herodotus  is  almost  apologizing,  to  his  free  trade  democratic
fifth-century  audience,  for  the  economic  progress  Athens  made  under  the
Pisistratids.


CHAP.  XIV  FREE   INTERCOURSE  361

Athenian  Empire.  There  nuisl  be  no  question  about  tlic  supre-
macy of  the  Athenian  navy  :  no  sacrifice  of  time  and  money
must  be  spared  to  secure  its  efficiency.  Athenians  must  set  the
world  an  example  of  civic  devotion  to  the  famous  service  on  which
their  all  depended.  But  this  was  only  the  foundation  of  Pericles'
imperial  theory.  Whatever  devotion  they  may  inspire,  navies
and  defences  are  only  the  means  to  a  spiritual  end,  and  Pericles
never  made  the  mistake  of  confusing  means  with  ends.  With  the
clear-sightedness  of  his  race  and  time,  he  kept  his  gaze  fixed
upon  essentials.  Athens  must  lead  the  world  in  arms  because
she  is  to  lead  it  also  in  civilization.  She  is  to  be  mistress  in  the
double  sense  of  both  ruler  and  teacher.^

What  is  she  to  teach  ?  For  the  answer  we  must  turn  once
more  to  the  Funeral  Speech.  Not  art  or  literature  or  what  we
moderns  think  of  as  Hellenism,  but  simply  the  practice  of  civic
virtue,  '  what  a  good  life  is,  from  its  first  signs  of  power  to  its
final  consummation.'  But  Athens,  since  she  had  become  an
Empire,  had  raised  her  standard  of  civic  virtue  far  above  the
dull  round  of  petty  duties  which  we  are  apt  to  associate  with  the
name.  If  her  citizens  are  truly  to  be  'an  education  to  Greece',
they  must  find  room  in  their  natures,  and  time  in  their  lives,  for
the  new  world  of  art  and  of  ideas  which  was  being  opened  out
to  them  by  their  free  contact  with  the  outside  world.  They  must
go  about  their  work,  not  with  the  stolid  conscientiousness  of  the
Spartan,  but  brightly  and  joyfully,  with  '  independence  of  spirit,
manysidedness  of  attainment,  and  ease  and  grace  and  spontaneity
of  behaviour  '.  They  must  welcome  with  open  arms  all  that  the
world  has  to  offer  them — as  their  City,  according  to  tradition,
had  always  been  glad  to  open  her  arms  to  strangers  from  every
part.  They  must  be  lovers  of  all  beauty  and  of  all  wisdom — the
one  without  extravagance  and  the  other  without  unmanlincss.
Only  so  would  they  be  able,  not  by  their  words  but  by  their
deeds,  to  teach  mankind  the  great  secret,  which  no  other  body
of  citizens  has  ever  toiled  so  earnestly  to  reveal,  how  men  can
and  ought  to  live  together  in  civilized  society— how  Liberty  and

'  Thuc.  ii.  37,  41,  61.  I,  cf.  i.  144.  I,  iv.  62.  2.  Pericles  regarded  the
Peloponnesian  War  as  a  necessary  interlude  to  clear  the  air,  but  always
seems  to  be  looking  forward  to  the  permanent  settlement  which  was  to  follow
it.  So  did  the  architect  whom  he  employed  on  the  Propylaea  and  the
Erechtheum.


362  ECONOMICS  PART  III

Goodness,  Beauty  and  Knowledge  and  Justice,  can  make  their
dwelling-place  together  and  fill  their  community  with  happiness.^

If  Athens  was  to  accompli-sh  this  great  civilizing  mission  two
material  prerequisites  were  indispensable — absolute  security  and
adequate  wealth.  We  have  seen  that  the  first  was  guaranteed
by  her  sea- power.     How  was  she  to  secure  the  second  ?

This  question,  which  we  must  now  attack,  formed  the  standing
problem  of  Athenian  statesmanship  in  the  fifth  century.     Round

'  Cf.  Thuc.  i.  2.  6  with  the  similar  ideas  in  the  Funeral  Speech.  To  welcome
foreigners  and  to  assimilate  foreign  ideas  were  kindred  notions  in  men's
minds.  The  Athenian  community  during  the  Periclean  time  must  be  regarded
as  the  most  successful  example  of  social  organization  known  to  history.  Its
society,  that  is,  was  so  arranged  ('organized'  is  too  deliberate  a  word)  as  to
make  the  most  and  the  best  of  the  human  material  at  its  disposal.  Without
any  system  of  national  education,  in  our  sense  of  the  word,  it  '  drew  out '  of
its  members  all  the  power  and  goodness  that  was  in  them.  Gallon  noted
{Hereditary  Genius,  ed.  1892,  pp.  329-30,  cf.  the  table  on  p.  30)  what  an
exceptional  number  of  '  illustrious  persons  '  Athens  produced  at  this  time,
and  attempted  to  show  that  the  causes  favourable  to  their  production  must
also  have  produced  a  corresponding  and  far  greater  number  of  persons  who,
without  possessing  what  the  world  calls  'genius',  were  of  exceptional  ability:
in  other  words,  that  the  general  spiritual  level  of  the  community  was  astonish-
ingly high.  '  The  average  ability  of  the  Athenian  race  is,  on  the  lowest  possible
estimate,  very  nearly  two  grades  higher  than  our  own,  that  is,  about  as  much  as
our  race  is  above  that  of  the  African  Negro.  This  estimate,  which  may  appear
prodigious  to  some,  is  confirmed  by  the  quick  intelligence  and  high  culture  of
the  Athenian  commonalty,  before  whom  literary  works  were  recited  and  works
of  art  exhibited  of  a  far  more  severe  character  than  could  possibly  be  appre-
ciated by  the  average  of  our  race.'  This  is  true,  but  the  eugenic  moral  which
(Jalton  draws  from  it  is  not  convincing  :  that,  '  by  a  system  of  partly  un-
conscious selection,  Athens  built  up  a  magnificent  breed  of  human  animals,'
which  '  in  the  space  of  one  century'  (530-430  B.C.)  produced  fourteen  *  illus-
trious persons  '•  So  far  as  Greek  selection  was  conscious,  it  was  exercised
without  any  regard  to  mental  and  moral  qualities  (cf.  p.  326  above).  Breed  may
explain  some,  but  by  no  means  all  of  the  greatness  of  ancient  Greece.  Why
should  all  this  capacity  flower  just  at  Athens  and  just  at  this  time .'  Clearly
not  because  the  Athenians  suddenly  began  to  be  born  clever,  but  owing  to
social  causes.  We  are  apt  to  forget  that  we  owe  the  Parthenon  sculptures
not  merely  to  the  genius  of  Phidias  but  also  to  the  genius  of  the  social  system
which  knew  how  to  make  use  of  him.  Similarly,  we  owe  the  Albert  Memorial,
not  to  the  fact  that  nobody  was  born  in  this  country  with  the  latent  power  of
designing  a  better  one,  or  even  to  the  fact  that  nobody  sent  in  a  belter  design
(at  least  one  far  better  one  was  sent  in  and  is  still  in  existence),  but  to  the
social  and  industrial  system  which  presided  over  its  erection.  It  is  impossible
to  estimate  how  much  high  capacity  is  thus  lost  to  us  by  our  own  bad  manage-
ment ;  but  the  marked  predominance  of  the  sturdier  qualities  (roughly  speaking,
of  will-power  over  intellect  and  sensibility)  in  modern  Western  life  suggests
how  great  is  the  wastage.  For  the  sins  of  Western  '  education '  under  this  head
see  What  is  and  ivhat  inigJit  be  by  Edmond  Holmes,  late  Chief  Inspector  of
Elementary  Schools,  whose  experience  has  convinced  him  '  that  under  favour-
able conditions  the  average  child  can  become  the  rare  exception  and  attain  to
what  is  generally  regarded  as  a  remarkably  high  degree  of  mental  and  spiritual
development '  (p.  303),  a  striking  commentary  on  Gallon's  estimate.


CHAP.  XIV  FREE   INTERCOURSE  363

it,  in  the  many  sliapcs  which  it  assumed  with  var)in<^  circum-
stances, turned  most  of  the  <^reat  debates  on  Athenian  poUcy.
For  on  the  right  answer  to  it  depended,  as  men  vaguely  felt,  th(-
whole  future  of  Athens  and  of  Athenian  ideals.

The  two  wisest  imperial  statesmen,  one  the  founder  of  the
Empire,  the  other  its  most  convinced  upholder,  were  in  no  doubt
as  to  the  right  reply.  The  best  way  to  make  Athens  rich,  so
they  preached,  was  not  to  rest  content  with  the  resources  of  her
tribute-paying  Empire  but  to  develop  her  trade  and  industry.  It
was  not,  as  they  knew,  either  the  quickest  or  the  most  tradi-
tional or  the  most  attractive  method  of  advance,  but  it  was
the  safest,  and,  above  all,  it  embodied  the  new  imperial  ideal  of
freedom.

Before  we  ask,  then,  what  other  means  of  enrichment  presented
themselves  to  the  statesmen  of  Athens,  let  us  turn  our  attention
to  her  commercial  and  industrial  resources  and  prospects.  Were
they  sufficient  to  supply  her  with  the  material  wealth  that  she
needed  if  she  was  to  bring  her  schemes  to  fruition  ?

Commerce  and  sea-power  go  naturally  together.  After  the
battles  of  Salamis  and  Mycale,  in  480  and  479,  the  Athenian
navy  took  the  place,  in  the  Aegean,  of  the  navies  of  the  States
of  Asia  Minor.  The  same  was  to  be  true,  in  the  long  run,  of  her
mercantile  marine.  Athens's  most  important  trade-rivals  had
been  seriously  affected  by  the  Persian  wars.  Miletus  had  been
sacked  and  its  inhabitants  enslaved  after  the  Ionian  Revolt,  and
Eretria  had  been  wiped  out  by  the  Persians  on  their  way  to
Marathon.  Other  important  trading  centres,  such  as  Phocaea,
lost  some  of  their  most  active  and  enterprising  spirits,  who  would
not  submit  to  the  Persian  yoke.^

But  the  upward  movement  of  Athenian  commerce  was  slower
than  that  of  her  navy.  Sea-power  can  be  won  at  a  blow  in  a
.single  fight,  but  in  trade  there  is  a  momentum  which  lasts  on
even  when  the  original  impulse  has  died  away.  Connexions  and
agencies  once  formed,  routes  and  methods  once  selected,  are
adhered  to  for  the  sake  of  custom  long  after  they  have  ceased
to  be  the  most  profitable  and  convenient.  This  is  true  even  in
the  modern  world,  where  men   are  used  to  rapid  changes  and

^  Hdt.  vi.  17,  18,  loi  and  the  beautiful  epitaph  on  the  Eretrians  in  captivity
in  Babylonia,  Anth,  Pal,  vii.  256  (Mackail,  2nd  ed.,  p.  152).


364  ECONOMICS  PART  III

accustomed  to  bow  before  passing  fashions :  four  centuries  have
passed  since  the  discovery  of  the  New  World,  and  the  capital  of
the  British  Empire,  with  its  wide  oceanic  connexions,  still  looks
eastwards  down  the  Thames  towards  Europe.  In  Greece,  where
custom  controlled  men  so  much  more  closely,  it  is  not  surprising
to  find  that  the  natural  momentum  of  economic  forces  exercised
a  powerful  influence.  It  was  only  by  slow  degrees  that  Athenian
traders  succeeded  in  securing  the  agencies  and  connexions  which
had  originally  been  controlled  by  their  rivals,  and  in  attracting  to
the  Piraeus  the  goods  which  used  to  be  transhipped  for  re-export
at  Miletus  or  Samos  or  Phocaea.  It  was  not  till  the  middle  of
the  fourth  century  that  Athens  could  be  described  as  the  one
great  commercial  centre  and  mart  of  the  Greek  world,  through
which  every  trader  was  bound  to  pass  on  a  long-distance  journey.
During  the  greatest  period  of  her  Empire,  while  Pericles  directed
her  commercial  policy,  '  the  trade  of  Athens  was  still  behind  that
of  the  Asiatic  cities ' — an  indication,  adds  Wilamowitz,  of  the
good  use  these  cities  were  able  to  make  of  the  security  and  justice
which  they  enjoyed  within  the  Athenian  Empire.  In  the  West,
which  remained  outside  the  range  of  her  sea-power,  her  advance
was  even  slower  ;  for  she  had  a  number  of  prosperous  rivals  eager
for  the  carrying  trade,  of  whom  the  most  serious,  Syracuse,  was
as  enterprising  and  ambitious  as  herself,  and  had  the  prestige  of
two  successful  wars  against  Barbarians  to  inspire  her  efforts.^

With  these  considerations  in  mind,  let  us  summarize  briefly
what  is  known  of  the  commercial  development  of  fifth-century
Athens  down  to  the  Peloponnesian  War,  of  the  new  relationships
which  she  knit,  with  the  prestige  of  Salamis  upon  her,  both  in
the  East  and  the  West.

The  East  was  nearer  and  more  familiar  to  her,  for  here  she  was
working  upon  ground  already  prepared  by  Pisistratus.  But  here
she  found  that  she  had  herself  placed  a  formidable  barrier  in  her
path.  While  the  coast-towns  of  Asia  Minor  were  still  on  friendly
terms  with  the  power  which  held  the  roads  up-country,  the  com-
merce of  inner  Asia  flowed  naturally  down  the  river  valleys  to  the

^  IVays  and  Meatis,  i.  6-8  ;  Wilamowitz,  Reden  und  Vortrdge  {=  Aus
Kydailien  with  different  footnotes),  notes  to  pp.  39  and  41,  based  on  '  infor-
mation, printed  and  verbal,  of  the  discoveries  of  the  last  few  years'.  For
the  prosperity  of  fifth-century  Sicily  see  Diod.  xi.  68.  6,  72.  i  (from  Timaeus).


CFIAI'.  XIV  FRl'I-:    TXTKRCOURSK  365

Greek  ports  near  their  mouths.  Rut  since  Greece  and  Persia  had
become  enemies  the  caravan  routes  had  been  interrupted,  and
the  inland  trade  of  the  coast-towns  had  not  since  been  effectively
revived.  It  is  true  that,  after  the  first  few  campaigns,  active
hostilities  languished.  The  Persians  withdrew  their  armies  into
the  interior,  and  the  Phoenician  navy  did  not  venture  to  show
itself  in  what  were  now  regarded  as  Greek  waters.  But  the  land-
power  and  the  sea-power,  the  Persian  Empire  and  the  Athenian
Confederacy,  still  remained  nominally  at  war  for  thirty-two  years
from  the  date  of  Salamis,  and  from  time  to  time  the  smouldering
fires  broke  out  into  an  active  blaze.  Themistocles,  more  far-
sighted  than  his  contemporaries,  had  the  courage  to  set  his  face
against  the  continuance  of  this  state  of  war.  But  he  was  de-
nounced by  the  public  opinion  of  his  day  as  disloyal  to  the
national  cause,  and  his  efforts  at  conciliation  only  ended  in  forcing
him  into  exile.  After  his  death  attempts  were  made  by  his
successors  to  develop  his  ideas  without  abandoning  those  of  his
opponents — to  pursue  a  commercial  policy  in  Eastern  waters
without  making  peace  with  the  national  enemy.  Efforts  were
made  to  keep  Cyprus  permanently  independent  of  Persia  and
thus  to  make  it  accessible  to  traders.  Athenian  troops  even  seem
to  have  made  a  brief  incursion  into  Phoenicia.  But  the  real  goal
of  this  policy  was  P^gypt,  at  this  time  in  open  revolt  against  the
Persian  yoke.  Athens  sent  out  the  largest  force  she  ever  collected,
in  order  to  drive  the  Persians  out  of  Africa  and  secure  an  open
door  in  Egypt.  But  she  was  playing  for  too  high  stakes.  The
effort  failed,  leaving  her  sea-power  shaken,  and  even  the  Aegean
for  a  moment  at  the  mercy  of  a  foreign  fleet.  The  young  Pericles,
who  had  inspired  it,  was  converted  for  good  to  Themistocles'
old  policy  of  peace  and  commercial  intercourse.  In  448  Athens
and  Persia  became  friends  at  last.  This  necessarily  involved  the
permanent  curtailment  of  Athenian  naval  ambitions  in  Eastern
waters.  Athens  had  indeed  secured  complete  freedom  of  access,
which  was  all  that  Themistocles  had  desired  for  her.  llcr  traders
and  travellers  could  go  where  they  liked,  as  we  know  from  the
itinerary  of  Herodotus.  But  she  surrendered  her  claims  to  the
sea-dominion  of  the  Levant,  and  was  forced  to  acquiesce  for  good
in  the  competition  of  rival  powers.  Henceforward  she  abandoned
all  hope  of  monopolizing  the  Egyptian  corn-supply  for  her  own
12  la  A  a


366  ECONOMICS  tart  ill

purposes,  and  was  glad  to  share  the  Eastern  carrying-trade
with  the  experienced  merchantmen  of  Phoenicia.  Athenians
must  have  grown  used  to  seeing  crews  of  Semite  Barbarians
at  the  Piraeus,  taking  advantage  of  the  reciprocity  which  Athens
was  bound  to  offer  them.  We  should  like  to  know  what  they
talked  about  as  they  stood  chatting  on  the  quays— how  far  they
acted  as  intermediaries  between  the  ideas  of  Greece  and  Palestine.
But  our  extant  fifth-century  writers  have  all  chosen  to  ignore  them.
Athens  did  not  look  upon  them  with  favour,  for  her  mind  was  set
upon  other  things.^

Let  us  now  cast  a  brief  glance  westwards.  Here  Athens  was
brought  into  contact,  through  her  growing  ambitions,  not  with

*  For  Themistocles'  policy  of  developing  commercial  relations  with  Persia
see  Meyer,  iii,  §  283.  It  follows  naturally,  apart  from  some  detailed
pieces  of  evidence,  from  Thuc.  i.  93.  4.  Themistocles  understood  not  only
what  sea-power  was  but  what  it  should  lead  to.  Themistocles  had  a  sharp
tongue  and  lacked  the  geniality  of  his  rival  Cimon,  so  he  was  never  very
popular  within  his  lifetime.  After  his  death  his  successors  seem  to  have  been
anxious  to  steal  his  ideas  and  discredit  his  services.— Athens  sent  200  +  ^0
ships  in  two  detachments  to  Egypt  as  against  136  +  75  to  Syracuse.  While
her  troops  were  in  Egypt  she  was  also  simultaneously  engaged  in  Aegina
and  Megara,  and,  later,  in  Boeotia  (Thuc.  i.  105.  3,  107-8),  although  her
financial  resources  were  far  inferior  to  what  they  were  a  generation  later.
We  sadly  miss  a  contemporary  account  of  Athens  during  the  tension  of  these
years.  Our  most  eloquent  record  of  it  is  an  inscription  of  the  year  459-458,
giving  168  names  of  members  of  the  tribe  Erechtheis  'who  died  in  the  war
in  Cyprus,  in  Egypt,  in  Phoenicia,  in  Halieis,  in  Aegina,  in  Megara,  in  the
same  year',  one  of  ten  similar  lists  for  each  of  the  tribes  (Hicks  and  Hill,
no.  26).  There  is  an  echo  of  these  heroic  years  in  Thuc.  vi.  17.  7,  where  the
young  Alcibiades,  arguing  for  the  Sicilian  expedition,  appeals  to  the  policy  of
the  young  Pericles.  By  the  treaty  of  448  Greek  waters  were  fixed  as  extend-
ing from  the  Cyanean  islands  (at  the  Bosporus  entrance  to  the  Black  Sea)  to
the  Chelidonian  Islands  off  the  coast  of  Lycia,  not  far  from  the  river
Eurymedon,  where  the  Phoenician  navy  was  broken  up  in  466.  It  was  taken
for  granted  that  the  Black  Sea  was  Greek.  No  Persian  ships  ever  ventured
there.  We  know  little  about  the  commercial  life  of  Cyprus,  Egypt,  and  the
Syrian  coast  in  the  years  after  448,  except  what  can  be  gathered  incidentally
from  Herodotus,  who  was  able  to  travel  freely  there.  The  relations  between
Athens  and  Persia  remained  good,  and  Athenian  missions  to  Susa  were  so
frequent  '  as  almost  to  assume  the  character  of  a  standing  Legation  .  .  .  while
a  knowledge  of  Persian  and  Aramaic  was  not  unusual  among  Athenians  '
(Wilamowitz,  Redeii  unci  Vortriige,  p.  41).  For  the  relations  between  Athens
and  Gaza  see  p.  189  above  ;  cf.  Hdt.  iii.  136  for  a  Phoenician  coasting  voyage.
Xen  Oec.  viii.  11  refers  in  familiar  terms  to  'the  great  Phoenician  vessel',
which  was  a  model  of  shipshapeness.  Little  is  known  of  any  interchange  of
ideas  between  Athenians  and  Semites.  There  was  a  small  resident  Phoeni-
cian colony  at  Piraeus;  we  possess  some  thirty  inscriptions  relating  to  it,  as
against  one  epitaph  on  a  Carthaginian  :  Clerc,  Metcqiies  aih.,  pp.  381-2  ;
Francotte,  Industrie^  vol,  i,  p.  218  (cf.  Hyper,  v.  4  for  an  Egyptian  shop-
keeper at  Athens).


CHAi'.  Niv  FREF.    I\TFRC(^URS1-:  ^|67

Barbarian  rivals,  but  with  Greeks.  The  three  next  Greek  sea-
powers  of  the  day  lay  straight  on  her  Westward  traders'  course.
The  sea-road  to  Italy  and  Sicily  passed  through  the  waters,  first
of  Corinth  and  her  dependants,  then  of  Corcyra,  and  then,  on  the
opposite  side  of  the  Ionian  Straits,  through  the  sea-domain  of
Syracuse.  Corinth  herself  commanded  the  gulf,  and  her  colonies
held  the  sea  to  the  North-west  as  far  as  the  mouth  of  the
Ambracian  Gulf.  Here  the  trader  would  enter  the  territorial
waters  of  Corcyra,  who  lived  on  the  toll  she  took  from  the  ships
that  put  in  as  they  passed  by.  Off  the  coast  of  Italy  the  limits
of  the  territorial  waters  were  not  so  clearly  marked  ;  but  Syra-
cuse thought  herself  strong  enough  at  need  to  assert  her  sea-
power  as  far  north  as  the  Gulf  of  Tarentum.  If  Athens  was  to
trade  westwards,  she  must  either  cripple  these  rivals  and  annex
and  patrol  their  territorial  waters,  or  proceed  by  a  policy  of
negotiation  based  upon  considerations  of  mutual  interest.  Here,
as  in  the  East,  Pericles  was  converted  to  the  latter  course.
During  the  whole  period  of  his  supremacy  Athens  was  at  peace
with  Corcyra  and  Syracuse,  and  during  the  whole  of  the  latter  part
of  it  with  Corinth  too.^

We  cannot  watch  in  detail  the  extension  of  the  commercial
relations  which  were  thus  established  by  Athens  in  Italian  and
Sicilian  ports.  Only  a  few  scattered  facts  remain  to  testify  to
the  growing  activity  of  her  merchants.  We  know  from  the
merchants'  marks  on  the  Attic  vases  that  from  about  480  on-
wards the  men  who  carried  them  to  their  Western  market  were
no  longer  lonians  but  Athenians.  We  know,  as  we  might  ex-
pect, that  Themistocles  threw  his  influence  into  this  movement,
that  he  had  influential  connexions  in  the  northern  Peloponnese,

^  Thuc.  i.  29.  3  and  30.  3  (Corinthian  waters),  36.  2,  3  (Corcyraean  waters),
ii.  7.  2  (Athens's  commercial  treaties  with  Sicily),  iii.  86.  3,  iv.  64.  3,  vi.  21.  2,
34.  4,  with  which  cf.  Diod.  xv.  13.  i  (Syracusan  waters).  Athens  was  at  war
with  Corinth  between  4i;9  and  451,  and  made  incursions  into  her  waters,  even
stationing  warships  at  Pegae  at  the  head  of  the  Gulf.  But  from  445  the  two
were  at  peace,  each  accepting  the  other's  supremacy  in  her  own  waters,  and
Corinth  remained  faithful  to  this  arrangement  even  during  the  Samian  Revolt
in  440-439.  See  Thuc.  i.  40.  5,  117.  i,  120.  2  (where  such  an  arrangement  is
clearly  alluded  to).  Corinth,  with  her  good  corn-land  and  her  Peloponnesian
allies  at  her  back,  had  of  course  no  reason  to  fear  starvation,  like  Athens.
None  of  the  Peloponnesian  States  found  it  necessary  to  try  to  organize  their
oversea  corn-supply.  Temporary  deficiencies  seem  to  have  been  made  up
first  from  South  Russia,  and  later,  when  Athens  monopolized  this  source,
from  Sicily  and  Egypt  (Hdt.  vii.  147;  Thuc.  iii.  86.  4,  iv.  53),

A  a  2


368  ECONOMICS  part  hi

and  had  knit  close  relations  with  Corey ra,  and  also,  probably,
with  Hiero,  the  wealthy  tyrant  of  Syracuse.  We  know  also — for
the  stones  themselves  are  preserved — that  Athens  began  to  enter
into  close  treaty  relations  with  Western  cities,  first  with  Segesta,
in  454,  and  later  on,  in  433,  with  Rhegium  and  with  Leontini.
In  438,  too,  we  find  an  Athenian  admiral  at  the  Greek  colony  of
Naples,  apparently  helping  the  city  against  an  attack  from  the
Barbarians  of  the  hinterland.^

But  the  most  important  record  of  the  nature  and  extent  of
Athenian  designs  is  the  scheme  for  the  colonization  of  Thurii.
The  old  commercial  capital  of  South  Italy  had  been  the  famous
city  of  Sybaris,  commanding  the  isthmus  route  from  the  Eastern
to  the  Western  Mediterranean.  Sybaris  had  been  destroyed  in
510,  and  her  trade  connexions  passed  into  other  hands.  Her
surviving  inhabitants  retired  to  their  West-coast  harbours.  After
a  lapse  of  time  they  tried  to  resettle  on  the  old  site,  but  the
jealousy  of  their  old  neighbour  and  enemy,  Croton,  made  it  im-
possible for  them  to  do  so.  In  444  Athens  determined  to  do  it
for  them.  The  new  colony  was  not  to  be  an  offshoot  of  Athens
on  the  old  City  State  lines.  It  was  to  be  a  Panhellenic  settlement
under  the  influence  of  Athens,  a  permanent  embodiment  of  her
new  ideal  of  the  blessings  of  free  intercourse.  Men  from  all  the
Greek  States  were  to  be  merged  and  mingled  in  the  new  citizen
body.  All  Greece  was  invited  to  take  part  in  the  enterprise.
Colonists  streamed  in,  not  only  from  Athens  and  her  Empire,  but
from  Arcadia,  Elis,  and  Achaea,  from  Boeotia,  and  the  rest  of
Central  Greece.  Amongst  them  were  some  of  the  best-known
figures  of  the  day,  Protagoras  the  sophist,  Empedocles  the  poet
and  philosopher,  Hippodamos  the  architect,  and  Herodotus  the
historian.

The  city  was  duly  founded  ;  Hippodamos  laid  out  the  streets
in  the  approved  rectangular  fashion,  and  Protagoras  had  a  hand
in  the  model  constitution.     Yet  not  all  the  wise  men  she  had

'  Vases  :  see  above,  p.  316.  Treaties  :  Hill,  Sounrs,  chap,  iii,  §  327,  Hicks
and  Hill,  nos.  51,  52.  Naples:  Hill,  chap,  iii,  §§  381-3,  Meyer,  iv,  §  435.
Themistocles  :  Thuc.  i.  135.  3,  136.  i  ;  Plut.  77/t'w.  24  and  32:  two  of  his
daughters  were  called  Itslia  and  Sybaris.  Hiero  died  in  466,  just  about  the
time  of  Themistorles'  flight.  If  we  suppose  that  the  news  reached  him  at
Corcyra,  on  his  way  to  Sicily,  we  shall  have  an  explanation  of  his  roundabout
route  to  Persia.


CHAr.  XIV  FREE   INTERCOURSE  369

gathered  enabled  her  to  live  up  to  her  ideal.  The  old  City  Slate
idiosyncrasies  were  too  powerful  to  be  lived  down.  Within  a  )'ear
or  two  the  new  citizen-body  had  divided  itself  into  tribes,  accord-
ing to  the  previous  nationality  of  its  members,  and  by  440  Hero-
dotus and  other  prominent  upholders  of  the  new  princi[)lcs  retired
ruefully  to  Athens,  leaving  the  city  in  the  hands  of  the  anti-
Athenian  majority.  The  first  attempt  to  put  the  educational
policy  of  Athens  into  practice  had  ignominiously  failed.  The
City  State  tradition  was  too  firmly  rooted.  Greece  was  not  fitted
for  Panhellenism,  as  Pericles  understood  it.  Athens  herself,  as
we  shall  see,  was  not  truly  fitted  either.^

Such  was  the  policy  of  Periclean  Athens  in  the  Levant  and  in
the  West.  In  neither  of  these  regions  was  Athens,  in  the  true
Greek  sense,  a  sea-power.  She  did  not  hold,  or  aim  at  holding,
the  lines  of  communication.  She  could  not  hope  to  annex
to  her  Empire  the  Eastern  and  the  Western  seas.  She  was
in  fact  not  a  ruler,  but  simply  a  missionary  and  a  pioneer.  What
her  traders  desired,  and  what  their  statesmen  tried  to  secure  for
them,  was  not  monopolies  in  foreign  markets  for  buying  or
selling  goods,  but  merely  access  and  free  intercourse  and  power
to  mingle  and  exchange  with  other  nations.  It  is  this  conception
of  free  intercourse  of  men,  of  goods,  and  of  ideas  which  is  the
distinctive  contribution  of  the  Periclean  age  to  Athenian  policy
and  economy.  Again  and  again  we  find  it  emphasized  in  the
Funeral  Speech.  The  generation  of  Marathon  and  Salamis  had
given  Athens  the  prestige  of  an  Empire  '  enlarging  the  ancestral
patrimony '  of  Attica  by  the  membership  of  the  Delian  Con-
federacy. The  next  generation  used  that  prestige  to  'secure
the  complete  self-sufficiency  of  the  City  both  in  war  and  peace'.
'Our  pioneers,'  said  Pericles,  'have  forced  their  way  into  every
sea  and  every  land,'  and,  as  a  consequence  of  the  intercourse
thus  opened  up,  products  from  the  ends  of  the  earth  find  their
way  to  Athens.

^  Diod.  xii.  9ff.  ;  Meyer,  iv,  §§  397  ff.  No  Corinthians  are  mentioned  as
taking  part  in  the  colony.  No  doubt  they  had  their  own  trade-connexions
and  looked  askance  at  Athens's  attempt  to  knit  new  ones.  But  neither  Athens
nor  Corinth  were  strong  enough  in  Western  waters  to  dream  of  going  to  war
to  keep  the  other  out.  Both  were  only  there  on  sufferance.  At  this  time,  as
Wilamowitz  remarks  {Reden,  p.  41  note,  from  Helbig),  'the  Sicilian  cities,
and  especially  Syracuse,  controlled  the  local  trade  with  the  West  coast
of  Italy.'


370  ECONOMICS  tart  ni

'  The  choice  things  of  Sicily  and  Italy/  says  the  Old  Oligarch,
'  of  Cyprus  and  Kgypt  and  Lydia,  of  Pontus  or  Peloponnese
or  wheresoever  else  it  be,  are  all  swept,  as  it  were,  into  one
centre.'  What  were  these  '  choice  things  '  ?  Fortunately,  an  Old
Comedian  has  given  us  a  list  of  many  of  them,  compiled  in  the
fourth  year  of  the  Peloponnesian  War,  as  if  to  show  how  little
Sparta  and  her  allies  could  interfere  with  their  arrival.  Here
are  some  of  the  items  from  regions  beyond  the  sea-domain  of
Athens :  hides  and  vegetable  relish  from  Cyrene,  grain  and
meat  from  Italy,  pork  and  cheese  from  Syracuse,  sails  and
papyrus  from  Egypt,  frankincense  from  Syria,  cypress-wood
from  Crete,  ivory  from  inner  Africa,  chestnuts  and  almonds
from  Paphlagonia,  dates  and  fine  wheat-flour  from  Phoenicia,
and  rugs  and  cushions  from  Carthage.  Athens  had  to  do  with-
out a  great  deal  during  the  Peloponnesian  War,  for  her  land  was
ravaged  and  her  land-trade  was  cut  off.  She  could  not  get  pigs
and  vegetables  from  Megara  or  her  favourite  eels  from  the  Boeotian
lake.  But  with  these  distant  delicacies  Pericles  was  still  able
to  keep  her  supplied,  until,  as  he  tells  us,  they  seemed  '  more
home-like '  than  the  produce  of  their  own  poor  farmsteads.^

All  these  were  part  of  the  good  life  which  Athenians  desired
to  perpetuate.  But,  of  course,  they  were  luxuries,  and  from  the
statesman's  point  of  view  they  could  be  dispensed  with  at  a  pinch.
It  was  sufficient  to  secure  them  by  the  congenial  Athenian
method  of  persuasion,  by  voluntary  agreements  and  treaties.
Her  real  necessaries,  as  we  have  seen,  Athens  held  by  a  firmer
tie,  that  of  undisputed  sea-power.  Let  us  glance  briefly,  in  con-
clusion, at  this  aspect  of  Athenian  trade,  for  it  is  important  for
our  purpose  not  merely  to  mark  clearly  the  extent  and  limits  of
Athenian  sea-power,  but  also  to  observe  how  far  its  maintenance
was  compatible  with  the  Periclean  ideal  of  free  intercourse.

The  battles  of  Salamis,  Mycale,  and  Eur)'medon,  followed  by
the  Persian  Treaty  of  448  and  the  humbling  of  Aegina  a  few
years  earlier,  left  Athens  sole  and  undisputed  mistress  of  the
Aegean.  In  the  decade  before  the  outbreak  of  the  Peloponnesian
War,  Pericles  extended  this  supremacy  not  only  over  the  Sea  of
Marmora  but  over  the  greater  part  of  the  Black  Sea.     By  431

'  Hermippus,  Frag.  63  (Kockj,  ap.  Athen.  i,  p.  27,  written  in  428;  Old
Oligarch,  ii.  7  ;  Ar.  Ach.  870  fif.  et pass.


CHAP.  XIV  FREE    INTERCOURSE  371

the  whole  expanse  of  water,  from  Crete  to  the  Crimea,  with
insignificant  exceptions,  iiad  been  converted  into  an  Athenian
lake.  It  became  the  domain  of  the  Athenian  people,  as  fully
and  indeed  even  more  fully  theirs  than  the  homeland  of  Attica,
for  they  relied  upon  it  more  completely  for  their  daily  bread.
No  one  might  sail  on  it  without  the  permission  of  Athens,  and
to  trespass  there  against  her  orders  was  as  serious  an  offence  as
to  invade  the  soil  of  Attica.  True,  her  policy,  here  as  elsewhere,
was  a  policy  of  free  intercourse.  She  had  liberated  the  Greek
seas  in  order  to  secure  freedom  for  the  Greek  cities ;  and  the
merchants  of  the  States  in  her  Empire,  and  even  of  those  outside
it,  such  as  Corinth  and  Megara,  could  make  in  peace-time  as  full
a  use  of  it  as  her  own.  But  they  were  only  allowed  there  on
sufferance.  Athens  knew,  and  they  knew,  that  the  moment  war
was  declared  their  trade  was  in  her  hands.  Athenian  guardships
would  be  posted  at  every  point  of  vantage ;  communications
would  be  cut  off  between  Greece  and  Asia,  and  even  between
island  and  island ;  and  the  enemies  of  the  suzerain  power,  or  her
rebellious  subjects,  could  only  pursue  their  designs  by  stolen
journeys  and  furtive  meetings,  like  pirates  and  conspirators.'

There  is  a  passage  in  the  Old  Oligarch  where  that  old  grumbler
puts  before  us,  more  vividly  even  than  Thucydides,  what  this
Aegean  supremacy  really  meant.  The  strategic  position  of
a  sea-power,  he  says,  is  infinitely  more  favourable  than  that
of  a  land-power.  '  The  subjects  ruled  by  a  land-power  can
come  together  to  form  one  city  out  of  several  small  ones  and  so
go  into  battle  all  together,  but  the  subjects  of  a  sea-power,  if  they
are  islanders,  cannot  bring  their  cities  together.  For  the  sea  lies
between  them,  and  their  mistress  is  a  sea-power.  And  even  if  it
were  possible  for  them  to  assemble  secretly  on  a  single  island

'  The  '  insignificant  exceptions  '  in  the  Aegean  were  the  heads  of  the  bays
of  Smyrna  and  Adramyttium  .  .  .  and  a  few  isolated  positions,  such  as  Anaea
opposite  Samos  (Thuc.  iv.  75  ;  Meyer,  iii,  §  292).  The  reason  why  Athens
ignored  them  is  probably  to  be  found  in  a  secret  arrangement  with  Persia.
Athenian  guardships  :  Thuc.  ii.  24.  i  (first  year  of  the  war) :  they  were  not
placed  permanently  at  the  mouth  of  the  Corinthian  Gulf,  to  hem  the  Corinthians
in,  till  the  winter  of  430-429,  after  Pericles  had  fallen  from  power  (Thuc.  ii.
69  ;  cf.  i.  30.  2).  See  in  Thuc.  iii.  29-33,  especially  32-3,  how  the  Pelopon-
nesian  fleet  sent  to  help  Mytilene  in  427  crossed  furtively  to  Ionia  and
retired  almost  at  once  '  through  the  open  sea,  determined  not  to  put  in
anywhere,  if  it  could  help  it,  till  it  reached  the  Peloponnese'.  Also  Aristeus's
two  journeys  in  i.  60  and  ii.  67.  i  :  and  v.  no.


^12  ECONOMICS  TART  III

they  would  only  do  so  to  die  of  famine.  Nor  arc  the  coast
cities  under  Athenian  rule  in  a  better  position.  The  larger  of
them  are  coerced  by  fear,  and  the  smaller  by  the  pinch  of  want,
since  there  is  no  State  in  existence  which  is  not  in  need  of
imports  and  exports ;  and  these  it  is  impossible  for  a  State
to  secure  unless  she  remains  subject  to  the  dominant  sea-power.
Moreover,  there  are  many  expedients  open  to  a  sea-power  from
which  a  land-power  is  debarred.  For  instance,  she  can  invade
and  ravage  the  territory  of  stronger  military  powers  than  herself;
for  her  force  can  sail  along  the  coast  to  a  spot  where  there  are  no
or  hardly  any  opposing  troops,  and  then,  when  reinforcements
are  approaching,  re- embark  and  sail  away,  leaving  the  land-
power  with  considerably  the  worst  of  the  bargain.  Again,  a  sea-
power  can  go  as  far  away  from  its  base  as  it  likes,  while  a  land-
power  can  only  move  a  few  days'  journey ;  for  marching  is  slow
work,  and  a  force  of  foot -soldiers  cannot  carry  rations  to  last
very  long.  Moreover,  a  land-army  must  necessarily  go  through
friendly  territory  or  fight  its  way,  while  a  naval  force  .  .  .  can
coast  along  till  it  reaches  the  territory  of  a  friendly  or  a  weaker
power.'  ^

These  arguments  might  be  copied  out  of  the  notebook  of
Pericles,  they  correspond  so  closely  to  all  that  we  know  of  his
own  management  of  Athenian  policy.  This  is  not  the  place  to
go  into  that  policy  in  detail,  or  to  show  how  every  move  in
it  rested  upon  the  underlying  assumption  of  Athens's  supremacy
in  her  Aegean  and  Black  Sea  domain.  One  illustration  must
suffice.  In  423,  after  eight  years  of  fighting,  the  Athenians  and
the  Peloponncsians  made  an  armistice,  practically  upon  the  basis
of  the  status  quo.  The  fourth  clause  in  the  agreement  ran  as
follows  :  ^  As  to  the  71  sc  of  tJte  sea,  so  far  as  it  refers  to  their
ozoi  coast  and  to  that  of  their  confederacy,  the  Lacedaemonians
and  their  allies  may  voyage  upon  it  in  any  vessel  rotccd  by  oars
and  of  not  more  tJian  five  hundred  talents  tonnage,  not  a  vessel  of
li'ar!  This  treaty  was  accepted  by  the  representatives  of  Sparta,
Corinth,  Sicyon,  Megara,  and  Epidaurus,  who  thus  acquiesced  in
the  complete  exclusion  of  their  sailing  ships  from  the  whole  of
the  Aegean.     The  contrast  between  the  ideal  of  free  intercourse

*  Old  Oligarch,  ii.  2;  cf.  Pericles'  own  statement  in  Thuc.  i.  140  fif.,  and
Archidamus  in  i.  81.  3.


CHAP.  XIV  FRKE    INTERCOURSE  373

and  the  necessities  of  self-preservation  cuiikl  not  well  be  more
clearly  marked.  Other  ideals,  as  wc  shall  see,  were  soon  to
go  on  the  same  road.^

'  Tluic.  iv.  118.  5  ;  cf.  viii.  56.  4  together  with  Hdt.  vi.  104  (before  and  after
the  Athenian  sea-power),  also  Thuc.  v.  47.  5.  On  the  contrast  and  ultimate
incompatibility  between  commerce  and  the  older  kind  of  imperialism  compare
an  interesting  passage  in  Montesquieu,  lisprit  dcs  Lois^  xx.  4.  He  quotes
Cicero's  remark  {De  Rep.  iv.  7),  '  Nolo  eundcm  ])opuIum  imperatorem  et
portitorem  esse  terrarum,'  and  points  out  that  the  disposition  and  habits  of
an  old-fashioned  imperial  race,  such  as  the  Romans  under  the  Republic,  are
wholly  different  from  those  of  a  nation  of  traders  or  '  facteurs'.  Unfortunately,
in  this  as  in  other  matters,  dispositions  do  not  disappear  when  they  have
become  harmful  and  antiquated.  Compare  note  on  p.  241  above.  A  talent
was  equal  to  a  cubic  foot  of  water  or  about  57  lb.,  so  500  talents  would  equal
about  12^  '  dead- weight '  tons.


CHAPTER  XV

IMPERIAL    ECONOMICS:    THE  FELLOW  WORKERS

Tt]v  yap  TToXiv  KOivrjv  Trnpe^^opfv^  khi  ovk  eaTii'  ore  ^fii]\aauui  dneifjyofxii'  Tii>n. —

Pericles  in  Thuc.  ii.  39.

We  throw  open  our  city  to  the  world  and  never  pass  decrees  to  exclude
foreigners.

OiKtTas  01  8vvdfxepoi.  uvovfrai  Ivn  awtpyovs  e^axri. — XENOPHON,  Memora-
bilia ii.  3.  3.

Those  who  can  afiford  it  buy  slaves  in  order  that  they  may  have  fellow
workers.

Forasmuch  as  it  is  reported  that  the  Woollen  clothes  dyed  in  Turkey  be
most  excellent  dyed,  .  .  .  you  shall  devise  to  amend  the  dying  of  England  by
carrying  hence  an  apt  young  man  in  the  Art  .  .  .  and  if  you  cannot  work  this
by  ordinary  means  then  to  work  it  by  some  great  base  me^.n.^Re»teifibrances
for  a  factor :  what  you  siiall  do  itt  Turkey,  beside  the  business  of  your  fact  or-
s/iip.     1582.     (Hakluyt's  Voyages,  ed.  Maclehose,  vol.  v,  p.  234.)

Fifth-century  Athens  had  not  only  thrown  open  her  doors
to  foreign  goods.  She  was  also  attracting  and  importing  human
beings.

Population  and  food-supply,  as  we  have  seen,  were  in  ancient
days  conditioned  by  one  another.  Once  Athens  had  assured
herself  of  a  food-supply  from  abroad,  she  could  afford  to  welcome
immigrants.  She  did  so  gladly  and  without  jealousy,  for  her
statesmen  were  wise  enough  to  know  that  all  wealth  is  created
by  human  brains  and  hands,  and  that  every  additional  worker  is
likely  to  be  an  additional  source  of  wealth.  That  indeed  is  one
of  the  commonplaces  of  City  State  economists.  The  words  of
Pericles  which  we  have  placed  at  the  head  of  this  chapter  find
a  constant  echo  in  other  writers.  '  Themistocles,'  says  Diodorus,
following  some  earlier  historian,  '  persuaded  the  people  to  grant
the  resident  aliens  and  the  craftsmen  immunity  from  special
burdens,  so  that  many  people  might  come  to  the  city  from  all
parts  and  that  they  might  easily  establish  more  crafts.'  Attica,
says  the  author  of  the  Ways  and  Means,  has  many  natural  ad-
vantages :  it  has  a  mild  climate,  a  favourable  situation,  and  is
specially  fortunate  in  her  marble-quarries  and  silver-mines  :  *  but


ciiAi".  XV  THE    FKLLOW  WORKI'RS  375

these  may  be  added  to,  in  the  first  place,  by  a  careful  handling  of
ourrcsidentalien  population.  And  for  mypart  Icanhardlyconceivc
of  a  more  splendid  source  of  revenue  than  lies  open  to  us  in  this
direction.'  What  does  he  mean  by  'a  careful  handling'?  Not
measures  of  exclusion  or  even  of  inspection,  such  as  we  arc  used  to
at  the  present  day,  to  maintain  the  standard  of  life  or  mitigate  unfair
competition,  but  steps  'to  improve  their  goodwill  ',  so  that  'all
people  without  a  city  of  their  own  may  aspire  to  the  status  of  an
Athenian  foreign  resident,  and  thus  further  increase  the  revenues
of  the  city  '.  The  Old  Oligarch,  writing  in  the  early  years  of  the
Peloponnesian  War,  expresses  the  same  opinion  in  a  still  more
direct  form.  '  The  city,'  he  says,  'stands  in  need  of  resident  aliens
because  of  the  multiplicity  of  her  crafts  and  for  the  purposes  of
her  navy.'  '  It  is  for  this  reason  that  we  have  established  an
equality  .  .  .  between  our  resident  aliens  and  full  citizens.'  The
breakdown  of  the  old  conception  of  the  city  as  an  exclusive
corporation  could  not  be  more  bluntly  stated.  Under  the  new
economic  regime  Athens  welcomes  workers  from  all  the  world
and  has  adapted  her  institutions  to  their  needs.  Solon  and  Cleis-
thenes,  Themistocles  and  Cimon,  all  contributed  to  the  change,
until  by  the  time  of  the  Funeral  Speech  there  was  in  Attica  an
adult  alien  population  of  about  125,000,  not  very  far  short  of  the
numbers  of  the  adult  citizens  and  their  women-folk.^

We  have  already  met  some  of  these  immigrants,  both  free  and
slave,  working  side  by  side  with  the  citizens  in  many  of  the  de-
partments of  the  City  State  hfe.  But  we  did  not  linger  over  them,
for  in  the  ordinary  city  they  were  but  an  incidental  feature.  It
is  only  under  the  regime  of  a  sea-power  such  as  Athens  that  they
become  a  large  and  all-important  element  in  the  population.  It
is  to  this  point  in  our  analysis,  therefore,  that  it  seemed  natural
to  reserve  their  fuller  consideration,  and  especially  the  treatment
of  that  most  puzzling  and  paradoxical  phenomenon  in  Athenian
life,  the  institution  of  slavery.

The  Old  Oligarch  provides  a  convenient  starting-point  for  our
discussion,  for,  in  his  sweeping  way,  he  makes  a  general  statement
which  goes  to  the  root  of  the  whole  matter.     He  states  categori-

1  IViiys  and  Means,  ii.  i  ;  Old  Oligarch,  i.  10-12;  Diod.  xi.  43.  3;  also
Plut.  Sol.  24;  other  refs.  on  p.  174  above;  cf.  also  p.  393.  I  calculate  the
adult  slaves  at  80,000  (well  over  three-quarters  of  the  whole  number)  and
the  adult  Outlanders,  men  and  women  (rather  fewer  women),  at  45,oco.


3/6  ECONOMICS  tart  hi

cally  that  Athens  'established  a  democratic  equahty  '  between
her  citizen  and  her  alien  popul  ition,  extending  the  bearing  of  this
statement  not  merely  to  free  men  but  to  slaves.^

What  does  he  mean  ?  With  regard  to  the  free  Outlanders,  who
numbered  about  a  third  of  the  settled  alien  population,  his  state-
ment is  not  difficult  to  explain.

Not  every  foreigner  who  came  to  Athens  acquired  the  status
of  an  Outlander  or  '  metic  '.  Many  w'ere  simply  birds  of  passage
who  came  for  the  trading  season  and  left  before  the  first  storms.
To  these  Athens  offered  no  special  privileges.  '  To  be  a  metic
a  man  must  have  definitely  fixed  his  domicile  in  a  city,  have
resided  there  for  a  stated  time,  and  be  a  contributor  to  certain
public  charges.'  In  other  words,  he  must  be  not  a  passing  trader
but  a  settler,  and  by  preference  a  craftsman.  For  what  Greek
cities  desired,  what  Athens  especially  desired  as  her  carrying-
trade  increased,  was  craftsmen  ;  she  needed  them  not  merely  to
meet  the  home  needs  of  her  increasing  population,  but  to  produce
goods  for  her  ships  to  carry  abroad  on  their  summer  rounds.
Athens  never  became,  in  our  sense,  a  great  industrial  centre;
most  of  the  products  manufactured  in  her  little  workshops  and
'  schools '  and  studios  were  made  for  the  home  market.  Still  she
was  now  attempting  to  make  her  exports  keep  pace,  so  far  as
possible,  with  the  increase  of  her  trade,  and  was  sending  out  her
merchants  and  pioneers,  not  only  with  the  wine  and  oil  which
she  had  ov^er  in  good  years,  but  with  clay  jars  to  hold  them,  with
painted  vases  and  statuettes,  with  shields  and  other  forms  of
metal  work  manufactured  from  imported  raw  material,  with
silversmiths'  work  made  from  the  mines  at  Laureion,  and  even
with  flawless  blocks  of  Pentelic  marble  for  imporlant  statues  in
foreign  shrines.  Such  were  the  '  manufactured  exports  '  of  fifth-
century  Athens,  a  mere  country  town  compared  with  the  indus-
trial centres  of  to-day,  or  even  with  cosmopolitan  Hellenistic
centres  like  Alexandria,  or  with  mediaeval. Venice.  Yet  even
this  she  could  not  attain  to  without  the  importation  of  skilled
labour.^

^  Old  Oligarch,  ii.  12.  The  word  is  tV/,yo/;ia,  the  same  that  Herodotus  uses
in  his  eulogy  of  Athenian  free  institutions,  v.  78.

^  Pentelic  marble  was  used  for  the  repairs  to  Phidias's  pediment  at  Olympia,
for  the  metopes  at  the  Heraeum  of  Argos,  and  for  some  of  the  figures  on  the
Alexander  sarcophagus  at  Sidon  (now  at  Constantinople).


CIIAI'.  w  T1II<:    FELLOW  WORK  I:KS  377

These  Outlanderswere  not  full  citizens,  at  least  after  the  enforce-
ment of  the  Law  of  451.  But  they  shared  many  of  the  privileges
and  responsibilities  of  citizens.  They  served  in  the  army  and  in  the
navy,  probably  after  a  similar  training ;  they  made  the  same  free
gifts  or  '  liturgies  '  as  the  citizens,  and  paid  the  same  income-tax  in
time  of  war,  and  in  the  same  proportion.  Their  economic  position
too  was  much  the  same  as  that  of  the  citizens.  Although  they
were  not  allowed  to  own  land  (a  disability  which  the  author  of
the  IVitj's  ami  Means  is  anxious  to  remove),  yet  there  were,  as
we  know,  at  least  a  few  cultivators  among  them.  The  majority
became  assimilated  to  the  petty  traders  and  craftsmen,  and  a
small  and  wealthy  minority  ranked  with  the  larger  merchants
and  the  rich  nobility.  As  a  class  they  had  no  special  material
interests  of  their  own.  They  were  neither,  as  some  scholars  have
supposed,  a  rich  and  ambitious  group  of  merchants  nourishing
sinister  political  designs,  nor,  as  might  have  seemed  more  likely,
a  depressed  and  degraded  class  of  immigrant  labourers,  such  as
some  countries  harbour  to-day.  Their  social  composition,  in  fact,
made  them  a  stable  and  harmonious  element  in  Athenian  life,
and  as  such  in  the  fifth  century  they  are  always  reprerented  ;
'  neither  burdensome  nor  in  any  way  obnoxious  to  the  city,'  as
King  Adrastus  says  of  the  model  metic  in  the  Stippliccs,  who  finds
his  place  there  so  fitly  among  a  little  gallery  of  Athenian  por-
traits. Why,  indeed,  should  they  be  'obnoxious'  in  such  a  city
at  such  a  time  ?  They  were  proud  and  glad  to  be  there,  even  as
outsiders,  as  we  should  be  if  we  had  the  chance.  For  they  had
been  attracted  to  the  '  school  of  Greece '  not  merely,  we  may  be
sure,  by  her  policy  of  the  '  open  door  ',  but  because  they  admired
her  ideals  and  were  eager  to  co-operate  in  her  institutions.  Most
of  them,  as  we  know  from  their  gravestones,  were  not  barbarians
but  Greeks,  in  a  position  to  appreciate  Athenian  excellence,  and
ready,  as  converts  always  are,  to  be  its  most  zealous  upholders
and  missionaries.  It  is  not  difficult  to  see  how  '  an  equality  was
established  '  between  such  aliens  and  their  citizen  hosts.  What
needs  explanation  is  rather  why,  through  religion  or  petty
jealousy,  they  were  excluded  from  full  citizenship.^

^  Eur,  Siipp.  892.  On  metics  see  Wilamowitz  in  Hermes,  18^7  (provincr
that  they  were  demesmen) ;  Clerc,  Les  Meteqiies  atheniens  (for  points  above
see  pp.  13, 25,  36,  382,  409-10)  ;  Francotte,  Dc  la  condiiioti  t/es  e'/rn/ii^trs  dans


37H  ECONOMICS  part  in

But  what  of  the  slaves  ?  Were  they,  too,  homogeneous  in
character  and  spirit  with  the  free  population,  and  ready  to  fall  in
with  Athenian  institutions  and  ideals.  The  Old  Oligarch  seems
to  think  so,  and  he  is  the  only  contemporary  authority  who
makes  a  direct  statement  on  the  subject.  Here  is  the  passage  ;
it  is  so  full  and  vivid,  and  so  pleasantly  malicious,  that  it  does
not  bear  condensation.  '  Another  point  (about  the  Athenian
democracy)  is  the  extraordinary  amount  of  licence  granted  to
slaves  and  resident  aliens  at  Athens,  where  a  blow  is  illegal  and
a  slave  will  not  step  aside  to  let  you  pass  him  in  the  street.
I  will  explain  the  reason  of  this  peculiar  custom.  Supposing  it
were  legal  for  a  slave  to  be  beaten  by  a  citizen,  it  would  frequently
happen  that  an  Athenian  might  be  mistaken  for  a  slave  or  an
alien  and  receiv^e  a  beating ;  since  the  Athenian  people  is  not
better  clothed  than  the  slave  or  alien,  nor  in  personal  appearance
is  there  any  superiority.  Or  if  the  fact  itself  that  slaves  in  Athens
are  allowed  to  indulge  in  luxury,  and  indeed  in  some  cases  to  live
magnificently,  be  found  astonishing,  this  too,  it  can  be  said,  is
done  of  set  purpose.  When  you  have  a  naval  power  dependent
upon  wealth,  we  must  perforce  be  slaves  to  our  slaves,  in  order
that  we  may  get  in  our  slave-rents  and  let  the  real  slave  go  free.
Where  you  have  wealthy  slaves  it  ceases  to  be  advantageous  that
my  slave  should  stand  in  awe  of  you.  In  Lacedaemon  my  slave
stands  in  awe  of  you.  But  if  your  slave  stands  in  awe  of  me
there  will  be  a  risk  of  his  giving  away  his  own  moneys  to  avoid

les  cites  grecques  (Louvain,  1903),  on  the  different  grades  of  privilege  and
immunity.  On  Outlanders  as  '  patrols '  (irfpinoXoL)  assisting  the  young  citizen
conscripts  see  Freeman,  Schools  of  Hellas,  pp.  215-16  and  refs. ;  e.g.  Thuc.
viii.  92.  2  together  with  Lys.  xiii.  71  ;  cf.  Thuc.  iv.  67.  2.  Also  Tod  in  British
School  Annual,  vol.  viii,  pp.  197  ff.,  where  note,  on  p.  205,  that  eight  of  the
freedmen  metics  are  classed  as  yecopyoi ,  '  farmers  '  or  '  farm-hands '.  Plato  and
Aristotle  prefer  cities  to  be  self-sufficient;  but  they  are  both  forced  to  admit  that
alien  craftsmen  are  indispensable  to  'the  good  life',  see  Pol.  1326a  20,  and
Laws  850,  where  Plato  says  that  he  will  levy  no  alien  tax  beyond  good  beha-
viour. Theories  of  Athenian  foreign  policy  based  on  a  supposed  diversity  of
interests  between  the  citizen  and  alien  populations  seem  to  be  wholly  with-
out foundation.  The  real  distinction  men  felt  was  between  the  '  resident
alien  '  and  the  passing  stranger  (^ecoy).  Note  how  this  is  marked,  for  instance,
in  the  Oedipics  Tyranmts.  Oedipus  was  (as  was  supposed)  not  Theban-born,
but  a  metic,  yet  he  is  '  numbered  a  Theban  among  Thebans '  (1.  222  and
Teiresias's  taunt  1.  452).  Cf.  the  roll  of  the  dead  in  Dittenberger,  no.  32,  where
the  fallen  are  grouped  into  (i)  Citizens  arranged  by  tribes,  (ii)  Outlanders
on  the  Army  List  {'eyypacpoi),  (iiij  bowmen,  i.e.  probably  mercenaries,  (iv)
strangers  (^eVot),  i.e.  troops  from  the  Empire.


CHAP.  \v  TIIK    F1:LL0\V   workers  379

running  a  risk  in  his  own  person.  It  is  for  this  reason,  then,
that  we  have  established  an  equality  between  our  slaves  and  free
men.'  ^

Some  of  this  needs  further  explanation  ;  but  the  main  gist  is
clear.  The  slaves  at  Athens  were  so  well  treated,  had  become
so  integral  a  part  of  the  life  of  the  city,  that  they  were  indistin-
guishable in  appearance  from  the  citizens.  Moreover,  although
we  have  always  been  taught  that  a  slave  is  a  thing,  and  a  thing
cannot  possess  another  thing,  the  slaves  at  Athens  were  some-
times rich  enough  'to  indulge  in  luxury',  or  'to  give  away  their
own  moneys '  in  order  to  save  their  skins.  And  the  reason  why
the  slaves  have  to  be  well  treated  and  to  be  allowed  to  become
rich  is  not  humanitarian  but  economic :  it  is  because  Athens
needs  wealth,  and  the  slaves  are  wealth-producers,  and  will  not
produce  wealth  unless  they  are  well  treated.

Here  is  a  very  different  theory  of  slave-labour  from  that  which
we  have  been  accustomed  to  hear  both  from  its  assailants  and
its  upholders.  Slavery,  as  we  read  of  it  in  Aristotle  and  in  the
writings  of  the  Southern  planters,  is  based  upon  a  wholly  different
conception  of  slave-nature.  '  The  lower  sort  of  mankind  are  by
nature  slaves,'  says  Aristotle,  '  and  it  is  better  for  them,  as  for
all  inferiors,  that  they  should  be  under  the  rule  of  a  master.
For  he  who  can  be,  and  therefore  is,  the  property  of  another,  and
he  who  participates  in  reason  enough  to  apprehend,  but  not  to
have  reason,  is  a  slave  by  nature.  Whereas  the  lower  animals
cannot  even  apprehend  reason ;  they  obey  their  instincts.  And
indeed  the  use  made  of  slaves  and  tame  animals  is  not  very
different;  for  both  with  their  bodies  minister  to  the  needs  of
life.'  To  Aristotle  and  to  the  Southern  planter  the  slave  is  half-
way between  free  mankind  and  the  animals,  'doomed  in  his  own
person  and  his  posterity  to  live  without  knowledge  and  without
the  capacity  to  make  anything  his  own,  and  to  toil  that  another
may  reap  the  fruits.'  To  the  fifth-century  Athenian,  if  we  may
judge  from  the  Old  Oligarch,  the  slave  is  so  much  a  man  like
himself  that  the  best  way  to  get  good  work  out  of  him  is  to

^  Old  Oligarch,  i.  10-12  (tr.  Dakyns).  The  law  alluded  to  is  given  in  Dem.
xxi.  47  and  runs  as  follows : — '  If  any  one  commit  a  personal  outrage  upon
man,  woman,  or  child,  whether  free-born  or  slave,  or  commit  any  illegal  act
against  any  such  person,  let  any  Athenian  that  chooses,  not  being  under  dis-
ability, indict  him  before  the  judges.'     Cf.  Aeschin.  Tim.  17.


380  ECONOMICS  PART  III

allow  him  to  become  assimilated  in  spirit  and  appearance  to  the
world  of  free  men  around  him.  '  In  order  that  we  may  get  in
our  slave-rents,  we  must  perforce  be  slaves  to  our  slaves,  and  let
the  real  slave  go  free'  What  is  the  explanation  of  this  strange
divergence  of  view  ?  ^

The  explanation  is  very  simple.  It  is  contained  in  the  nature
of  the  work  which  the  slave  is  called  upon  to  do.  Where  all
that  is  required  is  the  mere  mechanical  exertion  of  bodily  power,
the  slave  will  be  set  to  work  like  a  machine,  will  be  regarded  by
theorists  as  a  machine,  and  will  after  no  long  interval  be  whipped
and  brutalized  and  stupefied  into  the  miserable  likeness  of  the
dead  implement  he  represents.  Where,  on  the  other  hand,  he
is  asked  to  do  interesting  and  responsible  and  even  artistic  work,
where  a  call  is  made  upon  his  special  gifts  and  on  his  natural
ambition  and  enterprise,  he  is  likely  to  develop  into  a  valuable
and  active  element  in  the  working  community,  and  to  lead  the
theorists  and  apologists  of  his  status  into  very  different  fields  of
argument.  Broadly  speaking,  in  fact,  there  are  two  different
theories  of  slavery  because  there  are  two  different  kinds  of  slave-
work  and  therefore  two  different  kinds  of  slave,  Athens  har-
boured both  kinds  within  her  borders,  so  it  is  necessary  to
examine  them  somewhat  closely.  But  first  it  would  be  well
to  deal  briefly  with  the  institution  of  slavery  in  general,  for  there
is  no  department  of  Greek  life  on  which  so  much  confusion  of
thought  prevails.

We  have  been  taught  to  regard  slavery,  at  all  times  and  in  all
forms,  as  something  peculiarly  wrong  and  unnatural.  If  we  are
to  understand  the  place  of  slavery  in  Greek  life,  and  the  Greek
attitude  towards  it,  we  must  cast  aside  this  modern  view.  Or
rather  we  must  ascend,  with  the  Greeks  for  our  guide,  to  a  higher

'  Ar.  Pol.  1254  b.  The  other  quotation  is  from  the  celebrated  judgement
of  Judge  Ruffin  of  North  Carohna,  given  in  Cairnes's  S/dve-Powcr,  p.  385.
See  also  pp.  390  ff.  for  a  paper  on  '  The  Philosophy  of  Secession ',  from  the
Charlestcni  Mercury  of  Feb.  13,  1861,  which  is  a  most  eloquent  statement
of  the  Aristotelian  ideal  of  a  slave-society  'proportioned  with  labour  and
direction,  mind  and  matter  in  just  relation  to  one  another,  presenting  analogy
to  the  very  highest  developments  in  animated  nature.  .  .  .  The  ship  of  state
has  the  ballast  of  a  disfranchised  class :  there  is  no  possibility  of  political
upheaval,  therefore,  and  it  is  reasonably  certain  that,  so  steadied,  it  will  sail
erect  and  onward  to  an  indefinitely  distant  period '.  The  social  philosophy
here  embodied  is  not  confined  to  slave-states.


CHAP,  xv  Till':    FELLOW   W()RKI:RS  :58i

and  more  philosophic  level  of  thought.  All  labour  systems,
after  all,  do  no  more  than  regulate  relations  between  human
beings  or  groups  of  human  beings.  We  have  no  right  to  pass
judgement  on  them  till  we  have  looked  at  them  in  this  broader
light,  till  we  have  seen  what  human  relations  they  involve,
what  will  be  the  spirit  and  morale  of  the  human  beings  affected
by  them.  Hale  the  labour  systems  of  the  world  before  this
tribunal,  and  slavery  will  not  find  itself  the  only  or  even  the  most
heinous  offender.  It  is  always  wrong,  the  judge  will  say,  for
men  to  oppress  or  exploit  or  overwork  one  another,  to  treat  one
another  as  though  they  had  only  bodies  and  no  souls.  Any
system  of  labour  which  is  organized  on  the  assumption  that  man
is  no  more  than  one  among  many  other  machines  and  imple-
ments, and  is  to  be  treated  accordingly,  is  inhuman  and  un-
natural :  it  does  violence,  that  is,  to  the  true  nature  of  man.  But
whether  this  wrong  takes  place,  to  a  greater  extent  than  else-
where, under  systems  of  slavery,  is  a  matter,  not  for  inherited
belief  or  dogmatic  assertion,  but  for  careful  and  detailed  analysis.^
The  Greeks,  at  any  rate,  did  not  share  our  modern  view.
Slavery  to  them,  so  far  from  being  unnatural,  was  part  of  the
order  of  nature.  So  far  back  as  they  knew  there  had  always
been  slaves  in  Greece.  Master  and  man  was  to  them  no  more
abnormal  a  relation  than  husband  and  wife  or  father  and  child.
In  the  Epic  and  the  Tragedy,  in  the  Bible  of  Greek  institutions,

'  The  question  of  conditions  of  work  is  not  simply  a  legal  one.  Slavery  in
the  broader  sense  of  the  term,  i.  e.  treating  labourers  as  soulless  instruments,
cannot  be  abolished  by  legal  enactments :  it  is  a  matter  for  moral  forces,  for
corporate  feeling  and  opinion.  In  this  sense,  the  question  of  slavery  will
always  be  with  us,  so  long  as  the  abuse  of  power  remains  a  natural  human
temptation.  But  there  remains  a  large  sphere  open  to  the  activities  of  the
anti-slavery  reformer,  if  he  will  consent  to  recognize  the  inadequacy  of  the
narrow  legal  definition  of  slavery.  In  the  tropics,  as  Nevinson  says  in  con-
nexion with  the  contracted  wage-labourers  on  the  I'ortuguese  cocua  islands
(and  the  remark  applies  equally  to  the  free  tax-payers  of  the  Congo),  '  the
whole  thing  will  have  to  be  faced  anew,  for  the  solutions  of  our  grandfathers
no  longer  satisfy.'  But  so  it  needs  to  be  faced  anew  under  our  more  compli-
cated industrial  system  at  home,  where  exploitation  can  take  a  thousand
shapes.  Sometimes  it  startles  us  by  revealing  itself  in  forms  that  bear
a  striking  resemblance  to  ancient  conditions.  '  A  slave's  pay  is  his  food,'
says  the  author  of  the  Aristotelian  Economics  {8ov\w  fxicrdos  Ti)o(f)i]).  There
are  many  modern  workers,  even  in  the  United  Kingdom,  who  are  still  paid
largely  in  truck,  like  the  slaves  of  ancient  Greece.  The  chief  difference
between  them  is  that  it  was  to  the  ancient  employer's  interest  to  pay  them
enough  to  keep  well  on,  because  he  bore  the  cost  of  replacement.

1246  B  b


38a  ECONOMICS


TART  III


the  slave  has  his  place  in  the  household,  and  no  man  dreams  of
blaming  a  master  for  using  slaves'  services  without  reward.     To
own  and  utilize  slaves  was  not  regarded  by  the  Greek  as  a  crime
or  as  a  moral  offence  or  even  as  an  incongruity ;  it  was  too  much
a  part  of  the  old  world  in  which  his  society  had  grown  up.     Yet;
for  all  the  schooling  of  use  and  wont,  it  did  not  leave  his  sensi-
bility quite  untouched,  for,  unlike  the  modern  large  employer  or
shareholder,  he  had  most  of  his  living  instruments  close  at  hand,
and  not  removed  beyond  the  possibility  of  a  direct  appeal' to
the  senses.     So  what  was  no  sin  in  the  master  was  seen,  and
therefore  felt,  to  be  a  misfortune  for  the  man,  and  the  public
conscience  of  Greece,  which  refused  to  reproach  the  slave-owner,
yet  felt  pity  for  the  slave.     The  literature  of  Greece,  from  Homer
to  Euripides  and  beyond  him,  is  full  of  the  pathos  of  captivity —
of  the  cry  of  the  strong  man  who,  by  enslavement,  has  lost  '  half
his  manhood',  and  of  the  women  and  children  whom  he  is  help-
less to  protect  from  shame  and  insult.     The  real  horror  in  Greek
warfare,  the  great  dread  that  loomed  behind  that  glorious  and
exciting  tournament,  was  the  lifelong  imprisonment  that  might
await  the  unhappy  survivors  of  the  vanquished.     Greek  poets
and  teachers,  who  loved  to  dwell  on  the  mutability  of  human
things,  never  allowed  this  fear  to  grow  dim  in  the  minds  of  their
public.     The  fifth-century  Athenian,  with  slaves  about  him  to
help  in  his  daily  business,  listened  with  a  thrill  to  the  story  of
Hecuba  or  Andromache  or  Iphigenia,  and  returned  home  from
the   theatre,  not    yet   critical  or   resentful  of  the   institution  of
slavery,  but   resolved  to  be  kinder  and   more   patient  with   the
uncouth  young  barbarians  who,  by  some  strange  sport  of  heaven,
now  formed  part  of  his  own  household.     For  there  still  rang  in
his  ears,  as  a  solemn  and  lasting  reminder,  the  final  words  of  the
chorus  as  they  moved  slowly  off  the  stage  :

There  be  many  shapes  of  mystery
And  many  things  God  makes  to  be

Past  hope  or  fear.
And  the  end  man  looked  for  cometh  not.
And  a  path  is  there  where  no  man  thought,

So  hath  it  fallen  here ;

and  when  he  felt  inclined  to  break  out  against  the  petty  thieving
of  the  Thracian  maidservant  or  against  the  incorrigible  clumsiness


CHAP.  XV  THE    FELLOW   WORKERS  3H3

of  that  young  mischief-maker  Xanthias,  '  There,'  he  felt,  '  but  for
the  grace  of  the  high  gods  goest  thou.' '

But  it  is  time  to  return  to  the  economics  of  slave-work  and  to
the  consideration  of  our  two  classes.

Most  of  the  slaves  at  Athens  were  imported  barbarians,  for  it
did  not  pay,  on  the  whole,  to  breed  slaves  in  the  city  itself.  They
had  been  kidnapped  or  taken  prisoners  up  country,  in  Thrace,  or
Asia  Minor,  or  Syria,  or  Dalmatia,  and  were  brought  to  Piraeus
for  sale  with  the  rest  of  the  trader's  stock.  Let  us  follow  up  their
careers  when  they  have  passed  into  the  slave-merchant's  hands.^

His  first  business  will  be  to  analyse  the  quality  of  his  goods
and  to  gauge  their  suitability  for  different  kinds  of  work.  He
must  discover  which  of  his  purchases  can  be  induced  or  trained
to  work  willingly,  and  which  are  too  dangerous,  or  too  sullen,  or
too  weak,  or  too  stupid  to  become  more  than  brute  manual
workers  under  strict  supervision.  Some  of  these  last  he  ma}-
succeed  in  getting  ransomed  ;  some  of  them  will  probably  not
survive  very  long ;  most  of  the  remainder  will  go  to  the  silver
mines,  whither  we  cannot  follow  them  at  present.  He  will  be
left  with  a  pack  of  reasonably  docile  pieces  of  property.  The
men  of  fighting  age  will  have  perished  or  been  disposed  of;  and
the  females,  though  probably  a  little  older,  on  the  average,  than
the  males,  will  few  of  them  be  beyond  the  prime  of  life ;  for
there  is  no  market  for  old  women.  This  is  the  group  of  neW'
comers  or  freshmen  who  are  now  to  be  initiated  into  the  working
life  of  the  city,  to  be  trained  as  craftsmen  or  dealers  or  household
workers  or  entertainers  for  their  master's  profit."

^  IloXXat  fjLop(f)a).  tS>v  daifxovioiv,

TToXXa  S'  aeXmoiS  Kpaivov<n  deoi'
Koi  TO.  boKrjQevT    ovK  fTik((j6r],
tS)v  b'  aboKTjTcov  nopov  rjvpf  Oeos.
rotdi'8'  anff:iri  roSf  npayfxn,

BaccJiae  1388,  transl.  Murray  ;  cf.  Medea  141 5.
There  is  no  trace  in  the  fifth  century  of  Aristotle's  idea  that  slavery  is  good
for  the  slave.  That  is  simply  a  fourth-century  defence,  put  up  to  stay  the
criticism  of  a  sceptical  age.  The  fifth-century  Greeks  did  not  criticize  slavery,
but  they  often  felt  sorry  for  their  slaves.  So  it  is  to-day  with  a  labour-system
which  is  in  some  ways  equally  barbarous.  An  employer  who  reduces  his
staff  in  bad  times  does  not  criticize  the  industrial  system,  but  he  often  feels
sorry  for  the  men  he  dismisses.  But,  like  the  slave-master,  he  feels  power-
less.    The  famous  Homeric  lines  on  slavery  are  Od.  xvii.  322-3.

^  See  list  of  slaves,  called  by  the  land  of  their  origin,  in  the  household  of
a  rich  Outlander,  given  in  Hicks  and  Hill,  pp.  145-6.

^  The  Greek  formula  after  the  sack  of  a  city  is :  '  They  killed  the  grown

B  b  2


384  rXONOMICS  PART  ITT

How  will  they  be  trained  ?  In  the  true  Greek  way,  by  a  process
of  persuasion  rather  than  of  compulsion.  They  will  not  merely
be  taught  to  do  their  work  but  taught  to  take  an  interest  in  it.
For  the  services  they  are  required  to  perform  are  too  varied  and
difficult,  even  where  they  are  not  artistic,  to  be  learnt  by  a  process
of  drill  or  driving.

It  is  here  that  the  career  of  the  ordinary  Greek  slave  diverges
from  that  of  the  living  instrument  on  a  tropical  plantation.
Picture  the  two  scenes,  and  the  difference  is  clear  at  a  glance.
'  It  was  a  long  line  of  men  and  women,'  says  Nevinson,  'extended
at  intervals  of  about  a  yard,  like  a  company  of  infantry  going
into  action.  They  were  clearing  a  coffee  plantation.  Bent  double
over  the  work,  they  advanced  slowly  across  the  ground,  hoeing
it  up  as  they  went.  .  .  .  Five  or  six  yards  behind,  like  the  officers
of  a  company  under  fire,  stood  the  overseers  or  gangers  or  drivers
of  the  party.  .  .  .  Each  carried  an  eight-foot  stick  of  hard  wood,
pointed  at  the  ends,  and  the  look  of  those  sticks  quite  explained
the  thoroughness  and  persistency  of  the  work,  as  well  as  the
silence,  so  unusual  among  the  natives  whether  at  work  or  play.'
Very  different  this  from  the  free  and  easy  life  in  the  stoneyard
or  the  workshop  or  the  market-place,  or  even  from  the  manifold
daily  round  of  indoor  domestic  service.  On  the  tropical  planta-
tion fear  is  the  only  motive  required,  and  physical  compulsion
the  only  stimulus  applied.  But  once  outside  horsewhip  range
and  man.  as  Plato  remarks,  is  'a  troublesome  piece  of  goods'.
The  Greek  slave-master,  however  merciless  he  may  wish  to  be,
cannot  rule  his  household  simply  by  fear  ;  the  work  is  not
sufficiently  mechanical,  and  the  supervision  would  be  too  costly
and  irksome.  He  is  driven  by  the  logic  of  the  situation  to  supply
his  slaves  with  some  other  motive.  For  the  plantation  slave,
remember,  there  is,  this  side  of  the  grave,  nothing  to  be  gained
by  working,  either  for  himself  or  his  family.  There  is  only
something  extra  to  be  suffered  by  being  idle.  It  is  the  Greek
slave-master's  business,  as  it  is  of  the  modern  employer,  to  make
his  labourers  xvant  to  work.  He  must  make  them  feel  that  there
is  some  purpose  in  their  labours.     So  he  will  gradually  learn  to

men  and  enslaved  the  children  and  women' :  Thuc.  v.  32  and  116,  iii.  36.  2  ;
cf.  Polyb.  iii.  86.  li.  There  seem  to  have  been  few  Greek  slaves  at  Athens
itself,  though  no  doubt  they  v/ere  not  uncommon  in  Greek  slave-markets.
Plato  himself  is  said  to  have  been  kidnapped  and  ransomed  on  one  occasion.


CHAP.  XV  THE    FELLOW   \V0RKI':RS  3«5

lay  aside  (except  in  emergencies)  the  dull  compelling  scourge,
and  to  make  his  appeal  to  a  worthier  or,  at  the  worst,  a  steadier
class  of  motives — to  hope  or  ambition  or  interest  or  rivalry  or
even,  if  he  is  a  good  teacher,  to  personal  affection  or  the  true
spirit  of  art.^

From  this  initial  difference  of  motive-power  all  the  other  results
follow.  The  crucial  fact  about  a  slave,  in  the  planter's  sense  of
the  word,  is  that  he  has  within  his  own  breast  no  motive  for
working,  or  indeed  for  living  at  all,  because  he  himself  and  all
that  he  produces  belong  to  another.  A  slave  who  has,  somehow
or  other,  been  given  some  personal  motive  for  working,  and  has
thereby  recovered  some  glimmering  of  hope  and  of  self-respect,
is  an  entirely  different  being.  Roth  morally  and  economically
he  occupies  a  different  position  in  the  community.  He  belongs
indeed  to  a  new  class  of  labourer,  who  is  far  more  closely  allied
to  the  wage-earners  and  craftsmen  above  him  in  the  economic
scale  than  to  the  brutes  and  chattel-slaves  beneath  him.  It  is
a  long  step  upwards  from  a  position  as  a  slave-assistant  in
a  barber's  shop  in  the  Piraeus  to  manumission  and  citizenship  ;
but  for  the  economist  it  is  the  first  step  on  the  ladder,  the  intro-
duction of  a  new  class  of  motives  for  labour,  which  is  all-impor-
tant. A  slave  who  will  work  without  direct  compulsion  is  serving
his  apprenticeship  for  freedom.

How  did  the  Athenian  slave-master  persuade  his  slaves  to
work  ?  What  steps  did  he  take  to  restore  them  their  self-respect  ?
Our  fifth-century  evidence  is  too  scanty  to  enable  us  to  give
a  detailed  answer  to  this  question.  Broadly  speaking,  two  lines
of  policy  were  open.  It  was  possible  so  to  assimilate  the  slave
into  the  family  that  he  ceased  to  be  conscious  of  the  humiliation
of  his  status  and  was  proud,  like  a  faithful  servant,  to  work  for
his  master  till  he  died.  That  was  the  old  Homeric  method,
which  produced  Eumaeus  the  swineherd  and  Eurycleia  the  family
nurse;  and  it  lived  on,  with  the  household  tradition,  into  the
wider  world  of  the  fifth  century.  But,  with  the  great  influx  of
slave-immigrants  in  the  period  with  which  we  are  dealing,  other

'  Nevinson,  A  Modern  Slavery,  pp.  33-4  ;  Plato,  Laius  777  {bCvKoXov  fan
TO  dpeufxa  av6pa)no<s),  a  passage  which  shows  how  thoroughly  Plato  recognized
the  unity  of  human  nature  and  the  absurdity  of  dividing  off  mankind  into  two
separate  classes.  But,  in  the  Laws  at  any  rate,  he  accepts  the  division  into
free  and  slave  as  fundamental  and  tries  to  make  the  best  of  it.


385  ECONOMICS  part  hi

means  became  more  common  ;  and  it  became  generally  recognized
among  thoughtful  men  that  the  most  satisfactory  Avay  of  supply-
ing a  slave  with  an  adequate  motive  for  working  was  to  offer  him
the  prospect  of  ultimate  freedom — of  being  assimilated,  that  is,
to  the  free  alien  population.  This  method,  we  know,  was  early
adopted  in  Athens,  for  among  the  aliens  admitted  by  Cleisthenes
to  the  citizenship  in  507  a  certain  number  were  ex-slaves.  From
that  time  onwards  there  must  always  have  been  a  considerable
freedmen  population  in  Athens.  It  is  apt  to  escape  our  notice,
because  the  name  is  never  mentioned.  A  freedman  ranked  as  an
Outlander,  and  once  he  had  secured  his  rights  no  one  raised  the
question  of  his  origin.  It  was  part  of  the  Athenian  tradition  of
hospitality  to  let  bygones  be  bygones,  and  even  in  the  excitement
of  the  law-courts  the  curtain  was  seldom  raised  on  a  freedman's
past.  The  great  fourth -century  Athenian  banker  Pasion,  one  of
the  richest  and  most  public-spirited  men  in  Athens,  began  life
as  a  slave  ;  every  one  in  Athens  must  have  known  it,  but  it
might  have  remained  hidden  from  us  but  for  a  phrase  that  slips
out  in  a  speech.  '  Who  are  you,'  cries  his  son,  in  an  action  against
another  freedman,  '  that  you  should  inquire  into  my  father's
origin  ?  Who  would  not  have  been  indignant  at  such  usage,  men
of  Athens?'  We  do  not  know  Pasion's  origin,  whether  he  was
'  born  in  the  house '  or  was  one  of  those  '  Lydians  and  Phrygians
and  Syrians  and  other  barbarians  from  all  parts '  who,  according
to  the  author  of  the  IVays  and  Means,  formed  so  noticeable
a  part  of  the  resident  alien  population.  His  name  conceals  his
nationality ;  but,  whatever  it  was,  he  represents  what  was  a
numerous  and  important  class  in  fifth-  and  fourth-century  Athens.
That  to  hold  out  the  prospect  of  liberty  as  an  inducement  to
labour  was  an  expedient  in  common  use  seems  clear  from  the
consensus  of  opinion  among  Greek  economists  upon  the  subject.
Plato  is  the  only  writer  who  is  content  to  recommend  the  old-
fashioned  fatherly  method  of  treatment.  To  him  it  seemed
sufficient  that  slaves  should  be  treated  kindly  but  firmly,  as  in
the  good  old  days,  '  not  admonished  as  if  they  were  freemen,
which  will  only  make  them  conceited.'  P2ven  Aristotle  recognized
that  these  conservative  methods  provided  no  satisfactory  solution
for  the  servant-problem  of  his  da}'.  Though  he  must  have  felt
that  it  ran  counter  to  the  whole  of  the  rest  of  his  slave-theory,  he


CHAP.  XV  THE    FELLOW  WORKERS  3S7

boldly  broaches  the  question  of  freedom.  •  It  is  expedient,'  he
tells  us,  'that  liberty  should  always  be  held  out  to  slaves  as  a
reward  of  their  services.'  He  pledges  himself  indeed  to  a  further
discussion  of  the  subject,  but  in  our  text  of  the  Politics  this  is
not  forthcoming.  But  we  have  a  more  valuable  testimony — his
own  last  will  and  testament.  To  five  out  of  his  thirteen  slaves
he  bequeathed  the  gift  of  freedom.  The  more  practical  Xcnophon
had  been  forced  to  the  same  conclusion,  though  he  expresses  it
less  explicitly :  '  Slaves,'  he  says,  '  need  to  be  filled  with  good
hopes  even  more  than  free  men,  in  order  to  keep  them  at  their
posts ' ;  while  the  author  of  the  Aristotelian  Economics  goes
further  even  than  Aristotle  and  says  :  '  Slaves  are  willing  to  take
trouble  when  freedom  is  the  prize  and  the  time  is  fixed.'  In
other  words,  he  advises  his  readers  to  make  a  definite  arrange-
ment with  their  slaves,  pledging  them  their  freedom  after  a
definite  term  of  years  (or  a  definite  contingency,  such  as  the
death  of  the  master),  rather  than  to  keep  them  in  a  state  of
suspense  and  uncertainty.  Finally,  to  come  back  within  the
strict  limits  of  our  period,  we  have  the  Old  Oligarch's  statement
that  it  is  dangerous  to  intimidate  an  Athenian  slave  because
'  there  will  be  a  risk  of  his  giving  away  his  own  moneys  to  avoid
running  a  risk  in  his  own  person ' :  that  is,  of  his  paying  blackmail
to  an  outsider  to  the  detriment  of  his  master's  interest,  or  even
perhaps  of  his  demanding  to  buy  his  freedom  out  of  his  savings
in  order  to  escape  ill-treatment.  All  this  shows  us  not  only —
what  we  know  sufficiently  from  other  sources — that  slaves  at
Athens  were  commonly  allowed  to  possess  money  of  their  own,
but  suggests  that  the  thought  which  was  constantly  in  their
minds  as  they  were  earning  it  was  the  ultimate  purchase  of  their
freedom.  We  hardly  need  the  evidence.  To  slaves  and  prisoners
at  all  times  liberty,  even  liberty  to  starve,  has  loomed  in  the
distance  as  the  only  good.  Fifth-century  Athens  was  surely  no
exception  to  this  rule.^

^  Dem.  xlv.  81-2  (Pasion:  cf.  Is.  xvii  for  his  earlier  life,  uhich  is  vaguely
described,  §  22,  as  '  humble ')  ;  Ways  and  Means  ii.  3  ;  Plato,  Laws  777  :  in
915  he  recognizes  that  he  must  provide  for  freedmen,  and  lays  down  the  signi-
ficant condition  that  they  are  not  to  be  richer  than  their  former  masters.
Ar.  Pol.  1275  b  36,  1330  a  32  ;  Diog.  Laert.  v.  i.  9  (Aristotle's  will :  his  three
successors  at  the  Lyceum  increased  the  proportion  of  manumissions.  The
first  freed  five  out  of  nine,  the  second  four  out  of  six,  the  third  eleven  out  of
twelve).     Xen.  Oec.  v.  16;    [Ar.]  Oec.  1344  b  15:   the  whole  discussion  of


388  ECONOMICS  part  hi

The  material  resources  of  Athens,  then,  were  not  built  up,  as
is  so  often  said,  on  a  foundation  of  slave-labour.     They  were

slavery  here  is  full  of  valuable  hints  and  suggestions.  On  pocket-money  see
Menander,  Hero  11.  l-io  (Teubner),  where  one  slave  offers  to  look  after
another's  nest-egg  if  he  has  got  into  trouble  and  is  to  be  chained  and  sent  to  the
mill  (the  usual  threat )  as  a  punishment.  Unfortunately  our  detailed  inscriptional
evidence  about  manumission  is  almost  all  of  it  later  than  the  fifth  century.
This  seems  to  be  partly  accidental,  as  Calderini,  who  has  collected  it,  holds
that  the  few  inscriptions  which  have  survived  from  the  fifth  century  show
that  manumission  had  by  then  become  common  in  Greece.  See  his  La
Mattoinissiojie  e  la  condizione  del  liberti  in  Grca'a  (Milan,  1908),  p.  18.
But  it  was  partly  also  due  to  the  general  softening  of  manners  and  the
increasing  tendency  to  feel  uncomfortable  about  the  institution  of  slavery.
On  this  point  see  Ciccotti,  //  IraDionio  della  scJiiavitit  nel  inondo  nnliLO,
Turin,  1899,  esp.  pp.  118  fif.  There  are  some  interesting  details  about  these
later  manumission  contracts  in  Francke,  de  vianiiinissionibus  Delphicis
(^liinster,  1904).  Two  forms  of  contract  are  specially  interesting.  One  is
that  which  stipulates  for  'living-in'  {-napd^ovr]],  i.e.  the  slave  is  set  free  but
remains  indentured  to  his  master,  sometimes  for  a  fixed  period  varying  from
two  to  ten  years,  sometimes  until  the  whole  of  the  purchase-money  has  been
paid  off  by  instalments.  There  are  all  kinds  of  special  stipulations  in  such
cases,  e.  g.  that  if  the  freedman  fall  ill  his  period  of  service  be  correspond-
ingly lengthened  to  make  up  for  the  loss  of  time,  that  in  case  of  dispute
arbitrators  be  called  in  to  settle  the  terms  of  the  contract,  that  if  a  child  be
born  to  him  during  the  time  of  service  he  be  at  liberty  either  to  strangle  it  (ft  kq
/ifc  6eAj]  dnoTJiel^ni.  f^ovauii'  ex(Tu>j  or  to  bring  it  up  as  a  free  person,  &c.  The
other  form  of  contract  (mostly  dating  from  about  170  B.C.)  is  that  by  which
the  slave  takes  over  his  master's  debts  in  return  for  the  gift  of  freedom.  This
happened  when  a  master  had  raised  money  on  mortgage  on  the  security  of
a  rich  slave.  Another  interesting  fact  revealed  by  the  Delphic  inscriptions
is  that  the  initial  prices  paid  for  slaves  are  considerably  lower  than  the  sums
paid  by  the  slaves  to  redeem  themselves.  The  former  vary  between  one  and
three  minas,  the  latter  between  three  and  five.  So  it  will  be  seen  that  the
slave-masters  made  their  slaves  pay  dear  for  the  one  thing  they  wanted —
Freedom.  Sometimes  they  are  even  required  to  replace  themselves  by  training
a  slave-craftsman  to  do  their  old  work.  Now  that  the  evidence  has  been
collected  by  Calderini,  the  whole  question  of  this  intermediate  status  between
slavery  and  freedom  deserves  careful  inquiry  by  an  economist  who  is  also
a  lawyer.  See  my  own  very  tentative  articles  in  the  Sociological  Revieiu
(Jan.  and  Apr.,  1909),  in  the  first  of  which  1  attempted  a  rough  analysis
of  the  wage-earning  form  of  slavery,  and  added  a  translation  of  a  typical
manumission  contract.  A  good  selection  of  these  is  given  in  Ditlenberger,
Nos.  835  ff.  Slave-names  are  interesting  as  revealing  the  kind  of  sentiment
that  existed  between  master  and  slave.  Appended  to  the  Dialcktinscliriften
(vol.  iv,  pp.  311-17)  is  an  index  of  the  slave  names  in  the  Delphic  inscrip-
tions, beginning  with  'Af^poa-Crd  ('Delicacy')  and  ending  with  'il(p(Xiu)v
('  Little  Helper').  So  named,  they  would  hardly  know  themselves  for  Syrians
or  Phrygians.  They  had  entered  upon  the  novitiate  of  Hellenism.  Cf
Dem.  de  Cor.  131,  where  he  accuses  Aeschines  of  improving  the  names  of
his  parents.  See  also  Wilamowitz,  A.  A.,  vol.  ii,  pp.  175-9.  The  only  names
forbidden  to  an  Athenian  slave  were  Harmodius  and  Aristogeiton,  because
of  their  associations  with  liberty — a  very  characteristic  rule ;  see  Aulus
(iellius,  Nodes  Aiticae  ix.  2.  Very  interesting,  too,  if  we  had  space  to  deal
with  them,  are  the  public  slaves  employed,  sometimes  in  responsible  posi-
tions, by  the  State  or  at  sanctuaries.     The  Ion  of  Euripides  is  an  excellent


CHAP.  XV  THE    FI'.LLOW    WORKERS  3S9

built  up  through  the  cciituriey  by  a  society  consisting  mainly
of  free  workers  ;  and  it  was  only  late  in  her  history,  when  the
structure  of  her  civilization  became  too  heavy  to  be  sustained  by
their  own  unaided  efforts,  that  slaves  and  free  immigrants
crowded  in  to  co-operate  in  the  task.  And  these  she  treated  in
most  cases,  not  as  mere  living  instruments,  but  as  '  fellow  workers  '
with  her  citizens  and  *  free  partners  in  the  Empire '.  So  we  may
clear  the  name  of  Athens  from  one  cruel  reproach  which  has
clung  to  it  ever  since  the  human  conscience  began  to  concern
itself  with  these  questions.  Greek  democracy,  we  have  often  been
told,  was  rendered  possible  by  the  leisure  of  a  population  of
slave-owners.  Greek  physical  beauty  is  connected  with  their
distaste  for  manual  labour  ;  and  Greek  art  and  literature  and
philosophy  owe  their  growth  and  savour  to  men's  enviable
freedom  from  practical  cares  and  preoccupations.  Greek  civiliza-
tion, in  a  word,  with  all  its  wealth  of  thrilling  achievement,  is
inseparably  associated  with  conscious  cruelty  and  injustice ;  and
we  can  never  recapture  for  our  own  communities  the  spirit  and
temper  of  that  heroic  time  because  modern  man  would  not
tolerate  its  barbarous  and  indispensable  concomitants.  All  this
is  false,  false  in  its  interpretation  of  the  past  and  in  its  confident
pessimism  as  to  the  future,  wilfully  false,  above  all,  in  its  cynical
estimate  of  human  nature.  Societies,  like  men,  cannot  live  in
compartments.  They  cannot  hope  to  achieve  greatness  by  making
amends  in  their  use  of  leisure  for  the  lives  they  have  brutalized
in  acquiring  it.  Art,  literature,  philosophy,  and  all  other  great
products  of  a  nation's  genius,  arc  no  mere  delicate  growths  of
a  sequestered  hothouse  culture  ;  they  must  be  sturdily  rooted,
and   find   continual   nourishment,  in  the  broad   common  soil  of


example  of  the  type.  He  sweeps  the  temple  courts  and  lives  on  the  ofiferings
of  strangers  ;  but  he  is  also  steward  of  the  temple  treasures,  and  enjoys  a  full
measure  of  'what  is  dearest  to  man's  heart,  leisure'.  He  performs  these
manifold  functions,  which  he  is  unwilling  to  surrender  for  life  as  a  Prince  at
Athens,  with  all  the  tact  and  discretion  of  a  modern  verger  or  college  porter.
See  11.  54,  102,  323,  517  ff.,  csp.  544  (tact),  634  ft'.  On  State  sUives  see
\Vaszynski,Z>>i?  servis  Atlietiiensuivi  piiblicis  (Berlin,  1898),  and,  esp.  on  their
legal  position,  his  article  in  Hermes,  vol.  xxxiv,  pp.  553  ff.,  where  he  points
out  how  much  independence  they  enjoyed  :  '  although  each  of  these  iTr/jpeVat ',
(ypafjLIJLaTeii,  &c.)  'as  a  State  Servant,  had  an  «px'?'  (Magistrate  or  Minister)
'over  him,  in  private  life  he  was  more  or  less  his  own  master',  like  our  own
Permanent  Civil  Servants.


390  ECONOMICS  part  iii

national  life.    That,  if  we  arc  looking  for  lessons,  is  one  we  might
learn  from  ancient  Greece.^

'  See  Athenaeus,  \i,  p.  265  (from  Theopompus),  on  the  introduction  of
bought  slaves  into  Greece.  The  influx  did  not  begin  on  a  large  scale  till
States  could  aftbrd  to  buy  and  keep  them.  As  Ure  remarks  (/.  H.  S.  xxvi,
p.  135)  the  age  of  the  tyrants  was  still  an  age  of  free  labour.  See  also  Meyer's
two  pamphlets,  Die  ti'ir/schaft/ic/ic  Eniivickeluns;  des  Altertuins  (1895)  and
Die  Sklaverei  im  Altertuin  {1898),  reprinted  in  his  Kleine  Sclmften  (1910),
which  gave  the  coup  de  grace  to  the  old  view  of  slavery  as  the  foundation  of
Greek  life.  For  an  eloquent  if  somewhat  extreme  statement  of  this  view  see
Paterson's  Tlie  Nemesis  of  Nations,  who  has  tried  to  think  out,  with  more
imaginative  effort  than  the  writers  he  follows,  the  implications  contained  in
their  doctrine.


CHAPTER  XVI

IMPERIAL  ECONOMICS:   THE  SILVER  MINES

TJie  Peysian  Qttcoi :  KhI  tI  npos  tovtoktlv  tiWo  ;  TrXoCros'  f^apKqs  bofxois  ;
Chorus  :  dpyvpov  nrjyr]  Tis  aiiTo'is  iari,  drjtravpos  x^^"^^-

Aeschylus,  Persac  237-S.

TllEMlSTOCLES  and  Pericles  relied  for  the  perpetuation  of
Athenian  power  and  influence  upon  the  development  of  her  re-
sources as  a  trading  and  industrial  centre.  We  have  now  briefly
examined  most  of  these.     But  one  still  remains  to  be  treated.

The  slave-merchant  landing  at  Piraeus  with  a  cargo  of  bar-
barian captives  sold  off  most  of  them  at  good  prices  into  house-
holds and  workshops.  But  some  of  his  victims  were  by  condition
or  temperament  not  fitted  for  such  uses.  They  were  goods  of  a
lower  quality,  cross-grained  or  vicious  or  in  some  way  unteach-
able.  Why  then  did  he  trouble  to  transport  them  oversea?
Because  Athens  had  discovered  a  special  use  for  this  by-product
of  slave-raiding.  When  the  first  auction  was  over,  the  dealer  col-
lected the  base  remnant.s  for  whom  no  master  and  teacher  had
been  found,  and  sold  them  off  at  cheaper  rates  to  owners  who
had  no  need  for  good  character,  or  willingness,  or  intelligence,  or
physical  beauty,  or  indeed  for  anything  more  than  mere  vigorous
arms  and  legs.  Within  a  few  days  or  hours  they  would  find
themselves  being  driven  in  a  herd  to  work  as  living  instruments
in  the  silver  mines  at  Laureion.^

'  We  possess  no  account  of  a  fifth-century  slave  auction.  But  the  differ-
ence in  quality  between  mine-slaves  and  ordinary  slaves  is  clear  from  the
way  in  which  the  former  are  spoken  of,  e.  g.  in  Ways  and  Means  iv ;  cf.
Strabo,  562  (describing  some  mines  near  Sinope) :  'They  were  worked  with
mine-slaves  who  had  been  bought  for  their  bad  quality '  (roty  nVo  KaKovpyias
ilyopaCopevnis  (ip8pan68oii)  :  the  various  words  for  slave,  dv^pdnoSoi'  ('man-
foot,'  'captive')  and  a-mpn  ('body')  on  the  one  hand  and  olKerrjt  ('house-
slave  ')  and  TTdls  ('  boy ')  on  the  other,  suggest  this  distinction  of  quality,
but  they  were  often  loosely  used.  Cavaignac  notes  (pp.  172-3)  that,  amid
the  general  rise  in  the  prices  of  all  commodities  in  fifth-century  Athens,
slave-prices  alone  seem  to  show  a  decline.  The  reason  is  that  there  was
now  a  use  for  a  cheaper  article  which  had  scarcely  been  put  on  the  market
before.     This  affected  not  only  mine-slaves  but  all  slaves,  for  the  use  found


392  ECONOMICS  part  hi

Athenians  had  always  known  that  a  possible  source  of  wealth
for  their  city  lay  in  the  silver  and  lead  deposits  in  the  extreme
corner  of  their  peninsula.  But  in  earlier  days  they  had  done
little  to  develop  them.  Free  men  refused  to  work  underground,
and  slaves  they  could  not  afford  to  procure  in  sufficient  numbers.
Moreover,  the  location  and  tapping  of  the  deposits  was  a  trouble-
some and  disheartening  task,  for  they  are  so  disposed  as  to  baffle
a  community  lacking  in  systematic  knowledge  or  experience.
Even  in  the  fourth  century  the  exploiter  who  sank  a  shaft  still
ran  the  risk  of '  drawing  a  blank  and  losing  the  whole  of  the  sum
expended '.  In  the  sixth,  it  appears,  there  were  not  sufficient
Athenians  of  enterprise  who  had  any  large  sum  to  lose.  The
Greek  world  still  relied  for  its  precious  metals  mainly  upon  the
mines  of  Siphnos  and  Thasos.'

But  in  483,  towards  the  close  of  the  short  respite  between
Marathon  and  Salamis,  the  whole  outlook  changed.  The  Athe-
nians tumbled  suddenly,  perhaps  by  accident,  upon  a  new  and
very  profitable  vein  of  ore  :  it  was  found  at  a  spot  called  Maronea,
which  is  probably  to  be  identified  with  what  is  still  the  most  pro-
ductive deposit  in  the  district.  There  was  a  rush  to  the  mines ;
every  one  who  had  money  in  hand  and  slaves  fit  for  use  hired  a
concession  from  the  State  ;  and  by  the  end  of  the  year,  if  we  may
trust  our  authorities,  the  city  found  herself  in  possession  of  a
windfall  of  at  least  fifty  talents  from  mining  royalties^  apart  from
the  profits  that  were  being  made  by  the  exploiters  themselves.^

for  the  by-product  cheapened  the  general  cost  of  production.  Slave-raiders
and  dealers  always  have  to  make  allowance  for  a  very  large  wastage  ;  but
this  must  have  been  considerably  diminished  by  the  demand  for  mine-slaves.
As  to  prices,  we  hear  of  2co  drachmas  as  a  normal  sixth-century  ransom
(Hdt.  V.  "]•]),  while  at  a  household  auction  at  Athens  in  415  the  average
price  for  men  is  166  drachmas  and  for  women  170  (^33  4^-.  and  ^'34)  ;  the
author  of  the  Ways  and  Means  calculates  in  355  that  mine-slaves  could  be
bought  at  158  drachmas  each,  and  Demosthenes  (xxxvii.  4)  speaks  of  a  trans-
action in  which  mine-slaves  fetch  150  each.

^  Ways  and  Means  iv.  29;  Cavaignac,  p.  9  (the  deposits);  Hdt.  iii.  57
(Siphnos),  vi.  46  (Thasos  and  its  mainland) ;  cf.  i.  64,  where  we  learn  that
Pisistratus  relied  on  Attic  as  well  as  this  Thracian  metal.  But  Ure  {J.H.  S.
xxvi,  pp.  135  ff.)  is  wrong  in  thinking  they  were  largely  worked.  Solon,
xii.  49,  refers  to  metal- work  not  mining,  and  the  Mountaineers  (5ta/<pioi)
were  certainly  not  miners.

-  The  two  texts  are  Hdt.  vii.  144  and  A^h.  Pol.  xxii.  7.  The  latter  puts
the  State's  windfall  at  100  talents,  the  former  at  10  drachmas  a  head.  As
Hdt.  elsewhere  (v.  79)  calculates  the  citizen-population  at  30,000,  the  windfall
would,  on  his  reckoning,  only  amount  to  50  talents,  a  figure  which  Cavaignac


ciiAr.  xvT  THI'.   SILVl'.R    MIXICS  C593

What  was  to  be  done  with  this  enormou'^  sum  ?  According  to
the  traditions  of  Greek  finance  there  was  only  one  possible  answer.
It  must  be  divided  among  the  citizens.  They  had  shared  the
city's  evil  days,  contributing  willingly  out  of  their  scanty  re-
sources to  supply  her  needs.  Now  that  she  had  lighted  on  pro-
sperity it  was  her  turn  to  be  generous.  Greek  cities  were  accus-
tomed to  live  from  hand  to  mouth,  like  their  citizens.  In  this  case
especially,  where  the  windfall  was  not  merely  a  surprise  donation
but  appeared  likely  to  recur  and  increase  year  by  year,  there
.seemed  no  need  to  be  saving.  The  calculation  was  quickly  made.
Fifty  talents  among  30,000  would  be  10  drachmas  a  head  ;  and
so,  in  ordinary  times  and  under  ordinary  leaders,  it  would  have
been  spent.

But  Athens  had  not  only  found  a  treasure,  she  had  found  a
treasurer.  Themistocles,  who  was  at  that  moment  her  leading
statesman,  realized  the  potentialities  of  the  situation  and  refused
to  see  the  money  dispensed.  He  persuaded  his  fellow-citizens  to
spend  it  instead  on  the  construction  of  a  fleet  of  two  hundred  ships  ;
and  it  was  this  fleet  which  three  years  later  saved  Greece  and
Europe  at  Salamis.  Henceforward  no  more  proposals  were  made
to  spend  the  annual  surplus  in  the  old-fashioned  way.  Athens
had  entered  upon  a  new  era,  both  in  finance  and  in  policy.  With
the  influx  of  slaves  which  followed  the  war,  the  work  of  develop-
ing the  mines,  temporarily  interrupted  by  the  Persian  invasion,
was  continued  with  renewed  activity ;  and  by  the  beginning  of
the  Peloponnesian  War  it  is  calculated  that,  out  of  less  than  i  co,ogo
slaves  in  Attica,  some  30,000  were  employed  there  either  above
or  below  ground.     Let  us  watch  them  at  work.^

The  industry  at  Laureion  consisted  of  two  parts,  the  extraction

accepts  as  the  normal  annual  state  revenue  from  the  mines.  We  have  no
means  of  esthnating  the  total  annual  production,  as  we  do  not  know  what
terms  the  city  made  with  the  concessionaires.     Cf.  also  Aesch.  Eum.  947.

1  For  slave  numbers  cf.  p.  173  above.  I  follow  Cavaignac  (p.  172),  who  is
unwilling  to  exceed  100,000,  and  calculate  as  follows  for  the  year  431  : —

Total  number  in  Attica 90,000

Mine-slaves  (adult  males  only)       ....     20,000

Other  slaves 70,000

divided  into—

Adult  males 35.ooo

Adult  females 25,000

Children 10,000

But  these  calculations  are  highly  conjectural.


394  ECONOMICS  part  tit

of  the  ore  and  its  carrying,  crushing-,  and  grinding  above  ground.
The  underground  work  was  entirely  in  the  hands  of  slaves,  who
were  thus  altogether  cut  off  from  the  society  of  free  men.  The
work  was  carried  on  either  in  shafts  and  pits  or  in  galleries.  Some
2,000  shafts  and  80  to  100  miles  of  galleries  have  been  dis-
covered. The  shafts  are  generally  deep,  in  some  cases  as  deep  as
250  feet  ;  the  sides  are  smooth  and  almost  vertical,  with  ledges
for  ladders,  and  the  expert  who  has  examined  them  calculates
that,  with  two  workmen  to  each  shaft,  they  would  be  dug  out  at
a  rate  of  16  feet  per  month.  But  most  of  the  work  was  done
in  galleries.  These  galleries  are  winding,  following  the  vein  of
the  ore,  and  were  kept  very  narrow,  partly  to  save  the  trouble
of  propping,  partly  to  obtain  quick  results.  They  are  generally
2-3  feet  high  and  2-3  feet  broad  ;  ventilation  was  provided  by
occasional  airshafts.  As  the  galleries  were  quite  dark  the  miners
worked  with  small  clay  lamps,  for  which  niches  were  made  in  the
rock ;  these  remained  alight  for  ten  hours,  and  almost  certainly
marked  the  length  of  the  daily  shift.  It  is  calculated  that  a  work-
man could  dig  out  about  12  yards  of  rock  in  a  month  of  daily
shifts.  They  worked  in  chains  and  almost  naked,  and  were
branded  with  their  master's  stamp.  In  order  to  increase  the  rate
of  production  work  was  continued  without  interruption  night
and  day.^

It  will  be  noticed  at  once  how  very  closely  this  labour-system
corresponds  to  the  conditions  with  which  we  have  already  become
acquainted  on  the  tropical  plantations.  Unskilled  underground
mining  is  in  fact  a  class  of  work  which  lends  itself  most  con-
veniently to  the  perfect  form  of  chattel-slavery.  All  that  is
required  of  the  slave  is  a  vigorous  body,  and  sufficient  of  that
lower  kind  of  reason  which,  Aristotle  tells  us,  is  necessary  to
understand  a  spoken  command  :  all  that  is  required  of  the  master
is  watchful  and  drastic  supervision,  or  sufficient  capital  to  provide
efficient  overseers  to  do  this  for  him.  The  work  is  mechanical,
unchanging,  practically  inexhaustible,  and  entirely  unskilled.  The
workers  are  almost  stationary  in  their  places  and  can  be  chained

'  For  details  see  Ardaillon,  I.es  Mines  dii  Laun'o/i  dans  VantiquUc,  and
the  same  author  in  Daremberg,  s.v.  Meialla  ;  also  Paterson,  The  Nemesis
0/  Natio7is,  pp.  190  fif.  For  other  accounts  of  ancient  mining  see  Diod.  iii.
13-14,  V.  36-8,  which  attracted  the  attention  of  Marx  {Capital,  English  transl.,
p.  219),  who  detected  how  rare  such  economic  conditions  were  in  antiquity.


CI  I A  p.  X  vr  THE    SI  L\'  F.  R    M I X  I-  S  ^q.-;

without  interfering  witii  their  efficiency.  They  work  with  only
the  roughest  tools  and  appliances.  The  work  does  not  involve
disease  (which  would  mean  loss  of  capital),  but  is  yet  sufficiently
exhausting  to  lower  the  vitality  and  so  make  it  likely  that  death
will  follow  closely  upon  the  failure  of  working  power.  It  is
carried  on  in  a  number  of  separate  pits  and  galleries  underground,
under  conditions  where  the  amount  of  work  performed  can  easily
be  measured  and  tested,  and  where  the  task  of  supervision  is
extraordinarily  simple  and  inexpensive.  The  overseer  (generally
a  trusted  superior  slave)  could  probably  look  after  the  entire  pro-
perty of  a  considerable  mine-owner  or  concessionaire.  Above  all,
it  is  expended  in  production  of  silver,  almost  the  only  article  for
which  there  can  be  said  to  have  been  an  international  market  and
an  unlimited  demand.^

Thus  Athens  was  gradually  learning,  even  in  the  industrial
sphere,  to  break  with  her  old  traditions.  She  was  employing
a  new  class  of  labour  for  a  new  class  of  product ;  and  she  was
using  the  one,  as  she  was  producing  the  other,  wholesale,  as  we
use  and  produce  the  labour  and  the  goods  of  to-day.  Shields  and
sheepskins  and  oil-flasks,  like  the  craftsmen  and  their  '  boys '  who
made  them,  had  an  individuality  of  their  own  ;  but  the  owls  that
issued  from  Laureion  and  found  their  way  through  the  Aegean
were  all  made  alike,  and  each  bore  stamped  on  its  surface,  like
the  brand  on  the  slaves  who  mined  its  ore,  the  mark  of  a  driving
industrialism.  There  are  still  many  owls  on  our  museum  shelves,
but  their  makers  have  left  us  no  message.  We  only  know  that
in  the  crisis  of  the  great  war,  when  their  old  comrades  in  Athens
were  ready  to  die  fighting  on  shipboard  by  their  masters,  the
sullen  crowds  at  Laureion  felt  no  touch  of  the  same  spirit  ;  they
only  saw  in  the  crisis  an  opportunity  of  escaping  in  their  thousands

^  Nicias  paid  one  talent  for  a  skilled  overseer  (Xen.  Mem.  ii.  5.  2),  He
would  hardly  have  paid  so  large  a  sum  if  he  had  needed  several :  cf.  Ar.  Fol.
1255  b  35.  The  old  are  always  a  difficulty  in  a  chattel-slave  system.  Cato,
that  most  ruthless  of  economists,  recommends  that  they  shall  be  sold  ofi"
with  the  other  old  implements  for  what  they  will  fetch-  'sell  the  old  oxen,
the  worn-out  sheep  and  other  animals,  fleeces,  hides,  carts,  implements,
any  old  slave  or  diseased  slave  or  any  other  waste  that  remains  over  '  ('  boves
vetulos,  armenta  delicula,  oves  deliculas,  lanam,  pelles,  plostrum  vetus,
ferramenta  vetera,  servum  senem,  servum  morbosum  et  siquid  aliut  supersit
vendat ' — De  Agric.  ii.  7).  No  Greek  at  any  age  could  have  written  so  stonily
merciless  a  sentence  as  this.  F'or  a  more  detailed  analysis  of  chattel-slavery
see  Cairnes's  Slave-power  \  also  the  Sociological  Review,  1909,  pp.  4-5.


396  ECONOMICS  part  hi

to  what  they  hoped  might  prove  an  easier  servitude.  For  the  rest,
we  can  only  imagine  from  modern  instances  what  their  Hfe  must
have  been  like.  '  The  doctor  had  come  up  to  pay  his  official
visit,'  writes  Nevinson,  in  his  account  of  that  Portuguese  paradise.
' "  The  death  rate  here,"  he  remarked,  casually,  during  the  meal,
"  is  twelve  or  fourteen  per  cent,  among  the  labourers."  "And  what
is  the  chief  cause,"  I  asked.  "Anaemia,"  he  said.  "  That  is  a  vague
sort  of  thing,"  I  answered  ;  "  what  brings  on  anaemia  ?  "  "  Unhap-
piness,"  he  said,  frankly.'  That  same  vague  disease,  we  may  be
sure,  thinned  the  ranks  at  Laureion  day  by  day.  Did  their
Athenian  masters  when  tJieir  turn  came  to  die  of  exposure  and
of  broken  hopes  in  the  quarries  of  Syracuse  think  of  the  souls
they  had  sent  to  the  same  living  death  at  home  ?  Surely  not.
If  they  thought  of  their  slaves  at  all  it  was  to  curse  heaven  for
the  injustice  which  repaid  their  kindness  so  ill.  When  Nicias
their  general  was  cruelly  tortured  and  put  to  death  by  the  vic-
torious Syracusans,  '  thus,'  says  Thucydides,  '  died  a  man  who  of
all  the  Greeks  in  my  time  least  deserved  so  miserable  an  end,
seeing  that  his  conduct  had  always  been  directed  with  the  strictest
attention  to  the  recognized  virtues  of  life.'  Yet,  this  very  Nicias,
the  son  of  Niceratus,  so  we  learn  from  a  tell-tale  writer,  'owned
a  thousand  men  in  the  silver  mines.'  Such  are  the  ironies  of
industrialism.^

'  Thuc.  vii.  86.  5  (cf.  Classen's  note  on  vtvomaufvtjv,  which  is  not  ironical);
Ways  a7id  Means,  iv.  14,  cf.  25,  43-4,  on  the  effect  of  the  Decelean  war  on
the  mines ;  Xen.  Mem.  ii.  5.  2  ;  Thuc.  vii.  27.  5  (where  xftporex""'  must  refer
to  mine-slaves  :  Thucydides,  being  a  mine-owner  himself,  does  not  differen-
tiate them  from  other  workers:  cf.  iv.  105.  i,  and  vi.  91.  7,  where  their
desertion  is  foreshadowed  ;  the  slaves  inside  the  walls  could  not  get  away) ;
Hellenica  Oxyr/iync/na,  xii.  4  (the  runaway  slaves  glutted  the  market  at
Thebes)  ;  slaves  on  shipboard :  Xen.  Hell.  i.  6.  24  ;  list  of  fallen  in  /.  G.  ii.
959;  Nevinson,  A  Modern  Slavery,  p.  190.  With  the  last-named  compare
J.  K.  Turner,  Barbarous  Mexico  (London,  191 1),  who  states  that  employers
of  labour  on  the  hemp-plantations  of  Yucatan  estimate  the  death-rate  among
their  labourers  at  66  per  cent,  per  annum,  and  on  the  tobacco-plantations  of
Valle  Nacional  in  Oaxaca  at  100  per  cent,  per  annum  (pp.  12,  63  ff.).


CHAPTER  XVII
IMPERIAL   ECONOMICS:    FINANCE

'Qi/r]Ti)  f)  'Adrjvaicju  BCvafxis  fiaWou  fj  oiKeia. — The  Corinthians  in  Thucy-
DIDES,  i.  121.  3.

The  power  of  Athens  rests  on  money  rather  than  on  native  strength.

If  Athens  was  to  fulfil  her  ideals  she  needed  adequate  wealth.
We  have  now  examined,  one  by  one,  the  various  methods  by
which  Pericles  wished  to  enrich  her.  It  was  to  commerce  and
industry,  and  to  the  labour  and  skill  which  their  development  would
attract,  that  Pericles  looked  as  the  solid  and  lasting  foundations
of  Athenian  prosperity  ;  for  they  alone,  as  he  knew,  among  the
wealth-producing  forces  of  his  day,  were  in  harmony  with  the
ideals  of  the  City  and  the  Empire.

But  commerce  and  industry  and  immigration,  especially  in  the
old  conservative  Greek  world,  need  care  and  patience  and,  above
all,  time,  for  their  steady  development  ;  and  fifth-century  Athens
was  moving  faster  than  ever  community  moved  before  or  since.
More  immediate  and  satisfying  resources  were  needed  to  meet
the  ambitions  of  the  day.  Athens  could  not  live  upon  hopes  and
prospects.  It  was  natural  for  her  to  fall  back  upon  the  time-
honoured  expedient  of  State  robbery.

We  have  seen  that  the  development  of  Athenian  commerce
was  greatly  hampered  in  Eastern  waters  by  the  continuance  for
thirty-two  years  after  the  battle  of  Salamis  of  a  state  of  war  with
Persia.  It  was  not  till  448,  under  the  auspices  of  Pericles,  that
peace  was  finally  concluded,  and  peaceful  traders  and  travellers,
like  Herodotus,  took  the  place  of  organized  raiders  and  free-
booters. During  that  generation  and  a  half  many  a  windfall
reached  Athens  in  the  form  of  spoils  of  war.  Generals  sent  home
gold  and  silver  to  the  State  treasury,  and  gangs  of  captives  to
the  market-place  to  be  sold  for  the  benefit  of  the  city ;  the
soldiers  and  sailors  under  them  sent  home  welcome  additions  to
the   family  store.     On  the  distribution  of  the  booty  after   the

1216  C   C


398  ECONOMICS  tart  hi

capture  of  Sestos  and  Byzantium  Cimon  was  able  to  purchase
four  months'  provisions  for  his  ships  and  send  a  quantity  of  gold
besides  to  the  Athenian  treasury.  The  battle  of  Eurymedon
over  the  Persian  land  and  sea  forces  a  few  years  later  left  him,
we  are  told,  with  more  than  20,000  men  and  a  notable  quantity
of  riches,  'out  of  which  the  people  had  money  enough  to  build
the  wall  on  the  south  side  of  the  citadel,'  and  to  lay  the  founda-
tions of  the  Long  Walls  to  Piraeus.  Athens  was  '  growing  rich
upon  her  enemies  '  in  the  old-fashioned  buccaneering  way.^

But  after  448,  when  peace  was  concluded  with  Persia,  this
source  of  enrichment  dried  up.  It  was  Pericles'  ambition  that
Athenians  should  no  longer  rob  from  Persia  but  trade  with  her.
No  more  gold  and  prisoners  flowed  in  from  far-off  victories  in
Asia  for  the  building  of  walls  and  temples.  Athens  must  look
to  other  means  if  her  projects  were  to  be  carried  out.  She  found
them,  not  in  the  resources  and  vigour  of  individuals,  on  which
Pericles,  if  we  may  believe  his  words,  would  so  much  have  pre-
ferred to  rely,  but  in  the  funds  of  the  State.  The  great  Acro-
polis buildings,  into  which  Athenians  put  so  much  of  their  creative
energy  during  the  short  years  of  their  greatest  happiness,  were
built  out  of  the  sums  in  the  State  treasury.  It  is  necessary  for
us  therefore  to  turn  from  the  resources  of  individuals  to  those  of
the  State,  and  to  inquire  into  the  nature  and  management  of
Athenian  public  finance.

In  the  general  poverty  of  the  Greek  world,  both  States  and
individuals  were  accustomed  to  living  from  hand  to  mouth.
States  and  other  public  bodies  had  large  possessions,  sometimes
equal,  or  almost  equal,  to  those  of  all  their  citizens  combined  ;  but
few  of  them  produced  money  available  for  the  current  expenses
of  administration,  and  the  sums  on  each  side  of  the  State  balance-
^^heet,  could  we  recover  them,  would  seem  ridiculously  small.
Sparta  held  supremacy  over  the  Pcloponnesc  with  no  regular
State  finances  at  all.  Sixth-century  Athens  was  not  quite  so
primitive.  Yet  her  old  State  treasury  did  its  work  on  very
limited  resources.  There  were  three  regular  sources  of  revenue:
the  rents  from  the  State  lands,  law-court  payments  and  fines,  and
the  small  sums  that  came  in  from  the  various  indirect  taxes  and
dues.     Until  the  development  of  the  silver  mines  none  of  these

^  riut.  Cim.  9  (from  Ion  of  Chios),  13  ;  Diod.  xi.  62.


CHAP.  XVII  FINANCE  399

items  was  considerable.  They  were  used  to  defray  the  expenses
of  current  administration,  which  were  correspondingly  simple.
They  included  the  maintenance  of  public  works  and  of  the  few
public  slaves,  *  rewards  for  the  killing  of  wolves,  prizes  to  poets
and  doctors,  grants  to  the  infirm,  and  above  all  offerings  and
sacrifices  to  national  and  Panhcllenic  deities.'  This  last  item,
which  must  have  formed  a  large  proportion  of  the  whole,  amounted
in  the  sixth  century  to  three  talents.^

Thus  it  is  easy  to  see  how  welcome  to  the  State  were  the  free
contributions  of  citizens  towards  ships  and  sacrifices  and  dramatic
performances  and  other  public  purposes,  and  how  natural  it  was
that,  when  the  city  had  a  windfall,  it  should  be  distributed
amongst  those  who  helped  her.  There  was  no  thought  at  Athens,
down  to  the  time  of  the  Persian  wars,  of  accumulating  any  reserve
out  of  the  current  revenue  of  the  State.

But  the  old  State  treasury  was  not  the  only  repository  of
public  funds  at  Athens.  There  were  religious  resources  as  well,
treasures  and  offerings  preserved  in  the  sanctuaries  of  various
deities.  The  chief  of  these  was  Athena,  who  was  worshipped  on
the  Acropolis.  Her  worship,  and  the  treasure  which  it  had
accumulated,  went  back  to  dim  and  distant  times.  By  the  sixth
century  the  treasure  was  considered  of  sufficient  public  impor-
tance for  the  '  stewards '  who  managed  it  to  be  regarded  as  public
officials,  and  Solon,  in  his  work  of  constitutional  reconstruction,
made  fresh  rules  as  to  their  mode  of  appointment.  We  cannot
estimate  the  value  of  the  treasure  which  they  guarded.  We  only
know  that  it  must  have  grown  larger  year  by  year  ;  for  the  State
allow  cd  the  goddess  to  profit,  though  not  generally  in  the  form  of
money,  by  some  of  its  own  sources  of  revenue.  She  received  a  pro-
portion of  the  law-court  fines  and,  in  the  case  of  a  profitable
victory,  a  tithe  of  the  windfall  in  spoils.  As  the  sacred  expenses
were  considerably  less  than  the  secular,  the  goddess,  though  far
poorer  than  the  Panhellenic  deities  at  Delphi  and  Olympia,
gradually  came  to  hold  an  important  position  in  the  national
economy.  There  were  also  other  treasures  in  various  temples,  as
to  which  we  can  form  no  estimate  for  the  sixth  century.     The  fifth-


*  Lys.  XXX.  30;  Cavaignac,  p.  5,  on  the  ^fj.d(nov  or  old  State  treasury.
Its  treasurers  were  the  KaXaKptrui  or  'carvers '.     See  p.  S3  above.

C  C  2


400.  ECONOMICS  part  hi

century  financiers  lump  them  comprehensively  together  as  'the
other  gods'.^

When  the  Persians  occupied  Athens  in  480  no  attempt  was
made  to  remove  these  sacred  treasures.  The  pious  hoped  against
hope  that  by  some  miracle  they  would  be  saved.  The  enemy
laid  siege  to  the  Acropolis,  found  their  way  in  by  a  steep  side
entrance,  and  robbed  the  shrines  of  their  riches,  burning  all  that
they  could  not  carry  off.  When  the  Athenians  returned  they
found  themselves,  not  only  without  the  sacred  capital  which  had
been  accumulating  for  centuries,  but  without  the  sanctuaries
which  had  housed  it.  The  goddess  had  indeed  saved  Athens,
but  she  herself  had  lost  everything.  Her  subjects  came  back  to
their  ruined  city  with  a  great  design  in  their  thankful  hearts — to
build  for  their  national  goddess  a  temple  worthy  of  Athens  as  the
champion  of  Greece.  They  began  by  solemnly  dedicating  to  her
the  choicest  morsels  from  their  booty — the  chair  of  Xerxes,  the
scimitar  of  Mardonius,  and  other  illustrious  relics — and  engaged
on  what  seemed  likely  to  be  the  long  and  difficult  task  of  restoring
the  national  and  sacred  finances.^

So  much  was  necessary  as  an  introduction  to  the  State  finance
of  the  fifth  century.  Let  us  now  examine  this  in  detail,  looking
first  at  the  City  and  then  at  the  Empire.

The  old  State  treasury  had  far  more  to  pay  for  under  Pericles
than  t\\'o  generations  earlier.  There  were  perhaps  no  more
rewards  for  wolves,  but  there  were  a  large  number  of  new  and
more  pressing  obligations — finer  and  more  frequent  festivals,
larger  and  more  numerous  public  works,  both  to  make  and  to
maintain,  above  all,  the  continual  and  increasing  drain  of  payment
to  individual  citizens  for  service  as  councillors  and  in  the  law-
courts.  But  the  sources  of  revenue,  too,  had  expanded.  The
growth  of  trade  was  favourable  to  the  taxes  at  Piraeus  and  in  the
market-place  ;  the  licence-duties  on  slaves  and  Outlanders  gained
by  the  development  of  immigration  ;  law-court  fees  were  swollen
by  the  increased  duties  thrown  on  the  courts  :  and,  above  all,  the

^  Ath.  Pol.  vii.  3  ;  Hdt.  v.  yy  ;  Cavaignac,  pp.  30-1.

^  Hdt.  viii.  51  ;  Cavaignac,  p.  32,  who  refers  to  other  cases  (at  Olympia,
Delphi,  and  Branchidae)  of  attempts  to  collect  money  to  repair  disasters  to
great  shrines.  The  chair  and  the  scimitar  remained  among  the  treasures  in
the  Acropolis  till  they  were  abstracted  by  a  dishonest  '  Steward '  in  the  fourth
century  :   Dem.  x.\iv.  129.


CHAP.  XVII  FINANCE  401

city  treasury  was  now  assured  of  a  regular  revenue  of  some  fifty
talents,  if  not  more,  from  the  Attic  silver  mines,  and  of  other
large  sums  from  new  domains,  including  mines,  in  Thrace.  The
total  annual  revenue  received  by  the  city  treasury  during  the
supremacy  of  Pericles  seems  to  have  amounted  to  upwards  of
500  talents.^

But  Athens  had  now  other  resources  to  rely  on.  In  478  Athens
was  chosen  to  be  head  of  an  alliance  or  confederacy  of  the  Greek
States  against  Persia.  The  total  sum  annually  needed  for  the
purposes  of  the  alliance  was  fixed  by  Aristeides  the  Just,  to  whom
the  task  had  been  assigned,  at  460  talents.  This  sum  was  levied
on  a  system  agreed  on  between  the  confederates,  probably  in
most  cases  on  a  rough  valuation  of  their  lands.  There  were  re-
assessments in  detail  every  four  years  ;  but  the  main  principles
of  the  levy,  as  established  by  Aristeides,  were  part  of  the  original
arrangement  between  Athens  and  the  cities,  and  could  not  be
altered  without  bad  faith.  We  have  sufficient  evidence  to  re-
construct the  calculations  by  which  Aristeides  reached  his  total.
The  maximum  fighting  fleet  of  the  confederates  was  to  consist  of
200  triremes.  Each  trireme  was  manned  by  170  rowers,  8  officers,
and  10  marines,  that  is  188  in  all.  The  year's  campaigning
lasted  from  March  to  October,  when  the  season  closed  at  Athens
with  the  public  burial  of  the  fallen.  The  sum  which  a  man  re-
quired to  buy  food  and  other  necessaries  in  the  ports  of  the
Aegean  at  this  time  was  2  obols  (one-third  of  a  drachma)  per  day.
Aristeides'  calculation  then  was  as  follows  :

Each  sailor  cost,  for  season  of  210  days,  |  x  210  =  70  drachmas.
Each  trireme  of  188  sailors  cost  13,160  drachmas.
The  fleet  of  2co  ships  cost  2,632,000  drachmas.

As  the  talent  contains  6,000  drachmas,  this  works  out  at  4385
talents,  so  that  the  annual  levy  of  460  left  a  sufficient  margin  for
the  replacement  of  ships.^

To  whom  did  this  money  belong?    To  those  who  controlled

*  Xen.  Anab.  vii.  I.  27  ;  Cavaignac,  p.  51.  Francotte,  Finances  des  cites
grecques,  p.  175,  puts  it  as  high  as  600.     Thuc.  i.  loi.  3  (new  domain  lands).

'■^  Thuc.  i.  104,  i.  112.  2;  Plut.  Ciin.  12  (200  ships),  cf.  Thuc.  ii.  7.  2;  Plut.
Arist.  24  (land- valuation);  Plut.  Tkeiii.  lo  and  Ar.  Wasps  88  (Schol.)  (2  obols) ;
Thuc.  ii.  23. 2  (marines);  Cavaignac,  p.  44;  Meyer,  Forsciutfigefi,  vol.  ii,p.  170.
If  50  talents  built  200  ships  in  483,  20  talents  would  seem  an  ample  margin
for  replacement.     The  fittings  were  supplied  by  private  generosity.


402  ECONOMICS  part  hi

its  expenditure.  It  was,  and  was  frankl}^  called,  'tribute,'  paid
to  the  authorities  of  the  confederacy  in  the  same  way  as  most  of
the  confederates  had  previously  paid  it  to  the  King  of  Persia.
Who  were  these  authorities?  In  theory,  the  representatives  of
the  confederates  themselves  -.  in  practice,  their  acknowledged
leader,  the  people  of  Athens,  The  treasurers  who  received  the
money  were  Athenian  officials,  the  generals  to  whom  it  was  paid
were  Athenian  executive  officers,  and  the  body  which  appointed
and  controlled  them  was  the  Athenian  people.  Practically
speaking,  it  was  money  contributed  to  the  Athenians  under  two
understood  conditions :  firstly,  that  the  money  should  continue
to  be  levied  upon  the  system  agreed  to  by  the  confederates
and  associated  with  the  name  of  Aristeides ;  and,  secondly,  that
Athens  should  secure  those  who  paid  it  from  all  Persian  attacks.
Apart  from  this,  it  belonged,  says  a  writer  who  has  gone  into  the
legal  question,  like  all  tribute,  to  those  to  whom  it  was  paid  ;  it
became,  therefore,  the  property  of  the  Athenian  State  ;  but  Athens,
at  the  outset,  reserved  it  for  the  expenses  of  war  and,  to  inspire
the  allies  with  more  confidence,  made  it  into  a  fund  distinct  from
her  ordinar}'  revenues  and  deposited  it  at  Delos/"

Aristeides  was  not  only  a  just  but  a  very  careful  financier.
Indeed,  as  events  turned  out,  he  was  over-careful.  He  had  made
up  his  calculation  on  the  assumption  that  there  would  be  cam-
paigning every  season,  and  that  this  campaigning  would  bring  in
no  profits.  Both  these  assumptions  were  soon  disproved.  The
Persians  retired  up  country  and  left  it  to  the  Greeks  to  take  the
offensive,  which  they  were  slow  to  do  ;  and  when  they  did  so,
as  in  Thrace  and  at  the  Eurymedon,  they  generally  made  the
war  'nourish  itself,  and  came  home  loaded  with  booty.  Mean-
while the  annual  contributions  continued  to  flow  into  the  treasur)',
and  the  stewards  allowed  it  to  mount  up  and  form  an  imposing
Imperial  Reserve.  In  454-453,  when,  for  safety  or  for  convenience,
the  treasury  was  transferred  to  Athens,  this  reserve  must  have
amounted  to  some  3,000  talents.^

^  Francotte,  pp.  114  and  63  ff.,  on  the  meaning  of  </)opo?  and  (rvvTa^is,  esp.
p.  117.  The  word  (^opoj-  (tribute)  was  used  from  the  first  (Thuc.  i.  96.  2,
V.  18.  51,  and  connects  the  finance  of  the  confederacy  with  that  of  Persia;  cf.
Hdt.  iii.  89,  where  Darius  is  described  as  being  just  what  Athens  had  become,
'a  receiver  of  small  change.'

^  Cavaignac,  pp.  68-9  (cf.  p.  62  on  the  transference) ;  Francotte,  p.  161.


CTTAP.  XVII  FINANCE  40.^

From  453  onwards,  then,  Athenians  were  not  only  practically
but  visibly  masters  of  the  funds  of  the  league.  The  money  was
deposited  on  the  Acropolis,  where  their  other  funds  were  kept.
Athens  had  now,  therefore,  three  separate  treasuries,  connected
respectively  with  the  City,  the  Goddess,  and  the  Empire.  Let
us  watch  what  came  of  these  financial  complications.

All  this  time  Athens  had  been  trying  to  collect  money  for  the
great  new  temple  of  the  goddess.  The  State  had  made  generous
grants  out  of  spoils  and  other  sources  of  city  revenue,  and  indi-
vidual citizens  had  gladly  borne  their  share.  The  south  wall  of
the  Acropolis,  which  Cimon  constructed  out  of  booty,  was  built
to  strengthen  the  foundations  of  the  projected  shrine.  But  the
work  made  slow  progress.  The  temple  of  Zeus  at  Olympia,
which  was  finished  in  456,  was  built  out  of  a  treasure  which  had
taken  a  century  to  accumulate ;  and  Olympia  had  the  contribu-
tions of  all  Greece  to  rely  on.  '  The  temples  of  the  wealthy
cities  of  Magna  Graecia  and  Sicily,  which  are  contemporary  with
it,  were  almost  all  of  them  the  result  of  prolonged  activity  several
times  resumed.  And  all  these  monuments  are  in  plain  stone,
while  the  Parthenon  was  to  be  in  marble.'  Yet  Athens  was
poor  beside  these  States.  It  seemed  that  she  had  pitched  her
hopes  too  high.*

It  is  from  about  this  time  that  we  find  her  taking  definite
steps  to  hasten  the  execution  of  her  great  religious  and  artistic
projects.  *  Pericles,'  says  Plutarch,  '  anxious  to  raise  the  spirits
of  the  people  and  to  encourage  them  to  great  deeds,  procured
a  decree  that  all  the  Greeks,  wheresoever  they  resided,  whether
in  Europe  or  in  Asia,  whether  their  cities  were  great  or  small,
should  send  representatives  to  Athens  to  confer  upon  the  rebuild-
ing of  the  Greek  shrines  which  the  barbarians  had  burnt,  and
about  providing  those  sacrifices  which  had  been  vowed  during
the  Persian  War  for  the  preservation  of  Greece ;  and  likewise
about  the  sea,  in  order  that  all  might  sail  on  it  without  fear  and
maintain  the  peace.'  This  interesting  decree,  associating  Pericles'
policy  of  sea-power  with  his  building  projects,  cannot  be  dated
with  certainty ;  but  it  seems  to  belong  to  the  decade  between
460  and  450.     '  It  took  no  effect,'  says  Plutarch,  '  nor  did  the

^  Cavaignac,  pp.  51-2.


404  ECONOMICS  part  tit

cities  send  their  representatives  ;  the  reason  of  which  is  said  to
be  the  opposition  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  for  the  proposal  was
first  rejected  in  Peloponnesus.  But  I  was  wiHing  to  give  account
of  it  as  a  specimen  of  the  greatness  of  the  orator's  spirit  and  of
his  disposition  to  form  magnificent  designs.'  ^

But  a  second  and  less  ambitious  expedient,  which  Athens
adopted  about  the  same  time,  was  more  easily  carried  out.  She
made  the  allies  contribute  to  her  religious  designs  by  paying  in
to  the  treasury  of  the  Goddess  the  'first-fruits'  of  the  tribute.
The  proportion  thus  .deducted  was  one-sixtieth  of  each  contribu-
tion, and  it  is  to  the  records  of  these  offerings  that  we  owe  our
detailed  knowledge  of  the  imperial  system.  The  lists  were
inscribed  on  stone  slabs,  many  of  which  have  come  down  to  us.-

The  principle  thus  established  was  quickly  carried  further.
We  cannot  trace  its  development  in  detail,  but  we  know  the
outlines  of  the  story.  The  facts  speak  for  themselves.  In  448
peace  was  concluded  between  Athens  and  Persia ;  but,  though
their  contributions  should  no  longer  have  been  needed,  the  con-
federates were  not  relieved  from  them.  In  447  the  building  of
the  great  temple,  the  Parthenon,  was  begun.  In  445  peace  was
concluded  between  Athens  and  her  enemies  in  Greece  proper.
In  444  hot  discussion  arose  in  Athens  as  to  the  use  of  the  imperial
funds.  The  question  divided  the  assembly,  but  was  decisively
settled  early  in  443  by  the  banishment  of  the  statesman  who
opposed  the  financial  policy  of  Pericles.  In  the  year  443-442
the  Confederacy,  or  Empire,  as  it  had  now  become,  was  divided
into  five  tribute  districts,  for  the  more  convenient  collection  of
funds.  By  440  the  reserve  funds  of  the  Goddess  and  of  the
Empire  had  been  united  in  the  hands  of  the  treasurers  of  the
Goddess.     Athens  had  found  the  money  for  her  designs.^

In  440-439,  however,  she  was  startled  in  her  building  projects
by  the  sudden  revolt  of  two  of  her  most  important  allies  or
subjects,  Samos  and  Byzantium.  It  cost  her  two  seasons  of
campaigning  and  1,276  talents  out  of  her  reserve  (exclusive  of
current  imperial  revenue)  to  repress  them  ;  and  for  a  short  time

'  Plut.  Per.  17;  Cavaignac,  p.  60,  following  Keil.

*  Cavaignac,  pp.  60-1.     There   is  no  evidence  that  a  similar  first-fruit
offering  was  paid  to  Apollo  while  the  treasury  was  at  Delos.
'  Cavaignac,  pp.  76  note  2,  85  note  2,  96  note  3.


CHAP.  xviT  FINANCE  405

the  buildini^  of  the  Parthenon  was  interrupted.  But  payments
continued  to  be  made  for  the  preparation  of  the  gold  and  ivory
statue  which  was  to  be  the  great  feature  of  the  new  temple.  At
the  close  of  the  war  the  other  projects  were  resumed.^

The  following  seven  years,  down  to  the  outbreak  of  the  Pclo-
ponnesian  War,  were  the  zenith  of  Athenian  wealth  and  activity.
The  Parthenon  was  finished  in  438,  and  inaugurated  at  the  Pan-
athenaic  festival  in  the  summer  of  that  year.  The  gold  and
ivory  statue  of  Athena  was  completed  by  Pheidias  in  time  for  the
opening  of  the  temple.  The  artists  then  turned  their  attention
to  the  approach  of  the  Acropolis.  Mnesicles  drew  out  the  plan
for  the  great  Vestibule  or  Propylaea,  and  work  began  on  it  in
437.  Many  years  before  a  site  had  been  fixed,  on  the  jutting
western  edge  of  the  Acropolis,  for  a  little  temple  of  Athena-
Victory.  The  building  had  been  delayed  through  lack  of  funds ;
but  it  was  now  taken  in  hand,  although  its  plan  and  orientation
somewhat  interfered  with  those  of  the  Vestibule  of  Mnesicles.
A  number  of  other  temples  were  begun — the  Erechtheum  on  the
north  edge  of  the  Acropolis,  the  temple  of  Hephaestus  (the  so-
called  Theseum)  down  in  the  city,  and  the  temples  at  Sunium
and  Rhamnus  on  the  coast.  Besides  these  there  were  a  number
of  other  public  works,  the  Odeum  or  Singing  Hall,  the  third  or
middle  Long  Wall  to  simplify  the  defence  of  city  and  port,  and
new  docks  and  other  works  at  Piraeus.

Several  of  these  buildings  still  remain,  and  attest  the  boldness
and  patience  of  the  perfect  artists  who  planned  and  made  them.
Many  of  the  payments  made  In  connexion  with  them  remain
also,  to  attest  that  they  were  built  in  very  truth,  as  Pericles  tells
us,  with  the  strictest  regard  to  economy.  It  is  '  visible  in  every
detail',  down  to  the  careful  arrangements  made  for  selling  the
wood  used  in  the  scaffolding.  Every  item  of  expenditure  was
carefully  discussed  and  rigidly  controlled  ;  for  the  work  was
being  done,  as  every  one  knew,  not  out  of  the  native  or  normal
resources  of  the  city,  but  out  of  a  fund  which  was  originally
intended  for  military  purposes,  and  might  at  any  moment  be
required  for  them  again.  Here  is  a  rough  calculation  of  the
sums  that  were  spent  upon  public  works  between  447  and  432.

'  Cavaignac,  pp.  94-5.


4o5  ECONOMICS  i'ART  hi

Parthenon 700  talents     (^840.000)

Cold  and  Ivory  Statue  of  Athena  .        .         .  1,000       ,,       (^i, 200,000)

Propylaea  or  V^estibule  (unfinished)      .        .  400       „         (;^48o,ooo)
Odeum  (Singing  Hall) .  \

Ship-houses  .         .         .  o  ^^^               1  r^A^^,^^\

Middle  Wall.         ..••••  3'°o°       »       f^3.6oo,oco)

Works  at  Piraeus.         .  )

Two  Mctories  in  gold    .....       200       ,,  (^240,000)

Other  monuments,  including  X ike-temple    .    2,700       „       (^3,240,000)

Total 8,000       „       (^9,600,000)^

This  expenditure  covers  a  period  of  sixteen  years,  from  447  to
431,  but  it  only  reached  its  height  during  the  latter  portion  of
this  period,  when  the  Goddess  had  established  a  firm  hold  over
the  surplus  funds  of  the  league.  So  far  as  can  be  judged  from
the  inscriptions,  the  average  annual  expenditure  between  447
and  43(S  was  between  300  and  400  talents,  while  between  438  and
431  it  was  650  talents.  This  is  confirmed  by  Thucydides'  state-
ment that  at  the  zenith  of  the  treasure,  before  the  Vestibule  was
begun,  there  were  9,70c  talents  of  reserve  in  hand.  It  would
almost  seem  as  if  Pericles,  knowing  that  a  great  war  was  imminent
and  that  he  and  his  artists  were  growing  old,  determined  to  do
the  work  that  was  in  them  while  there  was  yet  time.  By  431,
when  the  storm  broke,  most,  but  not  all,  of  it  was  done.-

It  is  hard  for  us  in  these  opulent  modern  days  to  tonn  any
conception  of  the  temper  of  Athens  during  these  few  crowded
years  of  creative  activity.  Those  8,000  talents  paid  to  her
craftsmen  and  labourers  represent  in  hard  work  and  artistic
power,  above  all,  in  self-sacrifice,  far  more  than  can  be  expressed
in  the  feeble  terms  of  present-day  money.  From  our  cautious
modern  point  of  view,  which  puts  good  business  before  every-
thing and  lets  in  art  as  an  afterthought,  her  finance  was  crazy.
As  a  modern  economist  remarks:  ^  The  works  of  Pericles  served
no  economic  purpose  but  that  of  display  ;    they  could   not  be

'  F>ancotte,  p.  175,  following  Busolt ;  Cavaignac  agrees  generally  (e.  g.
as  to  the  Parthenon,  p.  99;  as  to  the  Propylaea,  as  against  Heliodorus,
p.  102).  I  reckon  the  purchasing  power  of  a  drachma  at  4^'.  Cavaignac
(p.  88)  reckons  it  at  5^.     It  was,  of  course,  sinking  all  through  the  century.

^  Francotte,  p.  175  (annual  expenditure);  Thuc.  ii.  13.  3  (9,700  talents);
ii.  64.  5  (running  risks  for  glory) ;  Cavaignac  does  not  believe  there  were
ever  more  than  6,000  talents  in  hand  at  any  one  time,  and  gives  reasons  for
emending  the  text  of  Thucydides  accordingly  (p.  108).  I  have  not  ventured
to  follow  him,  though  it  is  hard  to  explain  the  existence  of  so  large  a  sum  just
after  the  Samian  War  and  the  completion  of  the  Parthenon  and  its  statue.
Meyer,  Forschnngen,  vol.  ii,  p,  119,  prefers  not  to  take  Thucydides'  words
literally.


niAr.  xviT  FINANCE  407

realized  in  money  or  exported  to  other  lands,  or  utilized  for  the
production  of  more  wealth.  The  skill  and  treasure  devoted  to
them  were  permanently  sunk  ;  their  construction  afforded  a  means
of  employing  the  people  ;  but  when  completed  they  provided  no
employment  for  industry  and  no  incentive  to  trade.  When  large
sums  are  laid  out  in  productive  public  works  like  those  of  the
Egyptians  at  Lake  Moeris,  wealth  so  expended  not  only  giv^es
employment  at  the  time,  but  affords  facilities  for  continued
employment  afterwards.  Harbours,  canals,  irrigation,  roads,
railways,  or  anything  else  that  opens  up  a  country  may  have  this
character.  Pericles,  in  endeavouring  to  find  profitable  employ-
ment for  the  people,  deliberately  turned  their  energies  to  unpro-
ductive public  works ;  the  magnificent  buildings  which  were
reared  under  his  direction  absorbed  the  wealth  of  the  city  with-
out developing  any  natural  resources  or  trading  facilities  in  return.
The  treasure  was  exhausted  once  and  for  all ;  it  was  locked  up
in  forms  that  are  artistically  superb,  but  economically  worthless.'
From  the  economic  and  political  standpoints  this  criticism  is
sound,  and  Pericles  would  have  admitted  it.  His  friend  Herodotus
had  been  to  Lake  Moeris,  and  had  told  him,  as  he  has  told  us,
about  reproductive  Egj'ptian  public  works.  Athenians  were  not
so  blind  as  not  to  know  that  their  temples  would  bring  in  no
income,  except  from  sightseers,  and  that  the  sums  out  of  which
they  were  being  built  were  only  too  strictly  limited.  They  knew
that  they  were  working  against  time,  and  spending  upon  the
work  sums  that  wise  men  would  have  laid  by  for  purposes  of
national  defence  and  commercial  and  industrial  development.
Only  on  one  point  would  they  have  indignantly  contradicted  the
modern  economist.  He  speaks  as  though  the  buildings  were
undertaken  'to  find  profitable  employment  for  the  people',  as
though  the  Parthenon  had  been  built  as  a  relief  work.  The
Parthenon  was  built  by  honest  craftsmen,  eager  to  do  honour  to
their  goddess,  who  were  paid  a  frugal  pittance  for  their  devoted
services.  Artists  do  not  work  for  money,  even  though  they,  like
other  men,  need  money  to  live  by.  But  of  the  craftsmen  and
labourers  employed  on  the  temples,  as  of  the  city  as  a  whole,
the  inscriptions  justify  us  in  saying  that  they  were  '  lovers  of
beauty  together  with  cheapness  '.*
^  Hdt.  ii.  149,  ill.  91  (Lake  Moeris);  sightseers:  Old  Oligarch,  i.  17;  cf.


4o8  ECONOMICS  part  ill

We  have  brought  this  rough  history  of  Athenian  finance  down
to  the  years  before  the  Peloponnesian  War.  Fortunately  we  now
reach  firm  ground,  for  Thucydides  tells  us  exactly  how  much  of
the  treasure  was  left  when  building  was  stopped  by  the  beginning
of  hostilities.  'Apart  from  the  other  income'  (i.e.  the  old  city
treasury),  he  represents  Pericles  as  saying,  '  an  average  revenue
of  six  hundred  talents  of  silver  was  drawn  from  the  revenue  of
the  allies ;  and  there  were  still  six  thousand  talents  of  coined
silver  in  the  Acropolis.  .  ,  .  This  did  not  include  the  uncoined
gold  and  silver  in  public  and  private  offerings,  the  sacred  vessels
for  the  processions  and  games,  the  Median  spoils,  and  similar
resources  to  the  amount  of  five  hundred  talents.  To  this  Pericles
added  the  resources  of  the  other  temples.  .  .  .  Nay,  if  they  were
absolutely  driven  to  it,  they  might  take  even  the  gold  ornaments
of  Athena  herself;  for  the  statue  held  forty  talents  of  pure
gold  and  it  was  all  removable.  This  might  be  used  for  self-
preservation,  and  must  all  of  it  be  restored.  Such  was  their
financial  position — surely  a  satisfactory  one.'  These  were  the
resources  provided  for  Athens  by  her  greatest  financier  and
described  by  her  greatest  historian  as  '  superfluously  abundant '

a  line  preserved  from  the  comedian  Lysippus  (Jloj-tiii  434) :  '  if  you  have  not
seen  Athens  you  are  a  blockhead'  (el  fxi)  redeaa-ai  Tas\\6r)vai  areXex"^  *')  j
Cunningham,  Wesfeni  CivilizatioJi,  pp.  120-1.  It  is  more  often  the  Erech-
theum  which  is  spoken  of  as  relief  works,  because  work  on  it  was  resumed
when  Athens  was  practically  in  a  state  of  siege— surely  one  of  the  most  superb
national  achievements  of  the  artistic  temperament  in  the  whole  of  history.
The  idea  that  the  Athenians  at  the  height  of  their  greatness  were  grasping  in
money  matters  is  very  widespread.  It  is  due  partly  to  the  strictures  of
Plato,  who  objected  to  the  system  of  payment  for  public  work,  partly  to  the
undoubted  fact  that  the  standard  of  money  expenditure  went  up.  This  was
due  to  the  general  rise  in  prices  which  was  the  natural  result  of  the  influx  of
bullion  from  the  mines  and  in  the  shape  of  tribute.  .Athens  was,  as  it  were,
living  upon  a  standing  indemnity  paid  in  cash  ;  and,  as  has  been  recently
pointed  out,  indemnities  are  not  an  unmixed  blessing  to  the  countries  which
receive  them.  (See  N.  Angell,  The  Great  Illusion,  pp.  68  ff.;  Undoubtedly
high  prices  must  have  done  something  to  hamper  the  growth  of  Athenian
export  trade,  and  the  rapid  recuperation  and  subsequent  expansion  of
Athenian  trade  after  404  must  be  connected  with  the  fall  in  prices  which
resulted  from  the  loss  of  the  Empire  and  the  closing  of  the  mines.  The
subject  is  one  which  would  repay  closer  investigation.  It  is  difficult,  for
instance,  to  say  how  widely  the  effect  of  .Athenian  prices  was  felt.  Cavaignac
fp.  127)  assumes  that  it  was  felt  generally  throughout  the  Aegean,  but  from
Thuc.  viii.  29  compared  with  iii.  17.  4  it  would  rather  seem  that  this  was
not  so  ;  cf.  also  v.  47.  6  (where  three  Aeginetan  obols  =  five  Attic  in  weight).
No  doubt  the  Athenians  carried  their  own  standard  of  prices  with  them,  and
the  market-sellers  of  the  Aegean  tended  to  treat  them  accordingly.


CHAr.  XVII  FINANCE  409

• — a  few  millions  of  bullion  ore,  and  behind  them,  no  hope  of
a  loan  or  other  help  from  wealthy  capitalists  at  home  or  abroad,
but  merely  a  National  Museum  to  be  turned  into  ready  money.
Nothing  could  better  illustrate  how  pathetically  frail  was  the
basis  on  which  Athens  was  attempting  to  build  the  costly  fabric
of  a  civilization.^

Let  us  now  attempt  to  do  in  conclusion  for  Pericles  what  we
have  already  done  for  Aristeides — to  put  into  figures  his  calcula-
tions for  the  conduct  of  a  possible  war.  In  doing  so  we  must
remember  that  prices  had  been  rising  at  Athens,  and  that  the
sum  calculated  by  Aristeides  for  maintenance  no  longer  sufficed.
It  will  show  how  slender  were  Athens's  resources  not  only  in
money  but  in  men.  It  was  a  small  handful  of  human  beings,
judged  by  our  modern  standard,  which  beat  back  the  Persians,
created  the  Empire,  adorned  Athens  with  her  immortal  buildings,
and  was  ready  now  in  431  to  take  its  stand,  in  the  ranks  or  on
shipboard,  to  defend  and  hand  down  its  heritage.  But  Pericles
knew  how  impossible  it  was  for  Athens  both  to  fight  and  to  do
her  proper  work,  and  he  did  not  intend  that  she  should  fight.
We  can  best  enter  on  the  history  of  the  war  with  these  figures
before  us :

Adult  male  population  of  Attica  in  431  :

Adult  citizens    ....         about    40,000
Outlanders        ....  ,,         24,000

Slaves „        55,000

Total 119,000

This  was  the  total  strength  of  the  hands  and  brains  on  which
Athens  depended  for  her  maintenance  as  a  centre  of  civilization.
It  can  be  seen  at  a  glance  how  severely  her  working  power  would
be  crippled  if  even  a  small  proportion  of  them  were  dixertcd
from  the  arts  of  peace  to  the  arts  of  war.

Let  us  now  examine  the  same  population  organized  for  purposes
of  national  defence.  We  must  subtract  the  20,000  mine  slaves,
who  would  be  worse  than  useless,  and  the  35,000  other  slaves,
who  could  only  be   called    upon    in   the  last    emergency,  thus

1  Thuc.  ii.  13.  3-5,  65.  13.  The  600  talents  include  the  indemnity  paid
annually  by  the  Samians  since  439  and  some  accessions  to  the  Empire  (e.g.
in  the  Black  Sea)  since  the  total  originally  fi.xed  by  Aristeides.


4IO  ECONOMICS  PART  III

reducing  our  total  to  64,000  (citizens  40,000,  Outlanders  24,000).
This  was  the  total  military  strength  on  paper  of  the  population
of  Attica  proper.  But  we  should  add  to  this  the  Out-residents,
six  to  ten  thousand  in  number,  in  scattered  settlements  in  the
Aegean  area,  who  were  still  called  upon  for  military  duty.  This
gives  us  the  following  figures :

Citizens about     48,000

Outlanders        ....  „        24,000

72,OCO

How  were  these  72,000  organized  for  purposes  of  national
defence  ?

The  nature  of  a  man^s  military  obligations  at  Athens  depended
on  his  census  or  property  qualification.  If  he  was  rich  enough  to
provide  his  own  armour  he  served  as  a  heavy-armed  soldier ;  if
not,  he  served  as  light-armed  or,  more  generally,  as  a  rower.
Working  upon  our  previous  estimates  we  reach  the  following
figures :  ^

Heavy-armed  citizens     ....       28,000
Heavy-armed  Outlanders       .         .        .        8,000

36,000

Light-armed  citizens       ....       20,000
Light-armed  Outlanders         .        .        .       i6,oco

36,000

Side  by  side  with  these  more  or  less  conjectural  estimates,  let
us  put  Pericles'  own  dispositions  for  the  army,  using  the  figures
recorded  by  Thucydides.^


I.  P'ield-Service  .\rniy
Cavalry

Heavy-armed  infantry

Light-armed  mounted

,,  on  foot .

Total  .


15,800


1,000

13,000

200

1,600

15,800


n.  Reserve  (entirely  hea\y-armed) 16,000

Citizens  (including  oldest  and  youngest)    .        8,000
Outlanders 8,oco

Total 16,000

'  See  pp.  169-73  above.  ^  Thuc.  ii.  13.  6-8.


GHAP.  XVII  FINANCE  411

III.  Garrisons  in  the  Empire       ....        2,500
To  which  must  be  added  :

IV.  Marines  on  fleet 3,ooo

Total  (III  and  IV)         ....      ~         .       5,500

Grand  total 37, 300'

consisting  of :  Heavy-armed         .....     35,500
Light-armed         .....        1,800

Upon  the  naval  establishment  Thucydides  is  not  so  explicit.
It  appears  that  three  hundred  triremes  were  always  kept  sea-
worthy and  that  there  was  another  hundred  in  reserve,  for  whom
commanders  were  appointed  every  year  in  case  of  need.  The
number  which  actually  put  to  sea  every  year  in  peace-time,  for
purposes  of  practice  and  to  collect  tribute  and  guard  the  sea-
routes,  was  sixty.

The  peace  establishment  then  would  be  188  x6o  =  j  1,280.  of
whom  some  3,500  were  citizens  and  the  rest  Outlanders  and
hired  rowers.

The  war  establishment  would  be —

170  rowers  x  300        .         .         .         .  =     51,000

8  officers  x  300 =       2,400

10  heavy-armed  marines  x  300         .   =       3,000

Total  188  X  300  .         .         .         .  =     56,400''

But  this  was  far  more  than  the  total  number  of  citizens  and
Outlanders  available  for  naval  service,  which  only  amounted  to
36,000.     If  the  whole,  or  even  a  large  part,  of  the  fleet  was  to  be

'  The  garrison  figures  are  from  Ai/i.  Pol.  xxiv,  the  horse-archers  (not
counted  separately  from  cavalry  in  Thucydides)  from  Meyer,  Forsch.,  vol.  ii,
p.  162,  from  whom  I  differ  as  regards  the  number  of  Outlander  hoplites.  There
is  a  difficulty  as  to  what  Thucydides  means  by  '  from  the  oldest  and  youngest ':
on  my  reckoning  the  citizen  reserve  would  be  in  the  proportion  of  i  :  2  to  the
hoplites  on  active  service,  as  with  the  Peloponnesians  (Thuc.  ii.  10.  2).  Why
the  reserve  for  defending  the  walls  should  have  consisted  entirely  of  heavy-
armed  troops,  as  Thucydides  plainly  says,  is  hard  to  explain  ;  as  Fawcus  has
pointed  out  {/.  H.  S.,  vol.  xxix,  p.  27)  light-armed  troops  would  suffice  for
the  work  required.  Possibly  the  explanation  is  to  be  found  in  the  decline  in
the  value  of  money,  which  brought  a  number  of  the  poorer  citizens  within  the
limits  of  the  '  hoplite  census ',  whether  they  could  provide  their  own  armour
or  not  ;  see  Cavaignac,  p.  168.  Thuc.  iii.  18.  4  shows  that  there  were  hoplites
at  Athens  who  had  been  through  the  oarsman's  training.

"^  Thuc.  ii.  13.  Sand  ii.  24.  2  with  Old  Oligarch,  iii.  4  (400  trierarchs),  Plut.
Per.  II  (60  ships  in  commission  ;  cf.  Wilamowitz,  A.  A..,  vol.  ii,  p.  206) ;  Old
Oligarch,  i.  19;  and  Thuc.  i.  142.  6-8  (naval  mana^uvres)  ;  Ar.  Ach.  162
(citizens  as  superior  oarsmen  only) ;  Thuc.  i.  121.  3  and  143.  1  (hired  rowers
and  citizen  officers).


413  ECONOMICS  PART  III

sent  to  sea,  Athens  would  need  to  hire  foreign  rowers ;  and
everything  would  depend  on  her  ability  to  pay  them  generously
for  their  services.  Here,  as  her  enemies  knew,  was  the  weak
spot  in  her  defences.  In  the  last  resort,  as  the  Corinthians  said,
'  the  power  of  Athens  rested  upon  money,  not  upon  native
strength.'

Let  us  now  work  out  with  Pericles  the  expenditure  which  the
use  of  these  forces  would  entail.

The  pay  in  the  army  and  navy  had  now  probably  risen  to  one
drachma  a  day — the  same  for  all  ranks.  To  keep  the  Field
Service  Army  in  the  field  for  a  season's  campaigning  of  six
months  would  therefore  cost

15,800  X  180

=  474  talents,

6,000  '  '

while  to  keep  300  ships  at  sea  for  a  similar  period  would  cost  no
less  than

56,000  X  1 80


6,000


=  ],68o  talents.


Towards  such  bills  as  these  the  paltry  six  thousand  talents  on
the  Acropolis  would  not  carry  Athens  very  far  in  a  war  of
indefinite  continuance.  It  is  quite  certain  that  Pericles  never
contemplated  incurring  them.^

In  conclusion,  let  us  turn  once  more  from  the  arts  of  war  to
the  arts  of  peace,  and  set  out  in  brief  tabular  form  the  results  of
our  inquiries  into  the  Athenian  economy.  There  is  no  need  to
sum  up  the  work  of  production  and  distribution  within  the  limits
of  the  City  State  proper — the  work  of  the  cultivators,  the  crafts-
men, and  the  retail  traders  of  the  market-place.  Those  went  on
in  Attica  in  peace-time,  as  in  every  City  State.  Our  tabular
statement  can  only  give  what  went  on  at  Athens  over  and  above
the  ordinary  self-sufiicient  City  State  economy,  her  dealings  with
abroad.  It  can  be  most  conveniently  expressed  in  the  form  of
a  national  balance-sheet.  The  items  are  numbered  in  order  of
relative  importance.

*  Pay:  Thuc.  iii.  17.  4,  vi.  cS.  i,  30.  3.  The  Potidaea  campaign  cost  from
first  to  last  2,000  talents  (Thuc.  ii.  70.  2) :  the  forces  employed  there  for  the
whole  30  months  were  only  3,000  hoplites  and  less  than  50  ships.  Athens
was  not  in  a  position  to  afford  many  more  summer-and-winter  campaigns.


CHAP.  XVII  FINANCE


4T,?


Cr.  Dr.

(i)  Tribute  from  allies  (600  talents  a  year),      ( i)  Xecessaries,  incliuliiiL,^ :

circulated  among  Athenians  for  ex-  (<i)  Two-thirds     of'    corn-

penses  of  government,  building  of  supply    for     350,000

public  works,  ships,  &c.  people  ;

(2)  Profits  of  carrying  trade.  {l>)  Timber  for  shipbuild-

(3)  Exports:  ing,  and  other  mili-

(a)    Silver  from  mines  ;  tary  necessaries  (e.g.

(//)    Olive-oil  (  =  butter,  soap,  light) ;  iron  for  weapons,  flax

(c)  Painted  pottery,  statuettes,  &c.  ;  for  sails).

(d)  Marble  ;  (2)  Luxuries,  including  :

(e)  Manufactures  from  imported  raw  (a)  Raw  material  for  manu-

material,  e.g.  shields;  facturcs  (except  clay,

(/)  Re-exported  imports.  marble,  and  wool);

(e)  and   (/)   insignificant,  and  (/')  Bought     labour     (i.e.

all  except  (a)  hampered  by  slaves)     for     crafts,

rise  in  prices  due  to  (i)  and  household,      and

(3)  ")•  mines  ;

(4)  Payments  by  visitors,  coming  for  legal  (c)  Finished    products    of

business  or  as  sightseers.  all  kinds.

When  we  put  together  all  these  separate  facts  and  figures  and
try  to  imagine  for  ourselves  their  cumulative  social  effect,  we
begin  to  understand  in  some  measure  the  meaning  of  Pericles'
words  about  his  fellow-citizens — how  '  they  yield  to  none,  man
by  man,  for  independence  of  spirit,  many-sidedness  of  attainment,
and  complete  self-reliance  in  limbs  and  brain  '.  For  over  two
thousand  years  we  have  been  admiring  them,  in  their  writings
and  monuments,  for  that  inimitable  ease  and  many-sidedness  and
cloudless  serenity  of  spirit.  Only  now  that  we  can  piece  together
their  household  bills  can  we  admire  also  the  steady  courage  which
put  so  bold  a  face  upon  the  sterner  realities  of  life.  Only  now
can  we  appreciate  why  Athens,  who  has  shown  us,  in  every  line
she  wrote  and  every  stone  she  carved,  how  willingly  she  submitted
to  the  compelling  power  of  art,  spoke  with  so  businesslike  a  caution
of  the  homage  she  paid  in  its  cause — why,  not  out  of  choice  but
out  of  necessity,  she  '  loved  beauty  with  cheapness  '.


Dd


CONCLUSION
THE    PELOPONNESIAN   WAR

O  TToXf/xoy,  v(f)eXo)v  Trjv  (vnopinv  tov  Kn6^  fjnepav,  /3'ntoy  bi^dcTKaXos  Ka\  npos
TO  TidpopTci  Tas  opyas  twp  ttoXXcov  opoio't. — THUCYDIDES,  iii.  82.  2.

War,  by  taking  away  the  comfortable  provision  of  daily  life,  is  a  teacher
who  educates  through  violence ;  and  he  makes  men's  characters  fit  their
conditions.

In  434,  while  the  workmen  were  still  busy  on  the  Vestibule,
a  cloud  appeared  in  the  West.  Two  years  before,  the  small  city
of  Epidamnus,  a  Corcyraean  colony  on  the  coast  of  Albania,  had
become  involved  in  domestic  troubles.  A  party  of  her  citizens
applied  to  Corcyra  for  assistance,  but  the  mother-country  refused
to  help  them.  So  they  sent  to  Corinth  instead,  and  the  Corinth-
ians at  once  consented.  Thucydides  informs  us  in  detail  as
to  the  motives  for  this  decision,  setting  them  forth,  no  doubt,  in
what  he  considered  to  be  their  order  of  importance.  They  reveal
a  typically  Greek  blending  of  sentiment  and  material  interest.
'  Believing  the  colony  to  belong  as  much  to  themselves  as  to  the
Corcyraeans,  they  felt  it  to  be  a  kind  of  duty  to  undertake  its
protection.  Besides,  they  hated  the  Corcyraeans  for  their  neglect
of  the  mother-country.  Instead  of  meeting  with  the  usual  honours
accorded  to  the  parent  city  by  every  other  colony  at  public
assemblies,  such  as  precedence  at  sacrifices,  Corinth  found  herself
treated  with  contempt  by  a  power  which  in  point  of  wealth  could
stand  comparison  with  the  richest  Greek  States  of  the  day,  which
posse.'-sed  great  military  strength,  and  which  sometimes  could
not  repress  a  pride  in  the  high  naval  position  of  an  island  whose
nautical  renown  dated  from  the  days  of  its  old  inhabitants,
Homer's  Phaeacians.  This  was  one  reason  of  the  care  which
they  lavished  on  their  fleet,  which  was  very  powerful  ;  indeed  they
began  the  war  with  a  force  of  i  20  galleys.  All  these  grievances
made  Corinth  eager  to  send  the  promised  aid  to  Epidamnus.'^

It  was  a  serious  decision,  for  between  Corinth  and  Epidamnus

^  Thuc.  i.  25.


THE   PELOPONNESIAN    WAR  415

lay  the  sea-domain  of  Corcyia.  CoiiiUh's  acceptance  of  the
invitation  was  thus  a  direct  challenge  to  her  rebellious  daughter.
Corinth  and  Corcyra  were  the  two  chief  sea-powers  of  Western
Greece.  Corcyra  was  the  stronger  of  the  two;  her  120  ships
'  held  the  seas '  northward  and  westwards  from  the  mouth  of  the
Ambracian  Gulf.  But  Corinth,  though  her  fleet  was  smaller,  had
good  friends  and  neighbours  behind  her,  whilst  Corcyra,  remote
from  the  City-State  world,  had  hitherto  always  maintained  herself
in  haughty  isolation.  Corinth  appealed  to  her  allies,  and  before
long  had  beaten  up  a  force  of  seventy-five  ships  and  2,000  heavy
infantry.  When  they  reached  the  territorial  frontier,  Actium,  at
the  mouth  of  the  Ambracian  Gulf,  '  where  the  temple  of  Apollo
stands,  the  Corcyraeans,'  says  Thucydides,  'sent  on  a  herald  in
a  light  boat  to  warn  them  not  to  sail  against  them.  Meanwhile
they  proceeded  to  man  their  ships,  all  of  which  had  been  equipped
for  action,  the  old  vessels  being  undergirded  to  make  them  sea-
worthy. On  the  return  of  the  herald  without  any  peaceful  answer
from  the  Corinthians,  their  ships  being  now  manned,  they  put  out
to  sea  to  meet  the  enemy  with  a  fleet  of  eighty  ships  (forty  were
engaged  in  the  siege  of  Epidamnus),  formed  line  and  went  into
action.  They  gained  a  decisive  victory  and  destroyed  fifteen  of
the  Corinthian  vessels.  The  same  day  saw  Epidamnus  compelled
by  its  besiegers  to  capitulate.'  ^

The  effect  of  this  engagement  was  to  make  Corcyra  as  supreme
on  the  Western  seaboard  of  Greece  as  Athens  was  in  the  Aegean.
'  The  Corcyraeans  set  up  a  trophy  on  Leucimme,  a  headland  of
Corcyra,  and  slew  all  their  captives  except  the  Corinthians,  whom
they  kept  as  prisoners  of  war.  The  Corinthians  and  their  allies
returned  home  and  left  the  Corcyraeans  masters  of  all  the  sea
about  those  parts.  Sailing  to  Leucas,  a  Corinthian  colony,  they
ravaged  their  territory  ;  they  burnt  Cyllene,  the  harbour  of  the
Eleans,  because  they  had  furnished  ships  and  money  to  Corinth.
For  almost  the  whole  of  the  period  that  followed  the  battle  they
remained  masters  of  the  sea,  and  the  allies  of  Corinth  were
harassed  by  Corcyraean  warships.  At  last,  towards  autumn,
roused  by  the  sufferings  of  her  allies,  Corinth  sent  out  ships  and
troops  . .  .  for  the  protection  of  Leucas  and  the  rest  of  the  friendly
cities.     The  Corcyraeans  on  their  part  formed  a  similar  station

^  Thuc.  i.  29.
D  d  2


4i6  CONCLUSION

on  Lcucimme.  Neither  party  made  any  movement,  but  they
remained  confronting  one  another  till  the  end  of  the  summer,  and
winter  was  at  hand  before  either  of  them  returned  home.'  ^

So  far  matters  had  only  followed  the  ordinary  course  of  a
season's  naval  campaigning.  But  it  was  clear  that  things  could
not  continue  in  this  fashion.  The  issues  involved  were  too  impor-
tant. Corinth  could  not  acquiesce  in  the  loss  of  her  sea-power
outside  the  Corinthian  Gulf,  or  relinquish  the  smaller  maritime
States,  who  relied  upon  her  protection,  to  the  tender  mercies  of
the  Corcyraean  buccaneers.  She  was  prepared  to  stake  all  upon
the  recovery  of  her  naval  power  from  her  undutiful  daughter.
So  *  she  spent  the  whole  of  the  year  after  the  engagement  and
that  succeeding  it  in  building  ships  and  in  straining  every  nerve
to  form  an  efficient  fleet,  rowers  being  drawn  from  the  Pelopon-
nese  and  the  rest  of  Greece  by  the  inducement  of  high  pay.  The
Corcyraeans,  alarmed  at  the  news  of  their  preparations,  being
without  a  single  ally  in  Greece,  .  .  .  decided  to  repair  to  Athens,'
in  the  autumn  of  434,  '  in  order  to  enter  into  alliance  and  to
endeavour  to  procure  support  from  her.  Hearing  of  their  inten-
tions, Corinth  also  sent  an  embassy  to  Athens,  to  prevent  the
Corcyraean  navy  being  joined  by  the  Athenian,  and  her  prospect
of  ordering  the  war  according  to  her  wishes  being  thus  impeded.
An  assembly  was  convoked  and  the  rival  advocates  appeared
before  the  people.'  ^

This  is  the  moment  which  Thucydides  has  selected  for  the  first
of  his  famous  set  speeches  or  expositions  of  policy  and  opinion.
It  was  a  peculiarly  difficult  position  with  which  Athens  and
Pericles,  her  chief  adviser,  were  confronted.  The  arguments  on
either  side  are  very  narrowly  balanced.  To  understand  their
full  bearing  we  must  recall  other  elements  in  the  general  poli-
tical situation.  The  Greek  world  was  divided,  as  it  had  been  now
for  more  than  a  generation,  into  two  political  groups,  centring
round  Athens  and  Sparta.  Athens,  with  her  250  dependent
cities  round  the  Aegean  seaboard  and  a  few  other  independent
allies,  took  rank  as  the  chief  sea-power ;  Sparta,  with  her  Pelo-
ponnesian  League,  which  included  Corinth  and  all  Boeotia  except
Plataea,  as  the  chief  land-power.  The  two  groups  had  been  at
peace,  bound  by  a  thirty  years'  truce,  for  the  last  eleven  years  ;  but

'  Thuc.  i.  30.  2  Thuc.  i.  31.


TME    PKLOl'ONNESIAN   WAR  417

feeling  between  thcni  was  steadily  growing,  and  every  one  felt  tlial
a  final  struggle  could  not  long  be  delayed.  Not  that  there  were  any
special  reasons  of  policy  why  they  must  needs  come  to  blows.
Their  interests  crossed  one  another  very  little,  nor  could  war  do
much  to  readjust  them  on  a  satisfactory  basis.  The  forces  which
all  Greece  saw  to  be  making  for  a  great  war  were  sentimental
rather  than  material :  they  concerned  honour  rather  than  trade  or
riches.  In  the  old  days  Sparta,  with  her  invincible  army  of
trained  soldiers,  had  been  acknowledged  by  all  to  be  the  chief
power  in  Greece.  The  trained  sailors  of  Athens  had  now  out-
stripped her.  '  It  was  the  growth  of  the  power  of  Athens,  and
the  alarm  which  this  inspired  in  Lacedaemon,'  says  Thucydides,
'  which  made  war  inevitable.'  ^

This  general  situation  is  well  reflected  in  the  arguments  of  the
two  speakers.  The  Corcyraeans  boldly  declare  that  the  great
war  is  inevitable,  and  must  come  sooner  rather  than  later.  Once
this  is  conceded,  the  rest  of  their  argument  is  easy.  '  Remember
that  there  are  but  three  considerable  naval  powers  in  Greece —
Athens,  Corcyra,  and  Corinth,  and  that  if  you  allow  two  of  these
three  to  become  one  and  Corinth  to  secure  us  for  herself,  you  will
have  to  hold  the  sea  against  the  united  fleets  of  Corcyra  and  the
Peloponnese.  But  if  you  receive  us  you  will  have  our  ships  to
reinforce  you  in  the  struggle.'

Against  these  weighty  arguments  ot  policy  Corinth  had  little
definite  to  ofl*er.  Her  envoys  were  indeed  in  a  somewhat  delicate
position.  For  the  last  generation,  as  everyone  knew,  the  relation
between  Athens  and  Corinth  had  been  one  of '  bitter  hate ' :  it
was  not  friendship  but  simply  expediency  which  had  kept  the
peace  between  them.  The  bitterness  dated  from  an  occasion
some  twenty  years  before,  when  Athens  had  interfered  in  a  border
war  between  Corinth  and  Megara  and  had  helped  the  latter  to
build  Long  Walls  and  so  render  herself  impregnable,  with
Athenian  help,  against  her  Western  neighbour.  So  it  was  not
without  a  touch  of  irony  that  the  Corinthian  envoys  reminded  their
hearers  that  Corinth  and  Athens  were  bound  by  the  ties  of  a  poli-
tical treaty,  whereas  Corcyra  and  Athens  '  had  never  even  been  in
a  truce ' — for  the  simple  reason  that  they  had  never  been  at  war.
They  proceeded  to  admit  the  existence  of  grievances  which  might

^  Thuc.  i.  23.  6  ;  of.  i.  68.  3.


4i8  CONCLUSION

lead  to  a  great  war,  but  urged  the  advisability  of  composing  them.
But  their  main  argument  rested  upon  a  plea  for  spheres  of  sea-
power.  If  Athens  was  to  be  left  undisturbed  by  Corinth  in  the
Aegean,  she  must  leave  Corinth  free  in  the  West.  If  she  upset
the  naval  balance  she  must  expect  reprisals.^

Two  assemblies  were  held  before  the  Sovereign  People  made
up  its  mind.  Whichever  way  the  decision  fell,  it  involved  a  change
in  Athenian  policy.  Hitherto  she  had  abstained  from  interfering
in  the  politics  of  the  North- West.  She  had  been  content  to  rely
for  the  safety  of  her  trade — her  only  Western  interest — upon  the
political  neutrality  and  commercial  interests  of  Corcyra.  But
now  she  could  no  longer  do  so.  If  she  broke  with  Corinth,  she
risked  a  general  conflagration.  But  if  she  broke  with  Corcyra,
she  was  postponing,  but  not  averting,  this  risk,  with  the  added
fear  that  her  Western  communications  would  be  in  permanent
danger.  Moreover,  she  was  unwilling  to  accept  the  Corinthian
doctrine  of  spheres  of  sea-power,  which  seemed  to  hem  her  in  for
all  time  within  her  Aegean  domain.  Outside  her  own  Empire
she  stood  for  a  free  sea  and  for  free  intercourse  ;  and  Pericles,  the
founder  of  Thurii,  would  not  willingly  allow  Corinth  to  seize  in
the  Western  waters  the  right  Athens  claimed  for  herself  in  the
Eastern.  Still,  he  was  too  cautious  a  statesman  to  plunge  her
needlessly  into  war.  The  solution  which  was  eventually  adopted,
no  doubt  upon  his  suggestion,  embodied  an  attempt  at  compromise.
The  Athenians  agreed  to  make  an  alliance  with  Corcyra,  but  of
a  purely  defensive  character.  Athens  continued  to  observe  the
Thirty  Years'  Truce  by  refusing  to  join  Corcyra  in  any  attack
upon  Corinth,  but  promised  to  come  to  her  assistance  if  her
own  territory  was  invaded.  The  calculation  was,  as  Thuc}'dides
frankly  tells  us,  that  the  two  would  weaken  one  another  by  mutual
conflict,  and  so  leave  the  sea  free  for  Athens  as  indisputably  the
greatest  naval  power.-

'  With  these  views,'  the  historian  continues.  'Athens  received
Corcyra  into  alliance  and  sent  ten  ships  to  their  assistance.  Their
instructions  were  to  avoid  collision  with  the  Corinthian  fleet,  except
under  certain  circumstances.  If  it  sailed  to  Corcyra  and  threatened
a  landing  on  her  coast,  or  in  any  of  her  possessions,  they  were  to
do  their  utmost  to  prevent  it.  These  instructions  were  prompted
^  Thuc.  i.  32-43.  103.  4.  -  Thuc.  i.  44.


TIIK    PELOPONNKSIAN    WAR  419

by  an  anxiety  to  avoid  a  breach  of  the  treaty.'  Hut  they  would
be  very  difficult  to  carry  out,  for  who  should  decide,  in  a  naval
campaign,  the  exact  limits  between  offence  and  defence  ?

So  the  sequel  showed.  The  Corinthians  completed  their  pre-
parations, and  sailed  against  Corcyra  with  150  ships  of  her  own
and  her  allies.  Corcyra  met  them  with  no,  the  ten  Athenian
ships  being  posted  in  reserve.  When  superior  numbers  began  to
tell,  the  Athenians  could  not  help  joining  in.  'At  first,  it  is  true,
they  refrained  from  charging  any  ships ;  but  when  the  rout  was
becoming  patent,  and  the  Corinthians  were  pressing  on,  the  time
at  last  came  when  every  one  set  to  and  all  distinction  was  laid
aside,  and  it  came  to  this  point  that  Corinthians  and  Athenians
raised  their  hands  against  one  another.'  The  battle  ended  inde-
cisively, both  sides  raising  a  trophy  of  victory.  The  Corinthians
'put  some  men  on  a  boat,  and  sent  them  without  a  herald's  wand
to  the  Athenians  ',  to  register  a  formal  protest  against  their  breach
of  the  Thirty  Years'  Truce.  Then  they  sailed  home,  and  the
operations  were  concluded  for  the  time  being.  '  In  this  way,'
says  Thucydides,  '  Corcyra  maintained  her  political  existence
against  Corinth,  and  the  Athenian  vessels  left  the  island.  This
was  the  first  cause  of  the  war  that  Corinth  had  against  the
Athenians,  namely,  that  they  had  fought  against  them  with  the
Corcyraeans  in  time  of  treaty.'  ^

'  Almost  immediately  after  this,'  probably  in  the  winter  of
433-432,  '  fresh  differences  arose  between  the  Athenians  and  the
Peloponnesians  and  contributed  their  share  to  the  war.'  Athens
having  interfered  in  the  West,  '  Corinth  was  forming  schemes  of
retaliation  and  Athens  suspected  her  hostility.'  The  weak  spot
in  the  Athenian  Empire  was  what  was  called  the  '  Thrace-ward
district ',  comprising  the  cities  on  the  north  coast  of  the  Aegean
from  the  Gulf  of  Salonica  to  the  Dardanelles.  There  had  been
some  shrinkage  of  tribute  in  that  district  during  the  previous  years,
and  there  was  danger  of  more  defections,  as  one  of  the  hinterland
powers— the  kingdom  of  Macedonia — was  just  now  hostile  to
Athens.  Athenian  statesmen  knew  that  Corinth  would  be  hoping
for  trouble  there,  and  resolved  to  forestall  any  possible  attempt.
Corinth's  natural  leverage  in  this  quarter  was  through  the  city  of
Potidaea,  on  the  isthmus  of  Pallenc,  an  old  colony  of  hers,  but

'  Time.  i.  55.


420  CONCLUSION

now,  like  the  other  coast  cities,  a  tributary  ally  of  Athens.  Athens
accordingly  ordered  the  Potidaeans  to  pull  down  part  of  their
walls,  to  give  hostages,  and  to  break  off  all  the  customary  com-
munications with  their  old  metropolis.  The  Potidaeans  first  pro-
tested, then  refused,  entered  into  relations  with  the  Peloponnesian
Confederacy,  and  finally  revolted  from  Athens.  Corinth  hastily
raised  a  force  to  help  them,  which  managed  to  slip  across  the
Aegean  while  the  Athenian  northern  squadron  was  engaged
elsewhere,  and  to  enter  the  town  within  forty  days  of  its  defec-
tion. The  Athenians  immediately  sent  out  a  force  to  besiege
them.^

Corinth  had  now  a  double  grievance.  Athens  had  attacked
her  sailors  off  Corcyra  and  was  besieging  some  of  her  soldiers  at
Potidaea.  She  found  Athens  prepared  to  maintain  her  Empire
at  all  costs  in  the  East,  and  to  fight  for  the  open  sea,  or  even,
perhaps,  for  another  sea-empire,  in  the  West.  She  saw  no  limit
to  Athenian  designs,  or  to  the  skill  and  energy  and  devotion  with
which  she  pursued  them — so  different  from  the  dull,  dogged,
unthinking  courage  and  discipline  of  Sparta.  Both  anger  and
apprehension  made  her  eager  to  precipitate  the  inevitable  war ;
and  she  set  herself  to  the  difficult  task  of  rousing  the  energy  and
inflaming  the  feelings  of  the  slow-moving  Spartan  leaders.^

Athens  was  well  aware  of  the  situation.  Pericles  was  not
anxious  for  war,  but  he  rightly  felt  that  the  city  had  gone  too  far
to  draw  back.  Potidaea  must  be  reduced  at  all  costs,  Corinthians
or  no  Corinthians,  not  only  for  the  sake  of  Athenian  prestige,
but  because  Athens  depended  absolutely  on  the  steady  arrival  of
her  tribute-money.  There  was  only  one  possible  way  by  which
war  might  yet  be  averted— by  a  display  of  Athenian  power  which
might  serve  as  an  object-lesson  to  the  Peloponnesians  as  to  the
nature  of  the  war  on  which  they  were  being  asked  to  engage.
Pericles  determined  to  give  a  demonstration  of  what  sea-power
really  meant.  The  victims  selected  for  the  purpose  were  the
Megarians,  against  whom  Athens  had  had  a  grudge  ever  since
they  had  ungratefully  deserted  her  alliance  and  butchered  their
Athenian  garrison  at  a  moment  of  grave  difficulty  thirteen  years
before.     A  decree  of  boycott  was  issued  closing  all  the  harbours

'  Thuc.  i.  56-68.  -  Thuc.  i.  66-71.


THE    PELOPONNESIAN    WAR  4a>

of  the  Empire  and  all  the  markets  of  Attica  to  Megariaii  ships  and
Megarian  goods.  Thus  at-  a  single  blow  Megara  was  practically
isolated  from  the  world,  and  thrown  back  for  her  subsistence  upon
the  old  self-sufficient  agricultural  basis.  How  severely  she  felt
the  pinch  we  know,  not  only  by  the  part  she  played  in  the  final
deliberations  at  Sparta,  but  by  Aristophanes'  picture  of  the  poor
Megarian  who  disguises  his  daughters  as  pigs  and  smuggles  them
across  the  border  into  the  Athenian  market  for  sale.  What
Athens  could  do  for  Megara  she  could  do  also,  so  soon  as  war
was  declared,  for  the  other  maritime  cities  of  the  Peloponncsian
League,  and  Pericles  was  anxious  that,  in  their  councils  of  war,
this  fact  should  be  duly  weighed.^

The  Spartans  were  frightened,  as  well  they  might  be.  When
their  assembly  met  to  discuss  peace  or  war,  the  wiser  heads  among
them  frankly  asked  how  they  could  expect  to  defeat  a  power  which
was  invulnerable  by  land  and  which,  by  superior  seamanship  and
superior  money  power,  could  be  sure  of  driving  them  off  the  sea.
Sparta,  they  said,  had  no  resources  of  her  own  whatsoever.  Athens
could  only  be  conquered  by  sea  ;  ships  cost  money,  and  good
hired  sailors  cost  even  more.  But  the  Corinthians  countered
these  arguments  by  skilful  appeals  to  Spartan  pride.  To  acquiesce
in  these  last  acts  of  Athenian  aggression  would  be  to  prove  to  all
the  world  that  they  had  lost  their  old  supremacy,  which  had  passed
for  good  from  the  land-power  to  the  sea-power.  They  must  make
a  stand  once  and  for  all,  make  up  their  minds  to  fight,  raise  what
money  they  could,  and  risk  the  consequences.  This  appeal  was
supported  by  the  Spartan  presiding  magistrate  and  was  finally
approved  by  the  assembly,  which  voted  that  the  treaty  had  been
broken,  and  that  war  must  be  declared,  'not  so  much,'  says
Thucydides,  '  because  they  were  persuaded  by  the  arguments  of
the  allies' — they  cared  little  enough  for  the  particular  grievances —
'  as  because  they  feared  the  power  of  the  Athenians,  seeing  most

^  Thuc.  i.  67.  4,  114.  1  ;  Ar.  Ach.  530-5,  729  ft.  The  decree  was  preceded
by  some  vexatious  frontier  regulations  which  caused  the  Megarians  much
irritation  :  Thuc.  i.  42.  2  ;  Ar.  Ach.  519  ft".;  cf.  Meyer,  iv,  §  539;  Forschungcn,
vol.  ii,  pp.  297  ft". ;  Busolt,  vol.  iii,  p.  812.  Megara  relied  considerably  upon
imported  grain,  which  she  paid  for  by  manufactured  exports,  notably  cheap
clothing:  she  had  little  good  soil,  though  no  doubt  Isocrates  is,  as  usual,
exaggerating  when  he  says  her  cultivators  'have  only  rocks  to  farm'  (Is.  viii.
117  ;  Xen.  Mem.  ii.  7.  6).  Her  trade  connexions  with  the  West,  via  Pegae,
were  still  formally  open,  but  were  probably  insignificant.


432  CONCLUSION

of  Greece  already  subject  to  them.'  This  was  in  the  autumn  of
432.  The  year  431,  then,  was  to  see  the  opening  of  the  decisive
struggle  between  the  two  great  powers  for  the  supremacy  of
Greece.^

Embassies  now  passed  to  and  fro,  raking  up  old  grievances  and
making  impossible  demands.  When  the  last  set  of  envoys  arrived,
the  Sovereign  People  of  Athens  met  in  Parliament  for  the  final
decision  between  peace  and  war.  Pericles,  as  chief  adviser,  pleaded
for  steadiness  against  the  faint-hearts  who  were  even  now  willing
to  urge  a  compromise,  and  then  set  forth,  as  General,  the  policy
which  he  intended  to  adopt.  It  was  based  upon  the  principle,
not  of  defeat,  but  of  exhaustion.  He  proposed,  not  to  attack  the
enemy,  but  to  ignore  them,  or,  if  not  to  leave  them  quite  uninjured,
at  least  to  spend  upon  hurting  them  as  little  as  possible  of  Athens's
precious  resources  in  money  and  men.  Athens  was  now,  for  good
or  for  evil,  a  sea-power,  not  a  land-power.  She  must  abandon
her  land  without  a  qualm  to  the  Peloponnesian  invader,  and  prove
to  him  how  little  he  could  hope  to  bring  her  to  terms  by  trampling
her  corn-fields  and  felling  her  olive-trees.  After  a  few  fruitless
seasons  of  campaigning  against  an  invisible  foe^  they  would  realize
their  helplessness  and  be  prepared  to  accept  her  supremacy  ;  for
even  land  campaigns  cost  money,  and  the  Peloponnesian  yeomen
farmers  would  be  reluctant  to  leave  their  crops  just  when  their
labour  was  needed.  The  one  and  only  consideration  for  Athens
must  be  the  maintenance  of  her  sea-power.  '  Consider  for  a
moment,^  he  said,  with  that  peculiar  impressiveness  in  his  manner
(Athenians  called  it  '  Olympian  ')  which  he  always  adopted  when
he  had  anything  unpalatable  to  say.  '  Suppose  we  were  islanders :
can  you  conceive  a  more  impregnable  position?  Well,  this,  in
future,  should  as  far  as  possible  be  our  conception  of  our  position.
Dismissing  all  thought  of  our  land  and  houses,  we  must  keep
guard  over  the  sea  and  the  city.  .  .  .  We  must  not  cry  over  the
loss  of  houses  and  land  but  of  men's  lives  ;  since  it  is  not  houses
and  land  that  make  men,  but  men  them.'  With  the  sea  and  the
city  safe,  and  the  treasure  on  the  Acropolis,  and  the  tribute  coming
in  from  the  Empire,  and  her  traders  and  craftsmen  pursuing  their
peaceful  and  prosperous  callings,  and  her  garrisons  and  guard-
ships  keeping  watch  over  her  territorial  waters  and  coasts,  Athens
^  Thuc.  i.  80-8,  6S-71.


THE   PELOPONNESIAN   WAR  423

could  bid  her  enemies  strike  where  they  were  able.  She  would  meet
the  blow  without  flinching.    Nowhere  could  they  touch  the  quick.'

Athens  obeyed  Pericles  to  the  letter.  A  defiant  answer  was
returned  to  Sparta.  Early  next  spring  the  country-folk  moved
into  the  city,  bringing  with  them  '  their  children  and  women  and
the  rest  of  their  household  possessions,  including  the  woodwork
of  the  houses  themselves ;  the  sheep  and  beasts  of  burden  were
sent  across  to  Euboea  and  the  adjacent  islands.'  They  found
what  quarters  they  could  in  the  overcrowded  city,  and  waited  to
see  what  would  happen.^

What  happened  was  exactly  what  Pericles  had  predicted  and
arranged.  The  Peloponnesian  field  army,  some  30,000  strong,
marched  into  Attica,  just  when  the  corn  was  ripe,  ravaging  the
country  as  it  went,  encamped  for  some  weeks  in  the  plain  outside
Athens,  engaged  in  a  few  skirmishes  with  flying  parties  of  the
defenders'  horse,  and  finally,  '  after  remaining  in  Attica  as  long
as  its  provisions  lasted,  retired  home  through  Boeotia  by  a
different  road.'  ^

But  these  were  stirring  weeks  at  Athens.  It  was  not  easy  for
the  proud  Athenian  people  to  see  the  enemy  at  their  gates  and  yet
stay  crouching  behind  their  walls.  Pericles  needed  to  exert  all
his  powers  to  restrain  them.  He  even  stretched  his  authority  as
General  so  far  as  not  to  summon  the  Sovereign  People  to  the
ordinary  monthly  Parliament.  In  default  of  this,  the  constitu-
tional safety-valve,  '  knots  were  formed  in  the  streets  and  engaged
in  hot  discussion.   .  .  .  Oracles  of  the  most  various  import  were

^  Thuc.  1.  139-44.  On  the  'policy  of  exhaustion'  as  a  strategic  principle
see  the  interesting  essay  by  Delbriick,  Die  St>-aiegie  des  Pericles  crlautert
durch  die  Strategie  Friedrichs  des  Grossen,  who  invokes  the  authority  of
Clausewitz  on  Pericles'  behalf.  There  has,  of  course,  been  a  whole  literature
of  writers  eager  to  set  Pericles  to  rights,  to  some  of  whom  Delbriick  refers.
As  regards  devastation,  he  points  out  (p.  no)  that  burning  houses  is  simple
enough,  but  to  destroy  corn-fields,  fruit-trees,  and  vineyards  costs  time  and
trouble.  In  the  Middle  Ages  armies  used  to  take  reapers  with  them  for  this
purpose.  'To  fell  a  single  moderate-sized  tree,  even  with  the  best  imple-
ments, takes  several  hours.'  This  explains  how  it  was  that  the  Athenians
'  were  able  to  enjoy  their  harvests  '  all  through  the  earlier  part  of  the  war,
down  to  the  occupation  of  Decelea.     (Thuc.  vii.  27.  4.)

*  Thuc.  ii.  14-17.

^  Thuc.  ii.  18-23.  It  was  in  one  of  these  skirmishes  that  the  Phrygian
woodcutter,  whose  epitaph  is  given  above  (p.  272),  lost  his  life.  Thucydides
only  tells  us  that  the  Peloponnesian  army  numbered  two-thirds  of  their  whole
fighting  force.     I  follow  Meyer's  estimate  (i\.  §  545^ •


424  CONCLUSION

recited  and  found  eager  listeners.  ...  In  short,  the  whole  city-
was  in  the  most  excited  condition  ;  Pericles  was  the  object  of
general  indignation  ;  his  previous  counsels  were  totally  forgotten ;
he  was  abused  for  not  leading  out  the  army  which  he  commanded,
and  was  made  responsible  for  the  whole  of  the  public  suffering.'
Pericles,  of  course,  had  foreseen  this  change  of  temper,  and  he
had  his  own  remedy  ready.  While  the  Spartans  were  still  in
Attica  he  sent  out  a  naval  force  of  a  hundred  ships  round  the
Peloponnese,  not  with  the  object  of  achieving  any  particular
success,  but  in  order  to  meet  pinpricks  with  pinpricks  and  to  keep
up  the  spirits  of  the  grumbling  citizens.  In  addition  to  this,  he
set  the  regular  war-guards  '  by  land  and  sea  at  the  points  at  which
it  was  intended  to  have  regular  guards  during  the  war',  thus
closing  the  Athenian  domain  to  all  the  shipping  of  the  enemy.
Henceforward,  till  peace  was  declared,  all  who  sailed  there  with-
out Athens's  leave  knew  themselves  to  be  privateers.  Later  on  in
the  season  he  allowed  the  heavy-armed  their  outing  too.  A  large
force  was  sent  into  the  Megarid  in  the  early  autumn  to  gratify  its
lust  for  vengeance  by  trampling  the  stubble-fields  and  vineyards
of  its  hungry  neighbours.  They  ravaged  the  greater  part  of  the
territory  and  then  retired,  resolved  to  repeat  the  incursion  every
year.  Such,  with  a  few  minor  incidents,  were  the  events  of  the
first  season's  campaigning.^

By  the  end  of  the  season  Pericles  had  regained  his  full  ascen-
dancy. In  the  autumn,  on  All  Souls  Day,  when  the  army  was
back  from  Megara,  he  was  chosen  to  deliver  the  Funeral  Speech
over  the  dead  of  the  year.  Thucydides  pauses  in  his  narrative  to
record  it,  to  show  us  with  what  high  hopes  and  undimmed  ideals
Athens  and  her  leader  looked  forward  to  the  second  year  of  the
Great  War.  Her  imperial  power  was  intact  and,  to  all  seeming,
impregnable.  Her  allies  remained  her  friends,  bound  to  her  by
the  acceptance  of  favours  from  the  champion  of  liberty.  Both  in
public  and  in  private,  by  her  free  self-governing  institutions  and
the  high  personal  character  of  her  citizens,  Athens  was  an  educa-
tion to  Greece.  She  was  only  waiting  for  a  final  peace  and  the
definite  acknowledgement  of  her  supremacy  in  order  to  bring  the
whole  civilized  world  under  her  lasting  influence.^

'  Thuc.  ii.  21-3,  67  fin.,  31.  -  Thuc.  ii.  34-46;  cf.  61.  i.


THE    PELOPONNKSIAX    WAR  425

'Such,'  continues  Thucydidcs,  with  ahnost  unbearable  calm,
'  was  the  funeral  that  took  place  during  this  winter,  with  which
the  first  year  of  the  war  came  to  an  end.  In  the  first  days  of  the
next  summer,  the  Lacedaemonians  and  their  allies  invaded  Attica
as  before,  and  sat  down  and  laid  waste  the  country.  Not  many
da}'s  after  their  arrival  in  Attica  the  Plague  first  began  to  show
itself  among  the  Athenians.  .  .  .  All  speculation  as  to  its  origin
and  its  causes,  if  causes  can  be  found  adequate  to  produce  so
great  a  disturbance,  I  leave  to  other  writers ;  for  myself  I  shall
simply  set  down  its  nature,  and  explain  the  symptoms  by  which
perhaps  it  may  be  recognized  by  the  student,  if  it  should  ever
break  out  again.  This  I  can  the  better  do  as  I  was  a  sufferer
myself  and  watched  its  operation  in  others.'^

Its  bodily  symptoms  find  no  place  here.  One  out  of  four  of
the  population  succumbed  to  them,  one-fourth  of  that  precious
man-power  which  Athens  could  spare  so  ill.  The  remaining
three-fourths  survived.  But  our  concern  is  not  with  the  body
but  with  the  spirit,  not  with  the  citizens  but  with  the  city.  Indi-
vidual Athenians  grew  well  again.  Athens  herself  never  recovered.
For  the  whole  of  that  blazing  windless  summer  and  the  winter
beyond  it,  and  another  summer  and  another  winter  beyond  them,
the  Angel  of  Death  stood  over  her,  laying  his  hand  upon  whom  he
would.  When  he  passed  away  at  last  for  a  brief  respite,  Athens
awoke  to  find  her  spirit  seared.  The  old  hope  and  reverence  and
self-discipline  and  joy  had  passed  away  as  in  a  dream.  In  their
place  were  anger  and  greed  and  suspicion,  mean-eyed  envy  and
weak  despair,  and  all  the  devils  of  disillusionment.  She  awoke
clear-eyed  to  the  realities  of  her  position  ;  she  saw  herself,  at  last,
not  as  a  missionary  of  Freedom  but  as  a  Tyrant.  But  she  had
lost  her  old  power  to  think  quietly  and  steadily  and  with  saving
thoughts.  Henceforward  not  even  Pericles,  weakened  himself
by  disease,  had  the  power  to  uplift  the  minds  and  hearts  of  her
citizens.  '  Fear  of  gods  or  law  of  man  there  was  none  to  restrain
them.'  "

We  must  not  attempt  to  trace  the  details  of  the  long  decline
of  Athenian  policy  from  the  mood  of  the  Funeral  Speech,  when

^  Thuc.  ii.  47-8.

2  Thuc.  ii.  53,  58.  3,  iii.  87  ;  Diod.  xii.  58.  4.  There  was  a  bad  recrudescence
of  plague  in  the  winter  of  427-426.


426  CONCLUSION

Athens  is  still  a  Liberator,  to  the  mood  of  the  great  Sicilian
Expedition,  when  she  stands  self-confessed  as  a  Robber  Empire.
Thucydides  has  marked  every  step  of  the  way  with  deadly  pre-
cision and  quiet  unsleeping  irony,  for  he  lived  through  it  all
himself.  We  will  leave  him  to  tell  the  story,  to  which  this  whole
book  has  been  an  introduction.  All  that  remains  for  us  here  is
to  mark  the  full  significance  of  the  change,  and  to  point  out,  in
conclusion,  some  of  the  milestones  by  the  way.

For  a  whole  wonderful  half  century,  the  richest  and  happiest
period  in  the  recorded  history  of  any  single  community,  Politics
and  Morality,  the  deepest  and  strongest  forces  of  national  and  of
individual  life,  had  moved  forward  hand  in  hand  towards  a  com-
mon ideal,  the  perfect  citizen  in  the  perfect  state.  All  the  high
things  in  human  life  seemed  to  lie  along  that  road  :  '  Freedom,
Law,  and  Progress  ;  Truth  and  Beauty  ;  Knowledge  and  Virtue  ;
Humanity  and  Religion.'  Now  the  gods  had  put  them  asunder.
Freedom,  Law,  Virtue,  Humanity,  and  all  the  old  forces  of  city
life  lay  along  one  road:  Beauty,  Knowledge,  Progress,  and
all  the  great  new  world  of  Civilization  to  which  Riches  and
Empire  held  the  key,  along  another.  The  gods  had  put  them
asunder.  The  gods  have  kept  them  asunder.  Twenty-three
centuries  have  passed ;  the  world  has  grown  wiser  than  ever
Greeks  hoped,  kinder  than  ever  they  dreamed,  and  richer  far
than  ever  they  would  have  desired  :  yet  man  has  not  learnt  how
to  reunite  them.

Athens  now  fell  into  a  mood  of  childish  anger  and  weakness.
Bereft  of  her  ideals  for  the  future,  she  began  to  despair  even  of
what  she  had.  '  After  the  second  invasion  of  the  Peloponnesians,'
says  Thucydides,  '  a  change  came  over  the  spirit  of  the  Athenians.
Their  land  had  been  twice  laid  waste,  and  war  and  pestilence  at
once  pressed  heavily  upon  them.  They  began  to  find  fault  with
Pericles  as  the  author  of  the  war  and  the  cause  of  all  their  misfor-
tunes, and  became  eager  to  come  to  terms  with  Lacedaemon.
Indeed,  they  actually  sent  ambassadors  thither,  who  did  not  how-
ever succeed  in  their  mission.  Their  despair  was  now  complete,
and  all  vented  itself  upon  Pericles.  When  he  saw  them  exas-
perated at  the  present  turn  of  affairs  and  acting  exactly  as  he  had
anticipated,  he  called  an  Assembly,  being  (it  must  be  remem-
bered) still  General,  with  the  double  object  of  restoring  confidence


THI-:    ri-LOPONNESIAN    WAR  427

and  of  leading  them  from  these  angrj-  feelings  to  a  calmer  and
more  hopeful  frame  of  mind.' '

He  only  partly  succeeded,  and  that  at  how  great  a  cost !  For,
though  he  turned  their  minds  from  an  ignominious  peace,  it  was
only  by  setting  them,  once  and  for  all,  into  an  even  more  dangerous
channel.  He  tried  them  first  with  the  old  imperial  appeal^  which
he  had  used  so  often  of  late  to  hearten  their  resolution  :  '  born
citizens  of  a  great  State  and  with  a  character  worthy  of  your
birth,  you  should  be  ready  to  face  the  greatest  disasters  and  still
to  preserve  undimmed  the  lustre  of  your  name.'  But  the  call  fell
upon  deaf  ears.  The  words  were  the  same  :  it  was  the  audience
which  had  changed.  '  I  am  the  same  man  and  do  not  alter :  it
is  you  who  change,'  said  their  leader  sadly  ;  and  then  turned,  as
orators  will,  when  the  meeting  is  dull,  to  a  more  violent  and
reckless  note.  '  I  will  now  reveal  an  advantage  arising  from  the
greatness  of  your  dominion  which  I  think  has  never  yet  suggested
itself  to  you,  as  I  myself  never  mentioned  it  among  my  previous
arguments.  It  has  so  bold  a  sound  that  I  should  scarce  adven-
ture it  now,  were  it  not  for  the  unnatural  depression  which  I  see
around  me.  You  perhaps  think  that  your  Empire  extends  only
over  your  allies.  I  will  declare  to  you  the  truth.  The  visible
field  of  action  has  two  parts,  land  and  sea.  In  the  whole  of  one
of  these  you  are  completely  supreme,  not  merely  as  far  as  you
use  it  at  present,  but  also  to  what  further  extent  you  may  think
fit.  Your  naval  resources  are  such  that  your  warships  may  go
where  they  please,  and  neither  the  king  nor  any  other  nation  on
earth  has  power  to  stop  them.'  Thus  it  was  that,  by  one  of
Fate's  cruellest  ironies,  Pericles,  the  cautious  and  clear-sighted,
the  champion  of  the  Free  Sea  and  Free  Intercourse,  who  had  been
warning  Athens  for  a  whole  generation  against  the  dangers  of
aggrandizement,  was  the  first  to  preach  to  her  the  fatal  doctrine
of  Universal  Sea-power.-

It  was  his  last  recorded  public  speech.  He  was  sick  of  the
plague  when  he  made  it,  saddened  too  by  the  loss  of  friends  and
of  his  last  surviving  legitimate  son.  Soon  afterwards  he  lost  his
ofifice,  and,  though  he  regained  it  at  the  next  election,  he  never
lived  to  resume  power.  It  is  at  this  point  that  he  drops  out  of  the
history  of  the  war.  '  He  outlived  its  commencement  two  years
'  Thuc.  ii.  59.  "^  Thuc.  ii.  60-4.


428  CONCLUSION

and  six  months,'  says  Thucydides,  '  and  the  correctness  of  his
previsions  concerning  it  became  better  known  by  his  death.'
Plutarch  tells  a  story  of  his  last  hours,  which  reveals  more  clearly
than  his  recorded  speeches  the  thought  that  was  most  in  his
mind.  '  When  he  was  at  the  point  of  death,  his  surviving  friends
and  the  principal  citizens,  sitting  about  his  bed,  discoursed  together
concerning  his  excellence  as  a  man  and  the  great  authority  he
had  enjoyed,  and  enumerated  his  various  exploits  and  the  number
of  his  victories  ;  for  while  he  was  General  he  had  raised  no  less
than  nine  trophies  of  battle  in  the  city's  honour.  These  things
they  talked  of,  supposing  that  he  attended  not  to  what  they  said,
but  that  his  senses  were  gone.  But  he  took  notice  of  every  word,
and  found  voice  to  answer  them  as  follows :  '  I  am  surprised  that,
while  you  recollect  and  extol  these  acts  of  mine,  though  fortune
had  her  share  in  them  and  many  other  generals  have  performed
the  like,  you  take  no  notice  of  the  greatest  and  most  honourable
thing  of  all,  that  no  Athenian  through  my  fault  ever  put  on
a  mourning  robe.'  Pericles  died  with  a  rebuke  to  the  War-spirit
upon  his  lips.^

With  the  passing  of  Pericles  the  change  of  spirit  is  complete.
Gentleness  and  chivalry  and  idealism  form  no  part  now  of  the
city's  life.  Her  new-found  advisers  care  nothing  for  moral  issues,
and  take  no  heed  of  saving  thoughts.  Wise  or  foolish,  they  set
their  course  by  expediency  and  interest  alone.  The  old  imperial
boasts — Athens's  care  of  the  weak,  her  defence  of  the  oppressed —
stir  men's  courage  no  longer.  Her  one  faithful  mainland  ally,
Plataea,  who  alone  was  with  her  at  Marathon,  sends  in  this  same
year  to  say  that  the  Peloponnesians  are  at  her  gates.  Shall  she
risk  a  siege?  Her  envoys  return  with  this  message,  given  in
the  proud  old  style :  '  The  Athenians  say  that  they  have  never
hitherto  on  any  occasion  abandoned  us,  nor  will  they  now  neglect
us,  but  will  help  us  according  to  their  ability ;  and  they  adjure
you  by  the  oaths  which  your  fathers  swore,  to  keep  the  alliance
unaltered.'  Mindful  of  the  oaths,  the  Plataeans  obeyed  them.
But  Athens  did  neglect  them  :  for  it  was  not  considered  ex-
pedient to  risk  a  battle.  She  was  too  busy  extending  her  sea-
power  in  distant  waters,  and  could  not  spare  the  money  and  men.
For  two  years  Plataea  held  out  in  hope,  while  the  Athenians
'  Thuc.  ii.  65  ;  Plut.  Fer.  36-8.


THE   PELOPONNESIAN   WAR  4^9

roamed  the  seas  from  Crete  and  Caria  lo  the  Corinthian  Gulf;
when  at  last  she  was  reduced  by  hunger,  her  survivors  were  put  to
death  for  their  dependence  on  Athenian  promises.  Yet  the  little
city  lay  but  a  night  and  a  day's  march  from  her  all\-,  on  the  further
slope  of  the  range  which  bounds  the  plain  of  Athens.  As  she
was  trustful,  the  Athenians,  watching  the  sun  set  behind  her
mountain,  could  afford  to  neglect  her.  What  would  they  have
done  had  she  proved  faithless  ?  ^

We  cannot  tell,  for  Plataea  was  only  an  ally,  not  a  subject :
she  had  no  money  value,  for  she  paid  no  tribute.  But  we  know
what  arguments  were  used  when  a  subject  withdrew  her  allegiance.
A  year  after  Pericles'  death,  Mytilenc,  one  of  the  richest  states
in  the  Empire,  and  one  of  the  few  which  still  preferred  to  contri-
bute ships  instead  of  money,  suddenly  revolted.  Athens  was
stirred  to  feverish  activity.  She  sent  out  a  large  fleet,  and  soon
news  came  that  all  was  well.  The  popular  party  in  Mytilene  had
reasserted  itself,  and  the  city  had  given  in  its  adherence.  An
assembly  was  held  to  discuss  what  treatment  should  be  meted
out  to  the  rebels.  Thucydides  has  recorded  the  debate,  in  order
that  we  may  see  the  new  spirit  at  work.^

It  was  not  a  contest  between  ideals  and  expedienc)',  for  no
one  cared  for  ideals  now,  but  between  wisdom  and  foll>'.  Athens's
most  persuasive  adviser  was  now  a  Parliamentarian  called  Cleon,
whom  Thucydides  describes  as  '  in  all  respects  the  most  violent
man  in  the  city ',  the  very  embodiment  of  the  mad  war-spirit
which  was  driving  Athens  down  the  decline.  Cleon's  advice
was  very  simple  :  to  give  the  allies  a  lesson  in  loyalty  by  putting
to  death  the  whole  population  of  Mytilene.  He  carried  the
assembly ;  but  on  second  thoughts  the  debate  was  resumed,  and
at  the  further  sitting  saner  counsels  prevailed.  It  was  decided
that  it  would  be  more  expedient  to  execute,  not  the  entire  popula-
tion, but  only  the  ringleaders.    '  These,'  adds  Thucydides  grimly,

'  Thuc.  ii.  73,  85.  5-6,  iii.  19,  20-4,  52-68,  Plataea  lies  about  thirty  miles
from  Athens,  on  the  northern  slope  of  Mount  Cithaeron,  overlooking  the
Boeotian  plain.  It  is  within  an  easy  day's  march  from  the  frontier  fort  of
Oenoe,  which  remained  in  Athenian  hands  all  this  time  (Thuc.  ii.  19,  i  ;  cf.
viii.  98).  No  sooner  had  Plataea  fallen  than  Athens  began  to  form  schemes
for  the  invasion  of  Boeotia.  Ambition  descried  a  way  where  loyalty  could
find  none  :  Thuc.  iii.  95,  iv.  77.  Cithaeron  is  full  in  view  from  the  Acropolis  ;
on  Midsummer  Day  the  sun  sets  just  behind  its  summit.

"  Thuc.  iii.  2-18,  25-8.
124G  E  e


430  CONCLUSION

'  numbered  rather  more  than  a  thousand.'  The  reasoning  that
swayed  her  was  financial ;  for  the  pursuit  of  universal  sea-power
was  proving  a  drain  on  the  city  treasure.  We  must  encourage
cities,  urged  the  winning  speaker,  to  '  come  to  terms  while  they
are  still  able  to  refund  expenses  and  to  pay  tribute  afterwards  '.
If  we  are  merciless  with  revolted  allies  we  shall  be  reduced  each
time  to  '  the  expense  of  a  siege,  and  when  we  are  victorious  we
shall  secure  a  ruined  town  from  which  we  can  no  longer  draw
the  revenue  which  forms  our  real  strength  against  the  enemy '.
Athens  had  lost  her  humanity  ;  but  so  far,  despite  Cleon,  she
still  retained  some  of  her  common  sense.^

Two  years  later,  in  the  seventh  year  of  the  war,  the  luck
turned  suddenly,  as  happened  sometimes  in  Greek  wars.  Athens
succeeded,  by  a  succession  of  accidents,  in  isolating  a  detachment
of  Spartan  citizens  on  an  island  off  their  coast,  in  a  position  where
it  was  impossible  for  the  land-power  to  relieve  them.  Sparta,
with  her  diminishing  citizen-body  and  ever  in  fear  of  a  Helot
revolt,  could  not  afford  to  sacrifice  them.  The  danger  brought
her  to  her  knees.  She  sent  envoys  to  Athens  to  sue  humbly  for
peace.  The  terms  she  offered  were  the  terms  for  which  Pericles
had  advised  Athens  to  wait.  Sparta  agreed  to  abide  loyally  by
the  status  quo,  to  accept  the  fact  of  the  Athenian  Empire  and
the  consequent  supremacy  of  the  sea-power  over  the  land-power.
'  The  Lacedaemonians,'  said  their  envoys,  addressing  the  Sove-
reign People,  '  invite  you  to  make  a  treaty  and  to  end  the  war,
offering  peace  and  alliance  and  the  most  friendly  and  intimate
relations  in  every  way.'  They  felt  no  doubt  at  all  as  to  the
reception  of  the  offer.  The  war  had  already  lasted  far  longer
than  was  customary,  and  not  only  Sparta,  but  all  Greece,  had
grown  tired  of  the  fighting  mood.  INIoreover  they  knew,  or  could
guess,  how  severely  the  Athenians  were  feeling  the  strain,  in  the
loss  of  men  and  of  treasure.  '  If  peace  was  ever  desirable  for
both  parties  it  is  surely  so  at  the  present  moment,  before  any-
thing inexpiable  occurs  between  us,  before  our  public  hostilities
are  transformed  into  a  bitter  and  intimate  personal  hatred.'  -

'  Thuc.  iii.  36-50.

^  '1  hue.  iv.  3-20,  esp.  20.  i.  avi]Ki(jTn^  is  a  very  strong  word  :  '  inexpiable,'
'  irremediable,'  give  only  a  shadow  of  its  full  religious  meaning  ;  it  is  asso-
ciated with  the  old  idea  of  bloodguiltiness  or  pollution  by  murder;  cf.
pp.  95  ff.  above  and  Soph.  O.  T.  98.


THE    PELOPONNESIAN    WAR


43'


Before  the  Sovereign  People  give  answer  let  us  join  them  in
their  deliberations  and  see  which  way  the  balance  inclined,
towards  peace  or  towards  war.

They  had  been  fighting  now  for  nine  seasons,  dating  from  the
affray  at  Corcyra,  at  first  merely  on  the  defensive,  except  for
summer  raids,  but  latterly,  since  Pericles  died,  on  the  offensive
too,  keeping  ships  at  sea  during  the  winter  outside  their  own
waters,  and  sending  troops  far  afield,  to  Aetolia  and  even  to  Sicily.
How  had  the  six  thousand  talents  of  Acropolis  treasure  withstood
these  unwonted  demands?

Fortunately  we  are  in  a  position  to  present  Cleon's  audience

with  the  bill.     Reconstructed  from  the  fragmentary  inscriptions

of  payments  made  to  the  generals,  the  chief  heads  of  expenditure

on  campaigns,  exclusive  of  shipbuilding  and  other  extras,  had

been  as  follows  : —

Year  433.     Corcyra

,,     432.     Thracian  Expedition      .....
Siege  of  Potidaea  (from  September)

„     431.     Siege  of  Potidaea

ICO  ships  round  Peloponnesc  (June  to  September)
30  ships  to  Locris  (June  to  September)

„     430.     Siege  of  Potidaea

150  ships  to  Peloponnese  (July),  then  to  Potidaea

(up  to  September)

At  this  point  Pericles  retires  from  power.
20  ships  to  Naupactus  (all  the  winter)  .
,,     429.     4,000  heavy-armed  and  400  horse  in  Thrace  up  till

June

20  ships  at  Naupactus  under  Phormio,  spring  429

to  spring  428

20  ships  sent  to  Phormio  via  Crete  (October  429

spring  428)

,,     428.     40  ships  equipped  for  Peloponnese  sent  to  Myti

lene  (pay  at  one  dr.)

30  ships,  later  reduced  to  12,  round  Naupactus
100  ships  to  Asia  Minor         ....
„     428.     (Winter)  5,000  heavy-armed  for  siege  of  JNlytilene

12  ships  at  Naupactus

,,     427.     Siege  of  Mytilene  (to  July)     ....

60  ships  to  Corcyra  (August)

12  ships  at  Naupactus   .....

20  ships  to  Sicily  (pay  at  one  dr.) .
„      426.     (Up  to  July)  12  ships  at  Naupactus

20  ships  in  Sicily   ......

Sums  advanced  to  generals  in  Sicily

2,000  heavy-armed  and  60  ships  under  Nicias

30  ships  and  troops  under  Demosthenes  for  Aetolia

Total

^  Cavaignac,  pp.  I2c-i,  a  very  moderate  estimate  indeed,  as  he  calcul.ites

E  C  2


30

talents.

100

j>

500

11

1,000

)>

200

J5

30

)'

1,000

•)

225

'•

40

,,

120


40


150

30

100

200

24

200

30

75

100

24

80

480

35

65

4,998  talents.'

432  CONCLUSION

At  the  beginning  of  the  war  Pericles  had  persuaded  the  People
to  set  aside  one  thousand  out  of  their  six  thousand  talents  of
treasure,  and  to  decree,  on  pain  of  death,  that  they  should  only
be  touched  in  the  last  resort,  when  Athens  had  suffered  defeat  at
sea,  and  the  enemy's  fleet  was  advancing  upon  the  Piraeus.  Of
the  remaining  4,700  talents  a  good  proportion  had  been  spent
during  Pericles'  leadership  on  the  strictly  necessary  task  of
quelling  the  revolt  of  Potidaea.  It  was,  then,  with  very  much
diminished  resources,  not  only  in  men  but  in  money,  that  Athens
entered  upon  the  pursuit  of  universal  sea-power.'

Already  three  years  before  this  time,  in  the  spring  of  428,  at  the
news  of  the  revolt  of  Mytilene,  Athens  had  found  herself  in  finan-
cial straits.  She  needed  money  for  her  fleet  before  the  year's  tribute
arrived,  and  met  the  need  by  adopting  two  unwonted  devices,  an
immediate  loan  from  the  treasuries  of  the  Parishes  and  the  more
cumbrous  but  profitable  method  of  a  direct  tax  upon  her  citizens.
A  sum  of  200  talents  was  raised  upon  the  capital  value  of  the
citizens'  property,  probably  at  the  rate  of  one  per  cent.  In  the
same  year  the  four-yearly  reassessment  of  the  allies'  contributions
fell  due.  Under  the  wise  guidance  of  the  men  who  had  rescued
the  tax-payers  of  Mytilene  she  made  a  few  minor  alterations,  but
left  the  total  practically  unchanged.  It  stood  as  high  as  was
compatible  with  safe  and  inexpensive  collection ;  and  a  time  of
crisis  was  not  the  moment  to  run  the  risk  of  further  revolts.^

Two  years  had  passed  since  then,  and  Athens  had  still  been
spending.  Now  came  the  offer  of  peace,  not  only  with  honour
but  with  acknowledged  victory.  We  have  heard  the  speech  of
the  Spartan  envoys.     What  reply  did  the  People  give?

'The  Athenians,'  says  Thucydides,  'having  the  men  enclosed
on  the  island,  thought  that  the  treaty  would  be  ready  for  them
whenever  they  chose  to  make  it,  and  were  in  a  mood  for  grasping
at  something  further.     Foremost  to  encourage  them  was  Cleon,

pay  at  3  obols,  except  where  the  contrary  is  stated.  I  believe  the  one
drachma  rate,  given  in  Thuc.  iii.  17.  4,  to  have  been  usual:  it  was  the
ordinary  wage  for  a  day's  work  at  this  time.  Moreover,  the  heavy-armed  at
Potidaea  received  two  drachmas,  one  for  themselves  and  one  for  an  attendant.
On  the  other  hand,  three  months  is  perhaps  too  long  a  reckoning  for  the
summer  expeditions  in  431.

^  Thuc.  ii.  24;  cf.  viii.  15  ;  Ar.  Lys.  174.

^  Thuc.  iii.  19  ;  Cavaignac,  p.  125  ;  Hicks  and  Hill,  no.  58  (the  loan  from
the  local  authorities).


THE   PKLOPONNESIAX    WAR  4^^^

son  of  Cleaenetus,  a  popular  speaker  of  the  day  and  very  powerful
with  the  multitude.'  Under  Cleon's  persuasion  they  demanded
impossible  conditions.  The  envoys  did  not  refuse  them,  but
showed  the  seriousness  of  their  intentions  by  replying  with
reason  and  good  temper.  '  They  asked  that  commissioners
might  be  chosen  with  whom  they  could  confer  on  each  point,
so  as  to  talk  the  matter  over  quietly  and  attempt  to  reach  some
agreement.'  They  appealed  from  Philip  drunk  to  Philip  sober,
from  the  Sovereign  People  in  General  Assembly  to  the  Sovereign
People  in  Committee.  This  gave  the  Parliamentarian  his  cue.
'  He  knew  from  the  first,  he  said,  that  they  had  no  right  intentions ;
it  was  clear  enough  to  all  now.  They  were  ashamed  to  speak
before  the  People,  preferring  to  confer  in  secret  with  two  or  three.
No !  if  they  meant  anything  honest  let  them  say  it  out  before
all.'  Of  course  he  had  his  way.  '  The  Lacedaemonians,  seeing
that  whatever  concessions  they  might  be  prepared  to  make  in
their  humiliation  it  was  impossible  for  them  to  speak  before  the
multitude  and  lose  credit  with  their  allies  for  a  negotiation  in
which  they  might  after  all  miscarry,  and,  on  the  other  hand,
that  the  Athenians  would  never  grant  what  they  asked  for  upon
moderate  terms,  returned  home  from  Athens  with  their  mission
unfulfilled.'  Thus,  when  Victory  came  to  her,  Athens  coldly
averted  her  eyes.  The  winged  and  flighty  goddess  never  came
near  her  again. ^

Cleon  was  now  her  acknowledged  leader,  and  his  foolish
violence  her  evil  genius.  If  the  citizens  desired  to  live  in  idle-
ness, varied  by  the  excitements  of  naval  campaigning,  it  would
be  easy  to  find  the  money.  No  need  to  raise  it  at  home  when
there  was  treasure  overseas  to  be  had  for  the  asking,  '  from  the
Black  Sea  to  Sardinia.'  Henceforward  Athenians  paid  no  more
war-taxes.  Cleon  showed  them  a  better  way.  Let  their  lazy
subjects  eastwards  and  westwards  pay  for  the  privilege  of
Athenian  rule.  In  the  autumn  of  this  year  Athens  broke  the
Charter  of  her  p:mpire— the  contract  drawn  up  two  generations
before  by  Aristeides  the  Just  between  Athens  and  her  Allies — and
doubled  the  rates  of  tribute."^

1  Thuc.  iv.  21,  22.

-  Cavaignac,  p.  128  ;  cf.  124  and  132  (disappearance  of  the  war-ta.^)  and
Wasps  700;  cf.  Francotte,  Finances,  pp.  99  and  115.


434  CONCLUSION

Portions  of  this  revised  tribute-list  still  remain  to  us.  We
have  the  title  and  the  grand  total,  and  a  good  many  of  the
detailed  entries.  Let  us  set  out  the  first  dozen  in  the  Province
of  the  Islands,  putting  together  the  old  rates  with  the  new,  in
order  to  show  how  Cleon  went  to  work.'

30  talents  instead  of  16  talents,  1,200  dr.
„         „      6        „         4,000  dr.
.,     6


Pares

•     30

Naxos

•     15

Andres     .

•     15

Males

•     15

Siphnos    .

•       9

Eretria     .

•     15

Thera

•      5

Ceos

.     10

Carystos  .

•       5

Chalcis     .

.     10

Cythnos    .

.       6

Tenos

.     10

»  ))  4  5)

')  !>  5  >'

?>  ))       ^         ,,

I  ))         ))      3        )»

5>  )>  3  )J

One  entry  here  will  have  arrested  the  reader's  attention.  Why
is  there  no  earlier  rate  of  payment  for  Melos?  Because  that
island  had  hitherto  been  successful,  alone  in  the  Archipelago,  in
preserving  its  neutrality.  It  needed  no  protection  from  Athens,
and  had  never  provoked  her  hostility  ;  so  she  had  always  allowed
it  to  remain  outside  the  meshes  of  her  Aegean  sea-power.  It  was
a  small  rocky  island  with  home-keeping  Dorian  traditions,  which
traced  back  its  quiet  history  over  seven  hundred  years  of  unbroken
life.  No  one  had  thought  it  worth  while  to  fit  out  an  expedition
against  it,  till  Cleon,  the  great  financier,  entered  it  upon  his
revised  list.'-

For  nine  years  the  islanders  remained  upon  the  list ;  but  they
never  paid.     At  last,  in  416,  during  a  temporary  lull  of  the


'  /.  C.  i.  ^j,  printed  in  Hicks  and  Hill,  no.  64,  and  partly  in  Cavaignac,
p.  128.  The  heading  is  simply  Td^is  cf)6pov,  the  total  960,  against  Aristeides'
460  (raised  to  600  by  the  Saniian  Indemnity  &.C.,  see  note  on  p.  409  above).
Thucydides  does  not  mention  the  assessment,  but  cf.  iv.  5 1  for  the  conse-
quent anxiety  of  Chios.

^  Thuc.  V.  112.  2.  There  is  no  suggestion  whatever,  in  Thucydides  or
any  other  fifth-century  writer,  that  the  Melians  abused  their  neutrality  by
indulging  in  piracy.  In  spite  of  the  bareness  of  their  country  and  their  fine
land-locked  harbour,  they  remained  agricultural,  like  their  fellow  Dorians  in
Crete.  The  market-place  of  their  city  has  been  identified  by  the  British
excavators.  It  lies  at  the  highest  point  of  the  city  (which  lay  en  a  steep  hill
slope),  conveniently  for  transport  with  the  interior,  not  with  the  harbour
(_/.  //.  S.,  vol.  xvii,  p.  131  ;  /i.  S.  A.,  vol.  ii,  pp.  77  fif.,  with  photograph)  :
this  is  probably  the  Agora  mentioned  by  Thucydides  in  v.  115.


thp:  peloponnesian  war  43;,

unending  war,  Athens  bethought  her  of  the  arrears  and  deter-
mined to  compel  them.  Troops  were  dispatched  to  the  island,
and  their  generals  sent  envoys  into  the  h'ttle  rock-bound  city  to
demand  the  money.  An  interchange  of  views  followed  between
the  island  leaders  and  their  visitors.  Thucydides  has  selected
the  occasion  for  his  most  intense  and  ironical  description  of  the
war  spirit  at  work.  '  We  shall  not  trouble  you  with  specious
pretences,'  say  the  Athenians,  with  that  chilling  candour  which
their  public  speakers  were  now  so  proud  to  display,  '  cither  of
how  we  have  a  right  to  our  Empire  because  we  overthrew  the
Persians,  or  are  now  attacking  you  because  of  wrong  that  you
have  done  us.  You  know  as  well  as  we  do  that  right,  as  the
world  goes,  is  only  in  question  between  equals  in  power,  while  the
strong  do  what  they  can  and  the  weak  suffer  what  they  must.'

•As  we  think,  at  any  rate,'  pleaded  the  Melians,  'it  is  expe-
dient that  you  should  not  destroy  what  is  our  common  protection,
the  privilege  of  being  allowed  in  danger  to  invoke  what  is  fair
and  right.  Surely  you  are  as  much  concerned  in  this  as  any,
since  your  fall  would  be  a  signal  for  the  heaviest  vengeance,  and
an  example  to  all  the  world.'

'  We  feel  no  uneasiness  about  the  end  of  our  Empire,  even  if
end  it  should,'  came  back  the  proud  answer,  as  if  to  challenge  the
high  gods  ;  '  a  fellow  Empire,  like  Lacedaemon — though  it  is  not
she  who  is  our  real  enemy — is  not  so  terrible  to  the  vanquished
as  subjects  who  by  themselves  attack  and  overpower  their  rulers.
This,  however,  is  a  risk  that  we  are  content  to  take.'

*  And  how,  pray,'  ask  the  Melians,  '  could  it  turn  out  as  good
for  us  to  be  subjects  as  for  you  to  rule  us  ? '

'Because  you  would  have  the  advantage  of  submitting  before
suffering  the  worst,  and  we  should  profit  by  not  having  wiped
you  out.'

'  Do  your  subjects  accept  this  as  a  reasonable  policy — to  put
strangers  and  neutrals  in  the  same  category  with  States  that  are
most  of  them  your  own  colonists  and  some  of  them  even  conquered
rebels  ? '

'  So  far  as  right  goes,'  replied  the  sea-power,  '  our  subjects
consider  that  one  has  as  much  of  it  as  the  other :  that  if  any
maintain  their  independence  it  is  because  they  are  powerful,  and
that  if  we  do  not  molest  them  it  is  because  we  are  afraid.     So


43^  CONCLUSION

that,  besides  extending  our  Empire,  we  should  gain  in  security
by  your  subjection  ;  and  the  fact  that  you  are  islanders,  and
weaker  than  others,  renders  it  all  the  more  necessary  that  you
should  not  succeed  in  baffling  the  masters  of  the  sea.'

*  But  we  know  that  the  fortune  of  war  is  sometimes  more
impartial  than  the  disproportion  of  numbers  might  lead  one  to
suppose.  To  submit  is  to  accept  despair,  while  resistance  still
preserves  for  us  a  hope  that  we  may  stand  upright.'

'  Hope  is  ever  danger's  comforter,'  was  the  prophetic  answer.
'  Let  those  take  her  to  their  breast  who  have  abundance  of  re-
sources. Wound  them  she  may  ;  she  will  have  no  power  to
kill.  But  her  nature  is  to  be  a  spendthrift ;  and,  when  men  stake
all  upon  her  ventures,  it  is  only  in  the  hour  of  ruin  that  they
behold  her  face  unveiled.'

'  You  may  be  sure  that  we  are  as  well  aware  as  you  of  the  diffi-
culty of  contending  against  your  power  and  fortune,  unless  the
terms  are  equal.  But  we  trust  that  the  gods  may  grant  us
fortune  as  good  as  yours,  since  we  are  just  men  fighting  against
unjust.'

The  appeal  to  religion  and  morality,  the  last  resort  of  the  simple
islanders,  stirred  the  intellectual  interest  of  their  visitors  from  the
great  world.  They  had  learnt  their  philosophy  in  a  sterner  school,
not  at  the  humble  shrines  of  a  backward  island,  but  in  the  field
of  affairs  and  experience.  They  were  practical  men,  and  poli-
ticians ;  and  they  were  proud  to  have  faced  the  facts.  So,  with
the  mocking  simplicity  of  the  intellectual  preaching  sense  to  his
country  cousin,  they  end  by  expounding  the  creed  which  en-
lightened Athens  now  professed.  It  was  more  than  a  creed  ;  it
was  a  rule  of  life.  So  it  is  well  for  us,  as  it  was  for  Melos,
that  she  frankly  stated  it.  'When  you  speak  of  the  favour  of
the  gods  we  may  as  fairly  hope  for  that  as  you,  neither  our
pretensions  nor  our  conduct  being  in  any  way  contrary  to  what
men  believe  of  the  gods,  or  practise  among  themselves.  Of  the
gods  we  believe,  and  of  men  we  know,  that  by  a  necessary  law
of  their  nature  they  rule  wherever  they  can.  It  is  not  as  if  we
were  the  first  to  make  this  law,  or  to  act  upon  it  when  made.
We  found  it  in  the  world  before  us,  and  shall  leave  it  in  the  world
after  us ;  all  we  do  is  to  make  use  of  it,  knowing  that  you  and
everybody  else,  having  the  same  power  as  we  have,  would  do  the


THE    PKLOPONNESIAX    WAR  437

same  as  \vc  do.  Thus,  so  far  as  the  j^ods  arc  concerned,  \vc  have
no  fear  at  all.'  ^

The  Athenians  withdrew  from  the  conference,  leaving  the
Melians  to  debate.  Their  decision  was  soon  announced.  '  Our
resolution,  men  of  Athens,  is  the  same  as  it  was  at  first.  We  will
not  in  one  moment  deprive  of  liberty  a  city  that  can  look  back
over  seven  hundred  years  of  free  life.  We  put  our  trust  in  the
fortune  by  which  the  gods  have  preserved  it  until  now,  and  in  the
help  of  men,  that  is,  of  the  Lacedaemonians.  So  we  will  tr)'  and
save  ourselves.'

Neither  gods  nor  men  came  to  their  aid.  They  held  out
through  the  autumn  and  made  two  successful  sallies.  At  last,
in  the  winter,  the  besiegers  sent  for  reinforcements.  '  The  siege
was  now  pressed  vigorously  ;  and,  some  treachery  taking  place
inside,  the  Melians  surrendered  at  discretion.'  Athens  had  grown
too  worldly-wise  by  now  to  repeat  her  clemency  at  Mytilene.
'  The  Athenians  put  to  death  all  the  grown  men  and  sold  the
women  and  children  for  slaves.  Later,  they  sent  out  five  hundred
settlers  and  inhabited  the  place  themselves.'  ^

So  Melos  never  paid  Athens  tribute.  But  there  was  once  more
corn  in  her  little  valleys  and  men  sat  in  her  city  market-place
drinking  the  sweet  wine  from  her  hillsides.

Where  bled  her  children  hangs  the  loaded  sheaf.
Forgetful  is  green  earth  ;  the  Gods  alone
Remember  everlastingly :  they  strike
Remorselessly,  and  ever  like  for  like.
By  their  great  memories  the  Gods  are  known.

Still  hungry,  the  imperial  city  lifted  up  her  eyes  towards
a  better  prey,  from  a  small  island  in  the  East  towards  a  larger
in  the  West.  Six  months  after  the  sack  of  Melos  the  Great
Armada  left  port  for  Sicily.

'  Thuc.  V.  85-105.  I  have  considerably  abridged  the  conversation,  but
have  not  worried  the  reader  by  marking  the  omissions.  The  translation  is
substantially  Crawley's.

^  Thuc.  V.  Jin.  Remember,  in  reading  this  part  of  Thucydides,  that  the
division  into  books  is  not  his  own.  See  /.  G.  xii.  1187  for  an  inscription
dedicated  by  one  of  the  Melians  who  betrayed  his  city,  and  was  granted
Athenian  citizenship  for  his  services.


CHRONOLOGICAL   TABLE


(Many  of  the  earlier  Dates  must  be  regarded  as  merely  approximate.)

B.C.
1300-900  First  settlement  of  Greeks,  in  various  tribal  bodies,  in  Greece,  the
islands,  and  the  coastlands  of  Asia  Minor;   first  Achaeans,  later
Dorians.     Village  life,  beginning  slowly  to  concentrate  round
fortified  centres.

500-800  Spread  of  City-life,  with  Law  interpreted  by  Magistrates,  '  heredi-
tary,  with   definite   prerogatives.'     Traditional   Greek   date   of
'  Hesiod  '  and  '  Homer '  (Hdt.  ii.  53).
1000-700  Aegean  trade  mainly  in  hands  of  Phoenicians.

800-650  Growth  of  exploration,  commerce,  and  colonization.  The  coining  of
money,  adopted  from  Lydia,  spreads  throughout  Greece,  work-
ing an  economic  revolution.  Influence  of  the  Delphic  Oracle  as
*  adviser  to  European  Greece '.  and  of  Hebrew  I'rophets  (Amos
750,  Hosea  743,  Isaiah  720).

800-700  Spartan  conquest  of  Messenia  (First  Messenian  War).

776  Traditional  Greek  date  of  first  Olympic  festival.

750  Pheidon,  '  King  '  of  Argos,  introduces  definite  standard  of  weights

and  measures.

735  Traditional   date   of   first    Sicilian    colony,    Naxos,    promoted  by

Apollo.

734  Traditional  date  of  foundation  of  Syracuse.

721  Traditional  date  of  foundation  of  Sybaris.

715  Traditional  date  of  foundation  of  Zancle  (Messina).

683-2       List  of  annual  Governors  (Archons)  at  Athens  begins.

668  Traditional  date  of  Spartan  defeat  by  Argos  at  Hysiae.

664  Traditional  date  of  great  sea-battle  between  Corinth  and  Corcyra.

650-600  Age  of  Law-givers  in  Greece  (623,  finding  of  Book  of  Instruction
in  the  Jewish  Temple,  and  consequent  reforms).

64S  (April  6)  Eclipse  of  the  Sun  mentioned  by  Archilochus.

640-30     Foundation  of  (ireek  settlement  at  Naucratis  on  the  Nile.

630  Foundation  of  Cyrene  (Tripoli,  in  North  Africa).

630-600  Final  reduction  of  Messenia  by  Sparta  ('  Second  Messenian  War'j.

600  War  between  Athens  and  Mytilene  on  coast  of  Dardanelles.  Sappho,

Alcaeus,  and  Pittacus  at  Mytilene.

594-3  Solon  'Governor  '  at  Athens.  Abolition  of  debt-slavery  and  '  Shak-
ing-off-of-burdens '.

593-1       Continuation  of  Solon's  legislation.

585  (May  28)  Eclipse  of  the  Sun.     Thales  (Wise  Man)  flourishes.


CHRONOLOGICAL   TABLE  439

B.C.

605-562  Reign  of  Nebuchadnezzar  of  Babylon.

560  Croesus  succeeds  to  throne  of  Lydia.

561-0       Pisistratus  becomes  '  tyrant '  of  Athens.

559-6       Miltiades  becomes  '  tyrant '  of  Thracian  Chersonese  (nortli  coast  of

Dardanelles).
550  Spartan  conquest  of  Thyreatis.

548-7       Temple  of  Apollo  at  Delphi  burnt  down.

546  Cyrus,  King  of  Persia,  conquers  Lydia  and  dethrones  Croesus.

546-5       Persian  conquest  of  Asiatic  Greeks.
538  Cyrus  takes  Babylon.

528-7       Death  of  Pisistratus.
526  Polycrates,  'tyrant'  of  Samos,  abandons  alliance  with  l^gypt  and

joins  Persia.
525  Persian  conquest  of  Egypt.

521  Accession  of  Darius  of  Persia.

514  Conspiracy  of  Harmodius  and  Aristogeiton.

512  First  European  expedition  of  Darius  ;  conquest  of  Thrace.

510  Fall  of  Pisistratid  tyranny.    Spartans  in  Attica.    Athens  joins  Pelo-

ponnesian  League.     War  of  Sybaris  and  Croton.
508-7       Isagoras  '  Governor  '  at  Athens.    Spartans  in  Attica  ;  besieged  on  the

Acropolis  and  capitulate.     Supremacy  of  Cleisthenes.
503-2       First  civil  year  on  system  of  Cleisthenes.
499  Outbreak  of  Ionian  Revolt  against  Persia.

498  Athens  at  war  with  Aegina.

497  lonians  with  an  Athenian  contingent  burn  Sardis.

494  Defeat  of  lonians  at  Lade;  Persians  capture  Miletus.

493-2       '  Governorship  '  of  Themistocles.
492  Persians  subdue  Thrace  and  Macedonia.

490  Persian  naval  expedition  to  Greece.    Destruction  of  Eretria.     Battle

of  Marathon.
489  Expedition  of  Miltiades  to  Paros.

487  Athens  at  war  with  Aegina.

487-6       Governors  begin  to  be  appointed  by  lot  out  of  elected  candidates.

Elected  generals  supersede  '  Polemarch  '  as  chiefs  in  command.
485  Death  of  Darius.     Accession  of  Xerxes.

483-2       Discovery  of  new  vein  in  silver  mines  at  Laureion.     Large  surplus.
482  Increase  of  Athenian  fleet.

480  (Spring)  Athens  recalls  ostracized  citizens.

480  (August)  Xerxes  enters  Greece.     Battles  of  Artemisium  and  Ther-

mopylae.
(September)  Battle  of  Salamis.
(October  2)  Eclipse  of  the  Sun.     Carthaginians  invade  Sicily  and

are  defeated  at  Himera.
479  (Spring)  Persians  in  Attica.

(August)  Battle  of  Plataea  ;  battle  of  Mycale  ;  lonians  revolt  from

Persia.


440  CHRONOLOGICAL   TABLE

B.C.

479-8     (Winter)  Fortification  of  Athens.    Athenians  capture  Sestos  on  Dar-
danelles.
478-7     Organization  of  Confederacy  of  Delos  by  Aristeides.
476-5     Cimon  captures  Eion  in  Thrace.
474         Battle  of  Cyme  ;  defeat  of  Etruscans  by  Syracusans.
473-2     Cimon  conquers  pirates  at  Scyros.
472        The  Persae  of  Aeschylus.
472-1     Athenians  reduce  Carystos  in  Euboea.     Ostracism  of  Themistocles.

'  Synoecisms '  of  Elis  and  Mantinea.
471         Flight  of  Themistocles  from  Greece.
470-69  Revolt  and  reduction  of  Naxos.
468         First  victory  of  Sophocles.

467  or  466  Battle  of  Eurymedon ;  defeat  of  Persian  land  and  sea  forces.
465         Revolt  of  Thasos.

464        Earthquake  at  Sparta  ;  revolt  of  Helots.     Siege  of  Ithome.
463         Surrender  of  Thasos  ;  increase  of  Athenian  domain  lands  and  mines.

(April  30)  Eclipse  of  the  Sun.
463-2     Cimon  in  Messenia  helping  Sparta  against  Helots.
462-0     Pay  introduced  forjudges  at  Athens.     First  appearance  of  Pericles.
461-0    Ostracism  of  Cimon.     Alliance  of  Athens  with  Argos  and  Thessaly.
460-59  Athens  wins  over  ^legara.     Long  Walls  of  Megara  built ;  hostility

between  Athens  and  Corinth.     Athenian  expedition  to  Egypt.
459-8     Battles  with  Corinthians,  Epidaurians,  and  .\eginetans  in  Saronic

Gulf.    Activity  of  Athens  in  Cyprus,  Egypt,  Phoenicia,  Aegina,  and

Megara.
458        The  Orestean  Trilogy  of  Aeschylus.  Building  of  Long  Walls  of  Athens.
457         Battles  of  Tanagra   and  Oenophyta ;    Athenian   party  supreme   in

Boeotia.
457-6     (Winter)  Athenian  conquest  of  Aegina.
456        Death  of  Aeschylus.     Completion  of  Temple  of  Zeus  at  Olympia.

Athens  invites  the  Greeks  to  restore  the  temples  burnt  by  Persians.
456-5     First  appearance  of  Athenian  fleet  in  Corinthian  Gulf.
454        Catastrophe  of  Egyptian  Expedition.

454-3     Treasury  of  Confederacy  transferred  from  Delos  to  Athens.
453         Capture   of  Ithome.     Expedition   of  Pericles    to   Corinthian   Gult.

Messenians  settled  at  Naupactus.     Athenian  treaty  with  Segesta.
452-1     Thirty  years'  Peace  between  Argos  and  Sparta.     Five  years'  truce

between  Athenians  and  Peloponnesians.
451-0     Law  at  Athens  confining  citizenship  to  persons  of  Athenian  birth  on

both  sides.     Settlers  sent  to  Andros.
450-49  Cimon's    expedition    to    Cyprus.      Death    of    Cimon.      Treaty   with

Miletus.
448         Peace  between  Athens  and  Persia  ;  delimitation  of  territorial  waters.
447         Defection  of  Boeotia  (battle  of  Coronea).     Settlers  sent  to  Thracian

Chersonese  (Dardanelles),  Euboea,  and  Xaxos.  Work  begun  on  the

Parthenon.


CHRONOLOGICAL   TABLE  441

B.C.

447-6  Revolt  and  reduction  of  Eiiboea.  Defection  of  McKai;i.  Abortive
Peloponnesian  invasion  of  Attica.

446-5     Thirty  years'  peace  between  Athenians  and  I'eloponnesians.

443         P'oundation  of  Thurii.     Ostracism  of  Thucydides  son  of  Melesias.

443-2  Division  of  Athenian  Confederacy  into  five  districts.  Sophocles
'  Steward  of  the  (ireeks  '.

440        Revolt  of  Samos  and  liyzaniium.

439        Their  reduction.     Pericles  in  the  Black  Sea.

438         Inauguration  of  the  Parthenon.     The  Alccstis  of  Euripides.

436-5     Trouble  at  Epidamnus.

435         Sea  victory  of  Corcyra  over  Corinth.

433  Defensive  alliance  of  Athens  with  Corcyra.  Athenians  take  part  in
battle  against  Corinthians.

433-2     Revolt  of  Potidaea.

432        (Autumn)  The  Megarian  boycott  enforced.

432-1     Assemblies  at  Sparta  decide  on  war.

431  First  year  of  the  Peloponnesian  War.  First  Peloponnesian  invasion
of  Attica  (May).     The  Medea  of  Euripides.

430  Second  year  of  the  War.  Outbreak  of  plague  at  Athens.  Second
invasion  of  Attica.  Pericles  deposed  from  generalship,  tried,  fined,
and  reappointed  for  next  year.  Phormio  operates  in  the  west  :
surrender  of  Potidaea.     Herodotus's  History  completed.

429  Third  year  of  the  War.  Peloponnesians  besiege  Plataea.  Death  of
Pericles  (.'Vutumn).

428  Fourth  year  of  the  War.  Third  invasion  of  Attica.  Revolt  of
Mytilene.     The  Hippolytus  of  Euripides.

427  Fifth  year  of  the  War.  Fourth  invasion  of  Attica.  Surrender  of
Mytilene.    Surrender  of  Plataea.    Civil  war  breaks  out  in  Corcyra.

426  Sixth  year  of  the  War.  Aetolian  expedition  of  Demosthenes  in  hope
of  reaching  Boeotia.

425  Seventh  year  of  the  War.  I'ifih  invasion  of  .Attica.  Athenians  send  an
expedition  to  Sicily.  Occupation  of  Pylos.  Rejection  of  Spartan
Peace-terms  by  Athens.  Capture  of  Spartans  in  Sphacteria.  Athens
raises  the  tribute  of  her  allies.  The  Acharniaiis  of  -Aristophanes.
Probable  date  of  '  Old  Oligarch's '  pamphlet.

424  Eighth  year  of  the  War.  Athens  wins  Oeniadae  in  Corinthian  Gulf  ;
captures  Nisaea,  with  the  Long  Walls  of  Megara.  and  Cythera.
Athenian  invasion  of  Boeotia  ;  battle  of  Delium.  Brasidab  in
Thrace.  Revolt  of  Acanthus,  Amphipolis,  and  other  cities.  Banish-
ment of  Thucydides,  the  historian.     The  K?iigJtts  of  Aristophanes.

423  Ninth  year  of  the  War.  Negotiations  for  peace.  One  year's  truce
(March).     Revolt  of  Scione.     The  C^«(^/'j- of  Aristophanes.

422  Tenth  year  of  the  War.  Battle  of  Amphipolis.  Deaths  of  Cleon  and
Brasidas.     Peace  negotiations.     The  IVusps  of  .\ristophanes.

421  Eleventh  year  of  the  War.  Peace  of  Nicias  (March).  The  l\-iuc  ol
Aristophanes.     Capture  of  Scione  :  inhabitants  killed  or  cnblavcd.


442  CHRONOLOGICAL   TABLE

B.C.

421-20  Defensive  alliance  between  Athens  and  Sparta.

420  Twelfth  year  of  the  War.     Alliance  of  Athens  with  Argos.

419  Thirteenth  year  of  the  War.

41 5  Fourteenth  year  of  the  War.    Defeat  of  Argos  by  Sparta  at  Mantinea.

Argos  forms  alliance  with  Sparta.
417        Fifteenth  year  of  the  War.     Nicias  in  Thrace.

416  Sixteenth  year  of  the  War.    Concjuest  of  Melos.    Embassy  of  Segesta

to  Athens.

415  Seventeenth  year  of  the  War.  Athenian  expedition  to  Sicily.  The
Trojan  Women  of  Euripides.

414  Eighteenth  year  of  the  War.  The  Birds  of  Aristophanes.  Siege  of
Syracuse.     The  Spartan  Gylippus  arrives  in  Sicily.

413  Nineteenth  year  of  the  War.  Spartans  occupy  Decelea  in  Attica.
Second  Athenian  expedition  to  Sicily.  The  iphigenui  in  Taicris
and  Elecira  of  Euripides.  Great  battle  in  the  Syracusan  Harbour
(September  9).     Total  defeat  of  the  Athenians.

412  Twentieth  year  of  the  War.  Revolt  of  Athenian  allies.  Treaty  of
Miletus  (between  Sparta  and  Persiai.     The  Helen  of  Euripides.

411  Twenty-first  year  of  the  War.  Revolt  of  Rhodes.  Revolt  of  Abydos
and  Lampsacus.  Assembly  at  Colonus  and  provision  made  for  a
new  Constitution  (May).  Council  of  Four  Hundred  comes  into
office  (early  in  June),  and  governs  till  September.  Revolt  of  Euboea
(September).  Four  Hundred  overthrown  and  Polity  established
(September).  Battle  of  Cynossema  in  Dardanelles.  Lysistrata
and  TJicsinophoriazinae  of  Aristophanes.

410  Twenty-second  year  of  the  War.  Battle  of  Cyzicus  in  sea  of  Marmora.
Restoration  of  Democracy  at  Athens.     Athens  recovers  Thasos.

409  Twenty-third  year  of  the  War.  Athens  recovers  Colophon  :  loses
Pylos  and  Nisaea.

408  Twenty-fourth  year  of  the  War.  Athens  recovers  Chalcedon  and
Byzantium.     The  Orestes  of  Euripides.

407  Twenty-fifth  year  of  the  War.  Prince  Cyrus  of  Persia  comes  down  to
the  coast.

406  Twenty-sixth  year  of  the  War.  Battle  of  Arginusae.  Trial  and
execution  of  the  Generals  in  command.  Deaths  of  Euripides  and
Sophocles.

405  Twenty-seventh  year  of  the  War.  The /■n)^,'^- of  Aristophanes  (January).
Lysander  becomes  Spartan  Admiral.  Cyrus  called  to  Susa.  The
Bacchae  of  Euripides  produced.  Battle  of  Aegospotami  in  Dar-
danelles (end  of  Summer).

405-4     Twenty-eighth  year  of  the  War.     Blockade  of  Athens.

404  Surrender  of  Athens.  Long  Walls  pulled  down  (April).  Spartan
garrison  on  the  Acropolis.

401         Oedipus  at  Colonus  of  Sophocles  (produced  by  his  grandson).

399        Death  of  Socrates.

About  398  Thucydides'  History  published.


INDEXES


NOTE

A  fuller  description  of  each  modern  work  will  be  found  on  the  first  page
where  it  is  cited.     With  regard  to  the  ancient  authorities  cited,  note:

liellcnica  Oxyfkynchia  refers  to  the  fragment  of  a  fourth-century  Greek
historian  (perhaps  Theopompus)  discovered  in  Egypt  in  1906,  and  since
published  in  the  Oxford  Text  Series,  together  with  other  fragments  of  its
possible  authors.

Old  Oligarch  refers  to  the  anonymous  treatise  entitled  'Xdqvaiap  YIoXiTfia,
commonly  printed  among  the  lesser  works  of  Xenophon,  as  in  the  Teubner
Text.  See  Murray's  Oree/c  Literature,  pp.  167-9.  Its  probable  date  (which
can  only  be  determined  by  internal  evidence]  is  425.

Ways  and  Means  refers  to  the  anonymous  treatise  entitled  Wopoi,
commonly  printed  among  the  lesser  works  of  Xenophon,  whom  some
scholars  still  believe  to  have  been  its  author.  It  dates  almost  certainly  from
the  year  355.

/.  G.  refers  to  the  new  Berlin  series  of  Inscriptiones  Graecac.

I.  G.  A.  stands  for  Inscriptiones  Graecae  Antiquissiniae.


INDEX    OF    MODERN   WRITERS


This  index  includes  every  modern  writer  and  periodical  cited  in  the  book
For  the  sake  of  readers  in  need  of  guidance  I  have  put  an  asterisk  against
writers  whom  they  are  likely  to  find  especially  helpful.


Abrahams  210

Achad  Haam  176

Addams,  Jane  58,  64

Aynerican  Journal   Oi    Archaeology

209, 232
Angell,  Norman  241,  408
Annual  of  British  School  at  Athens

261,  300,  336,  378,  434
Ardaillon  394

Beazley  261
Beloch  170
B^rard  24,  31,  48,  82,  235,  312  ('law

of  the  isthmus  '  criticized)
Bliimner  255
Bockh  291
Booth,  Charles  269
Brants  316

British  School,  see  Annuai
Brown,  Horatio  211,  287
Browning  14,  90,  331
Bruns  331
Biichsenchiitz  310
Bulletin     de     Correspondance    Hel-

leniqiie  163,  278
*Burke  55,  77,  175,  191
Burkitt  209

Burns,  Rt.  Hon.  John  291
Bury  107

Busolt  133,  271,  406,  421
Butler,  Samuel  88

Cairnes  326,  380,  395

Calderini  388

Cambridge  Modern  History  211,  287

Capps  325

Carcopino  165

Carpenter,  Edward  338

*Cavaignac  142,  170,   181,  182,   188,

190,  271,  287,  302,  391,  392,  393,

399-406,  408,  411,  431-4
Charles'on  Mercury,  The  380
Ciccotti  388

Classen  186,  193,  196,  396
Classical    Association,    Frcceedings

of  the  18,  37,  250
Classical  Philology  1 50
Classical  Review  165
Clausewitz  423
1210


Clerc  173,  366,  377

Cobbett  273

Cotnptes   rendus    de  I'Acadeinie  des

Biscriptiofts  et  Belles-Lettres  264
Cornford  178
Crawley  242,  437
Cromer,  Lord  317
Cunningham,  H.  J.  165
Cunningham,  W.  113,  408
Curtius  120

Dakyns  171,  379

*Darembergand  Saglio,  Dictionnaire
des  antiquith  27,  48,  50,  132,  142,
161,  185,  260,  284,  287,  290,  307,

325,  394

Daresie  310

Darwin  176,  320

d'Avenel  218

Davis  304,  306

d'Azambuja  234

Delbriick  170,  423

Demolins  30,  66,  31 1

de  Sanctis  113

*Dittenberger,  Sylloge  Jnscriptionuvi
Graecarum  (2nd  ed-)  85,  171,  229,
248,  256,  265,  271,  276,  277,  290-1

305.  355.  359,  378,  388
Donaldson  331,  334
Dorpfeld  82,  292

Evans,  Sir  Aithur  297

Fawcus  170,  411
Ferguson  150

Ferrero  116,  304,  306,  352,  356
Fleckeisen's_/if;//;'^'/VV/;i?;  174,  333
Fiance,  Anatole  267
Francke  388
*  Francotte  :
La  Polls  grecque    75,  76,    £0,    86,

144,  145,  147,  150
VIndustrie  dons  la  Grke  antique

173,  224,  256-8,  316,366
Les  Finances  des  lit/s  graques  213,

311,  401-2,  4c6,  433
Le  Pain  a  ion  tnarch^  IS^
De  la  condition  des  et)  an  gets  377-8
Freeman,  E.  A.  72


Kf


446


INDEX   OF   MODERN    WRITERS


Freeman,  K.  J.  291,  378
Furtwangler  and  Reinhold  48,317,337
Fustel  de  Coulanges  T],  85,  95

Gallon,  Sir  F.  362
Gernet  170,  356
Gilliard  127
*Glotz :
La  Solidarite  de  la  famille  78,  loi,

102,  130,  132,  134
Etudes  so  dales  et  jttridiques  97,  98,
142,  325
In     Bnlletiti     de     Correspondance
Hellhiiqtie  163

In   CoDiptes   reiidus  de  V Acade7nie
desInscriptionsetBelles-Letii-es2(ii,
Goethe  14
Grenfell  and  Hunt,  see  OxyrhyticJais

Papyri
Grote  136,  113  (note  in  abridged  ed.)
Grundy  45  (*  Map),  81,  341
Guiraud  227,  260,  264,  318

Haeckl  316

Haggard,  Rider  99

Hahn  338

Hakluyt  37  (John  Eldred),  248,  374

Head  297,  301

Headlam  172

Hehn  51

Helbig  369

Hermes  297,  354,  359,  389  ;  see  also

under  Wilamowitz
*Hicks  and  Hill  174,  185,  186,  210,

248,  303,  309,  318,  353.  357,  366,

368,  383,  432,  434
Hill  182,  189,  190,  368
Holmes,  Edmond  362

lnscriptio7is  juridiques  grecques  1 1  o,

229
Inscriptions,    selected,    see    Ditten-

berger  and  Hicks  and  Hill
Ivvan  Miiller  226,  227

Jahreshefte       des       osterreicJiischen
archdologischen  Instiiuts  210,  263,

279,  317,  354
J  ebb,  'J  heophrasius  47,  60,  164,  211,

307,  317  ;  Sophocles  157,  265,  341
Join-nal  of  Hellenic  Studies  170,  172,

261,  297,  390,  392,  411,  434

Keil  171,  299,  404

Kiepert  {Festschrift fiir)  290

Kinglake  23,  61

Kipling  22,  99,  350,  353

Klio  82,  271

Korneniann  82,  290


Lecrivain  185,  287
Lehmann-Haupt  297
Liddell  and  Scott  305,  31 1
Lincoln,  Abraham  157,  195
l^ouvre  Album  4ti

Mackail  363

Mahaffy  231,  336

IMalthus  320

Marshall  207

Marx  394

Mediterratiean  Pilot  i-^^^  24,25,  28, 36,

38
Melanges  d'archeologie  et  cThtstotre

(Journal     of    French     School    at

Athens)  27
Melanges    ifhistoire    aticienne     165,

170,  356
Melanges  Nicole  356
Meredith    (Odes   iti   Co7itribution   to

the  So7tg  of  French  Hisloty)  437
Merkel  291,  310
*Meyer,  Eduard  :
Forschungen   zur  alien    Geschichte

72,  75,  170,  173.227,  332,401,406,

411,  421
Geschichte  des  Altertums  73,  76,  83,

85,  86,  107,  no,  129,  143,  144,  185,

189,  198,  248,  333,  345,  346,  366,

368,  369,  371,421,423
Kleme  Schriften  1 1 2,  252,  390
Michel  315
Miller  15,  65
Milligan  325
Mitieilungen  des  deuischen  archdc-

logischen  histituts  307
Monro  72,  ^i

Montesquieu  207,  360,  373
Morris,  William  281
Muller,  O.  174,  333
Mitfichener  A  rchdologische  Studien

316
*  Murray,  Gilbert  :
Anciefit  Greek  Literature  193
Rise  of  the  Creek  Epic  24,  30,  46,

69,71.  73,  117,  118

Euripides  (Introduction  to  transla-
tions) 125,  132,  191,  337,  346,  426

Etcripides  (notes  to  Greek  text)  142
Translations  :

Bacchae  382

Lphige7iia  i7i  Tau7is  249

Medea  86,  234,  331

Troades  17
*Myres :

Greek  Lands  and  the  G7-eek  People
13,  43,  28,  227,  323


INDEX    OF    :\IODERN    WRITERS


447


Herodotus  and  Anthropology  i8,  44,

176,331
The  Geographical  Aspect  of  Greek-
Colonization  22,  41,  250

Nation,  The  (London)  102

Neue  Jahrbiicher  fiir  das  klassische

Altertum  290
Nevinson  381,  385,  396
*Nietzsche :
Philologika  ( Works,  vol.  xvii)  9,  167,

337

Was  ichden  Altcnverdanke{_  Works,
vol.  viii)  70,  195
Also  sprach  Zarathustra  193
Norton  162

Oxyrhynchus  Papyri  325

Pater  109

Paterson,  Alexander  64

Paterson,  W.  R,  390,  394

Pauly-W  issowa      ( Realencyclop.idie)

loi,  154,  158,   165,  260,  277,  284,

297,  298,  307,  310
Pears,  Sir  Edwin  24
*Philippson  13,  32
Phillipson  174
Pohl  265

Pohlmann  290,  346
Poland  264
Pottier  259,  316
Punch  136
Putnam,  Emily  James  78,  268,  335

Quarterly  Re7'iew,  The  241,  287

Renan  146

Revue  archeologique  316

Revue  de  instruction  publique   en

Belgique  316
Revue  des  etudes  grecques  3 1  o
Ridgeway  80,  297,  298
•Riezler  212,  243,  298,  306.  310
Rodd,  Rennell  65,  236
Roscher  [Lexikon)  72
Ruskin  251,  344
Rutherford  331

Salvioli  266,  356

Schmitt  66

Schreiber  290

Seeley  104

Sociological  Review  388,  395

Steup  196

Sudhoff  48

Sundwall  154,  158,  170

Sykes,  Mark  51


Tarde  219
Times,  The  291
Tod  261,  336.  378
Todd,  Canon  80
Tolstoy  90
Toynbee  191
Trevelyan,  G.  M.  89
Trevelyan,  Sir  G.  O.  340
Tucker  326
Turner,  J.  K.  396

Ure  390,  392
Uyehara  77

Wachsmuth  276
Walker  1 13
Wallas  194,  262
Wallon  107
Waszynski  389
Wellhausen  80
Wells,  H.  G.  218
Westermarck  221
Whitelaw  135
Wiegand  354

*Wilamo\vitz-Moellendorff :

Aristoteles  und  Athen  49,  loi,  113,

127,   I39ff-,  142,   144.   146,  151-3.

158,  160-1,  165,  169-71,  178,  228,

332,  359.  388,  411

Aus  Kydathen  82,  83,  126,  133,  148.

169,  171,  186,  188,  262
Ein  Gesetz  von  Sainos  305,  354
Hippolytos  329
Nord-Ionische  Steine  129
Oedipus  98

Orestie  i\\,  73,  98,  120,  338
Reden  und  Vortrdge  351,  364  (where
see  note),  366,  369
Staat  und  Gesellschaft  der  Griechen
129,161.  163,171,287,326,333,338
Griechisches  Lesebuch  (text)  195
Articles  in   Hermes   186,   331,    335,

336,  377
*Wilhelm    142,    182,   263,   272,  iiq,

315.359
Withers,  Hartley  295
Wordsworth  103,  193,  211


Yiddish  -  English

Manual  121
Young  209

Zangwill  274
Ziebarth  264
Zimmern  388,  395


CoHversction


GENERAL    INDEX


This  index  is  drawn  up  for  those  who  have  already  read  the  book  and
wish  to  refer  back  to  topics  mentioned  in  it.  Special  attention  has  therefore
been  paid  to  the  footnotes,  and  subjects  fully  discussed,  and  easily  discover-
able from  the  Contents,  have  been  passed  over.


Abdul  Hamid  30,  58

Academy,  Plato's  49,  56  ;  cf.  387  note

Acciajuoli  304

Acharnae  42,  160,  272

Acropolis  building  design  286,  290,
291,  361,  405

Adriatic  32  ;  cf  247,  250

Advertisements  134,  277

Aegina  297,  302,  316,  366,  370.  408

Aegospotami  46,  350

'Afifavrni  142

Aeneas  Tacticus  64,  343

Aeschylus,  epitaph  66  ;  Orestean  Tri-
logy, 94  ff.;  Pejsae,  125;  as  an
inventor  2i9note;  quoted  79,  391

Aetolia  231,  431

Albania  338,  414

Albert  Memorial  362

Alcibiades  180,  203,  366  ;  cf.  351  note

Alexander  59,  324

Alluvial  plains  38,  45»  62  ;  cf.  341,  343

oKaos  41

Amasis,  King  59  ;  vase-painter  260

Amateurs,  in  cricket  and  government
156,  159;  cf.  288,  301

America  86, 175,285  :  cf  116,290,322

Amos  III,  113,  119

Anarchists  68,  126

Apaturia  145,  149;  cf.  195,  401,  424

Archive,  the  first  92

Argo,  who  owned  her?  233

Argos  72,  76,  257,  271,  313,  349

Aristeides  165, 180, 182.  334.  401.  409,

433

Aristocracy,  Greek  different  from
English  dy  ;  see  Oligarchy

Aristotle,  aristocratic  89 ;  on  aliens
378  ;  on  education  289  ;  on  Law
124 ;  on  Parliament  and  Market
276;  on  population  questions  321,
326;  on  respectability  115;  on
self-sufficiency  281,  345  ;  on  slaves
264,  289,  379,  383,  386-7  ;  on
Solon's  land-laws  130;  on  the  City-
State  as  a  normal  institution  63  ;
on  the  early  City  76  ;  on  the  Model
City  248,  294, 32 1 ,  345  ;  on  Tragedy
80;   on  Virtue  119,  201,  337;   on


walls  82;    on  women  57;    secular

102  ;  socialistic  287  ;  used  a  garden

56
Armour  340-1
Arms,  manufacture  of  260  ;  wearing

of  75,  231,  341-2
Art  forms,  Greek  and  modern  219
Aspasia  332,  334
Asphodel  43
Asylum,  right  of  310.
Athenians,  not  '  Atticans'  75
Athletics  339
Atlantic,  the  21
Atlantis  23

Bacc/iae  337

Bathing  25,  48,  210  (end  of  note)

Battles  at  the  Ships  26

Bedroom  furniture  210-11

Beggars  loi,  310

Bengal  291

Bimetallism  299

Black  Sea,  see  Pontus

Blood-guiltiness  98,  430

Boeotia,  Athenian  trade  with  310,370;

constitution  of  126,  160,  163  ;  name

of  72,  75  ;  relations  with  350,  366,

416
Border-wars   43,    238    ff.,    340,    350,

416
Bosporus  24-5,  350,  355  ft.
Boswell,  a  Greek  262
Boxes  or  '  levels  '  45
Boycotting  317,  420-1
Brasidas  233
Brea  Decree  318

Brotherhoods  67,  91,  145  ff.  ;  cf.  263
Budgeting  211-13,  398  ff.,  412  ff.
Byzantium  24,  404

Caius  Gracchus  352

Calendar   at   Athens   161  ;    at    Ceos

228
Camp-fire  talk  50,  180,  339
Capitalism  252,  254;  cf.  394,  396
'  Captains  of  industry'  313
Carthage  and  Carthaginians  22,  23,

177  ^in  Sicily),  366,  370


GENERAL   INDEX


449


Catalan  Grand  Company  236

Catiline  304

Cato  115  ;  on  worn-out  slaves  395

Cavalry  88,  17 1,  410

Caves  on  Greek  hillsides  232

Celibacy  70,  203,  32S

Chalcedon  24-5

Chalcis  28,  142,  186,  434

Charcoal  burning  42,  272

Childlessness,  dread  of  70,  323

Chilon  112

Chinese  Law-courts  95,  102

Chios  129,  181,  185,  434

Christianity  69,  146,  201 ;  cf.  426

Cicero  115,354

Cimon  327-8  and  333  (wife  and  family

of),  366,  375,  398,  403
Civil  Servants  159,  172,  389;  cf.  400
Classical  education  13,  17
Cleanliness  48,  210  (end  of  note)
Cleisthenes  78,  86,  1398".,  173-4,  321,

333
Cleon  97,  167,  228,  429-30,  432-4
Clerks  159,  265,  266
Clerks  of  the  Market  276  fif.,  359
Clocks,  Greek  61,  63
Clothes    33,    48,    59,    178    (foreign

fashions),  209,210  (borrowed),  260

(working  clothes)
Cnidos  90,  271
Coinage,  Athenian   187-8,  300,  302,

395  ;  see  cover
Colonnades  56
Colour-prejudice  317
Comforts,  absence  of  209,  313
Commission-system  170  (secret),  316
Committees  162,  433
Communism  282
'  Companions  '    at    Athens   335  ;    in

Macedonia  142
Competition  218,  256,  263,  314;    cf.

29,  90-1
Confirmation  148
Congo  99,  381
Conservatism,    Greek    68,   217,  225,

329,  359
Constantinople  18,  65,  286  ;  see  also

Byzantium
Continents,  as  boundaries  1 7-1 8
Contractors  255-7,  290  ;  cf.  354,  407
Corcyra  and  Corcyraeans  29,  33,  34,

351.  367,  368,  414  ff-
Corinth,  currants  =  Corinths  47  ;
fleet  of  212  ;  frontier  of  43  ;  good
coinage  of  301  ;  loan  to  Athenians
305  ;  in  Funeral  Speech  197 ;  rela-
tions with  Athens  283, 367, 369,  37 1,


372,  414  {{. ;  serfs  at  107  ;  temple-
slaves  at  336  ;  tyrants  at  122

Corn  Exchange  359

Corn  and  corn  supply  45-6,  222  ff.,
320-2,  349  ff,  421

'  Corner  '  in  olive-presses  48  ;  in  grain
358

Council  at  Athens  159  ff.,  433

Craft-gilds  (diaam.)  263

Credit-built  finance  241,  303

Crete  107,  129,  4;  cf.  Minos

Croesus  176,  220-1

Currents  27  ;  cf.  249

Customs  and  customs-houses  311,318

Cyclops  79,  248

Cyprus  181,  189,  351,  355,  365,  366

'  Cyrenaic'  pottery  219

Dalmatia  19,  247,  383

Dardanelles  23-4, 138, 350,  355  ff.,419

Darius  170,  189,  298,  402

Darwinism  misapplied  240  ;  cf.  436

Death  rate  322

Debased  currencies  298-9

DeceleanWar40,  210,  217,  395-6,423

Delian  League  i82ff.,  402;  treasuries
212  ;  market  278,  352

Delphi,  Croesus's  gifts  to  176;  influ-
ence of  68,  118  fC,  126-7,  246;
international  centre  for  traders  310;
loss  of  influence  177-8  ;  plagiarism
25  ;  rebuilding  of  temple  399-400  ;
Sicyonian  Treasury  at  341 ;  sides
with  Peloponnesians  351  ;  treasury
at  212,  305

Denies  151  ff.,  158,  333,  341,  432

Democedes  61,  253,  261,  265

Democracy,  modern  155  ;  cf.  58,  135

Demosthenes  as  creditor  305

Demotionidae  145

devrepos  irXovs  3II

Dionysus,  on  vases  336-7

Division,  numbers  of  in  Athenian
Parliament  164-5

Doctors  253,  265  ;  cf.  56  and  61,  261

Dorians  85,  105  ff.,  434

Dowries  324

Drachma,  origin  of  300

Drinking  47,  1 14-15  ;  cf-  336-7

Earthquakes  19

Ebenezer  (Winchester  notion)  340
Ecclesia,  see  Parliament
Economics  as  an  exact  science  296
Education  at  Athens  289-90,  338-9  ;

cf.  63,  217,  26s,  362
Egotism  208


F  f  S


45°  •


GENERAL   INDEX


Egypt  and  Egyptians  174, 177-8,  189,
3i7,35i>355'365,  366,  407;  cf.  148
Electra  69,  328
Electrum  298
Elis  73,  loi,  368,  415
Elpenice  328
Emigration  58,  134  (modern),  246  ff.,

31?

Empiricism  in  politics  262

Emporia  250

Engineering,    Greek    2)7i    270,    290,

310-11
England,  discoverers  of  22
Epidamnus  414

Equality  in  Greek  lands  58,  103
Erechtheum  workmen  258,  408
Eretria  28,  363
Erythrae  185-6
Etesian  winds  34
Etruria  189,  316
Eugenics  318,  326,  362
Eumaeus  84,  235  (his  nurse's  death).

Euphrates,  navigation  on  37

Euripides,  Bacchae  of  337  ;  choruses
of,  quoted  17,  249,  330-1,  382  ;
countryman  in  Electra  228  ;  Ion  of
388-9  ;  later  plays  346  ;  on  women
330-1 ;  scene  oi  Orestes  56  ;  cf.  167

Euripus  28

Evaporation  20

Examination  tests  263

Exposure  of  infants  43,  324-6,  388

Fashion  versus  Custom  219

Fertile,  Greece  not  39,  46,  213,  320

Feudalism  87,  285

Fez,  the  Ottoman  127,  318

Fish  and  fishermen  30,  276,  352

Fleas  (charm  against)  229;    cf.  155

note
Fohn,  in  Switzerland  34
Fool,  the  Shakespearian  336
Forests  in  Greece  40-2,  272
Forge  as  club-house  33,  91
Franks  in  Greece  15,  65,  235
Frederick  the  Great  423
Freedmen  174,  386-8
Freed  women  335
French  plays  278
Friendship   96-7,    172    note,    337-8;

cf.  291  note
Fruits  51,  227,  229

Gallio  267
Gardens  56
Gaza  188-9,  366


Geishas  336

General  Purposes  Committee  143, 1 59

Gibraltar  21,  25

Giotto's  Campanile  253

Gipsies  311

Goats  and  goat  pasture  41-4,  226

Gorillas  22

Gortyn,  Laws  of  129

Gramophones  218

Hague  Conference,  the  94

Hanno  22,  29

Harbours  26,  34

Harpies  35

Hecataeus  30,  86

Hedges  44

Heliaea  133,  154,  167

Hellenistic  cities  290,  304

Hellespont,  see  Dardanelles

Helots  51,  73,  81,  107-9,  347,  378

Herodotus  at  Thurii  368-9  ;  journeys
of  365  ;  not  self-conscious  336  ;  on
development  1 76 ;  on  free  trade  360 ;
on  oracles  177  ;  on  the  Trojan  War
97  ;  on  tyrants  123,  360  ;  story  of
Adrastus  100;  stories  of  Arion,
Nitocris  and  Gyges  127;  stor}'  of
Deioces  92  ff.  ;  story  of  Solon  and
Croesus  176,  220-1  ;  story  of  the
Andrians  213  ;  story  of  the  Cni-
dians  243  ;  story  of  the  expedition
to  Paros  243  ;  story  of  the  war  in
Thyreatis  244

Hesiod  57,  68-9,  73,  89  ff.,  92,  116

Hiero  of  Syracuse  368

Hippias  139,  300-1

Homer,  aristocracy  in  87 ;  blindness
of  253  ;  debt  collecting  in  305  ;
evidence  of  67  ff.  ;  fighting  in  341  ;
Iliad  Ti,  82  ff.,  96-7 ;  Odyssey,
geography  of  30 ;  poor  widow  in
Iliad  335  note ;  predecessors  of
14;  shield  of  Achilles  39,  44;
slavery  in  382-3  ;  town-life  in  79

Homeric  hymn  to  Hermes  341

Homesickness  15,  58;    cf.  311

Horace  n,  1 88,  311

Horsemanship  171

Hotels  47,  292,  322

Housing  conditions  209-10,  289-90,
292

Illiterate  voters  at  Athens  165
Immigrants  at  Athens, see  Outlanders
Imperialism  209,  290 (territorial),  373,

427  ff-
Indemnities  408


GENERAL    INDEX


4.51


Interdict  99,  100

International  finance  304

International  law  94,  184

Investments  306-7

Ionia  129,  181,  246;  cf.  364

Iron  Age  -Ji,  116

Iron  money  300

Isocrates  122,  154,  196,  263,  421

Japan  77,  178,  210,  336

Jews,  the  81,95,  1 76-7, 2 36  (Spanish)

302,  305  ;   cf.  317
Joiners,  as  artists  75,  91
Jonah  cited  343
Journalism  254

KaKbiaeoii  ypa(f>ai  1 3 1-2
Kings  in  Greece  85  fF.
King's  Peace,  the  359

Land-tax  (Athenian)   138,  (English)

147,  (in  Athenian  Empire)  401.
Landed  tradition  85,  223  flf.,  252
Landladies,  Athenian  167
Law  of  the  Isthmus  criticized  312
Law  Courts  at  Athens  1 58  ;  cf  Heliaea
Letter,  the  earliest  Greek  278
Light-armed  troops  227,  410-11
'Liturgies'  169,  171,  284,  353,  399
Living-in  388
London,  City  of  76  ;  County  Council

steamboats  150  ;  Old  London  261  ;

situation  of  364
Lot,  election  by  158,  159
Luncheon  interval  47
Lyceum,  slaves  at  387  ;  cf.  56
Lycia  189;  cf.  398
Lycurgus   31,   87,   124,   127-9,   282;

cf.  300
Lysias  and  the  corn-dealers  358
Lysicrates,  monument  of  284

Macedonia,  142,  231,353,  419;  cf.  87
Machpelah,  Cave  of  112
Maenads  337
Magazines   213   (store   houses),   219

(light  reading)
Malaria  323  ;  cf.  40-1
Manchester  27,  296,  307
Mantinea  74,  80
Map-making  29
Marathon,  battle  of  81,  175,  179, 195,

350,  369,  428  ;  mile  *  run '  at  341
Maria  Theresa  dollars  188
Market-place    61.   83,    262    (shelter

from),  275  ff.,  359,  434,  437
Marriage  laws  70,  333


Mayors  1 50;  cf.  154

Meals,  Greek  46,  91  ;  cf.  164,  also  96

Megarian  Decree  317,  420-1

Melos  434-7

Merchant  Service,  Athenian  198,315,

410-11
Messina,  Straits  of  27  ;  cf.  367-8
Metics,  see  Outlanders
Mexico,  labour  conditions  in  396
Miletus  27,  114,  122,  142,  312,  363,

364

Military  commands  at  Athens  168-70

Mill  work  51,  218,  255  (mill-catch)

Mining  253,  391  ff.

Minos  and  Minoan  29,  49,  213,  250

Mohammedanism  18,  69

Money  no,  187,  274,  295  ff.,  406  (pur-
chasing power),  410,  431-2,  434

Money-changers  188,  302

Monkeys  317  ;  cf.  22,  176,  315

Montenegro  109

Mugwumps  199;  cf.  208

Muses  89-90,  92

Museums  303,  409  ;  cf.  259

Mycenaean  period  71,  y^t  295

Mytilenaean  debate  97,  429

Naples  368

Naucraries  142

Naucratis  312

Nausicaa  26,  48,  87

Naval  officers,  modern  77

Naxos,  foundation  of  250

Negroes  316,  317,  362

Nightdresses  260

Night  voyages  35,  234,  339

Nomenclature   87-8,   130,    150,   153,

38«
Non-intervention  351  ;  cf.  349,416-17
Norway  30
Nymphs  38  ;  cf.  116-17

Oeantheia  309

Oligarchy  86, 126,  136,  162,  332,  334  ;

cf.  171  note
Olive-oil  47,  413
Olive  picking  33,  50
Olive-tree,  the  49,  50,  51,  55,  130,  164,

225,  227,  229,  253,  422-3
Olympia,  inscription  at   101  ;    scene

at  310  ;  temple  at  400,  403
Oracle,  see  Delphi
opytuives  1 44
Orneates  107
Oropus  28  ;  cf.  75  note
Orpheus  42
Ostracism  164-5


453


GENERAL   INDEX


'Outlanders'  134,  153,  172,  174,  186,
257,  272,  332  (Outlander  women),

347  ff-,  374  ff-,  400,  410
Oxford  289,  cf.  327 ;  vase  at  261

*  Paganism  '  336 ;  cf.  66

Palestine  compared  with  Greece  35,
40,  43,  62,  80,  101-2,  III  ;  inter-
course with  Greece,  366

Panathenaic  procession  172  ;  cf.  171

Panhellenism  179-80,  369;  cf.  195
note

Parable  of  the  Sower  40 ;  of  the  la-
bourers in  the  Vineyard  201  ;  of
the  lost  piece  of  silver  211  ;  of  the
Talents  302

napdaracns  316

Parians,  the  114,  243,  434

Parliament  at  Athens  155,  158,  203,
244, 275,  276, 423  ;  debates  in  166-
7,  404,  416,  422,  426-7,  429;  de-
scription of  161  ff.

Pasion  386

Patriapotestcxs  95

Patriarchal  system  67  ff.,  79

Pay  for  private  work  165,  258,  265,
386-8,  413

Pay  for  public  service  83,  90,  161,
165,  170-1,  400,  408,  412,  413

Pegae  367,  421

Pelasgian  Wall  64

Pentelic  marble  376  ;  cf.  270

Pericles,  death  of  427-8 ;  family  of
88,  327  ;  Funeral  Speech  of  194  ff.  ;
policy  of  355ff.

Persia  114,  175,  177,  180,  188-9,  363;
365-6,  397-8,  402

Personal  remarks  60,  167

Phaeacia  26,  79,  224

Phaselis  185

Pheidon  129,  297

Philip  of  Macedon  33,  59

Phoenicians  31,  181,  249,  315,  365-6

Phormio  35,  81,  341,  431

Phrygians  in  Attica  272,  386,  423

Pigs  43

Pindar  22,  86,  88,  120,  338

Piracy  29,  231  ff,,  309

Pisistratus  24,  50,  137  ff.,  345,  357,
392

Plague  34,  292,  425

Plantation-work  51,  384,  394,  396

Plataea  72,  195,  210,  327,  416,  428-9

Plato,  aristocratic  89,  154;  contem-
porary influence  of  154-5  ;  Critias
of  281;  model  cities  of  108,  248,
294,345-6;  myth  of  Protagoras  82 ;


used  a  garden  56  ;  on  aliens  378 ;
on  Apollo  120,  127;  on  bargaining
276  ;  on  communism  of  husbands
and  wives  216  ;  on  currencies  299;
on  education  289 ;  on  food  46 ;
on  friendship  338;  on  general  la-
bourers 270  ;  on  immortality  70  ;
on  parliament  and  market  276  ;  on
population  questions  247,  321,  326  ;
on  retail  traders  273  ;  on  respecta-
bility 115  ;  on  slave-doctors  265  ;
on  slaves  384-5  ;  on  Sparta  109,
282,  299  ;  on  teaching  for  money
267 ;  on  the  best  life  104  ;  on  the
philosopher  king  126  ;  on  travelling
249;  on  wills  134;  on  wine  47;
on  women's  questions  330-1

Plautus  30,  278

Polemarch,  duties  of  174

Police  131,  171,  289;  cf.  315,  371
(sea-police)

Polites  76

Polybius  33,  326,  339

Polycrates  of  Samos  233,  240

Pontus   32,   190,  356  ff.,  366,  370-2,

433
Population  of  Athens  170,  173,  375,

393,  409
Portuguese  Africa  38 1,  384,  396
Postage  stamps  188,  301
Postal  system  218,  289
Potidaea  412,  419,  431-2
Prefect-system,  the  157
Prices,  not  fixed  278
Priesthood,  not  powerful  in  Greece

102,  177-8
Primogeniture,  not  Greek  85
Professions  and  character  274
'  Progress  '  1 76
Prometheus  218
Propylaea  82,  187,  405-6,  414
Protection  317-18,  356
Prytaneis  143,  160;  cf.  83
Psychology  162,  178,  274  ;  cf.  262
Purple  dye  30-1

Radicalism,  Greek  68,  86,  144,  150;

cf.  161  note,  214,  219  note
Railway  cuttings  40
Rain  in  Greece  32,  35,  56
Rate  of  interest  307
Rates  286,  287
Referendum  156;  cf.  136
Relief  works  407-8
Rhamnus  151,  405
Rivers  and  river-beds  36
Roads  289,  310-11


GENERAL    INDEX


4.53


Roman  Empire  146,  306  ;  Greekness

of  18
Romance  13  :  cf.  217-1S
Rome,  wrongly  associated  with  Greece

TJ,  197  (embassy  to  Athens).  290

(drains),  373  (not  traders)  ;  policy

of  1S5
Rotation  of  crops  227
Ritth  cited  83

Salamis  17,  164,  177.  363.  369.  397

Salt  21

Samian  War  194,  367,  404,  406,  409

Sanitation  289-90

Sappho  336

Schoolmasters  265,  266,  267

Scottish  Lowlands  73 ;  thrift  21 1

Scrub  43,  226,  231

Sea-power  29,  30,  344  ff.,  363  fif.,  403,

411,  415  ff-

Segesta  189,  368

Self-sufficiency  46,  219,  281,  299,
349  ff.,  369  (cf.  197),  421

Servant-keeping  class  269

Sestos  23,  357,  398

Shame  (atScbs-)  117;  cf.  435-7

Sheep-dogs  44,  232,  310

Shepherds  43,  226,  310-11

Shipbuilding  42,  181,  353,  401

Shore,  party  of  30,  137

Sicily  177,  250,  364,  367,  437

Siege  operations  340,  342,  349,  411

Siena  154

Siesta  33,  350

Sigeum  24,  139,  358

Siphnos,  mines  at  392

Siris  28,  312

Slavery  and  slaves,  at  Athens  173,
356,  374  ff.,  391  ff-;  debt-slaves
H3-14;  Homeric  84;  household
269  ;  in  crafts  257-8  ;  in  guilds  264  ;
in  National  Balance-sheet  413  ;  in
workshops  260  ;  join  in  public  ban-
quet 355  ;  new  definition  of  105  ;
ransom  of  130,  343;  riches  calcu-
lated in  295  ;  Roman  slaves  146,
395;  runaway  slaves  310;  silver-
bought  slaves  117,  390;  slave-
infants  326 ;  slave-market  276 ;
slave  nurse-girl  325  ;  slave  shop-
keepers 275  ;  slave- work  266

Smyrna  38,  371

Socialism  29,   214-6,    252,   287;    cf.

398-9
Socrates,  a  stonecutter  255  ;  claim  to
public    maintenance    170;     could
think  standing  163  ;   death  of  Tj,


'94i  333  :  double  marriage  of  3-^4  ;
family  of  327;  habits  of  262;  holds
office  as  'Chief  161;  personal
appearance  of  277  ;  trial  of  358
Solon  50,  102,  I26ff.,  176,  184,  253
(on   Athenian    earners),    317,    S45.

347  ff-,  351,  399

.Songs,  labourers'  255

Soothsayers  loi,  253-4

Sophocles,  atmosphere  of  his  plays
69,  70,  120;  chorus  on  the  olive
50;  Oedipus  Tyran/tus  o{  ()?,,  310,
378;  on  Athens  132,  177,  190-1  ;
on  unmarried  women  328  ; '  Steward
of  the  Greeks  '  183

Sparta  and  Spartans,  armistice  made
by  423,  372;  avoid  Marathon  179;
battle-speeches  to  341 ;  conquests  of
124  ;  discipline  at  contrasted  with
Athens  197;  Helots  at  108-9;  in
Attica  139:  incredible  to  us  217;
laws  of  124;  money  at  188,  299,
300;  place  in  narrative  128;  potters
of  219  ;  reject  Athenian  proposal
404  ;  situation  of  45  ;  unwalled  74,
81  ;  war  with  Athens  416  ff.

Sport,  war  as  a  245,  339  ff.

St.  Francis  119

St.Paul's  journey  34

State  Insurance  352

Stirrups  171

Stock  Exchange  305-6,  313

Stone-masons  255

Stores,  Wholesale  209

Street-corner  gatherings  163,  423

Subalterns  169

Subtropical  cultivation  51

Suicide  221

Sunium  15,  41,  277,  358,  405

Surnames  at  Athens  88,  152-3

Switzerland  44,  130.  178;  see  Fohn

Sybaris  27,  264,  368

Synoecism  74

Syracusan  Expedition  36,  351,  366,
426,  437

Syracuse  250,  367.  369,  370


Taormina  355

Tartessus  (Tarshish)  22

Taxation,    in   money  138,    155,   283,

289-90,300,400;  in  time  163  note,

169-72,  283
Temperance  47  ;  cf.  115-16,336-7
Temple-slaves  336,  388-9
Tenancy  228
Tenos  310:  cf.  292


454


GENERAL   INDEX


Thasos  392  :  cf.  401

Theatre  audience  56,  165-7

'J'hemistocles,and  Athenian  fleet  212  ;
and  Athenian  wall  81  ;  character
nf  288  ;  encouraged  aliens  174,  374,
hoarded  his  money  302  ;  journey
of  368  ;  mother  of  333  ;  policy  of
365-6,  391

Theognis  104,  1 15-17

Thcophrastus,  Characters  oi  2io-i\  ;
see  Index  I  under  Jebb

Thermopylae  81  ;  cf.  177

'Theseus'  75,  80,94,  125,  141,  143,
158,  159,  187

Thessaly  72,  107-8,  227

Thucydides  193 (life);  on  'mediaeval'
Greece  72,  74  ;  introduction  to  426

Thurii  37,  36S-9,  418

Tides,  absence  of  25,  31

Timber-trade  42,  353,  413

Tin  Islands  22-3

Tiryns  76

Town-life  in  Greece  79  ;  cf.  63-4

Town-planning  290

Towpath  by  the  sea  23

Trade  and  traders,  commercial
treaties  184-5,  309-^2,  367-8:
growth  of  trade  114,  237,  249;
retail  trade  273  fif.  ;  foreign  trade
308  ff. ;  trade  and  sea-power  344  ff. ;
Athenian  trade  197,  198,  360  fif.,
376

Trades  Unions  263

Tragedy,  the  Greek  69,  79,  80

Treaty-rights  183-4,  309  ff.,  417

Trident,  uses  of  30

Trojan  War  72,  74,  83,  235

Troy  24

Truck,  payment  in  381


Turks  42,  219,  317-18.  338  ;  cf.  286
Tyrants  59,  121  ff.,  360,  390
Tyrtaeus  341

Unemployment  55,  257,  263,  407-8
Uniforms  31,  127,  171  ;  cf.  210
Universities     115,     162,     327  ;     cf.

289
Usury  III,  302
Utopias,  ancient  and  modern  214  ff.,

345

Valuation  at  Athens  2S6-7

Vari,  cave  near  232

Vase-painters  259  ff.

Vendetta  96

Venereal  disease  336

Venice  38,  136,  211,  287,  312,  376

Village  life  y}.

Waggoners  187,  270

Warfare  66,  193  ff.,  238  fi.,  338 ff.,  397,

414  ff.
Water-supply  36,  y^,  1 16-17,  289-90.

293

Wmds  35,  339

Wine  47,  1 1 5-16;  cf.  336-7

Winter,  the  Greek  33

Women  48  (washing  arrangements
for))  57)  loi  (women  officials),  146
(in  secret  societies),  204,  261,  268,
296,  327  ff.,  343  (cannot  throw)

Wooden  horse,  the  91,  253

Yorkers  339

Zeus-born  kings  85,  92
Zollverein  188  ;  cf.  184


I


OXFORD:      HORACE    HART
PRINTER    TO    THE    UNIVERSITY


GREECE    &    THE    ADJOINING    LANDS


ft Y.'CaxW shift ,  eittf<s^,  11"


English     Miles.


/^^


A     00'


i


