THE ZOIST: A Journal of Cerebral Physiology & Mesmerism, and their Applications
to Human Welfare. Vol. VI (March 1848 to January 1849).
Edited by John Elliotson. London: Hippolyte Bailliere, 219 Regent Street.
Public domain. Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/s1id13659940).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

THE  ZOIST :

A  JOURNAL

OF

CEREBRAL  PHYSIOLOGY  &  MESMERISM


AND


THEIR  APPLICATIONS  TO  HUMAN  WELFARE.


“  This  is  Truth,  though  opposed  to  the  Philosophy  of  Ages.” — Gall.


VOL.  VI.

MARCH,  1848,  to  JANUARY,  1849.


LONDON :

HIPPOLYTE  BAILLIERE,  PUBLISHER,

219,  REGENT  STREET;

PARIS:  J.  B.  BAILLTERE,  RUE  DE  L’ECOLE  DU  MEDECINE;

LEIPSIZ:  T.  O.  WEIGEL.


M  DCCC  XLIX.


LONDON :

PRINTED  BY  WALTON  AND  MITCHELL,
*24,  Wardour  Street,  Oxford  Street.


MAC.  4


INDEX.


page.

Abscess,  Lumbar,  cured  .  201

Adams,  Mr.,  his  Cases .  93

Aglionby,  Miss,  her  Case . 237

Alexis  Didier’s  Clairvoyance  . .  417

Antiquity  of  Mesmerism  .  255

Ashburner,  Dr.,  Facts  in  Clairvoyance .  96,  380

Athenaeum,  its  bad  conduct .  29,  405

Bagnold,  Col.,  Mesmerism  in  India  40  Years  ago .  250

Barth,  Mr.,  his  Cases .  64

Bell,  Mr.,  his  Clairvoyant  Dream .  54

Bentinck,  Lady  Mary,  obligation  of  Mesmerists  to  her .  317

Brain,  Excitement  of,  Mesmerism  in  .  205

Buckley’s,  Major,  Facts  in  Clairvoyance .  96,  380

Cancer  cured  with  Mesmerism  .  213

Chandler,  his  Cases . . .  56,  59,  188,  208

Clairvoyance .  54,  96,  264,  250,  321,  370,  380,  409,  417

Cold,  Effect  in  opposing  Mesmerism  .  2

College  of  Physicians  and  Mesmerists .  399

Contraction  of  a  Finger,  Mesmerism  in  ...  . .  284

Conolly’s,  Dr.,  his  disbelief  in  Mesmerism .  369

Corfe,  Mr.,  his  conduct  in  regard  to  Mesmerism  ....  233,  405,  410,  411,  412

Cough,  Mesmerism  in  obstinate  .  283

Crystals,  Effects  of .  61

Dalhousie,  Lord,  his  noble  conduct .  113

Development,  estimation  of  Cerebral  . .  291

Drummond,  Mr.  H.,  his  abuse  of  Mesmerism .  198

Elliotson,  Dr.,  on  the  Musical  Talents  of  Henry  VIII .  53

- Cure  of  Cancer  . .  213,  312

-  - Reports  of  Dr.  Esdaile  .  1,  113,  121,  158,  393

- Notes  on  Col.  Bagnold’ s  Paper .  254

- on  a  Paper  of  Mr.  Whitfeld .  272

- on  Mr.  Parsons’s  Case .  368

- on  the  College  of  Physicians  and  Mesmerists .  399

Epilepsy,  Mesmerism  in .  36,  41,  69,  148,  197,  203

Erysipelas,  power  of  Nitrate  of  Silver  upon .  208

Esdaile,  Dr.,  his  Hospital .  1,  113,  121,  393

- his  Triumph  and  Reward . . .  115

- his  Review  of  his  Reviewers .  158

Face,  swelled,  Mesmerism  in .  64


IV


INDEX.


page

Freeland,  Mr.,  his  Verses  on  Genius .  398

Fitzclarence,  Lord  F.,  Testimony  to  Clairvoyance .  417

Fry,  Mr.  E.,  Cure  of  Epilepsy .  197

Glands,  enlarged,  nearly  cured .  32,  33

Goethe,  his  Clairvoyance  .  265

Gout,  Mesmerism  in . . .  64

Hare,  Lieut.,  his  Case  of  Lock-jaw .  290

Harley,  Mr.,  his  Cases . .  190

Hawkins,  Dr.  F.,  his  sad  conduct .  213

Head-ache,  Mesmerism  in .  64,  87,  147

Heart,  Disease  of,  Mesmerism  in .  71,  412

Hereditariness .  273,  282

Holland,  Mr.,  his  case .  61

Horne,  Mr.,  his  Cure  of  Lumbar  Abscess  .  201

Hydrophobia,  supposed  Case  of  .  304

Hysteria,  Mesmerism  in  .  57,  188

Insanity,  Mesmerism  in .  40,  321,  390

Jackson,  Dr.,  his  absurdity .  171

Jaffray,  his  Strictures  on  Mr.  Prideaux’s  Organ  of  Sympathy .  173

Joint,  Elbow,  inflamed,  Mesmerism  in  .  145

Knee,  diseased,  cured  .  411

Liston,  Mr.,  his  outrageous  Letter .  210

Lock-jaw  predicted  and  cured  .  290

Martineau,  her  Report  of  Mesmerism  abroad .  236

Materialism,  absurd  notion  of  many  on  it .  112

Mayo,  Dr.,  his  conduct  in  reference  to  Mesmerism  . . .  379

Mesmeric  Phenomena  in  India . .  . . . 151-2

Mitchell,  Mr.,  his  Cases  .  283

Mott,  Mr.,  his  testimony  to  Clairvoyance . . .  383

Mouat,  Dr.,  his  absurdity . 162

Musical  Talents  of  Henry  VIII . t .  53

Neuralgia,  Mesmerism  in .  146,  147,  148,  185,  190,  282

Operations,  Painless  Surgical .  3,  &c.,  121,  &c.,  405

Opium  taking,  Mesmerism  in  Mischief  of  .  93

Oken,  his  opinion  of  Mesmerism .  110

O’Shaugnessy,  Dr.,  his  absurdity .  160

Pain,  removal  of,  by  Mesmerism .  384

Painlessness  of  Operations  effected  in  former  times .  31,  42

Palsy,  Mesmerism  in  .  39,  146,  413

Palmer,  Mr.,  his  Testimony  to  Mr.  Thompson’s  Cures .  414

Parturition,  painless.... .  59,  208

Parsons,  Mr.,  his  Case  of  Insanity,  &c .  321

Pasly,  his  Hypotheses .  319

Peach’s,  Capt.,  Case  continued  .  61

Phrenology,  Mr.  Whitfeld  on .  266,  270

Prideaux,  on  the  Organ  of  Sympathy .  72

Reynoldson,  Mr.,  his  Cases . . .  86

Rheumatism,  Mesmerism  in. .. .  32,  33,  34,  36,  38,  86,  149,  150,  151,  416


INDEX.


V


page

Roffe,  Mr.,  his  Literary  Contribution .  54

Sandby,  Rev.  G.,  his  admirable  work .  212

Saunders,  Mr.,  his  Cure  of  Head-ache  . .  87

- Case  of  Self-Mesmerism  .  91

Self-Mesmerism .  91

Seymour,  Dr.,  his  hostility  to  Mesmerism .  96

Silvester,  Dr.,  on  Old  Modes  of  rendering  Operations  painless .  42

Sleeplessness  and  Exhaustion,  Mesmerism  in .  185,  186

Stewart,  Dr.,  his  absurdity  . 161

Stiff  Arm,  cured  .  39

Storer,  Dr.,  his  Cases .  203,  205

Strangulation,  Mesmerism  in  Fits  of  . .  181

Strictures  on  the  Organ  of  Sympathy  . .  . .  ..  173

-  estimating  Development .  291

St.  Vitus’s  Dance,  Mesmerism  in  . .  86

Sydenham,  his  opinion  of  Animal  Heat  .  260

Sympathy,  Organ  of .  72

— —  —  Mr.  Whitfeld  on  .  267

Tetanus,  Mesmerism  in .  148,  149

Thompson,  Mr.  H.  S.,  his  Cures .  304,  412

Throat,  inflamed,  Mesmerism  in .  86

Timins,  Mr.,  his  Cure  of  Insanity  .  390

Trevelyan,  Mr.  A.,  his  Cures .  384

Tubbs’s,  Mr.,  Painless  Operation  .  405

- Cure  of  diseased  Knee .  411

Ulcers,  cured  by  Mesmerism  .  198

Unconscious  action  of  the  Brain . .  222,  375

University  College,  its  rejection  of  Mesmerism .  393

Voice  restored .  56

Wakley,  Mr .  213,  237,  211,  393,  402,  405,  410,  421

Wallace,  Miss,  her  Cure  of  Heart  Disease . .  71

Weight,  increased  by  Mesmerism .  95

West,  Mr.,  his  Cure  of  Epilepsy  .  69

Whitfeld,  his  Cases,  &c . 181,  266

Wilson,  Dr.  J.  A.,  his  hostility  to  Mesmerism  .  234

Will,  Silent  Power  of  .  289


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  VI.

No.  XXI.

Report  by  Dr.  Elliotson  upon  “  A  Record  of  Cases  treated  in  the  Mesmeric
Hospital,  from  November,  1846,  to  May,  1847,  with  the  Reports  of  the
Official  Visitors.  Printed  by  Order  of  Government,  Calcutta.  W.  Rids-
dale,  Military  Orphan  Press,  1847.”


VI


INDEX.


The  employment  of  measures  to  prevent  the  pain  of  Surgical  Operations  by  Drugs,
not  a  novelty.  By  Thomas  Hookham  Silvester,  M.D.  Clapham,  Surrey.

The  Musical  Talents  of  Henry  the  Eighth.  By  Dr.  Elliotson.

Clairvoyance  in  a  Dream.

Cure  of  Loss  of  Voice  :  and  benefit  in  two  Cases  of  Hysteria.  By  Mr.  Chandler,
Surgeon,  Rotherhithe.

Unconscious  Delivery  in  the  Mesmeric  Sleep.  By  Mr.  Chandler,  Surgeon,
Rotherhithe.

Continuation  of  Captain  Peach’s  Case,  in  a  letter  from  Mr.  Holland  to  Mr.
Chandler ;  with  a  note  by  Mr.  Chandler  on  the  effects  of  Crystals  on  the
Captain.

Rapid  Cure  of  Inflammatory  Swollen  Face,  Acute  Gout,  of  Spasms  of  the  Chest
with  Involuntary  Movements  of  one  Arm,  with  local  Mesmerism;  and
Cure  of  severe  Pains  of  the  Head,  with  Mesmerism.  By  Mr.  G.  H.  Barth.
Communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson,  to  whom  the  account  was  addressed  in
a  Letter.

Case  of  Epilepsy  cured  by  the  Mesmeric  Influence,  after  the  signal  Failure  of
Medicine.  By  Mr.  John  Wickens  West,  Surgeon,  Poole.

Mesmeric  cure  of  a  severe  Affection  of  the  Heart,  by  Miss  Wallace  of  Laurel
Lodge,  Cheltenham.  Communicated  as  a  letter  from  the  patient  to
that  lady.

On  an  Organ  of  Sympathy,  seated  between  Comparison  and  Benevolence.  By
Mr.  T.  Symes  Prideaux.

Cures  of  St.  Vitus’s  Dance,  Rheumatism,  and  infantile  inflammation  of  the
Throat.  By  Mr.  Reynoldson,  Bootle,  near  Liverpool.

Cure  of  intense  Head-ache  and  other  distressing  Symptoms.  By  Mr.  Saunders.

Benefit  of  Self- Mesmerism  in  a  case  of  Impediment  of  Speech.  By  Mr.  Saunders,
Bristol.

A  case  of  the  relinquishment  of  Opium  taking,  and  one  of  the  restoration  of  lost
Weight,  with  Mesmerism.  By  Mr.  Adams,  Surgeon,  Lymington.  In  a
letter  to  Mr.  Kiste.

Facts  in  Clairvoyance.  By  Dr.  Ashburner.

The  illustrious  Oken’s  opinion  of  Mesmerism.

No.  XXII.

Triumph  and  Reward  of  Dr.  Esdaile.

Account  of  a  “  Record  of  Cases  treated  in  the  Mesmeric  Hospital,  from  June
to  December,  1847 ;  with  Reports  of  the  Official  Visitors.  Printed  by
Order  of  Government.  Calcutta,  1848.”

Account  of  “  A  Review  of  my  Reviewers.”  By  James  Esdaile,  M.D.  Calcutta,
January  26,  1848.

Notes  on  the  “  Organ  of  Sympathy,”  discovered  by  Mr.  J.  S.  Prideaux.  By
Mr.  W.  J affray,  Aberdeen.

Cures  of  Fits  of  impending  Strangulation ;  Nervous  Exhaustion  and  Sleeplessness  ;
painful  Affection  of  the  Head  and  Spine.  By  Mr.  Henry  Whitfeld,
Surgeon,  Ashford,  Kent.

Cure  of  severe  Hysteria  without  sensible  effects.  By  Mr.  T.  Chandler,  Surgeon.


INDEX.


•  •
Vll

Two  oases  of  the  severest  Tic  Douloureux,  cured  by  Mesmerism,  at  Kingsb ridge,
in  Devon,  by  Mr.  James  Harley.  Communicated  by  Mr.  Edmund  Fry,
of  Plymouth,  to  Dr.  Elliotson.

Case  of  Epilepsy  cured  with  Mesmerism.  By  Mr.  Edmund  Fry.

Mesmeric  Cure  of  Ulcers  of  long  standing.  By  a  Clergyman  of  the  Church  of
England.

Successful  treatment  of  Lumbar  Abscess  and  Disease  of  the  Spine  with  Mesmerism.
By  Mr.  James  Davis  Horne.

Cure  of  Epilepsy  and  severe  Nervous  Affection.  By  Dr  Storer.

Great  Benefit  of  Mesmerism  in  severe  Inflammatory  Excitement  of  the  Brain.

Communicated  from  the  patient  to  Dr.  Storer,  and  by  him  to  Dr.  Elliotson.
A  fresh  instance  of  unconscious  Parturition  in  the  Mesmeric  Sleep.  By  Mr.  T.
Chandler,  Surgeon.

A  Letter  of  the  late  Surgeon  Liston,  exhibiting  his  outrageous  joy  at  the  hope
of  Mesmerism  becoming  less  useful.  By  Dr.  Elliotson.


No.  XXIII.

Cure  of  a  true  Cancer  of  the  Female  Breast  with  Mesmerism.  By  Dr.  Elliotson.
Mesmeric  Phenomena  in  her  own  Person,  described  by  Miss  Aglionby,  Nunnery,
Penrith,  Cumberland.

Mesmerism  in  India  Forty  Years  ago.  By  Colonel  Bagnold.

Mesmerism  in  India  and  Goethe’s  Clairvoyance.

On  the  Mesmeric  Excitement  of  Cerebral  Organs ;  Sympathy  of  Taste  and

Mental  State;  the  Nervous  Fluid;  and  the  source  of  Filial  Affection.

*

By  Mr.  Henry  Whitfeld,  Surgeon,  Ashford,  Kent.

An  Interesting  Case  in  reference  to  the  Laws  of  Hereditary  Descent.

Great  Benefit  of  Mesmerism  in  a  Case  of  Obstinate  Cough  and  Contraction
of  a  Finger  ;  and  in  one  of  Neuralgia  of  the  Leg,  with  various  exquisite
Phenomena.  By  Mr.  Mitchell.

Prediction  and  Cure  of  Lock-Jaw  in  Master  Chapman.  By  Lieutenant  Hare,  R.N.
Notes  on  the  Ordinary  Method  of  estimating  Cerebral  Development.  By  Mr.
James  Straton.

A  case  of  supposed  Hydrophobia.  By  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson.

Appendix  to  the  Case  of  Cancer.  By  Dr.  Elliotson.

Notices  of  the  Pamphlets  of  Mr.  Barth  and  Mr.  Pasley.

No.  XXIV.

Case  of  Cataleptic  Insanity  treated  Mesmerically,  with  interesting  Phenomena.
By  Mr.  Parsons,  Royal  Marine  Library,  Brighton.  With  notes  by  Dr.
Elliotson.

Major  Buckley’s  Clairvoyant  Patients.  Communicated  by  Dr.  Ashburner.

Cases  of  the  removal  of  Pain  with  Mesmerism.  By  Mr.  Arthur  Trevelyan.

Cure  of  Insanity  with  Mesmerism.  By  Mr.  Charles  Timins,  Surgeon.

Dr.  Esdaile’s  progress  in  India.  By  Dr.  Elliotson.

The  London  College  of  Physicians  and  Mesmerists.  By  Dr.  Elliotson.


Vlll


INDEX.


Case  of  Surgical  Operation  and  the  application  of  caustic  to  an  Inflamed  Eye
without  Pain,  in  mesmeric  sleep-waking.  Together  with  Clairvoyance.
By  Mr.  Tubbs,  Surgeon.  In  a  letter  to  Dr.  Elliotson.

Rapid  Cure  of  Diseased  Knee  with  Mesmerism.  By  Mr.  W.  J.  Tubbs,  Surgeon.
In  a  letter  to  Dr.  Elliotson.

Remarkable  benefit  of  Mesmerism  in  Organic  Disease  of  the  Heart,  Palsy,
Rheumatic  Neuralgia,  and  Acute  Rheumatism.  By  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson,
of  Fairfield  House,  near  York.  With  an  account  of  two  of  the  cases  by
Mr.  Palmer,  Surgeon,  York.

Clairvoyance  of  Alexis  Didier.  By  Dr.  Elliotson.


THE  ZOIST.

No.  XXI.


APRIL ,  1848.


I.  Report  by  Dr.  Elliotson  upon  “  A  Record  of  Cases  treated
in  the  Mesmeric  Hospital ,  from  November ,  1846,  to  May,
184 7,  with  the  Reports  of  the  Official  Visitors.  Printed
by  Order  of  Government,  Calcutta.  W.  Rids  dale,  Military
Orphan  P?'ess,  1847.”

The  official  visitors  were, —

R.  M.  M.  Thompson,  Esq.

D.  Stewart,  Esq.,  M.D.

J.  Jackson,  Esq.,  F.R.C.S.

E.  J.  Mouat,  Esq.,  M.D.

R.  CVShaugnessy,  Esq.,  F.R.C.S.

I  shall  give  an  account  first  of  the  surgical  operations,
and  then  of  the  medical  cases,  of  the  whole  period,  and  not
the  whole  practice  of  each  successive  month,  as  is  properly
done  in  the  Report.  I  formerly  received  the  first  monthly
report  of  the  surgical  operations  performed  by  Dr.  Esdaile,
and  it  appeared  in  The  Zoist  for  last  July.  On  referring  to
No.  XVII.  one  operation  will  be  found  to  have  been  the  re¬
moval  of  an  immense  cancerous  breast,  weighing  7  lbs.,  from
a  woman,  and  five  removals  of  those  tumors  so  common  among
men  in  India,  one  tumor  weighing  30  lbs.,  one  40  lbs.,  and  one
100  lbs. ;  one  being  small,  and  one  spoken  of  only  as  “  one  of
the  usual  tumors the  patients  all  appear  to  have  done  well.
In  regard  to  the  woman,  two  thirds  of  the  tumor  were  removed
without  her  moving  or  appearing  to  feel;  but  she  then  woke  up
and  seemed  to  recover  her  senses  before  the  operation  was
finished :  no  restraint  at  all  was  required  during  this,  but  im¬
mediately  afterwards  she  became  very  violent.  The  man,  whose
tumor  weighed  30  lbs.  and  the  removal  of  which  was  tedious
and  severe,  lay  motionless  till  about  the  middle  of  the  opera¬
tion,  when  he  awoke  and  was  quite  aroused  before  it  was  over.

VOL.  VI.  b


2


Dr.  Esdaile’s  practice  in  the


The  man  whose  tumor  weighed  40  lbs.  shewed  not  the  slightest
shrinking  from  the  knife  or  the  smallest  movement  of  the  trunk
or  lower  extremities,  but  made  an  indistinct  moaning  when
the  chord  was  cut  across,  and  yet  remained  passive  and  mo¬
tionless  while  the  arteries  were  tying.  The  man  whose  tumor
weighed  100  lbs.  cried  out  and  shewed  other  signs  of  suffering
about  the  middle  of  the  operation ,  but  his  exclamations  were
unintelligible  and  had  no  evident  reference  to  his  situation  at
the  time ;  and  he  remained  asleep  for  four  hours,  and  knew
nothing  of  the  operation  or  any  occurrence  which  had  taken
place  since  he  was  mesmerised  to  sleep  16  hours  before.  The
man  whose  tumor  was  small  exhibited  signs  of  pain  towards
the  end  of  the  operation,  though  on  awaking  he  was  ignorant
of  all  that  had  passed.

These  patients  were  mesmerised  in  a  cool  month,  and
therefore  not  naked  as  in  hot  weather,  but  under  two  blankets
and  a  sheet,  with  only  their  faces  exposed.  Having  been
tested  in  the  mesmerising  room,  they  were  carried  on  their
beds  into  the  operating  room  through  which  a  current  of  the
north  wind  blew ;  and  that  every  movement  of  the  body  might
be  seen,  they  were  exposed  stark  naked  to  the  spectators.
“  I  remarked  on  several  occasions,”  says  Dr.  Esdaile,  “  that
a  deep  inspiration,  and  other  involuntary  movements  im¬
mediately  followed  this  exposure  of  the  body  to  the  cold  air,
although  the  persons  had  a  moment  before  been  quite  in¬
different  to  the  loudest  noises,  pricking  and  pinching.  The
demesmerising  influence  of  cold,  when  artifically  applied,
was  familiar  to  me,  as  will  be  seen  in  my  Mesmerism  in  India,
and  it  will  appear  surprizing  that  I  should  not  have  been  more
on  my  guard  against  it  as  a  natural  agent.  I  can  only  plead
in  extenuation,  the  stupifying  influence  of  a  successful  routine ;
but  failures,  when  improved,  are  often  more  instructive  than
complete  success.  I  suspected  that  cold  was  the  secret  enemy
at  work,  and  lost  no  time  in  determining  the  point  by  actual
experiments.”  The  man  who  is  said  only  to  have  had  one  of
the  usual  tumors  was  mesmerised  and  rendered  so  insensible
of  pain  that  a  boil  discovered  on  one  of  his  arms  had  a  conical
incision  made  in  it  without  his  shrinking  in  the  least.

“  He  was  then  carried  under  the  blankets,  and  his  bed  placed
in  the  north  door  of  the  hospital ;  the  blankets  and  sheet  were  sud¬
denly  pulled  off,  and  he  was  exposed  naked  to  the  cold  air;  in  about
two  minutes  he  shivered  all  over,  his  breathing  became  disturbed,
and  he  clutched  right  and  left  for  the  bed-clothes,  but  still  sleeping;
they  were  supplied  to  him,  and  he  huddled  himself  up  under  them
with  the  greatest  satisfaction,  still  sleeping  however.  The  bed  was
then  carried  back  to  the  mesmerising  room,  and  he  was  artificially


Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.


3


awoke.  He  had  slept  profoundly  without  a  dream,  he  said,  and
awoke  this  moment  from  feeling  cold.  When  shewn  the  wound  in
his  arm,  he  was  greatly  surprized,  and  shewed  the  usual  signs  of
pain,  saying,  that  he  had  struck  the  boil  against  something  in  his
sleep,  he  supposed,  and  it  had  burst.

“  Dec.  28th.  The  magnetic  machine  awoke  him  to-day  on  the
second  application.

“Dec.  29th.  He  was  more  deeply  affected  to-day,  and  lay  un¬
moved  for  several  minutes  in  the  open  air;  he  then  shuddered  all
over,  his  breathing  became  irregular,  and  he  immediately  awoke  into
the  full  possession  of  his  senses  :  the  cold  had  awoke  him,  he  said.

“  Dec.  30th.  I  covered  the  wound  in  his  arm  with  nitric  acid
to-day  ;  the  flesh  became  instantly  white ,  but  he  did  not  shrink  in
the  least  :  a  pin  was  also  thrust  through  the  flesh  between  his  fingers,
and  left  there ,  of  course  without  his  minding  it.  He  was  then  ex¬
posed  in  the  northern  doorway,  and  awoke  in  less  than  a  minute
after  being  exposed  to  the  air.  The  cold  awoke  him,  he  said.

“  The  pin  sticking  between  his  fingers  greatly  perplexed  him,  and
he  drew  it  out,  expressing  as  much  pain  as  most  people  would  do  on
having  it  stuck  into  them.  The  whitened  sore  on  his  arm  was  now
shewn  to  him,  and  he  immediately  exhibited  signs  of  the  greatest
pain,  as  people  always  do  when  any  raw  surface  comes  in  contact
with  the  mineral  acids  ;  the  pain  was  so  severe  that  I  ordered  his
arm  to  be  fomented  with  warm  water.

“  A  stove  was  ordered  for  the  operation  room.”


The  effect  of  having  the  room  properly  warmed  was,  that
the  mesmeric  state  continued  and  the  operation  was  rendered
painless.


“Dec.  31st.  The  room  being  agreeably  heated  to-day,  I  pro¬
ceeded  to  operate  on  him  in  the  presence  of  numerous  spectators,
exposing  only  the  diseased  surface.  The  operation  was  very  severe
and  tedious  from  the  hardness  of  the  diseased  mass  and  its  adhering
closely  to  the  delicate  organs  below,  which  were  all  saved.  No  sound
escaped  the  man ,  there  was  not  the  slightest  shrinking  under  the
knife,  and  the  only  movements  observed,  I  was  told,  were  some
slight  contractions  of  the  toes  and  forehead.

“  He  awoke  in  about  ten  minutes  after  all  the  arteries  were  tied,
as  if  from  a  natural  sleep,  stretched  himself  well,  complained  that
he  felt  his  thighs  and  arms  stiff,  and  seeing  his  bhai,  Bogobun  Doss,
he  asked  him  to  shampoo  them  for  him.  He  had  slept  very  well,
he  said,  nothing  had  disturbed  him,  and  he  felt  no  pain  in  the  part.
The  wound  was  at  last  shewn  to  him,  and  he  expressed  the  greatest
horror  and  alarm,  exclaiming  that  it  pained  him  excessively.  After
a  while,  I  asked  him  if  Bogobun  Doss  had  told  him  the  truth.  ‘Oh!
yes,’  he  answered,  *  it  was  done  exactly  as  he  described.’

“  Dr.  Dickens  from  Cuttack,  visited  the  hospital  a  few  days
after,  and  was  recognized  by  Mothoor.

“  After  telling  him  all  about  it,  he  confidentially  asked,  ‘  But
how  did  the  Dr.  Sahib  do  it  V  ”


b  2


4


Dr.  Esdaile’s  practice  in  the


The  discovery,  by  Dr.  Esdaile,  that  insensibility  to  pain
from  mechanical  causes  does  not  necessarily  imply  insensibility
to  cold,  is  one  which  presented  itself  to  my  notice  in  1841,
in  regard  to  both  heat  and  cold.  In  mesmerising  Miss
Rosina  Barber,  cured  by  me  of  severe  epilepsy,  and  well  up
to  the  present  moment,  and  now  married,  I  found  that,
though  in  her  mesmeric  sleep-waking  she  was  insusceptible
to  pain  from  mechanical  causes  up  to  her  collar  bones, — a  limi¬
tation  of  anaesthesia  that  has  occurred  in  other  of  my  patients,
she  was  every  where  susceptible  of  feeling  temperature.

“  Though  she  never  gave  the  least  sign  of  sensation,  however
mechanically  injured  within  the  limits  mentioned,  she  had  an  exquisite
sense  of  temperature  throughout  her  frame,  but  not  more  in  the  face
than  in  her  arms  and  hands.  Not  merely  did  cold  or  hot  substances,
when  applied  to  her  hands  for  example,  give  an  immediate  sensation ;
but  even  when  held  at  a  small  distance,  so  that  nothing  could  be
ascribed  to  contact.  Her  sensibility  to  cold  was  indeed  extreme  :  if
the  weather  was  cool,  she  would  shudder  as  soon  as  she  was  asleep,
and  require  a  shawl,  though  previously  she  had  not  complained  of
cold :  and  contact  of  anything  cold  made  her  shudder  distressingly.
And  this  I  have  noticed  in  other  cases,  in  which  the  loss  of  common
feeling  ( anaesthesia )  existed.  The  same  peculiarity  may  exist  in  or¬
dinary  palsy,  but  it  is  not  noticed,  because  not  examined  into : — a
part  is  pinched  and  does  not  feel,  and  therefore  is  presumed  to  have
no  kind  of  feeling.*

The  same  occurred  in  Miss  Abbot,  also  cured  by  me,  in
1843,  of  Epilepsy,  well  up  to  the  present  moment,  and  now
married.

“  She  was  perfectly  insensible  to  mechanical  injury  throughout
her  body,  except  the  face,  and  even  in  it,  for  the  breadth  of  half  an
inch  of  its  circumference,  where  it  joins  the  ears  and  hairy  part  of
the  head;  so  that  any  surgical  operation  could  have  been  performed
upon  her,  even  while  conversing  most  rationally  with  us,  and,  ex¬
cept  upon  the  face,  not  been  noticed  by  her:  and  a  seton  was  in¬
troduced  into  the  back  of  her  neck,  and  I  on  two  subsequent  occa¬
sions  used  great  violence  to  the  wound  in  order  to  make  it  discharge,
without  giving  her  the  least  sensation;  as  I  described  at  length  in
No.  V.,  pp.  108,  9,  which  account  I  must  request  the  reader  to
peruse,  as  it  contains  several  interesting  particulars.  Yet,  as  I  have
noticed  in  so  many  cases  of  insensibility  to  mechanical  injury,  she
was  highly  sensible  of  temperature,  and  cold  things  applied  any
where  annoyed  her  greatly.

“  For  the  last  four  years  she  had  been  subject  to  sleep-waking  in
the  form  of  somnambulism.  She  would  rise  in  her  sleep  in  the  dark,
no  light  having  access  to  her  room,  dress  herself  completely,  lacing
her  stays  and  boots,  and  fastening  the  back  parts  of  her  dress.  Once

*  Zoist  No.  VI.,  p.  209.  f  Zoist,  No.  IX.,  p.  59.


Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.  5

she  took  out  and  put  on  a  new  boa,  which  was  locked  up,  and  the
lock  had  been  so  spoiled  that  she  had  tried  in  vain  to  unlock  it  when
awake.  She  sometimes  took  out  clean  linen,  which  she  must  have
picked  out  from  a  quantity,  and  did  various  things  which  her  mother
is  perfectly  certain  she  could  not  do  with  her  eyes  shut  when  awake.

“  She  thus  often  found  herself  dressed  on  the  bed  when  she  awoke
in  the  morning,  though  she  had  undressed  and  got  into  bed  and  gone
to  sleep  at  bed  time.  Now  and  then,  though  rarely,  she  would  wake
when  only  half  dressed.  Not  unfrequently  she  walked  down  stairs,
— one,  two,  or  three  pairs.  Sometimes  she  would  walk  down  un¬
dressed,  and  was  often  awakened  by  the  coldness  of  the  painted  sides
of  the  stairs  beyond  the  carpet  on  either  side ,  or  of  the  foor-cloth
in  the  passage”*

The  employment  of  ether  and  chloroform  is  now  making
the  medical  profession  acquainted  with  the  phenomena  of  the
mesmeric  sleep- waking,  and  will  inevitably  lead  them  to  devote
all  the  attention  we  can  desire  to  mesmerism. f  Among  the
other  phenomena  from  ether  and  chloroform  that  are  analo¬
gous  to  those  of  mesmerism,  has  occasionally  been  noticed
sensibility  to  temperature  when  there  was  insensibility  to  me¬
chanical  injury,  so  that  the  surgeon’s  cold  hand  has  annoyed  a
cabinet  minister,  and  a  draught  of  cold  air  annoyed  another
patient,  while  the  knife  gave  no  pain.  A  mesmeric  patient
who  gave  no  sign  of  pain  under  incisions,  but  shrunk  from
something  cold  accidentally  touching  him,  would  in  England
have  been  at  once  pronounced  an  impostor.  In  etherized
patients  the  occurrence  was  considered  striking,  but  begat  no
injurious  suspicions.  The  fact  of  sensibility  to  temperature
remaining  not  very  rarely,  after  the  loss  of  sensibility  to  cut¬
ting,  pinching,  &c.,  in  paralysis,  would  not  have  remained  un¬
thought  of  to  the  present  moment  by  nearly  all  medical  men,
had  the  pages  of  The  Zoist  been  studied  as  they  deserve  to  be,
and  will  one  day  be,  by  the  medical  world,  and  the  fact  been
learnt  of  artificial  anaesthesia  being  often  accompanied  by  a
perfect  feeling  of  temperature.  Dr.  Esdaile  gives  us  no  reason
to  suppose  that  he  was  aware  of  my  observations,  and  the  facts
mentioned  by  him  in  regard  to  the  impression  of  cold  in
the  mesmeric  sleep-waking  have  the  greater  force.  Mesme¬
rists  have  always  known  the  effect  of  blowing  upon  or  fanning
mesmerised  patients  in  dissipating  sleep,  and  this  takes  place
even  though  pinching  their  faces  is  not  felt ;  and  this  was

*  In  disease  when  there  is  no  morbid  sensibility  of  touch,  nay,  when  sensi¬
bility  of  touch  is  lost,  there  is  sometimes  morbid  sensibility  of  cold  or  heat,  so
that  Dr.  Darwin  suggested  that  there  must  be  distinct  nerves  for  temperature.
(Zoonomia,  Sect.  xiv.  6,)  see  my  Human  Physiology,  p.  419.

t  See  my  Paper  on  the  Conversion  of  the  Medical  World  to  the  duty  of  pre¬
venting  Surgical  Pain. — Zoist,  No.  XVI.,  p.  581 ;  also  No.  XVII.,  p.  44.


6


Dr.  Esdaile’ s  practice  in  the


known  to  Dr.  Esdaile.*  Nav,  the  continued  contraction  of  a
muscle,  as  when  the  jaw  is  obstinately  closed,  in  mesmeric
patients,  is  often  at  once  removed  by  the  application  of  a  cold
substance,  though  the  patient  be  insensible  of  pain  from  me¬
chanical  causes. t

In  some  cases  there  is  equal  insensibility  of  temperature
and  of  mechanical  injury.  Elizabeth  Okey  did  not  feel  cut¬
ting,  so  that  a  seton  was  put  in  her  neck,  as  in  Miss  Abbot's,
without  her  knowledge,  and  she  held  live  coals  and  put  her
fingers  into  the  fire  without  feeling;  in  Miss  Abbot  there
was  sensibility  of  heat  only  when  intense ;  whether  a  frozen
substance  also  would  have  been  felt  I  do  not  know.  I  need
scarcely  remark  that  in  testing  a  patient  to  ascertain  whether
sensibility  is  sufficiently  destroyed  for  a  surgical  operation  to
be  commenced,  we  should  not  have  recourse  to  the  application
of  substances  of  high  or  low  temperatures,  as  was  sometimes
done  in  India ;  but  to  pinching,  pricking,  &c.,  since  a  patient
may  wince  from  heat  or  cold,  and  yet  be  quite  insensible  to
mechanical  injury. J

This  is  an  opportunity  for  stating  the  greater  mesmeric
susceptibility  of  persons,  and  the  greater  power  of  mesmerisers,
if  the  respective  party  is  warm.  The  apartment,  the  two
parties,  and  the  mesmerising  hand,  should  be  comfortably
warm.  Patients  have  frequently  assured  me  that  the  effect
of  my  passes  was  much  less  when  my  hand  was  cold,  though
I  felt  elsewhere  warm  and  comfortable.  All  the  susceptibilities
and  powers  of  a  living  frame,  even  the  power  of  thinking,  are
lessened  by  much  cold.

Although  care  be  taken  that  cold  do  not  rouse  the  patient,
the  sleep-waking  may  become  exhausted ;  and,  to  prevent  the
return  of  sensibility  to  the  knife  before  the  operation  is  com¬
pleted,  mesmeric  means  should  be  steadily  employed  till  the
patient  is  put  to  bed.  Passes  may  be  still  made,  as  is  Dr.
Esdaile' s  usual  course,  or  the  palms  of  the  mesmeriser's  two

*  Mesmerism  in  India  and  its  Practical  Application  in  Surgery  and  Medicine,
by  James  Esdaile,  M.D.,  p.  165  ;  London,  1846.  A  medical  man  would  learn
from  this  neglected  work  far  more  than  from  any  one  of  the  professional  works
which  are  noticed  in  reviews  and  made  the  subject  of  conversation.

f  Zoist ,  No.  IX.,  p.  57.

X  I  must  be  excused  for  mentioning  the  importance  of  taking  care  that
patients  having  surgical  operations  performed  upon  them  be  kept  warm ;  an
extremely  low  temperature  of  course  prevents  all  sensation,  but  a  considerable
coldness  short  of  this  aggravates  the  pain  of  injuries.  We  all  know  the  greater
intensity  of  pain  if  we  accidentally  strike  any  part  when  it  is  very  cold,  than
when  it  is  comfortably  warm.  A  surgical  operation  performed  upon  a  cold
patient  in  a  cold  room  must  be  all  the  more  agonizing ;  yet  I  have  seen  persons
operated  upon  in  the  depth  of  winter  in  large  theatres  destitute  of  any  provision
for  warmth.


Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.


7


hands  kept  in  contact  with  the  forehead  or  some  other  part
of  the  face  or  head ;  or  the  points  of  two  fingers  be  kept  in
contact  with  the  upper  eyelid  upon  the  ball  of  the  eye,  or
the  point  of  a  finger  be  kept  upon  the  tip  of  the  nose  or
upon  the  chin.  I  learnt  this  extreme  susceptibility  of  the
eyes  and  the  tip  of  the  nose  in  many  persons,  from  my
study  of  the  cases  of  the  Okeys,  in  whom  it  was  remarkable.
If  the  reader  turns  to  the  beautiful  and  wonderful  case  of
Miss  Rosina  Barber,  which  is  recorded  in  Yol.  II.,  p.  194,  of
The  Zoisty  and  is  a  fine  study  for  any  one  desirous  of  learning
mesmerism :  he  will  find  that  she  had  a  great  disposition  to
wake  from  her  mesmeric  sleep-waking  during  its  early  stage,
and  that  I  deepened  her  state  by  placing  the  points  of  my
fingers  upon  her  eyes.  I  remarked  that

"  It  was  common  for  her  to  place  her  arms  side  by  side  in  her
lap  and  cross  her  knees  very  soon  after  going  to  sleep,  and  awake  in
five  or  ten  minutes  unless  I  deepened  her  sleep  : — a  thing  done  by
holding  her  hands,  or  especially  by  placing  the  points  of  the  fingers
upon  her  eyes.  Her  arms  would  then  slowly  relax,  separate,  and
drop  at  her  sides,  and  the  knee  which  was  upon  the  other  would
fall  off.  There  is  usually  no  surer  mode  of  deepening  sleep  than  to
establish  contact  with  the  patient.  Laying  the  hand  upon  the  fore¬
head  or  any  other  part,  placing  the  points  of  the  fingers  on  the  eyes,
or  the  tip  of  the  nose,  or  the  points  of  the  fingers  upon  the  points
of  his  fingers,  all  are  powerful  in  deepening  and  producing  sleep.
The  more  extensive  the  contact  the  greater  in  general  the  effect.
An  occult  soporific  power  over  others  exists  clearly  in  the  animal
frame.  In  the  excitement  of  active  sleep-waking,  contact  gradually
reduces  the  excitement  and  deep  sleep  comes  on.  The  Okeys  in
their  delirious  sleep-waking  were  often  so  susceptible  that,  if  they
laid  a  hand  upon  my  shoulder,  or  if  sitting  on  the  ground  they
rested  their  head  against  my  leg  while  I  was  writing,  they  were  pre¬
sently  lost  in  sleep.  Generally  the  pointed  parts  of  the  body,  as
the  bent  knuckles  and  still  more  the  tips  of  the  fingers,  the  chin
and  still  more  the  point  of  the  nose,  are  more  efficacious  than  an
equal  portion  of  flat  surface.  There  may  be  for  a  time  a  peculiar
susceptibility  of  a  certain  part.  I  have  often  known  touching  the
point  of  the  patient’s  nose  with  the  tip  of  my  finger  produce  instant
sleep  for  a  period.  The  phenomena  of  this  kind  in  the  Okeys  were
endless,  and  all  have  presented  themselves  to  me  again  and  again  in
other  cases.  The  absurdity  of  trying  to  explain  mesmeric  sleep  by
monotonous  impression  on  the  senses,  or  by  fatigue  or  over  straining,
and  of  not  seeing  clearly  that  there  are  occult  powers  not  recognized
by  the  medical  world,  is  glaring  (supra,  p.  53),  no  less  so  than
the  attempt  to  explain  certain  phenomena  by  currents  of  air  and
other  common  impressions  on  ordinary  sense.  Water,  mesmerised
by  passes  over  it,  and  even  by  pointing  at  it,  is  often  powerfully
soporific,  and  produces  as  it  did  in  the  Okeys,  instant  depth  of  sleep
in  the  mesmeric  state.”


8


Dr.  Esdaile’s  practice  in  the


If  the  patient  is  susceptible  of  rigidity  from  mesmerism,
the  most  powerful  method  is  to  place  a  strong  magnet  or  a
large  crystal  in  contact  with  his  hands  or  face.  I  have  found
that  in  such  subjects  rigidity  is  very  generally  induced  by
those  bodies,  and  even  in  the  waking  state  and  mesmeric
sleep-waking  induced  :  although  on  those  in  whom  mesmeric
means  do  not  induce  rigidity,  or  induce  only  catalepsy,
magnets  and  crystals  have  not  this  power.  These  observa¬
tions  I  communicated  a  year  ago,*  and  have  verified  them  up
to  the  present  moment.

In  the  following  case  the  operation,  though  not  possible
without  pain  in  the  cold,  was  performed  in  a  warm  apart¬
ment  without  any  suffering,  and  the  history  exhibits  in  a
striking  point  of  view  the  power  of  mesmerism  over  inflam¬
mation.

“  Chand  Khan,  aged  35,  has  got  the  same  complaint.  We
commenced  mesmerising  him  on  the  8th  December,  and  on  the  25th
he  was  insensible  to  pricking,  &c.

“  December  27th.  He  was  carried  on  his  bed,  under  the  blankets,
to  the  north  door.  I  called  upon  him  loudly  by  name,  and  plucked
a  pinch  of  hair  out  of  his  moustache  without  disturbing  him.  I
then  drew  off  the  bedclothes;  in  less  than  a  minute  he  shivered,
sighed  deeply,  like  a  person  after  a  shower  bath,  and  eagerly  sought
for  the  bedding,  straining  his  eyelids  to  open  them,  but  in  vain.
He  soon  after  awrnke  from  the  cold,  he  said.

“December  28th.  Again  exposed  to  the  cold  air,  after  inflicting
different  tests  of  sensibility.  After  shivering,  and  seeking  for  cover¬
ing,  as  yesterday,  but  finding  none,  he  rolled  himself  up  like  a
hedge-hog,  and  tried  to  make  the  most  of  it,  but  soon  awoke,  and
from  the  cold,  he  said.

“  December  30th.  Acted  precisely  the  same  as  yesterday.

“December  31st.  I  stuck  a  pin  into  his  nose,  and  left  it  there
a  moment,  before  drawing  off  the  bedding.  He  awoke  exactly  as  he
had  done  on  former  days,  and  from  the  same  cause,  cold.

“  When  getting  up  he  rubbed  his  nose  against  the  bed,  and  the
pin  fell  out  to  his  great  surprize.

“  After  he  got  up,  I  gently  pricked  his  nose  with  the  pin,  which
he  resented  as  much  as  any  one  in  the  company  would  have  done.

“  Next  day,  he  was  operated  on  without  knowing  anything  about
it,  and  although  the  operation  was  not  the  formidable  one  expected,
it  wras  very  curious,  and  will  be  related  next  month.”

“radical  cure  of  hydrocele.

“  January  Is/.  Chand  Khan,  one  of  the  men  experimented
on  last  month,  to  ascertain  the  effect  of  cold  on  the  mesmeric
sleep,  was  exposed  to-day  to  have  his  tumor  carefully  examined.

*  Zoist ,  No.  XIV.,  p.  278.


Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.


9


It  was  found  that  the  greater  part  of  the  swelling  was  watery,
arising  from  hydrocele,  and  did  not  require,  at  present,  the
formidable  operation  of  excision.  The  tumor  was  tapped,
and  the  usual  stimulating  injection  thrown  in,  without  a  sign
of  sensibility  appearing.  After  a  considerable  time,  he  awoke
spontaneously,  said  nothing  had  disturbed  him,  and  felt  no
pain  anywhere.  He  was  desired  to  sit  up  and  shew  the  part,
and  he  was  much  surprized  to  see  the  bed  wet,  and  the  di¬
minished  size  of  the  tumor.  The  hole  made  by  the  trocar
was  pointed  out  to  him,  and  it  was  suggested  that  the  bag
had  probably  burst  when  he  was  asleep,  and  he  seemed  to
consider  this  a  likely  solution  of  the  problem.  But  it  is  for
the  Physiological  History  of  such  cases  that  this  is  related,
and  not  as  an  example  of  insensibility  under  the  knife,  for
the  operation  is  only  a  prick.  Every  medical  man  knows,
however,  that  the  first  contact  of  the  acrid  injection  with  the
spermatic  nerves,  causes  very  considerable,  and  often  very
great  pain,  which  is  propagated  to  the  loins.  Now,  in  all  the
cases  in  which  I  have  operated,  and  they  amount  to  about  a
dozen,  this  first  pain  has  never  been  felt,  and  the  patient  only
begins  to  feel  pain  in  about  10  hours  after,  when  the  artificial
inflammation  commences.

“But  this  is  not  all  that  is  to  be  learned  from  this  simple
operation.  In  five  or  six  days,  when  the  fever  has  subsided
that  usually  ensues,  it  will  be  found  that  the  patient  is  very
easily  entranced  again.  The  inflamed  part  is  still  very  tender,
and  the  least  pressure  causes  great  pain,  but  in  the  trance
the  parts  can  be  rudely  handled  and  severely  pressed,  without
eliciting  a  vestige  of  sensibility,  after  which,  however,  it
returns  in  all  its  natural  intensity  the  moment  the  trance  is
dissipated.  This  disease  is  so  common  that  every  medical  man
can  find  plenty  of  cases  for  actual  experiment;  and  in  the
presence  of  candid  observers,  I  would  willingly  rest  the  proof
of  the  reality  and  power  of  mesmerism  on  the  frequent  exhi¬
bition  of  these  phenomena  alone.  Having  witnessed  the
frequent  suspension  of  artificial  inflammation  by  the  trance,
I  was  led  to  infer  the  possibility  of  subduing  natural  inflam¬
mation  by  it.  Soon  after  ascertaining  the  above  facts,  a  case
of  natural  inflammation  of  both  testes  occurred,  and  was
completely  extinguished  by  keeping  the  man  in  the  trance
for  24  hours,  with  very  short  intervals  of  waking.  I  only
mention  this  to  shew  what  can  be  done  under  the  most  favor¬
able  circumstances,  when  a  person  is  sensible  to  the  influence
to  the  necessary  degree,  and  this  brings  me  to  the  subject.”


10


Dr.  Esdaile’s  practice  in  the


“  HYPERTROPHIA  SCROTI.

“  December  3rd,  1846. — Baboo  Nundkishore  Roy,  the
Book-keeper  of  Messrs.  Lattey,  Brothers  and  Co.,  Calcutta.
He  has  got  the  usual  tumor,  about  the  size  of  a  man's  head.
It  commenced  16  years  ago  with  hydrocele,  but  has  been
stationary  for  many  years,  and  is  only  a  local  encumbrance.
He  is  a  large  robust  man,  and  enjoys  perfect  health.

“  On  the  7th  February,  I  considered  him  to  be  fit  for  the
knife,  and  invited  several  gentlemen  to  be  present,  but  un¬
luckily,  just  as  he  was  going  to  sleep,  the  pipe  of  the  stove
fell  upon  his  bed  with  a  terrible  clatter.  He  got  up  in  great
alarm,  and  for  24  hours  afterwards,  could  neither  sleep  na¬
turally  nor  mesmerically.  Just  as  he  was  going  to  sleep,  he
started  up  in  great  dread,  thinking  that  the  roof  was  falling
in  upon  him,  and  his  case  had  to  be  recommenced.  It  took
us  as  much  time  more  to  bring  him  back  to  the  state  he  was
in  at  the  time  of  the  accident.  There  is  often  a  simple,  but
very  curious  and  characteristic  symptom  observed  in  mesmeric
sleepers,  and  in  this  man  it  was  very  marked.  He  snored
loudly  for  about  ten  days  in  his  sleep,  and  then  his  respiration
became  noiseless  and  tranquil,  like  a  sleeping  child's.  I  have
now  seen  about  200  persons  in  the  trance,  and  do  not  recollect
an  instance  in  which  the  natural  snoring  was  not  extinguished
as  the  influence  deepened,  and  the  physiological  cause  of  this
is  very  evident  to  those  who  have  had  the  necessary  oppor¬
tunities  of  observation.  In  natural  sleep,  the  semi-voluntary
muscles  of  respiration  continue  to  act  after  all  the  voluntary
muscles  have  gone  to  rest,  and  the  first  invasion  of  mesmeric
sleep  cannot  be  distinguished  from  natural  slumber.

“  But  as  the  influence  deepens,  the  semi-voluntary  muscles
gradually  partake  of  the  general  condition  of  the  muscular
system,  whether  it  be  rigidity,  catalepsy,  or  flaccidity ;  and
this  state  is  often  so  complete,  that  not  a  trace  of  thoracic
movement  can  be  seen  above  the  pit  of  the  stomach ;  the  re¬
spiration  is  carried  on  by  the  diaphragm  and  abdominal  mus¬
cles,  and  the  breathing  often  sinks  from  24  respirations  in
the  minute  to  16.  Inspiration  and  expiration  are  therefore
performed  more  slowly  and  less  forcibly,  and  as  a  natural
consequence  snoring  disappears,  even  when  the  chest  is  not
quite  motionless.  This  is  so  practical  an  observation,  that  I
never  think  of  testing  the  sensibility  of  snoring  sleepers.

“  30th.  He  has  slept  daily  for  a  fortnight,  and  snores
loudly,  but  awakes  on  being  pricked  and  called  by  name.

“  315/.  The  room  was  heated  to-day  for  the  first  time,  and
the  mesmeric  sleep  was  well  established ;  the  snoring  has
ceased.


Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.


11


“Jan.  4 thy  1847.  He  bore  the  lower  power  of  the  electro¬
magnet  to-day  for  three  minutes,  and  then  awoke.

“  5th.  Severely  pricked,  and  racked  by  the  magnetic  ma¬
chine  for  three  minutes ;  he  then  began  to  roll  about,  and
soon  after  awoke,  spontaneously,  he  said.

“  6th.  He  appears  to  be  capable  of  bearing  the  knife  to¬
day.

“  7th.  Invited  several  gentlemen  to  witness  the  operation
to-day,  but  just  as  he  was  going  to  sleep,  the  funnel  of  the
stove  fell  with  a  great  crash  across  the  foot  of  his  bed,  and
frightened  him  terribly.

“  10th.  Has  not  been  able  to  sleep  all  last  night ;  when¬
ever  he  was  falling  off,  he  awoke  with  a  sudden  start,  thinking
that  the  roof  was  falling  in  upon  him,  and  this  nervousness
still  continues  to-day.

“  He  cannot  be  put  to  sleep.

“  26th.  This  man’s  case  had  to  be  begun  again  from  the
date  of  the  funnel  falling  on  him,  but  he  is  again  well  ad¬
vanced  towards  insensibility.

“  Feb.  2nd.  Being  found  insensible  to  pricking,  both  his
legs  with  the  thighs  were  raised  up  in  the  air  and  thrown
down  on  the  charpaie  several  times,  ac  testis  admodum  com-
primebatur  without  disturbing  him  in  the  least.

“  3rd.  He  was  deaf  to  the  loudest  noises  and  calling,  but
he  appeared  to  be  disturbed  teste  compresso.

“  4th.  He  was  very  deeply  entranced ;  a  large  brass  basin
was  twice  thrown  down  on  the  stone  floor  close  to  his  bed,
causing  a  very  great  noise  without  rousing  him ;  his  body  was
pricked  all  over  for  about  four  minutes,  ac  testis  multum
comprimebatur  with  no  more  effect.

“  He  has  a  great  objection  to  be  operated  on  in  the  Hos¬
pital,  and  I  told  him  that  I  was  about  to  do  it  now,  if  he  did
not  object :  silence  seemed  to  give  consent.

“5th.  The  same  repeated  to-day  with  like  results.  As
another  security,  I  sent  for  carb.  of  ammon.  and  applied  it
to  his  nose.  This  disturbed  him  somewhat,  without  awaking
him  :  after  he  awoke  and  had  dressed  himself,  I  put  the  bottle
of  carb.  of  ammon.  to  his  nose  which  was  as  disagreeable  to
him  as  to  me.  He  was  asked  if  he  had  ever  smelt  this  before ;
he  said,  it  was  like  smelling  salts,  but  that  he  had  never  smelt
it  before  in  the  Hospital.

“  6th.  I  operated  on  him  to-day,  in  the  presence  of  nu¬
merous  persons,  among  them  were  Dr.  Thompson,  Dr.  Mouat,
and  Mr.  R.  O’Shaughnessy.  His  pulse  on  several  occasions
had  been  counted  in  the  trance,  and  was  found  to  be  alwavs
120;  it  was  so  to-day,  but  his  natural  pulse  is  80.  I  cut  at


12


Dr.  Esdaile’s  practice  in  the


once  down  upon  the  testis  dexter  to  ascertain  its  state  :  it  was
involved  in  a  large  hydrocele,  and  was  much  enlarged  and  ad¬
herent  to  the  sac ;  it  was  therefore  let  alone,  and  after  freeing
the  testis  sinister  cum  pene,  it  was  removed  along  with  the
general  mass,  which  weighed  about  16  lbs.

“  His  crura  were  separated,  and  placed  one  on  each  side
of  a  chair ;  as  usual,  no  one  held  him.  I  was  told  that  the
operation  lasted  4J  minutes,  and  I  was  not  conscious  of  the
slightest  quiver  in  the  man's  whole  body  all  the  time.  The
only  thing  that  distinguished  him  from  a  corpse,  was  his
breathing  becoming  disturbed  about  the  end  of  the  operation,
but  it  very  soon  became  quite  tranquil  again.  This,  which
is  frequently  seen,  arises,  I  presume,  from  an  instinctive
effort  of  the  lungs  and  heart  to  accommodate  themselves  to
the  altered  state  of  the  circulation.  The  pulse,  I  was  told,
remained  unchanged  till  the  fall  of  the  mass ;  it  then  sunk  to
85,  and  when  he  awoke  it  had  settled  at  58.

“  After  the  arteries  were  tied,  his  mesmeriser  was  desired
to  desist,  and  he  awoke  spontaneously,  just  about  his  usual
time  daily.  In  reply  to  questions  put  to  him,  he  said  that
he  had  slept  very  well ;  had  not  been  in  any  way  disturbed,
not  even  by  a  dream ;  that  he  felt  no  pain  any  where,  and
was  not  weaker  than  usual ;  upon  saying  this,  he  prepared  to
get  up  as  usual,  but  I  laid  my  hand  upon  his  shoulder,  and
desired  him  to  lie  still,  and  listen  to  what  I  said.  I  told  him,
that  although  he  had  been  led  to  expect  that  he  should  be
operated  on  at  home,  I  did  not  think  it  proper  to  comply
with  his  wishes,  as  it  might  make  him  anxious  and  watchful,
and  so  defeat  our  object,  and  that  finding  him  in  a  fit  state,
I  had  taken  the  opportunity  to  operate  on  him  here.  He
started  with  surprize,  and  was  about  to  examine  the  part,  but
I  begged  him  not  to  do  so,  as  it  would  bring  on  pain  which
he  had  not  yet  felt,  and  accordingly,  he  said,  “  I  now  feel  a
burning  about  the  part."  In  conclusion,  he  was  asked  if  it
was  true  that  people  could  be  cut  up  in  their  sleep  without
knowing  it,  and  he  replied,  ‘It  seems  so.'  Shortly  after,
some  vessels  required  to  be  tied,  and  he  showed  more  than
the  usual  signs  of  pain  during  the  process.

“  7th.  He  has  had  no  pain  in  the  part  since  the  first  half
hour  after  he  awoke  :  has  had  some  pain  in  the  loins  since  the
evening,  which  increased  at  night,  preventing  his  rest ;  had
a  slight  fever  at  8  p.  m.,  no  motion.

“  He  was  feverish  for  a  week.  The  fever  gradually  left
him  by  the  occasional  use  of  laxatives  and  quinine.  The
wound  now  appears  very  healthy ;  and  is  rapidly  contracting.
He  now  sits  up  in  his  bed  and  walks  about ;  he  eats  well,  and
is  daily  getting  strength."


Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.


13


“  HYPERTROPHIA  SCROTI.

“  January  9th,  1847.  Manoo,  a  bearer,  aged  35,  has  come
from  Cuttack,  a  distance  of  200  miles,  in  consequence  of
having  learned  from  one  of  his  friends  that  he  had  undergone
an  operation  at  Hooghly  without  being  put  to  pain.  This  is
another  example  of  a  healthy  man  being  reduced  to  the  most
intense  degree  of  insensibility.  He  is  an  active,  hardy  look¬
ing  man,  and  has  travelled  10  days  consecutively,  at  the  rate
of  20  miles  a  day,  and  the  majority  of  patients  operated  on
since  I  came  to  Calcutta,  have  been  men  in  apparently  good
health.  If  they  cost  us  more  than  the  usual  trouble,  our
success  is  the  more  satisfactory,  on  account  of  the  difficulties
to  be  overcome.

“  This  man  was  very  speedily  subdued,  and  might  have
been  operated  upon  on  the  4th  or  5th  day,  but  for  a  peculiarity
in  his  mesmeric  condition  that  I  observed,  and  which  I  greatly
wished  to  understand,  or  at  least  get  rid  of.  Although  he
was  strikingly  cataleptic,  and  bore  with  perfect  indifference
the  electro-magnetic  shocks  for  many  minutes,  and  could  be
pricked  all  over  without  awaking  him;  yet  on  attempting  to
draw  him  down  to  the  end  of  the  bed  on  his  mattress,  he
often  awoke  instantaneously  into  the  full  possession  of  his
senses.  Raising  his  legs  and  letting  them  fall  suddenly  on
the  bed,  awoke  him  in  the  same  manner.  I  regret  to  say,
that  I  have  not  been  able  to  account  for  this  peculiarity  of  his
mesmeric  constitution,  but  we  succeeded  in  extinguishing  it
by  prolonged  treatment.  Every  practical  mesmerist  is  aware
of  such  singular  anomalies,  and  that  the  patient  may  be  able
to  bear  severe  pain  of  one  description,  although  he  is  awoke
by  apparently  inferior  disturbing  causes.  If  their  weak  point
is  noted  and  avoided,  the  necessary  liberties  may  often  be
safely  taken  with  them  with  impunity,  and  I  might  have
disposed  of  this  man  at  a  very  early  period,  if  I  had  not
wished  to  reserve  him  for  experiment  and  observation.

“  The  case  of  the  Baboo  is  an  illustration  of  this ;  the
day  before  the  operation,  he  was  annoyed  by  the  fumes  of
ammonia,  but  this  did  not  prevent  me  from  operating  on  him
next  day,  without  testing  him  with  ammonia,  and  he  lay  like
a  corpse  throughout.  Manoo  has  got  the  usual  tumor,  but
of  a  small  size,  rendering  the  organs  useless,  however :  to  be
mesmerised.

“  10 th.  Slept  for  a  few  minutes  only.

“  11  th.  He  appeared  to  be  in  a  profound  natural  sleep.

“  12 th.  He  was  partially  affected,  arms  cataleptic ;  not
disturbed  on  being  handled  freely.


14


Dr.  Esdaile’s  practice  in  the


“  13 th.  He  was  found  entranced,  perfectly  cataleptic.
He  was  insensible  to  pricking.

“  14 th.  He  slept  a  little,  and  was  roused  when  called.

“15 th.  He  was  deeply  entranced,  a  pin  was  thrust  into
his  hand  and  left  there,  on  awaking  he  was  confounded  to
find  the  pin  in  his  flesh.

“  1 6th.  He  was  placed  under  the  action  of  the  electro¬
magnetic  machine.  It  produced  convulsive  movements  of
his  hands ;  he  stood  it  well  for  several  minutes.  From  his
exhibiting  slight  movements  of  the  face,  the  machine  was
removed,  and  soon  after,  he  awoke,  and  when  asked,  said
that  nothing  had  disturbed  him  in  his  sleep.

“  1 7th.  He  stood  the  action  of  the  machine  for  about  three
minutes.

“  18 th.  He  awoke  on  the  mattress  on  which  he  lay,  being
carried  down  to  the  bottom  of  the  charpaie.

“  21  st.  He  was  found  perfectly  entranced ;  and  was  sub¬
jected  to  the  action  of  the  electro-magnetic  apparatus,  which
he  bore  for  about  three  minutes  without  the  central  magnet,
and  with  it,  for  a  minute.  It  only  produced  strong  convulsive
movements  of  his  arms.  He  was  then  pulled  down  on  his
mattress  to  the  bottom  of  the  charpaie ;  the  mesmeric  process
being  carried  on.  Both  crura  being  supported  on  two  chairs,
the  tumor  was  exposed,  testesque  multum  manu  tractati  sunt.
Pilis  abrasis,  the  part  was  covered  with  a  sheet.  He  was  then
pulled  back  to  his  usual  sleeping  position,  and  awoke  some
time  after  on  my  opening  his  eye ;  nothing  had  disturbed  him,
but  this.

“  22nd.  Being  found  insensible  it  was  attempted  to  drag
him  down  to  the  bottom  of  his  charpaie,  but  while  it  was
being  done,  he  awoke.

“  23rd.  He  awoke  to-day  on  a  piece  of  live  coal  being  put
into  his  hand.

“Feb.  5th.  Mesmerising  was  intermitted  for  nine  days,  on
account  of  the  patient  being  attacked  with  fever  and  diarrhoea,
— astringent  and  febrifuge  medicines  were  prescribed  for  him.

“  3th.  He  was  found  well,  the  process  was  recommenced,
and  he  slept  profoundly,  and  was  roused  by  a  cooly  touching
his  body  somewhat  rudely.

“  7th.  He  awoke  on  his  nipple  being  severely  pinched.

“  10 th.  He  was  subjected  to  the  action  of  the  electro¬
magnetic  machine  for  several  minutes,  testesque  multum
comprimebantur  without  awaking  him.  The  above  was  done
in  the  presence  of  His  Highness  the  Nabob  of  Moorshedabad,
Mr.  Torrens,  Dr.  Grant,  and  several  other  Mahomedan  and
European  gentlemen.


Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.


15


"11  th.  He  was  very  deeply  entranced  to-day,  his  legs
were  raised  in  the  air  and  thrown  down  on  the  charpaie  several
times,  et  testes  admodum  comprimebantur.  He  was  com¬
pletely  insensible.

"  12 th.  He  awoke  on  being  pricked.

“  13 th.  He  bore  several  tests  of  insensibility  well,  but
awoke  on  a  bit  of  live  charcoal  being  put  on  his  ancle.

“  14 th.  He  was  put  to  sleep  on  a  charpaie  that  divides  in  the
middle,  and  allows  the  lower  part  to  be  taken  away  without
disturbing  his  trunk.  Both  his  legs  being  lifted  up,  the  lower
half  of  the  bed  was  removed  and  his  legs  were  then  placed  on
two  chairs ;  the  tumor  was  exposed,  and  a  hydrocele  found
in  the  left  side  was  punctured,  and  a  large  quantity  of  serum
let  out.  The  testis  sinister  was  examined  and  severely
squeezed  without  disturbing  him.  The  bed  was  re-adjusted,
and  he  was  left  to  sleep.  He  awoke  about  15  minutes  after,
and  said,  when  questioned,  that  nothing  had  disturbed  him
in  his  sleep.  He  was  confounded  when  the  sheet,  on  which
he  lay,  was  pointed  out  to  him  wetted  with  blood  and  water,
he  said  it  was  not  so  before  he  fell  asleep.  As  desired,  he
handled  and  looked  at  his  tumor  and  was  surprized  to  find  its
bulk  much  reduced.  He  said  it  was  much  larger  when  he
went  to  bed.  The  opening  of  the  puncture  was  shown  to  him,
and  he  was  told  that  the  tumor  had  probably  burst  of  itself,
and  the  water  and  blood  escaped  through  the  opening.  All
this,  he  said,  might  have  been  the  case,  but  he  was  perfectly
unaware  of  what  had  happened,  for  he  was  fast  asleep.”

“  15^.  Considering  him  to  be  fit  for  the  knife,  the  lower
half  of  the  charpaie  was  removed,  and  his  legs  were  supported
by  two  chairs ;  his  arms  were  less  cataleptic  than  usual,  and
he  started  when  comprimebatur  testis  in  the  punctured  side ;
he  said,  on  awaking,  that  there  was  multum  doloris  in  teste.
The  inflammation  must  be  allowed  to  subside.

“  1 6th.  Arms  perfectly  cataleptic,  respiration  abdominal ;
a  very  slight  motion  of  the  floating  and  two  false  ribs  was
observed ;  testis  sanus  compressus  est  severely  several  times ;
an  attempt  was  made  to  lift  him  up  from  the  charpaie  while
asleep,  and  in  the  act  of  doing  so,  he  awoke.

“  1 7th.  He  was  insensible  to  external  impressions,  but
awoke  when  his  mesmeriser  attempted  to  open  his  eyes.

“  18 th.  The  morbid  part  and  his  thighs  were  pricked  all
over  for  about  two  minutes,  and  arete  compressus  est  testis
several  times ;  during  all  this  there  was  no  indication  of  feel¬
ing.  He  awoke  the  moment  he  was  dragged  by  the  leg.

“  19 th.  Having  placed  him  in  the  proper  position  for  the
operation,  we  went  over  all  that  was  done  the  previous  day ;


16


Dr.  Esdaile’s  practice  in  the


a  large  br^iss  basin  was  thrown  down  on  the  stone  floor  several
times  without  awaking  him ;  but  when  we  came  back  to  him,
after  having  tested  the  other  patients  lying  in  the  same  room,
and  rang  the  basin  with  a  stick  close  to  his  ear,  he  awoke.

“  20 th.  He  was  operated  on  to-day  in  the  presence  of  some
fifty  persons,  Europeans  and  natives.  The  colis  cum  tes-
tibus  were  dissected  out  of  the  diseased  mass  in  the  usual
way,  and  were  all  saved.

“The  patient  being  a  cataleptic  subject,  his  arms  were
placed  erect  in  the  air  before  I  commenced ,  and  they  remained
n'igidly  fixed  in  this  attitude  till  he  awoke,  a  quarter  of  an
hour  after  the  operation  was  finished.  There  was  not  the
slightest  shrinking  under  the  knife,  or  movement  of  the  body,
and  no  sound  escaped  from  the  patient.  I  was  told  that  some
slight  contractions  in  the  legs  and  fingers  were  observed,  and
the  motions  of  the  larynx  were  at  one  time  quickened.  In
the  trance  his  pulse  was  88  for  the  last  two  days,  but  it  sunk
considerably  during  the  operation,  I  was  told  by  Dr.  Wil¬
liamson.  After  the  arteries  were  all  tied,  his  mesmeriser  was
desired  to  desist,  and  the  man  awoke  in  his  usual  sudden  way,
in  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour  after.  Baboo  Kaseeprosaud
Ghose,  whose  acquirements  in  English  literature  are  well
known,  acted  as  interpreter,  and  put  whatever  questions  the
spectators  desired  to  the  patient.

“  The  sum  of  which  was,  that  he  had  slept  well;  had  not
even  dreamed,  felt  no  pain  in  any  part  of  his  body,  he  was  just
as  usual.  He  was  desired  to  rise  and  go  away  then.  He
obeyed  the  order  with  alacrity,  and  sat  up  at  once  to  arrange
his  cloth  before  getting  out  of  bed  :  a  stain  of  blood  met  his
view,  which  he  curiously  examined,  and  said  that  he  knew
not  how  it  came  there.

“  He  was  now  told,  that  as  he  was  a  strong  man,  we  had
great  difficulty  in  making  him  insensible,  and  that  he  had
better  submit  to  have  the  operation  performed  in  the  common
way.  He  answered,  that  he  was  quite  ready  to  have  it  done
just  as  he  sat,  if  it  was  my  pleasure.  The  play  was  then
ended,  and  he  was  informed  that  all  was  over,  and  contrary
to  custom,  he  felt  no  pain  in  the  part  till  about  ten  minutes
after  he  became  aware  of  the  fact.  Half  an  hour  after,  he
only  felt  a  little  smarting.  At  this  time,  I  heard  one  of  the
medical  visitors  ask  him,  ‘  Bohut  durd  hai  V  (have  you  much
pain  ?)  he  answered,  '  Bode  hai,  Sahib/  (there  is  a  sensation
in  the  part,  or  I  feel  it.)

“  215/.  He  had  an  attack  of  fever  at  night,  it  came  on
with  shivering  and  lasted  till  daybreak.  The  slight  pain  in
the  part  soon  after  left  him,  and  has  not  again  returned.  He


Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.  17

was  disturbed  at  night  by  pain  in  the  loins,  but  lias  now
none.

“  28th.  He  was  attacked  with  diarrhoea  for  a  few  days,
which  was  relieved  by  opiates.  He  is  now  doing  well,  wound
very  healthy,  testes  adherent.  There  is  a  tendency  to  cita-
trization,  his  appetite  is  much  improved,  several  ligatures
came  off.”

“  HYPERTROPHIA  SCROTI.

“  March  20th,  1847.  Bhoyrub  Doss,  a  washerman,  set.  43,
residing  at  Dingavanga  in  Calcutta ;  has  got  one  of  the  com¬
mon  tumors  for  about  16  years.  It  is  about  twice  the  size  of
a  man’s  head.  This  is  a  curious  example  of  elephantiasis
affecting  only  one  side  of  the  body :  the  leg  and  arm  of  the
left  side  are  much  enlarged,  and  the  disease  is  confined  to
the  left  side  of  the  scrotum ;  so  much  so,  that  the  raphe
separates  the  diseased  from  the  sound  skin :  the  testis  sinister
is  enlarged,  and  the  skin  is  very  thick  and  dense  over  it;
but  the  testis  dexter  is  healthy  and  the  skin  natural.  His
pulse  is  98,  respiration  18.  To  be  mesmerised  daily  for  an
hour  and  a  half.

“  21s/.  Did  not  sleep  to-day.

“  He  was  made  to  inhale  the  vapour  of  sulphuric  ether
for  about  an  hour  with  little  effect.  Half  an  hour  after  he
commenced  inhaling,  he  began  to  complain  of  giddiness,
dimness  of  sight,  and  became  sleepy.  He  then  left  off  in¬
haling,  and  asked  leave  to  lie  down.  For  a  few  seconds  he
was  insensible  to  my  pricking  his  leg,  but  the  sensibility  of
the  surface  immediately  returned,  although  the  inhalation
was  continued.  I  have  failed  in  a  dozen  successive  cases  since
my  first  successful  experiments  with  ether,  and  it  is  clearly
not  to  be  depended  upon  when  administered  by  common
inhalers.  I  have  therefore  ordered  the  apparatus  used  in
England  to  be  made,  and  when  ready,  it  shall  be  fairly  tested.

“  22nd.  He  was  partially  affected  to-day,  his  arms  and  legs
were  lifted  up  in  the  air  several  times,  and  forcibly  thrown
down  on  the  bed  without  any  signs  of  voluntary  movements
appearing ;  he  did  not  shrink  on  being  pricked ;  but  on  the
tumor  being  thrown  up  towards  the  abdomen  with  a  jerk,
he  awoke.

“  24dh.  He  was  found  perfectly  indifferent  to  all  tests  of
insensibility  that  he  was  subjected  to;  his  pulse  was  108;
respiration  24  in  a  minute.

“25 th.  The  operation  was  performed  to-day  in  the  pre¬
sence  of  a  large  company  of  spectators,  Europeans  and  na¬
tives.  Being  satisfied  that  the  testis  sinister  was  diseased,  it
VOL.  vi.  c


18


Dr.  Esdaile’s  practice  in  the


was  sacrificed  without  being  dissected  for,  and  it  was  found
to  have  been  converted  into  a  sac  full  of  water ;  not  a  tremor
was  perceptible  in  the  man’s  whole  body  from  first  to  last.

“  After  he  had  been  cleaned,  and  covered  with  a  fresh
sheet,  he  was  awakened  with  some  difficulty.  On  being
questioned,  he  was  unconscious  that  any  thing  had  happened
to  him ;  he  said  that  he  felt  just  as  usual ,  and  was  ready  to
be  operated  on  now ,  if  I  pleased.  Weight  of  tumor  15  lbs”

“  CARTILAGINOUS  TUMORS.

“March  20th,  1847.  Huro,  a  peasant  woman,  aged  25,  has
come  from  Chinsurah,  25  miles  off.  Has  been  suffering  from
a  cartilaginous  tumor  on  the  pinna  of  each  ear  for  about  two
years ;  the  left  one  is  the  largest,  and  is  about  1  lb.  weight :
there  is  also  a  small  excrescence  inside  the  right  ear.  The
disease  commenced  with  a  warty  excrescence  caused  by  boring
a  hole  in  each  of  the  ears  for  wearing  ear-rings  :  she  enjoys
very  good  health,  and  is  a  remarkable  example  of  natural
sensibility  to  the  mesmeric  influence.  To  be  mesmerised
daily  for  an  hour  and  a  half.

“  30th.  She  appeared  to  be  deeply  entranced,  her  limbs
were  all  flexible,  and  were  thrown  about  rudely  without  dis¬
turbing  her.  A  pin  was  also  put  into  the  tip  of  her  nose  and
left  there  for  a  few  seconds  and  then  removed ;  her  jaw  was
locked,  and  could  be  with  difficulty  partially  opened  :  each
ear  was  rudely  handled,  and  the  tumor  on  the  left  side  was
marked  with  ink  to  show  the  outline  of  the  natural  cartilage ;
and  all  without  disturbing  her  in  the  least.  She  could  be
operated  on  to-day  to  any  extent,  but  a  careful  first  exa¬
mination  is  so  much  time  and  power  lost ;  she  was  therefore
reserved  for  to-morrow.

“  31s/.  The  operations  were  performed  to-day,  at  12  o’clock,
in  the  presence  of  a  numerous  party  of  Europeans  and  natives.
The  three  tumors  were  very  leisurely  dissected  off,  and  no  one
could  detect  a  quiver  in  the  woman’s  body,  or  the  slightest
tremor  of  her  countenance.  In  about  ten  minutes  after  all  was
over ,  I  awoke  her,  and  she  was  unconscious  that  anything  had
happened  till  she  admired  her  improved  appearance  in  a  looking
glass  that  was  given  her.  She  had  no  pain  in  the  ears  till  half
an  hour  after  she  became  aware  of  having  been  operated  on.”

lt  HYPERTROPHIA  SCROTI.

“  March  25/^,  1847.  Sonatun  Mahetie,  a  labourer,  aged
32,  has  come  from  Budrock,  in  Zillah  Cuttack,  and  has  tra¬
velled  about  11  miles  a  day  for  14  days.  He  has  got  a  scrotal


Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.


19


tumor  for  about  18  years,  and  one  of  his  legs  is  afflicted  with
elephantiasis.  The  size  of  the  tumor  is  about  three  times
that  of  a  man’s  head.  His  health  is  considerably  impaired.
To  be  mesmerised  daily  for  an  hour  and  a  half.

“27  th.  On  the  second  day  he  was  found  fairly  under  the
mesmeric  influence,  and  was  not  disturbed  on  being  some¬
what  rudely  touched  and  lightly  pricked.

“28 th.  Sleeping  profoundly,  limbs  flexible,  bears  them
to  be  violently  thrown  about  without  waking.

“  29 th.  The  same  appearances  and  results  to-day.

“  30 th.  He  was  deeply  entranced ;  a  pin  was  stuck  into
the  tip  of  his  nose  and  left  there  for  a  few  seconds,  and  then
taken  out.  His  tumor  was  next  exposed,  a  cane  was  pushed
up  through  the  opening  of  the  prseputium  to  the  symphysis
pubis,  pilique  abrasi  sunt ;  all  without  awakening  him.

“315/.  He  did  not  go  to  sleep  to-day  as  soon  as  asual.

“At  12  o’clock  when  I  examined  the  woman,  Huro,  who
was  in  the  same  room  with  him,  he  was  not  entranced,  and
was  moving  about  uneasily.  The  spectators  were  admitted,
and  for  the  next  half  hour  the  room  resembled  a  fair.  Having
finished  with  the  woman,  I  examined  Sonatun  again,  and
thought  him  fit  to  be  operated  on.  The  operation  was  per¬
formed  in  the  usual  way,  but  the  testes  had  to  be  sacrificed,
as  they  were  found  to  be  atrophied  and  useless ;  while  cutting
the  cords  he  struggled  considerably,  but  his  sleep  was  not  bro¬
ken ,  and  when  the  mass  fell,  he  relapsed  into  death-like  repose.
His  mesmeriser  was  ordered  to  desist  after  all  the  arteries  were
tied,  and  all  traces  of  the  operation  removed.  He  awoke  spon¬
taneously  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour  after,  and  on  being  questioned
said  that  he  had  not  been  disturbed  by  a  dream  even.  In  about
a  minute  after  awaking,  he  said  that  he  felt  some  heat  in  his
scrotum,  and  on  carrying  his  hand  to  the  part,  said  that  he
had  been  cut.  Weight  of  tumor  16  lbs.

“  It  was  not  prudent  to  operate  under  such  circumstances
certainly,  but  I  wished  to  show  how  irresistible  the  power  is
even  under  the  most  exciting  and  unfavourable  conditions,
when  the  system  has  been  once  deeply  affected.”

“  CALCULUS - LITHOTOMY.

“  April  2nd.  Bhugeeruth,  a  husbandman,  aged  32,  came  to
my  house  this  morning,  complaining  of  all  the  symptoms  of
stone.  He  has  been  suffering  for  two  years,  and  for  the  last
year  has  been  in  constant  misery.  He  walks  with  the  greatest
pain,  seldom  sleeps,  and  when  he  does,  it  is  by  pressing  one
of  his  heels  into  his  perineum  which  gives  him  some  relief.
I  sounded  him,  and  found  a  stone;  he  suffered  much,  and

c  2


20


Dr.  Esdaile’s  practice  in  the


complained  loudly  during  the  examination.  He  was  desired
to  go  to  the  hospital.

“  3rd.  Came  to  the  hospital  to-day ;  the  constant  state
of  suffering  this  man  was  in  made  it  extremely  doubtful
whether  he  could  be  rendered  insensible,  but  it  was  resolved
to  try.  To  be  mesmerised  daily  for  three  hours  by  different
persons,  one  hour  each.

“  Sleeping  profoundly,  his  arms  became  cataleptic,  and
could  be  thrown  about  rudely  without  awaking  him :  he  was
insensible  to  pricking,  but  was  found  moving  his  limbs,  and
turning  his  head  instinctively ;  he  groaned  and  shrunk  when
his  right  nipple  was  severely  pinched.  He  awoke  about  half
an  hour  after  his  mesmeriser  left  him.

“  4th.  He  was  not  conscious  to  pricking ;  a  sound  was
gently  introduced  into  the  vesica,  and  the  stone  detected ;
he  was  then  brought  down  to  the  edge  of  the  table  with  the
mattress,  a  staff  was  passed  into  the  vesica  and  then  with¬
drawn,  deinde  pili  abrasi  sunt.  All  the  above  was  done
without  awaking  him,  but  some  convulsive  movements  were
observed  in  his  features.  He  was  then  with  some  difficulty
awakened,  and  when  asked,  he  said  that  he  had  not  felt
anything  since  he  went  to  sleep.

“  6th.  His  arms  were  rigid,  particularly  the  left  one,  and
were  lying  across  his  breast ;  a  sound  was  passed  into  his
vesica,  and  I  then  immisi  digitum  in  rectum,  and  the  stone
was  felt.  He  was  then  placed  in  the  position  used  for  the
operation  of  lithotomy  without  tying  his  hands  and  feet  as
usual ;  a  staff  was  next  put  into  the  vesica  and  held  in  the
usual  position  for  a  few  minutes,  it  was  then  withdrawn  and
he  was  made  to  lie  down  again ;  nothing  had  annoyed  him,
he  said  when  he  awroke.

“  3th.  He  was  operated  on  to-day.  The  mattress  with
him  upon  it  was  pulled  down  to  the  edge  of  the  table,  and
he  was  placed  in  the  usual  attitude  for  lithotomy ;  his  arms
loosely  passed  around  his  legs  below  the  knees ;  no  ligature  was
used ,  and  I  requested  him  not  to  be  held.  Before  commencing,
I  imprudently  pricked  him  around  the  anus,  which  brought
on  an  instinctive  contraction  of  the  anus  and  vesica,  followed
by  the  expulsion  of  the  lotium  around  the  staff,  but  not  a
sign  of  general  sensation  or  consciousness  appeared.  This
was  an  unpropitious  commencement,  and  it  would  have  been
better  to  put  off  the  operation  a  day.  I  injudiciously  pro¬
ceeded,  however,  and  having  injected  the  vesica,  performed
the  operation ;  not  a  sign  of  sensibility  appeared,  I  believe,
till  my  finger  was  pressing  the  stone  against  the  fundus  of
the  vesica.  He  now  became  disturbed,  and  moved  and


Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital .


21


moaned  while  I  was  trying  to  get  a  proper  hold  of  the  stone,
which  was  very  difficult  from  its  being  of  so  oblong  a  form.
He  opened  his  eyes  when  the  stone  was  passing  through  the
pelvis,  and  seemed  to  be  in  the  possession  of  his  senses,  but
when  all  was  over,  he  said  that  he  was  only  conscious  of  having
felt  something  give  way  in  his  inside ,  followed  by  some  heat  in
the  seat  of  the  wound.  As  in  former  instances,  he  did  not
see  for  some  time  after  his  eyes  were  wide  open,  and  the  first
thing  he  saw  clearly  was  the  stone  when  presented  to  him.
He  then  only  became  aware  of  the  presence  of  the  gentlemen
around  him.  The  stone  weighed  1  and  J  ounces,  20  grains.
With  a  little  more  patience  this  would  have  been  as  complete
a  case  as  any  on  record.

“  With  reference  to  the  eye  being  insensible  to  external
objects  when  wide  open,  and  apparently  natural,  I  beg  to
refer  to  the  case  of  Suroop,  a  somnambulist.  I  had  fre¬
quently  observed  the  same  phenomenon,  before  it  occurred
during  operations,  and  have  thus  spoken  of  it  in  my  ‘  Mes¬
merism  in  India.’  ”


<c  HYPERTROPHIA  SCROTI.

“  April  1st,  184 7.  Shaik  Koochill,  a  cart  driver,  set.  50,
residing  at  Karawa,  in  24-Purgunnahs.  Has  got  a  common
scrotal  tumor  for  eight  years.  To  be  mesmerised  for  an  hour
and  a  half  daily.

“  8th.  He  is  subject  to  fever  twice  a  month,  and  as  he
was  labouring  under  a  paroxysm,  when  admitted,  mesmerism
was  commenced  only  this  day :  sleeping  profoundly,  his  arms
were  flexible  and  were  tossed  about  the  bed,  his  body  was
pricked  all  over ;  hair  was  torn  out  of  his  beard,  and  the
tumor  was  severely  pressed  and  thrown  up  to  the  abdomen
with  a  jerk,  without  making  any  impression  on  him.

“  9 th.  The  same  appearances  and  results  to-day.

“  10 th.  The  operation  was  performed  to-day.  The  testis
dexter  being  diseased  was  removed.  There  was  not  a  quiver
in  his  body  visible  from  head  to  foot,  and  he  lay  like  a  corpse
for  half  an  hour  afterwards,  till  I  had  operated  on  another
man  in  the  same  room ;  I  then  awoke  him,  and  it  is  needless  to
say  that  he  knew  nothing  about  the  matter.  He  felt  no  pain
on  waking,  and  had  a  great  disposition  to  go  to  sleep  again.

“  28 th.  He  has  felt  no  pain  in  the  wound  up  to  this  date,
and  there  is  no  prospect  of  his  doing  so  during  his  cure.
Weight  of  the  tumor  10  lbs.”


22


Dr.  Esdaile’s  practice  in  the


“  HYPERTROPHiA  SCROTI.

“April  2nd.  Shaik  Torab,  a  labourer,  set.  50,  residing  at
Goorana,  in  Zillah  Hooghly,  has  contracted  a  scrotal  tumor
for  about  20  years.  To  be  mesmerised  daily  for  an  hour  and
a  half.

“  Qth.  Slept  naturally.

“  7th.  Arms  rigid ;  he  was  insensible  to  pricking,  &c.

“  8 th.  Deeply  entranced,  his  legs  were  raised  in  the  air
and  thrown  down  on  the  bed  several  times,  the  hair  of  his
beard  was  plucked  out ;  his  left  nipple  was  severely  pinched,
and  the  tumor  exposed  testisque  compressus  est  without  dis¬
turbing  his  sleep.

“  10 th.  After  having  disposed  of  Shaik  Koochill,  I  pro¬
ceeded  to  operate  on  this  man.  He  had  been  for  two  days  in
the  most  satisfactory  state,  and  I  took  it  for  granted  that  he
was  in  the  same  state  to-day.  He  shrunk  on  the  first  incision,
however,  and  I  almost  made  up  my  mind  to  desist,  but  trusting
that  though  the  trance  might  be  disturbed,  it  would  not  be
broken,  and  that  he  would  retain  no  recollection  of  his  appa¬
rent  suffering,  as  usual  I  proceeded  with  the  operation.  But
he  very  soon  woke  up  completely,  and  had  little  advantage
from  his  mesmeric  trance.  The  contrast  between  this  man
and  his  more  fortunate  neighbour,  Shaik  Koochill,  was  most
striking.  He  remained  for  24  hours  in  the  greatest  pain,
while  the  other  did  not  experience  an  ache  even.  This  poor
fellow  suffered  from  my  taking  too  much  for  granted.”

“  HYPERTROPHIA  SCROTI.

“  April  Qth,  1847.  Bonmallee  Bhuttacharge,  a  Brahmin,
set.  26,  residing  at  Sookchur,  in  24-Pergunnahs,  has  been
troubled  with  a  scrotal  tumor  for  nine  years.  He  was  not
mesmerised  until  the  13th  on  account  of  an  attack  of  periodic
fever  to  which  he  has  been  subject.

“  13 th.  His  arms  were  flexible,  and  tossing  them  about
did  not  awake  him ;  he  was  partially  insensible  to  pricking.

“  14 th.  He  awoke  on  his  right  nipple  being  pinched.

“15th.  A  metallic  basin  was  thrown  on  the  stone  floor
close  to  his  bed,  his  body  was  pricked  all  over,  and  his  tumor
exposed,  and  thrown  up  to  the  abdomen  with  a  jerk  without
disturbing  him.

“  20 th.  He  was  disturbed  on  being  rudely  handled,  and
was  therefore  mesmerised  for  an  hour  more  than  the  usual
time,  after  which  he  appeared  deeply  entranced ;  his  tumor
was  severely  squeezed,  and  he  was  pricked  all  over  without
exciting  the  least  movement  in  his  system.


Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.


23


“  2\st.  He  appeared  to  be  deeply  entranced,  and  was
therefore  with  the  charpaie  removed  to  the  operating  room  ;
he  was  made  to  sit  up  on  his  bed  in  a  strong  current  of  air
without  disturbing  him  in  the  least.  His  mouth  was  with
difficulty  opened,  and  it  remained  fixed  wide  open.  He  soon
after  awoke  with  a  start,  and  said  that  the  air  rushing  down
his  throat  had  awakened  him.

“  22nd.  The  operation  was  performed  to-day.  The  parts
were  all  saved :  weight  of  the  tumor  30  lbs.  Towards  the
end  of  the  operation  he  moved  and  cried  out  unintelligibly,
but  on  the  fall  of  the  mass  became  perfectly  tranquil,  and
did  not  awake  till  after  he  had  been  covered  with  a  clean
sheet,  and  all  traces  of  the  operation  removed.  Nothing  had
disturbed  his  sleep ,  he  said,  he  felt  just  as  usual,  had  no  pain
any  where,  fyc.  The  lump  was  then  shewn  to  him,  he  recog¬
nized  his  property,  and  said  it  made  him  sick  to  look  at  it.
He  had  no  pain  in  the  part  for  an  hour  after.”

“  HYPERTROPHIA  SCROTI.

“April  \Mh.  Shaik  Morad,  a  tailor,  set.  40,  residing  at
Sobhabazar,  in  Calcutta,  has  got  a  scrotal  tumor  for  six
years.

“To  be  mesmerised  for  an  hour  and  a  half  daily.

“  15 th.  Slept  apparently  naturally.

“  1 6th.  Arms  partially  cataleptic,  he  was  to  some  extent
indifferent  to  pricking ;  a  cane  was  pushed  up  through  the
opening  of  the  prseputium  to  the  symphysis  pubis,  which
roused  him.

“  1 7th.  He  was  pricked  all  over  for  a  few  minutes,  the
tumor  was  exposed  and  thrown  up  to  the  abdomen  with  a
jerk,  and  a  pin  was  put  into  the  tip  of  his  nose  and  left  there
for  a  few  seconds,  and  then  withdrawn ;  hair  was  plucked  out
of  his  beard,  and  his  right  nipple  severely  pinched ;  the  latter
appeared  to  have  awakened  him ;  but  on  seeing  his  hand
marked  with  blood,  he  said  that  he  awoke  from  the  pain
caused  by  pricking  his  hand.

“  19 th.  Deeply  entranced  :  he  was  subjected  to  several
tests  of  insensibility ;  a  brass  basin  was  thrown  on  the  stone
floor  close  to  his  bed,  &c.,  without  disturbing  him  in  the
least.

“  26th .  He  had  been  more  easily  disturbed  for  the  two
last  days,  and  I  suspected  that  I  had  examined  him  too  late
after  two  hours  mesmerising.  I  therefore  took  him  half  an
hour  sooner  to-day,  and  finding  no  instinctive  movements
present,  I  performed  the  operation.  It  was  excessively  severe
and  tedious,  from  the  hard,  almost  cartilaginous  character  of


24


Dr.  Es  dalle's  practice  in  the


the  mass.  Testis  unus  was  dissected  out,  but  the  other  could
not  be  found  after  protracted  search,  and  on  subsequent  exa¬
mination  it  was  found  to  have  degenerated  into  a  mere  capsule
of  skin,  about  the  size  of  a  French  bean.  This  man  was
also  disturbed  before  the  end  of  the  operation,  but  did  not
awake  till  after  he  had  been  covered  with  a  clean  sheet.  He
ivas  not  aware  that  anything  had  happened  to  him;  felt  the
weight  as  usual,  he  said,  had  no  pain  any  where,  fyc.

“  28 th.  He  has  had  no  pain  up  to  this  date.”

“  HYPERTROPHIA  SCROTI.

“  Myzoodeen.  This  will  be  found  to  be  a  very  curious  and
interesting  case,  from  its  having  given  rise  to  a  series  of  im¬
promptu  experiments  exhibiting  the  anodyne  as  well  as  narcotic
power  of  mesmerism,  and  therefore  its  curative  virtues,  and
it  also  introduces  us  to  an  extraordinary  mental  phenomenon
which  had  not  occurred  before  in  my  Calcutta  practice.

“I  allude  to  the  invasion  of  the  waking  by  the  sleeping
state,  which  will  be  seen  in  this  and  the  following  case ;  and
to  show  that  this  is  not  an  accidental  phenomenon,  but  is  a
specific  symptom  of  the  mesmeric  state,  I  will  cite  some
examples  in  which  I  had  observed  it  at  Hooghly.  The  first
occasion  on  which  it  occurred  was  in  a  lady  whom  I  entranced
on  the  first  trial  in  ten  minutes,  in  the  hope  of  relieving  long
standing  nervous  headaches.  I  awoke  her  with  great  diffi¬
culty,  and  she  felt  very  much  ashamed  at  having  been  caught
napping  by  me,  as  she  supposed ;  she  had  no  recollection  of
having  seen  me  that  day  before.  The  headache  had  dis¬
appeared,  and  never  returned.  Several  months  after  this,
the  lady  was  tormented  with  one  of  her  wisdom  teeth,  for
which  there  was  not  room  in  her  jaw,  and  the  gum  at  the
angle  of  the  jaw  had  in  consequence  become  ulcerated  and
indurated.  I  entranced  her  for  the  purpose  of  cutting  away
the  offending  gum,  as  easily  as  on  the  first  occasion,  and  left
her  lying  undisturbed  on  her  couch.  In  about  two  hours
afterwards,  she  awoke  as  if  from  a  natural  sleep,  and  went
to  arrange  her  hair  at  the  glass ;  she  then  saw  blood  about
her  mouth,  and  cried  to  her  husband  that  the  boil  had  burst
when  she  was  asleep,  and  she  wondered  why  I  had  not  come
to  relieve  her  that  day  as  I  had  promised  :  not  only  had  she
no  recollection  of  having  seen  me  that  day,  but  it  was  found
that  everything  that  had  happened  during  the  half  hour  pre¬
vious  to  the  trance  had  been  blotted  from  her  mind.*

*  See  Dr.  Elliotson’s  account  of  such  Phenomena,  in  Zoist,  No.  XI.,  p.  476.


Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.


25


“  Some  months  subsequently  to  this,  I  was  sent  for  by
this  lady  who  had  just  been  delivered,  and  was  suffering  from
severe  after-pains.  I  entranced  her  as  readily  as  on  former
occasions,  and  left  her  sleeping.  I  returned  in  an  hour  after,
and  found  her  still  asleep,  but  she  awoke  when  I  touched
and  spoke  to  her.  She  had  enjoyed  a  refreshing  sleep,  she
said,  the  pain  was  gone,  and  she  felt  much  stronger.  I  held
my  fingers  before  her  eyes  for  a  minute  or  two,  and  she  went
off  to  sleep  again ;  slept  for  two  hours,  and  on  waking  had
no  recollection  of  our  last  conversation.  This  lady  was  only
mesmerised  these  three  times,  and  each  time  this  mental
phenomenon  was  devoloped.

“  Dr.  Bedford  having  seen  an  ulcer  covering  the  whole  of
a  woman's  right  temple,  covered  with  muriatic  acid  while  she
was  in  the  trance  without  her  feeling  it,  returned  to  my  hos¬
pital  ten  days  after,  and  begged  to  be  permitted  to  touch  the
sore  with  the  acid  in  her  natural  state.  Whatever  I  might
think  of  such  a  proposal,  I  assented,  and  he  touched  the
sore  with  the  end  of  a  glass  stopper  wetted  with  acid.  The
woman  almost  immediately  cried  that  her  head  was  on  fire,
and  walked  about  the  room  distracted  with  pain.  As  the
best  anodyne,  I  threw  her  into  the  trance,  performed  an
operation  on  her  in  it,  and  when  she  awoke  she  had  no  recol¬
lection  of  the  burning  even.

“May  4 th,  1847.  Myzoodeen,  a  Khidmutgar,  set.  25,
residing  at  Kalitollah  in  Zillah  Hooghly,  has  got  a  small
scrotal  tumor  for  two  years.  It  came  on  as  usual  with  fever,
occurring  twice  a  month  at  the  change  of  the  moon.

“  To  be  mesmerised  for  an  hour  daily.

“  5th.  Sleeping  profoundly,  his  arms  being  flexible  were
tossed  about,  his  right  nipple  was  severely  pinched,  testes  com-
pressi  sunt,  and  he  was  subjected  to  the  weakest  power  of  an
electro-magnetic  machine  without  making  any  impression
on  his  system.  When  the  power  of  the  machine  was  in¬
creased  to  the  second  degree,  which  could  with  great  difficulty
be  borne  by  a  robust  man  for  a  few  seconds  only,  he  was
found  to  move  like  a  man  in  an  uneasy  dream,  and  when  he
awoke,  a  few  minutes  after,  he  said  he  had  not  been  dis¬
turbed  by  anything  while  sleeping.

“6th.  Deeply  entranced;  he  was  for  the  second  time
made  to  bear  the  action  of  the  electro-magnetic  apparatus
with  power  of  the  second  degree  without  showing  any  sign
of  voluntary  movements.  He  awoke  about  half  an  hour  after,
and  said  he  had  not  been  in  any  way  disturbed  whilst  asleep.

“  7th.  He  stood  very  well  the  action  of  the  electro-mag¬
netic  battery  with  the  power  of  the  third  degree  for  a  few


26


Dr.  Esdaile’ s  practice  in  the


minutes.  He  was  then  made  to  sit  upon  his  bed,  and  was
suddenly  thrown  down  upon  it,  and  his  eyes  were  opened
without  breaking  his  slumber.  He  was  then  left  sleeping.

“  8th.  He  was  made  to  sleep  on  a  divided  charpaie,  the
lower  part  of  which  was  removed,  and  his  legs  were  placed
on  two  chairs,  and  the  tumor  exposed.  But  before  com¬
mencing  the  operation,  he  was  pricked  with  a  knife,  which
made  him  shrink.  A  metallic  basin  was  then  thrown  down
on  the  stone  floor  close  to  his  bed,  which  made  him  start
suddenly.  The  operation  was  therefore  deferred.

“  9th.  The  operation  was  performed  to-day,  no  sign  of
sensibility  appeared  till  I  had  nearly  dissected  out  the  testis
alter,  he  then  moved  convulsively,  but  without  attempting
to  close  his  legs  or  interfere  with  my  proceedings,  and  as  I
made  the  last  cuts  he  screamed  out.  He  shrunk  during  the
tying  of  the  arteries,  but  I  desired  the  lad  to  continue  to
mesmerise  him,  and  in  a  few  minutes  he  was  again  entranced.
In  half  an  hour  after  (his  mesmeriser  having  desisted),  he
awoke  of  his  own  accord,  and  said  that  he  had  slept  soundly
since  half-past  10  o’clock,  that  nothing  had  annoyed  him  in
his  sleep,  and  he  had  no  pain  any  where.  He  had  no  sooner
said  this  than  he  exclaimed,  ‘  There  is  a  heat  between  my
legs.  Oh  !  it  burns,  what  have  you  put  upon  me,  Dr.  Sahib  ?’
and  he  appeared  to  be  in  very  great  pain.  I  ordered  him  to
be  again  mesmerised,  and  in  ten  minutes  he  was  fast  asleep.
At  this  moment  Dr.  Yeitch  entered  the  room,  and  I  told
him  what  had  happened,  and  that  I  expected  on  the  man’s
next  awaking  that  he  would  have  neither  recollection  of  the
operation,  nor  of  his  suffering  from  the  effects  of  it,  and  so
it  turned  out.  He  again  awoke  as  if  from  a  refreshing  natural
sleep,  and  told  us  that  nothing  had  disturbed  him  since  he
went  to  sleep  as  usual,  and  that  he  had  no  pain  any  where.
The  sheet  was  now  lifted  to  look  if  the  bleeding  had  ceased,
and  he  only  now  became  aware  that  the  operation  had  been
performed.  While  some  vessels  were  being  taken  up,  Mr.
Lindstedt,  the  man’s  master,  joined  us,  to  whom  he  repeated
what  I  have  just  said.  After  he  was  bandaged,  and  had  been
allowed  to  smoke,  I  proposed  to  the  gentlemen  to  make  a
third  experiment  if  they  would  stay  to  see  the  issue.  This
was  assented  to,  and  he  was  again  mesmerised.  In  about  a
quarter  of  an  hour  he  was  entranced  the  third  time,  and  I
plucked  hair  out  of  his  moustache  without  his  minding  it.
It  cost  me  considerable  trouble  to  awake  him,  and  in  reply
to  his  master’s  questions,  he  said  that  he  had  this  moment
awoke  and  felt  very  well,  he  had  not  seen  his  master  to-day
before,  nor  Dr.  Veitch,  nor  myself,  &c. ;  in  a  word,  the


Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.


27


transactions  of  the  last  hour  and  a  half,  in  which  he  had
acted  so  prominent  a  part,  had  not  left  a  trace  in  his  brain.”

“  HYPERTROPHIA  SCROTI.

“  May  10th ,  1847.  Gopaul  Doss,  a  sirdar  bearer,  set.  40,
a  large,  very  muscular  man,  has  come  from  Ballessur,  having
travelled  24  miles  a  day  for  5  days.  He  has  been  troubled
with  a  small  scrotal  tumor  for  five  years.

“  To  be  mesmerised  daily  for  an  hour  and  a  half.

“  Sleeping  profoundly,  arms  cataleptic,  his  tumor  was  ex¬
posed  and  severely  squeezed.  He  was  next  subjected  by  Mr.
Siddons  to  the  action  of  an  electro-magnetic  machine,  first
with  the  power  of  the  second  degree,  and  then  with  that  of
the  third,  for  about  two  minutes  and  a  half  each  time,  without
exciting  the  slightest  voluntary  movements.  He  was  placed
on  his  feet,  and  slept  standing  a  good  while.  He  was  after¬
wards  put  to  bed  and  left  to  sleep.

“  Ylth.  He  was  electrified  to-day  in  the  presence  of  Dr.
Jackson,  with  no  more  effect  than  yesterday.

“  12th.  The  same  repeated  to-day  in  the  presence  of  Mr.
Halliday,  Major  Sage,  Mr.  Simms  and  Mr.  Fraser.

“  13^.  The  operation  was  performed  to-day,  and  all  the
parts  saved.  He  lay  like  a  corpse  throughout ;  weight  of
tumor  10  lbs.  One  testis  was  involved  in  a  hydrocele,  which
was  left  till  after  all  the  vessels  were  tied.  I  then  opened  the
sac  and  leisurely  dissected  off  the  thickened  tunica  vaginalis,
to  which  he  was  as  indifferent  as  to  the  first  part  of  the  opera¬
tion.  He  began  to  awake  gradually,  with  the  assistance  of
fanning  in  about  half  an  hour.  After  all  was  over,  Mr.  Kemp,
who  is  an  excellent  Bengallee  scholar,  questioned  him  mi¬
nutely,  and  he  was  in  total  ignorance  that  any  thing  had  been
done  to  him.  He  answered  with  reluctance,  and  wished  to
go  to  sleep  again.  I  placed  my  fingers  on  his  eyes  for  a
minute,  and  on  lifting  them,  he  was  asleep.  I  now  begged
the  Messrs.  Kemps*  attention,  telling  them  that  they  would
probably  find  on  his  second  waking  that  he  had  totally  for¬
gotten  his  first,  and  so  it  happened.  We  awoke  him,  and  he
said  that  he  had  not  seen  one  of  us  to-day  before,  and  that
he  felt  just  as  usual.

“  14<th.  The  pain,  since  the  operation,  has  been  very
trifling.**

“  HYPERTROPHIA  SCROTI.

“  May  15th,  1847.  Ramessur,  a  husbandman,  set.  35,
residing  at  Tatowladaspore  in  Zillah  Burdwan,  has  got  a
moderate  sized  scrotal  tumor  for  twelve  years.  Both  legs  are


28


Dr.  Esdaile’s  practice  in  the


affected  with  elephantiasis.  He  has  been  subject  to  the  usual
periodic  fever  coming  on  twice  a  month,  but  now  only  once  in
six  months.  To  be  mesmerised  for  an  hour  and  a  half  daily.

“  1 7th.  No  sleep  was  induced  to-day.

“  18th.  Sleeping  soundly ;  the  tumor  was  exposed  and
severely  squeezed,  and  his  right  nipple  was  pinched  without
breaking  his  slumber.

“19th.  Apparently  in  mesmeric  sleep,  he  was  subjected
to  the  action  of  the  electro-magnetic  machine,  with  the  power
of  the  second  degree,  which  produced  strong  convulsive
movements  of  his  arms,  and  caused  sharp  shocks  to  persons
touching  his  body.  When  he  awoke  about  half  an  hour  after
he  said  he  had  not  been  in  any  way  disturbed  during  his  sleep.

“  20th.  Deeply  entranced,  he  was  pricked  all  over  for
several  minutes,  and  his  tumor  was  severely  squeezed  without
disturbing  him  in  the  least.

“  21st.  He  was  operated  on  to-day ;  unus  testis  was  found
to  be  atrophied,  and  was  removed,  the  other  was  saved  :  not
a  sound  or  sigh  escaped  him ,  and  the  only  movements  visible
I  was  told,  were  some  slight  contractions  of  the  toes  and  face.
After  all  the  vessels  were  secured,  and  he  was  covered  with  a
clean  sheet,  I  awoke  him.  He  said  that  he  had  no  pain  in
any  part  of  his  body,  that  he  felt  just  as  usual,  and  was  wait¬
ing  to  be  operated  on.

“22nd.  He  has  had  no  pain  since  the  operation.”

After  presenting  these  details  of  agonizing  operations
performed  with  the  most  perfect  evidence  of  painlessness, —
the  absence  of  movement,  and  of  sound,  and  of  the  least
effort  at  self-restraint,  with  the  perfect  corpse-like  appearance
of  the  patients  during  the  severities  of  the  knife,  it  is  right,
for  the  sake  of  displaying  what  we  have  to  contend  with
from  the  dulness  of  some  human  natures  in  matters  of  in¬
tellect,  and  their  errors  in  matters  of  morality,  to  present
two  extracts  from  the  Athenaeum,  the  reputed  editor  of  which,
Mr.  D.,  who  is  responsible  for  all  the  anonymous  leaders  in
his  Athenaeum,  ought  to  blush  and  despise  himself.

February  19,  1848,  p.  189.  “It  was  not  till  the  recent  dis¬
covery  of  the  narcotizing  effects  of  the  vapour  of  ether,  that  any
agent  had  been  employed  which  could  obviate  the  necessity  of  in¬
flicting  pain  during  the  performance  of  surgical  operations.  The
use  of  what  is  called  mesmerism  for  the  purpose  can  scarcely  be  said
to  be  an  exception  to  this  statement,  because  of  the  unsatisfactory
nature  of  the  evidence  on  which  cases  of  operation  without  pain  under
the  influence  of  mesmeric  agency  rests.  We  were  the  first  to  hail
the  discovery  of  the  anaesthetic  powers  of  the  vapour  of  ether,  and


Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.


29


we  pointed  out  the  difference  in  the  nature  of  the  evidence  as  to  the
beneficial  effects  of  this  agent  from  that  of  mesmerism .”

On  looking,  by  means  of  the  Index,  into  the  former
volume  of  the  Athceneum,  where  the  editor  was  the  first,  he
says,  to  hail  the  discovery  of  the  anaesthetic  power  of  ether,
and  where  this  difference  in  the  nature  of  the  evidence  was,  I
presume,  pointed  out,  I  found  the  following  leader  in  the
Number  for  January  2,  1847.

“  Animal  magnetism,  it  appears,  is  likely  to  meet  with  a  powerful
opposition.  It  can  no  longer  claim  to  be  the  only  agent  through
which  a  real  or  a  sham  insensibility  of  the  system  to  pain  may  be
produced.  It  has  been  found  that  the  vapour  of  ether  inhaled  by  the
mouth  induces,  for  a  time,  a  complete  paralysis  of  the  nerves  of  sen¬
sation  and  loss  of  consciousness,*  so  that  the  subjects  of  the  process
are  not  aware  of  the  application  of  painful  agents.  Teeth  have  been
extracted  both  in  this  country  and  in  America  without  feeling  on  the
part  of  the  patient,  and  the  daily  papers  announce  that  Mr.  Liston
has  amputated  a  leg  under  the  influence  of  this  new  agent.  We  can
readily  believe  these  statements .  A  priori  there  seems  no  reason  why
a  man  should  not  be  made  dead  drunk — for  such  appears  to  be  the
state  of  the  individual  under  the  influence  of  the  vapour  of  ether —
for  a  few  minutes  by  some  of  the  volatile  narcotics  which  are  used
in  medicine.  There  is  nothing  here  of  that  hocus-pocussing  which
characterizes  the  practices  of  the  mesmeriser.  At  the  same  time  we
do  not  regard  the  proof  of  the  unconsciousness  as  perfectly  satisfactory
in  these  ether  cases.  In  fact,  we  have  too  vivid  a  recollection  of  the
tricks  of  magnetical  impostors  not  to  be  on  our  guard  against  the
possibility  of  shamming  even  with  ether.”

It  would  appear,  therefore,  that  there  is  hocus-pocussing
in  mesmerism,  and  no  hocussing  in  making  people  “dead
drunk,”  and  that  the  evidence  in  the  two  agencies  is  different.
Now,  I  ask  any  reasonable  and  honest  man,  what  more  of
hocus-pocus  there  is  in  making  passes  with  the  hand  than  in
passing  the  glass  cylinder  of  an  electrical  machine  round  and
round  against  the  cushion  ?  or  in  touching  one  or  more  parts
of  a  patient  with  one^s  hand  than  in  touching  the  Leyden  vial
with  a  brass  conductor  ?  I  also  ask,  what  is  the  difference
of  the  evidence  afforded  by  a  patient  mesmerised  and  by  one
etherized  ?  After  such  assertions,  we  have  a  right  to  demand
that  the  accounts  recorded  in  this  number  and  those — between
two  and  three  hundred — formerly  recorded  in  The  Zoist ,  of
the  phenomena  of  mesmerised  patients  who  have  undergone
operations  painlessly,  and  the  accounts  of  the  etherized  pa¬
tients,  be  placed  side  by  side  and  the  differences  declared.  In

*  Loss  of  consciousness  is  not  necessary  to  absence  of  pain  in  etherization.
See  proofs  in  my  paper  in  No.  XVI.,  p.  581. — J.  Elliotson.


30


Dr.  Esdaile’s  practice  in  the


truth  the  evidence  is  the  same,  and  no  rational  and  honest  man
will  dare  to  say  that  there  is  the  slightest  difference.  We  have  a
right  to  demand  of  the  editor  what  there  is  unsatisfactory  in
the  evidence  of  insensibility  under  mesmerism  in  the  beau¬
tiful  and  touching  instances  of  painless  operations  performed
in  England,  in  France,  in  America,  in  the  East  and  West
Indies ;  what  in  the  cases  published  in  the  very  commu¬
nication  which  I  am  now  writing.  Boldness  and  unscru¬
pulousness  of  general  assertion  avail  nothing.  The  editor  and
his  writers  are  all  totally  ignorant  of  the  subject  on  which  they
write ; — totally  ignorant,  and  their  inhumanity  and  effron¬
tery  may  appear  valiant  in  their  own  eyes,  but  fill  the  good
with  sorrow  and  the  spirited  and  highminded  with  indigna¬
tion.  I  know  that  energetic  writing  displeases  some  persons ;
but  our  enemies  are  too  bad  to  be  influenced  by  gentleness
and  mild  persuasion.  Mesmerism  is  an  affair  not  of  mere
science,  but  of  mercy  and  feeling  for  our  suffering  fellow
creatures,  and  it  is  the  solemn  duty  of  all  men  to  hope  ear¬
nestly  that  the  alleged  powers  of  mesmerism  are  true ;  and  in
this  hope,  to  slight  no  facts  in  its  favour,  nor  rashly  to  de¬
nounce  it.  Such  conduct  is  as  cruel  as  it  is  irrational.  Mes¬
merism  is  one  of  the  gravest  and  most  important  matters
that  concern  mankind ;  it  is  a  holy  subject,  affording  unex¬
pected  insights  into  the  powers  and  working  of  our  nervous
system,  and  fraught  with  signal  blessings  to  mankind.  Horace
writes.


‘‘Sunt  quibus  in  Satira  videor  nimis  acer,”  &c.

But  he  who  “  knew  what  was  in  man,”  and  is  our  best  en-
sample,  did  not  refrain  with  the  obdurate  and  shameless  to
exclaim,  “  Woe  unto  ye,  Scribes,  Pharisees,  Hypocrites. ”
And  Horace  thus  ends  his  satire, —

“  si  quis

Opprobriis  dignum  latraverat,  integer  ipse,

Solventur  risu  tabulae  ;  tu  missus  abibis.”

The  writer,  however,  is  not  likely  to  feel  any  shame  at  being
convicted  of  either  inhumanity  or  gross  ignorance  of  the  facts
of  mesmerism.  He  is  more  likely  to  be  wounded  by  the  ex¬
posure  of  his  literary  ignorance.  He  says  it  was  not  till  the
recent  discovery  of  the  narcotizing  effects  of  the  vapour  of
ether,  that  any  agent  had  been  employed  which  could  obviate
the  necessity  of  inflicting  pain  during  the  performance  of
surgical  operations.  He  does  not  know  that  Pliny,  speaking
of  Mandrake,  says,  that  it  is  given  before  cutting  and
piercing  (or,  as  some  read  it,  firing)  people,  to  prevent


Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.


31


them  from  feeling, — “ Bibitur  et  contra  serpentes ,  et  ante
sectiones  punctionesque*  ne  sentiantur.*}*  The  editor  of  the
Athenceum  is  not  aware  not  only  of  the  passage  in  Pliny,  but
of  one  in  Middleton's  tragedy  of  Women  beware  Women,  pub¬
lished  in  1657.

“  I’ll  imitate  the  pities  of  old  surgeons
To  this  lost  limb,  who,  ere  they  shew  their  art,

Cast  one  asleep ;  then, — cut  the  diseas’d  part.”

In  Mr.  Samuel  Cooper's  Surgical  Dictionary ,  ed.  7,  p.  45,  is
the  following  passage, —

“  In  these  dismal  days  of  surgery,  the  dark  ages,  the  advice
delivered  by  Celsus  respecting  amputation,  was  renewed  by  Theo-
doricus,  who  used  to  administer  opium  and  hemlock  previously  to
the  operation,  for  the  purpose  of  rendering  the  patient  less  sensible
of  pain,  and  afterwards,  vinegar  and  fennel  were  given,  with  the
view  of  dispersing  the  intoxicating  effects  of  the  preceding  medicines.”
Chirurgice ,  lib.  iii.,  c.  10.

Also  at  page  53  of  the  Dictionary.

“I  shall  conclude  this  section  with  mentioning  the  laudable
attempts  made,  at  different  periods,  to  render  the  patient  less  sensi¬
ble  of  the  agony  produced  by  the  removal  of  a  limb.  Theodoricus
administered  for  this  purpose  opium  and  hemlock,  and,  though  he
was  imitated  by  many  of  the  ancient  surgeons,  few  moderns  have
deemed  the  practice  worthy  of  being  continued.  The  inhalation  of
stupifying  gas  has  been  tried,  and  so  has  magnetism.  M.  J.  Clo¬
quet,  by  some  preparatory  means  not  specified  by  Velpeau,  brought
a  patient  into  a  condition  in  which  the  removal  of  the  breast  was
accomplished  without  her  having  been  aware  of  it,  (Velpeau,  Nouv.
JElem.  de  Med.  Op.,  t.  i.,  p.  297,  ed.l).  Guido  made  the  experi¬
ment  of  benumbing  the  parts  with  a  tight  ligature ;  but  a  machine
devised  a  few  years  ago  in  England  expressly  for  the  object  of  stupi¬
fying  the  nerves  of  a  limb,  seems  freer  from  danger  than  some  of  the
means  adopted  to  bring  the  patient  into  a  stupified  state,  (See  J.
Moore’s  Method  of  Preventing  Pain  in  Several  Operations.  London.
1784),  &c.”

The  case  of  painless  removal  of  a  cancerous  breast  by  M.
Cloquet  was  the  celebrated  one  detailed  in  my  pamphet  on
Surgical  Operations  in  the  Mesmeric  State  without  Pain.

Further  information  on  the  measures  taken  by  surgeons
in  ancient  and  not  quite  modern  times,  and  successfully  too,
in  order  to  prevent  surgical  pain,  will  be  found  in  a  very  in¬
teresting  paper  by  Dr.  Silvester,  which  he  purposes  sending
to  The  Zoist.

*  Some  commentators  think  that  we  should  read,  not  punctiones,  but  ustiones,
because  Dioscorides  says,  “  JDantur  ex  eo  (mandragora)  terni  cyathi  his  qui
secari  aut  uri  debent,  iv.  76.”

t  Naturalis  Historia ,  1.  xxv.,  s.  xcv.


32


Dr.  Esdaile’s  practice  in  the
MEDICAL  CASES.


“  ENLARGED  GLANDS.

“  December  23 rd,  1846.  Miss  Gordon,  an  East  Indian  by
birth,  aged  18,  of  lymphatic  temperament.  She  has  been
suffering  for  two  years  from  enlargement  of  the  glands  of  the
throat  and  neck,  extending  from  the  ear  to  the  shoulder.
The  disfigurement  is  very  great,  and  could  only  be  adequately
described  by  a  drawing.  A  gland  at  the  angle  of  the  jaw  is
as  big  as  an  egg,  and  the  chain  from  the  ear  to  the  shoulder
is  raised  to  the  thickness  of  three  fingers,  impeding  all  motion
on  that  side.  There  are  also  single  enlarged  glands  in  the
upper  triangle  of  the  neck,  and  one  in  the  lower  as  big  as  a
large  marble.  Tenderness  on  pressure  is  very  considerable
in  most  of  the  glands,  and  they  are  all  extremely  hard.  She
has  derived  no  benefit  from  medical  treatment  under  different
doctors. — Catamen  :  irreg  :  She  was  requested  to  come  to
the  hospital  daily  to  be  mesmerised.

“  January  \%th.  She  has  been  mesmerised  for  an  hour
daily,  both  locally  and  generally.  The  swellings  are  sensibly
softer,  and  somewhat  reduced  in  size.

“  January  29 th.  She  has  occasionally  gone  to  sleep,  and
generally  feels  drowsy  under  the  process.  The  swellings  are
reduced  to  a  remarkable  degree ,  and  a  third  part  only  remains
near  the  angle  of  the  jaw.  The  lower  part  of  the  buttress  that
prevented  all  motion  nearly,  had  disappeared,  and  she  moves
her  head  with  little  impediment  to  that  side ;  the  single
glands  in  the  triangle  of  the  neck  have  nearly  disappeared,
and  there  is  every  prospect  of  the  whole  being  speedily  ab¬
sorbed.  Catamen :  abundantiora.”

“  LAMENESS  FROM  CHRONIC  RHEUMATISM.

“  W ulleemahmood,  a  boatman,  aged  30,  a  native  of  Chit¬
tagong,  admitted  14th  January,  1847.

“  He  has  been  troubled  with  rheumatism  for  five  years.
It  was  attended  with  fever,  coming  on  every  evening,  for  the
first  three  or  four  months,  but  becoming  irregular,  and  at
last  disappearing  altogether  for  the  last  month.  All  the  arti¬
culations  of  the  joints  are  more  or  less  painful,  but  especially
those  of  the  ankles,  knees,  wrists,  and  fingers.  The  ankles
are  considerably  swollen,  and  exceedingly  tender  to  the  touch,
and  there  is  much  pain  in  one  heel.  For  a  month  past  he
cannot  walk  without  the  support  of  a  staff.

“  To  be  mesmerised  locally  and  generally  for  an  hour
daily.  No  remarkable  change  was  perceived  during  the  first


Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.


33


four  days  of  mesmerising,  except  that  the  pains  became  more
general  and  the  joints  easier.

“ January  20 th.  Sleeps  at  the  time  of  mesmerising,  and
now  and  then  is  put  to  sleep  by  the  local  process  alone.

“  The  swelling  and  pain  of  the  joints  are  much  diminished  ;
he  allows  them  to  be  handled  freely,  excepting  the  ankles,
which  are  still  slightly  swollen  and  painful;  he  can  walk  out
of  the  room  without  a  stick.

“  January  23rd.  Has  no  pain  in  the  joints,  he  can  move
them  without  pain ;  he  walks  about  without  a  stick,  but  limps
a  little,  the  pain  and  swelling  of  the  ankles  nearly  gone.

“  January  25 th.  He  feels  quite  well,  has  no  pain  in  the
ankles.  He  walks,  runs,  and  leaps  without  the  least  pain,
and  was  discharged  to-day  at  his  own  request,  quite  well  ”

“  CHRONIC  RHEUMATISM  AND  STIFF  ELBOW  JOINTS.

“January  15 th.  Mr.  Des  Bruslais,  a  Frenchman,  a  mer¬
chant  in  Calcutta,  aged  32.  He  has  been  suffering  from
rheumatism  for  the  last  six  months,  the  left  elbow  is  much
enlarged,  very  tender  and  stiff;  it  is  half  bent,  and  can
neither  be  bent  nor  extended  farther.  Numerous  enlarged
glands  surround  the  joint,  and  the  least  pressure  is  exquisitely
painful;  the  wrist  is  also  quite  stiff.  The  other  elbow  is  a
little  contracted  and  painful,  but  not  enlarged,  and  there  are
two  unhealthy  abscesses  at  the  top  of  the  breast  bone,  where
the  surrounding  parts  are  swollen  and  very  tender.

“  The  left  elbow  is  scarred  all  over  by  blisters  and  cauteries,
from  which  he  derived  no  benefit,  and  he  has  abandoned  all
medical  treatment.

“  His  nights  are  very  restless,  and  he  can  with  great  diffi¬
culty  turn  himself  in  bed,  and  he  cannot,  without  help,  take
off  or  put  on  his  coat.  His  spirits  and  appetite  are  bad,  and
his  nervous  system  is  much  broken.  To  come  to  the  hospital
daily  for  an  hour  to  be  mesmerised,  locally  and  generally.

“  January  16/^.  The  abscesses  were  opened  to-day,  and  a
quantity  of  unhealthy  matter  let  out.

“January  18/^.  He  slept  during  the  mesmerising  yester¬
day,  and  had  a  good  night  afterwards ;  to-day  the  pains  are
much  less.

“January  20 th.  He  can  move  the  left  wrist  freely,  the
pain  in  the  elbow  joint  is  much  less,  and  he  can  dress  himself
without  help.

“January  25 th.  Nearly  all  pain  has  disappeared  from  the
left  elbow;  he  can  bear  it  to  be  freely  pressed,  and  even
struck  with  little  pain,  and  can  bend  it  nearly  to  the  natural
VOL.  VI.  d


34


Dr.  Esdaile’s  practice  in  the


degree :  he  also  extends  his  arm  better,  and  the  wrist  is  quite
free.  He  sleeps  well ,  turning  in  and  rising  from  his  bed
easily ;  his  spirits  and  appetite  are  much  improved.  He  has
slept  daily  for  the  last  week  during  the  mesmerising,  and
bears  considerable  extension  of  the  arm  without  awaking.
On  several  occasions,  he  has  tried  to  keep  awake  to  witness
certain  experiments  that  were  going  on  in  the  room,  but  found
it  to  be  impossible.  The  pain  and  enlargement  about  the
sores  on  the  breast  are  nearly  gone.

“  January  27th.  I  worked  his  elbow  with  considerable
force  to-day  when  he  was  asleep.  There  is  enlargement  of
the  ends  of  the  bones,  and  grating  about  the  joint,  and  the
head  of  the  radius  is  impacted  by  morbid  adhesions.

“  He  was  not  aware  of  this  rough  examination  on  waking,
and  it  is  clear  the  impediment  to  motion  now  is  purely  mecha¬
nical,  and  will  probably  be  overcome  to  a  great  degree  by
time  and  exercise.  The  original  contracting  cause,  inflam¬
mation,  is  extinguished.”

“  CHRONIC  RHEUMATISM.

“  Feb.  14 th.  Mr.  Johnson,  an  European,  aged  34.  He
had  a  severe  fever  three  years  ago,  and  after  it  was  seized
with  nervous  headaches,  which  came  on  daily  for  eight  months,
and  then  became  irregular.  He  got  no  permanent  relief  from
medical  aid.  Five  weeks  ago,  he  was  attacked  with  severe
pain  in  the  right  elbow  joint,  this  has  continued  ever  since,
increasing  greatly  at  night,  and  preventing  him  from  sleeping ;
as  the  disease  of  the  elbow  increased,  the  headaches  became
better,  and  have  not  been  felt  lately.  There  is  some  swelling
at  the  inner  side  of  the  joint,  which  is  considerably  contracted.
He  cannot  shave  himself  without  pain  and  difficulty ,  and
employs  a  barber.  To  be  mesmerised  locally  and  generally.
The  following  are  Mr.  Johnson’s  own  notes  of  his  case :

“  15 th.  Mesmerised  in  the  arm  for  half  an  hour,  pain
very  slight  after  the  operation  and  during  the  rest  of  the  day  :
no  pain  at  night.

“16th.  Mesmerised  in  the  arm  for  an  hour;  after  the
operation,  found  I  could  bend  the  arm  with  greater  ease,  and
bring  it  much  nearer  the  shoulder  than  I  could  before ;  no
pain  during  the  day  or  night ;  sleep  unbroken  for  the  first
night  for  many  months.

“17th.  Arm  painful  and  stiff;  mesmerised  locally  for  half
an  hour,  and  generally  for  the  same  time ;  felt  very  drowsy
during  the  latter  operation ;  was  roused  by  a  violent  shock
through  the  whole  of  my  body ;  arm  slightly  painful  all  day,


Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.


35


no  pain  during  the  night ;  slight  nervous  headache  during  the
afternoon  ;  slept  soundly ;  can  shave  easily.

“18 th.  No  pain;  mesmerised  locally  and  generally  for
half  an  hour.  Elbow  continues  contracted,  no  headache.
Towards  evening  felt  a  slight  pain  in  left  elbow,  which  in¬
creased  during  the  night  and  prevented  my  sleeping.  Slight
pain  also  in  right  elbow.

“19 th.  Severe  pain  in  left  elbow;  muscles  outside  the
joint  slightly  swollen  ;  no  pain  in  right  arm,  but  it  still  con¬
tinues  contracted ;  mesmerised  locally  in  each  arm  ;  no  per¬
ceptible  effect ;  slight  pain  in  left  arm  during  the  night.
Mesmerised  generally ;  fell  into  a  deep  sleep ;  have  no  idea  of
what  occurred  during  the  trance ;  how  long  it  lasted,  or  how
I  was  awakened;  no  headache.

“  20 th.  Slept  soundly,  pain  very  slight  in  left  arm  ;  none
in  the  right,  but  it  continues  slightly  contracted ;  mesmerised
locally  and  generally ;  no  sleep  produced.

“28 th.  Mr.  Johnson  had  taken  his  passage  for  Singapore
before  he  came  to  the  Hospital,  and  had  only  a  few  days  to
spare.  He  has  not  returned  since  the  20th,  and  then  he  was
without  pain  ;  the  contracted  arm  scarcely  differed  from  the
other,  and  could  also  be  much  more  freely  flexed.”

“enlarged  glands.

“  Feb.  18 th.  Sarah  Goodall,  aged  11  years.  For  the  last
eight  years  she  has  been  subject  to  a  periodic  attack  of  in¬
flammation  in  the  glands  of  the  neck  and  ear,  every  six  months.
The  glands  at  the  angle  of  the  jaw  first  become  painful  and
enlarged  ;  the  ear  is  next  involved,  and  she  is  not  relieved  till
suppuration  takes  place  ;  as  soon  as  one  ear  is  well,  the  other
is  attacked  in  the  same  wajr.

“  Her  mother  never  recollects  the  glands  swelling  without
the  ear  ache  following,  and  this  is  about  the  time  for  her  half-
yearly  attack.

“There  was  much  fever  during  the  attack  which  was  never
subdued  without  leeching,  and  her  eye-sight  has  been  injured
in  consequence.  The  words  in  a  book  often  seem  all  one  line.
She  looks  pale  and  lymphatic.

“  To  be  mesmerised  locally  and  generally.

“22 nd.  The  tenderness  and  enlargement  of  the  glands
under  the  ear  disappeared  after  two  days  mesmerising,  and
the  ear  has  not  been  at  all  affected,  which  never  happened
before.  She  looks  more  lively,  and  her  eye-sight  is  natural :
when  she  came  here  it  was  very  dim  and  imperfect.  This
girFs  system  has  been  exhausted  by  periodic  leeching  for  many

d  2


36


Dr.  Esdaile’s  practice  in  the


years ;  I  have  therefore  ordered  a  gentle  course  of  chalybeates
after  the  mesmeric  treatment.”

“  RHEUMATISM.

“Feb.  14 thy  1847.  Shaik  Ameer,  a  Moherer,  aged  50,
residing  in  Calcutta,  has  been  troubled  with  a  stiff  ankle  for
five  years.  It  came  on  after  an  attack  of  cholera,  with  rheu-
matic  pains  in  all  the  other  large  articulations  of  the  body.
He  cannot  bend  or  extend  the  foot,  nor  strike  his  heel  against
the  ground  without  much  pain.  The  joint  is  swollen,  and
painful  on  being  pressed,  and  he  limps  in  walking.  To  be
mesmerised  daily  for  an  hour.

“  15 th.  The  ankle  is  less  painful  on  being  pressed  ;  and
admits  of  slight  extension  and  flexion.

“  21s/.  He  can  walk  much  better,  and  feels  slight  pain  at
the  time ;  both  extension  and  flexion  are  performed  writh
greater  facility ;  the  swelling  of  the  ancle  is  somewhat  dimin¬
ished.  He  now  and  then  dozes  at  the  time  of  mesmerising.

“28th.  He  extends  his  foot  with  much  more  ease,  and
can  strike  it  against  the  ground,  which  he  could  not  do  for
the  last  five  years.

“March  10 th,  1847.  He  feels  slight  pain  when  he  walks
on  uneven  surfaces,  but  can  move  the  joint  pretty  freely.
The  swelling  and  pain  of  the  ankle  have  subsided,  except  at
the  outside,  which  is  painful  on  pressure.

“  15 th.  He  walks  very  well  even  on  an  uneven  surface,
and  feels  no  pain  at  the  time ;  he  can  strike  his  foot  against
the  ground  without  pain,  which  he  could  not  do  before.  The
swelling  of  his  ankle  has  entirely  disappeared,  it  is  like  the
sound  one.  He  feels  very  well  in  every  respect,  and  has  suffi¬
cient  strength  in  the  foot  to  enable  him  to  work  for  his  bread.
He  ceased  to  come  to  the  Hospital  after  this  date.”

“  EPILEPSY.

“  Jan.  27th,  1847.  Mrs.  Goodall,  aged  33,  has  been  sub¬
ject  to  epileptic  fits  for  19  years;  they  are  preceded  by  trem¬
bling  of  the  little  and  ring  finger  of  the  left  hand,  followed
by  convulsions  of  the  arms  :  she  becomes  insensible  and  foams
at  the  mouth  :  the  fit  lasts  about  ten  minutes,  and  returns
generally  twice  a  month.  The  last  fit  was  in  October,  and
she  has  had  threatenings  of  an  attack  every  week  since,  which
compel  her  to  sit  up  all  night  as  the  only  means  of  escaping
a  fit.  From  the  commencement  of  her  complaint  she  has
constantly  felt  a  sensation  of  creeping  in  the  ring  and  little
finger  of  her  left  hand,  which  causes  her  to  rub  them  per-


Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.


37


petually  with  her  thumb,  and  for  six  years  there  has  been  a
pain  in  the  lower  part  of  the  abdomen.  For  the  last  six  years
she  has  taken  tinct.  of  hemp  at  night,  and  cannot  possibly
sleep  without  it ;  she  commenced  with  four  drops,  but  now
takes  38  every  night  at  bed-time.  Her  general  health  is
broken  down :  catamen.  reg.  but  scanty,  and  she  has  dis¬
tressing  palpitations  on  lying  down.  To  leave  off  the  hemp,
and  be  mesmerised  daily  for  an  hour.

u  Mrs.  Goodall  kept  a  diary  of  her  case,  which  is  too  long
and  monotonous  to  give  in  full ;  I  shall  therefore  only  extract
a  few  of  the  entries  which  show  a  break  or  change  in  the
diseased  chain  of  action.

“  ‘  Jan.  28th.  Went  again  to  the  hospital  to-day  at  12
o’clock,  found  a  little  change  in  the  arm,  slept  from  10  till  4
o’clock.

“  ‘  29th.  The  creeping  in  the  fingers  has  disappeared ,  trem¬
bling  in  the  body  rather  less,  slept  from  \  past  10  till  \  past
3,  (this  trembling  which  was  a  new  symptom,  probably  arose
from  the  disuse  of  the  hemp,  but  it  is  also  often  a  mesmeric
symptom).

“  ‘  Feb.  1st,  1847.  Went  at  8  o’clock,  and  was  mesmerised
for  three  quarters  of  an  hour,  but  could  not  remain  on  account
of  the  trembling  and  heaviness  of  the  head,  night  restless.

“  ‘  2nd.  The  pain  in  the  lower  part  of  the  stomach  that
has  been  present  for  the  last  six  years  has  left  me  for  the  first
time  :  night  quiet.’  No  tendency  to  fits  during  this  month.

<c  e  March  20th,  1847.  Very  much  troubled  with  pain  in
the  arm  to-day ;  at  night  got  up  with  a  tingling  feel,  which
causes  me  always  to  start  in  my  sleep  before  the  fits  come  on ;
slept  for  four  hours  after ;  (when  I  used  to  have  that  sensation
before,  I  was  obliged  to  sit  up  all  night).’

“  In  all  April  there  is  only  a  record  of  nervous  aches,  &c.,
without  any  epileptic  symptoms,  and  at  this  date,  30th  April,
the  alteration  in  her  state  amounts  to  this.  The  sensation  of
creeping  in  the  fingers  and  the  pain  at  the  lower  part  of  the
abdomen  have  not  returned ;  during  three  months  there  has
been  only  one  epileptic  symptom,  and  this  for  the  first  time
was  not  followed  by  a  fit :  she  sleeps  enough  to  refresh  nature,
3  and  4  hours  at  a  time,  without  the  use  of  narcotics,  and
her  general  feelings  are  improved.  This  is  perhaps  as  much
as  could  be  expected  in  so  shattered  a  system,  and  so  inveterate
a  disease,  and  is  enough  to  show,  I  think,  that  mesmerism
is  a  new  source  of  relief  for  Mrs.  Goodall.*

“  *  There  has  been  no  epileptic  symptom  up  to  this  date,  10th  July.  Mrs.
G.  when  restless  sends  for  her  mesmeriser,  and  the  process  always  secures  her  a
night’s  rest.


38


Dr.  Esdaile’s  practice  in  the


“  That  we  may  not  be  in  danger  of  falling  into  the  ‘ post
hoc,  ergo  propter  hoc’  style  of  argument,  it  is  necessary  to
multiply  examples,  and  I  can  spare  no  more  labour  on  this
case,  my  time  for  experiment  being  limited.”

“chronic  rheumatism,  enlarged  glands  and  burs^:.

“  Jan.  21  st,  1847.  Frances  Ann  Elliot,  aged  30,  an  East
Indian  by  birth ;  has  been  suffering  from  enlargement  of  the
bursa  on  the  inner  side  of  the  right  ankle  for  about  two  years.
It  is  about  the  size  of  a  hen's  egg,  soft  and  painful  to  the
touch.  In  the  course  of  the  last  fortnight  the  left  one  has
been  similarly  affected,  and  is  exceedingly  painful,  especially
at  night,  preventing  her  sleep ;  the  skin  covering  it  is  dis¬
coloured,  and  cannot  be  touched  without  making  her  scream.
A  like  enlargement  also  occupies  the  back  of  her  left  hand,
and  the  middle  and  ring  finger  of  it ;  the  latter  is  much  swollen,
very  tender,  cannot  be  bent,  feels  as  if  bursting,  and  gives
her  great  pain  at  night.

“  To  be  mesmerised  locally  and  generally  for  an  hour  daily.

“  On  the  3rd  day  the  smarting  of  the  tumor  on  the  left
ankle  disappeared,  but  the  throbbing  remained,  and  the  skin
was  greatly  discoloured.

“  Ordered  to  apply  poultice  thrice  a  day.

“27th.  She  complained  of  much  throbbing  in  the  swelling
of  the  left  ankle.

“  To  have  ten  leeches.

“  28th.  She  is  not  relieved  by  the  leeches,  the  pain  rather
increased.

“315/.  The  swelling  and  pain  of  the  left  ankle,  and  on
the  back  of  the  hand,  and  the  ring  and  middle  fingers  much
diminished.  She  allows  them  to  be  handled  without  com¬
plaining  of  much  pain.  The  tumefaction  and  pain  in  the
right  ankle  remain  in  the  same  state,  she  feels  much  pain  on
being  touched  at  that  part.

“Feb.  10 th.  Much  freer  from  pain  and  tumefaction  in
the  left  ankle,  but  the  discolouration  rather  deepened.  The
swelling  on  the  left  hand  rapidly  discussing.  That  on  the
right  ankle  continues  unchanged.

“  28 th.  An  ulcer  broke  out  on  the  discoloured  ankle ;  it
is  very  unhealthy  and  painful  to  the  touch.

“  March  12 th.  The  swelling  in  the  left  hand  has  nearly
disappeared,  but  that  on  the  fingers  rather  increased;  the
ulcer  rapidly  healing  by  the  use  of  ordinary  dressings.

“315/.  The  ulcer  nearly  cicatrized.  The  swelling  and
pain  on  the  left  hand  and  fingers  disappearing  daily.


Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.


39


“  April  23rd.  The  ulcer  healed  up  :  the  swelling  and  pain
on  the  left  hand  and  fingers  have  left  her.  She  can  now  walk
from  the  hospital  to  her  home  without  any  inconvenience,
and  was  a  few  days  after  discharged  at  her  own  request,  quite
free  from  pain.”


“  STIFF  ARM.

u  April  5th,  1847.  Beeja,  a  Syce,  set.  30,  residing  in  Cal¬
cutta,  has  got  a  stiff  arm  for  about  six  months,  attended  with
pain  and  much  swelling.  It  was  caused  by  inflammation  of
the  elbow  joint  in  consequence  of  a  fall.  The  arm  was  bent
nearly  at  a  right  angle.  It  could  be  to  a  certain  extent  bent,
but  not  extended.  There  was  an  enlarged  bursa  at  the  back
of  the  joint.

“  To  be  mesmerised  for  an  hour  daily.

“  23th.  He  can  bend  the  arm  freely,  and  extend  it  to
about  an  obtuse  angle.  The  pain  of  the  joint  nearly  gone,
and  the  swelling  diminished.

“  30th.  The  pain  and  swelling  of  the  joint  have  disappeared,
and  he  can  stretch  the  arm  nearly  to  the  proper  extent  and
bend  it  well :  enlargement  of  the  bursa  remained  unchanged.

“  May  19 th.  The  arm  appears  perfectly  straight,  and  he
says  that  he  has  quite  recovered  the  use  of  it.”

“  PARALYSIS.

u  April  7th ,  1847.  Bhoobunmohun  Dey,  a  pedlar,  residing
in  Calcutta,  has  been  labouring  under  hemiplegia  for  about
16  days.  It  came  on  in  the  course  of  a  single  night;  he  went
to  bed  in  perfectly  good  health,  and  found  the  whole  of  the
left  side  of  his  body  totally  paralyzed  next  morning.  There
is  complete  palsy  of  all  the  left  side,  his  left  fist  is  firmly
clenched,  and  cannot  be  opened  without  much  difficulty ;
the  left  side  of  his  face  is  permanently  distorted,  and  drawn
upwards ;  his  left  foot  and  leg  are  rigidly  extended,  the  left
side  of  the  tongue  is  also  paralysed.  He  can  utter  only  indis¬
tinct  sounds,  which  he  does  with  great  exertion.  He  falls
to  the  ground  like  a  wet  rag  when  not  supported,  and  when
made  to  sit  up  he  falls  over  to  the  left  side  like  a  dead  body,
when  support  is  removed.

“  To  be  mesmerised  for  an  hour  daily.

“  8 th.  He  did  not  sleep  at  the  time  of  being  mesmerised.

“  11  th.  He  can  raise  the  fore-arm  and  the  leg  considerably
from  the  bed,  and  slightly  open  his  hand,  the  spasm  of  the
face  is  much  abated,  and  the  distortion  can  hardly  be  recog¬
nized.


40


Dr.  Esdaile’s  practice  in  the


“  13th.  He  can  sit  up  and  speak  pretty  distinctly.  He
has  so  far  regained  the  use  of  the  affected  limb  that  he  can
make  it  partially  bear  the  weight  of  his  body  in  the  act  of
walking,  with  a  slight  support.

“  13th.  He  got  up  from  the  bed  and  walked  in  the  room
with  a  staff  to-day.  He  could  stand  even  without  it.  He
complained  of  spasm  and  pain  in  the  affected  side.

“  24 th.  He  is  getting  strength  daily  in  the  affected  limbs ;
the  spasm  of  the  parts  nearly  gone :  he  now  walks  without  a
staff,  and  can  raise  the  paralyzed  arm  considerably,  but  can¬
not  open  or  close  the  fist.

“  2 7th.  He  slept  in  the  open  verandah  and  exposed  himself
to  the  cold  air,  he  became  worse,  his  voice  became  hoarse,
and  the  affected  side  was  felt  heavier,  and  lost  in  some  mea¬
sure  the  vitality  which  had  been  restored ;  he  coughs  and
can’t  expectorate.

“To  have  half  an  ounce  of  cough  mixture  thrice  a  day.

“  He  is  not  able  to  rise  from  his  bed,  and  in  attempting
to  do  so  tumbled  down.

“ May  1st.  He  appears  a  little  better;  regaining  strength
in  the  leg,  but  the  arm  can’t  be  moved,  raised,  or  bent :  the
fist  remains  closed,  but  can  be  easily  extended.

“  7th.  He  walks  without  a  staff,  and  the  limb  affords  con¬
siderable  resistance  at  the  time.  He  can  bend,  extend,  and
raise  the  fore-arm.  He  feels  much  aching  in  the  affected
side,  and  breathes  much  freer  :  his  voice  is  improved.

“  21st.  He  can  bend  and  extend  the  leg  pretty  freely ;  it
bears  the  weight  of  his  body  with  greater  firmness  :  he  can
raise  and  bend  the  arm  much  better.  He  is  getting  strength
daily  in  the  affected  side,  and  walks  safely  about  the  com¬
pound.  He  begged  leave  to  go  and  see  his  family  for  a  day,
but  promised  to  return.  If  he  does,  his  case  shall  be  con¬
tinued.”

“ INSANITY.

“  Kylas  Chatterjee,  a  Mohurer,  set.  28,  native  of  Talin-
parah  in  Zillah  Hooghly,  was  brought  from  the  lunatic  asylum
on  the  4th  April.  He  has  been  considered  insane  for  two
years ,  and  has  been  in  the  asylum  four  months.  He  looks
idiotic,  but  is  calm  and  quiet ;  his  spirits  are  dejected,  and
he  is  disinclined  to  all  active  exertion.  There  is  pain  in  the
loins  and  back  of  the  shoulders,  causing  great  difficulty  in
walking.  He  becomes  occasionally  violent.

“  To  be  mesmerised  for  an  hour  daily.

“  28 th.  The  pain  in  the  loins  and  shoulders  much  miti¬
gated,  his  health  is  greatly  improved,  and  he  looks  much  more


Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.


41


lively.  He  is  tired  of  being  idle,  and  therefore  wishes  to  be
allowed  to  act  as  cook.

“  May  5th.  The  pain  in  the  loins  and  shoulders  entirely
gone,  he  now  walks  without  any  inconvenience.

“  10th.  He  addressed  a  Bengalee  letter  to  me  to-day,
asking  permission  to  go  home  as  he  was  perfectly  cured.

“  21s£.  He  is  much  more  lively  than  when  he  came,  and
says  he  is  again  able  to  manage  his  business.  Seeing  no
reason  to  detain  him  further,  he  was  dismissed  to-dav.  The

/  V

native  doctor  of  the  lunatic  asylum  found  him  to  be  much
improved .”


“  EPILEPSY  AND  INSANITY.

“  Nobin,  a  labourer,  set.  30,  a  native  of  Joypore  in  Zillali
Cuttack,  was  transferred  to  our  hospital,  on  the  4th  April,
from  the  lunatic  asylum.  He  has  been  suffering  from  epilepsy
for  two  years ;  fits  come  on  two  or  three  times  a  month,
generally  at  the  change  of  the  moon,  and  last  for  about  10
minutes.  After  which,  he  becomes  insane  eight  or  ten  days,
and  behaves  very  violently,  and  speaks  incoherently.

“  To  be  mesmerised  for  an  hour  daily.

“  15th.  Had  a  fit  at  night  with  severe  convulsions  lasting
about  ten  minutes,  and  followed  by  heaviness  and  pain  in  the
head,  but  no  symptoms  of  insanity  followed.

“  23rd.  A  fit  came  on  in  the  first  part  of  the  night  with
strong  convulsions ;  it  remained  for  six  minutes,  but  was
followed  by  no  heaviness  and  pain  in  the  head,  or  derangement
of  mind.

“  29th.  This  day,  at  10  o'clock,  while  he  was  being  mes¬
merised,  he  was  threatened  with  a  fit,  but  it  did  not  come  on.

“11th.  A  paroxysm  occurred  at  about  11  o’clock,  lasting
about  five  minutes,  and  attended  with  convulsions,  but  fol¬
lowed  by  no  symptoms  of  insanity,  nor  by  heaviness  and  pain
in  the  head.

“  20th.  He  has  been  impatient  to  get  home  for  ten  days
past,  and  made  his  escape  last  night  by  climbing  over  the
wall.  A  remarkable  revolution  had  taken  place  in  this  man's
symptoms.  Formerly  the  fits  were  always  followed  by  eight
or  ten  days'  insanity :  since  he  has  been  mesmerised,  this
never  occurred.”


I  find  the  following  in  the  Delhi  Gazette  for  January
the  22nd. — John  Elliotson.

“  One  of  the  first  duties  of  the  new  Governor-General
will  be  to  decide  on  the  fate  of  the  mesmeric  hospital.  This


42  Measures  to  prevent  Pain  in  Surgical  Operations

institution  was  closed  last  month  after  more  than  a  year's
trial,  in  order  that  Lord  Dalhousie  might  be  left  free  to  decide
upon  the  subject ;  if  he  act  as  liberally  in  the  matter  as  Sir
Herbert  Maddock  has  done,  he  will  have  begun  his  adminis¬
tration  under  good  auspices.  It  is  to  be  hoped  he  has  not
come  here  charged  with  English  notions  about  mesmerism,
which,  as  every  body  knows,  are  none  of  the  brightest.  I
witnessed  a  mesmeric  operation  f  of  the  usual  kind '  yesterday
at  Dr.  Esdaile's  house,  in  company  with  a  few  distinguished
individuals,  among  whom  I  recognized  your  friend  Hurk.
There  were  present  besides  Colonel  Lawrence,  General  Whish,
Captain  Astell  (A.D.C.)  and  two  or  three  others,  not  forgetting
Mr.  Halliday,  Secretary  to  the  Government  of  Bengal,  who
is  very  much  addicted  to  mesmerism,  and  has  been  a  constant
frequenter  of  the  hospital.  After  the  operation  came  some
very  interesting  experiments  with  ‘  Chloroform/  the  new  agent
for  alleviating  pain  which  I  see  has  been  described  by  your
London  correspondent.  With  one  drachm  of  the  fluid  we
succeeded  in  depriving  a  bheestie  of  his  seventeen  senses  in
wonderfully  short  time.  The  spectators  most  of  them  tasted
the  vapour,  I  did  so  with  the  rest  and  found  it  very  pleasant,
but  f  powerful  strong  /  one  good  whiff  made  me  feel  very
after-dinnerish,  and  the  same  effect  was  noticed  by  every
body  else  who  swallowed  the  stuff.  Ether  chokes  you  and
makes  you  feel  tartar-emetic-ish ;  chloroform  (a  perchloride
of  formyle)  does  neither ;  it  knocks  you  down  at  once  and  no
nonsense  about  it."


II.  The  employment  of  measures  to  prevent  the  pain  of  Sur¬
gical  Operations  by  Drugs ,  not  a  novelty.  By  Thomas
Hookham  Silvester,  M.D.,  Clapham,  Surrey.

Whether  instructed  by  tradition  or  by  repeated  trials  and
diligent  search,  it  is  certain  that  from  the  earliest  ages  to  the
present  day,  anodynes  have  formed  an  important  part  of  the
materia  medica  of  the  medicine-givers  of  the  savage  and  of
the  civilized  states  of  past  and  present  times.

Surrounded  on  all  sides  in  every  region  by  agents  possess¬
ing  the  remarkable  property  of  benumbing  the  senses,  it  would
indeed  be  astonishing  did  not  man  employ  them  for  the  relief
of  pain  and  suffering  to  which  he  has  always  been  subject.

The  moderns  have  sought  to  explain  the  phenomena  of
the  living  body,  to  trace  structure  to  its  primary  condition,
and  to  reach  by  induction  first  principles  and  general  laws ;
the  ancients  bestowed  more  attention  on  the  means  of  cure,


by  Drugs,  not  a  novelty.  By  Dr.  Silvester.  43

and  the  possibility  of  relief  by  every  substance  not  employed
as  food.  They  ransacked  the  treasury  of  nature  in  search  of
remedies,  and  it  cannot  be  said  that  their  search  was  fruitless.
Nature  is  inexhaustible,  and  we  have  added  to  the  general
stock  of  remedies ;  we  have  retained  much  that  is  useful,
but  we  have  neglected  or  rejected  much  that  with  advantage
might  have  been  retained.

To  those  who  are  interested  in  such  matters,  I  would
recommend  a  critical  perusal  of  the  works  of  the  ancient
authors  contained  in  the  two  volumes  of  the  Artis  Medicce
Principes.  With  these  general  remarks  by  way  of  preface,  I
proceed  to  enquire  whether  the  ancients  or  medicine-men  of
former  days  possessed  any  knowledge  of  anaesthetic  agents,
and  whether  that  knowledge  was  at  any  time  practically  ap¬
plied  to  the  prevention  of  pain  in  operations.

The  rich,  copious,  and  discriminative  language  of  the
Greeks  will  afford  us  some  assistance  in  this  enquiry ;  for  the
existence  of  a  term  or  name  attests  the  former  existence  of  the
thing  to  which  that  was  applied.  There  may  be  many  more,  but
it  will  be  sufficient  to  enumerate  four  drugs  or  pharmaka.

1.  The  nepenthes,  or  sorrow  soother;  the  epithet  of  an
Egyptian  drug  which  lulled  sorrow  for  the  day  (occurring  in
the  Odyssey).

2.  The  pharmakon  acholon,  which  allayed  anger,  noticed
by  Homer.

3.  The  potos  astonos,  a  potion  to  chase  away  sighs,  men¬
tioned  by  Anacreon.

And  4.  The  pharmakon  anodunon,  an  anodyne  described
by  Plutarch.

The  narrative,  in  the  course  of  which  a  description  of  the
nepenthes  will  be  found,  sufficiently  shews  that  this  singular
remedy  could  not  have  been  either  wine  or  opium,  nor  have
we,  I  believe,  any  analogous  pharmaceutical  or  other  pre¬
paration.*  The  following  is  a  brief  extract  from  the  account
by  Homer.

“  Immediately  she  (that  is,  Helen,  the  daughter  of  Jove)
dropped  into  the  wine  of  which  they  drank  a  drug,  which  by
its  latent  power  destroyed  all  wrath,  removed  the  bitterest
grief,  and  buried  in  oblivion  evils  and  woes  of  every  hue.
Of  this  whoever  drank,  heaved  not  a  sigh,  nor  dropped  a  tear
the  livelong  day.  Ah  !  see  at  his  feet  the  mangled  corse  of
his  once  loved  and  venerated  sire,  or  the  remains  of  a  dear

*  M.  Veray  has  shewn  that  it  was  the  hemp,  used  in  the  east  and  now  medi¬
cinally  in  England.  See  Dr.  Fossati’s  paper  on  the  Art  of  making  Madmen  at
pleasure,  in  No.  XVII.,  p.  34. — Zoist.


44  Measures  to  prevent  pain  in  Surgical  Operations

mother,  or  the  deadly  gash  in  the  bosom  of  a  cherished  child
or  valued  brother ;  these  things  he  views  unmoved,  or  with  a
tranquil  smile.”*

Homer  goes  on  to  say  that  these  admirable  pharmaka  had
been  brought  by  Polydamna  from  Egypt,  where  the  gracious
earth  produced  an  abundance  of  remedies,  mixed  and  simple,
many  of  excellent  virtue,  some  dangerous  and  fatal :  but  of
all  men,  says  the  sage,  the  Egyptian  doctor  was  the  most
learned  and  skilful. f

It  would  be  tedious  and  wearying  to  go  through  the  his¬
tory  and  description  of  all  the  potions  and  medicaments
alluded  to  or  described  by  Hippocrates,  Galen,  Plutarch,
Anacreon,  and  other  Greek  authors;  anodynes  formed  an
important  part  of  their  armamentarium  against  disease.  The
poppy  was  known  to  them  as  well  as  the  cicuta,  hyoscyamus,
aconite,  and  mandrake;  their  peculiar  characteristic  effects
are  described,  the  dangers  attendant  on  their  careless  or  pro¬
fuse  administration,  and  the  best  antidotes  to  be  given  in
such  a  case.  Some  are  regarded  as  soporific  or  provocative  of
sleep ;  others  as  anodyne  or  capable  of  removing  bodily  pain ;
whilst  another  class  may  be  termed  anaesthetic,  being  endowed
with  virtues  analogous  to  ether  and  chloroform,  and  probably
employed  in  a  similar  manner  and  for  a  similar  purpose.
Time  will  not  allow  of  my  treating  this  subject  fully,  I  must
therefore  content  myself  with  giving  a  brief  account,  as  a
specimen,  of  one  of  the  most  remarkable  substances  used  in
former  times  as  a  soporific,  anodyne,  and  anaesthetic;  I  mean
the  atropa  mandragora  or  mandrake.

This  plant  belongs  to  the  solaneae.  It  is  found  wild  in
many  parts  of  Europe  and  Asia,  and,  what  is  remarkable,  it  is
everywhere  invested  with  fanciful  properties.  “  It  is  reported,”
says  Cruden,  “  that  in  the  province  of  Pekin  in  China  there  is
a  kind  of  mandrake  so  valuable  that  a  pound  of  that  root  is
worth  thrice  its  weight  in  silver ;  for  they  say  it  so  wonder¬
fully  restores  the  sinking  spirits  of  dying  persons  that  they
often  thereby  return  to  life  and  health.”  This  curiously  coin¬
cides  with  a  remark  of  Hippocrates,  that  a  small  dose  of  the
mandragora  root  in  wine,  not  sufficient  to  induce  delirium,
will  effectually  cure  those  who  are  saddened  in  spirit,  ready
to  destroy  themselves,  as  also  the  sinking  and  anxious  patients.  J
Josephus  also  under  the  name  of  baacas,  describes  its  efficacy

*  Odyssey,  lib.  iv.,  1.  221.  KaKcov  inlXrjOov  'airavTuv.

"t  4 tirpbs  §€  eKacrros  eirKrrdfxevos  tt ept  Trdvruv

’AvdpwTrwv -  -  1.  231.*

X  Hipp.  de  locis  in  homine,  p.  76.

*  Herodotus  iii.  129.  Diodorus  Siculus  gives  it  as  a  report  that  the  secret  was  still  in  his
own  time  in  the  possession  of  the  women  of  Diospolis,  the  ancient  Thebes. — Zoist.


by  Drugs ,  not  a  novelty.  By  Dr  Silvester.  45

in  the  cure  of  sick  persons  dying  under  the  malignant  influ¬
ence  of  demons.*  Pliny  gives  directions  for  its  digging  up
and  its  use.  Persons  who  take  it  improperly ,  he  observes,
lose  the  use  of  their  tongue  thereby,  and  prove  dumb  for  a
time ;  and  if  they  take  much,  they  surely  die ;  yet  it  may
safely  enough  be  given  to  procure  sleep.  According  to
Castell,  there  were  two  sorts,  that  cultivated  in  gardens  and
that  found  wild  ;  both  well  known  in  the  east  from  the  earliest
times,  and  identical  with  the  mandrakes  alluded  to  in  the
Holy  Scriptures, t  and  there  termed  dudha-im,  corresponding
with  the  Syriac  yabruhhe,  the  Chaldee  yabruhlun,  and  the
Arabic  yabruhh.  Dudha-im  implies  literally  agitation  or  ex¬
citement,  and  by  metonymy  that  in  which  it  takes  place.
Bulleine,  in  his  Bulwarck  against  all  Sicknesse,  says,  “  And
thus  I  end  of  mandrack,  whych  in  old  tyme  it  was  called
circceum  of  witches,  whych  had  vertue  (sayd  they)  or  c^aft  to
transforme  both  man  and  beast  and  herbe  out  of  kynde.”
An  ancient  Persian  authority,  quoted  by  Castell,  thus  ex¬
presses  himself, — “  love  properties^  are  usually  ascribed  to  this
root,  as  also  danger  in  pulling  it  up,  ”11  (so  faithfully  by  the
bye  depicted  by  Shakespeare  in  his  Borneo  and  Juliet.)  This
superstition  is  common  to  the  east  and  west,  and  has  made
its  way  over  a  considerable  portion  of  the  civilized  world,
being  of  very  ancient  date ;  the  wonder  is  how  it  has  so  long
passed  without  consideration  and  correction,  arising  as  it  does
out  of  ignorance.  Dr.  Lee,  in  his  Hebrew  Lexicon ,  says  that
it  was  well  known  to  the  ancients  as  possessing  extraordinary
virtues,  and  when  taken  inwardly  rendering  one  insensible  to
the  pain  of  even  cutting  off  a  limb.

It  can  scarcely  be  supposed  that  a  plant  which  has  so  ex¬
tensively  and  for  so  long  a  period  attracted  attention  and
bewitched  the  imagination,  possesses  no  virtues.  Extensive
and  popular  errors  have  commonly  something  like  truth  for
their  basis,  and  accordingly  we  find  in  all  the  best  authorities
of  ancient  and  comparatively  modern  times  no  ordinary
powers  attributed  to  the  mandragora.  The  father  of  medi¬
cine  says,  that  “  if  you  would  cure  convulsion  (does  he  mean
tetanus  ?),  let  a  fire  be  lighted  on  each  side  of  the  couch,  and

*  Josephus,  b.  vii.,  c.  6,  p.  3.

f  Genesis  xxx.  14,  and  Canticles  vii.  13.

X  Hesychius  gives  mandragoretis  as  a  title  of  Aphrodite. — Zoist.

||  Theophrastus  Hist.  Plaut.  ix.  9.  Columella  x.  15,  mentions  “  Semi-
hominis  mandragorse  flores,”  an  expression  that  calls  to  mind  the  nickname  of
mandrake  given  to  mad  Shallow  when  he  was  at  Clement’s  Inn  and  according
to  Falstaff  looked  for  all  the  world  like  a  forked  radish.” — Zoist.

The  epithet  given  to  the  mandrake  by  Columella  corresponds  with  that  given
to  it,  they  said  by  Pythagoras,  who  called  it  av^pwirop-opcpov. — Zoist.


46  Measures  to  prevent  Pain  in  Surgical  Operations

the  root  of  the  mandragora  be  administered  in  drink  in  a
dose  less  than  would  induce  delirium ;”  for  what  purpose  were
these  fires  lighted  but  to  affect  the  patient  through  the  fumes
of  the  dried  root  thrown  into  the  flames.  This  notion  will
receive  confirmation  as  we  proceed  with  our  enquiry.

Aretseus  says,  that  “  those  who  drink  an  infusion  of  the
root  fall  into  a  deep  and  long-continued  sleep  (sopor),  and  if
you  attempt  to  rouse  them,  they  do  not  attend  to  you,  and
soon  relapse  into  the  same  state.  Others  become  disturbed
in  mind  and  slowly  fall  into  an  oblivious  condition.  Some
seem  only  to  have  the  natural  sleep  augmented.  When
danger  is  present,  the  patient  keeps  drawing  in  the  air  at  his
mouth,  gasping,  and  if  help  is  not  soon  given,  he  dies  con¬
vulsed.”  This  appears  to  be  a  true  and  graphic  description
of  the  symptoms  of  poisoning  by  chloroform ;  the  lungs
being  generally  found  congested.

Paulus  iEgineta,  c.  44,  p.  547,  observes,  that  "  if  man¬
dragora  be  drunk,  a  heavy  sleep  and  stupor  with  relaxation
of  the  frame  immediately  takes  place;  and  so  vehement  is
the  tendency  to  sleep,  that  the  affection  differs  in  nothing
from  lethargy  or  apoplexy  itself.”  He  recommends,  in  such
a  case,  walking  the  patient  about  and  applying  stimulants  to
the  nostrils,  as  suitable  remedies.  Much  more  information
on  this  head  might  be  obtained  from  the  perusal  of  ancient
authors  on  medicine.  The  facts  adduced  are  sufficient,  I
hope,  to  establish  the  truth  that  powerful  anaesthetic  agents
were  known  to  the  physicians  of  antiquity.  It  must  now  be
shewn  that  the  ancient  practitioners  employed  these  agents
previously  to  surgical  operations  on  the  principle  now  employed
in  chloroform.

You  will  find  in  Dioscorides,  lib.  iv.,  c.  76,  when  treating
of  mandragora,  the  following  description,  abbreviated,  of  it
and  its  effects  :  “  There  are  two  kinds ;  the  black,  which  is
reckoned  the  female,  and  the  white,  which  is  called  the  male,
and  by  some  morion ;  the  berries  of  these  are  occasionally
eaten  by  shepherds  in  the  field,  and  a  sort  of  sleepy  torpor  is
the  consequence.  Some  boil  down  the  root  in  wine  to  a  fluid,
and  preserve  the  strained  decoction ;  of  this  they  drink  a
wine  glass  full  for  wakefulness  and  severe  pains  of  any  part
of  the  body,  and  also  previous  to  sectiones  ustionesque,”  that
is  to  say,  amputations  and  the  use  of  the  actual  cautery,
and — adds  my  author,  “  ne  sentiantur.”  It  seems  therefore
to  have  been  used  both  as  a  medicinal  anaesthetic  and  as  a
domestic  remedy.  Is  it  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  the
mandrakes  found  in  the  field  by  Reuben,  and  brought  to  his
mother  Leah,  and  afterwards  purchased  at  the  cost  of  her


by  Drugs ,  not  a  novelty.  By  Dr.  Silvester.  47

husband’s  favours  by  Rachel,  was  intended  to  make  into  a
wine  for  the  relief  of  the  pains  of  parturition  ?  Nothing  can
be  more  absurd  than  the  opinions  of  the  commentators  that
the  plant  in  this  case  formed  one  of  the  ingredients  of  a  love-
philter,  a  most  unlikely  present  from  a  son  to  a  mother.  The
anecdote  is  remarkable  for  its  graphic  simplicity  and  air  of
truthfulness.

In  the  words  of  our  author, — “  Ciet  atque  partum,”  it
promoteth  parturition, — something  like  an  allusion  to  its  par¬
ticular  employment  at  child-birth,  though,  it  must  be  con¬
fessed,  not  as  an  anaesthetic.

Dioscorides,  in  a  certain  part  of  his  treatise,  after  describ¬
ing  another  preparation,  the  maceration  of  the  external  coat
of  the  root  in  wine,  expresses  himself  thus,  “  Atque  dantur
ex  eo  terni  cyathi,  iis  qui  secari  urive  debent,  uti  ante  dictum,
neque  enim  altiore  somno  sopiti  dolorem  percipiunt ;”  that  is
to  say,  three  measures  of  it  are  given  to  those  who  are  obliged
to  undergo  the  operations  of  amputation  and  of  the  actual
cautery,  as  hath  been  before  said ;  for  buried  in  a  very  pro¬
found  sleep  they  feel  no  pain.

It  is  not  distinctly  expressed,  although  evidently  implied,
in  the  foregoing  quotation,  that  the  administration  of  this
agent  was  under  the  direction  of  the  surgical  operator.  The
following  passage  from  Dioscorides  plainly  shews  that  it  was
ordinarily  had  recourse  to  by  the  practitioners  of  medicine,
for  the  express  purpose  of  rendering  their  patients  insensible
to  the  pain  of  operations.

“  Obdormiscit  enim  homo,  eadem  qua  illam  comederit  figura,
sensus  impos,  terms  quaternisve  ex  quo  data  est,  horis ;  sed
et  ilia  medici  utuntur  cum  secandi  urendive  necessitas  adest.”

That  is  to  say,  “  The  person  falls  into  a  profound  sleep
in  the  same  attitude  as  that  in  which  he  was  when  he  drank
the  potion,  and  remains  deprived  of  sense  and  feeling  for
three  or  four  hours ;  physicians  employ  this  remedy  when
there  is  a  necessity  for  amputating  limbs,  or  for  the  use  of
the  actual  cautery.”

To  pass  on  to  a  later  age,  Pliny,  in  the  94th  Chapter  of
the  25th  Book  of  his  Natural  History ,  terminates  an  elaborate
account  of  the  mandragora  by  this  remark,  “that  it  is  admi¬
nistered  as  a  medicine  for  the  bite  of  serpents,  and  prepara¬
tory  to  amputations  and  other  surgical  operations,  in  order
to  prevent  the  sense  of  pain  which  these  inflictions  occasion.”

Having  thus  reviewed  in  a  rapid  and  cursory  manner  the
practice  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans  in  regard  to  narcotics
and  ansesthetic  agents,  it  remains  to  trace  a  similar  line  of
proceeding  amongst  the  practitioners  of  the  middle  or  dark


48  Measures  to  'prevent  Pain  in  Surgical  Operations

ages,  and  for  brevity  sake,  I  will  refer  chiefly  to  one  author,
namely,  Joannes  Baptista  Porta,  who  appears  to  have  col¬
lected  in  his  dissertation  on  natural  magic,  everything  known
at  that  period,  (namely,  the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century,)
on  the  subject  now  occupying  our  attention.

He  quotes  from  Dioscorides  a  passage,  which  describes
the  Greek  physicians  as  in  the  habit  of  exhibiting  drugs  to
their  patients  before  any  great  operation ,  and  so  of  keeping
them  in  a  state  of  perfect  insensibility  for  three  or  four  hours ,
and  he  remarks  that  Demosthenes,  in  one  of  his  speeches,*
likens  some  men  to  those  who  have  drunk  of  the  mandrake,
and  whom  no  eloquence  can  awake.  The  simplicity  of  an¬
cient  prescriptions  seems  to  have  been  relinquished,  for  we
now  find  a  pomum  somnificum,  composed  of  divers  secret  in¬
gredients,  much  in  use,  opium,  the  mandrake,  solanum,  bel¬
ladonna,  the  juice  of  the  cicuta,  and  seeds  of  hyosycamus,
with  the  addition  of  a  little  musk  both  for  concealment  and
fragrance ;  these  were  beaten  together  into  a  mass  as  large
as  the  closed  fist,  and  an  essence  extracted  from  the  composi¬
tion.  This  essence  was  not  to  be  swallowed ,  but  breathed  or
inhaled,  according  to  the  following  directions  : —

Let  the  essence  be  shut  up  in  vessels  of  lead,  most  accu¬
rately  closed,  lest  the  subtle  aura  escape,  for  in  that  case  the
whole  power  of  the  medicine  would  be  lost ;  at  the  moment
of  using,  the  lid  being  opened,  place  the  mass  immediately
under  the  nose  of  the  person,  and  he  will  draw-in  with  his
breath,  by  smelling  the  most  subtle  strength  of  the  vapour,
and  thereby  his  senses  will  be  locked  up  as  it  were  in  a  citadel,
so  that  he  will  be  buried  in  a  most  profound  sleep,  from  which
nothing  but  the  greatest  possible  violence  can  awaken  him.
After  this  sleep  no  heaviness  of  the  head  is  felt ;  and  if  the
feat  has  been  performed  during  the  natural  sleep  of  the  person,
and  without  his  knowledge  or  consent,  he  does  not  discover
the  trick  played  upon  him.  “Iniquis  celamus,  probis  ap-
paret,”  says  my  author, — “  we  conceal  these  matters  from  the
bad,  it  will  appear  plain  enough  to  the  good.”

A.D.  1579,  Bulleyne  expresses  himself  cautiously  as  fol¬
lows,  “  Again  the  juice  of  this  herb  pressed  forth  and  kept
in  a  close  earthern  vessel,  according  to  art ,  bringeth  sleepe
and  casteth  man  into  a  trance  or  a  deepe  terrible  dreame,
until  he  be  cut  of  the  stone,  &c.”

In  the  writings  of  Albertus  Magnus,  Joannes  B.  Porta,
the  alchymists,  and  natural  magicians,  there  reigns  a  spirit

*  Encom. — The  Timon  of  Lucian  taxes  Jupiter,  on  the  ground  of  his  evident
indifference  to  the  villanies  of  the  world,  with  being  asleep  under  the  influence  of
a  dose  of  mandragora. — Zoist.


by  Drugs ,  not  a  novelty .  By  Dr.  Silvester.


49


of  secrecy  and  concealment,  characteristic  of  the  age.  “  Haec
solerti  medico  clara  sunt,  impio  obscura,”  is  the  cautious  re¬
mark  of  Porta.  We  are  therefore  justified  in  the  supposition
in  reference  to  the  precise  manner  of  applying  the  powerful
anodynes  and  anaesthetic  agents,  described  in  their  works,
that  they  knew  more  of  the  method  by  inhalation  than  they
chose  to  confess ;  it  was  accomplished  whilst  the  patient  slept,
and  without  his  permission,  and  generally  he  was  kept  in
utter  ignorance  of  the  whole  transaction.  As  a  single  and
certainly  unique  illustration  of  this  remark,  I  will  beg  to  be
allowed  to  read  an  account  of  what  happened  to  Augustus,
King  of  Poland,  and  how  he  underwent  a  severe  operation
without  pain  or  suffering,  or  even  knowledge  of  the  trans¬
action,  until  he  awoke  from  the  trance  in  which  he  had  been
put  by  the  operating  surgeon.

The  following  view  of  the  operation  is  taken  from  Augustus
Gottlieb  Meissner’s  Skizzen ,  published  at  Carlsruhe  in  the
last  century.


The  story  to  which  the  print  refers  is  an  occurrence  in
the  life  of  Augustus  I.,  who  was  King  of  Poland  towards
the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century.  His  Majesty  had  for
some  time  been  suffering  from  a  wound  in  the  foot.  The
surgeon,  Weiss,  a  pupil  of  the  celebrated  Petit,  of  Paris,  on
being  consulted,  declared  that  mortification  was  taking  place,
and  that  immediate  amputation  was  necessary.  The  court
chirurgeons  were  opposed  to  this,  as  they  chose  to  term  it,
rash  advice,  and  strongly  urged  the  king  to  send  for  Petit,

VOL.  VI.  e


50  Measures  to  prevent  Pain  in  Surgical  Operations

which  was  accordingly  done.  Weiss,  in  the  mean  time,  being
apprehensive  of  a  fatal  result  from'  the  delay,  resolved,  at
the  risk  of  his  own  life,  to  save  that  of  his  sovereign.  Ac¬
cordingly,  one  night,  while  the  king  slept,  having  adminis¬
tered  a  powerful  anodyne  remedy,  during  the  insensibility
thereby  produced,  he  performed  the  operation  of  amputation,
cutting  off  the  diseased  parts.  The  patient  seemed  conscious
of  something  unusual  being  done,  but  was  pacified  by  the
assurance  that  the  surgeon  was  only  dressing  the  wound.
The  next  morning  the  king  demanded  to  see  the  wound,  and
then,  for  the  first  time,  discovered  that  a  portion  of  the  foot
had  been  amputated ;  he  angrily  demanded  the  reasons  for
this  procedure,  but  was  quickly  satisfied  with  Weiss’s  expla¬
nation;  and  grateful  for  the  courage  and  ability  displayed
by  the  young  chirurgeon,  and  having  desired  his  tobacco-box
to  be  brought  to  him,  he  therein  deposited  the  portion  of  the
foot  which  had  been  cut  off,  placing  the  box  in  the  surgeon’s
hand,  with  the  strictest  injunctions  to  secrecy.  The  great
man  from  Paris  soon  arrived.  A  consultation  of  the  most
eminent  of  the  faculty  was  summoned ;  but,  on  the  particu¬
lars  of  the  case  being  stated  to  him.  Petit  at  once  pronounced
the  necessity  of  immediate  amputation,  and  expressed  as¬
tonishment  and  vexation  that  it  had  not  been  already  done.
This  prompt  and  unexpected  opinion,  whilst  it  filled  the  bosoms
of  the  greater  part  of  the  assembly  with  chagrin,  reassured
and  encouraged  the  skilful  young  operator,  who,  stepping
forward  in  the  circle,  presented  the  gold  box  with  its  contents
to  his  venerable  master.  “  Behold,”  said  he,  “  the  fruits  of
your  discipline ;  the  merit,  if  any,  belongs  to  you,  for  I  have
learnt  skill  by  your  lessons  of  instruction,  and  boldness  in
danger  by  your  example.”

It  is  evident  from  the  particulars  of  the  foregoing  example,
that  the  anodyne  must  have  been  administered  by  inhalation,
according  to  the  mode  already  described  in  the  extract  from
Joannes  Baptista  Porta  on  Natural  Magic,  and  probably  from
a  similar  prescription.  The  universal  employment  of  the
Latin  language  by  learned  men  at  that  period,  whilst  it  tended
to  facilitate  the  general  diffusion  of  knowledge,  imparted  a
sameness  of  character  to  the  theory  and  practice  of  all  the
learned  professions,  and  accordingly  one  finds  even  at  the
present  day,  the  Laudanum  liquidum  Sydenhami,  even  in
more  common  use  in  Belgium  and  Germany,  as  an  anodyne,
than  amongst  ourselves.

I  must  be  allowed  to  add  one  more  quotation,  in  evidence
of  the  common  administration  of  anesthetics.  It  is  from
Middleton’s  tragedy  of  Women  beware  Women ,  published  in


by  Drugs ,  not  a  novelty.  By  Dr.  Silvester.


51


1657,  about  the  time  of  Augustus,  the  King  of  Poland,  above
referred  to.  The  poet  says  : —

“  I’ll  imitate  the  pities  of  old  surgeons
To  this  lost  limb — who,  ere  they  show  their  art,

Cast  one  asleep,  then  cut  the  diseased  part,”

Every  body  at  all  acquainted  with  ancient  books,  must
have  observed  the  frequent  allusions  to  the  power  of  inhaled
or  inspired  fumes.

Herodotus  (1. 202)  says  that  the  Massagetse  were  in  the
habit  of  casting  the  fruit  of  certain  trees  into  the  fire,  and
that  all  who  sat  near  enough  to  inhale  the  smoke  became
drunken,  heavy,  and  stupid,  and  some  jumped  from  their
seats  and  indulged  in  wild  antics.

Camerarius  says,  “  That  the  force  of  making  drunk  doth
not  consist  only  in  wine,  but  that  there  bee  some  people  which
heretofore,  and  in  this  our  time,  have  willingly,  and  by  other
means,  provoked  a  furie  or  madnesse,  continuing  some  hours.
Whereof  we  have  an  example  in  the  ancient  Thracians,  who
in  their  feasts  used  to  walk  about  the  hearth  and  to  cast  into
the  fire  certain  seeds  of  herbs,  the  smoke  whereof  would
make  them  fall  asleepe  after  a  short  furie  or  madnesse.

Dioscorides,  speaking  of  certain  herbs,  remarks  that  they
cause  sleep  by  smelling  to  the  berries,  and  by  too  much  smell¬
ing  of  these,  persons  lose  their  voice.  Pliny  makes  a  similar
remark,  but  adds,  “  It  is  sufficient  to  some  to  smell  the  root
to  prepare  them  for  the  operations  of  surgery.”

It  has  been  my  aim,  in  the  preceding  sketch  of  ancient
medicine,  as  it  relates  to  the  employment  of  means  for  the
relief  or  the  prevention  of  pain,  to  shew,  by  reference  to
actual  authorities,  that  from  the  earliest  ages,  drugs,  and
those  not  mere  opiates,  were  given  to  patients  about  to  un¬
dergo  any  severe  operation,  and  that  by  these  drugs  perfect
insensibility  to  pain,  a  dreamy  state,  or  deep  sleep,  were
produced ;  effects  not  at  all  differing  from  those  which  we
every  day  see  as  the  consequence  of  the  inhalation  of  ether
and  chloroform.  I  have  further  endeavoured  to  prove  that
this  practice  was  continued  up  to  a  period  little  anterior  to
the  present,  certainly  up  to  the  end  of  the  17th  century,  and
that  not  only  were  ansesthetic  potions  administered  in  the
usual  way  by  the  mouth,  but  that  certain  essences,  or  the
vapour  of  some  compound  preparations,  were  conveyed  by
inhalation  into  the  lungs  and  circulation,  through  the  nose,
in  a  manner  almost  identical  with  that  now  adopted  for  the
same  purpose.  It  would  have  been  easy  to  have  multiplied
proofs  and  illustrations  of  these  propositions,  but  sufficient,
I  hope,  has  been  said  to  interest  the  readers  of  the  The  Zoist

e  2


52  Measures  to  prevent  Pam  in  Surgical  Operations,  fyc.

in  the  history  of  the  many  successful  attempts  which  have  been
made  by  the  professors  of  medicine,  in  all  ages,  to  relieve
human  suffering,  and  to  mitigate  the  severities  of  their  art.

The  questions  that  will  naturally  arise  in  the  minds  of  all  who
have  considered  the  subject,  are,  Why  was  the  art  of  prevent¬
ing  the  pain  of  operations  discontinued  ?  How  was  it  lost  ?
How  is  it  that  no  one  has  hitherto  collected  the  scattered  re¬
corded  opinions  of  ancient  and  comparatively  modern  authors,
and  on  their  authority  pronounced  the  possibility  of  at  least
lessening  the  sufferings  of  patients  undergoing  the  tortures
of  the  knife  ?  In  the  first  place,  as  an  answer  to  the  above
enquiries,  ancient  authors  have  been  consigned  to  their  dusty
resting  place,  on  the  upper  shelves  of  our  bookcases.  The
moderns,  with  a  strong  feeling  of  self-glorification,  have  pro¬
nounced  medicine  amongst  the  ancients  to  have  been  in  its
infancy,  and  amongst  the  alchymists  and  sage  doctors  of  the
middle  ages,  nothing  more  than  magic;  whereas,  if  they  had
opened  the  leaves  of  Porta  on  Magic,  they  would  have  found
it, — what  science  is  now, — an  attempt  to  bring  together  the
truths  of  nature,  and  to  account  for  them.  These  may  be
some  of  the  causes  of  the  disuse  into  which  the  anaesthetics
of  former  times  fell ;  but  the  chief  cause  was  undoubtedly
their  alliance  with  witchcraft.  It  has  been  commonly  sup¬
posed  that  witchcraft  was  all  a  pretence,  a  false  display  of
powers  not  possessed  by  the  practitioner  of  this  diabolical
art.  That  is  not  the  true  view  of  the  matter.  Witches  and
wizards  were  actual  poisoners,  from  the  earliest  periods.  The
word  (Hebrew)  chausapt,  employed  by  Moses  in  the  sacred
scriptures,  is  translated  pharmakoi*  in  the  septuagint,  namely,
a  poison-giver,  veneficus.  The  affectation  of  deriving  their
influence  qver  men  from  another  world,  and  in  connexion
with  spirits  and  demons,  was  adopted  to  increase  their  im¬
portance,  and  to  fortify  their  tyranny  over  the  minds  of  the
multitude;  they  themselves  well  knew  the  source  of  their
terrible  power.  It  was  not  in  their  superhuman  association
with  fiends,  nor  in  their  ridiculous  practices,  nor  in  their
midnightly  meetings ;  the  fearful  and  potent  spell  is  traceable
to  the  smoking  cauldron — death  is  in  the  pot — from  thence
arise  the  fumes  of  the  mandragora,  the  aconite,  the  poppy,
the  ant’s  nest,  the  henbane,  and  the  valerian. f

*  Exodus  xxii.  18,  &c. — Zoist.

+  May  not  the  occurrence  of  some  fatal  instances  of  the  employment  of  anes¬
thetics,  as  in  the  case  of  ether  and  chloroform,  have  assisted  to  create  a  disin¬
clination  to  employ  them  ? — Zoist.


(  53  )


III.  The  Musical  Talents  of  Henry  the  Eighth.

By  Dr.  Elliotson.

“  Music  may  tame  the  savage  breast,  while  it  is  listened  to,
and  cooperate  with  a  good  nature  and  good  training  to  make
men  good.  But  it  neither  necessarily  expands  the  intellect
nor  leads  to  virtue.  Musical  people  are  just  as  gross,  unprin¬
cipled,  and  unfeeling  as  the  man  who  has  no  music  in  his
soul ;  neither  better  nor  worse  than  equal  numbers  selected
at  random  from  the  unmusical.  The  cerebral  physiologist
knows  that  the  love  of  music  depends  solely  on  a  very  small
portion  of  the  brain,  which  may  be  defective  while  the  moral
and  high  intellectual  organs  are  large,  or  be  large  while  these
are  small.”

This  I  wrote  in  the  eleventh  number  of  The  Zoist,  for
October,  1845.  A  few  months  afterwards,  being  at  a  concert
of  Ancient  Music ,  when  Prince  Albert  had  selected  the  music
for  the  evening,  I  became  acquainted  with  a  superb  illustra¬
tion  of  the  fact.  I  need  not  mention  the  various  vices  of
Henry  the  Eighth.  The  programme  distributed  in  the  con¬
cert  room  contained  the  following  information :

“  ANTHEM.*  King  Henry  the  Eighth.

“  O  Lord,  the  maker  of  all  things,

We  pray  Thee,  now  in  this  evening,

Us  to  defend,  through  thy  mercy,

From  all  deceit  of  our  enemies.

Let  neither  us  deluded  be.

Good  Lord,  with  dream  or  fantasy ;

Our  hearts  waking  in  Thee  Thou  keep,

That  we  in  sin  fall  not  on  sleep.

O  Father,  through  thy  blessed  Son,

Grant  us  this  our  petition  ;

To  whom  with  the  Holy  Ghost  always

In  heaven  and  earth  be  laud  and  praise.  Amen.”

*  “  Henry  the  Eighth  had  studied  music  very  seriously  in  his  youth,  accord¬
ing  to  Lord  Herbert  of  Cherbury,  who  tells  us,  in  his  life,  that  ‘  his  education
was  accurate,  being  destined  to  the  Archbishop  rick  of  Canterbury,  during  the
life  of  his  elder  brother.  Prince  Arthur.  By  these  means,  not  only  the  more
necessary  parts  of  learning  were  infused  into  him,  but  even  those  of  ornament,
so  that,  besides  being  an  able  Latinist,  philosopher,  and  divine,  he  was  a  curious
musician ;  as  two  entire  Masses,  composed  by  him,  and  often  sung  in  his  chapel,
did  abundantly  witness.’

“  Burnet,  though  he  denies,  in  his  History  of  the  Reformation ,  part  I.  p.  11.
that  Henry  was  ever  intended  for  the  church,  yet  allows  that  he  was  better  edu-


(  54  )


IV.  Clairvoyance  in  a  Dream.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

Sir, — As  it  has  been  intimated  that  authentic  accounts  of
peculiar  manifestations  would  not  be  unacceptable  to  The
Zoist,  I  take  leave  to  forward  to  you  the  following  extract,
from  the  narrative  of  a  Captain  Henry  Bell,  prefixed  to  his
translation  of  Luther’s  Colloquia  Mensalia.  Captain  Bell's
work  was  published  at  London,  1652,  in  folio,  and  was
printed  in  pursuance  of  an  order  made  by  the  House  of
Commons,  February  24th,  1846.  The  extract  and  the  parti¬
culars  relating  to  it,  are  to  be  found  in  a  note  by  Sir  John
Hawkins  in  the  third  volume  of  his  History  of  Music  (pub¬
lished,  1776),  from  whence  I  have  made  the  transcription.

Alfred  Boffe.

48,  Ossulston  Street,

Somers  Town.

After  relating  that  the  Emperor  Budolphus  II.,  instigated
by  the  Pope,  had  issued  an  edict,  that  all  copies  of  Luther’s
Colloquia  Mensalia  should  be  burnt,  and  imposing  the  penalty
of  death  on  any  one  concealing  the  book.  Captain  Bell  pro¬
ceeds  thus, — “  It  pleased  God  that  anno.  1626,  a  German
gentleman  named  Gasparus  Van  Sparr,  with  whom  in  the
time  of  my  staying  in  Germany  about  King  James's  business,
I  become  very  familiarly  acquainted,  having  occasion  to  build
upon. the  old  foundation  of  a  house  wherein  his  grandfather
dwelt  at  that  time,  when  the  said  edict  was  published  in
Germany  for  the  burning  of  the  foresaid  book,  and  digging
deep  into  the  ground  under  the  said  old  foundation,  one  of
the  foresaid  original  printed  books  was  there  happily  found,
lying  in  a  deep  obscure  hole,  being  wrapt  in  a  strong  linen
cloth,  which  was  waxed  all  over  with  bees'-wax,  within  and
without,  whereby  the  book  was  preserved  fair,  without  any
blemish.

And  at  the  same  time,  Ferdinand  II.  being  Emperor
of  Germany,  who  was  a  severe  enemy  and  persecutor  of  the
Protestant  Reformation,  the  aforesaid  gentleman,  and  grand-

cated  than  any  other  prince  had  been  for  many  ages,  and  that  ‘  he  was  a  good
musician,  as  appears  by  two  whole  Masses,  which  he  composed.’  Burnet,  vol.
II.,  p.  572—3.

“  Dr.  Busby,  in  his  General  History  of  Music,  vol.  I.,  p.  498,  states:  i  From
Erasmus,  and  also  Burnet,  we  learn  that  he  set  to  music  offices  for  the  church  ;
and  in  the  books  of  the  chapel  royal,  there  is  an  Anthem  of  Henry’s  for  four
voices.’  ”


Clairvoyance  in  a  Dream.  55

child  to  him  that  had  hidden  the  said  book  in  that  obscure
hole ;  fearing  that  if  the  said  Emperor  should  get  knowledge
that  one  of  the  said  books  was  yet  forthcoming,  and  in  his
custody,  whereby  not  only  himself  might  be  brought  into
trouble,  but  also  the  book  in  danger  to  be  destroyed,  as  all
the  rest  were  so  long  before,  and  also  calling  me  to  mind,
and  knowing  that  I  had  the  high  Dutch  tongue  very  perfect,
did  send  the  said  original  book  over  hither  into  England,
unto  me,  and  therewith  did  write  unto  me  a  letter,  wherein
he  related  the  passages  of  the  preserving  and  finding  out  of
the  said  book.

“  And  also  he  earnestly  moved  me  in  his  letter  that  for
the  advancement  of  God’s  glory  and  of  Christ’s  church,  I
would  take  the  pains  to  translate  the  said  book,  to  the  end
that  that  most  excellent  divine  work  of  Luther  might  be
brought  again  to  light.

“  Whereupon  I  took  the  said  book  before  me,  and  many
times,  began  to  translate  the  same,  but  always  was  hindered
therein,  being  called  upon,  about  other  business,  insomuch
that  by  no  possible  means  I  could  remain  by  that  work.
Then  about  six  weeks  after  I  had  received  the  said  book,  it
fell  out,  that  I  being  in  bed  with  my  wife,  one  night  between
twelve  and  one  of  the  clock,  she  being  asleep,  but  myself  yet
awake,  there  appeared  unto  me  an  ancient  man,  standing  by
my  bed-side,  arrayed  all  in  white,  having  a  long  white
beard  hanging  down  to  his  girdle-stead ;  who,  taking  me  by
my  right  ear,  spake  these  words  following  unto  me,  ‘  Sirrah,
will  not  you  take  time  to  translate  that  book  which  is  sent
you  out  of  Germany  ?  I  will  shortly  provide  for  you  both
time  and  place  to  do  it.’  And  then  he  vanished  away  out  of
my  sight.

“  Whereupon  being  much  thereby  affrighted,  I  fell  into
an  extreme  sweat,  insomuch  that  my  wife  awaking  and
finding  me  all  over  wet,  she  asked  me  what  I  ailed ;  I  told
her  what  I  had  seen  and  heard,  but  I  never  did  heed  nor
regard  visions  nor  dreams,  and  so  the  same  fell  soon  out  of
my  mind.

“  Then  about  a  fortnight  after  I  had  seen  that  vision,  on
a  Sunday  I  went  to  Whitehall  to  hear  the  sermon,  after
which  I  returned  to  my  lodging,  which  was  then  in  King
Street,  at  Westminster,  and  sitting  down  to  dinner  with  my
wife,  two  messengers  were  sent  from  the  whole  council  board,
with  a  warrant  to  carry  me  to  the  keeper  of  the  council,
which  was  done  without  showing  me  any  cause  at  all  where¬
fore  I  was  committed ;  upon  which  said  warrant  I  was  kept
there  ten  whole  years  close  prisoner,  where  I  spent  five


56  Cure  of  loss  of  Voice  :  and  beviefit  in  Hysteria,

years  about  the  translating  of  the  said  book ;  insomuch  as  I
found  the  words  very  true  which  the  old  man  in  the  foresaid
vision  did  say  unto  me,  *  I  will  shortly  provide  for  you  both
place  and  time  to  translate  it/  ”

The  author  then  proceeds  to  relate  that  by  the  interest
of  Archbishop  Laud,  he  was  discharged  from  his  confinement,
with  a  present  of  forty  pounds  in  gold.  By  a  note  in  his  nar¬
rative  it  appears,  that  the  cause  of  his  commitment  was,  that
he  was  urgent  with  the  Lord  Treasurer  for  the  payment  of  a
long  arrear  of  debt,  due  from  the  government  to  him.


Y.  Cure  of  Loss  of  Voice :  and  benefit  in  two  cases  of  Hysteria.

By  Mr.  Chandler,  Surgeon,  Botherhithe.

Aphonia  instantly  relieved  by  Mesmerism.

A  short  time  since  I  was  called  to  Miss  H.  K.,  who  was
cured  of  hysteria,  by  mesmerism  in  1845  (see  Zoist ,  Yol.  III.
p.  486).  I  found  her  unable  to  speak  above  a  whisper,  and
even  that  was  great  exertion  to  her :  she  attributed  it  to  cold,
though  she  had  not  any  cough,  fever,  or  other  catarrhal
symptom ;  she  had  been  in  this  state  four  days.  I  sent  her
some  medicine,  but,  on  visiting  her  the  next  day  and  feeling
convinced  that  the  affection  was  purely  hysterical,  I  proposed
to  mesmerise  her,  to  which  she  at  once  assented.  A  few
passes  sent  her  into  the  sleep,  in  which  state  I  kept  her
about  ten  minutes.  On  awaking  her,  to  the  surprize  of  all
present,  she  spoke  out,  which  she  had  not  done  for  five  days
before.  Her  voice,  however,  left  again  in  about  five  minutes.
I  mesmerised  her  again,  and  kept  her  asleep  half  an  hour ;
she  then  recovered  her  voice  for  some  hours,  but  it  left  in  the
evening.  The  next  day  I  mesmerised  her  for  about  twenty
minutes,  and  left  her  a  glass  of  water  mesmerised,  with  direc¬
tions  to  take  a  sip  when  her  voice  left.  This  always  had  the
effect  of  restoring  it,  though  only  for  a  few  minutes  at  a  time  :
it  nevertheless  enabled  her  to  converse  with  tolerable  ease
and  comfort,  and  by  dint  of  strict  economy  she  made  the
glass  of  water  last  till  my  visit  the  following  morning,  when
I  of  course  mesmerised  her,  and  left  her  another  supply.  I
pursued  this  plan  for  a  few  days,  finding  the  intervals
between  her  loss  of  voice  gradually  getting  longer  and  longer,
until  at  last  she  only  lost  it  on  going  up  or  down  stairs  rather
quickly.  After  another  two  or  three  days,  even  this  slight
remains  of  the  disorder  left,  nor  has  she  since  had  any  return
of  it.  A  curious  phenomenon  occurred  in  connection  with
the  mesmerised  water ;  I  told  her  only  to  take  a  sip  to  restore


by  Mr.  Chandler.


57


the  voice ;  but  on  one  occasion  when  I  was  present  I  re¬
quested  her  to  take  a  mouthful,  and  told  her  it  would  send
her  to  sleep.  She  took  it  but  continued  talking  as  before,
and  I  considered  the  experiment  had  failed  :  she  even  re¬
marked  herself,  “  You  see  it  has  not  taken  effect.”  Great
was  my  surprise,  however,  about  three  minutes  after  to  find
that  she  had  fallen  asleep ;  and  when  I  awoke  her,  she  did
not  know  that  the  water  had  sent  her  to  sleep,  but  imagined
that  I  had  made  a  pass.*

Two  Cases  of  Hysteria.

Susan  H.,  a  housemaid,  set.  18,  suffered  with  constant
head-ache,  pains  in  the  back  and  side,  and  other  symptoms
of  hysteria ;  there  was  also  amenorrhsea,  and  her  appearance
was  somewhat  chlorotic.  She  came  readily  under  the  influ¬
ence  of  mesmerism,  and  exhibited  many  of  the  minor  pheno¬
mena,  when  in  the  sleeping-waking  state,  such  as  traction,
phrenological  phenomena,  &c.  She  was  after  a  short  course
of  mesmerism  restored  to  nearly  perfect  health ;  but  having  to
remove  to  some  distance  before  she  was  quite  fit  to  give  up
the  remedy,  she  suffered  a  relapse ;  and  I  have  noticed  the
case  for  the  purpose  of  showing  how  ignorantly  some  medical
men  permit  themselves  to  talk  of  what  they  know  nothing,
and  about  which  they  take  the  greatest  pains  to  remain  in
ignorance.  She  was  suffering  amongst  other  symptoms  from
intense  head-ache,  when  the  medical  attendant  of  the  family
was  sent  for,  who  on  learning  what  had  previously  been  done
for  her,  declared  that  she  was  sure  to  die,  because  she  had
been  mesmerised.  The  poor  girl  herself  constantly  begged
her  friends  to  send  for  me,  knowing  how  often  I  had  given
her  immediate  relief,  when  suffering  in  the  same  way.  Her
urgent  requests  were  of  course  not  complied  with,  and  after
some  months  of  suffering  she  recovered  her  health,  in  spite  of
this  learned  doctor’s  sage  opinion,  and  his  drugs.  The  fact
was,  the  symptoms  were  so  severe,  that  he  mistook  the  case
for  one  of  phrenitis,  and  gave  his  prognosis  and  treated  it
accordingly.  Hysteria  assumes  so  many  forms  that  I  can
make  every  allowance  for  the  mistake,  but  his  blind  and
wilful  ignorance  with  respect  to  mesmerism  is  unpardonable.

Lydia  B.,  set.  19,  also  in  service,  suffers  frequently  from
hysterical  fits.  She  is  often  found  sitting  in  a  chair  quite
unconscious  and  rigid.  Some  months  ago,  she  was  seized
suddenly  with  severe  pain  in  the  right  side,  extending  round

*  See  other  cures  of  loss  of  voice,  No.  III.,  p.  335,  340  ;  No.  XIV.,  p.
243—4,  5  ;  No.  XIX.,  p.  302 .—Zoist.


58  Cure  of  Loss  of  Voice :  and  benefit  in  Hysteria,  fyc.

to  the  back,  with  great  head-ache,  but  unaccompanied  by
fever  or  any  inflammatory  symptoms.  I  gave  her  medicine,
applied  mustard  poultices,  &c.,  for  some  hours  without  relief;
indeed  the  pain  increased,  and  became  unbearable.  Believing
it  to  be  hysterical,  I  proposed  to  mesmerise  her;  she  readily
assented ;  in  three  minutes  she  was  asleep  and  cataleptic.  The
relief  was  of  course  immediate,  but  only  temporary,  returning
in  about  an  hour,  and  being  as  quickly  relieved  again.  The
following  day  her  mother  came  and  finding  her  quite  useless,
and  not  being  able  to  remain  to  nurse  her,  determined  on
taking  her  home  for  a  short  time.  She  was  leeched,  blistered,
and  dosed  to  no  purpose,  only  growing  the  worse  for  it  all,
but  after  about  ten  days  the  pain  left  almost  as  suddenly  as  it
had  come.  She  returned  to  her  place,  and  remained  tolerably
well,  until  a  sudden  fright  produced  one  of  her  fits  of  uncon¬
sciousness  with  rigidity.  Whilst  in  this  state,  knowing  how
very  susceptible  she  was,  I  began  mesmerising  her  by  touch¬
ing  her  eyes  with  the  points  of  my  fingers.  After  about  five
minutes  I  found  the  rigidity  had  given  away,  and  she  had
become  cataleptic ;  I  awoke  her,  and  she  expressed  herself
greatly  relieved,  and  after  remesmerising  her  twice  or  three
times,  she  was  able  to  resume  her  work,  whereas  on  former
occasions  she  had  been  unfit  for  anything  for  the  remainder
of  the  day.  She  frequently  suffers  from  pain  in  the  side,  and
head-ache,  which  is  always  relieved  by  a  few  minutes  mes¬
merism  :  but  if  she  neglects  to  speak  soon  enough,  she  is
certain  to  have  a  fit ;  and  although  she  is  quite  aware  of  the
benefit  she  always  derives  from  mesmerism,  the  more  she
requires  it,  the  more  averse  she  is  to  ask  for  it.*

The  following  phenomena  have  presented  themselves  in
this  case : — very  great  susceptibility,  insensibility  to  pain  the
second  time  of  mesmerising,  obedience  to  requests  given
during  the  sleep,  to  be  executed  on  awaking,  or  at  any  stated
time ;  she  will  also  awake  at  any  particular  hour  if  desired  to
do  so ;  she  shows  double  consciousness  to  a  great  extent.  I
can  make  her  imagine  herself  another  person,  when  she  will
talk  and  act  accordingly ;  she  will  also  fancy  me  any  person
I  may  choose  to  tell  her.

One  evening  when  she  had  been  mesmerised  about  a
dozen  times,  I  punched  out  a  portion  of  a  tooth  for  her,
which  operation  lasted  full  a  quarter  of  an  hour ;  she  showed
no  sign  of  suffering  pain,  and  when  I  awoke  her,  she  declared

*  I  have  found  this  peculiarity  in  many  other  patients  :  it  was  particularly
striking  in  Miss  M.  D.’s  case,  related  in  No.  XVIII.  of  The  Zoist :  she  would
run  away  from  me,  when  she  most  required  mesmerising,  whilst  at  other  times
she  would  appear  anxious  for  my  arrival.


Unconscious  Delivery  in  the  Mesmeric  State.


59


her  unconsciousness  of  the  entire  proceeding.  Her  general
health  is  much  improved,  and  the  necessity  for  mesmerising
her  has  become  much  less  frequent.


VI.  Unconscious  Delivery  in  the  Mesmeric  Sleep.  By  Mr.

Chandler,  Surgeon,  Botherhithe.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OE  THE  ZOIST.

Sir, — I  beg  to  forward  you  a  short  account  of  another  mes¬
meric  accouchment,  being  the  second  which  has  occurred  in
my  practice.*

Mrs.  Moss,  iet.  26,  whose  tooth  was  extracted  in  the  mes¬
meric  sleep  by  Mr.  Bell,  in  December,  1846,  ( Zoist ,  No.
XVI.,  p.  573),  became  pregnant  with  her  third  child.  I  told
her  she  could  be  delivered  in  the  mesmeric  sleep  with  just
as  much  certainty  and  safety  as  her  tooth  had  been  drawn.
She  was  of  course  quite  willing,  and  I  proposed  to  mesmerise
her  occasionally,  just  to  keep  up  the  influence.  This,  how¬
ever,  appeared  unnecessary,  for  I  soon  found  that  her  sus¬
ceptibility  had  much  increased  since  she  became  pregnant;
whether  on  that  account  or  not  I  will  not  pretend  to  say.  The
circumstance  at  least  is  worthy  of  observation,  particularly  as
it  recalls  to  my  mind  a  little  incident  which  occurred  to  me  at
the  very  commencement  of  my  mesmeric  career,  viz.,  a  lady,
far  advanced  in  pregnancy,  who  proved  very  susceptible  at
the  first  trial,  but  showed  no  susceptibility  some  months  after
her  confinement,  I  having  been  afraid  to  continue  to  mes¬
merise  her  in  the  interval.

The  question  arises,  are  women  more  susceptible  of  the
influence  of  mesmerism  during  pregnancy  than  at  other  times  ?
Mrs.  Moss  formerly  required  passes  for  one  or  two  minutes  to
send  her  to  sleep,  but  now  went  off  with  a  single  pass,  and
instead  of  requiring  fifteen  or  sometimes  even  twenty  minutes
for  the  loss  of  sensation  to  become  perfect,  travelling  from
the  tips  of  the  fingers  to  the  crown  of  the  head,  it  now  left
her  in  less  than  five  minutes,  the  time  shortening  as  her  ac¬
couchment  drew  near,  until  at  last  wrhen  she  was  in  labour,
it  left  almost  the  instant  she  was  mesmerised.

January  19th,  1848,  at  4  p.m.,  she  sent  for  me.  I  found
she  had  been  suffering  very  slight  pains  all  the  morning  and
that  they  were  just  beginning  to  increase.  I  immediately
mesmerised  her,  and  when  the  next  pain,  or  rather  I  should

*  For  the  first,  see  Zoist ,  No.  XV.,  p.  405.


60  Unconscious  Delivery  in  the  Mesmeric  State.

say,  in  this  case,  effort  came,  she  said  she  felt  nothing  of  it.
The  efforts,  however,  immediately  became  visibly  very  heavy
and  rapid,  and  she  was  delivered  of  a  fine  boy  in  twenty
minutes  after  my  arrival.  The  bearing  down  accompanied
the  efforts,  just  as  in  ordinary  labour  and  just  as  in  my  former
case,  ( Zoist ,  Vol.  IV.,  p.  405;)  and  having  now  had  the  ex¬
perience  of  two  cases,  I  have  no  hesitation  in  pronouncing
mesmerism  quite  as  safe  in  midwifery  cases  as  ether  or  chloro¬
form.

My  patients  surprize,  when  I  awoke  her  and  told  her  she
was  delivered,  was  most  amusing.  I  immediately  sent  her
off  again  and  left  her,  ordering  her  to  awake  in  an  hour,
which  she  did  almost  to  a  minute.  I  saw  her  again  in  the
evening  and  found  that  her  sensibility  had  not  returned  in
any  part.  She  was  quite  free  from  after-pains  ;  though  after
her  last  confinement,  she  suffered  severely  from  them.  I  mes¬
merised  her  for  four  or  five  minutes,  to  ensure  a  continuation
of  the  loss  of  sensibility,  and  then  awoke  her  and  left  her  awake,
giving  her  no  opium.  In  the  morning,  I  found  her  remark¬
ably  well,  having  passed  an  excellent  night.  I  mesmerised
her  again  for  five  minutes  and  left  her.  At  my  visit  the  fol¬
lowing  morning,  I  found  her  complaining  of  very  slight  after-
pains,  and  her  sensibility  had  partially  returned.  I  mesmerised
her  for  a  few  minutes,  when  the  pains  left  and  never  returned.
Two  or  three  days  after,  I  found  her  complaining  of  very
sore  nipples ;  nursing  the  baby  caused  her  great  agony.  I
mesmerised  her  a  few  minutes,  and  the  next  time  she  put  the
child  to  the  breast,  she  felt  nothing  of  it.  She  continues  to
go  off  with  even  half  a  pass ;  for  the  moment  the  points  of
the  fingers  come  opposite  to  the  eyes  they  are  closed,  and  her
sensation  is  entirely  gone  the  same  instant.  This  greatly
increased  susceptibility  is  certainly  very  curious.

This  case  was  only  more  perfect  than  my  former  one,  in¬
asmuch  as  it  was,  in  every  respect,  more  favourable ;  being
altogether  as  rapid  as  the  other  was  lingering.  The  external,
physical  signs  of  labour  were  all  present,  though  the  patient
was  quite  unconscious  of  any  suffering.

I  intended  having  at  least  one  medical  witness,  but  the
rapidity  of  the  labour  prevented  it.

My  patient,  Miss  C.,  whose  cure  of  hiccup  of  12  years
standing  was  reported,  it  may  be  thought  rather  prematurely,
in  the  last  Zoist ,  continues,  I  am  happy  to  say,  quite  well,
although  she  has  not  been  mesmerised  since.


(  61  )


VII.  Continuation  of  Captain  Peach’s  Case,  in  a  letter  from
Mr.  Holland  to  Mr.  Chandler ;  with  a  note  by  Mr.  Chandler
on  the  effects  of  Crystals  on  the  Captain.

Laurie  Terrace,  New  Cross,
6th  Dec.,  1847.

My  Dear  Sir, — The  marked  mitigation  effected  by  mes¬
merism  in  Captain  Peach’s  case,  has,  upon  the  whole,  been
maintained  up  to  the  present  period,  but  still  his  perfect  resto¬
ration  appears  to  be  as  far  off  as  ever ;  the  effort  having  been
continued  regularly  above  fourteen  months,  it  must  at  length
be  presumed  that  the  cause  of  his  malady  is  organic,  and  that
nothing  beyond  temporary  relief  can  be  expected.  I  know
that  such  has  been  the  opinion  of  Dr.  Toulmin  and  yourself
for  some  time  past,  and  in  consequence  of  your  recent  consi¬
derate  suggestion,  I  am  now  gradually  discontinuing  my  visits,
with  the  intention,  however,  of  seeing  him  occasionally,  and
being  guided  by  circumstances.  As  regards  the  amount  of
relief  afforded  hitherto,  I  will  only  remark,  that  he  has  not
had  the  slightest  return  of  the  agony  which  he  experienced  in
the  lower  part  of  the  spine,  as  mentioned  in  my  former  letters ;
this  symptom  was  even  more  unbearable  than  the  spasms  which
had  tormented  him  so  many  years.

There  have  been  some  occurrences  since  my  last  commu¬
nication,  the  detail  of  which  may  interest  you.

In  addition  to  the  phenomena  described  in  my  former
letters,  one  solitary  instance  of  exaltation  has  occurred,  very
nearly  allied  to,  if  not  identical  with,  the  lucidity  which  has
so  frequently  been  witnessed  in  connection  with  the  mesmeric
influence.  The  fact  has  often  been  alluded  to  in  my  presence,
of  the  Captain  having  announced  the  return  of  some  friends
from  the  country,  without  having  received,  in  the  ordinary
way,  any  communication  upon  the  subject.  It  seemed  to
him  that  he  had  paid  the  visit  of  welcome,  and,  among  other
minute  particulars,  he  stated  that  he  should  shortly  receive
a  small  packet  from  these  friends,  the  contents  of  which  he
accurately  described ;  and  he  even  accounted  for  the  absence  of
something  which  it  did  not  contain.  The  concluding  fact  was
a  knock  at  the  door,  when  he  exclaimed  with  the  utmost

confidence,  “  There  are  the - ■”  which  was  correct  to  the

letter.  I  am  not  at  liberty  to  be  more  explicit,  as  the  subject
had  reference  to  family  affairs.

About  the  middle  of  July  last,  I  received  a  letter  from  a
lady,  residing  in  Cork,  whose  sympathy  was  excited  from
having  read  the  Captain’s  case  in  The  Zoist.  She  gave  me


62


Continuation  of  Captain  Peach’s  Case.


to  understand  that  she  had  extensively  diffused  the  blessings
of  mesmerism,  and  favoured  me  with  some  suggestions,  as
to  treatment,  for  his  benefit,  which  she  had  obtained  from  a
lucid  patient  of  hers,  whilst  in  sleep-waking.  The  plan  re¬
commended  comprised  free  and  repeated  ablutions  with  a  tepid
mixture  of  vinegar  and  water,  to  be  continued  for  months,
including  a  system  of  wet  bandages,  hot  steeping,  mesmeric
passes,  &c.,  &c.  There  were  no  adequate  means  of  carrying
out  these  well-meant  suggestions ;  nevertheless,  the  Captain
voluntarily  persevered,  for  some  weeks,  in  the  application  of
the  mixture  indicated,  by  means  of  a  sponge,  and  with  appa¬
rent  benefit,  particularly  in  respect  of  gaining  flesh;  which
fact  his  personal  attendant  repeatedly  noticed  in  the  region
of  the  spine  :  the  process,  however,  was  discontinued,  the
patient  having  experienced  a  return  of  spasm  in  the  wrists
and  hands,  which  he  attributed  to  their  long  exposure  in  a
wet  state  during  the  operation.  He  described  the  immediate
effects  of  the  agent  employed  to  be,  first,  a  slight  chill;  then
a  warm  glow,  which  continued  unabated  for  a  considerable
time  after  the  sponging  was  completed,  and  his  toilet  finished  :
he  also  noticed,  that  in  rubbing  the  parts  wetted,  the  down¬
ward  stroke  occasioned  the  mixture  to  “  dry  in  quickly,”  but
not  so  when  rubbed  in  any  other  direction.

I  have  occasionally  presented  exceedingly  strong  liquid
ammonia  to  the  patient's  nostrils,  whilst  mesmerised ;  in
every  instance  he  merely  turned  his  face,  very  deliberately,
on  one  side,  although  when  demesmerised,  he  complained
that  the  inside  of  his  nose  felt  “  dry,  hot,  and  raw,”  without,
howrever,  betraying  any  cognizance  of  the  cause.

On  two  occasions,  Mr.  Broadwater,  residing  at  Poplar,
a  medical  friend  of  Dr.  Toulmin,  administered  nitrous  oxide
to  the  Captain,  having  found  that  this  gas  had  a  tendency  to
further  mesmeric  results ;  hardly  any  effect  was  produced  on
the  first  occasion,  beyond  a  slight  sensation  of  fullness ;  but
on  the  second,  the  Captain  felt  quite  intoxicated  or  stupified.
I  tried  transverse  passes,  in  order  to  disperse  the  effect,  but
without  success ;  I  then  mesmerised  him  in  the  usual  way ;
he  was  quickly  affected,  and  as  easily  demesmerised,  all  trace
of  the  prostration  occasioned  by  the  gas  having  simultaneously
disappeared.

In  the  course  of  the  last  few  months  many  friends  have
called,  not  having  seen  him  for  a  considerable  time,  and  have
been  agreeably  surprized  at  his  improved  appearance.

I  have  lately  tried  the  effect  of  crystals ;  he  invariably
says  that  they  occasion  a  feeling  of  contraction ;  whether  he
is  mesmerised  or  not,  they  always  set  up  a  spasmodic  action


Continuation  of  Captain  Peach’s  Case.


63


in  the  fingers  :  they  also  mesmerise  him  as  effectually  as
the  hand.  On  the  first  occasion,  I  presented  a  fine  crystal
of  calc  spar  between  the  brows  (he  was  not  aware  that  I  was
doing  so) ;  in  a  short  time  he  remarked,  “  I  wish  I  could
have  felt  so  last  night.”  This  was  afterwards  explained  to
refer  to  a  feeling  of  tranquillity  which  was  stealing  over  him,
and  which  would  have  been  exceedingly  welcome  the  night
previous,  the  whole  of  which  had  passed  without  sleep,  from
sheer  restlessness.

Not  long  since  he  informed  me,  for  the  first  time,  that
he  received  a  very  severe  kick  from  a  horse  (in  the  region  of
the  kidneys)  at  the  Cape,  in  1816,  the  effects  of  which  he
occasionally  experienced  up  to  the  commencement  of  his  long
illness,  which  he  connects,  in  some  measure,  with  this  accident.

At  the  present  moment,  and  for  some  time  past,  he  re¬
mains  tolerably  comfortable, — although  relapses  of  more  or
less  frequency  and  severity  have  occurred  since  the  date  of
my  last  communication, — he  is  fully  sensible  of  the  benefit
which  he  has  derived  from  mesmerism,  and  I  can  only  hope
that  its  partial  relaxation  may  not  be  prejudicial.

Believe  me,  my  dear  Sir,  very  truly  yours,

J.  Holland.

Thomas  Chandler,  Esq.

I  beg  leave  to  subjoin  the  copy  of  a  note  made  the  moment
I  returned  from  seeing  Captain  Peach  a  short  time  since,  in
corroboration  of  Mr.  Holland's  experiments  with  the  crystals.

Nov.  5th.  Went  to  see  Captain  Peach  with  Mr.  Holland}
found  him  looking  very  much  better.  Mr.  H.  has  been  trying
experiments  with  crystals  on  him  a  la  Reichenbach.  To  satisfy
myself  of  their  accuracy,  I  took  an  opportunity,  whilst  all
in  the  room  were  engaged  in  conversation,  of  taking  up  a
large  and  perfect  crystal  of  calcareous  spar,  and  applying  it
within  half  an  inch  of  Captain  P/s  forehead ;  taking  great
care  that  he  should  not  suspect  what  I  wras  doing.  After
about  a  minute  his  eyes  began  to  water,  just  as  they  do  when
Mr.  H.  looks  at  him  with  the  intention  of  mesmerising  him
by  a  look,  and  he  spoke  to  Mr.  Holland ;  evidently  expecting
to  find  him  near,  and  in  the  act  of  mesmerising  him, — though
Mr.  H.  was  at  the  further  side  of  the  room.  I  was  quite
satisfied,  and  allowed  Mr.  H.  to  finish  getting  him  off.  I
then,  without  making  any  remark,  took  up  the  same  crystal,
and  held  it  towards  the  palm  of  his  hand;  the  fingers  began  to
contract  in  a  few  seconds,  and  the  hand  to  follow  the  crystal.

Captain  Peach's  total  blindness  makes  these  experiments
very  satisfactory.  Thomas  Chandler.


(  04  )


VIII. — Rapid  Cure  of  Inflammatory  Swollen  Face,  Acute
Gout,  of  Spasms  of  the  Chest  with  Involuntary  Movements
of  one  Arm,  with  local  Mesmerism ;  and  Cure  of  severe
Pains  of  the  Head,  with  Mesmerism.  By  Mr.  G.  H.  Barth.
Communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson,  to  whom  the  account
was  addressed  in  a  Letter.

Great  Parndon,  Essex,
December  14.

Dear  Sir. — I  believe  you  are  always  willing  to  accept  facts
proving  the  utility  of  mesmeric  applications,  and  therefore
subjoin  a  few  which  are  at  your  service  in  any  way  if  they  can
be  made  useful.  We  may  convince  the  public,  although  no
ordinary  or  extraordinary  amount  of  evidence  will  convince
some  of  our  medical  detractors.  We  may  liken  them  to  the
culprit  at  the  halberts  who  could  not  be  satisfied.  He  was
either  hit  too  high  or  he  was  hit  too  low ;  “  Hit  him  how  I
would,  I  could  not  please  him,”  said  the  drummer.  Adduce
a  case  of  disease  cured,  which  has  required  long-continued
mesmeric  treatment ;  they  declare  it  has  been  cured  sponta¬
neously,  by  “  an  effort  of  nature ;”  that  “  it  would  have  been
all  the  same  without  your  mesmerism.”  Show  them  a  case
of  immediate  relief  or  cure  by  mesmerism,  and  they  call  it
“all  fancy,”  “imagination,”  “the  patient's  sufferings  were
more  imaginary  than  real,  therefore  mesmerism  is  as  likely
to  cure  as  anything  else ;”  or  “  he  still  suffers,  but  you  have
excited  his  imagination  and  persuaded  him  not  to  feel  his
sufferings ;”  or  again,  “  Ah !  I  have  often  known  patients
quite  eased  of  a  severe  toothache  as  soon  as  they  saw  the
instruments  produced  for  extracting  the  tooth;  it  is  just  the
same  with  mesmerism,  you  only  frighten  the  pain  away,  it
will  be  sure  to  return  again  :  you  cannot  call  that  curing.”
As  to  the  return  again,  when  patients  declare  to  the  contrary
why  not  believe  them  ?  Are  persons  cured  medically  alone
worthy  of  credence  ?  As  to  the  “  frightening  away,”  I  pre¬
sume  it  matters  little  to  persons  enduring  severe  pain  whether
it  be  drawn  away  or  driven  away  mesmerically,  or  frightened
away,  or  purged  away,  or  vomited  away,  or  thrown  off  by
the  skin,  so  that  it  only  be  got  rid  of.  Will  any  one  prove
that  the  mesmeric  is  a  less  elegant,  a  less  delicate,  a  less  safe
method  than  by  the  action  of  a  cathartic,  an  emetic,  or  di¬
aphoretic  ?  Professors  of  “  the  healing  art,”  who  refuse  to
extend  their  knowledge  of  “  the  art  of  healing,”  and  venture
to  call  mesmerists  “  fools,”  or  dub  them  “  humbugs  and  im¬
postors,”  must  be  left  to  the  operation  of  time ;  they  will  be
cured  of  their  unbelief,  eventually,  by  “  an  effort  of  nature ;”


Cures  of  various  Diseases  with  Mesmerism.


65


mesmerism,  or  a  general  conviction  of  its  utility  by  tlieir
patients,  will  just  “  frighten”  the  sceptical  disease  away.

Sarah  Pavit,  wife  of  Joshua  Pavit,  gardener,  of  this
parish,  a  stout  robust  woman,  about  40.  Saw  her  on  the
evening  of  last  April  22nd,  leaning  on  a  table,  face  buried  in
pillows  and  head  enveloped  in  flannel.  The  left  side  of  her
face  was  enormously  swollen ;  so  much  so,  that  the  jaws  could
not  be  opened  sufficiently  wide  for  my  finger  to  pass  betwixt
the  front  teeth.  Had  been  suffering  for  three  days  and  nights,
described  the  pain  as  darting  and  throbbing,  excruciating,
worse  than  any  toothache ;  it  affected  that  side  from  the  top
of  her  head  nearly  to  the  shoulder ;  would  rather  undergo  a
“  lying-in”  because  that  would  be  sooner  over.  Had  “  tried
warm  fomentations  and  other  applications  in  vain ;  could  get
no  ease  night  or  day ;  had  not  closed  her  eyes  or  been  able  to
keep  in  bed  for  three  nights ;  felt  quite  light-headed  and  as
if  she  must  lose  her  senses.”  I  knew  Mrs.  Pavit  well,  and
her  replies  were  delivered  in  a  tone  and  manner  different  from
that  wThich  is  natural  to  her.  Believing  that  local  mesmerism
would  relieve  her,  I  suggested  it.  She  received  my  suggestion
with  a  very  significant  grunt ,  as  if  she  thought  me  ridiculing
her  distress.  I  had,  therefore,  to  explain  my  intention  and
point  out  that  she  was  the  party  to  be  benefitted  ;  if  I  was
willing  to  take  the  trouble  she  ought  to  be  willing  to  take
my  offer.  She  replied  she  did  not  believe  that  mesmerising
could  do  her  any  good,  but  she  was  willing  to  do  anything  to
get  some  ease.  I  mesmerised  the  affected  part  locally  ;  she
felt  the  influence  like  a  cool  wind.  In  about  ten  minutes  she
declared  that  the  pain  was  not  so  bad ;  it  had  left  her  head
and  neck  and  she  only  felt  it  in  the  cheek  and  gum ;  in  ten
minutes  more  the  throbbing  pain  was  gone  entirely,  but  she
felt  the  inside  of  her  cheek  painful  and  tender.  On  feeling
externally  the  place  indicated,  I  found  a  hard  tumor  as  large
as  a  marble.  I  mesmerised  her  ten  minutes  longer,  and  left
her  exclaiming  with  astonishment  and  thankfulness  at  the
ease  she  experienced.  Next  morning  she  complained  of  pain
in  her  gum,  which  was  easily  mesmerised  away  and  gave  no
more  trouble.  The  swelling  of  the  cheek  and  tumor  of  the
gum  had  disappeared,  had  certainly  been  absorbed  during  the
night.  She  had  been  very  subject  to  tooth  and  faceache  pre¬
viously,  but  has  not  had  any  pain  of  the  kind  since.*

William  Standen,  residing  at  Great  Parndon,  had  an
attack  of  gout  about  twelve  months  since.  It  commenced  in

*  See  a  similar  cure  by  one  of  our  archbishops,  in  No.  XII.,  p.  513. — Zoist .

VOL.  VI.  F


66  Cures  of  various  Diseases  with  Mesmerism.

the  great  toe  of  the  right  foot,  and  in  two  days  the  left  foot
was  also  affected.  Had  skilful  medical  assistance  and  was
able  to  return  to  his  duties  in  about  a  fortnight ;  having  been
confined  to  bed  for  eight  days  of  the  time.  On  the  8th  of
July  last  he  had  a  similar  attack  of  gout  in  the  great  toe  of
the  right  foot.  I  saw  it  and  proposed  trying  mesmerism  the
next  day,  if  it  was  not  better.  Next  morning  the  redness
and  swelling  had  increased  and  extended,  and  the  pain  was
described  as  severe.  I  saw  the  external  appearances,  but  did
not  feel  the  pain,  and  yet  I  believed  his  assertion,  and  made
passes  over  the  foot  with  the  intention  of  relieving  him.  In
about  ten  minutes  he  declared  that  he  no  longer  felt  any  pain;
and  I  had  no  reason  to  suppose  he  stated  that  which  was  un¬
true.  In  some  four  or  five  hours  the  pain  returned,  but  ceased
on  the  foot  being  mesmerised.  Next  day  the  swelling  had  dis¬
appeared,  but  some  pain  was  felt;  mesmerised  it  away  as
before.  On  the  third  day  the  disease  was  but  slightly  per¬
ceptible  ;  mesmerised  the  foot  twice  during  the  day.  On  the
fourth  day  there  was  neither  pain,  tenderness,  nor  redness.  I
made  a  few  passes  by  way  of  preventing  relapse,  when,  to
my  surprize,  the  foot  immediately  became  red.  This  redness
soon  disappeared  when  I  discontinued  the  passes,  (in  the
course  of  an  hour  or  so),  but  for  several  days  was  reproduced
whenever  I  made  passes  over  the  foot.  The  passes  were  made
ivithout  contact :  at  the  second  pass  four  or  five  red  streaks
appeared,  and  as  the  passes  were  continued  more  streaks,
until  the  whole  blended  or  united.  When  the  red  streaks
ceased  to  appear,  I  considered  the  cure  complete  and  ceased
mesmerising.  Wm.  Standees  former  attack  prevented  him
attending  to  his  duty  for  a  fortnight,  and  he  endured  much
pain  :  during  this  latter  attack,  he  attended  to  his  duty  as
usual,  and  the  pain  was  subdued  by  a  few  mesmeric  passes.
In  this  case  not  anything  was  tried  but  local  mesmerism  and
two  doses  of  hydrg.  cum  creta  et  jalap.*

John  Burton,  aged  30,  Ty  Green,  labourer.  This  man,
who  was  a  perfect  stranger  to  me,  called  February  23rd,  1846,
to  request  some  trifling  service.  I  saw  that  he  was  partial^
blind,  and  on  enquiry  learned  that  he  was,  and  had  been  for
nine  months,  an  out-patient  at  the  Eye  Infirmary,  Moor
Fields,  and  had  received  medical  assistance  before  his  admis¬
sion  there.  He  said  his  sight  was  “  getting  worse  and  worse
every  week,  and  the  doctors  at  the  Infirmary  feared  they

*  For  mesmeric  cures  of  acute  gout  by  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson,  see  No.
XVII.,  p.  81  ;  and  of  inflammatory  rheumatism,  No.  V.,  p.  86;  VI.,  p.  257  ;
VII.,  p.  360,  380;  XVIII.,  p.  155. — Zoist.


By  Mr.  G.  H.  Barth.


67


could  do  little  more  for  him ;”  that  he  also  “  suffered  from
severe  pain  in  the  head,  generally  commencing  when  he  went
to  bed ;  his  mother,  with  whom  he  lived,  was  often  obliged
to  sit  up  at  night  to  keep  his  head  cool  with  cloths  soaked  in
water  and  vinegar ; — he  was  never  free  from  pain,  and  his
life  was  a  burden  and  misery  to  him.”  Had  been  repeatedly
cupped  and  blistered ;  had  swallowed  plenty  of  physic,  and
had  “  hot  stuff”  put  into  his  eyes.  The  blisters  always  relieved
him  for  a  few  hours ;  nothing  else  tried  ever  gave  him  any
relief.  Had  received,  some  years  ago,  a  very  severe  blow
with  a  spade  on  his  head.  This  case  did  not  seem  a  hopeful
one,  but  as  mesmerism  has  often  cured  after  medicine  and
surgery  have  failed,  I  felt  it  to  be  a  matter  of  duty  to  try  and
do  some  service  to  this  poor  man.  Told  him  as  they  gave  him
no  hope  of  cure  at  the  Infirmary  he  would  not  be  doing  wrong
to  discontinue  their  medicine  a  few  weeks,  and  if  he  would
call  on  me  every  day  I  thought  I  could  do  him  some  good
and  perhaps  benefit  his  sight.  At  first,  his  sight  improved
rapidly,  then  retrograded,  and  remains  now  very  little  better
than  when  I  commenced.  The  disease,  which  wras  progressing,
seemed  arrested;  but  the  mischief  done  could  not  be  repaired.
The  first  effect  of  mesmerism  on  the  pain  was  to  make  the
man  feel  much  worse.  After  a  few  day^s  treatment  he  became
quite  angry  with  me,  and  complained  that  I  had  “  done  him
more  harm  than  good,”  “  that  the  pain  used  to  be  bad  enough
in  his  head,  but  now  it  was  all  over  him  ;  he  felt  it  in  every
limb,  even  in  his  feet ;  he  could  not  think  what  I  had  done
to  him,  he  did  not  feel  as  if  he  was  himself,  but  just  like
being  another  person.  When  he  walked  he  did  not  feel  as  if
he  touched  the  ground ;  it  was  more  like  flying ;  it  seemed  to
him  that  he  did  fly,  though  he  knew  very  well  he  was  still
walking.”  The  hope  of  recovering  his  sight  induced  him  to
let  me  persevere,  or  I  believe  he  would  not  have  come  near
me.  At  the  end  of  three  weeks  the  pain  had  quitted  his
head  and  limbs ;  his  general  health  and  strength  improved,
and  he  felt  himself,  in  his  own  words,  “  as  good  a  man  as
ever  he  was  in  his  life,  barring  the  eyes.”  I  mesmerised  him
daily  for  five  consecutive  months,  hoping  that  the  disease,
which  was  called  an  affection  of  the  optic  nerves,  might  be
cured.  He  became  heavy  and  drowsy  under  the  influence,
but  never  went  to  sleep.  Long  passes  from  head  to  feet  de¬
prived  him  of  voluntary  power  of  motion ;  though  quite
awake  and  conscious,  he  could  not  rise  from  his  chair  until
demesmerised.  Passes  over  the  head  caused  a  sensation  of
great  weight ;  he  used  to  feel  his  neck  with  his  hands  as  he
thought  it  was  bulged  out  by  the  weight  on  his  head.  All

f  2


68  Cures  of  various  Diseases  ivith  Mesmerism.

downward  passes  felt  warm  ;  all  upward  or  transverse  passes
caused  a  cold  sensation.  The  nearer  my  fingers  the  stronger
his  sensation ;  but  it  was  quite  perceptible  at  a  distance  of
seven  or  eight  feet.  I  mesmerised  two  sovereigns  and  put
one  at  the  back  of  his  neck,  under  the  cravat,  and  the  other
in  his  right  hand,  telling  him  to  hold  it.  In  five  minutes  I
asked  for  it.  His  fingers  were  firmly  closed  and  he  began
unlocking  them  with  his  left  hand.  I  said,  “That  is  not
what  I  mean;  open  your  hand  and  let  me  take  it,  Burton.”
He  declared  that  he  could  not,  his  hand  and  arm  having
“ gone  to  sleep  .”  I  unclasped  the  fingers  partially,  took  out
the  gold  and  popped  a  piece  of  iron  rod  in,  telling  him  to
hold  it.  I  asked  for  it  in  a  few  minutes  :  he  handed  it  to  me
without  difficulty,  the  spasm  of  the  fingers  was  relaxed ;  he
said  the  stiffness  and  numbness  of  his  arm  had  gone  off.
This  experiment  was  strikingly  conclusive  of  the  truth  of
your  statements,  made  long  since,  of  the  mesmeric  effects  of
gold  and  iron.  The  man  is  an  ignorant  though  decent  country
labourer ;  he  could  not  know  what  I  anticipated  by  placing
gold  and  afterwards  iron  in  his  hand ;  he  was  not  asleep  but
in  his  normal  state,  and  yet  your  declared  effects  were  verified.*
I  made  an  experiment  with  him,  which,  as  far  as  I  am  aware,
has  not  been  tried  by  other  mesmerists.  Having  a  powerful
electro-magnetic  machine  in  action,  I  desired  to  know  if  any
difference  would  be  felt  in  the  sensation  caused  by  mesmeric
passes,  if  he  communicated  with  one  end  of  the  intensity  or
secondary  coil  and  I  the  other,  of  course  passes  without  con¬
tact.  I  placed  one  conductor  in  his  hand  and  the  other,  with
a  long  wire  attachment,  in  my  coat  pocket.  Standing  behind
him,  I  made  passes  over  his  head  and  down  the  spinal  column
with  one  hand  at  about  two  inches  distance.  “  Do  you  feel
anything,  Burton  ?”  “  Yes  Sir,  I  feel  you  mesmerising

me  all  down  my  back,  quite  warm.”  I  grasped  the  con¬
ductor  in  my  pocket  with  the  other  hand,  continuing  the
passes.  “  Do  you  still  feel  me  mesmerising  you  ?”  “  Yes,

plain  enough,  but  you  have  altered  it,  it  stings  and  pricks
me  now ;  I  can  bear  it,  but  I  doffit  like  the  feel.”  This  I
have  several  times  repeated ;  standing  behind  him,  with  the
conductor  in  my  pocket,  he  could  not  know  when  I  grasped
or  loosened  it ;  but  his  sensations  were,  invariably,  in  accord¬
ance  with  mv  act.  “That  is  nice  and  warm,”  “  there  is  the

*  These  were  the  precise  results  of  precisely  the  same  experiments  made
upon  the  two  Okeys  by  me,  and  witnessed  by  hundreds  of  persons,  and  by
Mr.  Wakley  among  the  rest,  who  could  make  no  other  reply  than,  “  Why,
hav’nt  people  been  touching  gold  ever  since  the  creation  of  the  world  without
growing  stiff?”  The  philosopher  forgot  that  people  had  not  been  mesmerised
before  they  touched  gold. — John  Elliotson.


Epilepsy  cured  with  Mesmerism .


69


tinkling  come  again he  meant  tingling.  This  experiment
has  succeeded  beautifully  with  others  whom  I  have  tried  it  on,
and,  also,  failed  with  subjects  who  were  highly  susceptible
of  the  mesmeric  influence.

I  was  so  fortunate,  a  few  weeks  ago,  as  to  cure  at  one
sitting,  (to  the  patients  friends  it  was  miraculous),  a  severe
and  distressing  case  of  nervous  spasms  in  the  chest  with  in¬
voluntary  motion  of  one  arm.  But  I  have  already  far  ex¬
ceeded  my  intended  limits.

It  seems  the  profession  are  now  anxious,  in  painful  opera¬
tions,  to  profit  by  the  mesmerists*  example ;  humanity  has
its  claims  in  favour  of  the  patients  acknowledged.  All  the
advantages  secured  by  the  induction  of  mesmeric  coma  are
desired ;  but  desired  independently  of  the  mesmeric  process  ;
the  effect  is  wanted  without  its  antecedent,  the  cause.  The
new  anaesthetic — chloroform,  is  to  supersede  ether.  I  sin¬
cerely  hope  it  may  answer  the  expectations  of  its  advocates.
Chemically,  it  is  related  to  the  ethereal  family.  Will  an  over¬
dose,  or  too  frequent  inhalation,  kill  a  patient  ?  Can  it  be  re¬
peated  as  often  as  may  be  needful  to  allay  a  patient's  suffering
after  a  capital  operation  ?  Will  the  patient  be  stronger  and
better  in  proportion  as  he  inhales  its  vapour  in  larger  quan¬
tities  or  more  frequently  ?  These  are  the  questions  by  which
to  test  the  relative  value  of  mesmerism  and  other  pain-pre-
venting  agents.  Have  you  perused  the  letter  of  “  an  hospital
surgeon"  in  the  Medical  Times  of  the  4th  instant  ?  Laudanum
in  excessive  doses,  to  soothe  the  agonies  afterwards  felt  by
patients  who  had  been  etherised  and  underwent  painless
operations,  was  administered  in  “  an  hospital  surgeon's"  cases.
Why  not  have  etherized  again  and  again  ?  I  presume  “  an
hospital  surgeon"  had  no  desire  to  kill  the  sufferers.  As
truth  must  ever  prevail  over  the  false,  it  requires  no  gift
of  prophesy  to  foresee  the  time,  when  a  medical  school  will
not  be  acknowledged  complete  without  its  mesmeric  professor¬
ship.  I  trust  you  may  be  spared  to  fill  the  first  chair,  and  am.

Dear  Sir,  your  obedient  servant,

G.  H.  Barth.


IX.  Case  of  Epilepsy  cured  by  the  Mesmeric  Influence,  after
the  signal  Failure  of  Medicine.  By  Mr.  John  Wickens
West,  Surgeon,  Poole.

The  subject  of  the  following  narrative  is  a  young  lad,  by  the
name  of  George  Buttress,  aged  17,  by  occupation  a  black¬
smith,  residing  in  Poole,  Dorset.  In  the  month  of  February
last,  he  was  seized  with  epileptic  fits,  which  continued  to


70


Epilepsy  cured  with  Mesmerism.


attack  him  daily  for  the  space  of  three  months.  A  fit  frequently
lasted  a  whole  day,  and  sometimes  throughout  the  night.  His
attacks  were  so  violent,  that  his  parents  were  compelled  to
watch  him  continually,  and  they  scarcely  knew  what  a  night's
rest  was  for  several  months.  During  this  period  he  was  under
a  judicious  mode  of  treatment,  and  attended  by  a  medical  man
of  considerable  experience,  who  tried  almost  every  remedy
the  routine  of  practice  suggested.  He  became  my  patient  on
my  succeeding  as  Parish-Surgeon  to  the  district  in  which  he
lived,  about  the  middle  or  latter  end  of  March  last.  The  fits
were  then  very  frequent  and  violent,  coming  on  with  general
convulsions,  total  insensibility,  complete  loss  of  intelligence,
pupils  immoveable,  and  teeth  firmly  closed.  I  administered
small  doses  of  the  nitrate  of  silver  in  the  form  of  pills,  at
the  same  time  keeping  up  a  moderate  action  in  the  bowels  by
means  of  aloetic  purges.  This  plan  had  little  or  no  effect,
and  the  fits  continued  to  follow  him  with  scarcely  any  inter¬
mission.  At  the  suggestion  of  his  parents,  who  had  heard
of  the  extraordinary  cures  which  mesmerism  had  effected  in
similar  nervous  and  intractable  disorders,  I  assented  to  per¬
form  the  operation  on  him,  which  I  did  in  the  presence  of
two  clergymen  of  the  town.  The  first  time  he  was  placed
under  its  influence,  it  had  a  very  peculiar  effect  on  him ;  his
eyes  were  open  and  fixed  as  in  epilepsy, — pupils  dilated;  and
he  continued  for  three  quarters  of  an  hour  in  a  complete  state
of  insensibility.  I  attempted  two  or  three  times  to  demesme-
rise  him,  but  could  not  succeed,  so  complete  was  the  stupor  :
he  recovered  without  assistance.  I  mesmerised  him  several
weeks,  at  intervals  of  two  or  three  days,  and  I  am  pleased  to
relate,  from  the  first  time  the  operation  was  performed  on
him,  he  has  never  had  a  relapse,  and  has  been,  independent
of  a  slight  affection  of  one  knee,  in  perfect  health  ever  since.
I  have  no  doubt,  had  the  epilepsy  continued  on  him,  his
intellects  would  have  been  impaired.

The  above  is  a  good  illustration  of  the  power  which  mes¬
merism  is  capable  of  exercising  over  the  nervous  system  ;
and  when  it  comes  into  more  general  use,  its  great  efficacy
in  such  cases  will  be  more  appreciated.  I  would  just  mention,
that  since  my  success  in  the  above  instance,  a  case  of  amau¬
rosis  has  fallen  under  my  care,  in  which  every  remedy  was
tried,  without  any  good  effect.  I  mesmerised  the  individual
several  times,  and  he  sufficiently  recovered  his  sight  to  enable
him  to  read  a  few  lines  in  the  Bible.  I  have  not  heard  of
him  lately,  and  cannot  therefore  state  whether  the  effect  was
permanent  or  not.

John  Wickens  West,
Poole,  17th  December.  Surgeon,  M.R.C.S.L.


(  71  )


X.  Mesmeric  cure  of  a  severe  Affection  of  the  Heart ,  by
Miss  Wallace,  of  Laurel  Lodge,  Cheltenham.  Commu¬
nicated  as  a  letter  from  the  patient  to  that  lady.

Madam, — As  you  wished  me  to  state  my  case  in  full  for  pub¬
lication,  I  will  begin  from  the  beginning.

About  two  years  ago,  I  was  first  troubled  with  palpitations
of  the  heart,  and  they  became  so  violent,  I  applied  at  the
dispensary  for  relief.

Dr.  Ackworth,  under  whose  care  I  was  placed,  is  a  very
nice  gentleman,  and  very  skilful,  but  he  told  me,  mine  was
a  diseased  heart,  which  never  could  be  cured.  I  replied,
“  Bless  the  Lord ;  it  might  be  worse ;  I  can  die  happy.”
Dr.  Ackworth  put  out  his  hand,  and  said,  “  Then  you  are  a
happy  man.”

I  remained  a  dispensary  patient  about  eighteen  months,
getting  no  better,  and  several  times  when  Dr.  Ackworth  saw
me,  he  said,  it  was  a  wonder  to  him  to  see  me  alive,  and  he
cautioned  me  to  live  carefully,  for  it  was  probable,  I  should
be  called  suddenly.  Last  July,  on  a  very  hot  day,  I  took
down  a  barrow  of  coals  for  your  cook,  and  was  sitting  on  the
steps,  suffering  such  violent  pain  and  convulsions  of  the  heart,
that  I  thought  there  was  not  a  minute  between  me  and
eternity.

You  came  in  from  walking,  and  said,  “  My  man,  are  not
you  very  ill  ?”  I  said,  I  was  very  ill,  with  a  disease  of  the
heart,  which  the  doctor  said  I  never  could  get  over.  You
questioned  me  minutely,  how  long  I  had  had  it,  and  what
were  the  symptoms  I  felt.  When  I  told  you  all,  you  looked
me  right  in  the  face,  and  said,  “  With  God’s  assistance,  I
think,  I  can  cure  vou.”  I  was  struck  with  astonishment  to
hear  a  lady  say,  with  such  authority,  that  she  could  cure  me,
but  the  manner  you  spoke  gave  me  great  faith,  and  I  believed
you  could.

According  to  your  desire  I  prayed  fervently,  that  if  it  was
the  Lord’s  blessed  will,  I  might  be  cured.  From  the  very
moment  you  began,  my  heart  became  perfectly  quiet,  and  has
never  been  convulsed  since.  I  was  first  mesmerised  on
Tuesday,  and  on  Sunday,  when  washing  my  hands  to  go  to
chapel,  my  heart  gave  a  plunge,  and  seemed  as  if  it  was
turned  round.  When  I  told  you  this,  you  said  you  believed
I  was  cured,  and  so  I  was,  for  since  that  time,  my  heart  has
been  as  well,  and  lies  as  quiet  as  it  did  thirty  years  ago,  and
I  am  able  to  follow  my  business,  go  to  Gloucester  with  my
horse  and  cart,  walk  above  twenty  miles,  there  and  back


72  On  an  Organ  of  Sympathy.

again ;  load  and  unload  my  goods,  and  find  myself  perfectly
well.

I  am  most  thankful  to  God  for  my  cure,  which  I  think
one  of  the  greatest  miracles  under  the  creation,  and  I  wish  for
the  benefit  of  others  my  cure  should  be  made  public.  I
should  wish  my  residence  to  be  related,  and  me  and  my
family  will  testify  on  oath,  the  truth  of  my  wonderful  cure.

Signed,  William  Penn.

Wife  and  Son  of  William  Penn,  John  Penn

Sherborne  Street,

Nov.  14th,  1847*


ESSAYS  ON  PHRENOLOGY.  No.  I.

XI.  On  an  Organ  of  Sympathy,  seated  between  Comparison
and  Benevolence.  By  Mr.  T.  Symes  Prideaux.

At  the  age  of  fifteen,  looking  over  some  old  medical  journals
that  had  belonged  to  my  father,  I  chanced  to  alight  on  an
article  on  Dr.  Gall’s  system  of  Craniology,  in  the  Medical  and
Physical  Journal,  for  March,  1806,  containing  a  faithful
account  of  Dr.  Gall’s  visiting  the  House  of  Correction  and
the  Hospital  of  Torgau  in  Saxony,  the  4th  and  5th  of  July,
1805,  to  which  was  appended  a  plate  depicting  the  position
of  the  twenty-seven  organs  then  discovered.

The  narrative  profoundly  interested  me,  and  I  remember,  as
if  it  were  but  yesterday,  the  steps  by  which  my  mind  arrived
at  conviction.  Dr.  Gall’s  predication  of  the  characters  of  the
prisoners,  from  their  heads,  so  closely  agreed  with  the  des¬
cription  previously  written  down  by  the  chaplain  and  steward,
from  an  experience  of  their  conduct  and  a  knowledge  of  their
crimes,  (and  which  description  the  doctor  had  not  been  allowed
to  see,)  that  I  instantly  rejected,  as  absurd,  the  idea  that
such  a  remarkable  agreement  could  be  a  mere  coincidence, —
the  result  of  accident.  According  to  the  doctrine  of  proba¬
bilities,  the  chances  against  such  an  occurrence  were  thousands
to  one,  and  to  have  formed  such  a  conclusion  would  have  been
an  outrage  on  common  sense.  This  point  decided,  the  next
was  to  enquire  whether  there  could  have  been  any  collusion
between  the  authorities  of  the  prison  and  the  doctor.  The
station  and  office  of  the  parties,  and,  above  all,  the  absence
of  any  previous  acquaintanceship  proclaimed  this  supposition

*  See  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson’s  cure  of  a  similar  case,  in  No.  XIX.,  p.  289,
where  are  references  to  two  others  in  former  numbers. — Zoist.


By  Mr.  Prideaux.


73


to  be  in  the  highest  degree  improbable.  Was  it  possible
the  whole  account  was  a  hoax, — a  tale  coined  by  the  brain  of
some  writer  of  fiction  in  the  pursuance  of  his  avocation?
The  circumstance  of  the  narrative  making  its  appearance  in
a  scientific  journal  forbade  such  a  conclusion.  There  appeared
then,  no  alternative  but  to  accept  it  as  demonstrated,  that  the
German  doctor  had  really  discovered  certain  signs  for  man’s
internal  faculties,  and  that  the  development  of  the  former  and
the  manifestation  of  the  latter  stood  in  the  relationship  of
cause  and  effect ;  that,  in  short,  the  science  of  phrenology
had  its  foundations  in  nature,  and  constituted  a  great  Fact.

Such  a  revelation  of  the  constitution  of  humanity  seemed
like  the  discovery  of  a  new  world  ;  such  a  key  to  the  character
and  motives  of  the  beings  by  whom  I  was  surrounded, — a  new
Aladdin's  lamp,  which  revealed  treasures  of  knowledge  more
precious  than  gold.  I  immediately  became  possessed  with
the  most  insatiable  curiosity  to  know  my  own  development
and  that  of  every  body  by  whom  I  was  surrounded,  in  order
to  compare  the  agreement  of  the  external  sign  with  what  I
knew  of  our  capacities  and  dispositions.  To  be  able  to  do
this,  previous  study  and  observation  were  required,  for  I  found
myself,  at  the  outset,  quite  incapable  of  forming  a  conclusion
as  to  the  size  of  the  organs,  and  I  saw  clearly  that  to  be  en¬
abled  to  do  so,  a  general  idea  of  the  outline  of  average  heads
must  be  obtained,  and  repeated  comparisons  between  dissim¬
ilar  ones  instituted.  I  procured  Combe’s  Elements  of  Phre¬
nology  and  studied  it  with  attention,  and  after  having  made
myself  familiar  with  the  position  of  the  organs,  resolved  to
commence  my  own  personal  observation  with  the  most  decided
case  I  could  procure.

In  the  town  where  I  then  resided,  lived  a  boy  of  about
ten  years  of  age,  of  rather  weak  intellect,  and  known  to  all
the  inhabitants  for  his  pilfering  propensities.  When  not  at
school,  he  roamed  the  streets  from  morning  till  night,  raking
in  gutters  and  searching  in  the  dust  heaps  for  old  nails,  bits
of  cork,  wood,  leather,  cardboard  and  such  like  articles ;
or  else  loitering  at  the  doors  of  shops  in  quest  of  plunder;
when,  if  he  chanced  to  espy  a  bit  of  coloured  paper  or  other
showy  object  which  particularly  fascinated  his  attention,  so
strongly  would  he  covet  it,  that,  overcoming  his  natural
timidity,  which  was  very  great,  he  would  rush  and  seize  it  at
the  risk  of  being  caught  and  beaten,  and  then  make  off  with
it.  The  articles  acquired  in  these  predatory  wanderings
were  carried  home  and  hid  in  holes  in  the  wall  or  buried  in
the  garden.

His  parents,  who  were  religious  people,  deeply  afflicted


74


On  an  Organ  of  Sympathy.


at  this  propensity  of  their  son,  did  all  in  their  power  to  dis¬
courage  and  suppress  it.  Often  catching  him  immediately
on  his  return  from  his  rambles,  they  emptied  his  pockets,
dispossessed  him  of  the  result  of  his  labours  and  beat  him
for  his  pains :  often  searching  the  garden  for  his  concealed
stores,  they  destroyed  them  before  his  eyes,  reproved  him  for
his  conduct,  and  to  make  the  lesson  more  impressive,  con¬
cluded  it  by  a  flogging.  All  their  endeavours  to  eradicate  the
habit,  however,  proved  equally  fruitless,  and  their  only  effect
on  the  child  seemed  to  be  to  stimulate  him  to  conceal  his
acquisitions  with  more  cunning.  Here  then,  I  said  to  myself,
if  anywhere,  a  large  organ  of  Acquisitiveness  should  be  found,
something  so  marked  that  even  a  learner  like  myself  should
be  competent  to  appreciate  it  and  be  able  to  detect  a  decided
deviation  from  the  average  outline;  and  accordingly,  I  de¬
termined  to  select  this  lad  as  the  object  of  my  first  experiment.
Having  succeeded  in  catching  him,  who  shall  describe  my
pleasure  and  surprise  at  discovering,  not  only  a  large  and
well-defined  protuberance  at  the  organ  of  Acquisitiveness,
but  also  that  the  breadth  of  the  head  at  this  part  was  as  great
as  above  the  ears.  Numberless,  have  been  my  phrenological
observations  since  this  period,  numerous,  the  striking  and
pleasing  confirmations  of  phrenological  truth  I  have  received,
many,  the  still  more  gratifying  verifications  of  ideas  and  sug¬
gestions  of  my  own,  but  none  have  ever  reproduced  the
thrilling  sensation  of  delight  I  experienced  on  this  occasion.

Soon  after  this  occurrence,  I  paid  a  visit  to  a  phrenologist
in  a  neighbouring  town,  to  whom  I  had  procured  an  intro¬
duction  and  who  was  aware  of  my  anxiety  for  information  on
the  subject.  Scarcely  had  I  entered  his  presence  before  he
exclaimed,  “  Why,  you  are  a  musician.”  No  essay  could  have
been  more  unfortunate  as  an  introductory  display  of  the
powers  of  the  science ;  for  it  so  happened,  that  only  a  few
weeks  previously,  desirous  of  learning  to  sing,  I  went  to  take
a  first  lesson  in  the  art,  when  my  ear,  as  it  is  termed,  proved
so  defective  that  I  could  not  master  the  gamut,  and  having
fully  satisfied  myself  of  my  extreme  dullness  and  stupidity
with  regard  to  musical  science,  I  abandoned  the  attempt.

I  have  known  some  infinitely  silly  people  who,  on  account
of  a  failure  of  this  kind,  have  at  once  rejected  phrenology.
No  proceeding,  however,  can  more  infallibly  indicate  a  feeble
and  superficial  mind,  since  no  amount  of  errors  committed
by  individual  observers,  can  invalidate  the  conclusions  once
formed  by  an  adequate  induction  from  positive  facts.  We  all
know  that  it  is  easy  to  form  rash  judgments,  and  every  sensible
man  knows  likewise  that  it  is  easy  to  form  even  erroneous


By  Mr.  Prideaux.


75


judgments  cautiously,  when  our  knowledge  is  incomplete ;
that  such  errors  are,  in  fact,  inseparable  from  the  infancy  of
all  sciences,  and  necessary  preliminaries  to  their  advancement.
The  same  circumstances  which  present  doubts  and  difficulties
to  the  thoughtless,  stimulate  the  intelligent  cultivator  of
science  to  further  research,  furnish  him  with  the  very  materials
out  of  which  he  constructs  a  fresh  pillar  for  the  edifice,  and
are,  in  reality,  fraught  with  the  most  instruction.  In  science,
it  may  be  truly  said,  the  stumbling  blocks  of  the  simple,  are
directing-posts  to  the  wise.

The  question  to  be  solved  was,  what  was  the  real  expla¬
nation  of  the  error,  which  at  first  sight  certainly  appeared
somewhat  startling  ?  The  head  could  not  in  reality  justify
the  prediction,  or  the  opinion  of  Gall,  as  to  the  seat  of  the
organ  of  Music,  must  be  erroneous.  In  the  first  place,  the
adjoining  organs  of  Number,  Order,  and  Constructiveness
being  large,  gave  a  breadth  and  fulness  to  the  head  in  this
region,  which,  supposing  a  very  slight  error  committed  in
the  estimate  of  position,  might  readily  lead  to  the  belief  that
the  cerebral  convolutions  upon  which  musical  talent  depended,
were  much  more  fully  developed  than  was  really  the  fact.  In
the  second  place,  though  so  deficient  in  the  capacity  of  appre¬
ciating  the  pitch  of  sound,  I  was  by  no  means  insensible  to
the  charms  of  music.  A  military  band  always  excited  me  in
the  highest  degree,  and  a  single  air  which  appealed  to  the
feelings,  and  came  spontaneously  from  the  heart  of  the  singer,
called  up  emotions  which  neither  the  finished  roulades  of  the
most  accomplished  artists,  nor  the  more  scientific  combina¬
tions  of  the  orchestra  ever  succeeded  in  awaking.  In  fact
my  perceptions,  with  regard  to  certain  qualities  of  sound,
were  singularly  acute,  and  deemed  by  many  fastidious.  Tew
were  better  judges  of  the  relative  merits  of  two  instruments
of  the  same  kind  with  respect  to  the  richness  of  quality  of
their  tone,  notwithstanding  that  one  might  be  half  a  note
higher  or  lower  than  the  other,  without  my  being  able  to
distinguish  it.  My  discrimination  and  memory  of  voices  was
also  extraordinary,  and  attended  with  equally  marked  likings
and  antipathies  to  individuals  in  consequence.  Here  then  was
ample  ground  for  concluding  that  the  region  of  the  forehead,
the  general  development  of  which  had  been  found  by  Gall  to
be  ample  in  musicians,  should  not  as  a  whole  present  any  very
marked  deficiency  in  my  head.  The  musical  talent  it  was
evident  required  analysis ;  and  had  my  forehead  presented
that  complete  shelving  off,  of  the  lateral  portions,  observable
in  some  persons  incapable  of  even  comprehending  the  idea  of
music,  and  who  declare  that  they  perceive  nothing  more


76


On  an  Organ  of  Sympathy.


musical  or  agreeable  in  the  sound  of  a  piano  than  in  the
rumbling  of  a  cart  wheel,*  then  would  phrenology  have  been
greatly  at  fault.

A  few  months  after  the  occurrence  just  related,  I  was
present,  for  the  first  time,  at  a  surgical  operation, — the  ampu¬
tation  of  a  leg  above  the  knee.  The  operator,  noticing  the
attention  with  which  I  watched  the  preliminary  proceedings,
called  me  forward,  though  the  youngest  in  the  room,  to  hold
the  limb.  Such  was  the  diseased  state  of  the  bone,  that  the
catlin  was  never  laid  aside  till  the  limb  was  off;  but  upon
turning  round  with  my  burden,  I  missed  two  of  my  com¬
panions, — two  young  friends  who  had  each  been  studying
surgery  upwards  of  a  year,  and  had  already  had  an  oppor¬
tunity  of  habituating  themselves  to  such  spectacles, — yet
they  had  felt  sick  and  faint,  and  been  obliged  to  withdraw.
In  pursuit  of  my  favourite  employment  of  analyzing  pecu¬
liarities  of  character,  and  tracing  them  to  their  appropriate
cerebral  organs,  I  sought  to  refer  the  difference  between  my
friends  and  myself  to  some  difference  in  our  organization.
According  to  the  received  phrenological  doctrines  either  their
Destructiveness  should  be  small,  or  moderate,  or  their  Bene¬
volence  of  an  unusual  size,  and  their  heads  might  be  expected
to  contrast  greatly  in  these  particulars  with  mine.  Such
however  was  not  the  case ;  and  I  knew  in  addition  that  they
manifested  no  less  fondness  for  the  rod  and  the  gun  than
myself ;  and  with  the  utmost  desire  to  form  an  impartial  and
correct  judgment,  I  could  not  come  to  the  conclusion  that
they  possessed  greater  Benevolence.  In  short,  after  much,
cogitation,  I  felt  myself  at  fault  for  a  solution,  and  came  in
the  end  to  the  conviction  that  the  recognized  assemblage  of
organs  were  inadequate  to  this  end.  Thus  at  a  very  early
period  I  became  firmly  impressed  with  the  belief  that  no
quantitive  admixture  of  the  known  organs  was  competent
to  explain  certain  varieties  of  character,  but  that  new  and
qualitatively  different  primitive  faculties  remained  to  be  dis¬
covered.  Many  years  however  elapsed  before  I  ventured  to
form  any  conclusions  as  to  their  nature.

At  a  subsequent  period,  I  repeatedly  saw  students  in
London  obliged  to  leave  the  operating  theatre,  in  spite  of  all
their  gradual  training  to  such  scenes  during  their  apprentice¬
ship  in  the  country,  and  at  once  attributed  their  conduct  to
the  existence  in  a  still  higher  degree,  of  the  same  peculiarity  of
organization  which  had  overpowered  my  young  friends  at  the

*  A  literal  transcript  of  the  declaration  of  a  clergyman,  whose  peculiar  idio¬
syncrasy  I  had  just  discovered,  and  w'hose  forehead  presented  a  shelving  at  the
corners  very  similar  to  Anne  Ormerods.


By  Mr.  Prideaux.


f*t  T-'

/  7

first  operation  I  witnessed.  Dining  shortly  afterwards  at  the
house  of  an  elderly  gentleman,  the  conversation  after  dinner
chanced  to  fall  on  the  spectacle  of  public  executions,  when
my  host  expressed  himself  as  quite  horrified  at  the  idea,  and
depicted  in  vivid  colours  the  shock  his  feelings  received,  and
the  faint  sickness  that  came  over  him  from  having,  by  acci¬
dent  and  unawares,  caught  sight  of  two  men  hanging.  Here
I  felt  assured  I  had  in  the  person  of  my  entertainer  another
specimen  of  the  idiosyncrasy  before  alluded  to.  This  time  I
did  not  let  the  subject  drop,  but  perpetually  turned  it  over
in  my  mind  during  my  moments  of  leisure,  endeavouring  to
conceive  the  nature  of  a  faculty  competent  to  produce  the
results  I  had  remarked.

That  something  besides  Benevolence  was  concerned  in  it
I  had  long  ago  fully  convinced  myself ;  for  I  had  seen  it
exhibited  in  certain  cases  with  an  actual  callousness  to  the
sufferings  of  others,  provided  the  individual  could  escape  wit¬
nessing  them,  and  banish  them  from  his  imagination.  In
fact,  from  having  narrowly  watched  and  pondered  on  the
conduct  of  certain  parties,  I  had  been  enabled  to  conceive
the  possibility^  of  the  existence  of  two  men, — one  an  imper¬
sonation  of  selfishness,  who,  for  a  trifling  advantage  to  him¬
self,  could  condemn,  without  pity,  a  fellow  man  to  the  rack,
or  to  be  broken  on  the  wheel,  and  yet  be  unable  himself  to
be  present  and  witness  his  torments ;  and  another,  full  of
Benevolence,  ready  to  sacrifice  all  he  possessed  to  ransom
the  sufferer,  who  could  yet,  if  duty  demanded,  stand  firmly
by  and  be  a  spectator  of  his  pangs.  Such  phenomena  seemed
to  demand  for  their  explanation  a  faculty  which  translated  the
expression  of  emotion  in  sentient  beings  in  such  clear  and  deep
characters ,  that  the  organization  of  the  recipient  involuntarily
vibrated  in  response,  and  participated  in  the  feelings,  whether
of  pleasure  or  pain,  of  the  object  observed.  A  faculty  half
affective,  half  intellectual,  having  for  its  function  the  linking
of  sentient  nature  together  in  one  sympathetic  bond,  and
by  means  of  which  animals  become  participators  in  the  mental
states  of  those  with  whom  they  come  in  contact.  An  organ
greatly  inferior  in  dignity  to  Benevolence,  yet  nevertheless,
from  serving  as  its  eye,  greatly  conducive  to  its  action.

The  more  I  reflected  on  the  subject  the  more  the  necessity
for  such  a  faculty  became  apparent,  and  the  more  I  became
convinced  of  its  existence.  The  next  point  was  to  determine
its  position,  and  here,  guided  by  analogy  from  the  nature  of
its  function,  I  did  not  hesitate  to  assign  it  a  seat  between
Comparison  and  Benevolence,  to  both  which  organs  it  had
evidently  an  intimate  relationship.  For  a  long  time  previ-


78


On  an  Organ  of  Sympathy.


ously,  I  had  been  of  opinion  that  a  space  intervened  between
these  two  organs,  from  having  observed  that  in  those  cases
where  the  outline  of  Benevolence  could  be  traced.  Comparison
would  require  to  be  prolonged  backwards  to  twice  its  length,
in  order  to  join  it ;  and  I  saw,  upon  subsequent  consideration,
that  the  assigned  position  on  the  mesial  line,  accorded  with
the  high  importance  and  indispensable  nature  of  the  faculty.
I  immediately  placed  all  the  casts  of  criminals  I  possessed
side  by  side,  and  in  all  guilty  of  cold-blooded  and  deliberate
murder,  I  saw,  to  my  great  pleasure,  a  marked  deficiency  in
development  at  this  spot.  In  no  other  single  point  did  they
all  so  universally  correspond.  The  great  restraining  power
of  the  organ  of  Sympathy  seems  to  arise  from  its  making  the
perpetrator  of  cruelty  so  conscious  of,  and  alive  to,  the  suf¬
ferings  of  the  victim,  that  if  Benevolence  be  not  all  but
absolutely  wanting,  the  crime  will  be  shrunk  from.

Upon  recalling  to  mind  the  shape  of  the  head  of  the  gen¬
tleman  who  had  so  vividly  described  his  feelings  of  horror  at
the  sight  of  an  execution,  I  clearly  recollected  that  it  was
remarkable  for  its  prominence  at  this  spot,  the  forehead  being
high,  and  the  coronal  surface  prolonged  forward  to  meet  it  in
a  curve  so  much  bolder  than  usual  as  to  constitute  quite  a
peculiarity  in  the  head,  which  was  left  in  the  memory  as  its
distinguishing  characteristic.  It  is  difficult  to  imagine  a  better
illustration  of  a  small  and  large  development  of  the  portion
of  brain  in  question,  than  that  presented  by  the  heads  of  Lord
Eldon  and  Basil  Montagu,  (see  Zoist,  Yol.  I.,  p.  271.)  The
former  cold  and  impassive — the  advocate  and  supporter  of  the
punishment  of  death  for  the  most  trifling  thefts ;  the  latter
the  great  agitator  for  its  abolition,  who  suffered  agony  at  the
idea  of  an  execution,  never  slept  the  night  previous,  and
before  daylight  would  walk  up  and  down  on  the  south  side  of
Lincoln' s-inn-fields,  listening  to  the  tolling  of  St.  Sepulchre’s
bell.  Of  course  Benevolence  was  also  very  large,  or  he  would
have  spared  his  feelings  by  shunning  all  proximity  to  the
scene,  instead  of  labouring  in  behalf  of  the  condemned ;  but
I  conceive  that  without  the  organ  of  Sympathy  had  been
large,  though  he  might  have  equally  deplored  and  pitied  the
lot  of  the  criminal,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  he  would  not  have
been  a  vivid  participator  in  his  agony.  In  his  lordship's
head  Comparison  appears  prominent,  and  the  line  of  the  head
immediately  behind,  is  not  merely  not  convex,  but  absolutely
concave .  There  is  a  positive  hollow.

The  sympathetic  Shelley  presented  an  extraordinary  deve¬
lopment  of  this  part  of  the  head.  Capt.  Medwin  relates  of
him ;  “  So  sensitive  was  he  of  external  impressions ;  so  mag-


By  Mr.  Prideauoc.


79


netic,  that  I  have  seen  him,  after  threading  the  crowd  in  the
Lung  Arno  Corsos,  throw  himself  half  fainting  into  a  chair,
overpowered  by  the  atmosphere  of  evil  passions,  as  he  used
to  say,  in  that  sensual  and  unintellectual  crowd/’  This  por¬
tion  of  the  head  is  also  largely  developed  in  all  the  great
dramatic  writers  whose  portraits  I  have  had  an  opportune
of  examining,  and  amongst  modern  poets  it  is  particularly
conspicuous  in  Schiller,  Lamb,  Campbell,  and  Tennyson.
The  writings  of  Leigh  Hunt,  and  Dickens  (who  bestows  life
on  a  tea-kettle)  manifest  an  excessive  activity  of  the  faculty.
The  organization  of  the  latter  is  in  accordance ;  that  of  the
former  I  am  unacquainted  with.  I  attribute  to  it  the  ten¬
dency  to  invest  nature  with  the  feelings  of  humanity.  In  the
prominence  of  this  tendency  in  his  writings,  Shelley  sur¬
passes  all  poets,  either  ancient  or  modern,  and  exhibits
examples  of  it  in  nearly  every  page.  As  a  specimen  of  the
style  it  produces,  I  subjoin  the  following  extracts  : —


“  Call  not  these  things  inanimate, — the  trees,

The  grass,  the  herbs,  the  flowers.  A  busy  life
Dwells  in  their  seething  limbs  ;  and  as  soft  blooms
Unfold  themselves  unto  the  alluring  Sun,

Fond  music,  (which  we  hear  not,)  mystic  odours,

Accompany  their  soft  confessions.  Thus,

One  springs  and  fades, — then  others  come, — whilst  sighs
Exhale  from  each  into  the  listening  air,

Telling  through  all  its  course,  (from  life  to  death,

From  verdant  spring-time  until  autumn  sere,)

The  same  eternal  story.’ ’

Barry  Cornwall.

“  Here’s  nought  but  whispering  with  us, — like  a  calm
Before  a  tempest,  when  the  silent  air
Lays  her  soft  ear  close  to  the  earth,  to  hearken
For  that  she  fears  is  coming  to  afflict  her.”

G.  Chapman.

“  I  love  thee  and  am  full  of  happiness,

My  bosom  bounds  beneath  thy  smile  as  doth
The  sea’s  unto  the  moon,  his  mighty  mistress,

Lying  and  looking  up  to  her,  and  saying, —

Lovely  !  lovely  !  lovely  !  lady  of  the  heavens  !”

Festus.


“  I  heard  a  mermaid  on  a  dolphin’s  back
Uttering  such  dulcet  and  harmonious  breath,

That  the  rude  sea  grew  civil  at  her  song.”

Midsummer  Night's  Dream.


“The  earth  was  feverous,  and  did  shake
For  horror  of  the  deed.”

Macbeth.


80


On  an  Organ  of  Sympathy.


“  Walking  upon  the  fatal  shore,

Among  the  slaughtered  bodies  of  their  men
Which  the  full-stomached  sea  had  cast  upon
The  sands,  it  was  my  unhappy  chance  to  light
Upon  a  face,  whose  favour  when  it  lived
My  astonished  mind  informed  me  I  had  seen.

He  lay  in  his  armour  as  if  that  had  been
His  coffin ;  and  the  weeping  sea  (like  one
Whose  milder  temper  doth  lament  the  death
Of  him  whom  in  his  rage  he  slew)  runs  up
The  shore,  embraces  him,  kisses  his  cheek ;

Goes  back  again  and  forces  up  the  sands
To  bury  him,  and  every  time  it  parts,

Sheds  tears  upon  him  ;  till  at  last  (as  if
It  could  no  longer  endure  to  see  the  man
Whom  it  had  slain,  yet  loth  to  leave  him)  with
A  kind  of  unresolved  unwilling  pace,

Winding  her  waves  in  one  another,  (like
A  man  that  folds  his  arms,  or  wrings  his  hands
For  grief,)  ebb’d  from  the  body  and  descends  ;

As  if  it  would  sink  down  into  the  earth,

And  hide  itself  for  shame  of  such  a  deed.”

Cyril  Tourneur.

“  Beatrice. — But  I  remember,

Two  miles  on  this  side  of  the  fort,  the  road
Crosses  a  deep  ravine  ;  ’tis  rough  and  narrow,

And  winds  with  short  turns  down  the  precipice ;

And  in  its  depth  there  is  a  mighty  rock,

Which  has  from  unimaginable  years,

Sustained  itself  with  terror  and  with  toil

Over  a  gulph,  and  with  the  agony

With  which  it  clings,  seems  slowly  coming  down.”

Shelley,  The  Cenci.


i(  I  am  the  earth,

Thy  mother  ;  she  within  whose  stony  veins,

To  the  last  fibre  of  the  loftiest  tree

Whose  thin  leaves  tremble  in  the  frozen  air,

Joy  ran,  as  blood  within  a  living  frame.

.1.  ■?.

*T*  T  *T*  *7*  V  T

Bright  clouds  float  in  heaven,

Dew-stars  gleam  on  earth.

Waves  assemble  on  ocean  ;

They  are  gathered  and  driven
By  the  storm  of  delight,  by  the  panic  of  glee  !
They  shake  with  emotion.

They  dance  in  their  mirth ,

But  where  are  ye  ?

The  pine-boughs  are  singing
Old  songs  with  new  gladness  ;

The  billows  and  fountains
Fresh  music  are  flinging,

Like  the  notes  of  a  spirit  from  land  and  from  sea :
The  storms  mock  the  mountains
With  the  thunder  of  gladness,

But  where  are  ye  ?  ”


Shelley’s  Prometheus  Unbound.


By  Mr.  Prideaux.


81


et  Claribel.

te  Where  Claribel  low-lieth
The  breezes  pause  and  die,

Letting  the  rose-leaves  fall :

But  the  solemn  oak-tree  sigheth,
Thick-leaved  ambrosial,

With  an  ancient  melody
Of  an  inward  agony.

Where  Claribel  low-lieth.

At  eve  the  beetle  boometh
Athwart  the  thicket  lone  ;

At  noon  the  wild  bee  hummeth
About  the  mossed  head-stone  :

At  midnight  the  moon  cometh,

•  And  looketh  down  alone.

Her  song  the  lint-white  swelleth.

The  clear-voiced  mavis  dwelleth,

The  fledging  throstle  lispeth,

The  slumberous  wave  outwelleth.

The  babbling  runnel  crispeth,

The  hollow  gust  replieth,

Where  Claribel  low-lieth.’  ’

Tennyson.


In  this  exquisite  little  gem  of  art,  this  choice  cabinet
painting  unsurpassable  in  depth  of  tone  and  purity  of  tint,
the  poet  represents  nature  as  sympathizing  in  his  grief,  and
mourning  with  him  over  the  grave  of  his  love.

Much  of  the  impulsive  character  of  poets  may,  I  think,
be  attributed  to  this  organ.  When  large,  the  individual
takes  the  tone  of  his  feelings  from  those  by  whom  he  is  sur¬
rounded.  Weeps  with  the  sorrowful,  and  laughs  with  the
joyous,  and  in  this  point  of  view  when  in  excess  it  constitutes
a  weak  point  in  the  character,  and  is  apt  to  merge  the
individuality  of  the  individual  in  that  of  those  wTith  whom
he  comes  in  contact.  Those  in  whom  it  is  small,  are  on  the
contrary,  cold  and  impassive,  possess  a  hard  and  inflexible
individuality,  and  pursue  their  own  train  of  ideas  unaffected
by  the  mental  condition  of  their  associates.  The  faculty  of
Sympathy,  though  very  much  below  that  of  Benevolence  in
dignity,  is  nevertheless  a  great  stimulator  of  its  activity.
Benevolence  deals  with  the  abstract  idea  of  suffering,  and  its
influence  on  character  is  permanent,  durable,  and  constant.
Sympathy,  on  the  contrary,  is  limited  and  evanescent  in  its
manifestations,  excited  through  the  direct  presentation  of  the
expression  of  suffering,  or  its  vivid  pictorial  conception  by
the  imagination.  If  Benevolence  be  very  small,  the  indivi¬
dual  seeks  to  banish  the  image  as  a  painful  one,  as  soon  as
possible,  and  perhaps  seeks  forgetfulness  in  the  society  of  the
gay.  If  Benevolence  be  large,  precisely  the  contrary  takes

VOL.  VI.  G


82


On  an  Organ  of  Sympathy.


place.  Sympathy  is  stimulated  to  call  up  the  sunken  cheek,
the  haggard  eye,  the  suppressed  tear,  the  attitude  of  despair ;
the  picture  thus  presented  to  the  imagination  reacts  in  its
turn  upon  Benevolence,  the  painful  impression  on  the  nerves
of  the  individual  is  heroically  braved,  and  scenes  of  suffering
are  sought  out  and  alleviated  by  those  ministering  angels  of
mercy,  the  Frys  and  Howards  of  society ;  beings  who  con¬
stitute  the  greatest  glories  of  the  human  race,  and  redeem
our  faltering  faith  in  the  beauty,  dignity,  and  ultimate  per¬
fection  of  man's  moral  nature.

Benevolence  is  larger  in  the  English  head,  Sympathy  in
the  French ;  and  in  combination  with  their  large  Love  of
Approbation,  which  employs  “  Sympathy"  in  its  service,  com¬
municates  that  amiability  of  character  to  the  French,  that
exquisite  tact  in  divining  and  gratifying  the  wishes  of  those
with  whom  they  come  in  contact,  for  which  they  are  distin¬
guished  above  all  other  nations.  Persons  so  organized  are
always  awake  to  the  emotions  of  others,  and  sympathize  with
a  thousand  little  griefs  and  temporary  troubles  that  pass  un¬
noticed  by  those  who  are  not  so  endowed.  And  though  such
feelings  are  often  very  superficial,  even  transparently  so,  yet
it  is  nevertheless  a  fact  that  they  soothe  and  gratify  the  objects
on  which  they  are  lavished.  Much  of  the  impulsiveness  of
the  French,  and  the  manner  in  which  sympathy  suddenly
invades  large  masses,  who,  bound  by  this  tie  alone,  act  to¬
gether  in  unison,  without  concert,  must  be  attributed  to  the
general  large  size  of  this  organ  in  the  national  head.

The  organ  is  larger  in  the  English  females  than  in  males,
and  doubtless  in  females  generally  ;*  and  it  is  this  character¬
istic,  combined  with  their  larger  love  of  Approbation  and  Se¬
cretiveness,  which  gives  to  women  that  tact  and  amiability,  that
facility  in  divining  the  feelings  and  intentions  of  those  with
whom  they  come  in  contact,  and  that  intuitive  sagacity  in
appreciating  character,  in  which,  at  least  in  England,  they
so  greatly  surpass  men,  and  may  be  said  to  approximate  to
the  French.  The  organ  was  strikingly  smaller  in  the  ancient
Romans  than  in  the  Greeks,  and  its  deficiency  in  size  is  very
marked  in  all  savage  and  barbarous  nations,  and  particularly
so  in  the  North  American  Indians.

The  softness,  flexibility,  and  kindness  it  imparts  to  the
manners,  often  in  union  with  great  selfishness  of  character,
have  been  well  appreciated  and  drawn  by  many  of  our  writers
of  fiction ;  who,  equally  true  to  nature,  have  also  not  failed
to  seize  and  delineate  the  opposite  characteristic,  where  a

*  In  combination  with  Language,  it  constitutes  the  fundamental  element  in
the  character  of  the  gossip.


By  Mr.  Prideanx.


83


comprehensive  Benevolence,  and  deep  goodness  of  heart,  lie
concealed  under  an  exterior,  cold,  impassive,  and  even
brusque.

Before  the  existence  of  such  a  primitive  faculty  as  I  have
attempted  to  describe,  occurred  to  me,  I  found  myself  per¬
petually  at  fault  in  my  endeavours  to  analyze  character.
Many  times  have  I  been  greatly  surprised  to  see  the  vivid
impression  mayle  by  the  news  of  some  accident  or  misfortune
on  those  around  me,  who  were  yet,  to  the  best  of  my  know¬
ledge,  quite  undistinguished  by  active  benevolence.  They
expressed  the  most  lively  pity  and  concern — seemed  to  make
the  case  their  own,  and  feel  with  the  sufferer — and  were  so
visibly  affected  for  the  moment,  as  to  have  the  whole  current
of  their  thoughts  diverted  from  their  previous  occupation  and
engrossed  with  this  new  topic.  Affectation  it  was  not ;  the
thing  was  perfectly  real ;  and  often  I  have  felt  inclined  to
accuse  myself  of  insensibility  and  coldness,  when  I  contrasted
the  small  disturbance  created  in  my  own  mental  condition  by
what  so  greatly  shocked  others.  By  degrees,  however,  as  I
discovered  that  all  this  fine  display  of  feeling  often  evaporated
without  producing  any  fruit,  and  assured  myself,  by  repeated
observation,  that  I  might,  without  presumption,  rank  myself,
in  point  of  active  benevolence,  at  least  on  a  par  with  some
of  those  foremost  in  sympathy,  and  at  the  same  time  pay
myself  by  no  means  a  high  compliment  in  so  doing,  I  grew
better  reconciled.

Those  in  whom  the  organ  is  large  are  desirous  for  others
to  take  the  same  view  of  things  as  themselves,  and  are  ever
ready  to  attempt  to  make  converts  to  their  own  doctrines.
Ceteris  paribus,  they  are  more  annoyed  at  the  expression  of
a  difference  of  opinion  than  those  in  whom  the  organ  is
small.  They  do  not  appear  to  understand  what  it  is  “  to  be
content  to  differ,”  but  give  themselves  an  amount  of  trouble,
and  evince  a  degree  of  anxiety  to  make  others  share  their
opinions,  quite  incomprehensible  to  those  oppositely  organized.

It  becomes  an  interesting  question  to  determine,  to  what
extent  the  faculty  of  Sympathy  assists  the  talent  for  Physi¬
ognomy.  I  have  never  been  able  to  satisfy  myself  that  the  latter
depended  upon  the  organ  of  Form  alone,  though  this  being
always  present  as  a  fundamental  condition  of  its  existence,
the  office  performed  by  Sympathy  may  be  merely  affective
and  restricted  to  acting  as  a  stimulus.  Physiognomy  would
appear  to  be  merely  the  law  of  the  expression  of  forms,  yet
the  talent  is  not  so  common  as  might,  on  this  supposition
have  been  expected,  from  the  frequently  large  development
of  the  organ  of  Form,  and  certainly  my  observations  on  the


84


On  an  Organ  of  Sympathy.


existence  of  Sympathy  large,  where  the  talent  for  Physiog¬
nomy  is  possessed  in  a  high  degree,  incline  me  to  the  belief
of  there  being  a  close  connection  between  the  two.  I  was  at
one  time  staggered  in  this  opinion  by  the  case  of  Sir  Charles
Bell.  I  knew  nothing  of  his  head,  but  surmised,  from  his
vivisections,  that  he  most  probably  had  the  organ  of  Sympathy
small ;  a  circumstance  not  to  be  expected  in  the  author  of  a
work  on  the  Anatomy  of  Expression,  and  weighing  heavily
(if  proved  to  be  the  fact)  against  that  connection  between  the
large  development  of  the  organ  of  Sympathy  and  a  talent
for  Physiognomy,  which  numerous  examples  of  the  associa¬
tion  of  the  two  had  been  leading  me  to  form.  Beading,
however,  one  day  a  review  of  his  works,  I  alighted  on  the
following  passages  : — “  It  is  not  too  strong  an  expression  to
use,  that  he  suffered  agony  of  mind  previous  to  undertaking

a  great  operation.” . “  His  exquisite  pain  at  the  sight

of  suffering  made  him  averse  to  all  experiments  on  living
animals.”  Statements  certainly  sufficient  to  turn  the  scale,
and  throw  all  the  weight  to  be  attached  to  the  example,  in
favour  of  the  connection  of  Sympathy  with  a  talent  for  ap¬
preciating  Expression.

In  no  point  of  view  do  physicians  differ  more  than  in
their  talent  for  diagnosis.  All  may  be  schooled  to  a  cate¬
gorical  knowledge  that  certain  symptoms  are  indicative  of
certain  diseases  ;  a  mode  of  diagnosis  which  may  be  exercised
without  seeing  the  patient.  But  that  fine  practical  sagacity,
by  which  many  can  read  the  whole  progress  of  the  case  and
its  probable  termination,  in  the  countenance  and  attitude  of
the  patient,  is,  so  far  as  my  experience  extends,  an  intuitive
gift  not  to  be  acquired.  A  sixth  sense,  by  which  the  con¬
dition  of  the  patient  is  perceived  rather  than  inferred,  and  by
means  of  which,  without  asking  a  question,  a  more  compre¬
hensive  and  correct  knowledge  of  the  case  is  gathered  at  a
glance,  than  can  be  attained  by  one  deficient  in  this  instinct
by  the  longest  cross-examination.  In  forming  a  judgment  of
the  probable  termination  of  the  case,  and  the  length  of  time
the  patient  is  likely  to  live,  the  latter  class  are  equally  or  still
more  at  a  loss  than  in  divining  the  nature  of  the  affection.
Yet  there  is  no  doubt  but  that  weeks  before  the  termination
of  diseases,  necessarily  fatal,  death  has  set  his  seal  on  the
countenance,  and  that  the  final  result  is  written  in  unerring
characters  for  all  who  possess  the  capacity  of  deciphering
them.  In  all  the  more  remarkable  examples  of  this  power
which  have  come  under  my  notice,  a  large  development  of
the  portion  of  the  head  lying  between  Benevolence  and  Com¬
parison  has  been  associated  with  the  perceptive  faculties  at


By  Mr.  Prideaux.


85


the  root  of  the  nose.  Perhaps  these  considerations  offer  some
explanation  of  what  I  believe  to  be  an  unquestionable  fact,
viz.,  that  those  medical  men  who  devote  themselves  “  con
amove ”  to  the  operative  department  of  the  profession,  rarely,
if  ever,  excel  as  physicians.

This  faculty  is  the  origin  of  communicativeness ;  the  ten¬
dency  to  impart  our  own  ideas  to  others.  Where  is  the  man
so  cold  and  impassive  as  to  be  self-sufficient  to  his  own  happi¬
ness  ?  Are  not  all  more  or  less  suppliants  and  cravers  after
the  sympathy  of  others?  Is  there  not  a  constant  flux  and
reflux  of  perceptions,  observations,  and  emotions,  the  source
of  perpetual  activity  and  progress,  as  limitless,  unceasing,
and  mighty  in  its  effects  as  the  tides  of  the  ocean  ?  And  how
appropriately  is  such  a  faculty  seated  at  the  summit  of  the
forehead,  the  junction  of  intelligence  and  feeling,  at  the  ter¬
mination  of  the  intellectual  faculties,  whose  function  is  the
acquisition  of  knowledge,  thus  ensuring  its  transmission,
when  acquired,  to  others ;  and  making  each  successive  gen¬
eration  the  heir  in  intellectual  wealth  of  all  that  have  pre¬
ceded  it.

By  its  means  man  is  knit  to  his  fellow-man  by  an  indis¬
soluble  tie — becomes  a  partaker  in  his  fate — the  sharer  in  his
joys  and  sorrows — the  craver  for  his  sympathy.  Nature,  ever
in  harmony,  has  made  man’s  duties  to  be  in  unison  with  his
interests,  and  “  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself”  is  shown  to  be
the  summit  of  true  wisdom  as  regards  the  happiness  of  the
individual,  the  true  policy  even  of  selfishness,  if  it  were  suffi¬
ciently  enlightened  and  far-seeing  to  discern  it.  The  richest
and  the  proudest  cannot  isolate  themselves  from  the  universal
heart  of  humanity.  One  life-blood  circulates  throughout  the
human  race.  The  pulses  of  agony  from  the  dungeon  pierce
through  stone  walls,  vibrate  in  the  palace,  and  disquiet  the
head  that  bears  a  crown.  By  a  law  of  nature  we  are  made  to
a  certain  extent  partakers  of  one  common  lot.  The  haughtiest
of  eastern  despots,  who  encounters  the  glance  of  the  meanest
of  his  slaves,  cannot  avert  the  passage  to  his  heart  of  the
feeling  with  which  that  look  was  fraught,  but  is  gladdened
with  its  sunshine,  chilled  with  its  despair,  or  poisoned  with
its  hate.

T.  S.  Prideaux.

Southampton,  March  1,  1848.


(  86  )


XII.  Cures  of  St.  Vitus’s  Dance ,  Rheumatism ,  and  infantile
inflammation  of  the  Throat.  By  Mr.  Reynoldson,
Bootle,  near  Liverpool.

St.  Vitus’s  Dance.

Mr.  Gardner,  a  respectable  tradesman  in  Scotland  Road,
engaged  me,  March,  1845,  to  attend  his  son,  then  about
11  years  of  age,  for  St.  Vitus’s  dance.  I  treated  him  about
a  month  with  passes  down  the  right  side,  and  with  my  right
hand  directed  to  that  portion  of  the  left  lobe  of  his  cerebellum
where  I  detected  the  presence  of  increased  heat.  His  re¬
covery  was  gradual  but  complete.  His  health  is  thoroughly
established.


Rheumatism.

Mrs.  Ashbey,  living  in  Peach  Street,  was  several  years  in
the  domestic  employ  of  Bishop  Magee,  of  Dublin,  our  friend
Dr.  M'Neile’s  father-in-law.  She  is  much  respected  for  moral
worth,  though  in  humble  life.  She  had  been  a  martyr  to
rheumatism  for  many  years.  Had  been  bled,  blistered,  and
cauterized.  For  three  years  carried  her  left  arm  in  a  sling,
and  had  been  well  supplied  with  medicines  for  five  years.  In
spite  of  all,  the  pain  had  left  her  arm  and  flown  to  the  heart.
She  was  supposed  to  be  dying  in  February,  1844.  A  mutual
friend  (Mr.  Samuel  B.  Jackson)  requested  me  to  visit  her.
For  some  minutes  I  hesitated :  her  immediate  death  was
anticipated.  I  had  then  few  friends  in  Liverpool,  and  thought
a  coroner’s  inquest  might  be  urged  by  some  splenetic  medical
practitioners  to  criminate  me  in  the  transaction.  The  con¬
verse  of  this  view  was  more  imperative.  There  is  an  oppor¬
tunity  presented  of  saving  a  valuable  life,  and  if,  from  cow¬
ardice,  I  let  that  woman  die,  how  shall  I  answer  for  it  to  the
Father  of  spirits  ?  The  result  was  most  triumphant :  and
this  very  day,  Nov.  22nd,  1847,  I  have  taken  away  all  her
ailment — a  pain  in  the  arm — with  two  passes.

Mr.  Collins,  late  of  Newark,  and  now  of  Everton,  Liver¬
pool,  was  present,  and  can  testify  to  this  last  fact.

She  never  slept  ten  minutes  in  all,  though  twice  very
early  in  the  case  she  went  into  mesmeric  sleep.

Inflammation  of  the  Throat  in  an  Infant.

The  infant  child  of  Mr.  Campbell,  Temperance  Hotel,
Mount  Pleasant,  was,  if  I  mistake  not,  at  the  point  of  death
from  inflammation  in  the  throat.  On  Thursday,  the  11th  of


87


Cure  of  intense  Head-ache,  fyc.

November,  I  called  accidentally,  and  found  the  infant’s  com¬
plexion  yellow,  and  her  mother’s  breasts  inflamed.  The  first
appreciable  result  of  my  action,  was  an  inclination  to  take  the
breast  after  a  change  in  her  complexion  had  been  effected.
My  next  concern  was  to  take  the  inflammation  from  the
mother’s  breast,  before  allowing  this  child  to  suck  any  more
hurtful  milk.  A  few  passes  relieved  Mrs.  Campbell  at  the
expense  of  striking  pain  to  her  back,  which  was  next  cured.
The  child  slept  well  that  night  for  the  first  since  it  had  been
very  ill ;  for  two  days  with  slight  manipulations  it  had  much
sleep.  I  will  not  offer  an  opinion  as  to  the  proportion  of
mesmeric  and  ordinary  sleep,  or  how  far  the  terms  involve  a
distinction  without  a  difference ;  but  at  some  times  the  repose
was  so  complete,  that  though  the  skin  was  moist  and  the
stomach  and  bowels  regular,  parental  affection  took  alarm,
and  sent  for  the  attendant  surgeon,  who  humbly  confessed  he
could  do  nothing  more.  Three  times  medicine  was  admi¬
nistered,  once  in  my  presence,  after  I  commenced  to  act,  and
each  time  instantly  rejected  by  the  child’s  stomach.  The
child,  after  sleeping  nearly  night  and  day  for  four  days,  awoke
very  lively,  and  beautifully  convalescent.


XIII.  Cure  of  intense  Head-ache  and  other  distressing
symptoms.  By  Mr.  Saunders.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

Sir, — As  there  are  many  persons  who  believe  in  the  mesmeric
phenomena,  but  who  at  the  same  time  think  the  cures
effected  through  that  agency  are  not  lasting,  I  beg  to  for¬
ward  the  following  case  of  Mrs.  Saunders  (my  wife),  whose
cure  has  been  of  the  most  permanent  description ;  I  will  let
her  tell  her  own  tale,  and  only  add  a  few  remarks  by  way  of
explanation.

“I  was  in  ill  health  for  some  years,  almost  constantly
under  medical  care,  and  very  frequently  obliged  to  consult
physicians,  many  of  whom  (and  most  of  them  of  very  con¬
siderable  eminence)  declaring  my  absolute  restoration  to
sound  health  to  be  very  improbable.  My  malady  was  termed
by  them  overflow  of  blood  to  the  head.  I  suffered  the  most
violent  pains  in  my  head  almost  daily,  frequently  so  agonizing
were  the  pains  as  to  cause  me  to  groan  aloud,  and  compel  me
to  lie  a  good  portion  of  my  time  in  bed ;  I  could  not  go  into
society  without  the  excitement  causing  my  head  to  ache  most
violently.  I  also  suffered  from  extreme  weakness ;  I  was
quite  unable  to  walk  any  distance  or  endure  the  least  bodily


88  Cure  of  intense  Head-ache  and  other

fatigue ;  I  was  frequently  bled  from  the  arm,  leeched  pro¬
fusely,  besides  my  taking  all  sorts  of  medicines,  and  being
kept  to  a  very  spare  diet;  change  of  air  was  frequently
tried,  all  which  means  afforded  me  only  a  temporary  relief;
I  did  not  gain  any  strength,  indeed  I  very  soon  became
as  great  a  sufferer  as  ever.  At  length  my  husband  became
acquainted  with  mesmerism,  and,  finding  he  could  himself
mesmerise,  he  was  induced  to  try  its  effect  in  my  case.
After  many  trials  to  induce  the  required  sleep,  he  was  obliged
to  relinquish  his  efforts,  for  unfortunately  no  effect  was  pro¬
duced  upon  me,  and  I  conceived  myself  to  be  wholly  unsus¬
ceptible.  After  an  interval  of  some  weeks,  another  trial  was
made  to  induce  sleep,  and  strange  to  relate,  a  few,  very  few,
passes  obliged  me  to  sit  down  (for  I  was  at  the  time  standing) ;
and  ultimately  a  sound  sleep  was  induced.  The  result  of
daily  mesmerism  for  about  three  months  was  the  entire  relief
of  the  pains  in  my  head,  a  great  addition  to  my  strength,  and
the  producing  a  cheerfulness  of  spirits,  such  as  I  had  not  felt
for  several  past  years.  In  the  space  of  six  months,  I  became
such  a  different  being,  that  my  friends  scarcely  recognized
me  as  the  same  person,  who  had  so  long  been  a  sufferer;  and
am  now  in  perfect  health  and  spirits,  and  much  stronger  than
I  ever  felt  in  my  life.  It  is  now  between  three  and  four  years
since  I  gave  up  medicine  and  resorted  to  mesmerism.

“  Matilda  Saunders.”

I  will  now,  sir,  proceed  to  give  you  a  few  of  the  pheno¬
mena  which  occurred  during  and  after  the  restoration  of  my
wife  to  perfect  health.  As  she  has  already  told  you,  we  con¬
sulted  many  physicians  and  surgeons  of  Bath,  but  without
deriving  any  benefit  from  their  prescriptions.  One  physician
treated  her  for  a  flow  of  blood  to  the  head,  and  after  changing
the  medicine  several  times  during  five  or  six  months,  declared
he  could  not  tell  whether  she  was  better  or  worse,  and  hoped
in  a  little  time  to  find  out  what  really  was  her  disease.  Find¬
ing  this  physician  was  working  in  the  dark  as  to  her  com¬
plaint,  and  feeling  satisfied  that  when  a  medicine  does  not
produce  a  beneficial  effect,  it  frequently  does  considerable
harm,  I  took  her  to  another  leading  medical  man,  a  surgeon  ;
he  treated  her  as  labouring  under  general  debility,  but  his
medicines  were  also  useless.  Another  surgeon  had  her  bled
frequently,  which  gave  her  a  little  relief  for  a  few  hours,  but
she  became  invariably  worse.  Another  physical  said,  after
attending  her  for  some  months,  that  the  disease  had  made
such  inroads  upon  the  constitution,  she  having  been  labouring
under  it  for  eight  or  ten  years,  that  he  did  not  think  she  ever


distressing  symptoms.  By  Mr.  Saunders.


89


would  be  cured  of  it,  and  that  she  had  better  keep  herself
quiet,  take  plenty  of  aperients,  be  frequently  bled,  bathe  her
head  with  cold  water,  and  never  read  or  talk  of  anything  that
was  at  all  likely  to  excite  her.

I  thought  it  therefore  my  duty  to  try  the  effects  of  mes¬
merism  upon  her,  and  after  many  attempts,  as  she  has  already
told  you,  I  caused  sleep  to  come  on,  and  was  able  to  make
her  limbs  perfectly  rigid.  I  made  passes  over  her  head  by
joining  the  fingers  of  my  two  hands  at  the  top  of  her  head,
and  drawing  them  down  each  side  to  the  shoulders.  Her
face  was  very  red,  and  I  made  passes  in  front  of  the  face  from
the  organ  of  Veneration  down  to  the  chest,  and  could  see  dis¬
tinctly  the  redness  descend.  First  it  came  down  to  the  eyes ;
I  then  with  about  eight  or  ten  passes  brought  it  down  within
half  an  inch  of  her  chin.  As  the  colour  descended,  she  said
the  pain  left  her  head,  and  she  could  feel  it  (the  pain)  just
where  the  red  colour  appeared  to  stop ;  so  that  at  first  the  pain
was  on  the  top  of  the  head,  it  then  left  that  part,  and  fixed
itself  in  a  line  with  the  eyes,  indeed  the  eyes  became  very
much  inflamed ;  it  then  went  to  the  chin,  and  so  on  down  the
body  till  it  entirely  left  her,  and  I  am  happy  to  say  that  she
became,  comparatively  speaking,  quite  a  new  being.  Her
spirits  are  excellent ;  she  can  walk  almost  any  distance,  and
never  has  a  pain  in  her  head  or  any  malady  which  is  not  taken
away  in  a  few  minutes  by  local  mesmerism.  The  only  medi¬
cine  that  she  has  taken  since  I  applied  mesmerism,  which  is
now  between  three  and  four  years,  is  an  occasional  antibilious
pill.  After  I  had  effected  her  cure,  I  attempted  to  excite
her  phrenological  organs,  and  they  responded  very  quickly.
On  one  occasion,  when  I  had  some  friends  at  my  house,  a
gentleman  present  sent  her  into  the  sleep  in  about  half  a
minute;  he  tickled  the  sensitive  part  of  the  nose  and  touched
the  eyelashes  without  producing  the  least  symptom  of  feeling.
Several  lozenges  were  tasted  behind  her  back,  and  she  told
correctly  the  taste  of  each ;  snuff  was  also  taken  behind  her
back,  and  she  sneezed  several  times ;  her  speech  was  instantly
checked  by  touching  with  the  finger  the  back  part  of  the
occipital  protuberance,  and  as  instantly  resumed  when  the
finger  was  removed.  Phreno-mesmerism  without  contact
was  very  successful  and  interesting ;  the  organs  of  Veneration,
Benevolence,  Destructiveness,  &c.,  all  gave  strong  manifesta¬
tions,  though  the  party  pointing  the  finger  held  it  fully  two
inches  from  the  organ,  and  also  stood  behind  her  in  order
that  she  might  not  know  to  what  organ  he  was  directing  his
finger.  On  another  occasion,  she  was  sent  into  the  sleep  by
a  gentleman  of  high  scientific  attainments,  in  about  a  quarter


90


Cure  of  intense  Head-ache  and  other


of  a  minute.  The  phrenological  organs  of  a  third  party  were
touched,  and  showed  their  manifestations  very  clearly  in
Mrs.  Saunders.  She  can  play  a  game  of  cribbage  with  great
ease  in  the  sleep,  even  with  her  eyes  bandaged,  and  fre¬
quently  reads  addresses,  and  letters,  cards,  &c;  sometimes
when  they  are  placed  on  the  top  of  her  head,  and  at  others
when  they  are  under  her  foot.  If  she  meets  with  an  accident,
such  as  a  burn,  or  fall,  she  invariably  gets  me  to  locally  mes¬
merise  her.  Once  she  fell  down  on  her  left  arm,  and  upon
getting  up,  she  could  scarcely  move  the  arm ;  it  began  to
swell,  looked  red,  and  the  pain  she  said  was  very  acute.  I
made  some  passes  down  the  arm,  for  about  five  minutes,  but
though  I  could  ordinarily  catalepse  the  arm  in  one  pass,  and
even  by  the  look  alone,  still  on  this  occasion,  it  took  me  full
ten  minutes  to  produce  rigidity ;  but  when  once  rigidity  was
produced,  the  arm  returned  to  its  original  colour,  the  pain
entirely  left  it,  and  after  I  reduced  it  to  its  original  state,
she  said  she  could  scarcely  believe  that  there  had  ever  been
anything  at  all  the  matter  with  it;  and  I  almost  invariably
find  that  where  a  limb  is  strained,  and  I  can  produce  rigidity,
the  cure  is  certain.  As  she  was  feeling  great  pain  one  day
from  an  inflammation  of  the  eye,  I  made  passes  down  the
face,  and  thought  I  could  bring  the  disease  out  at  the  shoulder ;
on  waking  her  up,  for  she  had  gone  into  the  sleep,  her  eye
was  quite  cured,  but  she  felt  a  severe  pain  in  her  shoulder.
I  then  made  some  passes  from  the  shoulder  to  the  fingers,
and  the  pain  immediately  vanished.

She  is  very  correct  in  describing  the  diseases  of  parties
who  come  to  me  to  be  mesmerised.  Only  a  week  or  two  back,
a  young  gentleman  called  on  me  to  ask  me  if  I  thought  mes¬
merism  would  be  of  any  use  to  him.  He  said  he  had  not  seen
anything  of  mesmerism,  and  although  he  believed  in  the
sleep,  yet  he  could  not  believe  anything  beyond  that  state.
I  put  Mrs.  Saunders  into  the  sleep  :  she  took  his  hand,  and
so  minutely  described  his  complaint,  and  even  the  shooting
pains  which  he  then  felt  in  his  head,  that  he  looked  aghast,
and  said  the  truth  of  her  statement  was  so  exact  that  he  felt
quite  frightened.  He  then  submitted  to  the  manipulations
for  a  short  time,  but  being  very  nervous  when  he  felt  the
mesmeric  effects  commencing,  he  got  up,  and  I  have  not  seen
him  since.

Having  lately  changed  our  residence  from  Bath  to  Bristol,

I  have  not  had  time  to  devote  so  much  attention  as  I  could
have  wished  to  many  parties  who  are  desirous  of  receiving
benefit  from  mesmerism ;  but  prevous  to  my  coming  to
Bristol,  I  find  on  looking  over  my  book,  that  out  of  fifty


distressing  symptoms.  By  Mr.  Saunders.


91


patients,  I  have  thoroughly  cured  twenty-five,  and  as  I  only
operate  u  en  amateur  ”  I  am  not  able  to  give  my  patients  that
time  and  regularity  which  would  be  expected  from  a  pro¬
fessional  man.

S.  D.  Saunders.

Back  Hall,  Bristol,

March  9,  1848.

This  case  should  be  read  side  by  side  with  that  of  Mr.
Snewing,  in  No.  XIX.,  p.  284. — Zoist.


XIX .  Benefit  of  Self-Mesmerism  in  a  case  of  Impediment  of
Speech.  By  Mr.  Saunders,  Bristol.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

Sir, — In  spite  of  the  opposition  of  the  medical  profession  in
Bristol,  mesmerism  is  making  gigantic  strides  in  this  city ;
indeed  a  vast  number  of  those  medical  Practitioners  who  for¬
merly  spoke  of  mesmerism  as  humbug  and  delusion,  are  either
become  converts  to  the  science,  or  else  admit  that  they  are
not  in  a  situation  to  give  an  opinion  upon  the  subject,  from
not  having  examined  it.  We  have  a  Mesmeric  Investigation
Society,  which  meets  once  a  fortnight,  and  amongst  its  most
attentive  members  are  some  gentlemen  of  high  standing  in
society  and  great  scientific  attainments.  Independently  of
this  Society,  it  is  in  contemplation  to  establish  a  Mesmeric
Infirmary,  and  from  the  tone  of  the  public,  I  have  every  reason
to  believe  that  it  will  meet  with  very  general  support.  For,
though  we  have  many  medical  men  here  who  are  perfect
believers  in  mesmerism,  still  they  are  afraid  of  losing  caste
by  practising  it ;  so  that  the  few  benevolent  amateurs  who
mesmerise  are  unable  to  devote  a  sufficient  time  to  alleviate
the  sufferings  of  one  third  of  the  individuals  who  apply  to
them  for  relief.  Indeed  some  parties,  fearing  to  trespass  too
much  upon  the  time  of  their  mesmerisers,  have  operated  upon
themselves,  and  with  considerable  success.

A  person,  by  the  name  of  Taylor,  living  in  this  city,
applied  to  me  on  account  of  an  impediment  in  his  speech,
which  at  times  caused  him  great  inconvenience.  I  succeeded
in  closing  his  eyes,  but  he  still  retained  consciousnesss.  By
drawing  my  hand  down  before  his  throat,  I  caused  him  to
throw  his  head  backwards;  and  he  said  he  felt  his  throat
dragged  forwards  towards  my  hand  :  the  moment  I  placed
my  fingers  in  contact  with  his  head,  he  instantly  returned  to
his  natural  state,  and  opened  his  eyes.  By  making  passes


92  Benefit  of  Mesmerism  in  Impediment  of  Speech.

clown  the  back  of  his  head,  a  similar  effect  was  produced.
After  mesmerising  him  a  few  times,  I  could  close  his  eyes,
and  draw  his  head  and  neck  into  almost  any  position  by  the
will  alone,  and  even  when  in  an  adjoining  room,  with  a  thick
wall  between  us.  After  a  few  weeks,  the  thought  struck  him
that  he  might  be  able  to  mesmerise  himself.  He  accordingly
tried,  and,  after  making  a  few  passes  down  his  face,  his  eyes
closed,  and  his  head  and  neck  became  twisted  and  strained
to  such  a  degree  that  he  was  compelled  to  desist,  and  make
the  reverse  passes  over  his  face,  in  order  to  take  away  the
severe  pain  caused  by  the  straining  of  the  parts  of  the  throat.
By  making  a  few  passes  with  his  right  hand  over  his  left  arm,
the  latter  became  perfectly  rigid,  and  could  not  be  restored
to  its  natural  state  until  he  made  reverse  passes  over  it.  He
continues  to  mesmerise  himself  every  morning,  and  considers
his  speech  greatly  improved ,  as  is  also  his  general  health.

In  my  own  house  mesmerism  is  a  never-failing  remedy.
If  a  finger  is  burnt,  a  few  passes  are  made  and  the  pain
vanishes.  Let  what  will  happen  to  either  Mrs.  Saunders  or
the  children,  they  invariably  become  speedily  cured  by  a  few
of  my  mesmeric  passes.  We  have  lately  had  an  aunt  staying
with  us ;  she  has  been  subject  to  great  heat  and  pain  in  the
back  part  of  her  head  :  but  a  little  mesmerism  soon  puts  her
head  to  rights.  She  was  unlucky  enough,  a  few  days  back,  to
fall  down  and  sprain  her  hand,  whilst  on  a  visit  to  a  friend ;
but,  upon  her  return  to  our  house,  I  mesmerised  her  hand,
and  it  speedily  became  perfectly  well.  Not  long  ago,  Mrs.
Saunders  (who  has  been  thoroughly  cured  of  a  disease  of  the
nerves  of  the  head,  after  having  been  attended  by  the  heads
of  the  medical  profession  of  Bath  unsuccessfully,)  fell  down
and  strained  her  elbow  very  severely.  The  arm  began  to
swell  down  to  the  wrist,  and  gave  great  pain.  I  made  some
passes  over  it,  and  she  complained  of  the  burning  which  the
passes  caused.  I  endeavoured  to  cause  the  arm  to  become
rigid,  (an  effect  which  I  was  in  the  habit  of  producing  by  one
pass  alone,)  but  could  not  do  so  till  after  manipulating  nine
or  ten  minutes :  but,  as  soon  as  it  did  become  rigid,  the  pain
immediately  left  her  elbow.  I  then  mesmerised  the  arm,  and
neither  swelling  nor  pain  were  either  seen  or  felt  afterwards.
Indeed  I  invariably  find  that  in  the  case  of  strains,  rigidity
is  rather  difficult  to  produce ;  but,  when  once  obtained,  the
cure  is  effected.

Mesmerism  has  lately  been  greatly  assisted  by  some  very
excellent  lectures  which  have  been  delivered  by  Dr.  Storer,
a  resident  physician  of  Bristol,  at  the  Literary  Institution  in
Park  Street.  At  the  last  lecture,  the  theatre  of  the  Insti-


Habit  of  Opium-taking  removed  through  Mesmerism.  93

tution  was  crowded  by  an  audience  of  believers, — the  same
theatre  in  which  only  three  years  ago  a  round  robin  against
mesmerism  was  signed  by  the  Bristol  medical  practitioners.
A  friend,  who  has  just  ordered  his  bookseller  to  erase  his
name  as  a  subscriber  to  the  Lancet,  has  read  to  me  a  few  lines
from  that  work  upon  the  notice  of  the  Bristol  Mercury  relating
to  Dr.  Storeys  lectures ;  but  the  opinions  expressed  are  evi¬
dently  those  of  a  man  made  up  of  love  of  notoriety,  destruc¬
tiveness,  and  acquisitiveness,  and  writhing  day  and  night,  at
home  and  abroad,  under  the  bitterest  disappointment  at  the
steady  manner  in  which  mesmerism  has  advanced  in  this  and
other  countries.  For  the  time  he  deemed  it  a  vile  imposi¬
tion,  and  declared  he  had  destroyed  it  for  ever,  nine  years
ago ;  and  now  it  is  fairly  established  as  one  of  the  grandest
and  most  sensible  truths  of  nature.

I  remain,  Sir,  yours  thankfully.
Back  Hall,  Baldwin  Street,  S.  D.  Saunders.

Bristol.


XY.  A  case  of  the  relinquishment  of  Opium-taking,  and  one
of  the  restoration  of  lost  Weight,  with  Mesmerism.  By
Mr.  Adams,  Surgeon,  Lymington.  In  a  letter  to  Mr.
Kiste.

Lymington,
January  28th,  1848.
My  dear  Mr.  Kiste, — I  fear  you  will  think  me  a  poor  coad¬
jutor  in  extending  the  knowledge  and  practice  of  mesmerism ;
as  I  have  not  reported  a  single  case  to  the  public  since  I  had
the  pleasure  of  seeing  you  more  than  two  years  ago,  when
we  had  so  much  discussion  on  this  most  interesting  and  im¬
portant  subject.

The  fact  is  that  I  have  been  prevented  from  attempting
much  in  mesmerism,  by  the  engrossing  occupations  of  general
practice ;  and  then  I  suffer  so  much  from  exhaustion  in  the
process,  that  I  cannot  persevere  with  it  long  together.  How¬
ever,  I  am  happy  to  say,  that  the  prejudices  and  obstacles
to  the  progress  of  mesmerism  in  this  neighbourhood  are  of
late  much  diminished,  and  I  hope  the  time  is  at  length
approaching  when  the  relatives  and  friends  of  the  afflicted
will  be  disposed  to  take  upon  themselves  the  office  of  mes-
meriser  under  the  direction  of  their  medical  adviser ;  which
seems  the  only  method  by  which  much  progress  can  be  made.

I  shall  select  two  cases  out  of  some  others,  which  have
lately  come  under  my  notice,  of  the  beneficial  effects  of


94  Habit  of  Opium-taking  removed  through  Mesmerism .

mesmerism,  for  your  perusal,  and  if  you  think  them  of
sufficient  interest  for  publication,  I  will  thank  you  to  report
them  in  The  Zoist.  Although  there  may  be  no  novelty  in
them,  yet,  perhaps  it  may  be  necessary  and  useful  to  continue
to  publish  cases  of  this  kind,  from  as  many  independent
sources  as  possible,  till  by  their  repetition,  the  public  mind
shall  be  more  generally  awakened  to  the  importance  of  the
subject.

Case  1.  A  habit  of  Opium, -taking,  removed  through  Mesmerism.

In  the  month  of  November  last,  a  lady,  45  years  of  age,
from  a  neighbouring  town,  whose  name  I  am  not  at  liberty
to  give,  applied  to  me  for  medical  advice  under  circumstances,
which,  at  my  request,  she  has  described  in  writing.  And  her
statement  is  as  follows.

“  It  is  seven  years  ago  last  May,  that  my  illness  first  com¬
menced,  from  a  fright  I  received  at  that  time,  being  two
months  advanced  in  pregnancy.  I  suffered  severely  from
repeated  haemorrhages  during  the  following  four  months,  and
at  the  end  of  that  time  gave  birth  to  a  dead  child,  having  at
my  confinement  suffered  very  much  from  violence  of  pain
and  nervous  irritation  ;  being  constantly  obliged  to  resort  to
composing  medicine  to  allay  the  almost  maddening  pains
I  endured.  After  a  few  months,  I  was  again  pregnant,  and
at  the  end  of  the  second  month,  was  attacked  with  flooding,
which  ended  in  miscarriage.  Three  times  in  quick  succession
was  I  the  subject  of  this  occurrence ;  and  once  I  gave  birth
to  a  living  child,  who  died  in  a  few  months.  On  all  these
occasions  the  symptoms  were  the  same,  namely,  violent  pains
and  nervous  irritation,  which  could  only  be  subdued  by
laudanum.  The  habit  of  taking  laudanum  I  have  found  it
ever  since  impossible  to  break  through ;  any  attempt  to
do  so  being  followed  by  insupportable  local  irritation  and
restlessness.”

I  told  my  patient  there  was  no  hope  for  her  restoration  to
health  unless  the  laudanum  was  left  off.  The  quantity  taken
amounted  to  about  three  teaspoonfuls  in  twenty-four  hours.
To  leave  it  off  was  considered  by  her  an  impossibility.  I  told
her  I  thought  it  might  be  done  under  a  course  of  mesmerism,
and  that  if  she  would  consent  to  it,  I  expressed  my  willingness
to  give  her  six  consecutive  sittings  in  the  presence  of  her  son,
if  he  would  promise  to  go  on  with  it  for  some  weeks.  This
was  assented  to.  Without  tediously  detailing  the  results  of
each  sitting,  I  have  the  satisfaction  of  stating  that  the  patient
was  readily  influenced  by  the  mesmeric  passes ;  that  a  soothing.


Restoration  of  lost  Weight  with  Mesmerism.  95

tranquil  effect  entirely  new  to  her  was  produced  at  the  very
first  sitting,  which  gradually  increased,  and  was  frequently
succeeded  by  sleep  of  half  an  hour’s  duration  ;  nights  of  good
rest  soon  followed.  Half  the  laudanum  was  left  off  in  a  week,
and  the  whole  of  it  at  the  end  of  five  weeks  from  the  com¬
mencement  of  the  mesmerism  ;  without  any  return  of  the  dis¬
tressing  feelings  for  which  it  was  taken.

Case  2.  Restoration  of  lost  Weight  with  Mesmerism.

In  September  last,  a  young  gentleman  about  13  years  of
age,  the  son  of  a  friend  of  mine,  came  from  a  distance  to
stay  with  me  a  few  weeks  for  the  benefit  of  sea  air.  He  was
thin  and  weak,  having  recently  suffered  from  chronic  abscess,
which  was  then  nearly  cured.  His  appetite  and  spirits  were
good,  and  there  being  no  symptoms  of  disease  of  any  kind,
I  trusted  to  a  generous  diet  and  change  of  air  for  the  com¬
plete  restoration  of  his  health  without  giving  any  medicine.
I  weighed  him  a  day  or  two  after  his  arrival,  and  on  doing  so
again  a  fortnight  after,  was  disappointed  at  finding  he  had
gained  nothing  in  weight.  Observing  at  this  time  some  slight
jerking  muscular  movements  about  him  of  a  St.  Vitus’s  dance
character,  I  began  mesmerising  him  every  morning  for  half
an  hour.  In  other  respects  no  change  was  made ;  his  diet
and  habits  of  exercise  continued  the  same,  and  no  medicine
was  given.  At  the  end  of  another  fortnight  he  had  gained  six
pounds  in  weight.

I  now  left  off  the  mesmerism,  being  very  much  engaged
otherwise,  and  not  very  well ;  and  a  fortnight  afterwards
ascertained  that  he  had  lost  two  pounds.  I  then  resumed
the  mesmerism,  but  not  very  efficiently  I  fear,  not  being
quite  well,  and  meeting  with  frequent  interruptions  to  the
process.  However,  at  the  end  of  the  next  fortnight,  he  had
regained  one  pound.  Soon  after  this,  my  young  friend  left
me  to  join  his  relations.  I  have  lately  had  the  pleasure  of
hearing  that  he  is  perfectly  well.

By  way  of  comment  on  the  first  of  these  cases,  the  ques¬
tion  naturally  suggests  itself,  by  what  other  means  any  medical
man,  who  repudiates  mesmerism,  can  expect  to  cure  so  de¬
structive  a  habit  of  seven  years’  standing,  and  in  so  short  a
time  ?  Any  one  professing  the  healing  art  who  refuses,  after
reading  this  statement,  to  employ  mesmerism  in  a  similar
case,  must  either  disbelieve  my  statement,  or  stand  convicted
of  prefering  the  indulgence  of  his  prejudices  to  saving  the
lives  and  removing  the  sufferings  of  his  patients.  As  to  my
veracity,  it  would  be  well  for  any  sceptic  to  consider  that  my


96


Facts  in  Clairvoyance.


testimony  in  favour  of  the  beneficial  agency  of  mesmerism  is
that  of  one  only  amongst  a  hundred  others, — all  honourable
members  of  an  honourable  profession.  But  the  friends  of  so
new  and  startling  a  discovery  as  mesmerism,  have  the  same
difficulties  to  contend  with  in  pressing  it  on  mankind  as  have
always  attended  every  important  innovation  in  the  scientific
and  moral  world.  Time,  however,  is  the  friend  of  all  truth  ;
and  its  advocates  best  promote  its  advancement  by  a  calm,
dignified,  and  persevering  assertion  of  its  presence  and  pro¬
perties.  Philosophers  should  not  return  railing  for  railing ;
it  damages  their  cause,  as  well  as  disturbs  their  composure.
The  right  way  is  to  keep  the  lamp  of  truth  steadily  burning ;
to  expose  error  and  leave  it  to  rot.  The  cloak  of  ignorance
and  prejudice  will  be  much  sooner  stripped  off  by  the  sun¬
beams  than  by  the  blast.

I  remain,  my  dear  Sir,  yours  truly,

To  A.  Kiste,  Esq.  N.  Adams.


XVI.  Facts  in  Clairvoyance.  By  Dr.  Ashburner.

“  Drs.  Winslow,  Browning,  Hodgkin,  and  other  medical  gentlemen,  were  then  examined
as  to  the  present  state  of  mind  of  the  alleged  lunatics,  and  agreed  that  they  were  insane,  and
incapable  of  managing  their  affairs.  On  being  cross-examined  by  Mr.  Miller,  several  ad¬
mitted  that  there  was  no  unsoundness  of  mind  except  as  to  the  above-mentioned  delusions.
Dr.  Hodgkin  said,  *  A  person  who  believed  that  any  one  under  the  influence  of  mesmerism
could  read  a  booh  in  the  next  room,  would  be  labouring  under  a  delusion ,  although  he  might  be
able  to  take  care  of  himself  and  property .’  ” — Extract  from  a  Newspaper.


“Mr.  Macaulay.  You  mentioned  as  a  remarkable  instance  that  a  person  of  great  rank
in  the  state  was  a  patron  of  the  mesmeric  hospital. — Dr.  Seymour.  Yes.  1  have  seen  a  pro¬
posal  going  round  with  his  name  at  the  end  of  it.

“  Mr.  M.  Do  you  conceive  that  in  patronizing  the  mesmeric  hospital,  he  shewed  a  dis¬
regard  to  the  College  of  Physicians? — Dr.  S.  I  think  he  shewed  a  great  disregard  to  our
acquirements,  to  common  sense,  and  to  everything  else  !

“  Mr.  M .  Is  not  the  principal  of  the  mesmeric  hospital  a  feliow  of  the  Royal  College  of
Physicians? — Dr.  S.  That  I  cannot  help.  He  became  a  fellow  before  he  took  up  his  apos¬
tolic  mission.

“  Mr.  M.  Has  he  been  allowed  by  the  college  to  make  a  public  appearance  upon  an
occasion  of  great  interest  l*— Dr.  S.  He  was  not  passed  over  :  that  was  all.  1  think  it  was  a
bad  measure,  but  I  cannot  help  it.”  ( Report  from  the  Select  Committee  on  Medical  Registra¬
tion  ;  together  with  the  Minutes  of  Evidence,  pp.  1300 — 1303.)


“  There  are  more  things  in  heaven  and  earth,  Horatio,  than  are  dreamt  of  in  your  phi¬
losophy.”—  Shahespere.


Physicians  who  know  little  of  metaphysics, — almost  nothing
of  the  physical  facts  relating  to  the  philosophy  of  mind ;  who
are  grossly  ignorant  of  the  splendid  truths  developed  by
the  brilliant  discoveries  of  Gall, —  many  of  them,  perhaps,
unable  to  appreciate  the  knowledge  of  these  from  the  habits
of  illogical  reflection  in  which  they  indulge,  or  may  be  from  a
deficiency  in  the  organization  of  their  brains,  continue  to
chatter  before  courts  of  justice,  and  before  committees  of  the
legislature,  on  subjects  which  they  do  not  understand,  and

*  Dr.  Elliotson’s  delivery  of  the  Harveian  Oration.


By  Dr.  Asliburner.


9  7


which  should  be  studied  and  comprehended,  in  some  ele¬
mentary  fashion  at  least,  before  they  are  ventured  upon  in
public.  Dr.  Hodgkin  cannot  be  ignorant  of  the  existence
of  the  quarterly  publication  issuing  from  No.  219,  Regent
Street,  entitled  The  Zoist.  As  a  physician,  he  ought  not  to
be  ignorant  that  many  things  important  to  the  best  interests
of  humanity  are  to  be  found  in  that  work.  No  physician
should  practice  his  profession  who  is  ignorant  of  the  facts
contained  in  PetethRs  book  on  Animal  Electricity.  The
different  works  of  Mesmer,  De  Puysegur,  Tardy  de  Mon¬
travel,  Foissac,  Deleuze,  Mialle,  Townshend,  Colquhoun,
Reiclienbach,  not  to  speak  of  the  Harveian  Oration  of
Elliotson,  should  have  had  some  attentive  consideration,
before  a  man  ventures  to  commit  himself  solemnly  in  a  court
of  justice,  or  before  an  assembly  of  members  of  the  House
of  Commons  on  the  subjects  on  which  these  persons  have
recorded  most  important  truths.  To  say,  as  some  physicians
have  said,  that  they  will  not  go  to  school  again,  is  to  ac¬
knowledge  that  having  been  negligent  in  learning,  having
omitted  to  acquire  knowledge,  they  yet  claim  to  practice  on
a  par  with  those  who  have  the  knowledge.  Being  ignorant
themselves,  they  will  brand  those  as  quacks  who  know  more
than  they  do.  What  is  a  quack,  in  the  common  acceptation
of  the  term,  but  a  doctor  ignorant  of  that  which  he  professes
to  practice  ?  And  men  will  pretend  to  talk  of  their  acquaint¬
ance  with  diseases  of  the  mind,  while  yet  they  know  nothing
of  mesmerism  !

Before  an  opinion  is  hazarded  in  a  solemn  court  of  justice
concerning  the  views  or  the  belief,  on  any  of  the  physical
phenomena  of  nature,  entertained  by  contemporary  phy¬
sicians,  a  man  should  have  made  himself  master,  at  least,  of
the  description  of  evidence  they  can  adduce  in  favour  of
facts  apparently  improbable  to  narrow  intellects.  The  pro¬
position  is  quite  correct  that  the  truth,  having  been  esta¬
blished  by  consecutive  series  of  facts  to  the  satisfaction
of  severely  enquiring  minds,  should  be  regarded  with  some
respect  by  all  advanced  and  philosophical  thinkers.  It  is
quite  impossible,  without  some  great  deficiency  of  intellect,
that  any  man  or  set  of  men  having,  with  due  philosophic
humility,  examined  the  facts  that  have  been  received  as  truths
by  persons  with  intellectual  cerebral  organs  of  more  than
average  size  and  activity,  can  treat  them  with  contempt  or
even  with  want  of  ordinary  attention.  When  we  hear  of
men  exposing  themselves  before  courts  of  justice,  or  before
committees  of  the  House  of  Commons,  by  attempting  to  de¬
preciate  the  intellects  of  those  who  study  mesmerism,  and
VOL.  VI.  h


98


Facts  in  Clairvoyance.


who  believe  in  the  existence  of  the  occult  phenomena  known
now  to  thousands  of  persons  in  all  quarters  of  the  globe,  may
we  not  pity  them  for  the  absence  of  that  self-control  which
allows  of  a  silly  exhibition  of  ignorance,  conceit,  and  arro¬
gance.  Poor  Dr.  Seymour’s  large  organs  of  Self-esteem  and
Love  of  Approbation  overcame  his  wisdom,  albeit  not  over¬
abundant,  if  the  size  of  his  forehead  be  examined  for  intel¬
lectual  power,  when  he  appeared  as  a  champion  for  the  vast
acquirements  of  those  who  despise  that  knowledge  which  they
refuse  to  study ;  his  answer  on  the  “  disregard  that  a  person
of  great  rank  in  the  state  (simply  by  advocating  mesmerism)
shewed  to  the  acquirements  of  the  College  of  Physicians,  to
common  sense,  and  to  everything  else  /”  evinces  the  confusion
of  intellect, — the  impertinent  and  inordinate  vanity  that  cha¬
racterizes  low  mental  power  with  large  posterior  parietal  deve¬
lopment.  Dr.  Hodgkin’s  reputation  will  not  be  increased,
among  reflecting  men,  by  his  classing  the  phenomena  of  clair¬
voyance  among  delusions.  May  be,  he,  like  some  other
medical  practitioners,  may  assume  that  it  is  competent  for
him  to  say  what  is  and  what  is  not  in  the  course  of  nature, —
that  the  Almighty  has  it  not  in  his  power  to  shew  us  facts
which  may  militate  against  the  preconceived,  the  prejudged
convictions  of  what  is  called  an  accomplished  physician,  proud
of  his  own  acquirements.  Either  the  phenomena  of  clairvoy¬
ance  are  in  the  course  of  nature, — happen  and  fall  out  into
the  light  of  this  world  by  God’s  permission  and  will,  for  they
are  truths, — or  the  physicians  who  declare  them  to  be  against
the  course  of  nature,  deny  to  him  the  power  of  bringing  to
pass  things  which  are  daily  existent,  and  are  proved  to  be
truths  by  those  who  humbly  and  diligently  seek  for  them.
The  god  of  these  prejudging  physicians  is  but  an  idol !  and
they  are  idol-worshippers.  They  would  have  God’s  will  bend
to  their  limited  determinations,  and  are  angry  at  the  truth  of
clairvoyance,  as  those  sailors  were  angry  with  their  deity,  an
idol  whom  they  whipped  and  threw  overboard  because  their
prayers  to  him  did  not  succeed  in  securing  propitious  weather.
Their  carpenter  could  make  them  a  new  god, — but  Dr.  Hodg¬
kin’s  carpenter  cannot  construct  for  him  a  deity  who  shall  get
rid  of  the  Almighty’s  will,  that  the  truths  of  clairvoyance  are
as  firmly  established — are  as  fully  correct — as  the  truths  re¬
lating  to  the  diurnal  changes  which  it  has  pleased  that  Being
to  ordain.

And  whose  is  the  right  to  declare  his  brother  a  lunatic  for
believing  in  such  truths  P  Is  it  Dr.  Hodgkin’s  ?

If  religion  or  philosophy  can  teach  him  humility,  he  would
do  well  to  study  The  Zoist !  He  would  do  well  to  learn  what


By  Dr.  Ashburner.


99


Gall  has  written  !  He  would  do  well  to  enquire  practically
about  mesmerism,  which  would  teach  him  how  valuable  was
that  knowledge  which  Gall  obtained  from  the  book  of  nature,
and  which  that  gifted  man  threw  out  for  the  benefit  of  the
world,  before  he  could  be  allowed  to  know  through  mesmerism
of  the  almost  mathematical  demonstration  that  all  he  had  said
on  the  functions  of  the  brain  and  nerves  was  absolute  truth  !
Above  all,  Dr.  Hodgkin  would  do  well  to  find  out  that  by  the
aid  of  mesmerism  he  may  be  enabled  to  understand  far  more
than  he  knows  relating  to  the  subject  of  delusions,  and  by
God’s  blessing  to  a  physician, — the  truly  humble  mind  of  the
real  philosopher, — to  cure  mental  diseases.

Good  heaven !  that  men  professing  to  practice  among
their  fellow-beings  afflicted  with  lunacy  should  be  arrogantly
ignorant  of  mesmerism  !  No  man  can  do  justice  to  his  fellow-
man,  as  a  medical  practitioner,  while  he  remains  ignorant  of
mesmeric  science !  If  he  have  common  powers  of  reflection,
the  facts  in  The  Zoist  will  teach  him  that  new  things  are  ap¬
pearing  which  must  change  the  whole  practice  of  physic ;
that  the  polarities  of  crystals  lead  to  reflections  on  the  princi¬
ples  involved  in  the  modus  operandi  of  all  the  substances  em¬
ployed  in  medical  art ;  that  the  analogies  between  mesmerism
and  electricity  are  so  close  as  to  demonstrate  the  gross  igno¬
rance  and  absolute  folly  of  deriding  the  facts  which  belong  to
these  twin-sister  sciences.  Sneers  and  boastings  of  acquire¬
ments  are  not  the  class  of  arguments  to  make  converts  in  these
days,  and  the  votaries  of  truth  fear  not  the  fool’s  weapon  of
ridicule.  For  myself,  notwithstanding  the  position  assigned
to  me  by  Dr.  Hodgkin  in  the  category  of  the  “  deluded,”  I
will  shew  that  I  am  a  firm  believer  in  clairvoyance  by  a
statement  of  facts,  which,  I  doubt  not,  will  be  interesting
to  the  readers  of  The  Zoist.


On  Saturday,  12th  February,  1848,  Major  Buckley,  well
known  as  an  ardent  and  powerful  mesmeriser,  and  among
his  brother  officers  as  possessing  a  high  character  for  truth¬
fulness  and  integrity,  brought  to  my  house,  at  half  past  eight
o’clock  in  the  evening,  two  young  women  who  had  arrived
at  Paddington,  about  three  hours  before,  from  Cheltenham.
The  one,  A.  B.,  aged  26  years,  is  of  a  slight  figure,  above
the  middle  height,  of  a  nervo-lymphatic  temperament,  with
dark  hair  and  grey  eyes.  It  appeared  that  she  had  been
mesmerised  occasionally  since  the  27th  December,  1846.
She  works  as  a  dress  maker,  is  a  person  of  excellent  cha¬
racter,  was  formerly  said  to  be  consumptive  and  delicate,
but  has  latterly  enjoyed  good  health,  notwithstanding  verv

h  2


100


Facts  in  Clairvoyance.


assiduous  attention  to  her  occupations,  which  sometimes
oblige  her  to  sit  up  at  her  needle  till  very  late  in  the  dark
hours  of  night.

The  other,  E.  L.,  is  21  years  of  age.  She  is  slightly  em¬
bonpoint,  of  middle  stature,  lymphatic  temperament,  with
dark  hair,  hazel  eyes,  of  most  interesting  expression.  She
has  been  mesmerised  occasionally  for  three  years.  She  is  a
dress  maker,  and  the  intimate  friend  and  companion  of  A.  B.
In  her  feelings  she  is  more  sensitive  than  her  friend.  Both
have  amiable  cerebral  developments.  A.  B.  has  better  Con¬
structiveness,  Size,  Individuality,  Music,  Time,  and  Mirth ;
but  as  a  whole,  the  head  of  E.  L.  indicates  Causality,  Com¬
parison,  Colour,  and  other  organs  of  taste  and  judgment,
better  than  that  of  her  friend.  Her  head  is  larger.  Both  are
well  formed  for  affection  and  the  social  feelings  of  our  nature.
Both  have  a  delicacy  of  nervous  fibre  that  produces  a  highly
sensitive  condition  of  mind.  Each  is  susceptible, — both  are
impressionable.  The  phenomena  exhibited  by  these  young-
women  were  to  me  most  extraordinary.  I  had  corresponded
with  Major  Buckley  on  their  cases  long  before  I  saw  them,
and  had  proposed  that  a  committee  should  be  appointed
to  examine  into  the  facts  so  often  alleged  to  have  been  com¬
pleted  by  these  young  women.  The  objection  to  such  a
committee  exists  in  the  truths,  elicited  by  much  experience,
concerning  the  utter  failure  of  the  phenomena  in  the  pre¬
sence  of  severely  doubting  minds.  It  would  seem  as  if  the
fluid  emitted  by  the  brains  of  persons,  who  are  severely — and
to  clairvoyantes — disagreeably  sceptical,  was  sufficient  to  suf¬
focate  and  to  destroy  the  developing  events.  It  was  conse¬
quently  agreed  that  on  the  evening  of  the  arrival  in  town  of
these  young  women,  nobody  should  be  present  besides  them¬
selves,  at  first,  but  Major  Buckley  and  myself.  We  assembled
in  my  little  library.  I  had  provided  myself  with  a  dozen
walnut-shells,  bought  at  Grange's,  in  Piccadilly,  containing
carraway  comfits,  and  as  I  thought  a  motto  each,  and  two
ounces  of  hazle  nut-shells,  containing  comfits  and  printed
mottos.  These  were  in  two  packets  of  an  ounce  each,  and
had  been  purchased  by  me  about  two  hours  before,  at  Law¬
rence's,  in  Oxford  Street,  at  the  corner  of  Marylebone  Lane.
One  of  the  young  women  was  seated  at  either  side  of  the
fire  place,  Major  Buckley  placed  himself  at  the  apex  of  a
triangle,  of  which  they  formed  the  basial  angles.  He  made
a  few  slow  passes  from  his  forehead  to  the  pit  of  his  stomach,
on  his  own  person.  The  girls  said,  after  he  had  made  eight  or
ten  of  these  passes,  “that  they  were  sufficient."  They  saw  a
blue  light  upon  him ;  and  A.  B.,  having  taken  up  one  of  the


By  Dr.  Ashburner.


101


nut-shells  provided  by  me,  placed  it  upon  the  chimney  piece
above  her  head.  E.  L.  then  did  the  same  thing  with  one  of  the
nut-shells  allotted  to  her.  I  was  fully  aware  of  the  objections
of  sceptics,  that  a  possibility  existed  of  changing  these  shells
by  sleight  of  hand ;  I  watched  the  proceedings  anxiously  and
accurately,  to  avoid  the  possibility  of  being  deceived.  The
movements  of  these  young  women  were  slow  and  deliberate,
not  like  the  hocus  pocus  quick  jerk  of  the  conjurer.  A.  B.
first  announced  her  readiness  to  read  the  motto  in  her  nut¬
shell.  She  said  that  the  words  were,

“The  little  sweetmeat  here  revealed,

Lays,  as  good  deeds  should  lay,  concealed.’ ’

I  wrote  down  to  her  dictation,  then  I  cracked  the  shell,
emptied  out  the  comfits,  and  found  among  them  a  little  strip
of  paper,  several  times  folded,  on  which  were  printed  the  very
words  she  had  spoken.  Bemember,  reader,  she  was  not
asleep ;  both  the  girls  were  wide  awake,  and  joined  in  the
conversation  with  Major  Buckley  and  myself,  in  the  intervals
of  the  phenomena  which  they  were  exhibiting.

Then  E.  L.  read  the  motto  in  her  hazle  nut-shell.  It  ran
thus,

“An  honest  man  may  take  a  knave’s  advice,

But  idiots  only  will  be  cheated  twice.”

After  I  had  written  this  down,  and  before  I  opened  the  shell
by  the  aid  of  the  nut-crackers,  she  said,  “  At  the  top  above
the  first  line  is  part  of  another  motto,  it  runs  thus,

“  Who  smiles  to  see  me  in  despair.

The  word  despair  is  cut  close.”  When  the  nut-shell  was
opened,  and  the  motto  unfolded,  the  description  given  by
E.  L.  was  found  to  be  quite  correct.

A.  B.  then  took  another  shell,  and  in  a  very  short  time
read  these  words,  which  I  wrote  down,

“  She’s  little  in  size

Has  bright  speaking  eyes,

And  if  you  prove  true.

Will  be  happy  with  you.”

The  shell  was  broken  open,  and  the  words  printed  on  the
little  slip  of  folded  paper  found  among  the  sweetmeats  within,
were  word  for  word  with  those  written  down  by  me.

E.  L.  took  her  turn  at  reading,  the  words  she  read  out
were,

“  In  every  beholder  a  rival  I  view,

I  ne’er  can  be  equalled  in  loving  of  you.”

Having  written  down  these  words,  the  shell  was  opened  and
it  was  found  that  E.  L.  had  read  the  motto  quite  correctly.


102


Facts  in  Clairvoyance.


The  servant  announced  that  Mr.  Arnott  wished  to  see  me.
He  had  come  on  professional  business,  and  with  no  view  of
witnessing  these  phenomena.  I  asked  Major  Buckley’s  per¬
mission  to  introduce  him.  He  came  in  and  sat  down.  A.  B.
proposed  that  he  should  take  up  a  nut-shell  from  the  table,
and  she  offered  to  read  the  motto  while  he  held  it  in  his  hand.
He  seemed  hardly  to  be  aware  of  what  wonder  he  was  to  wit¬
ness.  He  took  up  a  nut,  held  it  in  his  closed  hand,  and  A.  B.
read  thus,

“  The  pangs  of  absence,  how  severe,

Have  they  ne’er  waked  thy  bitter  tear  ?”

Mr.  Arnott  took  the  nut-crackers,  broke  his  nut-shell,  and
found  that  A.  B.  had  read  quite  correctly.  His  laugh  and
look  of  surprize  told  enough  of  the  conviction  of  his  mind.
The  event  had  become  a  fact.  How  to  account  for  it  was
another  matter.  He  could  not  deny  that  he  had  witnessed
the  fact.

Major  Buckley  adjourned  our  meeting  to  Tuesday,  15th
of  February.

This  time  he  brought  the  young  women  by  day-light.
They  arrived  at  my  house  about  a  quarter  past  one.  I  pro¬
posed  that,  as  at  our  last  meeting  the  mottos  had  been  read
in  hazle  nut-shells,  the  walnut-shells  should  now  be  offered.
A.  B.  took  one,  and  after  a  while  said  there  was  no  printed
paper  within,  though  there  were  some  carraway  comfits  and
other  sugar  plums.  The  nut-shell  was  cracked,  and  she  was
found  to  be  quite  correct.

She  took  up  another  walnut  and  read,

“  If  you  were  man,  as  man  you  are  in  shew,

You  would  not  use  a  gentle  lady  so.”

Above  the  top  line,  she  added,  near  the  commencement,  there
were  the  two  letters,  My,  clipped,  part  of  another  motto  that
had  been  cut  by  the  scissors  in  separating  the  mottos  for  use.
The  shell  was  broken,  and  it  was  found  that  she  was  quite
right  in  every  particular.

E.  L.  read  her  first  walnut-shell  motto  thus,

“  Beneath  your  bounteous  smile  to  live,

Is  joy  that  splendour  ne’er  can  give.”

The  shell  was  opened,  she  was  quite  correct.

In  the  next  shell  she  said  the  slip  of  paper  contained  a
conundrum.  It  began  with  a  capital  Q.  for  question,  thus,

“  Q.  Why  is  a  young  swan  like  a  seal  ?

A.  Because  it  is  a  cygnet.”

She  added  that  there  was  another  word  signet  spelled  differ¬
ently,  and  placed  between  brackets,  thus,  (Signet.)  In  all


By  Dr.  Ashburner.  103

this,  upon  opening  the  walnut-shell,  she  was  found  to  be  quite
correct.

A.  B.  then  read  her  third  motto  in  the  walnut-shells.  It
was  exactly  the  same  as  the  last,  read  by  E.  L.,  and  quite
as  accurately  described.

A.  B.  then  read  from  the  fourth  of  her  walnut-shells,  and
here  she  made  a  mistake,  attended  by  some  remarkable  cir¬
cumstances.  I  wrote  down  her  words,  thus,

u  T’is  love  like  the  sun  that  gives  light  to  the  year.

The  sweetest  of  blessings  that  life  can  endear.”

She  added,  underneath  the  printing  of  this  motto  is  the  top
part  of  a  capital  T,  and  of  two  small  t's.  At  the  com¬
mencing  side  there  appears  to  be  half  of  an  N  and  a  small  e,
belonging  to  another  motto.  All  this  was  quite  true  that  she
added,  but  she  had  mistaken  the  motto,  which  ran  thus,

“  My  love’s  too  great,  you  may  perceive,

And  clearly  see  I  don’t  deceive.”

That  she  should  be  able  to  perceive  the  letters  accidentally
clipped  by  the  hasty  scissors  from  another  motto,  and  yet  not
be  able  as  usual  to  read  the  whole  of  what  was  on  the  printed
slip  of  paper,  is  quite  unaccountable.

Another  walnut-shell  was  given  to  E.  L.,  and  she  said
there  was  a  large  sweetmeat  in  it,  but  no  motto,  which  on
opening  was  found  to  be  quite  true.

The  next  taken  up  by  E.  L.  contained  a  conundrum.  She
said  it  began  with  letter  Q.,  thus,

“  Q.  Why  is  a  person  who  steals  a  noted  newspaper  like  Cain  ?”

She  was  rather  joyous,  laughed,  and  said,  “  Do  you  give  it
up  ?"  and  then  went  on,

“  A.  Because  he  takes  a  Bell’s  Life.”

Abel's  life,  she  added,  was  in  brackets,  (Abel's  life.)  I  opened
the  walnut-shell,  and  found  that  she  was  quite  correct.

E.  L.  took  up  another  walnut-shell,  and  said,  “  There  is
no  motto  in  this,"  which  when  it  was  opened,  was  found  to
be  quite  true.

A.  B.  had  been  a  little  damped  in  spirits  by  her  mistake,
but  was  encouraged  to  take  another  walnut-shell ;  the  conun¬
drum  in  which  she  read  perfectly  correctly,

“  Q.  Why  was  Titian’s  fat  daughter,  Mary,  like  William  Cobbett  ?

A.  Because  she  was  a  great  Polly  Titian.”

Quickly  A.  B.  read  the  next  conundrum,  inside  of  a
walnut,  thus,

“  Q.  Why  is  tea,  bought  at  the  corner  of  Devereux  Court
in  the  Strand,  like  a  rope  ?

“  A.  Because  ft  comes  from  Twining’s.”


104


Facts  in  Clairvoyance.


The  walnut-shell  on  being  opened,  allowed  us  to  unfold  and
read  the  slip  of  paper,  and  it  was  found  that  A.  B.  was  quite
correct.

E.  L.  next  read  the  slip  of  paper  in  the  walnut-shell,  which
fell  to  her  lot.

“  Q.  When  is  it  dangerous  to  walk  by  the  side  of  a  river  ?

A.  When  the  bull-rush  is  out.”

“  Between  brackets,”  she  added,  “  are  the  words  (bull  rushes
out) .”  The  accuracy  of  her  clairvoyance  was  proved  by  the
opening  of  the  nut-shell.

At  two  o'clock  Mr.  Ashhurst  Majendie  was  announced.
All  the  walnuts  were  exhausted,  but  I  found  the  remainder  of
my  hazle  nuts  in  a  drawer,  where  I  had  secured  them.  With
Major  Buckley's  permission,  Mr.  Majendie  assented  to  the
proposal  of  A.  B.,  that  he  should  hold  a  hazle  nut  in  his  hand.
She  noticed  that  on  the  top  of  the  folded  paper  slip  there
were  three  capital  letters,  C.  A.  L.,  part  of  the  C.  cut  off,
the  motto  running  thus,

“  Come  kiss  and  forgive,

In  love  let  us  live.”

Mr.  Majendie  cracked  the  nut,  and  found  that  all  she  had
said  was  quite  true.

Then  A.  B.  proposed  to  read  a  motto  while  the  nut  was
held  in  my  hand.  She  said,

“  In  spite  of  your  indifference,

I  still  have  hopes  of  your  compliance.”

She  proved  to  be  quite  right.

E.  L.  took  up  the  cue,  and  read  from  a  nut  on  the  chimney
piece,

“  Trifling  presents  preserve  friendship.”

On  opening  the  hazle  nut  it  was  found  that  she  was  quite
right.

She  next  read  a  motto  in  another  nut,

“  Love  is  the  greatest  blessing  given
To  pilgrim  man  by  pitying  heaven.”

She  first  read  under  heaven,  and  then  corrected  herself,  the
unfolding  proved  that  the  words  were,  “  by  pitying  heaven.”

E.  L.  had  not  read  a  motto  from  a  nut  held  in  a  person's
hand ;  Mr.  Majendie  wished  her  to  try  and  read  one  in  his
hand,  and  he  took  one  from  the  table.  She  read.

<f  How  few  like  you  possess  a  mind.

Where  all  the  virtues  are  combined.”

Mr.  Majendie  on  opening  the  nut-shell,  found  that  she  was
quite  correct.


By  Dr.  Ashburner.  105

Major  Buckley,  having  an  appointment,  was  obliged  to
break  up  our  seance .

On  Wednesday,  16th  February,  at  about  one  o’clock,  my
friends,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Gutch,  were  with  me,  when  Major
Buckley  arrived  with  his  clairvoy antes.  The  sight  of  strangers
produced  a  little  nervousness,  and  Mr.  Gutch  went  for  a  while
into  another  room.  A.  B.  read  her  first  motto, —

“  Make  much  of  precious  time  while  in  your  power,

Care  full  well  and  husband  every  hour.”

The  shell  being  opened,  it  was  found  that  her  reading
had  been  quite  correct.

Finding  that  the  girls  were  reassured,  I  asked  permission
to  bring  back  Mr.  Gutch.  When  he  came  in  E.  L.  read  a
motto  in  a  hazle  nut-shell, —

“  Banish  care,  and  welcome  glee,

Accept  this  motto,  love,  from  me.”

A.  B.  then  read, —

“  Believe  me,  in  good  as  well  as  ill,

Woman  is  a  contradiction  still.”

She  said  that  on  the  slip  of  paper  containing  these  lines  there
were  a  capital  T.  and  some  parts  of  letters  not  legible.  Mr.
Gutch  opened  the  shell  and  found  that  she  had  given  a  per¬
fectly  correct  account  of  the  matter.

The  next  motto  in  a  hazle  nut-shell  was  read  correctly  by
E.  L.,  as  Mr.  Gutch,  who  opened  the  shell,  has  testified.

“  Breath  for  life  I  less  require,

Than  you,  the  object  of  my  heart’s  desire.”

The  fifth  was  read  by  E.  L., —

“  My  heart  ordains  this,

All  women  to  kiss.”

Mr.  Gutch  opened  the  shell,  and  found  that  the  lines  had
been  read  correctly.

The  sixth  was  read  by  E.  L., —

“  Beauty  and  modesty  combine,

To  make  my  heart  entirely  thine.”

Found  by  Mr.  Gutch  to  have  been  read  accurately.

The  seventh  was  read  by  A.  B.

“  If  I  feared  not  to  offend,

A  thousand  vows  of  love  I’d  send.”

Mr.  Gutch  opened  this  shell  and  found  that  what  I  had  written
down  corresponded  accurately  with  the  words  read  by  A.  B.

On  Thursday,  24th  February,  Lord  Adare  came  by  ap¬
pointment  at  half-past,  three  to  witness  the  clairvoyance  of
these  young  women.  Major  Buckley  having  made  the  passes


106


Facts  in  Clairvoyance.


down  his  own  face,  the  girls  said  they  saw  a  blue  light  on  his
forehead  and  cheeks.  They  were  nervous  at  the  presence  of
Lord  Adare,  and  it  was  a  long  time  before  either  of  them
felt  able  to  read.  A.  B.  trembled  and  could  not  read  at  all.
E.  L.  at  last  said  she  could  see  the  last  line  of  the  motto  in
her  nut,  and  she  read  thus, —

<f  He  seeks  for  thorns  and  finds  his  share.’ ’

I  had  written  a  for  his,  and  when  I  read  out  before  the  nut
was  cracked,  she  corrected  me.  Lord  Adare  opened  the
shell  and  read, —

“  Man  blindly  follows  grief  and  care;

He  seeks  for  thorns  and  finds  his  share.”

The  last  line  was  just  as  E.  L.  had  seen  it  before  the  shell
was  opened.

In  conversing  with  Dr.  Elliotson  on  the  subject  of  these
experiments,  he  suggested  to  me  that  notwithstanding  the
conviction  I  had  of  the  nut-shells  being  identical  with  those
I  had  bought  myself,  there  might  be  a  possibility  of  some
jugglery.  It  was  possible  that  each  nut  might  be  changed
for  one  the  motto  of  which  was  well  known.  It  was  not
right  to  be  content  with  probabilities.

Lord  Adare  presented  a  nut,  the  motto  of  which  had  been
previously  taken  out  and  marked.  E.  L.  said  there  was  some¬
thing  in  that  nut-shell  which  gave  her  a  severe  head-ache.
She  was  sure  it  was  marked,  and  the  very  suspicion  of  her
being  guilty  of  fraud  made  her  feel  very  ill.  She  began  to
read, —

“  Thy  charms,  my  love,  can  make,”

but  could  not  proceed.  She  went  away,  and  both  girls  passed
a  restless  night,  so  keenly  hurt  were  they  from  having  failed,
and  from  having  been  thought  capable  of  trick  and  deceit.
The  next  day,  they  came  again,  and  Lord  Adare,  Major
Buckley,  and  I  were  the  only  persons  present.  The  first
part  of  the  motto  read  yesterday  proved  to  be  correct.  I  had
procured  some  nuts  at  M.  Coeuret/s  in  Drury  Lane,  and  had
taken  out  the  mottos,  cut  them  carefully  with  scissors  so  that
I  should  know  them  again,  and  had  moreover  written  my
initials  on  each  slip  of  paper  before  I  refolded  and  replaced  it
in  the  nut-shell.  I  ought  to  observe  that  I  put  back  the
sugar-plums  and  closed  the  shells  so  carefully  with  chocolate,
I  am  certain  no  person  could  detect,  the  day  after,  that  they
had  been  opened.  The  number  I  treated  in  this  manner
prevented  my  remembering  the  lines  of  the  mottos,  so  that
the  phenomena  could  not  be  dependant  on  thought-reading.
E.  L.  laboured  under  a  head-ache,  and  said  she  was  too  con-


By  Dr.  Ashburner.


10  7


fused,  she  feared,  to  read  accurately.  At  last  she  said,  “  I  see
J.  A.  at  one  end  of  the  motto  written  in  ink — that's  a  marked
nut  I  know  then  she  proceeded, —

“  Love  not  governed  by  sense  or  reason,

Is  like  a  chance  bird  out  of  season.”

Lord  Adare  broke  the  shell,  and  on  examining  the  paper
found  the  letters  J.  A.  I  recognized  my  marks.  The  words
printed  were, —

“  Love  not  guided  still  by  reason,

Is  the  chance  bird  of  a  season.”

So  that  the  clairvoyante  had  been  confused  in  her  reading.

A.  B.  then  tried  to  read  a  marked  nut, —

“  Fair  maiden,  hear  my  loving  vow.”

She  remarked  that  the  sugar-plums  were  all  white,  instead
of  being  of  several  colours.  She  was  quite  correct.  The
illness  of  the  clairvoyantes  prevented  our  going  on  with  the
experiments.

Major  Buckley  asked  me  to  go  to  the  Opera  on  Tuesday,
the  29th  February,  and  he  said  a  young  lady  would  be  in  his
box  who  was  able  to  read  in  nut-shells  while  she  was  wide
awake,  quite  as  well  as  the  two  clairvoyantes  he  had  exhibited
to  me.  Accordingly,  I  accepted  his  invitation,  and  had  the
good  fortune  to  pass  a  very  agreeable  evening.  Clairvoyance
is  always  witnessed  to  greater  perfection  if  the  subject  be  not
agitated  or  depressed.  M.  Marcillet  often  said  that  Alexis
Didier  exhibited  the  phenomena  best  when  the  “  entourage "
was  favourable.  “  ya  va  mieux  en  riant,"  he  said ;  and  his
observation  was  just.  The  young  lady  at  the  Opera  could
see  no  motto  until  she  felt  relieved  of  her  first  embarrassment
at  seeing  a  stranger.  She  read  a  motto  in  a  nut-shell,  which
I  held  in  my  hand,  accurately.  Then  I  presented  one,  the
motto  in  which  was  marked  with  my  initials.  She  detected
the  mark  in  ink,  which  was  blotted,  and  she  read  the  lines  in
print  quite  correctly.

On  Friday,  the  3rd  March,  this  lady  was  at  Major
Buckley's,  when  I  called ;  the  two  clairvoyantes  from  Chel¬
tenham  were  there  too.  I  had  some  marked  nut-shells  with
me.  I  had  marked  the  shells  as  well  as  the  mottos.  The
lady  said  of  the  first  motto  that  she  could  see  it  was  very
dirty,  it  appeared  stained  all  over ;  it  was  notched  in  two  or
more  places.  This  was  all  true.  It  was  stained  with  choco¬
late,  notched  with  a  pair  of  scissors  in  two  places,  and  torn
in  another.  She  read  the  motto, —

“  Oh  !  whate’er  my  fate  may  be,

I  will  ever  think  of  thee.”


108


Facts  in  Clairvoyance .


When  I  opened  this  shell  I  found  she  was  quite  correct.  I
asked  this  lady  to  give  me  an  account  of  how  she  managed
to  read  the  words  on  a  piece  of  paper  folded  up,  as  these
mottos  are  known  to  be  in  the  shell.  She  said  the  paper  ap¬
peared  before  her  in  space  unfolded,  and  she  had  only  to  read
on  as  in  a  book.  The  two  girls,  A.  B.  and  J.  L.,  had  pre¬
viously  told  me  the  same  thing,  before  they  knew  this  lady.

E.  L.  volunteered  to  read  a  motto  in  any  shell  marked  or
otherwise.  I  produced  one  from  my  pocket,  marked  by  my¬
self.  “  I  see,”  she  said,  “the  capital  letter  A.  written  in  ink,
now  I  see  J.,  J.  A.”  Then  she  read  the  motto  before  the
shell  was  opened, —

“  Her  eye  discourses,

I  will  answer  it.’'

When  I  cracked  the  shell,  I  found  this  was  correct,  except
in  the  word  Her,  which  was  read  for  Your,  and  this  error  was
attributed  to  haste  and  carelessness.  I  believe  that  I  have
tested  the  clairvoyance  of  these  subjects  as  carefully,  as  watch¬
fully,  and  as  severely  as  the  nature  of  the  subject  will  warrant.
If  the  greatest  delicacy  be  not  observed  in  these  experiments,
they  fail.  The  human  brain  is  not  to  be  examined  harshly,
and  he  who  wishes  to  arrive  at  the  truth  must  not  here  tor¬
ture  nature.  She  will  yield  to  positive  persuasion,  but  nega¬
tive  violence  has  no  charms  for  her.  Address  may  gain  her
affections,  but  a  doubt  that  she  possesses  the  virtues  of  her
sex  affronts  her  sense  of  propriety.  In  chemistry  and  in
electricity,  nature  is  often  in  a  delicate  mood,  and  the  arrival
at  truth  is  by  arts  of  great  nicety.  But  in  the  examination
of  clairvoyance,  the  tenderest  management,  most  extreme
delicacy  of  investigation,  is  absolutely  necessary.

Figurative  language  is  hardly  allowable  in  severe  science,
but,  in  the  present  retarded  state  of  our  civilization,  it  is
difficult  to  avoid  the  vulgar  errors  of  the  society  in  which  we
move,  and  to  refrain  from  adopting  the  most  unphilosophic
tendency  to  explain  ourselves  by  personifications  and  figures
that  are  not  quite  warranted  by  the  rules  of  severe  analysis.
New  points  on  the  functions  of  the  brain  and  nerves  are  daily
brought  into  notice,  and  we  must  leave  those  who  come  after
us  to  chasten  our  expressions,  and  to  sift  the  evidences  we
offer  for  those  truths  which  will  remain  long  after  our  labours,
anxieties,  and  names  are  forgotten.  We  say  that  in  the
operations  of  the  mind  a  fluid  emanates  from  the  brain,  be¬
cause  the  phenomena  of  thought  and  mutual  interchange  of
ideas  between  individuals  are  accompanied  by  rays  of  colours,
visible  to  persons  who,  asleep  or  awake,  happen  to  be  in  an


By  Dr.  Ashburner.


109


exalted  condition  of  clairvoyance.  Analogies  are  our  only
warrants  for  calling  these  rays  fluids.  We  have  strong  evi¬
dence  of  their  presence  being  attended  by  an  attractive  force.
Some  of  Major  Buckley's  subjects  require  occasionally,  in
addition  to  the  blue  colour  perceived  on  his  countenance,  a
few  passes  on  the  nut-shells,  to  enable  them  to  read  the
mottos,  and  these  passes  are  described  as  being  accompanied
by  the  emission  from  his  fingers  of  a  blue  stream  that  en¬
lightens  the  objects  within  the  shells.  These  passes,  however
attractive,  fail  to  produce  clairvoyance  in  subjects  who  happen
to  be  in  an  agitated  condition  of  mind,  or  who  are  placed  in
circumstances  where  their  feelings  are  not  agreeably  affected.
Very  careful  observations  have  led  me  to  coincide  with  other
experienced  students  of  mesmerism  in  this  conviction.  To
say  that  these  facts  are  not  truths,  because  they  do  not  tally
with  the  preconceptions  of  those  religionists  who  personify
their  deity  and  construct  an  idol  of  their  false  imaginations,
to  represent  a  being  of  whom  we  limited  mortals  can  form
no  notion,  is  to  say  that  the  progress  of  philosophy  shall  be
arrested  until  these  arrogant  idol  worshippers  shall  control
and  comprehend  the  Power  which  pervades  time,  space,  and
eternity.*

Dr.  Hodgkin  is  at  perfect  liberty  to  say  now  that  I  am
under  a  delusion.  I  forgive  him.  1  pity  him.  I  had  hoped
better  things  of  the  philosophic  power  of  his  brain.  If  he
really,  sincerely,  humbly,  loyally,  piously,  wishes^  to  study

*  Eminent  physicians,  with  whom  I  have  conversed  on  these  points,  remind
me  of  a  passage  in  Lardner’s  Manual  of  Electricity,  in  the  Cabinet  Cyclopedia ,
vol.  i.,  p.  47.  I  wish  the  following  extract  could  lead  them  to  reflect  on  their
weak  and  silly  want  of  candour  ;  on  their  most  unphilosophical  desire  to  cling  by
their  rooted  prejudices. — “  When  these  and  other  papers  (proposing  that  an  iron
rod  should  be  raised  to  a  great  height  in  the  air,  to  convey  electricity  from  the
clouds  to  the  earth)  by  Franklin,  illustrating  similar  views,  were  sent  to  London,
and  read  before  the  Royal  Society,  they  are  said  to  have  been  considered  so  wild
and  absurd,  that  they  were  received  with  laughter,  and  were  not  considered
worthy  of  so  much  notice  as  to  be  admitted  into  the  ‘  Philosophical  Transac¬
tions.’  They  were,  however,  shewn  to  Dr.  Fothergill,  who  considered  them  of
too  much  value  to  be  thus  stifled  :  and  he  wrote  a  preface  to  them  and  published
them  in  London.  They  subsequently  went  through  five  editions.  After  the
publication  of  these  remarkable  letters,  and  when  public  opinion  in  all  parts  of
Europe  had  been  expressed  upon  them,  an  abridgment  or  abstract  of  them  was
read  to  the  Society  on  the  6th  of  June,  1751.  It  is  a  remarkable  circumstance
that,  in  this  notice,  no  mention  whatever  occurs  of  Franklin’s  project  of  drawing
lightning  from  the  clouds.  Possibly  that  was  the  part  which  before  excited
laughter,  and  was  omitted  to  avoid  ridicule.” — Lardner’s  Cabinet  Cyclopedia :  a
manual  of  Electricity,  8fc.,  vol.  i.,  p.  47.

f  If  the  doctor  has  any  desire  to  read  the  lucubrations  of  a  non  sequitur  phi¬
losopher,  who,  like  other  men  that  slip  away  from  sound  logic,  commit  themselves,
let  him  turn  to  pages  143,  144  of  the  third  volume  of  The  Zoist,  and,  having
studied  the  text,  he  may  possibly  gain  some  improvement  by  the  lesson  on  pre¬
judice,  in  the  note  by  the  translator  of  Dr.  J.  B.  Mege’s  discourse.


110  The  illustrious  O ken’s  opinion  of  Mesmerism.

the  subject  of  hallucinations,  let  him  turn  to  the  third,  or
1845  volume  of  The  Zoist,  where,  at  pages  365  and  471,  he
will  find  some  most  valuable  facts  and  observations  by  Dr.
Elliotson.  If  Dr.  Hodgkin  be  capable  of  large  views,  and
have  the  faculty  of  philosophical  reflection,  he  may  learn  by
the  aid  of  mesmerism  to  do  that  which  has  already  been  done
by  this  holy  power,  to  cure  hallucinations,  instead  of  talking
nonsense  about  them.

John  Ashburner.

65,  Lower  Grosvenor  Street,  London.


XVII.  The  illustrious  Oken’s  opinion  of  Mesmerism.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

Sir. — Perusing  lately  the  Elements  of  Physiophilosophy  by
the  immortal  Oken,  the  greatest  mind  amongst  the  moderns
who  has  devoted  himself  to  science — a  man,  measured  with
whom,  the  physiologists  of  the  present  day  appear  as  pigmies,
and  the  development  of  one  of  whose  stray  ideas  (Ueber  die
Bedeutung  der  Schadelknochen)  constitutes  the  greatest
achievement  of  our  own  Owen — perusing,  I  say,  lately,  this
book,  I  was  not  a  little  amused  at  observing  the  great  contrast
which  his  opinions  on  mesmerism  present  to  those  so  loudly
and  confidently  trumpetted  forth  to  the  world  by  some  of  our
own  celebrities  in  their  way,  who,  mutilated  by  nature  in  the
imaginative  and  higher  powers  of  the  human  mind,  would
wish  to  pare  down  science  to  their  own  dwarfish  and  stunted
capacities,  and  with  that  shallow  and  complacent  presumption
so  peculiarly  the  appanage  of  superficiality,  cry  darkness  at
the  limits  of  their  own  vision  and  deny  the  existence  of  every
thing  they  cannot  touch,  and  handle,  and  bottle  upon  the
shelves  of  their  museums.  But  enough  of  these  blind  leaders
of  the  blind,  whose  rash  dogmatism  so  well  exemplifies  the
words  of  the  poet,  that, —

“  Fools  rush  in  where  angels  fear  to  tread.”

Let  us  listen  to  the  voice  of  wisdom  from  the  lips  of  a  phi¬
losopher.

R.  I.  D.  E.

“  MESMERISM.

“  2721.  When  the  sensibility  mounts  to  the  highest  degree,
each  mass-function  will  then  almost  cease,  and  the  organs  of
sense  feel  the  weakest  operation  of  the  stimulus.

“2722.  Since  every  stimulation  is  a  polarizing  act,  and
each  body  is  in  polar  activity  towards  the  other  at  every  con-


Ill


The  illustrious  Oken’s  opinion  of  Mesmerism.

ceivable  distance,  so  may  an  extremely  irritable  nervous
system  also  perceive  the  feeblest  polarizations.

“2723.  The  eye  perceives  the  polarization  at  a  remote
distance  from  the  body  whence  it  proceeds.

“  2724.  In  hearing,  the  vibrating  body  still  indeed  acts
directly  upon  the  ear  through  the  vibrations  of  air ;  but  a
finer,  i.  e.}  more  irritable  ear,  hears  farther  than  one  that  is
more  dull.

2725.  With  an  elevated  sensibility  the  other  systems
also  may,  therefore,  perceive  the  polarization  of  the  bodies
without  coming  into  contact  with  them.

“  2726.  To  perceive  objects  in  the  distance,  i.  e.,  merely
their  polar  influence,  is  called  mesmerism  or  animal  mag¬
netism.

“2727.  Now,  if  it  is  once  possible  for  other  senses  besides
that  of  sight,  to  extend  their  perception  into  remote  space,
it  no  longer  matters  as  to  the  magnitude  of  the  latter.  A
feebly  charged  electrical  machine  only  attracts  bodies  that  are
near ;  one  strongly  loaded,  those  which  are  more  remote :
such  is  the  case  too  with  weak  and  strong  magnets.

“  2728.  The  integument  at  once  perceives  electrified  sur¬
faces  at  certain  distances  ;  now,  as  every  surface  appears  elec¬
tric  to  the  integument,  so  must  the  latter,  if  its  sensibility  is
very  much  elevated,  perceive  something  of  that  sort  in  every
proportionate  distance.

“2729.  But  homologous  polarities  only  act  upon  each
other,  and  therefore  traverse  thoroughly  through  heterologous
bodies.  Thus  the  magnet  attracts  the  iron  filings  through
the  table-board,  unhindered  by  the  interposed  wood,  and
without  any  regard  being  paid  to  this,  or  its  being  even  per¬
ceived.

“  2730.  The  senses  may  therefore  perceive  their  homolo¬
gous  polarities  through  other  bodies,  walls  and  such  like.
By  virtue  of  their  perception,  they  stand  in  relation  to  them.

“2731.  To  the  very  sensible  nervous  system,  the  vegetable
system  and  its  impulse  is  a  foreign  object,  which  detaches
itself  from  the  above  system,  just  as  the  objects  of  sense  have
done  from  the  sensorial  organs.  The  vegetable,  or  in  general
the  material  body  appears,  therefore,  to  the  mesmerised  like
a  strange  world,  they  see  their  own  organs, — are  clairvoyants.
Mesmerism,  therefore,  comprises  nothing  which  could  con¬
tradict  physiology .” — Elements  of  Physiophilosophy,  (p.  448).
By  Lorenz  Oken,  M.D.,  Professor  of  Natural  History  at  the
University  of  Zurich,  &c.  From  the  German,  by  Alfred  Tulk,
M.  B.  C.  S.  E.  Printed  for  the  Ray  Society.  London,  1847.


112  Book  received,  Notices  to  Correspondents,  §c.


BOOK  RECEIVED.

Philosophy  of  Animated  Nature ;  or,  the  Laws  and  Action  of  the  Nervous
System.  By  G.  Calvert  Holland,  M.D.,  Physician  extraordinary  to  the  Sheffield
General  Infirmary.

We  rejoice  to  see  that  this  distinguished  physician  fearlessly  speaks  of  phre¬
nology  and  mesmerism,  and  the  mesmeric  excitement  of  the  cerebral  organs,  as
indisputable  truths.


NOTICES  TO  CORRESPONDENTS.

•

Although  we  have  printed  seven  sheets  instead  of  our  stipulated  number  six,
several  communications  are  deferred  till  next  quarter.  Among  them  is  a  remarkable
Mesmeric  Cure,  by  Dr.  Elliotson,  of  genuine  Cancer  of  the  Breast,
pronounced  such  by  several  physicians  and  surgeons,  and  condemned  to  immediate
extirpation  by  a  truly  eminent  professor  and  hospital  surgeon  above  three  years
ago.

Mr.  Noel’s  proffered  paper  will  be  very  acceptable.

Mr.  Epsworth. — We  can  give  no  information  respecting  the  lecturer  whose
conduct  Mr.  Epsworth  represents  as  so  disgraceful.

Materialism. — So  uninformed  are  most  persons,  that  we  every  day  hear  men
spoken  of  with  horror  as  materialists.  Now  a  man  may  be  not  only  most  con¬
scientious,  but  most  devout ;  nay,  be  a  sincere  and  fervent  Christian,  aye,  and  a
trinitarian  Christian  too,  and  most  evangelical,  and  yet  be  a  materialist.  That  is,
a  man  who  believes  that  the  matter  of  his  organized  and  living  brain  is  endowed
with  such  properties  that  it  wills,  feels,  and  thinks,  and  that  these  by
nature  decay  and  cease  for  ever  with  the  brain  at  its  decay,  death  and  dis¬
integration,  may  also  believe  that,  by  the  will  of  God,  by  an  additional  and
miraculous  grant,  they  will  exist  again  with  a  brain  reproduced  but,  however
glorified,  still  matter ;  according  to  the  Fourth  Article  of  the  Church  of
England,  which  asserts  that  Christ,  the  first  fruits  of  them  that  slept,  sits  at  the
right  hand  of  the  Father,  with  “  his  body,  with  flesh,  bones,  and  all  things
appertaining  to  the  perfection  of  man’s  nature.”  We  urge  this,  because  we  know
that  many  excellent  persons  who  take  such  a  view  of  a  future  state  are  vilified
and  called  atheists,  infidels,  sceptics,  and  cruelly  injured,  from  the  total  igno¬
rance  of  the  majority  of  people,  even  of  the  higher  ranks,  that,  though  the
term  materialist  is  sometimes  used  to  signify  an  atheist,  it  has  another  and  most
innocent  signification,  relating,  not  to  supernatural  things,  but  to  an  innocent
opinion  on  a  natural  thing.  Yes  ;  a  man  may  be  a  true  Christian,  of  any  pro-
testant  denomination,  though  not  of  the  Roman  Catholic  persuasion,  and  yet
be  a  materialist.  We  beg  those  who  have  not  reflected  much  on  this  subject,
but  think,  as  parrots  talk,  by  imitation,  to  read  Bishop  Law’s  Theory  of
Religion,  Bishop  Sherlock’s  Discourses,  Bishop  Watson’s  Anecdotes  of  his  own
Life,  and  Archbishop  Tillotson.

£3=* *  It  is  requested  that  all  communications  may  be  addressed  to  the  Publisher ,
Mr.  Bailliere,  219,  Regent  Street ,  and  at  least  a  month  before  the  day  of
publication.


THE  ZOIST.

No.  XXII.


JULY,  1848.


I.

TRIUMPH  AND  REWARD  OF  DR.  ESDAILE.

When  Lord  Dalhousie,  the  new  Governor-General,  arrived
in  India,  it  was  the  sanguine  hope  of  all  the  enemies  of  mes¬
merism  and  Dr.  Esdaile,  that  the  new  Pharaoh  who  had
risen  in  Egypt  and  knew  not  Joseph,  but  was  probably  full
of  all  the  gross  and  ignorant  prejudices  which  have  prevailed
in  Great  Britain  against  the  most  magnificent  of  natural
truths,  would  at  once  thrust  Dr.  Esdaile  aside  and  crush  mes¬
merism  in  the  Presidency.  But  Lord  Dalhousie  is  a  self-
relying  character,  not  taking  matters  upon  hear-say,  as  the
bulk  of  persons  of  both  high  and  moderate  station,  both
carefully  educated  and  neglected,  both  medical  and  non¬
medical,  have  done  in  Great  Britain :  and  thus  the  unworthy
blows  aimed  by  the  unhappy  medical  visitors  of  the  mesmeric
hospital,  and  hereafter  to  be  considered,  told  not.

His  Lordship  was  greatly  surprised  one  day  at  finding  an
official  letter  upon  mesmerism  submitted  to  him  for  orders.
He  no  sooner  perceived  that  mesmerism  was  not  an  imposture
and  delusion,  but  was  considered  one  of  the  daily  realities
or  life  among  his  new  subjects,  than  he  called  for  all  the
papers  relating  to  it,  and,  though  overwhelmed  with  business,
found  time  to  examine  the  whole  case  carefully  for  himself ;  and
he  made  up  his  mind  upon  it  from  documentary  evidence  only,
notwithstanding  that  Dr.  Esdaile  had  offered  to  add  the  evi¬
dence  of  his  senses,  if  he  desired  it.  Lord  Dalhousie  thought
this  additional  evidence  quite  superfluous ;  and,  after  studying
the  Reports,  he  was  pleased  to  tell  Dr.  Esdaile  that  he  was
perfectly  satisfied,  and  to  compliment  the  Doctor  on  his

“  PUBLIC  SERVICES,  ZEAL,  AND  PERSEVERANCE.”

VOL.  VI.


I


114  Triumph  and  Reward  of  Dr.  Esdaile .

Soon  afterwards  Dr.  Esdaile  had  the  honour  of  an  invi¬
tation  to  dinner  at  Government  House,  and,  in  the  course  of
the  evening,  Lord  Dalhousie  congratulated  him  upon  his  being
appointed  Presidency  Surgeon , — a  post  which  usually  leads  to
fortune;  and,  in  reply  to  his  expression  of  thanks,  said,
“You  HAVE  NOTHING  TO  THANK  ME  FOR,  Dr.  EsDAILE  I
YOU  HAVE  ONLY  TO  THANK  YOURSELF  I  I  HAVE  ONLY  DONE
AN  ACT  OF  JUSTICE.”

Here  is  true  nobility, — the  nobility  of  intellect  and  feel¬
ing.*  What  would  I  not  give  to  have  witnessed  this  conver¬
sation  between  these  two  noble  natures,  standing  side  by  side,
replete  with  intelligence  and  exalted  sentiment !  Happy
must  it  be  for  India  to  possess  such  a  governor,  and  refreshing
must  it  be  to  all  true-hearted  medical  men  to  see  honour  be¬
stowed  by  those  in  authority  upon  a  practitioner  solely  for
his  merits  !

Dr.  Esdaile’s  merits  are  transcendent.  I  regard  him  as
one  of  the  most  glorious  men  of  our  profession.  He  stands
eminently  above  all  the  rest  of  his  profession  in  India.  He
only  of  the  whole  number  took  the  trouble  to  attend  to  mes¬
merism  ;  and  he  pursued  the  course  proper  for  a  philosopher
and  a  medical  man,  by  ascertaining  the  truth  of  the  statements
through  experiment.  He  felt,  as  a  philosopher,  that  the
subject  was  of  the  very  highest  interest,  as  relating  to  the
cerebral  faculties,  powers,  properties — to  the  mental  attributes
of  man,  at  present  ill  understood  and  not  all  known ,  and  as
relating  to  all  the  other  powers  and  properties  of  the  nervous
system;  he  felt,  as  a  medical  practitioner,  that  it  was  his
solemn  duty  to  learn  whether  there  really  existed  an  unac¬
knowledged  mighty  remedy  to  remove  or  assuage  disease,
and  a  mode  of  preventing  the  agonies  of  surgical  measures.
Facts  enough  were  in  print  before  the  eyes  of  the  other  me¬
dical  men  of  India,  but  interested  them  not,  either  philoso¬
phically  or  philanthropically :  nay,  one  of  them,  even  one
who  joined  the  worldly-wise  but  short-sighted  and  unhappy
visitors  of  his  hospital,  had  been  shewn  astonishing  and  un¬
questionable  mesmeric  facts  by  me  in  England,  and  knew
well  that  what  he  saw  were  all  real,  all  natural,  truths,  and
also  knew  that  throughout  the  whole  of  my  professional

*  Tota  licet  veteres  exornent  undique  cerae
Atria,  nobilitas  sola  est  atque  unica  Virtus.

We  respect  a  simply  good  man  :  but  simple  goodness,  without  intelligence,  is
merely  respectable ;  indeed,  it  continually  leads  to  error,  and  sometimes  even
to  the  very  deeds  which  the  wicked  commit.  Exalted  virtue  is  the  combination
of  intelligence  and  goodness  with  firmness  ;  and  this  it  is  which  strikes  terror  into
the  unprincipled,  the  mean,  the  selfish,  and  the  hypocritical,  who  hate,  but  at
the  same  time  fear,  the  noble  being.


Triumph  and  Reward  of  Dr.  Esdaile.


115


career  I  had  never  advanced  an  untruth,  never  exaggerated,
never  made  a  statement  till  after  the  most  patient  enquiry,
and  thus  had  never  led  my  brethren  or  my  patients  astray,
had  never  written  books  or  pamphlets  to  attract  consumptive,
nervous,  dyspeptic,  or  other  patients ;  but  that  all  my  con¬
tributions  had  been  for  the  benefit  of  the  profession,  and  that
all  I  had  advanced  or  defended,  however  frowned  upon  at
first,  had  become  firmly  established  and  generally  received.

All  his  actions,  all  his  writings,  prove  Dr.  Esdaile  to  be  a
man  of  sound  and  extensive  information,  of  solid  intellect
and  acute  observation,  of  great  activity,  courage,  and  perse¬
verance,  of  perfect  truth  and  honour,  of  the  warmest  benevo¬
lence,  and  of  the  noblest  independence  both  of  thought  and
conduct.

Not  only  has  the  Supreme  Authority  done  justice  to  Dr.
Esdaile,  but  the  press ,  from  Cape  Comorin  to  Simla  is  now
unanimous  in  his  favour.  Those  editors  who  formerly
attacked  him  and  ridiculed  mesmerism  are  now  acting  the
parts  of  honest  and  courageous  men,  and  atoning  for  their
errors  in  the  most  praiseworthy  manner.  From  hurling  mis¬
siles  at  him,  they  have  now  turned  to  worrying  all  the  doctors.

“We  are  happy  to  learn  from  the  Star  of  this  morning,  that
Government  has  appointed  Dr.  Esdaile  one  of  the  Surgeons  of  the
Presidency.  The  appointment  reflects  credit  on  the  Governor-
General.  The  zeal,  energy,  skill,  and  perseverance  manifested  by
Dr.  Esdaile  in  the  cause  of  mesmerism,  as  an  instrument  for  reliev¬
ing  human  suffering,  demanded  an  acknowledgment  from  Govern¬
ment,  and  it  has  been  made  in  the  most  suitable  manner.” — The
Friend  of  India.

“We  have  rarely  announced  an  appointment  with  greater  pleasure
than  we  do  now,  when  we  mention  that  Dr.  Esdaile  is  to  remain  in
Calcutta  as  a  Presidency  Surgeon.  We  may  leave  the  value  of  mes¬
merism  entirely  out  of  consideration ;  the  zeal,  energy,  self-reliance,  and
perseverance  which  have  characterized  his  investigation  of  that  mys¬
tery,  alone  stamp  him  as  a  man  deserving  the  highest  consideration :
the  appointment  is  most  honourable  to  the  Government.” — TheStar.

Lord  Dalhousie  did  not  think  it  necessary  to  continue  the
mesmeric  hospital  as  a  separate  Government  establishment
beyond  the  year  during  which  its  purpose  was  to  test  the
medical  and  surgical  utility  of  mesmerism;  nor  did  Dr.
Esdaile  consider  that  a  desire  on  his  own  part  for  its  continu¬
ance  would  be  reasonable,  since  there  exist  so  many  Govern¬
ment  hospitals  in  which  the  mesmeric  treatment  of  disease
can  be  so  much  better  practised  in  combination  with  the
usual  means  of  cure.  The  Government  has  shewn  its  opinions
and  expectations  sufficiently  by  its  establishment,  and  by

i  2


116


Triumph  and  Reward  of  Dr.  Esdaile.


rewarding  Dr.  Esdaile.  It  cannot  force  the  physicians  and
surgeons  to  be  humane  and  scientific  enough  to  bestow  the
blessings  of  mesmerism  upon  their  patients,  and  these  gen¬
tlemen  will,  as  in  England,  hold  out  as  long  as  possible.  But
the  day  must  arrive  there,  as  it  will  here,  when  the  public
voice  will  put  an  end  to  this  irrational,  this  cruel,  conduct,
and  diseases  will  be  cured  which  are  now  intractable,  diseases
will  be  cured  in  a  short  time  which  now  are  of  long  duration,
and  far  greater  alleviation  of  incurable  disease  will  be  ob¬
tained  than  at  present ;  to  say  nothing  of  the  innocent  pro¬
duction  of  insensibility,  and  an  augmentation  of  restorative
power,  in  surgical  cases.

“Dr.  Esdaile. — We  are  happy  to  announce  that  Dr.  Esdaile  is
a  Presidency  Surgeon,  by  appointment,  (we  believe)  of  the  Governor-
General.  He  will  not  therefore  be  posted  to  a  regiment,  and  the
citizens  of  Calcutta  will  have  the  gratification  of  being  able  at  all
times  to  consult  the  mesmeric  magician.

“  We  are  not  prepared  to  say,  whether  Government  will  re¬
establish  the  mesmeric  hospital ;  we  rather  think  that  having  at  first
sanctioned  the  residence  of  Dr.  Esdaile  with  the  hospital  charges,
until  mesmerism  became  established  in  the  convictions  of  the  com¬
munity,  and  now  by  the  appointment  of  the  Dr.  to  a  surgeoncy  in
Calcutta,  Government  will  leave  the  native  community  to  supply  from
their  benevolence  the  current  expenses  of  the  hospital.

“  The  native  community  appears  to  be  more  extensively  afflicted
than  Europeans  with  those  diseases  in  the  removal  of  which  mes¬
merism  has  exerted  its  sovereign  influence.  At  all  events  they  have,
more  largely  than  Europeans,  shared  in  the  blessings  bestowed  by  a
gracious  Providence  through  the  instrumentality  of  mesmerism  and
the  surgical  skill  of  Dr.  Esdaile.  To  them  therefore  we  look  for  the
necessary  donations  and  subscriptions  which  would  re-open  the  mes¬
meric  hospital — the  current  expenses  of  which  might  perhaps  be
within  300  rupees  per  month.  Now,  therefore,  is  an  opportunity
for  one  of  our  Calcutta  Millionaires  to  hand  down  his  fame  to  pos¬
terity  in  the  establishment  of  an  hospital,  which  certainly  is  a  wrork
of  far  greater  utility  than  that  of  erecting  a  bridge,  building  a  gbaut,
or  digging  a  tank.  We  trust  the  Calcutta  press  will  unite  with  us
in  directing  attention  to  this,  so  beneficial  an  object.” — Christian
Advocate.

“  We  are  glad  to  hear  that  Dr.  Esdaile  has  been  appointed  Presi¬
dency  Surgeon,  and  still  more  so  that  the  appointment  has  been
given  with  the  intimation  that  it  is  only  considered  as  an  act  of  jus¬
tice.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  some  arrangements  will  be  made  to
enable  him  to  pursue  those  investigations  which  have  attracted  so
much  attention,  and  the  result  of  which  has  been  such  decided  suc¬
cess  in  the  treatment  of  severe  and  dangerous  diseases.  We  know
not  whether  any  intention  is  entertained  of  re-opening  the  mesmeric


117


Triumph  and  Reward  of  Dr.  Esdaile.

%

hospital,  but  the  native  gentlemen,  who  have  already  expressed  their
sentiments  on  the  subject,  have  now  the  opportunity  of  proving  that
they  are  in  earnest,  by  offering  their  assistance  on  behalf  of  their
indigent  and  suffering  countrymen.” — The  Englishman.

“We  are  happy  to  hear  that  Dr.  Esdaile  has  been  appointed
Presidency  Surgeon.  As  this  gentleman’s  name  stands  at  the  very
bottom  of  the  list  of  full  surgeons,  such  an  appointment  can  only  be
looked  upon  as  the  reward  of  distinguished  public  services,  and  that
Dr.  Esdaile  is  entitled  to  some  such  high  mark  of  approbation,  no
one  will  think  of  questioning.  It  is  gratifying  to  find  that  Lord
Dalhousie  has  acted  in  this  case  according  to  its  own  ascertained
merits,  that  he  has  not  been  governed  by  any  prejudices  he  may
have  brought  with  him  from  Europe.  Perhaps  the  occasion  was  one
which  demanded  some  little  exercise  of  moral  courage,  and  we  are
glad  to  see  that  this  has  not  been  wanting.  The  more  conspicuous
a  man’s  position,  the  more  difficult  is  it  for  him  to  act  independently
of  prejudices  so  strongly  rooted  as  those  of  the  medical  profession,
against  all  novelties  in  general,  and  against  the  science  of  passes  in
particular.  Too  much  praise  can  never  be  given  to  the  Deputy
Governor  of  Bengal,  whose  independent  conduct  alone  opened  to
Dr.  Esdaile  the  fair  field  on  which  he  has  obtained  his  victory, — a
victory  in  which  mankind  at  large  is  so  deeply  interested.  But  we
all  know  that  Deputy  Governors  of  Bengal  are  only  “  very  respectable
gentlemen,”  whose  good  deeds,  however  worthy  of  immortality,
are  to  a  certain  extent  hid  under  a  bushel.  Importance  enough  they
have,  of  its  kind,  but  it  is  confined  to  India,  the  eyes  of  the  world
are  blind  to  all  their  dignity,  and  take  no  cognizance  of  their  actions,
good  or  bad.  But  whatever  is  done  by  a  Governor-General  is  tolera¬
bly  conspicuous,  and  when  we  find  a  man  in  Lord  Dalhousie’ s  position,
rewarding  a  professed  mesmerist  as  a  public  benefactor,  we  cannot
help  looking  forward  with  pleasure  to  the  impression  which  so  liberal
a  step  must  unavoidably  make  in  Europe.  This  one  simple  fact  will
do  more  to  overthrow  public  prejudice  at  home,  than  a  thousand
public  exhibitions  of  the  powers  of  the  alleged  agent,  or  the  advocacy
of  a  thousand  such  people  as  the  Martineaus,  the  Bulwers,  and  the
Dumas  of  the  day.

“We  think  every  one  who  wishes  God-speed  to  the  progress  of
mesmeric  science  will  be  satisfied  with  what  has  been  done.  If  Lord
Dalhousie  could  not  fairly  have  done  less,  we  do  not  know  how  he
could  fairly  have  been  expected  to  do  more.  As  to  the  permanent
establishment  of  the  mesmeric  hospital  as  a  separate  Government
institution,  we  have  never  recommended  it  ourselves.  If  the  pro¬
fession  would  do  their  duty,  every  hospital  would  be  a  mesmeric
hospital  when  occasion  required ;  that  is,  mesmeric  practice  would
form  a  part  of  the  daily  routine,  along  with  quinine  practice,  calomel
practice,  or  any  other  practice.  But  if  the  doctors  will  not  do  this,
and  we  don’t  see  how  the  Government  can  compel  them  to  do  it,  let
a  mesmeric  hospital  be  established  by  private  subscription.  Let  the
natives  who  put  their  names  to  a  petition  the  other  day,  sign  a  sub¬
scription  list  to-morrow,  let  them  raise  a  decent  fluid  to  begin  with,


118


Triumph  and  Reward  of  Dr.  Esdaile.


and  guarantee  a  certain  monthly  sum  for  current  expenses.  The
old  hospital  in  Jaun  Bazar  is  still  available,  we  suppose,  and  the
cost  of  a  respectable  corps  of  mesmerisers  would  be  insignificant
enough  when  distributed  among  the  whole  community.  As  to  Dr.
Esdaile’ s  services,  we  are  sure  they  could  be  had  for  nothing,  and
the  Government  that  has  just  signified  its  high  approbation  of  this
gentleman’s  public  merits,  will  certainly  not  object  to  his  devoting
a  considerable  portion  of  his  time  to  investigations  which  have  already
had  such  important  results,  and  which,  continued  under  favourable
conditions,  are  likely  to  assume  every  day  a  higher  importance.

“  We  hope,  then,  that  the  natives  will  lose  no  time  in  doing  their
duty,  or  what  we  conceive  to  be  their  duty,  in  this  matter.  That
some  separate  institution  is  highly  necessary,  we  think  we  have  a
right  to  infer  from  the  marked  unwillingness,  exhibited  on  more  than
one  occasion  by  the  gentlemen  in  charge  of  the  various  Presidency
hospitals,  to  aid  Dr.  Esdaile,  either  by  sending  him  patients,  or  by
sanctioning  mesmeric  practice  within  the  walls  of  the  institutions
under  their  control.

“  We  have  more  than  once  recommended  the  establishment  of  a
mesmeric  chair  at  the  Medical  College,  but  we  never  expressed  any
very  sanguine  expectation  that  our  suggestion  would  be  attended
to.  So  decided  a  step  as  this  was  almost  too  much  to  expect  at  once,
although  we  have  no  doubt  that,  a  few  years  hence,  mesmeric  in¬
struction  will  be  found  an  indispensable  part  of  the  curriculum  of
professional  education.

“We  have  then  only  to  repeat  that  we  see  every  reason  to  be
satisfied  at  the  course  the  Governor-General  has  taken  in  this  matter.”
— Hurkaru  Newspaper.

The  petition  alluded  to  was  the  following,  which  I  extract
from  another  Indian  newspaper.  It  exhibits  the  striking
phenomenon  that  these  dark-coloured  heathens  can  perceive
self-evident  facts  to  be  facts,  and  are  endowed  with  huma¬
nity  enough  to  go  to  witness  them,  while  white  Europeans,
trained  in  Universities,  admitted  as  Fellows  of  scientific
bodies,  and  appointed  as  teachers  to  the  rising  generation  of
medical  men,  neither  can  so  perceive  nor  are  so  endowed :
and  it  exhibits  the  no  less  striking  phenomenon  that  these
dark  coloured  heathens  regard  the  mesmeric  results  as  only
natural  circumstances,  proceeding  from  the  laws  of  nature,
while  large  numbers  of  Christians,  who  fancy  themselves
in  all  respects  their  superiors,  nay  not  a  few  religious
pastors,  even  some  graduates  of  Oxford  and  Cambridge  and
episcopally  ordained,  ascribe  these  things  to  the  Devil, — yes,
ascribe  to  the  Devil  what  these  dark  heathens  acknowledge
to  be  the  work  of  God, — and  cruelly  prevent  thousands  of
the  afflicted  from  being  blessed  with  ease  from  suffering  or
even  restoration  to  health.


Triumph  and  Reward  of  Dr.  Esdaiie.


119


“  MESMERIC  HOSPITAL.

“To  the  Right  Hon.  the  Earl  of  Dalhousie,

“  Governor -  General  of  India ,

“  $*c.,  fyc.

“  May  it  please  your  Lordship, — We,  the  undersigned
inhabitants  of  the  town  and  suburbs  of  Calcutta,  being  deeply  im¬
pressed  with  a  conviction  that  the  mesmeric  hospital  has,  in  the  pro¬
bationary  course  allotted  to  it,  sufficiently  established  its  pretensions
to  mitigate  and  ameliorate  manifold  diseases  to  which  humanity  is
incident,  have  beheld,  with  regret,  that,  its  year  of  probation  being
past,  no  step  appears  to  be  taken  for  the  continuance  of  the  Insti¬
tution.

“  We  have  carefully  perused  the  record  of  cases,  together  with
the  report  of  the  official  visitors,  and  several  amongst  us  have
attended  to  witness  the  operations  at  various  times.  We  would  take
the  present  occasion,  deferentially  to  enforce  upon  your  Lordship’s
attention  that  it  is  nowhere  pretended  to  be  denied  but  that  mes¬
merism  has  been  successfully  applied  to  a  variety  of  diseases,  and
we  submit  that  it  appears  less  significant  whether  greater  or  fewer
numbers  have  been  cured  or  treated  in  this,  or  that  hospital,  and  by
this  or  that  process,  provided  it  can  be  shewn  that  the  effect  anti¬
cipated  has,  in  multiplied  instances,  been  accomplished,  namely  the
surety  of  painless  operations  of  the  most  delicate  character  where
the  patient  has  fallen  under  the  mesmeric  influence.  It  would  be
bold  to  deny  that  such  influence  is  non-existent,  and  the  record  shews
that  it  has  been  triumphantly  vindicated  in  the  treatment  of  at  least
nine  different  species  of  ailments.

“  But  we  contend  that  the  whole  point  is  gained  if  it  be  proved
that  during  coma  and  its  approximating  conditions,  tumors  may  be
removed,  and  amputations  made,  without  the  endurance  of  suffering
or  the  entailing  of  evil  result,  to  the  invalids.  That  this  has  been
achieved,  we  feel  satisfied  every  unprejudiced  mind  must  acknowledge;
and  it  is  therefore  our  humble  prayer  that  your  Lordship  will,  on
account  of  the  benefit  positively  exhibited,  during  the  period  of  trial,
take  into  consideration  the  propriety  and  means  for  establishing  a
mesmeric  hospital  as  one  of  the  permanent  institutions  of  the  British
capital  in  India.

“We  presume  to  hope  that  it  will  not  lessen  the  force  of  our
prayer  when  your  Lordship  perceives  that  the  continuation  or  re¬
establishment  solicited  will  be  thankfully  received  by  us  as  an  indi¬
cation  that  your  Lordship  is  disposed  to  bear  in  mind  the  expressed
wishes  of  the  native  community  on  a  point  where,  for  the  most  part,
(seeing  how,  in  regard  to  society,  the  great  majority  of  treatments
must  tend)  they  have  a  direct  interest  in  a  science,  the  value  of
which,  if  not  as  yet  fully  known,  they  have  learnt  to  appreciate  from
the  evidence  of  their  own  senses.

“We  have  the  honour  to  sign  ourselves  with  the  utmost  respect,

“  Your  Lordship’s,  &c.


120


Triumph  and  Reward  of  Dr.  Esdaile.


“  Rajah  Radacant  Bahador,

Rajah  Kalikissen  Bahadoor,

Rajah  Jadubkissen  Bahadoor,

Rajah  Sutchurn  Ghosal  Bahadoor,

Rajah  Pertub  Chunder  Sing  Bahadoor,

Rajah  Nursing  Chunder  Roy,

Coomar  Sutchurn  Ghosal,

Coomar  Sutt  Jeebun,

Baboo  Ashootoss  Deb,

Baboo  Moteelall  Seal,

Baboo  Ramanoth  Tagore,

Baboo  Promothonauth  Deb,

Rustomjee  Cowasjee,

Baboo  Debendernauth  Tagore,

Baboo  Ramgopal  Ghose,

Baboo  Hurrymohun  Sein,

Baboo  Prawnkissen  Mullick,

Baboo  Beernursing  Mullick,

Baboo  Gopallant  Tagore,

Baboo  Kashipersaud  Ghose,

Baboo  Greendernauth  Ghose,

Baboo  Chundermohun  Chatterjee,

Roy  Nubbo  Chunder  Thokey  Bahadoor,

Baboo  Chundermohum  Chatterjee,  Mun  :  Com  :,
Baboo  Toolseedoss  Mullick,

Baboo  Ileeralall  Seal,

Roy  Bycantnauth  Chowdry,

Baboo  Nagendernauth  Tagore,

Baboo  Ram  Chunder  Mitter,

Baboo  Radapersaud  Roy,

Baboo  Ramapersaud  Roy,

“  And  about  300  signatures  of  the  principal  Native  gentlemen  of
Calcuttta.”

In  ordinary  times,  if  Dr.  Esdaile  had  desired  it,  he  could
easily  have  erected  a  mesmeric  hospital  by  subscription;  but
Calcutta  is  at  present  panic-stricken  by  the  loss  of  mercantile
credit  and  character  and  the  failure  of  the  Union  Bank.

The  mesmerisers  attached  to  the  late  hospital  have  been
distributed  by  the  Government  among  different  stations  in
Bengal,  and  will  no  doubt  be  heard  of  sooner  or  later.

John  Elliotson.


(  121  )


II.  Account  of  a  “  Record  of  Cases  treated  in  the  Mesmeric
Hospital,  from  June  to  December,  1847;  with  Reports
of  the  Official  Visitors.  Printed  by  Order  of  Govern¬
ment.  Calcutta,  1848.”

In  giving  an  account  of  Dr.  Esdaile's  hospital  practice  during
the  second  six  months  of  the  year,  I  shall,  as  on  the  former
occasion,  present  the  whole  number  of  surgical  cases  first,
and  then  the  whole  number  of  the  medical.

SURGICAL  CASES.

“  HYPERTROPHJA  SCROTI.

u  May  24 th,  1847.  Muneeroodeen,  a  labourer,  aged  30,
residing  in  Calcutta,  has  been  troubled  with  a  common  scrotal
tumor  for  about  10  years ;  his  right  leg  is  affected  with  ele¬
phantiasis.  It  commenced  with  fever  occurring  once,  twice,
or  three  times  a  month.

“  To  be  mesmerised  daily  for  an  hour  and  a  half.

“  25 th.  Did  not  sleep  or  feel  inclined  to  do  so.

“  2 6th.  Slept  naturally.

“2 7th.  Insensible  to  pricking  and  pinching ;  the  tumor  was
exposed,  testes  maxim e  compressi  sunt,  and  hairs  plucked  out
of  his  beard,  without  disturbing  him.

28 th.  He  was  subjected  to  the  action  of  an  electro-magnetic
machine,  with  the  power  of  the  second  degree,  and  his  eyes
were  opened  several  times,  without  making  any  impression  on
his  system.

29 th.  The  conductors  of  an  electro-magnetic  machine
with  the  highest  power  were  put  into  his  hands,  and  next  on
the  sides  of  his  body  and  arms,  causing  each  time  strong
convulsive  movements.  He  remained  as  passive  as  a  corpse ,*
and  was  then  with  great  difficulty  demesmerised  :  he  only
awoke  partially,  and  begged  not  to  be  disturbed,  but  to  be
allowed  to  sleep.


*  These  experiments  were  made  in  1838,  upon  the  elder  Okey,  who  had
what  is  called  insensibility  of  touch  or  anaesthesia.  She  stood  in  her  delirious
sleep-waking,  holding  the  cylinders  of  the  electro-magnetic  machine  in  her  hands
as  quietly  “as  if  they  had  been  cucumbers,”  while  strong  men,  Sir  William
Molesworth  for  example,  could  not  hold  them  for  half  a  minute,  and  cried  out
to  us  “for  God’s  sake  to  cease  turning  the  machine.”  When  asked  what  she
felt,  she  replied,  “  I  heard  it  go  giggle,  giggle,  giggle.” — (See  my  Numerous
Cases  of  Surgical  Operations  without  Pain  in  the  Mesmeric  State,  p.  30.)

Yet  the  poor  innocent  girl  was  an  impostor,  and  the  world,  being  told  so  by
Sir  Benjamin  Brodie,  who  never  saw  her  and  refused  to  see  her,  and  by  Mr.
Wakley,  who  is  as  ignorant  of  mesmerism  and  every  branch  of  philosophy  as  of
French,  Latin,  Greek,  or  Sanscrit,  believes  it  to  this  hour.  The  younger  had
no  such  insensibility  of  touch;  and  yet  Mr.  Wakley  cruelly  and  unwisely  pro¬
nounced  her  to  be  only  a  feeble  imitation  of  the  elder. — John  Ejlliotson.


122


Dr.  Esdaile’s  practice  in  the


"  30 tlx.  The  same  repeated  to-day.

“31s/.  He  was  operated  on  to-day;  all  the  parts  were
saved ;  weight  of  the  tumor  1  Olbs.  The  only  sign  of  life  ob¬
served  was,  a  slight  twitching  of  the  countenance  during  the
tying  of  the  vessels.  He  was  demesmerised  after  all  was
over,  and  knew  nothing  that  had  happened .”

“  HYPERTROPHIA  SCROTI.

“  May  29th,  1847.  Gobind  Chunder,  a  beggar,  aged  32,
residing  at  Ramkistopore,  has  been  suffering  from  a  scrotal
tumor  for  8  years.  It  was  preceded  by  a  periodic  fever  coming
on  twice  a  month,  and  lasting  for  about  two  days.

“  To  be  mesmerised  for  an  hour  and  a  half  daily.

“  31s/.  Slept  naturally.

“  June  1st.  Sleeping  soundly,  hair  was  torn  out  of  his  mous¬
tache  and  head,  he  was  pricked  all  over,  and  the  tumor  was
next  exposed  and  thrown  up  to  the  abdomen  with  a  jerk
several  times,  his  testes  maxime  compressi  sunt,  and  his  eyes
were  opened  with  great  difficulty,  without  breaking  his  slumber.

“  2nd.  He  was  to-day  subjected  to  the  action  of  the  electro¬
magnetic  machine  for  about  two  minutes  and  a  half;  his  arms
were  strongly  convulsed,  and  a  shock  was  felt  by  those  who
touched  his  body.

“  3rd.  Again  electrified  to-day  without  his  waking.

“  4dh.  He  was  operated  on  to-day.

“  He  was  perfectly  still  and  motionless  throughout,  and  it
is  useless  to  say  quite  unconscious  that  anything  had  been  done
to  him.  He  awoke  of  his  own  accord  a  quarter  of  an  hour
after  the  operation.”

“  HYPERTROPHIA  SCROTI.

“  June  1st,  1847.  Kheturmohun  Sen,  a  pedlar,  aged  21,
residing  in  Calcutta,  has  got  a  scrotal  tumor  for  about  8  years.
His  legs  are  also  affected  with  elephantiasis,  particularly  the
left  one.  He  has  been  subject  as  usual  to  periodic  fever.

“  To  be  mesmerised  for  an  hour  and  a  half  daily.

“  2nd.  Sleeping  profoundly,  the  tumor  was  exposed  and
the  testes  maxime  compressi  sunt.  He  was  then  made  to
bear  the  action  of  an  electro-magnetic  machine  with  the  power
of  the  highest  degree.  It  only  brought  on  strong  convulsive
movements  of  the  arms,  and  communicated  shocks  to  persons
touching  his  body.

“  3rd.  The  same  as  yesterday.

“  4 th.  He  awoke  from  one  of  the  conductors  of  the  ma¬
chine  suddenly  falling  on  his  body.

“  5th.  He  was  as  indifferent  as  a  corpse  to  the  shocks  to-day.


Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.


123


“  ($th.  The  same  to  day.

“  7th.  He  was  operated  on  to-day;  the  dissection  was
excessively  severe  and  tedious  from  the  great  thickness  and
hardness  of  the  walls  of  the  tumor,  and  its  encroaching  high
upon  the  pubes.  The  colis  was  six  inches  below  the  surface,
and  was  with  difficulty  extricated.  I  then  cut  down  on  both
testes  to  ascertain  their  condition,  but  found  them  atrophied
and  useless,  as  is  usually  the  case  in  elephantiasis.  The  man
lay  perfectly  passive  and  still  till  towards  the  end  of  the  opera¬
tion  when  he  began  to  moan  and  writhe  his  body  considerably.
After  the  fall  of  the  mass,  I  begged  that  he  might  not  be
disturbed,  and  he  immediately  relapsed  into  the  trance.  He
was  soon  after  demesmerised,  and  on  waking  was  unaware
that  anything  had  happened  to  him  in  his  sleep.  There  was  a
large  hydrocele  on  each  side,  and  the  tumor  before  it  was
emptied  must  have  weighed  upwards  of  301bs.”

“  HYPERTROPHIA  SCROTI.

“ June  8 thy  1847.  Mudhoo,  a  Mallee,  aged  32,  a  native
of  Kandapore,  in  Cuttack,  has  contracted  a  small  scrotal
tumor  for  3  years.

“  To  be  mesmerised  for  an  hour  and  a  half  daily.

“  9 th.  Insensible  to  pricking  and  pinching ;  his  arms  were
rigid ;  the  tumor  was  exposed  and  the  testes  maxime  compressi
sunt.  He  was  next  subjected  to  the  action  of  an  electro¬
magnetic  machine  with  the  power  of  the  second  degree  with¬
out  disturbing  him.

“  10 th.  He  was  electrified  with  the  highest  power  of  the
machine.  Mesmerism  was  interrupted  for  five  days,  as  he
was  attacked  with  a  fit  of  asthma.

“  15 th.  Sleeping  profoundly ;  he  bore  steadily  the  galvano-
magnetic  shock  of  the  second  degree,  but  showed  a  slight
sign  of  instinctive  movement  in  his  face  under  the  third.

“  1 6th.  He  was  again  electrified  with  the  highest  power
of  the  machine.

“  18 th.  I  did  not  intend  to  operate  to-day,  and  only  tested
the  man  severely.  Dr.  Palmer  having  come  from  Hooghly
on  purpose  to  witness  an  operation,  begged  me  to  gratify  him,
and  I  consented  to  do  it  sooner  than  I  intended.  The  case
is  only  a  repetition  of  the  last,  exhibiting  perfect  insensibility
till  towards  the  end  of  the  operation,  followed  by  vague  move¬
ments  and  moaning;  the  most  perfect  subsequent  repose,
and  total  oblivion  on  awaking.  He  awoke  a  quarter  of  an
hour  after  all  was  over,  and  felt  just  as  usual,  with  the  excep¬
tion  of  a  slight  heat  between  his  legs  :  all  the  parts  were
saved,  no  pain  till  next  day.”


124


Dr.  Esdaile’s  practice  in  the


“  HYPERTROPHIA  SCROTI.

“  June  30 th,  1847.  Kartick,  a  carter,  aged  30,  residing
at  Bhowbazar,  in  Calcutta,  has  got  a  common  scrotal  tumor
for  6  years.  Both  the  legs  are  affected  with  elephantiasis,
particularly  the  right  one.

“  To  be  mesmerised  for  an  hour  and  a  half  daily.

(e  July  1st ,  1847.  He  was  pricked  and  electrified  severely
without  awaking  or  disturbing  him,  and  might  be  safely  ope¬
rated  on  to  day.  He  was  then  left  to  sleep,  and  awoke  about
three  hours  after  of  his  own  accord.

“  2nd.  This  is  one  of  the  most  perfect  cases  that  I  have
operated  on  in  the  trance.  He  bore  the  knife  like  a  corpse,
and  only  began  to  move  a  little  at  the  tying  of  the  arteries.
After  the  vessels  were  all  secured,  the  testes  were  carefully
examined,  and  the  dexter  being  found  diseased  and  useless,
was  cut  off ;  the  sinister  was  involved  in  a  hydrocele,  out  of
which  it  was  leisurely  dissected  and  left.  He  was  now  covered
with  a  sheet ;  in  about  half  an  hour  after  all  was  over,  the
sheet  was  raised  to  see  if  there  was  any  bleeding.  The  sudden
exposure  to  the  air  disturbed  him ;  he  suddenly  raised  him¬
self,  opened  his  eyes,  seemed  to  see  the  wound,  and  stretched
out  his  hand  to  it,  but  instantly  fell  back  into  the  coma.
This  has  been  repeatedly  seen  and  described.  About  an  hour
after  the  operation,  as  I  was  attempting  to  open  his  eyes,  he
awoke.  He  said  he  felt  as  usual,  and  not  in  the  least  weak  ;
nor  was  there  any  pain  in  his  body,  and  he  wanted  to  know
why  so  many  people  were  gathered  around  him.  A  few
minutes  after  he  complained  of  a  sensation  of  heat  in  the
wound,  and  suspected  from  it  that  he  had  been  operated  on  like
others  when  he  was  asleep .”

(<  SCIRRUS  TESTIUM.  EXTIRPATION.

“  July  10 th,  1847.  Shamchunder  Dutt,  a  shop-keeper,
aged  40,  residing  at  Zingrapolasee,  in  Zillah  Hooghly,  has
been  troubled  with  hypertrophied  scrotum  and  scirrhous
testes  for  6  years.  It  commenced  with  a  periodic  fever  coming
on  twice  a  month.  The  paroxysm  was  very  violent,  and  pro¬
duced  active  inflammation  in  the  part,  which  suppurated  and
terminated  in  an  ulcer.  It  was  very  irritable,  disturbing  his
rest  at  night,  and  impairing  his  general  health  by  keeping
up  a  copious  discharge.

11  th.  Although  in  excessive  pain,  he  was  entranced  to-day
in  less  than  an  hour ;  his  arms  were  perfectly  cataleptic,  and
he  was  insensible  to  both  pricking  and  pinching;  this  was
reported  to  me  the  same  evening.


Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.


125


“12 th.  I  saw  him  for  the  first  time  in  the  trance  to-day,
and  as  the  case  was  urgent,  the  operation  was  at  once  per¬
formed.  The  testes  were  found  to  be  diseased  and  useless,
and  were  therefore  removed.  He  was  as  still  and  quiet  under
the  knife  as  a  corpse,  till  towards  the  end  of  the  operation
when  he  moved  slightly  like  a  man  in  an  uneasy  dream,  and
moaned  a  little.  The  mesmerising  was  continued  till  all  the
bleeding  vessels  were  secured.  He  awoke  of  his  own  accord
about  three  quarters  of  an  hour  after  the  operation,  and  felt
some  smarting  in  the  wounded  part;  when  asked,  he  said  he
had  not  been  in  any  way  disturbed  while  sleeping,  nor  had
he  any  dream,  but  he  felt  a  little  weaker  than  usual  ”

“  HYPERTROPHIA  SCROTI.

“  July  7th,  1847.  Moteewoolla,  jemadar,  aged  50,  residing
at  Alelompore,  in  Zillah  Burdwan,  has  got  a  moderate  sized
scrotal  tumor  for  8  years.

“To  be  mesmerised  for  an  hour  and  a  half  daily.

“8 th.  He  has  got  chronic  bronchitis,  than  which  there
can  be  no  more  disturbing  cause,  for  it  is  impossible  for  a
person  to  sleep  under  any  influence  who  has  to  clear  his  wind¬
pipe  frequently,  but  fortunately  he  is  not  obliged  to  cough
often.  Appeared  insensible  to  pricking  and  pinching ;  the
tumor  was  exposed,  testes  maxime  compressi  sunt,  and  his
eyes  were  opened  without  disturbing  him  in  the  least.  But  he
awoke  on  his  left  nipple  being  severely  pinched.

“9 th.  He  was  severely  electrified  to-day  without  awaking
him.

“  10//j,  Wth,  and  12 th.  The  same  repeated  with  little
varietv.

“  13 th.  He  was  operated  on  to-day  at  the  usual  hour,  12
o’clock.  The  operation  was  excessively  severe  from  the  great
hardness  of  the  mass,  and  the  depth  at  which  the  testes  lay.
All  the  parts  were  saved  :  weight  of  tumor  201bs.  He  was
perfectly  motionless  and  unresisting  as  regards  my  proceedings,
but  I  was  informed  that  sundry  movements  of  the  feet  and
chest  were  seen  towards  the  end  of  the  operation.  The  mes¬
merising  was  continued  a  few  minutes  after  the  operation.
He  awoke  of  his  own  accord,  about  half  an  hour  after  all  was
over ;  on  awaking,  he  complained  of  great  smarting  in  the
part,  which  he  could  not  account  for,  and  begged  to  be  allowed
to  sit  up  on  the  bed,  to  ascertain  the  cause  of  the  smarting  ;
this  he  did,  and  was  surprized  to  find  on  putting  his  hand  to
the  part,  that  the  tumor  was  gone.  He  was  then  told  that  it
was  cut  off,  and  the  part  removed  was  shewn  to  him.  He


126


Dr.  Esdaile’s  practice  in  the


blessed  me,  and  hoped  that  God  would  give  me  a  golden
palanqueen  and  a  golden  carriage.”

“amputation  of  the  great  toe.

“  July  12 th,  1847.  Bideadhur,  a  labourer,  aged  16,  resid¬
ing  at  Budruck,  in  Zillah  Cuttack,  has  got  his  great  toe  of
the  left  foot  contused,  being  crushed  accidentally  by  a  large
country  boat ;  the  accident  happened  two  months  ago.  The
wound  now  appears  gangrenous  and  unhealthy.  It  is  neces¬
sary  to  remove  the  second  joint.

“  To  be  mesmerised  an  hour  and  a  half  daily.

“  13 th.  Deeply  entranced,  and  fit  to  be  operated  on.

14th.  The  joint  was  cut  off  to-day,  and  as  there  was  no
skin  for  covering  the  end  of  the  bone,  about  half  of  the  first
phalanx  was  sawn  off.

“  The  boy  lay  like  a  log,  and  did  not  awake  till  half  an
hour  after  the  operation,  and  then  said,  that  the  pain  was
less  than  when  he  went  to  sleep.  This  is  another  example  of
the  extinction  of  acute  pain  by  mesmerism,  for  he  was  in
great  pain  when  first  mesmerised ;  yet  this  was  subdued,  and
he  was  ready  to  be  operated  on  in  one  hour.”

“  HYPERTROPHIA  SCROTI.

“  July  16th,  1847.  Shaik  Ackber,  a  coolee,  aged  30,  resid¬
ing  in  Doomoordoh,  in  Zillah  Hooghly,  has  been  troubled
with  a  moderate  sized  scrotal  tumor  for  3  years.  It  com¬
menced  with  periodic  fever  coming  on  three  or  four  times  a
month ;  the  last  attack  was  very  violent  :  it  brought  on  an
acute  inflammation  in  the  part,  and  ended  ultimately  in  an
ulcer,  which  being  very  irritable,  prevented  his  rest  at  night.

“  To  be  mesmerised  for  an  hour  and  a  half  daily.

“1 7th.  Fast  asleep,  he  was  insensible  both  to  pricking  and
pinching.

“  18 th.  Again  severely  tested  satisfactorily.

“  19 th.  The  operation  was  performed  to-day,  and  was
peculiarly  severe  from  the  thickened  tunica  vaginalis  requiring
to  be  dissected  off  the  testes  and  cords.  All  the  parts  were
saved.  The  tumor  weighed  about  121bs.  He  lay  perfectly
motionless  throughout ,  as  far  as  I  was  concerned,  and  awoke
a  quarter  of  an  hour  after  all  was  finished,  and  of  course
knew  nothing  about  it.  I  was  told  that  his  neck  and  face  were
convulsed  towards  the  end  of  the  operation.”

“HYPERTROPHIA  SCROTI.

“  July  1 6th,  1847.  Ramgopal,  a  husbandman,  aged  50,


Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.


127


residing  in  Furreedpore,  has  been  troubled  with  a  small  scrotal
tumor  for  2  years.  It  commenced  with  hydrocele  on  the  left
side,  and  was  preceded  by  fever  coming  on  once  in  two  months.

“  To  be  mesmerised  for  an  hour  and  a  half  daily.

“  On  the  third  day  he  was  entranced,  and  indifferent  to
the  electro-magnetic  machine.

“  19 th.  No  effect  was  produced  on  him  to-day.

“  20 th.  Hearing  that  the  man  was  alarmed  in  consequence
of  seeing  a  patient  operated  on  yesterday,  and  wants  to  leave
the  Hospital, — I  put  him  under  the  action  of  the  battery  for
a  few  minutes,  and  then  at  once  commenced  the  operation.
He  remained  perfectly  passive  under  the  knife,  making  no
movement  whatever.  His  breathing  alone,  which  became  a
little  disturbed  towards  the  end  of  the  operation,  particularly
when  the  arteries  were  being  secured,  gave  signs  of  life.
He  awoke  of  his  own  accord  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour  after
the  operation  was  completed,  and  he  had  been  covered  with
a  sheet.  He  said,  when  asked,  that  he  felt  as  usual.  He
protested  that  he  would  on  no  account  allow  himself  to  be
operated  on,  unless  he  was  made  insensible  like  the  other
people.

“  When  told  that  the  thing  was  done,  he  said  that  he  was
the  more  glad  of  it,  as  he  had  intended  to  run  away  to-day  .”


tc  HYPERTROPHIA  SCROTI.

tc  July  21st,  1847.  Ramdial  Chaterjia,  a  writer,  aged  40,
a  native  of  Sewree,  in  Zillali  Beerbhoom,  has  got  a  small
scrotal  tumor  for  5  years.

“  To  be  mesmerised  for  an  hour  and  a  half  daily.

“  22nd.  He  was  pinched,  pricked,  and  electrified  without
his  minding  it,

“  23rd.  All  that  was  done  to  him  yesterday  was  repeated
to-day.

“  24ith.  He  was  operated  on  to-day.  The  operation  lasted
about  4  minutes.  It  was  a  mere  repetition  of  the  above  :  no
dead  body  could  be  more  perfectly  passive,  his  breathing,  which
was  not  disturbed,  only  distinguished  him  from  a  corpse.  He
awoke  about  an  hour  and  a  half  after  all  was  over,  and  he
had  been  dressed  and  carried  to  a  clean  bed :  on  awaking,  he
put  his  hand  to  his  loins  and  complained  of  pain ;  when  asked
what  caused  it,  he  said  he  could  not  possibly  account  for  it ;
it  was  probably  produced  by  his  sleeping  for  a  long  time ;
when  asked  whether  he  felt  any  pain  in  the  part,  he  said  no.

“26th.  There  has  been  no  pain  in  the  wound/’


128


Dr.  Esdaile’s  practice  in  the


“  HYPERTROPHIA  SCROTI.

“  July  24th,  1847.  Akoy  Doss,  a  wood-cutter,  aged  35,  a
native  of  Balessur,  has  been  subject  to  a  small  scrotal  tumor
for  two  years.

“  Before  operating  on  Ramdial,  I  examined  this  man
whom  I  had  not  seen  before,  this  being  his  first  day  of  mes¬
merising.  He  had  been  acted  on  for  about  an  hour,  and  I
said  that  1  thought  he  might  be  operated  on  to-day,  but  that
another  was  more  advanced.  Having  disposed  of  Ramdial,
the  spectators  were  desirous  to  see  a  man  operated  on  the
first  day,  and  believing  that  we  can  now  afford  to  make  a
doubtful  experiment,  I  consented  to  make  the  attempt.  I
had  not  proceeded  far  before  he  became  disturbed  and  soon
woke  up  completely,  deriving  little  advantage  from  his  sleep.
I  hope  this  will  be  the  last  time  that  I  shall  be  seduced  into
a  doubtful  proceeding.

“26th.  Unlike  Ramdial,  operated  on  the  same  day,  he
has  been  in  great  pain  ever  since.”

“  HYPERTROPHIA  SCROTI.

“August  1st,  1847.  Seetaram,  a  porter,  aged  50,  residing
at  Kelore,  in  Zillah  Kuttuck,  has  got  a  small  scrotal  tumor
for  22  years.

“  To  be  mesmerised  for  an  hour  and  a  half  daily.

“  3rd.  Slept  apparently  naturally.

“4 th.  Not  mesmerised  to-day  as  he  took  a  dose  of  opening
medicine.

“  6th.  Deeply  entranced,  arms  cataleptic,  he  was  indif-
ferent  to  pricking,  pinching,  and  to  the  shocks  of  an  electro¬
magnetic  machine.

“  6th.  He  was  again  electrified  to-day  ivithout  being  dis¬
turbed  in  the  least.

“  7th.  He  was  operated  on  to-day,  and  all  the  parts  were
saved ;  he  bore  the  operation  as  passively  as  a  corpse ;  I  was
told  that  when  the  arteries  were  being  secured,  a  slight
movement  was  observed  in  his  left  leg.  He  awoke  about  an
hour  and  a  half  after  the  operation,  and  after  he  had  been  put
into  a  fresh  bed.  He  was  surprized  to  find  that  he  had  been
removed  from  the  place  where  he  went  to  sleep,  and  on  prevent¬
ing  his  attempting  to  sit  up  on  the  score  of  weakness,  he  said
he  was  not  in  the  least  weak,  but  felt  as  usual.  He  was  not
aware  of  having  felt  any  pain  while  asleep,  but  now  complained
of  smarting  in  the  part,  and  was  then  told  that  the  tumor  had
been  cut  off.”


Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.


129


“  HYPERTROPHIA  SCROTI.

“July  1 7th,  1847.  Baboo  Ramdhun  Nundy,  aged  45,  the
man  of  business  of  a  Rajah,  has  been  troubled  with  an
immense  scrotal  tumor  for  14  years.  He  is  a  remarkably
strong  muscular  man,  as  his  portrait  best  shows.  The  tumor
is  only  a  local  annoyance  to  him,  and  has  been  often  deeply
cauterized  bv  native  doctors  in  the  hope  of  discussing  it.

“  This  man  soon  began  to  sleep  regularly  during  the  pro¬
cess,  but  no  specific  symptom  having  appeared  up  to  the
12th  August,  I  lost  patience,  and  tried  to  finish  him  off  with
ether;  but  as  has  usually  happened,  when  I  have  resorted  to
it,  he  could  not  be  made  to  inhale  it  from  the  irritation  it
produced,  although  the  ether  was  said  to  be  the  purest,  and
prepared  by  Air.  Robertson,  of  the  Aledical  College,  for  the
purpose.

“  13 th.  He  slept  to-day  longer  than  usual,  and  did  not
awake  on  being  called.

“  14/A  He  was  deeply  affected  to-day,  and  indifferent
to  noises  and  electric  shocks.

“15 th.  Again  electrified  without  awaking  him.

“  16/A  He  moans  continuously  in  his  sleep,  and  I  parti¬
cularly  questioned  his  friends  on  this  point,  who  all  say  that
it  is  his  usual  habit,  and  it  may  arise  from  the  discomfort  of
being  compelled  to  lie  constantly  on  his  back,  he  is  a  very
light  sleeper.  The  noise  is  not  snoring  but  moaning.  The
operation  was  rehearsed  to-day  :  the  lower  half  of  the  bed  was
removed ;  the  tumor  raised  in  a  sheet,  and  placed  on  a  stool
in  front,  and  each  leg,  widely  extended,  was  placed  on  a  chair
on  either  side,  and  he  was  pricked  all  over  with  a  scalpel  for
a  few  minutes.  He  w?as  then  re-adjusted,  and  knew  nothing
about  it  when  he  awoke.

“  1 7th.  He  was  moaning  in  his  sleep,  as  usual,  but  as  I
considered  this  a  constitutional  peculiarity,  I  resolved  to  ope¬
rate,  if  he  stood  some  preliminary  pricking  to  day.  This  he
did,  and  as  his  only  safety  was  in  expedition,  I  made  the
operation  as  much  a  case  of  decapitation  as  possible.  Having-
freed  the  colis,  I  transfixed  the  neck  of  the  tumor  with  a  long
two-edged  knife,  and  struck  it  off  right  and  left  by  two  blows.
He  cried  out  as  I  was  making  the  last  cut,  and  the  moaning
deepened  into  groaning,  but  his  eyes  remained  closed,  and
no  articulate  sound  escaped  him,  nor  did  he  interfere  in  the
smallest  degree  with  my  proceedings ,  and,  as  usual,  no  one  held
him.  The  bleeding  was  frightful,  and  after  securing  the
principal  vessels,  I  thought  it  necessary  to  awake  him  to
administer  a  cordial,  as  his  pulse  had  disappeared.  He

VOL.  VI.  k


130


Dr.  Esdaile’s  practice  in  the


opened  his  eyes,  but  did  not  see,  he  said,  and  drank  some
wine  at  my  desire.  For  the  next  hour,  his  pulse  fluctuated
greatly,  but  at  last  became  pretty  regular  at  2  o’clock ;  he
was  still  in  a  half  conscious  state,  having  become  delirious
from  loss  of  blood.  I  now  left  him,  ordering  no  one  to
speak  to  him  till  I  returned,  and  Mr.  Kemp,  wdio  is  a
thorough  Bengalee  scholar,  kindly  promised  to  return  with
me  at  4  o’clock — when  we  came  back,  the  equilibrium  of  his
brain  was  not  yet  restored,  and  his  friends  informed  us  that
the  only  intelligible  words  he  had  uttered  were,  ‘don’t  cut
me — don’t  cut  me , — put  me  to  sleep ;’  and  he  continued  in  this
state  for  the  next  half  hour.  During  this  time,  he  was
removed  to  a  clean  bed,  and  whilst  some  small  arteries  were
being  tied,  his  senses  completely  returned,  and  he  for  the
first  time,  became  aware  of  his  altered  condition.  His  case
is  almost  parallel  with  that  of  Shaik  Manick,  related  in  my
report  of  December,  1846,  but  Shaik  Manick,  died  many
months  ago,  and  he  could  not  have  got  his  cue  from  him.
All  was  a  blank  from  11  till  4  o’clock,  and  he  said,  that  he
had  not  seen  me  since  the  morning,  and  had  no  recollection
of  anything  since  he  went  to  sleep.  He  had  no  pain  in  the
wound,  but  complained  of  his  back.  The  mass  weighed  70  lbs.

“  18 th.  He  is  incredibly  well  to-day,  and  does  not  look
exhausted  even.  He  repeated  that  he  recollected  nothing ,
except  going  to  sleep  yesterday  as  usual ,  and  awaking  at
4  o’clock,  when  he  found  us  to  be  tying  the  arteries.

"  His  mesmeriser,  one  of  the  graduates  of  the  Medical
College,  hereupon  asked  him,  'when  did  you  last  see  me
yesterday  V  He  answered,  'just  before  going  to  sleep,  and  I
have  not  seen  you  since  till  this  moment.’  This  corresponds
completely  with  his  own  history  of  his  feelings ;  for  his  mes¬
meriser,  although  he  was  present  when  I  returned  at
4  o’clock  yesterday,  did  not  wait  till  he  had  been  removed
into  a  clean  bed ;  the  moment  when,  as  he  stated  yesterday,
he  came  to  his  senses,  and  consequently  he  only  remembered
seeing  him  in  the  morning.  Those  who  did  not  observe  the
whole  course  of  this  case,  will  probably  not  be  satisfied  with
the  conclusion,  but  it  is  perfectly  satisfactory  to  the  person
principally  concerned,  who  had  often  declared,  that  on  no
account  would  he  consent  to  undergo  the  operation  in  his
natural  state,  and  he  now  says — '  That  Brahma  is  above  all,
and  I  am  next  to  him.’  I  do  not  pretend  that  this  man  did
not  suffer  during  the  operation,  but  I  believe  from  attentive
observation  of  the  case  throughout,  that  he  had  no  recollec¬
tion  of  the  operation,  when  he  recovered  from  the  state  of
delirium  at  4  o’clock.”


Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.


131


“  HYPERTROPHIA  SCROTI.

“  September  5th,  ]84 7.  Dabee  Ghose,  a  milkman,  aged  25,
residing  at  Bhowanypore,  in  Zillah  24-Pergunnahs,  has  got
a  small  scrotal  tumor  for  2  years.

“  To  be  mesmerised  for  an  hour  and  a  half  daily.

“  Qth.  He  was  entranced  on  the  second  day^s  trial,  arms
particularly  cataleptic ;  he  was  unconscious  both  to  pricking
and  pinching.

“  He  appeared  indifferent  to  the  severest  shocks  of  an  elec¬
tro-magnetic  machine.

“  Being  put  in  the  position  for  the  necessary  operation,
he  was  again  electrified,  and  pricked  all  over  with  a  scalpel
for  a  few  minutes.  He  was  then  left  to  sleep.

“The  operation  was  performed  to-day,  and  the  organs
were  all  saved.  He  remained  tranquil  throughout,  but
showed  towards  the  end  a  slight  movement  of  his  toes,  and
turned  his  head  gently  from  the  right  to  the  left  side  like  a
man  in  an  uneasy  posture.  Mesmerising  was  discontinued.
After  the  arteries  were  secured,  he  seemed  to  awake  just
when  the  bed  had  been  re-adjusted,  as  he  then  raised  his
head,  looked  at  the  wound  and  defended  it  from  being  hurt
by  lifting  up  his  sheet,  but  again  relapsed  into  his  f  comatose ’
state.  A  few  minutes  after  he  opened  his  eyes,  and  came
completely  to  his  senses,  when  he  said  that  nothing  had,
annoyed  him  in  his  sleep,  and  that  he  had  awoke  this  moment
of  his  own  accord”


“  HYPERTROPHIA  SCROTI.

“  August  7th,  1847.  Puranch  under  Some,  a  writer,  aged
23,  a  native  of  Juggutdul,  in  Zillah  24-Pcrgunnahs,  has  con¬
tracted  a  small  scrotal  tumor  for  2  years.  It  originated  from
a  hydrocele  on  the  left  side,  preceded  by  a  periodic  fever
coming  on  twice  a  month  at  the  change  of  the  moon.

“  To  be  mesmerised  for  an  hour  and  a  half  daily.

“  15th.  Slept  to-day  more  than  usual.

“  ]6th.  Found  perfectly  insensible  to  pricking,  pinching,
and  to  the  severest  shocks  of  an  electro -magnetic  machine.  He
awoke  whilst  the  part  to  be  shaved  was  being  wetted  with
water.

“  17  th.  I  catalepsed  his  arms,  put  him  into  the  proper
position  for  the  operation,  pinched  his  right  nipple  severely,
and  pricked  him  with  a  scalpel  for  a  few  minutes ;  as  a  fur¬
ther  security,  I  placed  live  charcoal  on  his  hand,  which  he
did  not  mind,  but  became  disturbed  when  it  was  placed  on

k  3


132


Dr.  Esdaile’s  practice  in  the


liis  abdomen,  though  he  remained  still  asleep.  He  awoke  a
few  minutes  after  naturally.

“  IBM.  He  wras  operated  on  to-day,  and  all  the  organs
were  saved.  A  large  hydrocele  was  found  in  each  side,  and
the  bags  were  dissected  out  entire  from  the  enclosing  mass.
After  all  the  principal  vessels  had  been  secured,  the  hydrocele
sacs  were  slit  open,  and  the  thickened  tunica  vaginalis  was
slowly  dissected  off  the  cords  and  testes ;  so  that  we  had  in
this  case  three  distinct  severe  operations.  To  all  this  he  was
perfectly  indifferent ,  and  only  made  a  slight  grimace  towards
the  end.  He  awoke  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour  after  the
operation  was  finished,  and  he  had  been  put  into  the  posi¬
tion  in  which  he  went  to  sleep,  and  had  been  covered  with
a  sheet.  He  said  when  asked,  that  his  slumber  broke
naturally,  and  that  he  had  felt  no  pain  ivhile  sleeping.  He
then  perceived  a  smarting  in  the  part,  the  cause  of  which  he
could  not  tell.  The  mass  was  then  shewn  to  him,  and  he
hid  his  face  under  the  bed-clothes  in  disgust,  and  when  again
asked  if  he  had  felt  any  pain,  he  replied,  f  If  I  had  felt  jiain ,
would  not  I  have  cried  out  V  ”

“  A  SECOND  OPERATION - THE  SAME  MAN.

“September  12th,  1847.  Setaram,  who  was  operated  upon
on  the  7th  ultimo,  went  on  very  well  for  some  time,  but  at
the  period  of  the  usual  fever,  it  came  on  very  severely,  and
sloughing  took  place  in  the  wound.  As  the  testes  merely
irritated  the  wound,  I  resolved  to  remove  them.

“  He  was  entranced  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  and  I  broke
up  the  recent  adhesions,  cut  through  granulating  surfaces,
and  rudely  squeezed  the  raw  testes,  without  a  sign  of  sensi¬
bility  appearing  in  any  portion  of  his  body.  After  the  vessels
were  all  tied,  he  awoke  as  if  from  a  tranquil  sleep,  and  felt  no
pain  in  the  part.  He  had  been  suffering  much  for  several
days  from  pain  in  his  elbow-joints,  which  local  mesmerising
much  relieved.

“  13 th.  I  desired  him  to  be  put  to  sleep  to-dav,  but
he  could  not  be  subdued,  which  I  considered  a  very  bad
sign.

“  14 th.  He  died  to-day.”

“  HYPERTROPHIA  SCROTI.

“  September  21st,  1847.  Shaikh  Gopal,  a  tailor,  aged  45,
residing  at  Mirzapore,  in  Calcutta,  has  got  a  moderate  sized
scrotal  tumor  for  30  years.

“  To  be  mesmerised  for  an  hour  and  a  half  daily.


Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.


133


“  22nd.  Slept  naturally  but  awoke  on  being  called  by  bis
name.

“  23rd.  Perfectly  insensible  to  pricking,  pinching  and  to
the  severest  shocks  of  an  electro-magnetic  machine  :  he  could
not  be  in  a  more  satisfactory  state  for  operating  on,  but  this
first  examination  consumed  much  time.

“  24tth.  No  effect  wras  produced  upon  him  to-day.

“  25th.  The  operation  was  performed  to-day,  although  he
wras  not  so  deeply  affected  as  on  the  23rd ;  the  organs  were
all  saved.  About  the  middle  of  the  operation,  he  began  to
cry  out,  and  continued  to  do  so  uninterruptedly,  but  unin¬
telligibly,  till  I  had  finished.  He  moved  his  legs  from  their
extended  position,  but  never  closed  his  knees  or  attempted  to
interfere  with  my  proceedings.  After  the  arteries  were  all
tied,  he  became  more  quiet,  but  still  continued  to  moan.  As
he  wTas  an  old  man,  and  had  lost  much  blood,  his  pulse
became  very  weak,  and  I  thought  it  advisable  to  bring  the
voluntary  powers  of  life  into  play,  and  proceeded  to  demes-
merise  him.  After  a  short  time,  he  began  to  complain  intel¬
ligibly,  and  lamented  bitterly  (his  eyes  still  firmly  closed)  his
hard  fate  in  living  to  witness  the  death  of  his  son.  He  beat
his  head  and  breast,  and  weeping  profusely,  said  he  was
destined  by  God  to  outlive  all  his  children,  and  to  be  ruined,
but  not  a  word  about  himself,  or  his  actual  situation,  escaped
him.  On  rousing  him  still  further,  a  change  came  over  the
spirit  of  his  dream,  he  clasped  his  hands,  and  protested
before  1  Allah ’  that  he  would  never  get  drunk  again,  would
never  drink  iaree  any  more,  which  was  the  cause  of  all  his
misfortunes.  I  continued  to  blow  upon  and  rub  his  eyes,
which  he  resented,  and  desired  to  be  let  alone ;  on  my  not
minding  him,  he  tried  to  strike  me,  and  abused  me  furiously.
A  few  minutes  after,  on  my  blowing  strongly  into  his  eyes,
rubbing  them  roughly,  dashing  cold  water  on  them,  and
desiring  him  to  open  them,  he  did  so  with  great  difficulty.  I
then  asked  him  who  I  wras,  he  answered,  f  How  can  I  tell
without  my  spectacles  V  I  again  blew  strongly  into  his  eyes,
and  rubbed  them  repeatedly,  he  at  last  recognized  me,  and
said  I  was  the  Doctor  Sahib.  He  had  no  pain  in  any  part  of
his  body  he  said,  and  when  told  that  he  had  been  operated  on ,
he  would  not  believe  it  till  the  mass  was  shewn  to  him ,  which
he  recognized  by  a  large  white  cicatrix  upon  it  caused  by  the
actual  cautery.  He  said  it  was  the  most  extraordinary  thing
in  the  ivorld,  and  that  all  he  had  heard  of  my  hospital  teas
quite  true,  and  that  men  were  really  made  insensible  to  their
sufferings.  He  confesses  to  having  indulged  occasionally  in
taree,  but  has  had  no  distress  in  his  family  lately.  There  is


134


Dr.  Esdaile’s  'practice  in  the


a  most  marked  difference  in  the  style  of  complaining  between
the  apparently  suffering  mesmeric  sleeper,  and  the  patient
writhing  and  crying  under  the  knife  in  his  natural  state.
The  movements  of  the  former  are  vague  and  objectless,
restraint  is  not  required,  and  the  surgeon  is  hardly  incon¬
venienced  by  them.  The  patients  (if  the  trance  is  not  com¬
pletely  broken)  never  open  their  eyes,  and,  what  is  still  more
peculiar  and  characteristic,  their  inarticulate  complaining  is
often  more  prolonged  than  if  they  were  in  their  natural  state,
and  sometimes  continues  for  hours  when  the  mesmeric  state
passes  into  delirium  from  great  loss  of  blood,  as  has  been  seen
in  the  cases  of  Shaik  Mannick  and  Ramdhun,  and  in  this
respect  the  cries  and  movements  of  mesmeric  sleepers  greatly
resemble  those  of  hysteria,  where  there  is  a  total  loss  of
voluntary  power,  and  subsequent  obliviousness  of  all  that  had
happened.  This  has  often  been  seen  in  ether  operations,  and
a  French  surgeon  has  said  that  his  patients  cried  out  more
than  formerly  since  the  introduction  of  ether  into  his  hos¬
pital,  although  they  were  subsequently  unconscious  of  their
acts  or  sufferings.  It  has  been  thought  that  the  nervous
ganglia  have  the  power  of  reflecting  sensational  impressions
to  the  nerves  of  motion,  without  perceiving  them,  and  this
would  explain  most  of  the  painless  writliings  of  mesmeric
sleepers.  But  even  when  the  brain  is  involved  in  the  dis¬
turbance,  the  life  of  volition,  on  which  it  appears  the  consci¬
ousness  of  pain  depends,  is  not  roused  into  activity,  and  the
brain  seems  to  be  reduced  to  the  temporary  condition  of  a
reflex  ganglion ;  or  if  there  is  any  sense  of  pain  it  is  so  im¬
perfectly  conveyed  to  the  seat  of  consciousness,  that  no  traces
of  it  are  left  in  the  memory  when  the  sleeper  recovers  his
senses.”

“  HYPERTROPIIIA  SCROTI.

“  September  28th.  Bamdoss,  a  shop-keeper,  aged  25,  re¬
siding  at  Shobhabazar,  Calcutta,  has  got  a  scrotal  tumor  for
9  y  ears.  It  is  scarred  all  over  with  cicatrices  caused  by  the
actual  cautery,  and  setons  have  been  passed  through  it  in  the
hope  of  discussing  it,  but  all  this  has  only  caused  cartila¬
ginous  adhesions  between  the  testes  and  the  walls  of  the  tumor.

“29 th.  He  was  mesmerised  at  half-past  10  o’clock  to-day,
for  the  first  time,  and  at  12  o’clock  I  found  him  so  deeply
entranced  that  I  proceeded  to  operate  upon  him  at  once,  I
have  never  had  a  more  severe  operation  to  perform  from  the
diseased  state  of  the  parts,  and  the  firmness  of  the  adhesions.
The  glaus  colis  could  hardly  be  recognized  from  several  large
warty  excrescences  that  surrounded  it,  and  all  the  neigh-


Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.


135


bouring  parts  were  fistulous  and  indurated.  It  was  therefore
very  difficult  and  tedious  to  free  the  colis,  and  the  testis  sinis¬
ter  was  so  embedded  in  a  cartilaginous  cicatrix  that  it  could
not  be  extricated,  it  was  therefore  given  up,  but  the  other
not  being  so  much  implicated  was  saved.  He  lay  perfectly
motionless  the  whole  time,  and  only  made  a  slight  grimace  as
I  was  finishing.  He  awoke  half  an  hour  after  the  arteries
had  been  tied,  and  had  no  suspicion  that  anything  had  hap¬
pened  to  him  till  he  saw  the  mass.  He  was  greatly  alarmed
and  horrified  at  first,  but  soon  expressed  his  gratitude,  saying
that  I  was  a  God,  &c.  Weight  of  tumor  10  lbs.”

“  HYPERTROPHIA  SCROTI

“June  1 7th,  1847.  Buddunchunder  Kowr,  aged  50,  a
letter  receiver  in  the  General  Post  Office,  residing  at  Entallee,
Calcutta,  has  been  troubled  with  a  scrotal  tumor  for  11  years.
This  is  one  of  the  most  protracted  and  troublesome  cases  we
have  had  to  deal  with.  The  patient  was  a  tall  vigorous  look¬
ing  man,  and  his  nervous  system  did  not  seem  at  all  weak¬
ened.  He  was  treated  daily  for  a  month  and  a  half  without
producing  any  specific  mesmeric  symptom,  and  as  we  could
afford  him  no  more  time,  I  tried  to  bring  him  under  the
influence  of  ether,  but  he  declared  that  he  could  not  go  on
after  two  or  three  inhalations.  As  he  would  not  submit  to  be
operated  on  in  his  natural  state,  he  was  allowed  to  go  home,
but  returned  at  intervals,  during  the  last  three  months,  to
try  it  again.  Unfortunately  on  each  occasion,  the  treatment
has  been  interrupted  after  a  few  days  by  attacks  of  bronchitis
and  periodic  inflammation  of  the  tumor,  to  which  he  is  sub¬
ject.  At  last  on  the  25th  September,  he  passed  into  the
mesmeric  trance,  and  was  long  and  severely  tested  in  the
presence  of  Dr.  Mouat.  As  the  examination  was  long,  I  put
off  the  operation  till  to-morrow,  but  he  disappointed  us,  as  he
could  not  be  made  to  sleep  at  all.  On  the  3rd  October,  I
again  found  him  entranced,  and  as  I  had  no  confidence  in
his  mesmeric  constitution,  I  operated  on  him  at  once.  The
tumor  was  apparently  40  lbs.  in  weight,  composed  principally
of  fluid,  and  it  was  evidently  one  huge  hydrocele.  The  testis
on  the  other  side  was  healthy  and  nearly  in  its  natural  posi¬
tion.  He  lay  perfectly  passive  till  I  had  dissected  this  out,
but  when  I  cut  open  the  huge  sac,  he  began  to  moan  and
cry  unintelligibly,  but  did  not  struggle.  I  have  repeatedly
seen  the  sudden  discharge  of  a  large  quantity  of  water  from  a
hydrocele  have  the  most  distressing  effect  upon  the  system,
and  I  believe  that  it  was  this  shock  that  disturbed  him,  and
not  the  knife.  About  40  lbs.  of  fluid  were  in  a  moment  let


13G


Dr.  Es  dalle’s  practice  in  the


free,  and  the  sac  removed  as  rapidly  as  possible.  Repeated
attacks  of  inflammation  had  so  altered  the  colour  of  the  fluid
that  it  looked  as  if  I  had  opened  a  hernial  tumor  instead  of  a
hydrocele,  and  for  a  moment,  I  had  this  uncomfortable  im¬
pression.  The  possibility  of  this  ought  never  to  be  overlooked
in  these  cases,  or  familiarity  and  success  be  permitted  to
engender  carelessness.  After  the  principal  arteries  were  tied,
I  awoke  him  thoroughly  to  administer  a  cordial,  as  his  pulse
had  become  imperceptible.  He  came  immediately  into  the
full  possession  of  his  senses,  and  said  that  he  had  slept  to-day
very  well.  After  taking  some  brandy  and  water,  he  com¬
plained  of  a  slight  smarting  in  the  wound,  and  carried  his
hand  to  the  part  to  ascertain  the  cause.  He  wras  now  fold
that  all  was  over,  and  he  expressed  his  gratitude,  declaring
that  I  was  next  to  God,  that  I  had  given  him  a  second
life,  &c.  In  this  case,  as  in  many  others,  a  most  strikiug  and
characteristic  feature  was  observed.  The  very  moment  that
perfect  consciousness  returned,  every  trace  of  suffering  in  his
countenance  instantaneously  disappeared,  and  he  looked  as
fresh  and  unbroken  as  if  he  had  just  awoke  from  a  natural
sleep.

“  25th.  He  has  not  had  a  disagreeable  symptom,  and  has
never  looked  ill  even.”

“  HYPERTROPHIA  SCROTI.

“  September  2 7th,  1847.  Ramkisto  Doss,  a  washerman,

aged  35,  a  native  of  Santipore,  in  Zillah  Nuddea,  has  got  a

scrotal  tumor  for  3  years.  It  is  about  the  size  of  a  child’s

%/

head,  and  scarred  all  over  with  caustics,  which  had  been
applied  for  discussing  it.  His  great  sufferings  on  account  of
frequent  attacks  of  fever  and  subsequent  local  inflammations,
to  which  he  has  been  subject,  have  induced  him  to  come  to
us  to  undergo  the  dangerous  operation  of  excision.

“  To  be  mesmerised  for  an  hour  and  a  half  daily.

“28th.  Could  not  be  made  to  sleep.

“  October  8th,  1847.  Since  the  last  date,  he  was  not  mes¬
merised  on  account,  of  an  attack  of  periodic  fever.  He  slept
to-day.

“  9 th.  Found  to  be  in  deep  coma,  arms  partially  cata¬
leptic.  He  was  perfectly  indifferent  to  the  ordinary  tests  of
insensibility,  and  to  the  highest  power  of  an  eletro-magnetic
machine.

“  10 th.  The  same  to-day.

“  11  th.  I  intended  to  have  operated  on  him  to-day,  and
several  gentlemen  were  present,  but  as  he  appeared  to  be


Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.  137

disturbed  when  testis  comprimcbatur,  the  operation  was
postponed.

“  12 th.  He  was  operated  on  to-day,  and  all  the  parts  were
saved,  he  began  to  moan  and  move  about  the  middle  of  the
operation,  bent  his  neck  backwards,  and  drew  up  his  chest
like  a  man  in  opistholonos,  but  did  not  make  any  attempt  to
interfere  with  the  operation,  nor  did  he  open  his  eyes.  After
the  arteries  had  been  secured,  he  cried  out  for  water,  and
the  mesmerising  was  then  discontinued.  He  asked  why  he
felt  smarting  in  the  part,  and  believed  it  to  be  caused  by
some  one  comprimente  testem,  and  he  begged  him  to  desist.
He  wras  then  told  that  it  proceeded  from  his  tumor  having
been  cut  off.

“  25th.  Is  doing  very  well.”

“  IIYPERTROPHIA  SCROTT.

“  October  22nd,  1847.  Susteedoss,  a  labourer,  aged  35,
a  native  of  Angoona,  in  Zillah  Burdwan,  has  got  a  small
scrotal  tumor  for  6  years.

“To  be  mesmerised  for  an  hour  and  a  half  daily.

“23 rd.  He  was  entranced  on  the  first  trial,  and  might
have  been  operated  on  to-day  with  safety,  as  he  was  found
to  stand  the  tests  of  insensibility,  for  about  an  hour,  without
shrinking  in  the  least.

“  24 th.  Nearly  the  same  to-day.

“  25 th.  He  was  operated  on  to-day,  the  organs  were  saved.
During  the  operation  he  remained  motionless  and  quiet,  except
towards  the  end,  when  he  gently  turned  his  face  from  one
side  to  the  other,  and  his  countenance  became  convulsed,  but
he  did  not  open  his  eyes  or  moan.  He  awoke  immediately
after  the  arteries  had  been  secured,  and  the  bed  re-adjusted.
There  was  a  large  party  of  native  gentlemen  present,  and  to
their  questions  he  replied,  that  he  felt  no  pain  anywhere ;
that  nothing  had  disturbed  him,  &c.

“  This  is  another  example  of  the  expression  of  pain  in  the
countenance  vanishing  instantly  like  a  shadow  on  the  return
of  consciousness,  and  still  further  proves  the  instinctive  and
unconscious  nature  of  these  appearances  of  pain.  This  phe¬
nomenon  has  been  lately  amply  illustrated  in  the  ether  ope¬
rations,  and  has  passed  into  an  universally  acknowledged
physiological  fact.  But  it  was  described  by  me  long  before
ether  had  been  heard  of  for  surgical  purposes.  In  proof  of
which,  it  may  be  permitted  me  to  quote  a  passage  from  my
report  for  December,  1816,  which  was  the  result  of  18  months
previous  observation.


138


Dr.  Esdaile’s  practice  in  the


“  1  When  the  trance  is  only  disturbed,  but  not  broken,
the  motions  often  seen  are  as  objectless  as  those  of  a  gal¬
vanized  corpse,  or  the  fluttering  of  a  fowl  after  its  head  has
been  cut  off :  the  spinal  nerves  seem  only  to  be  irritated,
without  involving  the  brain,  or  voluntary  part  of  the  nervous
system,  and  as  long  as  there  is  no  volition,  there  is  no  con¬
sciousness  of  sensation,  as  will  be  shortly  seen,  there  is  no
attempt  to  withdraw  the  part  from  under  the  knife,  the
patients  never  try  to  remove  it  with  their  hands,  and  it  is
quite  evident  that  they  have  no  idea  of  the  source  of  their
discomfort.  If  the  will  had  prompted  the  movements,  some
memory  of  them  would  remain,  but  there  is  usually  none.
I  think  it  very  probable  that  this  muscular  irritability  might
be  generally  extinguished  altogether  by  prolonged  treatment,
but  it  is  not  worth  the  trouble,  for  the  system  suffers  as  little
as  when  there  is  not  a  quiver  of  the  flesh/  ”

“  HYPERTROPHIA  SCROTI.

“  October  23rd,  1847.  Shaikh  Durrab,  a  broker,  aged  48,
residing  at  Kasseepore,  in  24-Pergunnahs,  has  got  a  moderate
sized  scrotal  tumor  for  8  years.  It  had  been  deeply  cauterized
in  the  hope  of  discussing  it  by  suppuration.  This  did  not
produce  the  desired  effect,  but  brought  on  contraction  of  his
knees  by  obliging  him  to  be  confined  in  bed  for  a  long  time.

“  To  be  mesmerised  for  an  hour  and  a  half  daily.

“24th.  On  the  first  day  he  appeared  deeply  entranced,
and  was  tested  satisfactorily  as  to  the  state  of  his  insensibility.

“25th.  He  was  more  strictly  tried  to-day,  and  found  fit
to  stand  the  operation.

“  2 6th.  The  operation  was  performed  to-day.  Before  com¬
mencing  the  operation,  I  explained  to  the  medical  gentlemen
present  my  reasons  for  not  attempting  to  save  the  testes  in
this  case,  although  the  tumor  was  not  of  great  magnitude, —
after  excision  it  weighed  28  lbs.  I  was  convinced  that  the
mass  was  solid  throughout  and  of  great  density,  and  this
had  been  increased  by  the  cauterizings,  to  the  cicatrices  of
which  the  testes  always  adhere,  and  the  man  was  of  a  weak
constitution.  I  said  that  in  all  probability  the  testes  would
be  found  to  be  not  worth  keeping,  but  even  if  healthy,  I
thought  it  would  endanger  this  man’s  life  to  attempt  to  keep
them.  I  therefore  first  got  out  the  colis,  and  removed  the
mass  at  once  by  transfixing  the  neck  and  cutting  right  and
left.  He  lay  perfectly  calm  and  motionless  like  a  corpse,  but
awoke  soon  after  the  fall  of  the  mass  when  the  arteries  were
being  tied.  I  had  good  reason  to  congratulate  myself  on  my


Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.


139


diagnosis  and  the  course  adopted,  for  a  few  minutes  after
opening  his  eyes  the  man  fainted,  and  it  was  half  an  hour
before  his  pulse  was  re-established ;  another  minute’s  delay
would  probably  have  proved  fatal.  On  cutting  up  the  tumor,
it  was  found  to  be  very  dense  in  its  structure ;  the  testes
were  6  inches  below  the  surface  embedded  in  a  semi-cartila¬
ginous  substance,  and  completely  disorganized.

“  28 th.  He  is  doing  very  well,  and  I  hope  to  be  able  to
straighten  his  legs  in  the  trance  at  a  subsequent  period.”

“  II YPERTROPHIA  SCROTI.

“  November  7th,  1847.  Gopeedoss,  sirdar  bearer,  a  native
of  Durmanugur,  in  Zillah  Balessur,  has  got  a  small  scrotal
tumor  for  5  years.  It  is  covered  all  over  with  warts,  about
the  size  of  peas,  and  is  excessively  hard.  The  prseputium  is
hypertrophied,  and  forms  a  second  pendulous  tumor,  the
size  of  an  ordinary  cucumber.  He  was  sent  to  us  by  his
country  friend,  Bhugwandoss,  who  was  operated  on  at
Hooglily  last  year  for  a  similar  tumor.  He  has  made  a
journey  of  ten  days  in  the  hope  of  being  relieved  of  his  burden
in  the  same  way  as  his  friend  has  been.

“To  be  mesmerised  for  an  hour  and  a  half  daily.

“  8th.  I  saw  him  for  the  first  time  at  12  o’clock  to-day,
and  found  him  to  be  in  the  most  profound  trance  after  \\
hour’s  mesmerising,  and  he  was  severely  electrified,  pricked,
and  pinched  without  disturbing  him  in  the  least.  I  then  put
a  piece  of  live  charcoal  on  his  chest,  and  a  slight  tremor  of
the  skin  was  perceptible,  which  instantly  passed  off ;  but  he
made  no  attempt  to  remove  the  fire :  half  a  minute  after,  he
suddenly  opened  his  eyes,  and  supposing  that  he  was  awake,
I  struck  the  charcoal  off  his  breast.  My  assistant  began  to
ask  him  in  Bengallee  what  had  awoke  him,  but  received  no
reply,  and  I  immediately  saw  from  the  fixed  unwinking  eyes,
that  though  they  were  open,  their  sense  was  shut.  I  said  in
English,  ‘  let  him  alone,  he  is  not  awake,’  and  immediately
after,  his  eye-lids  quivered  and  closed  spasmodically.  I  re¬
commenced  pricking  him  all  over  immediately  without  exciting
the  slightest  sign  of  sensibility.  About  an  hour  after,  he
awoke  naturally,  and  when  asked  said,  that  he  felt  no  pain
in  his  sleep,  that  the  black  patch  on  his  breast  was  caused  by
dirt  he  supposed,  and  that  he  now  saw  me  for  the  first  time.

“  9 th.  He  was  operated  on  to-day.  The  parts  were  all
saved.  The  dissection  was  tedious  and  very  severe  on  account
of  the  firm  adhesion  of  the  organs  to  the  cartilaginous  walls
of  the  tumor.  He  lay  perfectly  still  and  quiet,  till  I  had
nearly  dissected  out  both  the  testes ;  when  getting  out  the


140


Dr.  Esdaile’s  practice  in  the


last  of  which,  he  began  to  moan,  draw  up  his  chest  and  bend
his  head  backwards  convulsively,  but  did  not  interfere  with
my  proceedings.  When  the  general  mass  was  being  removed,
he  cried  out  once,  1  Juggernath  F  and  immediately  after
wanted  to  be  fanned ;  opened  his  eyes  once,  and  then  in¬
stantaneously  relapsed  into  his  comatose  state.  He  awoke  a
quarter  of  an  hour  after,  and  said  that  nothing  had  disturbed
him  in  his  sleep,  and  that  he  had  not  called  on  ‘  JuggernatlF
to-day.  He  very  soon  perceived  a  smarting  in  the  part,  and
asked  whether  it  was  removed  or  not/’

“  HYPERTROPHIA  SCROTI.

“  October  23rd,  184 7.  Horry,  water  carrier,  aged  30,  has
had  a  small  scrotal  tumor  for  5  years.  He  is  come  from
Cuttack,  in  the  expectation  of  getting  it  removed  without
pain,  as  has  happened  to  many  persons  from  that  quarter.
As  the  tumor  was  small,  I  dissuaded  him  from  having  it
removed  at  present,  but  as  he  expressed  an  earnest  desire  to
have  it  done  on  account  of  the  constant  attacks  of  inflam¬
mation  in  it,  at  the  times  of  periodic  fever,  I  consented  to
his  wishes.

“  To  be  mesmerised  for  an  hour  and  a  half  daily.

“  30th.  He  was  found  deeply  entranced  on  the  first  day,
and  bore  pricking  and  pinching  very  well,  but  the  first  touch
of  a  bit  of  live  charcoal  made  him  shrink,  he  however  became
subsequently  indifferent  to  it.

“  315/.  He  was  tested  satisfactorily  with  an  ejectro-mag-
netic  machine.

“  Nov.  1st.  The  same  to-day.

“  2nd.  I  operated  on  him  to-day  and  saved  all  the  parts.
He  remained  perfectly  passive  under  the  knife ,  and  I  cut  him
as  leisurely  as  I  would  a  dead  body  in  the  dissecting  room.  He
awoke  in  about  half  an  hour  after  all  the  arteries  had  been
secured ;  the  usual  questions  were  put  to  him,  and  it  is
superfluous  to  say  that  he  knew  nothing  about  the  matter.

“  He  is  doing  very  well,  and  has  not  felt  an  ache  since.”

“  HYPERTROPHIA  SCROTI.

“  October  23th,  1847.  Chundechurn,  aged  42,  a  pleader
of  the  S udder  Ameen’s  Court,  in  Sylhet,  which  is  his  place
of  nativity,  has  been  troubled  with  a  considerable  scrotal
tumor  for  5  years.  He  read  in  one  of  the  Bengallee  news¬
papers  that  a  Mesmeric  Hospital  had  been  established  in
Calcutta,  with  a  view  to  afford  relief  to  all  classes  of  persons
afflicted  with  scrotal  tumors,  and  it  is  from  this  absurd  mis-


Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.  ]  41

apprehension  that  my  hospital  has  been  almost  exclusively
supplied  with  such  cases  :  but  I  hope  the  Europeans  will  dis¬
abuse  the  native  mind  of  this  false  impression,  by  making  it
generally  known  that  there  are  very  few  surgical  cases  in
which  painless  operations  may  not  just  as  readily  be  obtained.
‘  When  any  one  goes  there,  it  was  said,  he  is  made  insensible
by  some  magical  process,  and  the  part  is  removed  without  his
feeling  any  pain/  He  showed  me  the  memorandum  he  took
of  my  name  and  the  site  of  the  hospital,-  and  said  that  he
came  in  a  boat  after  a  passage  of  22  days.

“  To  be  mesmerised  for  an  hour  and  a  half  daily.

“  Oct.  30 th.  He  was  entranced  on  the  first  day's  trial,  and
was  perfectly  indifferent  to  the  usual  tests  of  insensibility,
and  to  the  application  of  a  bit  of  live  charcoal.

“  31st.  The  same  to-day.

u  Nov.  1st.  The  operation  was  performed  in  the  usual  wav,
and  all  the  parts  were  saved.  As  soon  as  the  principal  arteries
had  been  secured,  the  cords  which  were  greatly  lengthened
were  examined,  and  as  they  were  still  embedded  in  the  thick¬
ened  tunica  vaginalis  it  was  dissected  off  their  whole  length.
The  man  thus  stood  two  severe  dissections.  There  was  not  a
quiver  observed  in  his  body  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the
principal  operation,  but  his  countenance  became  slightly  dis¬
turbed  during  the  second  cutting.  When  all  washover,  the
mesmerising  was  discontinued,  and  he  was  covered  with  a
clean  sheet :  a  few  minutes  after  he  awoke,  as  he  said,  na¬
turally,  and  did  not  feel  pain  anywhere,  except  a  pricking  in
his  limbs,  and  was  in  his  usual  vigour.  He  next  perceived  a
slight  heat  in  the  part,  and  wanted  to  know  the  cause  of  it.
It  was  then  intimated  to  him  that  he  had  been  relieved  of  his
burden,  and  the  mass  was  shewn  to  him.  He  said  that  he  was
more  than  compensated  for  his  long  and  tedious  voyage.

13th.  He  was  doing  well,  and  the  wound  improving
daily,  but  he  was  last  night  suddenly  attacked  with  cholera,
and  died  to-night."

“  HYPERTROPHIA  SCROTI.

‘‘  Nov.  20th,  1847.  Hurrochunder  Chowdry,  aged  36,  a
native  of  Ballerah,  in  Zillah  Burdwan,  has  been  troubled
with  a  considerable  scrotal  tumor  for  12  years.  He  has  had
it  twice  cauterized  in  the  hope  of  discussing  the  tumor.  This
has  converted  it  into  the  present  solid  cartilaginous  state,
and  has  broken  down  his  health  by  keeping  up  a  discharge
from  some  of  the  uncured  ulcers.  He  heard  that  Bamdhun
Nundy,  who  had  been  troubled  with  a  monstrous  tumor
(70  lbs.)  had  returned  home  quite  recovered,  and  having  been


142


Dr.  Esdaile’s  practice  in  the


encouraged  by  the  account  he  gave  of  the  manner  in  which
he  had  been  operated  upon  in  my  hospital,  he  was  induced  to
come  to  Calcutta  in  the  hope  of  being  cured  in  the  same  way.

“  To  be  mesmerised  for  an  hour  and  a  half  daily.

“  21st.  He  was  satisfactorily  tested  to-day  as  to  the  state
of  the  insensibility,  and  was  found  quite  fit  to  be  operated
upon.

“  22nd.  The  operation  was  performed  to-day,  and  no
attempt  was  made  to  save  the  testes,  as  I  was  convinced  that
they  were  useless  from  the  treatment  the  tumor  had  been
subjected  to.  The  morbid  part,  after  it  had  been  removed,
was  cut  open,  and  the  testes  were  found  to  be  exactly  in  the
state  that  I  had  anticipated.  Weight  of  tumor  about  15  lbs.
The  man  lay  like  a  corpse  till  about  10  minutes  after  he  had
been  covered  with  a  clean  sheet,  and  all  signs  of  the  operation
removed.  He  said,  when  asked,  that  he  felt  no  uneasiness
in  any  part  of  his  body,  and  was  in  his  usual  vigour.  I  had
retired  out  of  sight  before  he  awoke,  and  Mr.  Halliday  asked
him  what  he  had  come  to  hospital  for  ?  He  said,  to  have  his
disease  removed.  Well,  had  it  been  done  ?  Not  yet,  he
answered,  the  Dr.  Sahib  had  looked  at  it  yesterday,  but  he  had
not  yet  come  to-day.  He  was  then  told  that  his  tumor  was
cut  off  in  the  same  way  as  his  friend  Ramdhun  Nundy's,  and
the  part  was  shewn  to  him.  He  recognized  it  by  the  scars,
and  said  that  what  Ramdhun  Nundy  had  told  him  was  quite
true.  If  the  reader  will  refer  to  the  case  of  Ramdhun  Nundy,
he  will  find  that  it  was  one  of  the  cases  in  which  striking
signs  of  suffering  appeared  with  complete  subsequent  oblivion
of  the  whole  transaction.  As  his  case  agreed  so  completely
with  many  others,  I  saw  no  reason  to  disbelieve  the  man,
and  my  simplicity  was  very  generally  pitied  on  that  occasion,
I  believe.  Ramdhun  has  turned  out  the  most  consistent  of
liars,  at  least,  for  he  has  sent  two  of  his  friends  to  me  since
he  went  home,  and  has  been  to  present  himself,  and  tell  the
same  story  to  the  Magistrate  of  Burdwan,  he  writes.”

“  IIYPERTROPHIA  SCROTI.

“  December  2nd,  1847.  Kartick,  a  labourer,  aged  35,  a
native  of  Bhuddessur,  in  Zillah  Hooghly,  has  had  one  of  the
common  scrotal  tumors  for  10  years.  It  commenced  with
hydrocele  in  the  right  side,  which  was  tapped  about  seven
years  ago ;  since  that  time  the  scrotum  had  begun  to  thicken
and  form  the  present  tumor.  He  has  been  subject  to  pe¬
riodic  fever  twice  a  month,  but  now  once  in  one  or  two
months.

“  To  be  mesmerised  for  an  hour  and  a  half  daily.


Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.


143


“  2nd.  I  found  him  sleeping  with  his  eyes  half  open,  the
arms  lying  at  his  sides  were  rigid,  and  could  with  difficulty
be  bent  to  a  right  angle,  feeling  as  if  it  were  a  dislocation  of
the  radius,  which  prevented  its  being  further  flexed.  He  was
subjected  to  several  tests  of  insensibility,  and  to  all  he  ap¬
peared  indifferent  except  to  the  application  of  a  bit  of  live
charcoal,  under  which  he  at  first  shrunk,  but  became  subse¬
quently  as  indifferent  to  it  as  to  all  others.  He  might  be
operated  on  to-day  with  safety.

“  3rd.  He  was  tested  to-day  with  like  results.

“  4 th.  I  operated  on  him  to-day  in  the  usual  way,  and
saved  all  the  parts.  About  the  end  of  the  operation  he  strug¬
gled  a  little,  but  did  not  moan  or  attempt  to  interfere  with
me,  but  lay  with  eyes  half  closed.  He  awoke  just  after  the
principal  arteries  had  been  secured.  The  usual  questions
were  put  to  him,  and  they  were  answered  satisfactorily.

“  18 th.  He  is  doing  well,  and  has  not  felt  any  pain  in  the
wound  since,  which  is  contracting  daily.”

((  HYPEllTROPHIA  SCROTI.

“  December  3rd,  1847.  Luckhynarain  Hey,  a  hawker,
aged  37,  residing  at  Nabootullah,  in  Calcutta,  has  got  a
scrotal  tumor  for  10  years,  followed  by  elephantiasis  of  both
legs.  It  has  been  as  usual,  attended  with  periodic  fever  and
local  inflammation,  twice  a  month,  at  the  change  of  the  moon.
This  man  had  attended  our  hospital  a  few  days  in  the  month
of  August  last,  when  he  came  thoroughly  under  the  mesmeric
influence,  and  was  about  to  be  operated  on;  he  was  suddenly
attacked  with  severe  conjunctivitis  and  periodic  fever,  oblig¬
ing  him  to  return  home,  he  was  re-admitted  on  the  3rd
December.

“  To  be  mesmerised  for  an  hour  and  a  half  daily.

“  3rd.  He  bore  pricking  and  pinching  very  well  to-day,
but  a  slight  shiver  took  place  on  his  being  touched  with  a  bit
of  live  charcoal.  He  resisted  all  the  usual  demesmerising
means,  but  awoke  instantly  on  having  cold  water  squirted

into  his  eves.

%/

“  4th.  Found  deeply  entranced  to-day,  he  was  pricked
and  pinched  with  the  same  results  as  yesterday,  and  could
not  be  roused  with  the  loudest  noises  produced  by  throwing  a
metallic  basin  on  the  stone  floor  close  to  his  bed,  and  ringing  it
for  several  minutes  close  to  his  ears.  A  few  grains  of  sulphate
of  magnesia  were  next  put  into  his  mouth  with  great  difficulty,
as  his  jaws  were  firmly  clenched,  as  it  usually  happens.  The
tongue  remained  quite  passive,  and  the  mouth  gradually  closed
again.  His  nose  was  also  put  into  a  bottle  of  carlo,  of  ammo-


144


Dr.  Esdaile’s  practice  in  tJie


nia,  and  he  inhaled  the  fumes  like  common  air.  Repeated
attempts  were  afterwards  made  to  demesmerise  him,  his  eyes
were  rubbed,  opened  and  sharply  blown  into,  he  was  laid
hold  of  by  his  hands  and  lifted  up  from  his  bed,  and  made  to
sit  upon  it  for  a  few  minutes,  but  without  the  least  effect.
He  was  at  last  awakened  by  his  eyes  being  constantly  syringed
with  cold  water,  and  the  moment  he  came  to  his  senses  he
retched  violently,  and  said  that  his  mouth  was  disgustingly
bitter,  whv  he  could  not  tell.

“December  5 th. — In  the  same  state  to-day.  This  man  was
quite  ready  the  first  day,  but  the  operation  has  been  delayed
at  the  request  of  some  persons  who  desired  to  be  present.

“  6th. — The  operation  was  performed  to-day  by  my  assist¬
ant,  Baboo  Buddenchunder  Chowdry.  The  colis  having  been
freed,  an  incision  was  at  once  made  in  the  course  of  the
right  cord,  which  exposed  a  large  hydrocele,  on  puncturing
which,  a  quantity  of  bloody  pus  came  out ;  as  this  convinced
us  of  the  useless  state  of  the  testis,  it  was  left  untouched,
and  after  the  sinister  was  dissected  out,  it  was  removed
with  the  morbid  mass.  The  testis  sinister  was  also  found
lying  in  a  small  hydrocele,  which  was  laid  open  and  the  tu¬
nica  vaginalis  lining  it  being  much  thickened,  it  was  dissected
off  the  testis  and  cord.  The  patient  was  thus  subjected  to
two  m,ost  severe  dissections,  both  of  which  he  bore  as  passively
and  indifferently  as  a  dead  body.  He  was  awakened  in  about
a  quarter  of  an  hour  after  all  was  over,  and  said  when  asked,
that  he  had  slept  soundly  without  being  disturbed  in  any
way,  and  was  as  strong  as  usual.  On  being  questioned,  he
said,  that  he  came  here  to  be  cured  in  the  same  way  that
several  of  his  neighbours  had  been,  and  on  being  assured  that
lie  had  been  cured  like  his  neighbours,  he  could  not  be  con¬
vinced  until  the  part  removed  was  presented  to  him.  On  seeing
it  he  was  overjoyed,  and  said  that  he  would  like  the  elephan¬
tiasis  of  his  legs  to  be  removed  in  the  same  way.

“  18 th.  He  is  doing  wrell,  and  there  has  been  no  pain  since.

“  HYPERTROPHIA  SCROTI.

“  December  4 th .  Kasseenauth  Ghose,  a  husbandman,  aged
40,  a  native  of  Buddepattee,  in  Zillah  Hooghly,  has  contracted
a  moderate  sized  scrotal  tumor  for  10  years.

“  To  be  mesmerised  for  an  hour  and  a  half  daily.

“  5 th.  Found  insensible  to  pricking,  pinching,  and  to  the
loudest  noise  caused  by  a  metallic  basin  being  rung  close  to
his  ears ;  some  grains  of  sulphate  of  magnesia  were  placed  on
his  tongue,  to  which  it  was  quite  insensible.  He  was  soon
afterwards  demesmerised,  and  on  awaking  he  complained  of


Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.  145

a  saline  bitter  taste  in  his  mouth,  which  was  not  felt  before
he  went  to  sleep,  and  he  supposed  it  came  from  his  sleeping
too  long.  °

“  5 th  and  §th.  In  the  same  state.

“  7th.  He  was  operated  on  to-day.  The  dissection  was
very  severe  and  prolonged,  as  there  was  strong  adhesion  of
the  walls  of  the  tumor  to  the  delicate  organs  below,  which
were  all  saved.  He  was  as  passive  as  his  predecessor  from
first  to  last,  and  could  only  be  distinguished  from  a  corpse  by
a  slight  twitching  of  his  toes.  He  awoke  of  his  own  accord
about  half  an  hour  after  all  was  over  and  he  had  been  put
under  a  clean  sheet,  and  said  that  he  had  slept  uninter¬
ruptedly  up  to  this  moment,  and  that  he  had  come  here  to
get  rid  of  his  burden  by  the  advice  of  his  friend,  Ramlochun,
who  had  wonderfully  recovered  from  a  similar  disease.  He
was  then  told  that  he  was  cured  in  the  same  way,  but  he
could  not  be  made  to  believe  it  till  the  mass  was  shewn  to  him.

“  1  %th.  The  wound  is  healthy  and  cicatrising,  and  he  has
complained  of  no  pain  since/’

A  SORE  COVERED  WITH  NITRIC  ACID.

December  21  st.  Ramdoss,  a  man  who  was  successfullv
operated  upon  for  a  scrotal  tumor  on  the  first  day  of  mesmer¬
ising,  and  who  had  been  discharged  cured,  returned  to  the
hospital  a  few  days  ago  with  a  foul  sore,  the  size  of  a  crown
piece,  at  the  junction  of  the  scrotum  and  colis,  and  I  re¬
solved  to  apply  nitric  acid  to  it,  if  he  could  be  deeply  en¬
tranced.  This  was  the  second  time  only  that  he  had  been
mesmerised,  and  in  half  an  hour  he  was  subdued  :  the  nitric
acid  was  applied  to  the  margin  of  the  sore  only,  to  test  his
toleration  of  it,  and  it  might  as  well  have  been  warm  milk,
for  not  a  sign  of  feeling  appeared  in  his  whole  body,  and  when
he  awoke,  he  said  that  the  pain  was  less  than  before  he  went
to  sleep.”


MEDICAL  CASES.

CHRONIC  INFLAMMATION  OF  THE  ELBOW  JOINT.

April  Mh,  1847.  This  had  existed  4  months  in  a  man,
40  years  old,  caused  by  the  friction  of  the  water  bag.  The
joint  was  much  swollen  and  painful :  the  least  touch  made
the  patient  cry  out.  The  arm  was  bent  at  a  right  angle ,  and
could  not  be  moved  in  the  least.

To  be  mesmerised  an  hour  and  a  half  daily.

VOL.  VI.


L


146


Dr.  Esdaile’s  practice  in  the


In  16  days  moderate  pressure  was  borne,  and  a  little
motion  was  possible.

On  June  the  26th,  the  arm  was  as  straight  as  the  other ,
and  used  without  the  least  inconvenience.

PALSY.

1.  May  27th.  Palsy  of  the  right  half  of  the  body,  for  6
years,  in  a  tailor,  40  years  of  age.

To  be  mesmerised  locally  and  generally  an  hour  daily.

June  15  th.  Could  move  his  arm  like  the  other,  walked
safely  without  his  staff,  and  limped  but  slightly,  and  had
nearly  recovered  the  feeling  of  his  fore-arm  and  leg :  in  a  few
days  he  was  discharged  at  his  own  request.

2.  July  2nd.  Extensive  Palsy.  A  writer,  aged  38.
Had  a  fit,  April  29,  and  was  insensible  two  days.  Feels  and
walks  as  if  intoxicated  :  cannot  stir  without  a  staff.  Complete
insensibility  of  the  right  cheek :  incomplete  of  the  rest  of
the  body  except  the  right  side  of  the  breast,  right  arm,  and
left  cheek :  with  pricking  sensations,  preventing  sleep  at
night :  severe  spasm  of  the  hand  :  double  vision.

To  be  mesmerised  an  hour  and  a  half  dailv.

t/

Aug.  31s/.  Pricking  sensations  nearly  gone  :  sensation
and  vision  perfect,  walks  like  Gther  people,  and  is  strong
enough  to  discharge  his  duties.

3.  Nov.  25 M.  Weakness  of  legs  and  perfect  insensibility
of  his  whole  surface,  for  4  months,  in  a  labourer,  aged  50.
Feels  nothing  when  severely  pricked  all  over  with  the  point
of  a  knife.

To  be  mesmerised  an  hour  and  a  half  daily.

Dec.  13 th.  Walks  and  feels  like  any  other  man :  and
thinking  himself  perfectly  recovered  was  discharged  at  his
own  request.

4.  Dec.  18//l  Palsy  of  left  arm.  A  boy,  aged  10,  woke
yesterday  with  his  left  arm  powerless.  It  hangs  at  his  side
like  a  wet  rag :  much  pain  at  the  elbow.

To  be  mesmerised  an  hour  and  a  half  daily.

31$/.  Perfectly  recovered.

PAINS  OP  NERVES.

1.  July  4 th .  A  peasant  woman,  aged  50.  Ill  3  months.
The  pain  shoots  from  the  neck  to  the  waist,  back  and  front,
preventing  sleep,  and  increased  by  the  least  motion,  so  that
she  keeps  her  trunk  fixed  like  a  piece  of  wood,  walks  slowly,
and  cannot  bend  her  head  forwards  or  backwards.


Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital .


14  7


To  be  mesmerised  for  an  hour  daily.

•/

Aug.  22nd.  Can  bend  her  head  freely  in  all  directions,
has  no  pain,  walks  well,  and,  feeling  quite  well,  is  discharged.

2.  Sept.  1 7th.  A  writer,  aged  35.  Ill  6  months.  Pain
often  intolerable  in  the  middle  third  of  the  spine,  preventing
his  duties.

Local  mesmerism  for  an  hour  daily.

28th.  No  pain  :  can  bend  his  head  freely  and  keep  it
stooping  any  length  of  time.  Peels  cured,  and  has  resumed
his  business.

3.  June  2 5th.  A.  Sperods,  aged  32.  Ill  22  years.  Fits  of
excruciating  head-ache.  The  pain  seizes  one  temple  only  at  a
time,  and  never  lasts  less  than  24  hours,  and  during  it  no
food  is  taken  except  slops,  and  they  are  often  rejected.
Throbbing :  intolerance  of  light,  noise,  and  conversation :
inability  to  sit  up  without  maddening  pain  and  drowsiness :
various  other  symptoms.  Endless  remedies  from  endless
practitioners,  regular  and  irregular,  in  vain.

Mesmerised  an  hour  daily,  except  Sundays.  On  the
3rd  of  July,  having  risen  with  a  violent  attack,  begged  the
attendance  of  the  mesmeriser  at  his  own  house.  In  an  hour
he  was  thrown  into  a  sleep,  for  three  quarters  of  an  hour,
from  which  he  awoke  so  well  that  he  went  to  his  office  and
performed  his  daily  duties,  a  thing  never  before  practicable ;
afterwards  ate  his  dinner,  and  had  a  most  refreshing  sleep.
Not  being  able  to  visit  the  hospital  regularly,  a  mesmeriser
attended  him  at  his  own  house  at  intervals  for  12  days.  At
the  end  of  23  days  from  the  first  of  this  treatment  his  sister
mesmerised  him  every  morning  for  an  hour  during  a  month,
in  which  time  he  had  no  attack,  and  at  the  end  of  which  he
writes  that  his  “  health  is  improved,  and  strength  of  body
materially  renovated.”

4.  Aug.  3 Oth.  A  writer,  aged  32,  had  severe  neuralgic  pain
of  the  right  arm  and  leg  for  two  months :  could  not  raise  his
arm  perpendicularly,  or  bend  it  much  backwards.

To  be  mesmerised  an  hour  and  a  half  daily.

Oct.  1st.  Arm  quite  free  from  pain,  and  as  moveable  in
all  directions  as  the  arm  of  any  other  person.  The  pain  of
the  arm  had  ceased  above  a  week  ago.  Pelt  so  well  that  he
returned  to  his  business.

5.  Sept.  29th.  A  man,  aged  40  :  afflicted  with  1  sook  or  fits
of  agony  at  the  stomach  for  2  years.  The  natives  relieve  it

l  2


148


Dr.  Esdaile’s  practice  in  the


by  pressing  the  pit  of  the  stomach  against  a  stump  of  bam¬
boo  till  the  front  almost  touches  the  back.  So  agonizing  is
it  that  one  of  Dr.  E/s  patients  had  cut  his  throat  rather  than
bear  it.

To  be  mesmerised  an  hour  and  a  half  daily.

Oct.  10 th.  The  pain  had  gradually  yielded  :  and  as  it
had  not  now  returned  for  several  days,  he  considered  himself
cured  and  left  the  hospital.

6.  Sept.  30 th.  A  peasant  woman,  aged  50,  has  had  sciatic
pain  of  her  right  thigh  and  leg  for  2  months :  limps  consider¬
ably.

Oct.  12 th.  Walks  well  without  limping:  pain  nearly
gone.

EPILEPSY.

Sept.  19 th.  A  husbandman,  aged  30  :  ill  6  years.  A  fit
of  about  an  hour  five  or  six  times  a  month,  leaving  heaviness
aud  pain  of  head  for  two  or  three  days.

To  be  mesmerised  an  hour  and  a  half  daily.

Nov.  2nd.  No  fit  since  Oct.  2  :  and  the  fit  of  this  and
the  previous  day  had  been  very  short  and  not  followed  by
head-ache.  Fancying  himself  cured,  he  would  remain  no
longer.

TETANUS.

June  10 th.  Dr.  E/s  gardener,  aged  36,  had  acute  rheu¬
matism,  and  in  a  week  violent  tetanus.  The  spasms  came
on  every  two  minutes,  throwing  his  body  into  the  form  of  a
bow,  so  that  his  whole  weight  rested  on  his  heels  and  the
back  of  his  head  :  the  least  movement  or  change  of  position
renewed  them  :  the  muscles  of  the  calves,  abdomen,  and
neck,  were  very  hard.  There  was  no  lock-jaw.  The  pulse
was  quick.

To  be  mesmerised  six  hours  a  day  by  four  different
persons.

15 th.  The  bowels  were  freely  acted  upon  by  medicine :
but  the  spasms  only  became  more  strong  and  frequent.

To  be  mesmerised  at  night  for  three  hours  by  two  dif¬
ferent  persons.

1 7th.  Slept  well  for  four  hours  at  night  at  the  time  of
mesmerising.  The  muscles  of  the  calves  and  abdomen  are
become  soft  and  pliant.

To  be  mesmerised  daily  for  four  hours  by  four  different
persons.

18£A.  Spasms  much  less  frequent :  only  every  three  or
four  hours.  Can  rise  from  his  bed  with  a  staff ;  the  muscles


149


Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.

of  the  neck  and  abdomen  are  softer;  the  appetite  much  im¬
proved  :  all  constitutional  irritation  has  ceased.

19 th.  Spasms  have  nearly  ceased,  and  he  has  walked
about  the  ward ;  but  while  walking  was  seized  with  a  spasm,
which  threw  him  down  and  thus  severely  bruised  and  wounded
him.

Juhj  7th.  The  spasms  have  quite  left  him ;  he  can  walk
without  a  staff.  His  muscles  remained  soft  and  pliant,  and
he  gained  strength  daily.

Dr.  E.  mentions  having  seen  a  severe  case,  following  a
gunshot  wound  in  the  leg  and  the  cutting  out  of  the  musket
ball.  The  wound,  however,  had  nearly  healed.  The  useless
orthodox  treatment  was  followed,  the  wound  was  cut  open
afresh,  mercury  was  given  to  salivation,  with  large  doses  of
opium,  without  any  relief.  Red-hot  irons  were  proposed  for
the  sake  of  doing  something  more,  but  rejected  as  too  cruel.
He  never  slept.  Dr.  E.  was  allowed  to  mesmerise  him.  After
some  time  he  expressed  great  relief,  and  the  next  day  slept
several  times  and  then  had  a  good  night.  On  the  following
morning  he  was  free  from  spasms,  and  said  that  Dr.  E.  was
the  first  person  who  had  given  him  any  relief :  he  had  no
spasms  for  24  hours,  got  up,  and  declared  himself  cured.
But  the  disease  returned  and  killed  him.

In  another  case  from  a  wound  Dr.  E.  was  also  unsuccessful.

RHEUMATISM.

1.  May  27th.  A  Malee,  aged  30.  Ill  incessantly  for  a  year
with  severe  pain  in  the  left  half  of  his  back  from  the  lower
part  of  the  neck  to  the  waist,  in  paroxysms  of  6  or  7  hours
daily.  Had  been  blistered,  leeched  several  times,  and  scari¬
fied,  without  relief.

To  be  mesmerised  generally  and  locally  an  hour  daily.

June  10 th.  The  paroxysms  were  more  severe  and  long
the  first  five  days.  Therefore  he  was  to  be  mesmerised  twice

a  dav.

%!

18 th.  He  was  entranced  yesterday  and  to-day,  and  had
no  attack  afterwards.

At  the  end  of  8  days  he  thought  himself  well  and  was
discharged.

This  case  might  be  termed  neuralgia.

2.  June  1st.  A  kidmutgar,  aged  22:  ill  8  days  with  very
severe  acute  rheumatism.

To  be  mesmerised  generally  and  locally  for  an  hour  and
a  half  daily.


150


Dr.  Esclaile’s  practice  in  the


10/A.  Began  to  sleep  while  being  mesmerised,  and  at
night.  The  disease  has  gradually  declined  and  now,

Aug.  15/A.  He  can  walk  with  a  staff.  A  quantity  of  un¬
healthy  matter  formed  near  the  left  hip.

The  disease  might  certainly  have  run  the  same  course
without  mesmerism.

3.  June  15/A.  A  peasant  woman,  aged  40,  had  severe  rheu¬
matism  for  a  year.  One  leg  was  much  wasted.  With  a  staff
she  could  limp  about  a  little,  but  could  not  raise  herself
from  the  sitting  posture.  The  least  movement  of  her
shoulders  made  her  scream.

To  be  mesmerised  an  hour  and  a  half  daily.

Aug.  13/A.  She  could  walk  like  any  other  person,  said
she  was  well,  and  desired  to  be  discharged.

4.  Aug.  6/A.  A  boatman,  aged  35,  had  rheumatism  of  the
knees  and  weakness  of  the  hands  for  2  months :  the  joints
were  tender  and  swollen  :  he  could  walk  with  a  staff  onlv,

4/  *

and  could  not  rise  without  help.

To  be  mesmerised  an  hour  and  a  half  daily.

At  the  end  of  5  days,  much  less  pain  and  swelling,  and
he  began  to  walk  without  a  staff.

30/A.  He  walked,  ran,  and  jumped  like  other  people.
Discharged  and  cured.

5.  Oct  28/A.  A  shopkeeper,  aged  20,  had  lumbago  right
across  for  3  months :  preventing  sleep  and  also  preventing
him  from  treading  firmly  on  the  ground.

To  be  mesmerised  for  an  hour  and  a  half  daily.

Nov.  7th.  Free  from  pain,  walks  well,  and  is  able  to
carry  on  his  business.

6.  Nov.  17/A.  A  klassee,  aged  28,  has  had  acute  rheuma¬
tism  for  2  months  :  all  the  large  joints  are  swollen  and  almost
motionless :  cannot  turn  in  bed  without  help,  and  sleeps
badly.

To  be  mesmerised  an  hour  and  a  half  daily.

20/A.  Sleeps  well  at  night.

Dec.  10/A.  Walks,  runs,  and  jumps  like  any  other  man  :
no  pain  when  any  joint  is  strongly  pressed,  or  is  struck  with
the  hand.  Savs  he  can  resume  his  business:  and  is  dis-

o  *

charged.

7.  Aug.  31s/.  A  merchant,  aged  30,  has  had  paralytic
rheumatism  for  a  month :  loss  of  feeling  and  weakness  of  his


Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.


151


lower  limbs  up  to  his  waist :  cannot  walk  without  a  staff,  and
his  limbs  shake  greatly  in  the  act.  The  shoulders  and  loins
are  tender.

9 th.  The  feeling  of  the  palsied  parts  is  perfectly  restored  :
the  tenderness  of  the  shoulder  has  ceased :  walks  without  a
staff :  and  says  he  can  walk  home  without  help.  Sleeps  at
night  just  as  before  he  was  ill.

/  ‘  /

8.  Nov.  2 6th.  A  labourer,  aged  30,  has  suffered  from  acute
rheumatism  10  days.  Most  of  the  larger  joints  are  much
swollen,  very  hot,  and  so  tender  that  he  cannot  bear  them
touched ;  he  has  no  sleep  :  the  pulse  is  quick,  and  the  tongue
furred.

To  be  mesmerised  an  hour  and  a  half  daily.

On  the  first  day  a  perspiration  broke  out,  and  he  slept
during  mesmerisation.

Dec.  8 th.  Pain  and  swelling  of  the  left  shoulder  and
ankle  much  less :  good  nights,  and  deep  sleep  while  being
mesmerised  :  tongue  cleaner.

\0th.  Walks  much  better.

31s£.  Walks  perfectly  well :  and  can  run  and  jump :
considers  himself  well,  and  is  therefore  discharged.

9.  Aug.  10 th.  Dr.  E.  found  one  of  the  mesmerisers  being
mesmerised  for  a  stiff  neck  :  he  was  asleep,  cataleptic,  and
insensible  to  pricking.  The  process  had  been  carried  on  at
the  back  of  his  neck  only.  On  waking  the  pain  was  much
less.

13 th.  Pound  him  again  entranced :  on  waking  he  was
nearly  well.

Dr.  E.  mentions  having  once  mesmerised  the  knees  of  a
rheumatic  patient,  and  thus  induced  coma  and  general  rigidity.
Mesmerisation  of  any  part  of  the  system  had  afterwards  the
same  effect.


Dr.  Esdaile  relates  a  few  interesting  facts  which  pre¬
sented  themselves  unexpectedly  to  him  in  his  Asiatic  patients,
and  are  precisely  the  same  as  astonished  us  in  England  on
their  first  occurrence — proving  that  they  occurred  according
to  the  laws  of  nature,  and  that  the  human  beings  who  ma¬
nifested  them  were  not  impostors,  as  the  uninformed  foes  of
mesmerism  clamorously  declared.

We  frequently  find  some  portion  of  the  mesmeric  state
remain  locally  after  the  patient  has  awakened* — closure  of  the
eyes,  or  jaw,  for  instance,  or  rigidity  of  some  other  part ;

*  Zoist,  Vol.  III.,  p.  56,  7,  8. .


152


Dr.  Esdaile’s  practice  in  the


sometimes,  but  more  rarely,  the  insensibility  of  some  part;
sometimes  the  excitement  of  some  cerebral  organ  or  organs,
&c.,  &c.  We  also  often  produce  local  effects  in  mesmeric
patients  when  in  their  natural  state.

Dec.  8 th.  A  new  patient,  a  man  of  40,  had  been  mes¬
merised  for  an  hour.  He  was  entranced  and  insensible  to
pricking.  After  being  completely  awakened,  he  still  bore
pricking  from  head  to  foot  for  ten  minutes,  and  then  his
sensibility  returned.  He  was  now  blindfolded  carefully,  and
one  of  his  arms  mesmerised  with  every  precaution  that  he
might  not  know  it.  A  pin  was  given  to  him,  and  he  was
desired  to  test  the  condition  of  his  skin.  He  said  it  was  as
usual  except  the  very  arm  that  had  been  mesmerised.  The
other  was  next  mesmerised,  and  he  now  said  that  both  were
insensible  to  pricking  and  heavier  than  usual :  a  good  deal  of
rubbing  and  blowing  were  required  to  restore  it  to  its  natural
state.  Contact,  or  transverse  passes,  or  breathing,  we  here
usually  find  quickly  dissipate  these  local  effects.

Another  circumstance  which  occurred  in  India  is  common
enough  here.  In  the  mesmeric  sleep,  the  patient  appears,
after  a  time,  to  awaken,  but  can  make  no  voluntary  effort.
This  man,  when  entranced,  bore  severe  prickiug  all  over,
pinching  of  his  nipple,  and  a  piece  of  live  charcoal  in  his
hand.  A  fresh  piece  of  charcoal  was  placed  on  his  chest,  and
he  struck  it  off  convulsively  with  the  other  hand  and  instantly
relapsed  into  repose.  Epsom  salts  were  put  upon  his  tongue,
but  he  gave  no  sign  of  tasting  them.  When  thoroughly
awakened,  he  of  course  began  to  spit,  and  complained  of
something  salt  and  bitter.  He  declared  that  his  sleep  had
been  broken  by  something  burning  in  his  hand  and  then  on
his  breast ;  but  that  nothing  had  annoyed  him  up  to  that
time,  and  that  he  felt  something  was  put  into  his  mouth,
though  he  tasted  nothing.  “  When  asked  why  he  did  not
open  his  eyes  to  see  what  burned  him,  or  get  up  to  avoid
it,  he  replied,  that  he  tried  to  open  his  eyes  and  to  move,
but  could  not,  his  whole  body  felt  dead  and  powerless,  and
that  he  was  only  able  to  move  after  his  eyes  were  rubbed.”

If  any  one  will  sit  and  imagine  all  possible  degrees,  num¬
bers,  combinations,  successions,  and  localities  of  mesmeric
phenomena,  he  will  fancy  none  that  do  not  occur.*  Sometimes
nothing  but  this  inability  of  exertion  takes  place  ;f  sometimes
it  exists  in  the  active  sleep-waking  in  regard  to  rising  and
walking  only  sometimes  it  is  absent  in  active  sleep-waking  ;

*  Zoist,  Vol.  III.,  p.448.  f  Vol.  I.,  p.  335;  Vol.  V.,  p  372.

X  Vol.  II.,  pp.  63,  202;  Vol.  III.,  p.  GO.


Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.


153


sometimes,  and  usually,  nothing  is  remembered  on  waking ;
in  some  patients  every  thing  in  some  all  after  a  certain
period  ;f  in  others,  some  things  only  without  reference  to
the  period  of  sleep  in  one  patient  of  mine,  the  occurrences
of  the  sleep-waking  were  occasionally  dreamt  at  night,  and,
the  dream  being  remembered,  the  patient  learnt  them  on
waking  in  the  morning  :§  sometimes  the  emotions  occasioned
by  the  conversation  and  occurrences  in  the  sleep-waking
remain  in  the  waking  state,  though  the  facts  are  forgotten  ;§
and  frequently  by  making  the  patient  promise  in  the  sleep¬
waking  to  remember  certain  things,  these  are  remembered.

A  very  common  fact  is  the  possibility  of  producing  by  local
mesmerism  rigidity  or  insensibility,  or  both,  in  individual
parts  in  the  ordinary  waking  state  of  mesmeric  patients :  and
it  is  not  a  very  uncommon  one  in  persons  who  have  never  been
mesmerised.  In  August  last,  a  gentleman  from  England  men¬
tioned  this  phenomenon  to  Dr.  Esdaile  :  and  successful  trials
were  unpremeditatedly  made  upon  a  patient  before  a  large
company.  The  legs  and  arms  of  a  man  were  stiffened.  The
company  would  have  him  raised  from  the  ground  by  the  stiff¬
ened  extended  arms ;  and  this  caused  dreadful  suffering  and
convulsions ;  though  the  arms  were  motionless,  not  perceptibly
lowered.  To  end  this  scene,  Dr.  E.  relaxed  the  arms  by
sudden  transverse  passes ;  and,  to  soothe  the  pain,  mesmerised
him  to  sleep.  He  was  awakened,  and  scales  with  a  great
weight  were  put  into  his  hand,  and  the  arm  was  extended
and  stiffened.  As  soon  as  the  weight  was  felt,  he  screamed
and  implored  to  have  the  scales  removed.  He  was  told  to
open  his  hand,  but  could  not.  His  arm  was  blown  upon,  and
the  hand  instantly  flew  open  and  the  scales  dropped  to  the
ground.  These  were  transferred  to  the  other  hand,  and  he
was  desired  to  hold  them  voluntarily,  and  they  were  sustained
by  him  without  the  least  sign  of  discomfort  for  a  time, — as
long  as  could  be  expected  in  a  man  of  his  strength ;  but  at
length  his  arm  slowly  descended,  and  blowing,  of  course,
had  no  effect  upon  it.  When  it  was  near  the  ground,  Dr.  E.
blew  on  it,  and  the  hand  opened.  As  there  had  been  no  mes¬
merising,  blowing  of  course  could  have  had  no  share  in  the
relaxation :  and  the  hand  relaxed,  as  the  whole  arm  had
slowly  descended,  from  the  exhaustion  of  the  muscles,  and  this
would  have  occurred  without  the  blowing.  This  evident  coin¬
cidence  was  ridiculed  as  a  fine  piece  of  imposture,  though  there
was  no  mesmerism  in  the  case.  At  the  request  of  bystanders,

*  Vol.  V.,  p.  14  f  Vol  V.,  p.  375.  X  Vol.  III.,  p.  476,

§  Vol.  III.,  p.  63.


154


Dr.  Esdaile’s  practice  in  the


an  arm  was  stiffened  and  fire  applied  to  the  back  of  the  hand  :
the  man  cried  out  piteously  and  the  arm  started  an  inch,  which
was  as  far  as  it  was  always  found  capable  of  moving  when
stiffened,  but  it  could  move  no  farther  to  liberate  itself  from
the  torturing  fire. — The  reason  why  the  poor  man  felt  pain
when  raised  by  the  arms  was  that  the  insensibility  was  at  the
surface  only,  and  did  not  extend  to  the  joints;  and  why  he
felt  pain  when  fire  was  applied,  and  now  when  the  ice  was
applied,  was  that  the  sensibility  of  temperature  is  distinct
from  that  of  mechanical  injury;  and  even  the  sensibilities  of
hot  and  of  cold  are  distinct.  The  varieties  of  mesmeric
effects  are  endless.  I  often  find  patients  insusceptible  of
pain  from  cutting,  pricking,  and  pinching,  who  yet  feel  that
they  are  touched.  Some  have  insensibility  of  mechanical
injury  in  some  parts  of  the  surface  and  not  in  others;  and
the  localities  of  susceptibility  and  insusceptibility  will  shift
at  different  sittings.  Some  have  insensibility  only  skin  deep,
others  to  greater  or  less  depths.  When  the  elder  Okey
could  feel  no  pinching  or  pricking,  and  took  live  coals  in  her
hand  without  any  sensation  of  heat,  her  head  would  shake
from  violent  neuralgic  pain  within.  Every  day  patients  whose
skin  has  no  feeling,  suffer  intense  pains  of  the  bowels,  &c.
I  have  several  patients  whose  arms  can  be  stiffened  when  in
their  natural  state :  and  no  force  of  bending  or  pulling  the
joints  that  I  can  exert  gives  them  the  least  pain,  notwith¬
standing  the  Indian  felt  so  much ;  and  yet  these  same  patients
feel  the  least  contact  and  pressure  on  the  skin.  I  have  known
a  patient  not  feel  pricking  and  pinching,  and  yet  have  so
morbid  a  sense  of  weight,  that  a  light  substance  placed  on  the
hand  prevented  it  being  lifted.* * * §  This  patient,  with  others  of
mine  whose  surface  is  equally  insensible  of  mechanical  injury,
feels  heat  and  cold  as  acutely  as  any  other  person  :f  and  so
did  the  Indian  feel  heat.  Miss  Collins  was  insensible  to  me¬
chanical  injury  and  also  to  cold  and  heat,  unless  the  heat  was
very  great,  as  from  a  hot  poker,  and  then  she  felt  a  warmth  ;J
yet  she  felt  contact  and  resistance.  “  E.  Okey  when  insensible
to  cutting  and  burning  could  walk  and  hold  things.”§  All

*  Vol.  III.,  p.  60.  To  illustrate  the  modification  of  mesmeric  effects,  I  may
mention  that  in  some  of  these  patients  whose  rigid  arms  cannot  be  bent  by  force,
but  may  be  gradually  in  the  rigid  state  drawn  up  and  bent  by  tractive  movements
in  the  suitable  direction  without  contact,  the  rigidity  continues  during  the  whole
process  :  while  in  other  patients,  before  the  tractive  movements  bend  the  arm,
this  perfectly  relaxes,  and  then  begins  to  obey  the  tractive  movements  of  the
operator,  II.,  71,  207.

f  Vol.  II.,  p.  209-10;  III.,  p.  59.

J  Vol.  III.,  p.  452.

§  Vol.  II.,  p.  210.


Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.


155


these  varieties  occur  in  palsy.*  In  some  persons  the  parts
made  rigid  retain  their  sensibility.  In  some  these  phenomena
change  from  time  to  time.

Dr.  Esdaile  was  tormented  by  crowds  of  persons  ignorant
of  mesmerism,  each  eagerly  and  presumptuously  making  ex¬
periments  upon  the  patient  at  the  same  time,  as  though  any
satisfactory  results  could  thus  be  obtained.  My  fate  was  just
the  same  when  I  was  willing  to  oblige  every  body  by  shewing
them  my  patients.  While  I  was  attempting  traction  by  dis¬
tant  movements,  half  a  dozen  people  would  begin  the  same
thing  in  different  parts  :  not  knowing  that  the  tractive  move¬
ments  of  the  operator  first  make  an  impression  on  the  per¬
ception  of  the  patient  in  some  occult  mode,  and  after  a  lapse
of  time  excite  him  to  obey  and  will  the  action  desired,  though
by  compulsion  to  will  it ;  and  that  the  inclination  to  obey
continues  some  time  after  the  operator  has  ceased  to  draw,
and  may  begin  afresh  after  a  pause  of  some  minutes,  or  even
the  next  time  the  patient  is  mesmerised.  The  absurdity  of  per¬
sons  thus  experimenting  is  evident.  Many  considered  me  very
patient;  but  sometimes  I  could  scarcely  bear  the  folly  and  liber¬
ties  of  persons  whom  I  was  obliging.  So  Dr.  Esdaile  says, —

“  This  commenced  a  series  of  a'oss  purposes ,  which  went  on

increasing  to  the  end  of  the  proceedings . At  this  stage  the

endurance  and  forbearance  for  which  some  have  given  me  credit
on  many  trying  occasions,  broke  down  completely  exhausted,  I
am  sorry  to  relate.  For,  whatever  might  be  the  anomalies  and
apparent  contradictions,  (only  so  to  our  ignorance)  observed  through¬
out  this  case,  there  was  one  great  consistent,  ever  present  fact
before  us  from  first  to  last, — the  impossibility  of  bending  a  rigid
limb  without  causing  intense  pain ,  and  bringing  on  convulsions
even ;  nevertheless,  in  spite  of  all  experience,  and  my  warnings  of
the  probable  evil  consequences,  it  was  attempted  to  bend  his  rigid
spine  and  neck,  and  convulsions  would  have  followed  as  they  did
yesterday,  if  I  had  not  interfered,  and  protested  that  I  would  not  be
concerned  in  such  proceedings.  Half  an  hour  before  this  Dr.  Jackson
had  suddenly  applied  a  bottle  of  carb.  ammonia  to  his  nose,  and  he
instantly  drew  back  his  head, — I  was  nowr  requested  to  try  what
could  be  done  with  the  sense  of  smell.  In  a  few  minutes,  he  showed
the  most  perfect  indifference  to  the  fumes  of  ammonia  held  close  to
his  nose  for  some  time,  and  when  he  appeared  to  feel  the  irritation,
he  said  that  he  only  felt  a  heat  in  his  neck.  Yesterday,  it  will  be
remembered,  the  heat  was  in  the  chest.  His  nose  was  found  to  be
also  insensible  to  pricking,  and  his  tongue  likewise.  Seeing  this,  a

*  In  a  case  of  somnambulism  quite  unconnected  with  mesmerism,  seen  by
myself,  and  related  in  my  pamphlet  on  Operations  without  Pain,  there  was  in¬
sensibility  of  mechanical  injury,  but  not  of  cold,  p.  49.


156


Dr.  Esdaile’s  practice  in  the


large  bodkin  was  given  to  him,  and  he  was  desired  to  prick  his  body
and  face ;  and  say  where  it  hurt  him.  He  lightly  touched  his  arm
and  shoulder,  saying  it  hurt  him,  and  then  carried  the  bodkin  to
his  cheek  into  which  he  stuck  and  bored  it  repeatedly  (sometimes
lifting  up  thick  folds  of  the  skin  twice  transfixed)  in  so  shocking  a
manner,  that  I  was  begged  not  to  allow  him  to  perforate  his  cheek  ;
so  recklessly  did  he  stab  about  his  face,  that  a  spectator  considerately
diverted  his  blow  when  he  saw  him  about  to  stab  his  eyes  through
the  sticking  plaster, — while  he  was  boring  his  cheek  like  a  piece  of
wood.  I  demesmerised  the  part  in  a  moment,  and  he  instantly
drew  out  his  pin  with  an  expression  of  pain,  and  complained  of  the
holes  he  had  made  in  his  cheek.  I  pointed  my  fingers  at  his  ears,
and  in  a  short  time,  he  said,  that  he  heard  very  imperfectly  on  the
right  side,  and  that  ear  was  found  to  be  dead  to  all  feeling.  The
left  shoulder  and  side  of  the  neck  became  rigid  and  insensible  at  the
same  time,  and  pinches  of  skin  were  actually  torn  out  of  the
shoulder  without  his  appearing  in  the  least  conscious  of  it.  What
followed  was  a  chaos ;  every  one  making  his  independent  experiments
and  drawing  his  own  conclusions,  and  it  wras  in  vain  that  I  begged
leave  to  be  permitted  to  finish  my  course  of  experiment  undisturbed
by  foreign  and  distracting  influences.  One  medical  spectator  insisted
on  dividing  the  man’s  body  in  two,  and  kindly  made  over  one-half
to  me,  while  he  worked  his  will  on  the  other.  When  I  expostulated
against  such  a  game  of  pulley -hawley,  I  was  told  that  as  the  nervous
system  was  double,  I  ought  to  be  satisfied  with  my  portion,  and,
that  the  one’s  experiment  need  not  interfere  wdth  the  other’s,  and  he
went  on  mesmerising  his  half  of  the  body  while  I  was  trying  to
demesmerise  the  other.  The  man  had  been  tormented  for  about
two  hours  by  this  time,  and  his  amazing  patience  and  endurance
were  at  last  exhausted,  and  he  earnestly  begged  to  be  released.
Although  the  idea  of  collusion  between  me  and  the  patient  was
politely  disclaimed,  it  was  still  somewhat  inconsistently  thought,
that  there  was  a  secret  mode  of  communication  between  us,  and  that
he  was  acting  up  to  my  supposed  wishes  in  some  incomprehensible
manner.  The  real  fact  that  I  had  been  principally  employed  in  exe¬
cuting  the  wishes  of  others,  was  totally  lost  sight  of,  and  the  absur¬
dity  overlooked  that  he  had  been  acting  up  to  the  supposed  will  of
others,  and  not  mine  nearly  all  the  time.  It  was  therefore  proposed
to  me  to  leave  the  room,  and  let  the  man  suppose  that  I  had  left
him  altogether,  and  that  I  should  return  unawares,  and  try  to  make
his  right  shoulder  insensible.  This  was  done,  and  although  I  spent
more  than  the  usual  time  in  the  operation,  the  sensibility  of  the
part  was  not  affected,  as  on  every  other  occasion  it  had  been  from
first  to  last.  This,  of  course,  was  looked  upon  as  the  crowning
demonstration  of  the  imposture,  but  to  my  understanding,  it  can  be
readily  explained  by  one  of  two  suppositions  :  the  man’s  sensibility
had  become  exhausted  or  confused  by  his  long  endurance,  and  the
conflicting  influences  he  had  been  subjected  to  ;  a  common  and  well
known  result ;  or  being  left  to  the  mercy  of  his  enemies,  (as  he  had
good  reason  to  think  them)  it  had  created  such  terror  and  anxiety


Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.  157

as  to  suspend  the  mesmeric  influence  for  the  moment.  This  we  see
in  practice  daily,  and  many  of  my  most  promising  surgical  operations
have  been  lost  by  the  invasion  of  a  sudden  panic  which  could  not  be
subdued,  even  when  the  patients  had  been  previously  reduced  to  the
extreme  degree  of  the  mesmeric  trance.  The  man  now  became
unmanageable,  and  cried  bitterly  for  me  to  come  to  his  aid,  and  set
him  free.  I  re-assured  him  by  my  voice,  and  proceeded  to  remove
the  plasters  from  his  eyes,  which  caused  him  great  pain.  But  I  was
stopped  before  one  corner  was  opened,  and  was  requested  to  make
him  insensible  to  the  operation,  if  possible.  I  accordingly  mes¬
merised  his  eyes  carefully,  and  then  drew  off  both  the  plasters  rudely
without  his  showing  a  vestige  of  sensibility.  Here  a  new  pheno¬
menon  presented  itself,  and  was  the  source  of  interminable  confusion
and  misapprehension.  If  I  had  been  asked,  ‘  What  will  probably
happen  if  you  succeed  in  rendering  him  insensible  to  the  removal  of
the  plasters  V  I  should  have  confidently  replied,  ‘  You  will  find  his
eyes  spasmodically  closed,  and  that  he  will  not  be  able  to  open  them
till  I  assist  him  to  do  so.5  This  was  precisely  what  happened,  every
part  of  his  system  was  awake  and  in  its  natural  state,  except  his
eye-lids,  and  these  he  could  not  possibly  open.  Various  persons
tried  to  demesmerise  his  eyes  without  effect ; — and  it  was  said,  ‘  Oh !
he  will  only  open  them  for  you.’  To  test  his  obedience  to  me ,  I
desired  the  blowing,  &c.,  to  be  continued,  and  spoke  over  the  ope¬
rator’s  shoulder,  ordering  the  man  to  open  his  eyes,  but  to  no  pur¬
pose.  Then  it  was  said,  ‘  Oh  !  he  sees  it  is  not  you,  and  therefore
will  not  do  it ;  do  it  yourself,  and  it  will  soon  succeed.’  e  That  I
shall  do  it  better  than  you,  I  have  little  doubt,’  I  replied,  ‘for  every
one  ought  to  know  by  this  time,  that  the  mesmeriser  generally  has
superior  power  over  the  patient,  but  if  a  natural  consequence  is  to
be  construed  into  a  proof  of  deception,  I  will  leave  him  to  get  his
eyes  open  as  he  best  may.’  The  man  now  became  outrageous,  and
insisted  on  having  his  eyes  opened.  Being  as  weary  of  such  a
scene  as  he  was,  I  set  about  demesmerising  his  eyes  by  blowing  upon
them,  rubbing  them,  and  ordering  him  to  open  them,  and  with  the
expected  effect  of  course  ! — not  at  all,  with  no  more  effect  than  the
others  ;  the  arrangement  had  somehow  got  deranged.  I  was  urged
to  try  it  again,  and  to  blow  stronger;  ‘that,’  I  said,  ‘will  pro¬
bably  succeed.’  I  now  blew  sharply  upon  the  eyelids,  and  they
immediately  opened,  at  the  concerted  signal  of  course!’

The  following  is  a  striking  case  : —

“  Sept.  2 3i'd.  Rujub,  had  never  been  locally  mesmerised  before.

I  extended  his  left  arm,  without  saying  a  word,  and  mesmerised  it
from  the  shoulder  downwards,  and  the  result  will  surprize  the
reader  as  much  as  it  did  me,  I  dare  say.  A  pin  was  given  to  him  and
he  was  desired  to  ascertain  if  that  arm  was  the  same  as  the  other.
He  pricked  it  all  over  up  to  the  shoulder  without  feeling  it,  he  said,
and  being  ordered  to  continue,  he  declared  that  all  that  side  of  the
chest  was  insensible,  but  the  moment  he  passed  the  middle  of  his
chest,  he  arrested  the  pin,  and  said  that  it  hurt  him.  He  carried


158  Account  of  a  “  Review  of  my  Reviewers.

the  examination  upwards  and  downwards,  and  to  my  great  amazement
divided  his  body  with  the  greatest  precision  into  two  halves  down
the  median  line,  declaring  that  the  left  side  was  insensible  from
head  to  foot,  and  the  right  just  as  usual.  I  now  took  the  pin  and
pricked  him  from  behind,  and  whenever  I  diverged  a  line  from  the
centre  of  his  body  towards  his  right  side,  he  immediately  indicated
pain,  but  the  whole  of  the  left  side  from  head  to  foot  had  lost  its
sensibility  to  ordinary  impressions ;  this  was  immediately  restored
by  the  usual  demesmerising  processes.  Mr.  O’Shaughnessy  soon
after  came  in,  and  I  repeated  the  experiment  on  the  right  side  with
precisely  the  same  effects,  and  I  then  thought  of  turning  this  man’s
peculiarities  to  some  practical  benefit  to  himself.  I  proposed  to
ascertain  whether  the  tumor  could  be  rendered  insensible  to  pain  by
local  mesmerising,  and  was  gratified  to  find  that  it  could  be  so ;  all
but  about  two  inches  behind,  close  to  the  anus,  and,  but  for  this
isolated  sensible  patch,  I  would  have  tried  the  effect  of  an  operation
under  such  circumstances,  and  will  make  further  experiments  with
this  view.  I  plunged  a  knife  half  an  inch  deep  into  the  mass,  with¬
out  his  feeling  it.

“Sept.  24th.  I  blindfolded  him  to-day,  and  mesmerised  his
neck  unawares  ;  the  bandage  was  then  removed,  and  he  wras  desired
to  investigate  the  condition  of  his  body,  and  he  said  the  sensibility
of  the  skin  was  extinguished  on  both  sides  of  his  body.  Here  then
is  a  Bengal  cooly  exhibiting  on  the  instant,  a  demonstration  of  the
double  nature  of  the  nervous  system,  and  that  one  half  of  it  may
occasionally  act  independently  of  the  other.  If  this  is  a  genuine  and
spontaneous  natural  phenomenon,  it  is  surely  time  for  the  human
physiologist  to  give  up  experimenting  upon  frogs  and  donkeys,  and
betake  himself  to  the  study  of  the  laws  of  life  in  human  intelligent
creatures  like  himself,  who  are  capable  of  giving  an  exact  account  of
their  feelings,  and  whose  systems  under  the  mesmeric  influence  often
spontaneously  analyze  all  the  component  powers  which,  in  the  aggre¬
gate,  make  up  the  human  being.”

John  Elliotson.


III.  Account  of  “  A  Review  of  my  Reviewers.  By  James
Esdatle,  M.D.  Calcutta,  January  26,  1848.”

When  Dr.  Esdaile  was

“  Informed  that  it  was  the  intention  of  Government  to  attach  a
body  of  official  visitors  to  his  hospital  to  watch  over  and  report  upon
his  proceedings,  he  respectfully  begged  to  be  spared  such  an  inflic¬
tion,  as  the  public  and  the  whole  profession  had  been  invited  to
visit  his  hospital  at  all  times  to  witness  his  daily  practice ;  and  he
urged  that  from  their  public  and  private  engagements,  no  body  of
visitors,  however  willing,  could  give  any  but  fragmentary  evidence
on  the  subject,”  and  as  he  “  had  lately  been  tried  and  tortured  to
the  utmost  of  human  endurance  by  the  Mesmeric  Committee.”


By  James  Esdaile,  M.D  ”


159


Failing  in  this  request,  he  could  only  “  stipulate  for  as
much  fair  play  as  possible.”

“  He  had  never  hesitated  to  be  tried  by  a  body  of  men,  several
of  whom  he  knew  to  be  bitterly  prejudiced  against  him  and  his
cause,  because  they  would  be  compelled  to  report  what  they  saw,
and  if  they  did  so,  he  knew  that  the  facts  would  speak  for  them¬
selves,  whatever  might  be  their  opinions.  But  it  was  very  different
when  a  number  of  persons  were  left  at  liberty  to  witness  and  report
upon  only  such  parts  of  a  long  course  of  experiment  as  they
pleased.”

“  He  therefore  requested  that  the  visitors,  whoever  they  might
be,  should  have  no  power  to  act,  meet,  or  consult  together  as  a  body ;
and  that  each  should  be  required  to  speak  from  his  individual  and
independent  observation  :  and  this  appeared  so  reasonable  that  it  was
at  once  kindly  granted.  But  he  remained  so  deeply  convinced  from
past  experience  of  the  unequal  contest  he  should  have  probably  to
wage  at  the  end  of  the  year  against  forgotten  odds  and  ends,  that
he  resolved  to  make  a  bold  stroke  for  freedom  and  fair  play,”  and
obtained  “  permission  from  Government  to  publish  monthly  reports,
as  he  had  been  in  the  habit  of  doing,  in  which  all  the  persons  who
witnessed  his  proceedings  were  named,  and  invited  to  correct  any
inaccuracies  in  his  narratives.”

When  the  first  report  appeared,  the  visitors,

“  Instead  of  being  grateful  to  him  for  saving  them  so  much  time
and  money  by  making  their  mesmeric  duties  a  sinecure,  vehemently
protested  against  the  indulgence  granted  to  him,  as  tending  to  dis¬
seminate  erroneous  opinions  (by  inviting  people  to  see  and  judge  for
themselves  !)  and  as  being  unphilosophical,  unprofessional,  and  all
that  sort  of  thing.”

Dr.  Esdaile  in  a  counter-protest  said,

“  That  he  saw  no  reason  why  the  community  should  wait  for  the
opinions  of  the  visitors  who  would  report  the  evidence  in  fragments
only,  and  that  he  desired  to  place  it  unbroken  before  the  public,  and
he  begged  the  Deputy  Governor  to  consider  that,  in  withdrawing
the  permission  given  to  him,  His  Honour  would  deprive  him  of  the
means  of  executing  His  Honour’s  own  object,  for  the  natives  in
general  of  Calcutta  were  ignorant  of  the  very  existence  of  his  hos¬
pital,  and  that  Europeans  and  natives  were  equally  ignorant  of  the
medical  part  of  mesmerism,  which  was  hy  far  the  most  important.
But  the  visitors  gained  their  point  of  gagging  him  for  a  year,  and
succeeded  in  a  great  measure  in  cutting  off  his  supplies  by  keeping
the  public  as  much  as  possible  ignorant  of  his  proceedings.”

Dr.  Esdaile  addressed  a  respectful  circular  to  the  medical
officers  of  all  the  Government  hospitals  and  dispensaries  of
Calcutta,  soliciting  their  assistance  in  supplying  the  mesmeric
hospital  with  patients  both  to  be  rendered  insensible  of  pain
for  all  kinds  of  surgical  operations  and  for  remedial  mesmeric


1G0  Account  of  a  “Review  of  my  Reviewers  .”

treatment,  expressing  the  pleasure  he  should  have  if  gen¬
tlemen  would  operate  on  the  cases  they  might  respectively
send  and  would  superintend  the  cure,  and  his  readiness  to
visit  any  medical  charity  when  requested,  and  examine  cases
previously  to  their  being  sent  to  his  hospital.

At  that  time  mesmerism  had  not  led  to  the  discovery  of
the  narcotizing  effects  of  ether  or  chloroform,  and  was  the
only  known  means  of  inducing  insensibility  to  surgical  tor¬
ture  :  yet  Dr.  Esdaile’s  liberal  and  courteous  offer  was  not
accepted  in  a  single  instance.

I  shall  now  give  Dr.  Esdaile’s  account  of  the  conduct  of
each  of  his  official  visitors.  He  felt  the  task  disagreeable ;
but  he  only  could  follow  them  “in  their  erratic  course,  and
point  out  their  numerous  misapprehensions,  unfounded  opi¬
nions,  and  unwarranted  conclusions.”

“  This  was  due  to  the  medical  historian,  as  well  as  the  present
generation,  and  will  be  interesting  in  a  psychological  as  much  as  in
a  physiological  point  of  view,  by  shewing  the  disturbing  influence
of  the  passions  on  the  human  intellect.”

Moralists  and  cerebral  philosophers  of  future  times  will
incessantly  dwell  upon  the  medical  opposition  to  mesmerism
as  illustrating  the  overpowering  evil  influence  of  low  passions
upon  intellect  and  virtuous  feelings — benevolence,  conscien¬
tiousness,  and  self-respect — and  of  the  low  degree  of  civiliza¬
tion — of  philosophic  and  moral  cultivation — in  the  middle  of
the  present  century.  The  foes  of  mesmerism  who  figure  so
amusingly  in  the  various  pages  of  The  Zoist,  particularly  in  the
quotations  at  the  heads  of  articles,  will  acquire  a  ridiculous
and  pitiable  immortality;  for  The  Zoist  will  be  considered  a
treasure  of  truth  by  the  latest  posterity.

Mr.  R.  0‘Shaugnessy.

In  this  gentleman’s  first  half-yearly  report,  Dr.  E/s  pa¬
tients  are  said  to  be  “  comparatively  healthy  individuals,”  and
therefore  unusually  amenable  to  mesmeric  treatment.  But
Dr.  E.  replies  that  he

“  Found  health  the  greatest  antagonist  to  mesmerism,  and  would
have  had  much  less  trouble  if  he  had  practised  in  the  wards  of  the
Native  Hospital  or  Medical  College.”

“Mr.  0‘S.  also  thinks  mesmerism  can  never  be  available  for
general  surgical  purposes :”

Yet  avers  that  he  saw

“  The  great  majority  of  comparatively  healthy  individuals  entranced
and  operated  on  in  the  mesmeric  hospital.”


By  James  Esdaile,  M.D.”


161


Dr.  E.  has,  however,

“  During  the  last  two  years  and  a  half  performed  with  the  assistance
of  mesmerism  nearly  all  the  operations  required  in  general  practice,
in  four  different  hospitals,  and  demonstrated  by  facts  and  figures
that  mesmerism  is  available  for  general  surgical  practice  in  the  hos¬
pitals  of  Bengal.”

In  his  second  report,  Mr.  OfS.,  apparently  taking  courage
at  the  discovery  of  ether  made  since  his  first,

“Ventures  to  sneer  at  the  alleged  agent,  and  pooh  poohs  it  for  all
practical  purposes,” —

Yet  in  his  first  report  he  had  confessed,

“  I  have  witnessed  so  many  cases  operated  upon  by  Dr.  Esdaile
since,  without  the  patients  showing  the  slightest  physical  or  other
indication  of  suffering,  either  before,  during,  or  immediately  after
the  operation,  that  I  am  perfectly  satisfied  that  they  did  not  feel
pain,  no  more  than  the  bed  they  lay  upon,  or  the  knife  that  cut
them.”

Bravely  said  by  Mr.  0‘Shaugnessy.

Dr.  Stewart.

This  gentleman  declared  that  the  operations  which  he
witnessed  in  the  mesmeric  hospital

“  Were  all  more  or  less  successful,  the  patients  evincing  no  sign  of
pain  during  the  operation,  and  denying  all  knowledge  of  it  after¬
wards.”

Unfortunately  Dr.  E.  declares,

“Dr.  Stewart  has  not  witnessed  a  single  operation  in  my  hospital
since  it  was  opened  upwards  of  a  year  ago.”

As  to  the  medical  cases.  Dr.  S.  conceives  that  Dr.  E.
greatly  deceives  himself  as  to  the  amount  of  benefit.  But
unfortunately  Dr.  E.  says,

“  I  had  only  the  pleasure  of  seeing  Dr.  S.  for  a  few  minutes,  three  or
four  times,  during  the  half  year  included  in  his  first  Report :  and  if
we  are  to  be  favoured  with  a  second,  I  may  here  mention  that  he
has  not  entered  my  hospital  for  the  last  eight  months.”

Dr.  S.  terminates  with  his  opinion  that,

“  Until  extensive  experiments  are  made  of  the  nature  suggested  by
the  late  Mesmeric  Committee  upon  masses  of  individuals,  of  all
ages  and  both  sexes  ;  on  persons  in  sound  health,  as  well  as  on  the
sick  and  suffering ;  on  persons  of  education  and  good  sense,  as  well
as  on  the  ignorant  and  credulous ;  on  persons  who  are  already  fast
asleep,  as  well  as  on  those  who  wide  awake  resign  themselves  to  its
manipulations  ;  till  experiments  have  been  made  on  brute  animals  as
VOL.  vi,  m


162  Account  of  a  “Review  of  my  Reviewers.

well  as  on  man,  it  is  evident  that  no  theory  of  its  action  can  be
worth  listening  to,  and  no  dependence  placed  by  the  profession  at
large  upon  mesmerism  as  a  therapeutical  agent/5  &c.

Poor  Dr.  Stewart  appears  to  have  just  dropped  from  the
moon.  If,  before  he  presumed  to  become  an  official  visitor,
he  had  read,  as  was  his  duty ,  the  volumes  of  The  Zoist,  and
a  few  other  sterling  works  on  mesmerism,  he  would  have
known  that  all  this  had  been  done.  He  would  have  known
that  mesmerism  produces  its  effects  on  all  classes,  con¬
stitutions,  and  ages ;  on  both  sexes;  in  sound  health  and
in  disease ;  on  the  educated  and  wise  as  well  as  on  the  ig¬
norant  and  credulous ;  on  persons  asleep  and  those  who  are
the  widest  awake ;  and  on  brutes  as  well  as  on  man,  which
fact  Dr.  Wilson's  work  would  prove  to  him  and  he  might  have
found  had  he  condescended  to  mesmerise  cats  in  right  earnest,
as  many  medical  aspirants  to  fame  do  to  cut  them  up  alive.
Still  I  doubt  whether  he  would  even  then  have  shewn  more
sense,  since  he  considers  that  without  all  this  no  theory  of
the  action  of  mesmerism  can  be  worth  listening  to,  nor  any
dependence  placed  upon  its  medicinal  powers  !  Though  it  is
a  great  truth  that  we  can  cure  endless  cases  of  various
diseases,  even  costiveness  and  ulcers,  with  mesmerism,  we
should  be  bound  not  to  listen  to  any  theory  of  its  action,  nor
to  rely  upon  it !  What  right  has  this  wise  practitioner  to  cure
ague  with  quinine  or  to  prescribe  calomel  ?  He  is  perfectly
ignorant  of  the  theory  of  their  action  and  must  find  them
frequently  fail  and  produce  undesirable  effects,  as  is  true  of
opium  also  and  all  other  medicines;  and,  though  they  and
other  drugs  should  not  produce  just  the  same  results  upon
all  constitutions  and  on  brute  animals,  and  though  they
should  not  cure  a  single  brute,  still  their  power  of  curing
human  beings  and  their  results  on  human  beings  would  not
be  the  less  true,  nor  our  duty  the  less  to  avail  ourselves  of  it.

Dr.  S.  would  certainly  have  been  introduced  by  Shakspeare
into  one  of  his  plays  with  Justice  Shallow  and  Cousin  Slen¬
der,  or  with  Sir  Andrew  Aguecheek.

Dr.  Mouat.

According  to  Dr.  Esdaile's  account,  this  gentleman  ap¬
pears  the  most  amusing  of  the  whole.

Two  years  ago,  he  said  ( The  Zoist,  Yol.  IV.,  p.  413),  that
he  witnessed  four  of  Dr.  E/s  operations ;  and

“In  each  and  all  there  was  entire  absence  of  every — even  the
slightest — indication  of  physical  suffering.  I  not  only  satisfied
myself  of  this,  but  carefully  watched  every  movement  of  the  patient.


By  James  Esdaile,  M.D.”


163


to  discover  the  faintest  ray  of  feeling,  but  without  success.  Dr.  E.
has,  as  you  are  aware,  now  performed  more  than  100  mesmeric  ope¬
rations  ;  and  so  great  is  his  success,  as  well  as  the  confidence  which
the  natives,  far  and  wide,  have  in  his  skill,  humanity,  and  the  pain¬
less  nature  of  his  operations,”  &c.  "  He  is  one  of  the  most  able,

well  read,  and  proficient  members  of  the  Bengal  Medical  Service,”  &c.

Ether  bade  fair  in  the  eyes  of  the  short-sighted  to  render
mesmerism  useless,  and  those  who  had  seen  that  mesmerism
must  prevail,  and  for  that  reason  only  had  favoured  it,  now
took  courage.  Dr.  Mouat  marched  with  his  colleagues  and
turned  his  back  upon  Dr.  Esdaile  and  mesmerism.  Moreover
Dr.  E.  had  previously  practised  at  Hooghlv,  but  now  had  an
x hospital  within  half  a  mile  of  the  Medical  College.

Finding  a  cataleptic  mesmeric  patient  balance  himself  so
as  to  preserve  his  equilibrium  and  not  fall.  Dr.  M.  at  once
called  the  poor  fellow  an  impostor.  Professor  though  he  is,
he  is  ignorant  that  the  same  thing  occurs  in  spontaneous  cata¬
lepsy  without  mesmerism,  as  well  as  in  the  mesmeric.  In
truth  catalepsy,  whether  idiopathic  and  spontaneous,  or  mes¬
meric,  is  generally  a  state  of  sleep-waking,  in  which  there
is  actually  more  or  less  consciousness,  and  conscious  or  un¬
conscious  volitions  take  place.  He  should  read  Dr.  Gooch's
sensible  remarks  on  this  subject.*

“  Some  have  believed  catalepsy  to  be  a  fabulous  disease.  .  .  .
Mr.  Hunter  detects  some  remains  of  consciousness  and  volition,  and
thence  infers  the  perfect  possession  of  these  faculties  ;  but  because
we  find  that  they  are  not  completely  extinguished \  is  it  right  to  con¬
clude  that  they  must  be  completely  unimpaired  ?  Catalepsy  is  defined
to  be  a  loss  of  consciousness  and  volition;  but  medical  definitions  are
only  general  descriptions ,  and  seldom  admit  of  rigid  application.
It  may  be  said  that  voluntary  movements  are  impossible  without  con¬
sciousness,  and  that  where  these  movements  occur  there  cannot  be  a
loss  of  consciousness  :  but  the  loss  of  this  faculty  may  be  total,  or
may  be  partial ;  though  volition  is  impossible  in  the  former  it  is  not
so  in  the  latter,  and  who  has  ever  said,  for  who  could  tell,  that  in
catalepsy,  consciousness  was  utterly  extinguished?  Sleep  is  said  to
be  a  suspension  of  sensation,  volition,  and  the  intellectual  faculties ;
yet  if  the  sleeper  moves,  or  manifests  signs  of  outward  sensibility,
do  we  consequently  deny  the  sincerity  of  his  sleep  ?  when  we  are
tired  of  sleeping  on  one  side,  do  we  not  turn  to  the  other  without
waking?  Sleep-walking  is  a  still  more  remarkable  instance  of  the
kind?  nay  further,  not  only  are  voluntary  movements  compatible
with  a  considerable  loss  of  consciousness,  but  these  movements  are
capable  of  being  influenced  by  external  impressions.  If  a  person  is
tickled  during  sleep  he  will  often  put  his  hand  to  the  part  without

*  Transactions  of  the  Royal  College  of  Physicians,  London,  Vol.  V.  :  also
The  Zoist,  Yol.  II.,  p.  68.


164


Account  of  a  “  Review  of  my  Reviewers.


waking;  those  who  talk  in  their  sleep  often  answer  questions  ;  the
answer  it  is  true  may  be  absurd,  but  it  relates  to  the  question,  and
has  been  obviously  influenced  by  it.  Now  as  some  slight  remains  of
consciousness  and  voluntary  motion  does  not  lead  us  to  conclude  that
a  person  is  feigning  sleep,  so  from  these  appearances  alone  we  should
not  hastily  conclude  that  a  person  is  feigning  catalepsy.  Catalepsy
like  sleep  may  be  more  or  less  sound.”

In  the  cases  of  catalepsy  without  mesmerism  that  I  have
witnessed,  there  was,  on  careful  examination,  decided  con¬
sciousness  and  as  decided  volitions.  At  the  end  of  the  quo¬
tation  from  Dr.  Gooch,  I  said  in  The  Zoist ,

“  I  will  add  that  catalepsy  and  rigidity  sometimes  are  blended  or
interchanged  in  cataleptic  cases  :  and  that  the  sagacious  remarks  of
Dr.  Gooch  about  a  degree  of  volition  sometimes  remaining  in  cata¬
lepsy  are  perfectly  true.  There  is  sometimes  a  desire  to  resist  ex¬
ternal  force  in  the  sleepwaking  of  catalepsy  (for  it  really  is  a  state  of
sleep-waking  with  the  addition  of  catalepsy),  and  the  arm  cannot
readily  be  pushed  about  to  new  situations  ;  and  sometimes  the  resist¬
ance  engendered  prevents  the  change  of  situation  we  attempt,  rigidity
coming  on  and  a  voluntary  effort  being  evidently  made  and  even  anger
displayed.  I  have  no  doubt  that  sometimes  a  weight  might  be  ap¬
pended  to  a  catalepsed  arm,  and  resistance  and  rigidity  engendered
sufficient  to  support  the  weight ;  and  that,  on  this  being  unex¬
pectedly  withdrawn,  the  arm  would  suddenly  rise  from  the  super¬
abundant  force  it  had  been  exerting  still  continuing.  But  this  would
no  more  shew  imposition — the  unreality  of  the  sleep-waking — than
the  cunning  of  a  madman  proves  him  to  be  sane.”*

Dr.  M.  brands  another  man  as  an  impostor  who  gave  signs
of  suffering  during  a  surgical  operation  but  declared  he  recol¬
lected  nothing  of  it :  as  though  there  is  not  usually  complete
oblivion  after  waking  from  sleep-waking,  whether  idiopathic
and  spontaneous  or  induced  by  mesmerism  or  such  narcotics
as  ether  and  chloroform.  This  patient  was  so  consistent  a
liar  that  on  returning  home  he  sent  many  of  his  friends  to
Dr.  E.  to  be  operated  upon  without  pain.  How  differently
did  Dr.  M.  behave  respecting  ether !  He  left  immediately
after  the  operation,  when  delirium  had  come  on,  probably
from  the  great  loss  of  blood,  for  many  injurious  causes  pro¬
duce  thisf  in  the  mesmeric  state :  and  from  such  imperfect
knowledge  he  accuses  the  man  of  imposture.  But  witness
his  gentle  indulgence  to  etherized  patients  who  gave  similar
accounts  of  their  feelings.

te  A  somewhat  similar  state  has  been  observed  in  two  or  three  of

*  On  the  curious  subject  of  as  it  were  unconscious  perception  and  unconscious
volition,  see  my  remarks  in  The  Zoist ,  Vol.  II.,  p.  70  ;  Vol.  III.,  pp.  36,  362,  &c.

f  See  my  statements  on  this  fact  in  The  Zoist,  Yol.  III.,  pp.  473-4.


By  James  Esdaile,  M.D”


165


the  operations  performed  in  the  Medical  College,  under  the  influence
of  ether ;  the  patient  has  exhibited  the  most  unequivocal  signs  of
acute  suffering  during  the  operation,  and  subsequently  professed  to
remember  nothing  about  it.  I  must  confess  that  the  whole  matter
is  to  me  both  incomprehensible  and  inexplicable,  and  that  I  am
unable  to  form  any  determinate  opinion  regarding  it  without  farther
evidence  and  observation  !”

This  conduct  exhibits  a  sadly  to  be  deplored  state  of  the
moral  feelings  in  Dr.  M.,  and  a  consequent  deterioration  of
intellect  and  loss  of  prudence.  He  is,  however,  but  a  humble
imitator  of  a  host  of  his  professional  brethren,  who  up  to  the
days  of  ether  scouted  the  idea  of  a  person  feeling  no  pain
during  a  surgical  operation,  and  accused  of  barefaced  lying  a
peasant  in  Nottinghamshire  who  lay  like  a  corpse  while  his
leg  was  amputating,  moaned  as  in  a  troubled  dream  after
it  was  off  and  while  the  arteries  were  tying,  and  said  he
thought  he  once  heard  a  kind  of  crunching  in  his  sleep,  but
declared  that  he  felt  no  pain  :  and  yet  when  people  crv  out,
grimace,  or  draw  up  their  limbs,  confess  on  waking  that  they
heard  the  grating  of  the  instrument  in  their  mouths,  or  a  part
of  the  conversation  of  bystanders,  or  even  that  they  had  per¬
ceived  all  that  was  going  on,  but  maintain  they  had  felt  no
pain,  while  operated  upon  under  ether  or  chloroform,  they
are  all  implicitly  believed.  I  am  not  aware  that  a  doubt  has
been  once  expressed  of  the  truth  of  one  patient,  who,  what¬
ever  signs  of  pain  he  manifested,  maintained  that  he  had  felt
none ;  and  they  have  all  been  justly  believed.  I  entreat
Dr.  M.  to  read  my  papers  in  The  Zoist,  Yol.  IV.,  pp.  578 —
583 ;  Yol.  V.,  pp.  44 — 50,  and  my  pamphlet  On  Surgical
Operations  without  Pain  in  the  Mesmeric  State.  I  have  known
a  patient  operated  upon  under  chloroform  give  every  sign  of
agonizing  pain,  but,  being  conscious  all  the  time  and  able  to
converse,  declare  at  the  very  time  of  all  this,  as  well  as  after¬
wards,  that  she  was  suffering  no  pain,  but  was  frightened
and  distracted  with  other  ideas  in  her  mind :  and  she  too  was
at  once  believed  by  all  the  medical  men.  Mesmerism  in  the
place  of  chloroform  would  have  caused  this  lady  to  be  at
once  pronounced  a  most  unblushing  impostor.  On  the  other
hand,  I  know  an  instance  where  agony  was  felt  during  an
operation  under  chloroform  and  no  expression  of  pain  ap¬
peared.  A  servant  of  a  friend  of  mine  had  a  tooth  extracted
under  chloroform  and  felt  nothing.  Her  sister  in  a  few  days
followed  her  example  :  but  the  first  inhalation  of  chloroform
produced  complete  powerlessness  of  her  frame,  the  tooth  was
extracted,  and  she  was  afterwards  very  ill,  feverish,  feeble,
distracted  with  head-ache,  stupid,  and  half  delirious  for  several


166  Account  of  a  “Review  of  my  Reviewers.

days :  and  she  declared  that  the  pain  of  the  operation  was
terrible,  but  she  had  no  power  to  move  or  utter  a  moan.

The  poor  man  so  cruelly  stigmatized  by  Dr.  M.  may  have
suffered  pain  :  but  the  high  probability  is  that  he  was  only
in  a  terrifying  dream,  such  as  often  occurs  in  the  mesmeric
coma  if  the  patient  is  unhappy :  for  two  days  before  the
operation  he  had  been  weeping  and  fearing  to  go  into  the
operating  room,  and  had  unluckily  learnt  that  he  was  to  be
operated  upon  that  day  and  been  greatly  agitated  all  the
morning,  and  had  the  habit  of  always  moaning  in  his  ordinary
sleep ;  and  it  was  not  till  the  last  cut  was  made  that  the  moan¬
ing  changed  to  groaning ;  and  “  his  eyes,”  says  Dr.  E.,

“Remained  closed  and  no  articulate  sound  escaped  him,  nor  did  he
interfere  in  the  least  with  my  proceedings,  and,  as  usual,  no  one
held  him.”*

Dr.  M.  mentions  none  of  these  facts  of  the  impostor,  who
after  his  recovery  declared,

“That  Brahma  is  above  all,  and  Dr.  Esdaile  next  to  him.”

Dr.  M.  is  ignorant  of  the  very  common  fact  that,  when
sleep-wakers  wake  up  delirious  through  any  disturbing  cause, f
and  this  delirium  ceases,  ending  in  the  natural  state,  or  in
sleep-waking  and  then  in  the  natural  state,  and  the  delirium
recurs  before  the  natural  state  is  permanently  established,
there  is  usually  complete  oblivion  of  the  occurrences  of  the
intervals  of  the  natural  state,  no  less  than  of  the  delirious
and  mesmeric  state,  on  the  final  return  to  the  natural  state.

“  There  is  something  so  contradictory  and  so  incomprehensible
in  all  this,”  he  says,  “that  I  am  unable  to  understand  it.  That
the  occurrence  of  the  conditions  of  delirium  may  be  effaced  and  pro¬
duce  no  permanent  impression,  can  be  readily  understood ;  but  that
those  of  what  may  be  termed  a  *  lucid  interval’  are  equally  evanescent
and  shadowy,  is  opposed  to  common  sense,  and  subversive  of  all  our
present  knowledge  of  the  subject.”

Why  no  fact  is  more  common.  Hundreds  of  times  have
I  seen,  and  hundreds  of  times  shall  I,  if  I  live,  again  see,
persons  pass  from  sleep-waking  into  delirium  and  then  into
the  natural  state,  and  fall  back  again  into  delirium,  and
then  return  to  the  natural  state,  or  be  sent  back  into  the
sleep-waking  or  coma  and  then  return  to  the  natural  state,
and  know  nothing  of  the  occurrences  of  any  of  these  states, —
know  nothing  of  these  “lucid  intervals,”  however  numerous
they  may  have  been  !  No  phenomenon  is  more  common,
if  the  brain  is  much  disturbed,  than  oblivion  of  the  events


*  See  this  case  at  p.  129  above.


f  Zoisty  Vol.  III.,  pp.  473-4-5.


By  James  Esdaile,  M.D  ”


167


which  took  place  in  the  natural  state  for  a  longer  or  shorter
period  before  the  disturbance  happened.  I  formerly  said, —

“  A  striking  but  well-known  fact  is  that  of  a  sudden  shock  de¬
stroying  the  memory  of  things  that  occurred  immediately  before  it.
I  recollect  being  sent  for  into  Hertfordshire  to  a  lady  whose  horses
had  run  away  with  her,  and  after  running  some  distance  had  thrown
her  out  of  the  carriage  and  stunned  her.  When  she  recovered,  she
had  no  recollection  of  the  horses  running  away,  nor  of  the  circum¬
stances  that  occurred  for  a  short  time  before  they  ran  away.  I  have
seen  persons  frightened  into  a  fit,  and  on  recovering  have  no  know¬
ledge  of  the  circumstances  which  had  frightened  them.  Miss  Collins
was  terrified  one  day  in  her  sleep-waking  by  an  epileptic  pitching
forwards  with  his  head  on  the  floor,  as  was  his  habit  when  seized.
She  was  frightened  out  of  her  mesmeric  state  into  her  ordinary  state.
I  mesmerised  her  as  soon  as  I  heard  the  fall  in  another  room,  and
sent  her  off :  and,  not  having  spoken  to  her,  awoke  her.  She  was
ignorant  of  all  the  matter,  though  she  had  seen  the  boy  on  the
ground  in  his  fit.  The  next  day  I  sent  her  into  the  sleep-waking  as
usual,  and  in  this  state  she  recollected  it  all ;  the  memory  of  events
of  her  waking  state  being  stronger  in  the  mesmeric  than  in  the
common  state, — a  fact  in  harmony  with  the  heightening  of  various
sensorial  powers  in  mesmeric  sleep-waking,” — Zoist ,  Yol.  III.,  p.  476.

I  know  a  gentleman  who  was  in  the  greatest  danger  from
bronchitis.  He  became  delirious.  A  friend  mesmerised  him,
and,  though  neither  sleep  nor  sleep-waking  was  induced,  the
delirium  was  made  to  cease  and  he  was  brought  into  a  perfectly
lucid  state  for  few  or  more  hours  after  each  mesmerisation,
probably  by  being  strengthened,  so  that  in  it  he  transacted
business  like  other  people  and  made  his  will.  These  alterna¬
tions  went  on  for  at  least  a  fortnight ;  but  after  his  recovery
he  recollected  not  a  single  circumstance  of  these  lucid  inter¬
vals  any  more  than  of  his  delirious  intervals.

Dr.  M/s  ignorance  of  mesmerism  after  all  he  saw  in
England  is  laughable.  The  admission  of  light  being  found
insufficient  to  demesmerise  a  man’s  eyes  when  it  came  to  their
time  to  be  closed,  he  reports,

"  I  had  heretofore  been  accustomed  to  regard  light  as  a  certain
and  speedy  demesmeriser.”

Now  there  is  no  certain  and  speedy  demesmeriser  :  or  a  mes¬
meric  state  need  never  last  a  moment  after  we  wish  it  to
cease.  As  to  light,  the  strongest,  though  the  eyelids  be  sud¬
denly  pulled  and  kept  open  to  admit  it,  constantly  fails,
and  is  either  not  perceived  or  merely  irritates  the  patient.

I  have  seen  sleep-waking  patients  keep  their  eyes  open  in  a
strong  light  for  hours,  without  winking  once,  and  even  a  fly
settle  upon  the  exposed  eye  with  no  effect.


168


Account  of  a  “  Review  of  my  Reviewers.


“  I  have  given  instances,”  says  Dr.  E.,  “  in  which  men  lay  like
corpses  with  their  eyes  half  or  wide  open  under  an  Indian  noon-day
sun,  during  the  whole  time  of  a  severe  operation,  and  in  one  case
the  man  did  not  shut  his  eyes  for  20  hours !”

Dr.  M/s  ignorance  is  still  more  glaring  when  he  says  that

‘‘The  persistence  of  the  phenomena  in  each  case  depends  upon  the
will  of  the  mesmeriser,  and  may  be  prolonged  for  any  length  of  time
that  may  be  deemed  necessary  for  the  performance  of  test  experi¬
ments/’

Why  there  is  not  a  shadow  of  truth  in  this.  I  never
influenced  patients  by  my  will,  and  sometimes  cannot  keep
them  asleep.  Dr.  E.  remarks  upon  this  strange  untruth, —

“  And  this  is  a  mesmeric  authority  !  If  this  were  true  I  ought  never
to  have  had  an  imperfect  operation,  but  might  have  gone  on  making
mince  meat  of  my  patients  as  long  as  their  mesmerisers  could  keep
awake.”

What  with  light,  the  certain  and  speedy  demesmeriser,
and  the  dependence  of  the  persistent  phenomena  in  every
case  upon  the  will  of  the  mesmeriser,  we  must,  according  to
Dr.  M.,  indeed  possess  complete  power  over  our  patients.

Water  he  calls  “  a  powerful  demesmerising  agent.”  Water
may  be  one  of  the  most  powerful  mesmerising  agents.  In
fact,  it  has  no  power  in  itself  at  all.  If  mesmerised,  it
acquires  a  mesmeric  power,  and  may  stiffen  the  parts  to  which
it  is  applied,  and,  if  strongly  mesmerised,  induce  sleep,  a
very  deep  sleep,  and  still  more,  a  frightful  degree  of  debility.
If  cold  and  not  mesmerised,  its  sudden  application  will  some¬
times  wake  a  patient,  but  not  more  than  the  equal  applica¬
tion  of  cold  in  any  other  way :  not  it,  but  its  temperature,
demesmerises,  and  the  effect  is  uncertain.

The  rigid  poor  man  accused  so  unjustly  of  imposture  be¬
cause  of  his  power  of  balancing  himself  in  his  sleep-waking
and  want  of  memory  of  his  lucid  intervals,  is  farther  accused
because  he  masticated,  swallowed,  and  eructated,  and  a  mo¬
ment  afterwards  could  not  open  his  eyes,  and  his  mouth
would  not  open  when  gentle  Dr.  M.  violently  pulled  his
beard :  because  he  turned  round  very  cautiously  and  hesitat¬
ing  though  his  legs  were  free :  and  because,  though  he  bore
to  be  pinched  and  his  hair  to  be  plucked  out,  he  seemed  to
feel  when  the  diseased  part  was  roughly  handled.

“The  phenomena,”  says  Dr.  M.,  “  were  of  a  contradictory  and
incompatible  nature.”

Contradictory  and  incompatible  for  spasmodic  rigidity
to  exist  in  some  members  and  not  in  others  :  contradictory


By  James  Esdaile,  M.D”


169


and  incompatible  for  one  part  to  be  insensible  and  another  to
be  more  or  less  sensible ;  contradictory  and  incompatible  for
a  man  in  sleep-waking  to  move  his  free  legs  slowly  and  have
his  arms  rigid  !*  This  is  a  teacher  of  medical  students  !

It  was  Dr.  M.  who  figured  so  conspicuously  in  the  doings
related  at  pp.  155-6-7,  and  wished  to  work  at  one  half  of
the  man  while  Dr.  E.  worked  at  the  other,  maintaining  that,

“  As  the  two  arms  are  independent  of  each  other  and  derive  their
nerves  from  different  sides  of  the  spinal  chord,  the  affections  of  the
one  ought  not  to  influence  the  other.”

The  poor  patient,  (which  fact  is  not  stated  by  Dr.  M.)  having
been  tormented,  wideawake,  by  a  body  of  experimenters  during
two  hours,  his  amazing  patience  and  endurance  being  so  ex¬
hausted  that  he  begged  to  be  released,  no  wonder  Dr.  M.
could  not,  as  he  complains,  draw  the  arm,  at  which  he  thought
proper  to  work  while  Dr.  E.  was  demesmerising  the  other.
He  ought  to  have  known  that  at  the  end  of  a  large  number  of
experiments,  the  effects  are  most  irregular.  He  ought  to  have
known  that  effects  of  all  kinds  on  one  side  often  extend  to
the  other, — that  if  great  care  is  not  taken,  and  perhaps  with
the  utmost  care,  while  we  demesmerise  a  limb  on  one  side,  the
opposite  may  be  demesmerised  too.  This  I  see  every  day :  and
even  legs  will  often  relax  while  we  try  to  demesmerise  an  arm
only  :  nay,  even  the  rigidity  of  the  whole  frame  may  relax,
for  there  is  often  great  sympathy  of  various  parts.  *  But  in
ignorance  of  all  these  common  truths,  Dr.  M.  says  he  has

“  No  doubt  whatever  that  the  whole  of  the  effects  above  mentioned
were  feigned.”

When  light  and  water,  the  certain  and  speedy  demes-
merisers,  and  various  other  means  had  failed  to  wake  a  man,
and  the  honest  fellow  declared  that  none  but  Dr.  E.  could
wake  him,  and  Dr.  E.  did  not  feel  sure  that  he  could,  but  with

“  one  or  two  rapid  transverse  passes,  with  about  as  many  quick
blowings  upon  the  closed  lids  opened  them,”

Dr.  M.  regarded  the  poor  man  as  a  convicted  impostor  !  This
ignorance  and  presumption  are  almost  too  much  for  one’s  pa¬
tience.  Such  occurrences  are  as  common  as  sleep- waking
itself.  Sometimes  none  but  one  person  can  wake  a  patient,  at
least  in  reasonable  time;  sometimes  after  every  attempt  has
been  in  vain,  afresh  attempt  unexpectedly  succeeds,  or  possibly
the  patient  wakes  without  any  attempt  being  made — the

*  The  slowness  with  which  voluntary  movements  usually,  if  not  always,  take
place  in  rigid  patients  as  in  this  man,  is  very  striking  and  beautiful :  and  we
cannot  but  wonder  that  motion  takes  place  at  all.  See  the  account  of  a  re¬
markable  rigid  case  of  my  own  in  The  Zoist,  Vol.  II.,  p.  42.— See  Vol.  I.,  p.  339.


170


Account  of  a  “  Review  of  my  Reviewers.


sleep  having  expended  itself.  We  witness  all  this  daily,  when
there  are  no  bystanders.  Strange  to  say,  Dr.  M.  admits  that
the  mesmeric  influence  is  subject  to  “  extraordinary  and  un¬
accountable  fluctuations  and  what  Dr.  M.  regarded  as  his
“  crowning  triumph  over  the  unlucky  wretch  was  not  achieved
till  after  he  had  been  tormented  for  two  hours,  which  he  bore,”
according  to  Dr.  M/s  own  account,

‘  with  a  degree  of  calmness  and  absence  of  agitation  that  might
have  excited  the  admiration  and  envy  of  a  stoic  or  of  a  North  Ame¬
rican  warrior.’

Well  may  Dr.  E.  remark —

“  The  only  surprise  to  me  is,  and  will  be  to  all  who  know  any¬
thing  about  the  matter,  that  a  single  experiment  succeeded  after
my  influence  was  interfered  with  and  disturbed;  and  of  all  the
persons  present,  I  should  have  expected  Dr.  M.  to  have  been  most
aware  of  this  from  his  early  experience  gained  under  Dr.  Elliotson.”

“  Half  a  dozen  persons  were  to  be  seen  mesmerising  and  demes-
merising,  pricking,  pinching,  and  teasing  the  unhappy  victim  all
at  once,  and  after  driving  him  frantic,  and  destroying  my  influence
over  him,  the  crowning  experiment  was  proposed.

After  all,  Dr.  E.  declares  that  Dr.  M.  gives  an  untrue
account.  One  or  two  rapid  passes  with  quick  blowings  upon
the  closed  lids  did  not  succeed, — there  was  for  a  time  no  effect
whatever :  and  he  had  to  try  again,  and  blow  still  more
strongly,  before  he  succeeded  in  opening  the  eyes.  Dr.  M.
must  have  seen  similar  occurrences  repeatedly  in  my  patients.

Dr.  M.  wrote  me  word  on  December  7,  1847,  that
“  Perfect  insensibility  to  pain  has  only  been  seen  in  a  few
cases.”  But  in  fact,  during  the  year  1847,  in  49  consecutive
operations  in  the  hospital,

1 7  took  place  with  the  patient  like  a  corpse,

14  with  no  difference  from  the  appearance  of  a  corpse  except
slight  contractions  of  the  brow,  fingers,  or  toes,

13  with  considerable  indications  of  suffering,  but  subsequent
denial  of  it,  and

5  failures,  or  partial  failures,  the  patients  becoming  sentient
before  the  operation  was  completed.

0  disagreeable  symptoms  before  or  after  the  operations.

49

In  the  Beport  he  considers  that  mesmerism  is  not  entitled
to  our  confidence,  as  a

“  rapid,  speedy ,  and  certain  agent  for  procuring  perfectly  painless
operations.”

*  See  my  remarks,  Zoist,  Vol.  III.,  p.  366.


By  James  Esdaile.  M.D”


171


Who  ever  claimed  for  it  such  perfection  ?

As  to  the  medical  cases,  Dr.  E.  says  that  Dr.  M.  might
have  observed  a  case  or  two  with  tolerable  regularity,  but  often
confessed  to  him  that  such  broken  and  desultory  observations
as  he  could  make  were  very  unsatisfactory  to  himself :  and
yet  to  me  he  writes :  “  The  medical  cases  (that  is  all  the  me¬
dical  cases)  I  am  compelled  to  regard  as  failures/”  O  man  of
penetration  and  candour !

“  He  cannot  conscientiously  recommend  it  to  the  notice  of  the
profession  at  large  to  the  exclusion  of  other  means.”

Who  of  us  ever  thought  of  such  folly  ?

He  goes  on  to  mention  that  persons  have  taken  some  inert
substance  and  been  told  it  was  another  of  an  active  nature,
and  then  have  experienced  the  very  effect  of  the  latter,  just  as
if  this  had  been  taken  :  and  therefore  he  would  have  us  to
believe  that  much  of  the  apparently  curative  results,  in  many
if  not  most  of  Dr.  E/s  medical  cases  which  have  derived  any
appreciable  benefit,  has  arisen  from  imagination  or  some  such
influence.*

But  I  am  sure  my  readers  must  be  disgusted  with  such
twaddle.  Dr.  M.  will  live  to  see  mesmerism  universally  received
as  one  of  the  mightiest  and  most  valuable  truths,  against
which  no  selfish  feelings,  no  absence  of  humanity,  no  pride,
no  dulness  of  intelligence  has  prevailed;  and  to  regret  the  course
which  he  has  unwisely  thought  it  advantageous  to  pursue.

Dr.  Jackson.

tc  Shortly  after  becoming  practically  acquainted  with  the  subject,”
says  Dr.  E.,  “  out  of  regard  to  him,  I  made  an  offer  to  him  (which
I  would  have  made  to  no  other),  to  bring  down  my  assistants  to
Calcutta,  who  would  entrance  his  patients  in  his  own  hospital,  to
be  operated  upon  by  himself,  and  so  remove  his  doubts.  This  un¬
fortunately  he  paid  no  attention  to,”  but  “  treated  my  first  attempts
to  interest  him  in  mesmerism  with  perfect  indifference.”

Dr.  Jackson

“  Tells  us  that  he  sees  nothing  decisive  or  satisfactory  in  the
treatment  of  medical  diseases  by  mesmerism.”

To  which  Dr.  E.  replies,

“  How  could  he,  when  he  never  examined  my  patients  or  would
give  me  his  own  to  treat?”

*  I  said  in  The  Zoist,  Vol.  III.,  p.  48,  “To  ascribe  all  mesmeric  effects  to
imagination  would  be  as  absurd  as  to  ascribe  all  deaths  to  imagination  :  or,  because
sometimes  when  a  bread  pill  is  given  to  a  patient,  and  he  is  told  it  is  opium  or
calomel,  and  sleep  or  cathartic  effect  results  from  his  imagination,  to  deny  the  re¬
spective  powers  of  opium  or  calomel,  and  ascribe  their  daily  effects  to  imagination.”


172  Account  of  a  “Review  of  my  Reviewers  ”

Having  previously  seen  patients  relaxed  and  passive  from
mesmerism,  the  view  of  one  rendered  rigid,  as  sometimes
happens,*  causes  him  to  declare  that  he  cannot  conceive  how
two  opposite  states  can  result  from  the  same  treatment.  The
answer  is,  that  the  systems  of  the  patients  differed  in  their
susceptibilities.  Does  he  not  know  that  the  same  dose  of
opium  will  keep  one  person  wide  awake  and  send  another
into  a  deep  sleep  ?  that  the  same  quantity  of  hydriodate  of
potass  will  give  some  persons  appetite,  strength,  and  bulk,
and  cause  loss  of  appetite,  extreme  debility,  and  emaciation
in  others  ?  and  so  with  all  medicines  ?

Dr.  E.  complains  that  Dr.  J.,  and  Dr.  Mouat-\  also,
strangely  but  instructively,  misconstrue  a  call  of  the  Board
for  a  return  of  operations  for  the  removal  of  scrotal  tumors. —
Dr.  J.  says  that  Dr.  E.  in  his  operations  sacrifices  healthy
organs  to  save  time,  contrarily  to  all  former  practice,  as
though  Dr.  E.  did  this  unnecessarily ;  and  on  being  questioned
as  to  this  obvious  meaning,  innocently  declared,  good  man,
that  Dr.  E.  evidently  did  this  to  save  life,  and  therefore  not
unnecessarily. — In  giving  a  return  of  the  operations  in  1847,
at  the  Native  Hospital,  though  the  return  was  ordered  to  be
special,  he  coolly  gives  the  hypertrophy  of  the  scrotum  and  the
hypertrophy  of  the  colis  as  one  item ;  notwithstanding  the
operation  for  the  latter  is  usually  one  of  little  danger.  The
capital  operations  during  1847  amounted  to  46,  among  which
were  10  deaths  :  they  amounted  under  Dr.  E.  to  87 ;  50
during  the  year  in  the  hospital,  and  37  during  the  preceding
year  and  a  half,  with  only  nine  deaths  altogether.

Dr.  Thompson.

“A  story  of  the  woman,”  says  Dr.  E.,  “who  told  him  that
she  had  informed  me  that  she  was  quite  well  for  fear  of  offending  me,
reminds  me  of  the  unsuspected  delicacy  and  forbearance  of  a  medical
member  of  the  Mesmeric  Committee.  This  gentleman,  after  having
signed  to  the  fact  of  having  witnessed  painless  operations,  was  laugh¬
ing  heartily  at  the  joke  in  company.  A  person  of  tender  conscience

*  See  Zoist,  Yol.  II.,  p.  42,  for  two  cases  in  which  general  and  intense
rigidity  comes  on  with  the  coma,  and  lasts  with  it,  even  though  this  last  for  many
hours,  as  always  happens.  I  have  two  cases  at  this  moment  in  which  general  and
intense  rigidity  attends  the  coma  and  is  always  in  proportion  to  it.  It  is  dis¬
creditable  for  Dr.  Jackson  to  have  presumed  to  make  such  remarks  upon  mes¬
meric  phenomena  without  first  studying  the  subject  and  carefully  reading  The
Zoist.  What  would  he  think  of  a  coolee  favouring  the  world  with  his  saga¬
cious  objections  to  the  circulation  of  the  blood  ?

f  Dr.  Mouat’s  conduct  has  so  distressed  me,  having  formerly  hoped  for  better
things  of  him,  that  I  have  not  mentioned  it  all.  Respecting  some  of  it,  Dr.  E.
asks,  “  Is  this  natural  or  artificial  confusion  of  mind  ?”  I  trust  it  is  natural ;  but
I  have  my  fears.  He  is  not  aware  of  the  present  position  of  mesmerism.


On  Mr.  Pride  aux^s  “  Organ  of  Sympathy.”


173


present,  ventured  to  ask, *  *  But  how  could  you  sign  to  what  you  did
not  believe?’  ‘  Bah !’  replied  the  member  with  the  India  rubber
conscience,  ‘we  pitied  poor  Esdaile,  but  we  could  have  crushed  him.
Sir,  we  could  have  crushed  him?’  ”*


The  world  will  enquire  who  are  these  reporters,  never
having  heard  their  names  before.  Their  names  will  now  for
the  first  time  be  known,  and  will  be  handed  down  to  posterity
in  the  same  way,  and  only  in  that  way,  as  those  of  the  noisy
nobodies  who  signalized  themselves  by  every  sort  of  folly
and  bad  feeling  in  opposing  the  truths  of  the  circulation,  of
auscultation,  Peruvian  bark,  &c.,  &c.  Oh  that  medical  men
would  view  mesmerism  as  men  religiously  interested  in  all  the
truths  of  the  universe  and  in  the  duty  of  humanity !  They
would  then  anxiously  investigate  its  astounding  phenomena
and  fervently  hope  that  it  does  possess  the  powers  which  we
allege  of  curing  and  mitigating  diseasef  and  preventing  pain.

They  may  be  assured,  in  the  poetic  language  of  divinity,

that  MESMERISM  IS  God’s  TRUTH  AND  THE  GATES  OF  HELL
WILL  NOT  PREVAIL  AGAINST  IT.

John  Elliotson.


IV.  Notes  on  the  cc  Organ  of  Sympathy discovered  by  Mr.

J.  S.  Prideaux.  By  Mr.  W.  Jaffray,  Aberdeen.

The  most  enthusiastic  believer  in  phrenology  will  not  main¬
tain  that  it  has  already  arrived  at  perfection,  nor  will  he  affirm
that  all  the  mental  faculties  have  been  referred  to  their  proper
organs  in  the  brain ;  far  less  will  he  assert  that  the  whole
brain  has  been  fully  and  accurately  mapped  out.  He  will
readily  admit  that  his  science  and  its  philosophy  are  still  in
infancy ;  and,  although  both  give  ample  promise  of  a  blooming
youth  and  vigorous  manhood,— equal  to  the  task  of  removing
from  their  path  those  obstacles  which  truth  in  its  progress
ever  encounters, — he  is  quite  conscious  that  they  have  not
yet  attained  that  stage  of  existence  which  entitles*  him  to  set

*  The  editor  of  an  old  London  periodical  ridiculed  mesmerism  heartily  at  a
dinner  party  a  few  years  ago  :  on  being  asked  by  a  physician,  when  the  ladies  had
retired,  how  he  came  to  act  thus  when  he  believed  in  mesmerism,  “  Oh,”  replied
the  weekly  scribe,  “you  don’t  suppose  I  was  going  to  confess  this  before  the
women,  and  let  them  laugh  at  me  when  they  got  up  stairs.” — See  Zoist,  Vol  I
p.  76.  '  ”

t  Dr.  Mouat  should  be  the  last  man  to  neglect  an  assiduous  study  and  trial
of  mesmerism  in  place  of  his  routine  habits  :  for  he  confesses  that  there  are  many
cases  for  which  medicine  and  surgery  can  do  nothing  :  and  allows  that  our  ordi¬
nary  means  are  “  unsatisfactory  and  imperfect.”


174  On  Mr.  Prideaux’s  “  Organ  of  Sympathy”

them  up  as  fully  matured.  There  are,  indeed,  some  states  of
mind,  and  peculiarities  of  character,  which  puzzle  the  phre¬
nological  enquirer ;  and  the  man  who  by  patient  investigation,
careful  research,  and  cautious  generalization,  enlarges  the
boundary  and  resources  of  the  science,  bringing  within  its
scope  mental  conditions  which  have  escaped  the  notice  of
previous  observers,  is  graciously  ministering  to  its  health  and
growth, — he  is  improving  the  tone  and  energy  of  its  consti¬
tution, — and  deserves  the  gratitude  and  respect  of  all  his
fellow-labourers  in  the  same  field.  On  the  other  hand,  the
importance  of  preserving  its  simplicity  and  clearness  is  very
obvious,  for  if  we  encumber  the  science  with  nice,  minute
and  artificial  distinctions,  by  dividing  and  sub-dividing  the
various  organs,  to  suit  the  different  manifestations  of  the
feelings  which  they  produce  in  various  degrees  of  develop¬
ment  and  activity,  we  destroy  the  proper  individuality  of
these  organs,  mystify  the  tyro,  and  impede  the  advancement
of  the  science.

The  theory  of  an  organ  of  Sympathy,  lying  between
Benevolence  and  Comparison,  which  Mr.  Prideaux  has  stated
with  so  much  elegance  and  skill,  appears  to  me  to  be  open  to
one  or  two  objections.  The  chief  of  these  consists  in  this  :
that  the  known  and  admitted  functions  of  Benevolence
include  the  whole  of  the  manifestations  which  he  attributes
to  the  new  organ.  If  this  be  so,  then  it  follows  that  such  a
distinction  as  he  has  made  becomes  useless :  and  in  order
that  there  may  be  no  misunderstanding  as  to  what  are  con¬
sidered  the  functions  of  Benevolence,  the  following  quotations
are  selected  as  being  much  in  point.

“In  so  far  as  we  have  been  enabled  to  analyze  the  func¬
tion  of  the  organ,  it  appears  to  resolve  into  the  principle  of
sympathy,  spoken  of  by  the  metaphysicians.  In  treating  of
the  causes  which  enable  the  actor  to  excel  in  his  art,  we
observed,  that  although  by  mere  imitation  a  performer  may
have  the  power  of  exhibiting  the  skeleton  or  bare  anatomy  of
a  passion,  yet  in  order  to  represent  it  to  the  very  life,  to  feel,
in  short,  what  he  expresses,  he  must  also  himself  possess  in
ample  endowment  the  sentiment  which  he  is  to  portray.
Thus,  no  actor  can  perform  Coriolanus  who  has  not  large
Self-Esteem ;  nor  Richard,  with  small  Destructiveness ;  nor
Hotspur  with  weak  Combativeness.  We  conceive  that,  in
like  manner,  Sympathy,  which  is  admirably  defined  by  the
Apostle  to  be  ‘to  rejoice  with  them  that  do  rejoice,  and  to
weep  with  them  that  weep/  is  dependent  for  its  proper  exer¬
cise  upon  the  size  of  the  other  faculties.  Indeed  it  is  plain,
that  in  order  to  feel  with  another,  we  must  vividly  conceive


By  Mr.  W.  J affray.


175


what  he  feels ;  and  this  we  cannot  do  without  possessing,  in
large  endowment,  the  faculties  which  produce  his  sensations.
If  our  Destructiveness  and  Benevolence  be  large,  we  will  feel
deep  indignation  along  with  the  man  who  is  proclaiming  the
injuries  of  the  widow  and  the  orphan ;  if  our  Destructiveness
be  small,  we  shall  not  sympathize  in  the  indignation  of  the
speaker,  but  we  shall  feel  with  him  the  miseries  of  the  victims;
if  our  Destructiveness  be  large,  on  the  contrary,  and  our
Benevolence  small,  we  conceive  that  he  will  not  make  us  feel
at  all.  That  the  power  of  Benevolence  depends  upon  the
size  of  the  faculties  in  the  states  of  which  we  are  to  sympa¬
thize,  is  indeed  plain,  from  the  fact,  that  the  more  vividly
the  feelings  of  the  object  are  presented  to  us,  the  more  in¬
tensely  do  we  feel ;  as  for  example,  the  enemies  of  slavery,
in  order  to  move  public  compassion,  present  pictures  of  a
negro  kneeling  in  chains,  or  tied  up  and  suffering  under  the
driver’s  whip.  The  benevolent  man  actually  and  literally
shivers  with  the  naked,  weeps  with  the  mourner ,  and  feels  that
knife  entering ,  or  fire  burning  him ,  which  is  dismembering  or
eating  into  the  vitals  of  another.  It  is  thus  that  he  more
acutely  feels  present  and  immediate  misery,  than  that  which
is  distant,  and  that  minute  details  of  an  actual  case  of  cala¬
mity,  evoke  more  tears  from  the  eye,  and  pieces  from  the
purse,  than  a  thousand  homilies  on  charity.  f  We  are  in¬
clined  to  the  opinion,  that  Benevolence  is  one  great  source  of
national  enthusiasm,  or  that  principle  which  produces  some¬
times  in  a  whole  nation  one  common  sentiment  of  joy  or
sorrow.’  ‘  It  would  be  sufficient  evidence  to  us  of  a  small
national  endowment  of  Benevolence,  were  a  people  never
known  as  a  community  to  have  rejoicing  and  lamentation
together.’  fWe  have  said  that  Benevolence  is  sympathy.
Want  of  Benevolence  is  therefore  not  cruelty,  but  simply
the  destitution  of  sympathy,  or  what  is  generally  termed
callousness  or  an  insensibility  to  the  pain  or  misery  of
others.’  ” — Sidney  Smith’s  Principles  of  Phrenology .

It  is  curious  to  observe  how  many  of  the  manifestations
which  Mr.  Prideaux  sets  down  to  Sympathy  have  already
been  remarked  by  Mr.  S.  Smith  with  reference  to  Bene¬
volence.  The  lines  I  have  placed  in  italics  correspond  almost
entirely  with  Mr.  P.’s  definition  of  Sympathy.  He  calls  it
“  a  faculty  which  translates  the  expression  of  emotion  in  sen¬
tient  beings  in  such  clear  and  deep  characters,  that  the  organi¬
zation  of  the  recipient  involuntarily  vibrates  in  response,  and
participates  in  the  feelings,  whether  of  pleasure  or  pain,  of  the
object  observed In  analyzing  Benevolence  a  little  farther
we  see  more  clearly  how  Sympathy  is  involved  in  a  definition


]  76


On  Mr.  Prideaux’s  “  Organ  of  Sympathy.”


which  would  include  its  whole  functions.  For  example :  a
miserable  or  suffering  object  is  presented  to  a  man  possessing
a  large  and  active  Benevolence.  The  misery  or  suffering  is
instinctively  conceived, — pain,  in  proportion  to  the  vividness
of  the  previous  conception,  is  the  first  result, — and  then,  the
act  of  benevolence.  Again :  the  same  object  is  presented  to
another  individual  having  a  very  large  and  morbidly  active
organ.  The  misery  or  suffering  is  now  more  vividly  con¬
ceived  ;  and  the  pain  which  follows  is  so  intense  as  to  master
the  senses  of  the  individual,  and  he  sickens  or  faints.  It  is
impossible  to  imagine  Benevolence  relieving,  or  being  affected
by  misery  or  suffering,  without  having  first  sympathized  with
it,  as  that  would  be  supposing  an  effect  without  a  cause.  The
sympathy  is  precisely  the  realization  of  the  misery  or  suffering
of  the  object,  in  the  person  of  the  benevolent  man,  and  must
necessarily  precede  the  pain  which  such  conditions  always
bring  to  a  powerful  faculty.  Without  such  a  realization
blind  Benevolence  could  never  discover  the  objects  whose  suf¬
ferings  it  seeks  to  alleviate.  We  conclude,  therefore,  that  no
act  of  benevolence  is  performed  until  the  faculty  realizes  the
pain  or  suffering  to  be  relieved.  It  is  the  same  with  the
manifestations  of  the  faculty  when  it  is  called  into  action  by
the  presence  of  happiness  in  others.  Here  Benevolence  sym¬
pathizes  with  or  realizes  that  happiness ;  in  the  first  place,
before  the  individual  can  receive  pleasure  from  the  contem¬
plation  of  it.  The  outward  expression  of  Sympathy  will  of
course  depend  upon  the  development  of  Self-Esteem  and
other  faculties.

Another  objection  to  Mr.  Prideaux^s  theory,  lies  in  the
fewness  of  the  facts  which  he  adduces  in  support  of  it.  These
are  very  happily  stated,  and,  as  far  as  they  go,  exceedingly
interesting ;  but  they  are  by  no  means  conclusive.  The  fol¬
lowing  notes  upon  them  are  submitted,  with  deference,  for
his  consideration.

The  Students.  Admitting  that  Mr.  Prideaux^s  head  and
theirs  corresponded  at  Benevolence  and  Destructiveness,  and
that  his  and  their  temperaments  were  identical,  (an  element
of  which  he  takes  no  notice),  these  circumstances  alone  do
not  warrant  the  inference  which  he  has  drawn  from  them ;
for  it  appears  to  me  that  Firmness  has  much  to  do  in  sup¬
porting  the  mind  amid  studies  presenting  features  from  which
Benevolence  instinctively  recoils.  If  this  is  correct  phreno¬
logical  doctrine,  then  it  behoves  us  to  know  the  developments
of  that  organ  also,  in  himself  and  his  young  friends,  before
judgment.  Besides  I  should  have  liked  to  enquire  of  these
students  what  was  the  precise  nature  of  their  feelings  upon


By  Mr.  TV.  J affray.


1 77


the  occasion.  For  instance,  whether  the  sight  of  the  blood
alone  (a  peculiarity,  somewhat  inexplicable,  which  I  have
observed  in  some  cases)  was  the  cause  of  the  sickness  or  faint¬
ness,  or  whether  that  arose  from  witnessing  the  expression  of
pain  in  the  face  of  the  person  operated  upon,  and  his  great
sufferings  ?  Admitting  farther,  the  superior  activity  of  Sym¬
pathy,  in  the  students,  it  is  obvious,  according  to  Mr.
Prideaux^s  own  definition,  that  it  would  naturally  find  room
for  exercise  in  field  sports.  He  says  that  his  friends  “  mani¬
fested  no  less  fondness  for  the  rod  and  the  gun  than  himself
and  surely  there  is  an  “  expression  of  emotion”  in  the  last
eloquent  look  of  a  murdered  woodcock,  and  in  the  final  pant-
ings  of  a  lively  trout,  with  which  the  sympathetic  organs  in
his  friends  would  “  involuntarily  vibrate  in  response  ;”  but  he
is  silent  upon  that  subject,  and  we  are  left  to  infer  that  the
sufferings  of  these  creatures  produced  nothing  of  a  healthy
remorse  in  their  minds.

The  elderly  Gentleman.  The  size  and  power  of  this  indi¬
vidual^  Benevolence  is  not  given,  and  of  course  nothing  can,
in  the  mean  time,  be  remarked  as  to  the  value  of  the  evidence
derived  from  his  case.

The  Sentimentalists.  The  class  of  characters  who  are
stated  by  Mr.  Prideaux,  “  to  exhibit  an  actual  callousness  to
the  sufferings  of  others  provided  they  could  escape  witnessing
them,”  is  by  no  means  rare.  I  have  known  a  goodly  number
who  could  sympathize  amazingly  with  the  hero  in  a  pictured
tale  of  woe,  and  even  shed  real  tears  over  that  heroes  ima¬
ginary  misfortunes,  who  would  never  contemplate  ministering
to  his  happiness  were  he  placed  before  them  in  bodily  shape ;
but  it  requires  no  new  faculty  to  account  for  this  apparent
anomaly.  Those  persons  possess  a  sufficiently  active  Bene¬
volence  to  realize  the  misery  of  the  object ;  but  it  is  no  match
for  their  selfishness,  which  suggests  considerations  powerful
enough  to  restrain  the  hand  from  doing  a  benevolent  action ;
and  in  order  to  banish,  in  the  most  effectual  manner,  the
feeling  of  uneasiness,  which  arises  from  such  a  realization,
while  at  the  same  time  they  save  their  money,  they  avoid  the
presence  of  the  object.  Many  a  man  will  be  found,  with  his
selfish  feelings  in  a  quiescent  state,  weeping  over  a  thrillingly
melancholy  story,  who,  when  these  feelings  are  in  active  ope¬
ration,  would  not  spend  a  shilling  on  charity.  A  considerable
development  of  Love  of  Approbation  will,  probably,  be  found
in  those  persons  who  deal  in  expressions  of  sympathy,  where
none  is  really  felt.

The  Criminals.  In  comparing  the  casts  of  criminals  in
his  possession,  Mr.  Prideaux  discovered  that  they  were  defi-

VOL.  VI.  N


178  On  Mr.  Prideaux’s  “  Organ  of  Sympathy.”

cient  in  the  organ  of  Sympathy.  “  In  no  other  single  point
did  they  so  universally  correspond.”  But  there  are,  however,
other  points  in  which  criminal  heads  almost  invariably  agree,
which  he  has  overlooked ;  speaking  at  least  from  an  exami¬
nation  of  30  or  40  in  the  phrenological  museum  here,  viz.,
that  in  the  coronal  region  lying  below  Veneration,  (which,  as
a  rule,  is  largely  developed,  and  more  so  than  any  other
organ  among  the  sentiments — a  fact  for  divines,)  the  head
goes  shelving  off  towards  the  lateral  and  anterior  regions,
shewing  a  marked  deficiency  in  all  the  organs  lying  between
Veneration  and  these  regions.  Benevolence,  of  course,  is
included  in  the  portion  alluded  to ;  and  even  in  those  cases
where  it  may  be  said  to  be  moderately  developed,  when
contrasted  with  the  enormous  amount  of  antagonistic  pro¬
pensity,  its  counteracting  effect  is  barely  noticeable.  Where
Benevolence  is  very  deficient  we  expect  that  the  cries  and
sufferings  of  his  victim  would  only  the  more  infuriate  the
murderer,  and  keenly  stimulate  his  desire  to  kill.  In  cases
where  remorse  has  followed  murder,  we  find  a  good  develop¬
ment  of  Benevolence,  as  in  the  case  of  Burke,  with  whom
his  associate  Hare  contrasts  admirably  in  that  particular.  In
applying  Mr.  Prideaux's  definition  we  look  to  find  Sympathy
poorly  developed  in  Napoleon,  the  greatest  criminal  on
record :  but  not  so,  for  in  him  the  organ  is  large.  Where  in
his  career  was  “  its  great  restraining  power  manifested  ?”
When  was  he  “  so  conscious  of,  and  alive  to,  the  sufferings  of
his  victim,”  as  to  shrink  from  the  shedding  of  his  blood  ?

Lord  Eldon  and  Basil  Montagu.  Under  no  circumstances
could  we  imagine  Eldon  pleading  for  the  abolition  of  punish¬
ment.  Montagu  is  said  to  have  possessed  a  powerful  Bene¬
volence  ;  and  when  we  consider  that  it  was  much  engaged  in
a  cause  that  called  forth  its  noblest  manifestations,  we  can
easily  understand  how  the  faculty  was  thrown  into  such  a
morbid  state  of  activity,  as  to  produce  intense  agony  at  the
bare  idea  of  an  execution,  without  placing  that  agony  to  the
credit  of  a  new  organ.

The  Poets.  The  “  sympathetic  Shelley,”  possessed  very
high  moral  powers ;  his  Ideality  and  the  whole  region  of  the
imagination  were  largely  developed.  He  had,  besides,  a
temperament  so  susceptible  as  to  be  acted  upon  by  every
passing  shadow.  His  conceptions  of  the  purity  and  elevation
of  humanity  were  fine  and  instinctive.  Had  they  not  been
so,  mingling  with  depraved  men  would  have  given  him  no
pain,  however  large  his  organ  of  Sympathy.  Indeed  the
more  powerful  and  more  active  that  organ,  the  more  readily
would  he  have  sympathized  with  the  “  sensual  and  unintel-


By  Mr .  W.  J affray.


179


lectual  crowd/*  mentioned  by  Captain  Medwin ;  for  if  the
beings  composing  it  were  happy  in  the  pursuit  of  pleasure,
(of  however  gross  a  description)  he  must  have  derived  enjoy¬
ment  from  “  translating**  their  happiness.  In  the  portraits  of
Shelley,  Tennyson,  Lamb,  Campbell,  and  Dickens,  to  be  seen
in  this  town,  Individuality  and  Comparison  are  brought  out
large ;  and  I  respectfully  submit  to  Mr.  Prideaux,  whether
to  these  rather  than  to  the  new  organ  may  be  attributed,
“the  tendency  to  invest  nature  with  the  feelings  of  hu¬
manity.**  For  instance,  Beatrice  in  the  Cenci  speaks  of

“ - A  mighty  rock

Which  has  from  unimaginable  yeai'S,

Sustained  itself  with  terror  and  with  toil,

Over  a  gulph,  and  with  the  agony

With  which  it  clings  seems  slowly  coming  down.”

Quotation  by  Mr.  Prideaux.

Shelley  may  have  seen  or  read  of  a  man  clinging  terror-
stricken  to  the  edge  of  a  precipice.  His  Cautiousness  and
Benevolence  are  acted  upon — either  by  the  sight  or  the  vivid
picture.  Well.  He  afterwards  perceives  a  rock — “a  mighty
rock** — hanging  on  the  face  of  a  ravine.  Individuality  sepa¬
rates  it  from  every  thing  else  in  the  landscape.  Only  a  few
feet  of  base  serves  to  keep  it  in  its  present  position — it  is
apparently  quivering  with  the  passing  breeze — one  touch  will
send  it  into  the  abyss  below.  In  this  state,  it  is,  for  a  mo¬
ment,  (until  Causality  step  in  to  dispel  the  illusion,)  presented,
personified ,  to  Cautiousness  and  Benevolence,  who  are  once
more  brought  into  activity.  Comparison  comes  into  play,  and
contrasts  the  emotions  in  Shelley*s  mind  now,  with  those
which  he  had  on  beholding  or  reading  of  the  man  similarly
situated.  It  pronounces  them  to  be  identical  in  kind,  though
not  so  intense  in  degree.  Between  the  man  and  the  rock
there  is  no  physical  resemblance :  but  there  is  a  resemblance
between  the  emotions  which  each  calls  up  :  and  Individuality,
accordingly,  selects  the  same  terms  to  express,  or  indivi¬
dualize  the  position  of  both.  And  so  with  all  objects  in
nature,  animate  or  inanimate,  which  by  giving  rise  to  emo¬
tions,  similar  to  those  produced  by  human  objects,  are
invested,  figuratively,  by  Comparison,  aided  by  Individuality,
with  the  “  attributes  of  humanity.**  If  this  theory  is  unsound,
then  it  falls  to  Mr.  Prideaux  to  shew  how  Sympathy  goes  to
work  to  arrive  at  the  same  end.  Byron  has  the  tendency  in
question  well  defined  in  all  his  poetry.  His  address  to  the
sea,  in  the  concluding  stanzas  of  Childe  Harold,  is  a  fine
example  of  it.  Individuality  and  comparison  are  both  large
in  the  portraits  and  busts  which  I  have  seen  of  him  ;  while
Sympathy  seems  by  no  means  highly  developed.  The  for-

n  2


180  On  Mr.  Prideaux’ s  “  Organ  of  Sympathy.”

mer  organs  I  suspect  will  be  found  large  in  all  poets  wbo
excel  in  the  style  of  writing  commented  on  by  Mr.  Prideaux.

The  French  and  English.  Self-Esteem  is  much  larger  in
the  English  than  in  the  French  head.  Benevolence  in  the
former  is  not  so  much  alive,  therefore,  to  the  emotions  of
others,  as  it  is  in  the  latter,  unless  these  manifest  actual
pain  or  misery ;  and  when  it  does  sympathize  with  “  a  thou¬
sand  little  griefs  and  temporary  troubles,”  the  outward
expression  of  the  feeling  is  subdued  by  Self-Esteem.  The
large  and  predominating  Love  of  Approbation  in  the  French
head,  combined  with  Ideality,  gives  the  key  to  those  elaborate
courtesies,  and  minute,  trifling,  and  cheap  amiabilities  for
which  Frenchmen  are  so  celebrated.

Females.  “  Sympathy,”  says  Mr  Prideaux,  “  is  larger  in
English  females  than  in  males,  and  doubtless  in  females
generally.”  Admitting  this  to  be  the  fact,  how  does  it  hap¬
pen  that  females  are  so  much  superior  to  males  as  attendants
upon  the  sick,  if  the  sight  of  pain  and  suffering  be  so  racking
to  Sympathy?  Women  appear  to  enter  upon  the  task
entirely  con  amore ;  and  every  body  recognizes  the  truth  of
Scott’s  lines,  where,  speaking  of  woman,  he  says  : —

“  When  pain  and  sickness  wring  the  brow,

A  ministering  angel  thou  !”

Lately,  in  this  town,  wre  had  an  exhibition  of  Signor
Sard’s  Florentine  models, — one  shewing  the  anatomy  of  the
human  body — the  other,  the  diseases  to  which  it  is  subject.
It  was  no  uncommon  thing  for  visitors  to  faint  or  sicken,
after  looking  for  some  time  at  the  figures ;  but  the  person
shewing  them,  stated  that  for  one  female  who  fainted  or
sickened,  twenty  males  were  thrown  into  one  or  other  of
these  states.  The  large  Love  of  Approbation  and  Secretive¬
ness  possessed  by  females,  are  sufficient  to  account  for  their
“  tact  and  amiability,”  and  “  that  facility  in  divining  the
feelings  and  intentions  of  those  with  whom  they  come  in
contact.”

In  closing  these  hurried  remarks,  I  may  mention  that
the  leading  phrenologist  in  this  quarter  is  inclined,  from  a
large  series  of  observations  which  he  has  made,  to  place  one
new  organ,  if  not  two,  in  the  region  pointed  out  in  the  pre¬
ceding  note  upon  criminals.  The  nature  or  function  of  this
organ,  or  organs,  he  has  not  yet  been  able  to  discover.
American  phrenologists  have  been  more  successful.  They
have  found  out  two  organs  in  the  same  region.  A  phreno¬
logist  of  some  note,  among  them,  calls  one  of  these  “  Intui¬
tion,”  which  he  thus  describes :  “  The  organ  of  Intuition,


Cure  of  various  Diseases  with  Mesmerism.


181


between  Comparison  and  Benevolence,  gives  intuitiveness  of
judgment,  instantaneous  conclusions,  and  joined  with  Com¬
parison  and  the  perceptive  intellect,  off-hand  available  talent,
or  what  is  generally  called  common  sense.”  What  a  delight¬
ful  organ  !  Tell  us  its  development  in  any  given  individual,
and  we  have  an  “open  sesame,”  to  the  whole  mysteries  of
his  mind.  With  great  justice  it  might  have  been  christened
“  the  faculty  of  inspiration  !”  Verily  our  American  brethren
are  keeping  up  the  intensely  progressive  character  of  their
countrymen.


V.  Cures  of  Fits  of  impending  Strangulation ;  Nervous  Exhaus¬
tion  and  Sleeplessness ;  painful  Affection  of  the  Head  and
Spine.  By  Mr.  Henry  Whitfeld,  Surgeon,  Ashford,
Kent.  Communicated  in  a  letter  to  Dr.  Elliotson.

Sir — Having  been  engaged  for  more  than  four  years  on  the
subject  of  mesmerism,  and  having  also  practised  the  art  up¬
wards  of  half  that  time,  I  feel  myself  called  upon  to  attach
myself  to  the  small  minority  of  those  among  the  profession
who  believe  therein,  and  to  give  to  you  and  the  public  what
I  have  seen  of  its  Phenomena,  and  also  of  its  efficacy  in  the
cure  of  disease.

And  I  feel  this  moreover  as  a  duty  incumbent  upon  me,
as  it  was  from  a  perusal  of  the  valuable  pages  of  The  Zoist
that  I  first  became  acquainted  with  the  extraordinary  powers
of  Mesmerism  in  relieving  pain  and  disease,  and  was  thus
induced  to  practise  it ;  and  happily  with  success  in  many  in¬
stances,  where  all  other  means  had  failed.

I.  Cure  of  Fits  of  impending  Strangulation.

On  the  third  of  November,  1845,  I  was  called  in  to  see
a  young  lady  of  about  21  years  of  age,  of  moderate  stature,
well  formed,  of  sanguine  temperament,  and  who  had  enjoyed
good  health  till  the  age  of  16.  She  was  suffering  from  spasm
in  the  region  of  the  heart ;  the  pain  recurred  at  times  for
several  days,  when  it  was  succeeded  by  a  pustular  eruption  over
the  stomach  (probably  induced  by  a  blister  prescribed),  at¬
tended  by  much  pain  and  irritation,  which  continued,  more
or  less,  for  six  weeks ;  she  was  then  seized  with  sickness  and
violent  retchings,  which  continued  till  the  end  of  January,
when  the  above  were  exchanged  for  sufferings  of  the  severest
nature  and  most  distressing  to  behold.

At  about  six  o’clock  every  evening  she  was  attacked  with


182  Cure  of  Fits  of  impending  Strangulation.

violent  spasms  of  the  chest,  accompanied  by  a  complete  closure
of  the  glottis,  producing  feelings  of  immediate  suffocation ;
relief  from  which  could  only  be  obtained,  after  an  interval  of
15,  20,  or  even  30  seconds,  by  thrusting  the  forefingers
deeply  into  the  throat ;  these  sensations  of  suffocation  would
recur  every  three  or  four  minutes,  and  the  whole  attack  con¬
tinue  for  four,  five,  or  six  hours ;  and  so  the  case  went  on
day  after  day  and  week  after  week,  with  but  little  variation.
Quinine,  Iron,  Turpentine,  Ether,  Creosote,  Asapie-
ti  da,  were  given  without  effect.  Also  Stramonium,  Opium,
Prussic  Acid,  and  other  Sedatives.  Blisters,  Turpen¬
tine,  Tartar  Emetic,  and  other  Counter-irritants  were
applied  externally;  but  all  in  vain.  The  only  thing  that
tended  to  shorten  the  attack  was  an  emetic  of  salt  and  water ;
the  remedy  was,  however,  nearly  as  bad  as  the  disease,  being
always  succeeded  by  equal  prostration  of  strength.  During
all  this  time  she  took  scarcely  any  food ;  there  was  a  constant
pain  in  the  side ;  great  weight  on  the  chest,  and  a  sensation
of  a  lump  in  the  throat;  and  for  five  months  she  had  not  slept
so  much  as  one  hour  in  the  24.

Thus  did  her  sufferings  continue  and  the  symptoms  of
exhaustion  daily  increase  till  the  end  of  February,  when  her
state  was  truly  alarming,  as  the  attacks  would  now  come  on
during  the  day  as  well  as  the  night,  and  the  taking  of  a
mouthful  of  gruel  or  other  food,  or  a  change  of  position  in
bed  was  immediately  followed  by  the  closure  of  the  wind-pipe.
In  this  manner  her  state  day  by  day  grew  worse.

From  what  source  were  we  to  look  for  relief  ?  As  neither
food  nor  sleep  could  be  taken,  how  was  her  strength  to  be
supported  ?  The  functions  of  the  brain  were  rapidly  declining,
she  knew  but  little  at  times  of  what  was  passing  around  her,
and  felt  convinced  that  she  could  exist  but  a  few  more  days ;
and  on  the  2nd  of  March  she  was  thought ,  on  one  occasion,  to
be  dead.  The  case  was  most  desperate,  and  every  remedy  had
been  tried  but  one,  viz., — mesmerism.

This  I  had  proposed  to  the  physician  who  visited  her  with
me  in  consultation ;  but  as  he  had  not  seen  it  administered,
and  knew  but  little  of  its  advantages,  the  proposal  was  not
acceded  to.  When,  however,  our  prescriptions  failed  in  giving
relief,  and  after  some  unsuccessful  endeavours  to  procure  a
fit  person  as  a  mesmeriser,  I  offered  to  mesmerise  her  my¬
self,  though  at  the  time  unconscious  that  I  possessed  the
power.  The  patient,  as  well  as  her  relations  had  strong  pre¬
judices  against  the  remedy,  but  yielded  to  my  advice,  it  being
a  last  resource  in  a  hopeless  case.

On  the  morning  of  March  3rd,  mesmerism  was  first  tried


By  Mr.  Henry  Whitfeld.


183


and  produced  sleep  in  to?  minutes.  In  this  state  she  was  kept
for  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  and  was  then  awoke  by  transverse
passes,  when  she  expressed  herself  as  feeling  relieved :  the
weight  on  the  chest  was  also  much  diminished.  She  was
again  mesmerised  at  5  p.m.,  for  the  same  time  and  with  effect.
The  attack  recurred,  but  with  only  one  sixth  of  its  severity.
She  was  mesmerised  again  at  10  p.m.,  and  I  found  on  the
following  morning  that  she  had  had  three  hours  of  most  re¬
freshing  sleep ,  and  felt  very  comfortable.

March  4th.  She  was  mesmerised  three  times,  had  no  re¬
currence  of  the  spasms,  and  enjoyed  five  hours  of  sleep  at
night ;  the  weight  on  the  chest  and  the  lump  in  the  throat
were  also  gone.

March  5th.  She  was  mesmerised  only  twice,  had  no  spasms
or  weight  on  the  chest,  took  her  food  with  a  relish,  and  slept
seven  hours.

March  6th.  Increasing  strength  and  appetite ;  slept  eight
hours.

March  7th.  Improving  in  health;  slept  a  few  hours  in  the
day ,  as  well  as  eight  hours  at  night.

March  8th.  Stood  on  her  feet  this  morning ;  appetite  and
digestion  good ;  felt  sleepy  during  the  day,  and  has  lost  all
pain.

The  same  treatment  was  continued  throughout  the  month,
during  which  period  the  patient  appeared  in  every  way  con¬
valescent,  sleeping  generally  fourteen  hours  per  day.  She
made  no  complaint ;  increased  in  strength,  and  took  no  kind
of  medicine  from  the  commencement  of  mesmerism,  although
previously  aperients  had  been  constantly  necessary.

May  16th.  She  went  for  a  drive  in  a  pony  carriage  for  the
first  time,  and  seemed  in  every  way  improving, — increasing
in  flesh  and  strength.

June  1st.  She  continued  to  go  on.  It  was,  however,  evi¬
dent  that  she  depended  wholly  on  the  remedy,  for  if  the  mes¬
merising  were  delayed  only  three  or  four  hours,  she  lost  all
strength,  rejected  her  food,  became  chilly  over  the  whole
frame,  and  her  countenance  lost  its  healthy  appearance,  as¬
suming  a  livid  hue ;  and  I  have  no  doubt  that  a  still  longer
delay  would  have  induced  a  recurrence  of  the  spasms.

I  was,  therefore,  anxious  to  know  for  how  long  a  time
the  mesmerism  must  be  continued ;  to  ascertain  this,  I  made
a  more  accurate  enquiry  into  the  past,  and  learned  the  fol¬
lowing  facts :  that  she  had  slept  but  very  indifferently  during
the  last  six  years,  not  exceeding  three  or  four  hours  per  night ;
this  restless  state  was  first  induced  by  night-watching,  and
attendance  for  three  years  upon  an  invalid  sister,  and  con-


184  Cure  of  Fits  of  impending  Strangulation.

tinued  afterwards  through  paiu  in  the  side,  general  indisposi¬
tion,  and  various  other  circumstances ;  and,  for  five  months
previous  to  her  being  mesmerised,  she  had  not  procured  so
much  as  an  hour  of  sleep  per  night.  It  was,  therefore,  evi¬
dent  to  me  that  she  was  greatly  in  debt  to  her  constitution.
For  I  had  long  since  seen  the  truth  of  that  observation  of
George  Combe,  in  his  Moral  Philosophy ,  that  “  Nature  may
be  said  to  allow  us  to  run  an  account  current  with  her,
in  which  many  small  transgressions  seem  at  the  time  to  be
followed  by  no  penalty,  when  in  fact  they  are  all  charged  to
the  debit  side  of  the  account;  and,  after  a  lapse  of  years,
are  summed  up  and  closed  by  a  fearful  balance  against  the
transgressor.”  I  therefore  requested  her  to  put  down  the
smallest  amount  of  her  arrears  as  a  guide  to  our  proceedings,
and  to  enable  me  to  determine  the  probable  period  of  her
restoration  to  perfect  health :  this  was  done  agreeably  to  my
instructions ;  and  it  was  found  that  she  was,  on  the  most
moderate  calculation,  in  debt  on  the  score  of  sleep  7000  hours.
I  now  directed  her,  as  the  shortest  way  to  balance  her  ac¬
count,  to  get  as  much  sleep  as  possible ;  and  happily  by  mes¬
merism  she  was  enabled  to  gain  16  hours  out  of  the  24  ;*
and  in  this  system  she  persevered,  with  but  few  exceptions,
for  eighteen  months,  till  September,  1847,  leaving  about  2000
hours  unpaid.  During  this  period  I  had  reduced  the  fre¬
quency  of  the  remedy  from  twice  a  day  to  five,  four,  and  three
times  a  week.  Friends  and  relations  were  repeatedly  desirous
that  the  mesmerism  should  be  discontinued,  and  that  the
patient  should  return  to  her  more  active  habits;  and  several
attempts  were  made  but  unsuccessfully ;  and  about  this  time,
having  for  a  week  or  two  reduced  her  sleep  to  12  hours  a  day,
she  was  attacked  with  sickness,  pain  in  the  side,  and  a  return
of  the  spasms.  It  was  clear,  therefore,  that  nature  would
not  be  defrauded  of  her  dues,  and  that  the  best  way  was  to
discharge  the  account  as  quickly  as  possible.  I  was,  there¬
fore,  obliged  to  mesmerise  daily  for  a  week,  and  she  returned
to  her  16  hours  of  sleep  with  a  rapid  improvement  in  her
health;  and  she  continued  to  sleep  thus  till  the  end  of  De¬
cember,  when  I  observed  that  she  appeared  almost  regardless
of  the  remedy,  being  then  able  to  sleep  well  without  its  use.
She  had  also  increased  much  in  strength,  and  her  general
health  was  good;  and  upon  enquiry  I  found  that  her  debt
did  not  amount  to  more  than  900  hours,  which  she  appeared
able  to  discharge  without  the  aid  of  mesmerism,  having  be¬
come  an  excellent  sleeper.  The  remedy  was,  therefore,  from

*  Thus,  allowing  seven  hours  as  her  daily  portion,  there  remained  nine  hours
per  day  for  paying  off  the  arrears  due  to  her  constitution.


By  Mr.  Henry  Whitfelcl.


185


January  20th,  1848,  altogether  discontinued.  At  this  time
she  considered  herself  quite  well ,  and  in  better  health  than  she
had  been  for  many  years.  I  however  strongly  advised  her,
for  the  security  of  her  health  and  for  increase  of  strength,
to  take  no  less  than  90  hours  of  sleep  per  week  for  the  period
of  a  year,  and  to  enter  but  little  into  gaieties  for  the  same
time ;  being  satisfied  that  her  welfare  depended  on  such  dis¬
cipline.


II.  Nervous  Exhaustion  and  Sleeplessness.

Mrs.  H.,  aged  32,  of  a  nervous  temperament,  possessing
naturally  good  health  and  an  excellent  disposition,  became
ill  through  over-exertion  and  night-watching,  being  the
mother  of  six  children.  She  laboured  under  complete  ex¬
haustion  of  the  nervous  system ;  her  physical  condition  was
much  enfeebled,  and  her  mind  excitable,  irritable,  and  at
times  much  confused;  and  she  had  lost  the  power  of  sleep
for  many  weeks.  All  the  usual  remedies  were  tried  for  the
purpose  of  procuring  rest  by  night ;  but,  these  failing ,  mes¬
merism  was  proposed  and  acceeded  to.  It  was  tried  on  the
evening  of  the  6th  of  May,  1846,  for  15  minutes,  and  with
excellent  effect ;  she  went  into  a  deep  sleep  almost  imme¬
diately,  and  was  awoke  by  the  transverse  passes.  This  was
succeeded  by  seven  hours  of  refreshing  sleep  at  night,  and  a
great  improvement  in  all  her  feelings  next  day.  The  remedy
was  continued  daily  for  about  a  week  with  similar  effect  and
rapid  improvement  in  health ,  so  great  as  to  astonish  her  nurse ,
who  could  not  comprehend  how  so  great  a  change  in  the
condition  of  mind  and  body  could  be  caused  by  so  simple  a
proceeding.  She  was  then  mesmerised  only  three  times  a
week  for  a  fortnight,  when  she  felt  quite  well.  Soon  after¬
wards,  however,  her  nerves  received  a  severe  shock,  and  cir¬
cumstances  followed  that  kept  her  mind  in  a  continual  state
of  anxiety.  I  was,  therefore,  obliged  to  resume  the  remedy,
and  continued  its  use  four  or  five  times  a  week  for  a  month,
when  she  left  the  neighbourhood.

III.  Painful  Affection  of  the  Head  and  Spine.

M.  T.,  aged  36  ;  temperament  nervo-sanguineous  ;  occu¬
pation,  domestic  servant.  Liable  to  severe  head-aches  for
which  she  had  often  been  bled.  In  July,  1846,  she  was
much  worse  ;  the  pain  seemed  to  proceed  from  the  two  lower
cervical  vertebrae,  which  were  very  sensitive  of  pressure,  and
it  extended  to  the  head  in  which  there  was  a  sensation  of
great  weight,  particularly  in  the  hinder  region.  The  pain


186  Cure  of  Nervous  Exhaustion  and  Sleeplessness,

was  attended  with  giddiness,  some  confusion  of  mind,  and
loss  of  memory.  (Some  years  since  she  was  confined  to  her
room  for  many  months  in  consequence  of  a  spinal  disorder.)
For  the  purpose  of  obtaining  relief  she  was  advised  to  go
into  the  country  and  remain  quiet  for  three  months,  at  the
end  of  which  she  resumed  her  occupations  much  improved
in  health ;  but  in  six  weeks  all  the  symptoms  again  returned.
I  now  tried  mesmerism.  It  was  administered  for  10  minutes
after  she  had  retired  to  rest ;  she  was  left  in  the  sleep  and
did  not  awake  for  six  hours,  when  she  found  herself  greatly
relieved.  I  continued  to  mesmerise  her  nearly  every  night  for
three  weeks,  when  she  regained  the  power  of  sleep ,  and  seemed
in  other  respects  quite  well.  Six  months  afterwards,  in  con¬
sequence  of  over-exertion,  she  fell  ill  again,  and  lost  the  ability
to  sleep.  She  was  mesmerised  for  three  nights,  after  which
she  slept  well  and  recovered.

IV.  Nervous  Exhaustion  and  Sleeplessness.

Miss  T.,  aged  25 ;  temperament,  nervo-lymphatic ;  con¬
stitution,  naturally  good ;  consulted  me  in  September.  She
was  then  complaining  of  constant  pain  in  the  side,  loss  of
appetite,  indigestion,  great  prostration  of  strength,  and  a
total  inability  to  follow  her  usual  occupations.  These  symp¬
toms  had  been  gradually  coming  on  for  a  long  time,  and  were
probably  the  consequence  of  her  inability  to  procure  any
quiet  sleep  for  two  years,  and  the  whole  was  originally  caused
by  long-continued  active  duties,  unaccompanied  by  any  relaxa¬
tion.  All  the  usual  means  having  been  tried  in  vain  for  several
weeks,  I  had  recourse  to  mesmerism.  It  was  administered
for  fifteen  minutes  on  about  five  nights  in  the  week  with
immediate  advantage,  but,  in  consequence  of  her  being  so
much  exhausted,  and  her  arrears  of  sleep  being  so  great,  it
was  necessary  that  the  remedy  should  be  in  some  measure
continued  for  nearly  three  months,  when  she  could  sleep
unaided  twelve  hours  per  night.  She  thus  rapidly  increased
her  strength,  and  in  a  few  weeks  was  able  to  resume  her
daily  routine  of  duties ;  having  better  health  than  she  had
enjoyed  for  years.

I  have  now  to  make  a  few  remarks  on  the  curative  power
of  mesmerism,  suggested  by  the  above  and  other  cases  that
have  been  under  my  care.

It  has  so  happened  that  all  those  who  have  derived  benefit
through  my  mesmeric  aid  have  owed  their  sufferings  to  one
of  two  causes,  or  both  in  combination,  viz. :  over-exertion
and  deficient  sleep :  and  such  I  believe  to  be  the  case  with  a


By  Mr.  Henry  Whitfeld.


187


large  majority  of  nervous  patients,  and  particularly  those
who  inherit  a  defective  nervous  system.  Unfortunately  too,
opiates  and  the  other  usual  remedies  very  often  fail  in  these
cases  in  producing  sleep,  and  hence  afford  no  relief  to  the
sufferers.  Now  as  sleep  to  an  exhausted  condition  of  the
nerves  and  brain  is  the  great  and  only  restorative,  it  follows
that  the  extent  of  benefit  derived  from  mesmerism  will  much
depend  on  the  quantity  of  sleep  that  succeeds  the  operation,
and  this  inference  is  confirmed  by  my  experience.

Many  there  were  who  after  15  or  20  minutes  of  mesmeric
sleep  would  wake  up  feeling  well,  strong,  and  equal  to  any
exertion ;  but  the  result  ultimately  showed  that,  unless  this
state  was  succeeded  by  several  hours  of  natural  sleep,  the
beneficial  effects  of  mesmerism  were  nearly  or  quite  as  evanes¬
cent  as  those  of  ether  and  other  stimulants.

I  have  also  found  that  the  period  necessary  for  cure  will
depend  on  the  extent  of  arrears  of  sleep  due  to  the  consti¬
tution,  as  well  as  on  the  success  of  the  operation  in  producing
sleep.  All  persons  seem  aware  that  the  small  debt  incurred
by  keeping  watch  two  or  three  nights,  can  only  be  liquidated
by  an  extra  quantity  of  sleep  on  following  nights ;  yet  few
seem  conscious  that  months  or  years  of  arrears  can  only  be
balanced  in  the  same  manner.  The  fact  however  is  that  Na¬
ture  will  sooner  or  later  exact  her  due,  let  our  liabilities  be
ever  so  great,  and  though  she  kindly  permits  us  to  run  a  long
account,  she  will  ultimately  be  paid  in  full :  and  I  believe  it
is  the  accumulation  of  repeated  errors  which  is  often  the
secret  cause  of  many  diseases,  and  which  renders  them  so
difficult  and  tardy  to  cure.

I  would  also  observe  that  nervous  diseases  generally,
whether  treated  with  mesmerism  or  otherwise,  will  be  found
much  more  manageable  and  easy  of  cure,  when  additional
sleep  and  repose  is  prescribed,  instead  of  the  endless  variety,
and  as  endless  quantity,  of  excitants  and  stimulants.  I  lay
some  stress  on  these  matters,  as  the  opinion  very  generally
prevails,  that  nervous  persons  (those  in  whom  the  nervous
system  is  exhausted  or  hereditarily  defective)  require  the  daily
use  of  stimulating  beverages,  exciting  pleasures  with  much
company ;  in  short,  that  they  require  “  rousing ;  ”  and  very
many  infer  that  benefit  arises  from  such  treatment,  from  ob¬
serving  the  strength  imparted  at  the  moment ;  whereas,  in
truth,  these  remedies  are  inducing  an  extra  “  wear  and  tear”
of  the  whole  system  of  nerves,  and  thus  undermining  both
mind  and  body,  until  at  last  the  victim  of  such  treatment
becomes  a  subject  of  either  pity  or  condemnation.*

*  Very  many  who  are  under  the  censure  of  the  world  for  intemperance,  owe
the  habit  to  the  liberal  use  of  stimulants,  originally  prescribed  as  medicines.


188  Cure  of  severe  Hysteria  without  sensible  effects.

I  have  many  facts  to  mention  respecting  phreno-mesmerism,
community  of  taste,  mesmeric  shocks,  and  other  phenomena;
but  this  communication  is,  I  fear,  already  much  too  long.  I
will  therefore  defer  these  for  another  occasion.

And  am,  dear  Sir,

Yours  faithfully,

Henry  Whitfeld.


YI.  Cure  of  severe  Hysteria  without  sensible  effects.  By
Mr.  T.  Chandler,  Surgeon.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

Sir,— I  have  heard  Dr.  Elliotson  remark  that  one,  or  two,
of  his  best  cures  of  disease  by  mesmerism  took  place  without
sleep,  or  any  visible  effect  being  produced  upon  the  patients,*
but  as  this  was  at  variance  with  my  own  previous  experience,
I  should  have  doubted  it,  had  it  not  come  from  such  unques¬
tionable  authority.  The  following  case  shows  how  cautious
we  ought  to  be  in  rejecting  evidence  on  this  mysterious  sub¬
ject,  however  much  at  variance  with  our  own  preconceived
opinions.

Sarah  Ann  M - ,  set.  20,  a  robust  healthy-looking  girl,

was  attacked  in  May,  1847,  with  severe  hysteria.  Several
times  a  day  violent  paroxysms  occurred,  during  which  two
persons  were  required  to  prevent  her  injuring  herself.  She
suffered  at  other  times  with  pain  in  the  back  and  globus
hystericus ;  but  the  most  distressing  symptom  was  a  very
intense  splitting  head-ache.  I  saw  at  once  that  mesmerism
was  the  remedy  most  likely  to  cure  her,  but  felt  that  custom
demanded  the  cruelty  of  a  course  of  useless  drugs,  before  I
could  dare  propose  the  most  likely,  nay,  I  may  almost  say,
the  certain  means  of  cure.  I  accordingly  dosed  her  in  the
most  orthodox  manner  with  all  the  filthy  remedies  recom¬
mended  by  the  authorities,  but  without  the  slightest  benefit ;
and  as  a  last  resort  begged  leave  to  be  allowed  to  mesmerise
her.  The  friends,  being  quite  tired  out,  were  ready  to  submit
to  anything,  and  I  accordingly  commenced  at  once.  Medi¬
cines  were  discontinued,  and  I  mesmerised  her  half  an  hour
daily  for  about  a  week  or  ten  days,  without  producing  sleep
or  any  other  visible  effect.  The  disease,  however,  disap¬
peared,  and  though  certainly  post  hoc,  I  was  not  bold  enough
to  assert  that  it  was  propter  hoc.  I  have  lately,  however,
been  able  to  prove  very  satisfactorily  that  it  was  the  latter.

In  March  of  the  present  year,  the  mother  of  the  patient

*  Zoiaty  Yol.  I.,  p.  182;  Vol.  III.,  pp.  46,  206;  Yol.  V.,  p.  118. — Zoist.


By  Mr.  Chandler ,  Burgeon.


189


called  on  me  for  advice  for  a  younger  child  :  and  in  the  course
of  conversation  named  that  her  daughter  had  been  suffering
from  a  return  of  her  fits  for  a  month  or  six  weeks ;  that  she
had  visited  the  hospital,  and  taken  medicine  for  some  time,
but  without  the  slightest  benefit.  I  immediately  remarked
that  she  recovered  quickly  after  mesmerism  was  commenced
last  year,  and  begged  to  be  permitted  to  try  it  again.  She
was  accordingly  sent  to  me  the  next  evening,  apparently  in
a  much  worse  condition  than  last  year;  her  fits  were  very
frequent  and  violent,  and  her  head-ache  most  excruciating.
I  mesmerised  her  half  an  hour,  by  slow  passes  before  the
face,  without  any  visible  effect.  When  she  presented  herself
the  following  evening,  she  said  her  head  had  been  decidedly
better  during  the  whole  of  the  day.  I  manipulated  again  for
half  an  hour,  but  again  without  visible  effect.  The  remedy
was  however  working  secretly.  For  on  the  fourth  evening
she  told  me  she  had  not  had  a  fit  for  two  days,  and  her  head¬
ache  was  very  nearly  well.  On  the  sixth  day  she  absented
herself,  but  came  on  the  seventh  with  her  head  as  bad  as
ever,  and  having  had  a  fit  in  the  morning.  I  asked  her  why
she  had  omitted  coming,  and  she  said  she  thought  she  was
quite  well.  I  told  her  to  allow  me  to  be  the  best  judge,  and
not  to  discontinue  until  I  discharged  her.  She  was  quite
well  again  the  next  day,  and  by  mesmerising  her  daily  for
about  three  weeks  she  continued  so,  and  remains  in  perfect
health  at  the  present  time.

A  curious  anomaly  happened  in  this  case.  As  the  symp¬
toms  of  the  disease  left  her,  mesmerism  began  to  produce
more  visible  effect.  There  was  first  great  drowsiness,  so  much
so  that  she  could  scarcely  arouse  herself  to  walk  home ;  and
on  two  occasions,  she  fell  into  a  deep  sleep,  apparently  mes¬
meric,  and  very  probably,  should  I  ever  have  to  mesmerise
her  again,  some  phenomena  may  be  brought  out.

I  have  now  not  the  least  hesitation  in  asserting  that  mes¬
merism  cured  the  disease  on  both  occasions,  and  the  patient
herself,  and  her  friends  are  quite  of  the  same  opinion.

I  am  happy  to  find  that  mesmerism  is  spreading  in  all
directions.  Indeed  I  seldom  now  meet  with  a  decided  scep¬
tic  :  the  matter  is  beginning  to  be  received  as  a  settled  thing.
Even  the  Lancet  has  ceased  to  spit  its  occasional  bit  of  puerile
spite,  evidently  waiting  its  time  to  come  round.  Our  bitterest
enemy  may  ere  long  become  our  warmest  supporter.

I  remain,

Yours  faithfully,

58,  Paradise  Street,  Rotherhithe,  Thomas  Chandler.

June  8th,  1848.


(  190  )


VII.  Two  cases  of  the  severest  Tic  Douloureux,  cured  by
Mesmerism ,  at  Kingsbridge,  in  Devon,  by  Mr.  James
Harley.  Communicated  by  Mr.  Edmund  Fry,  of
Plymouth,  to  Dr.  Elliotson.

The  two  following  cases  are  remarkable  instances  of  the
power  and  value  of  mesmerism  in  arresting  the  progress  and
ultimately  eradicating  from  the  system,  a  malady  among  the
most  formidable  and  distressing  to  which  humanity  is  subject.
Too  much  praise  cannot  be  given  to  Mr.  Harley  for  the
assiduous  care  which  he  has  devoted  to  these  important
cases;  he  has  his  highest  reward  in  witnessing  two  of  his
fellow-creatures  restored  from  conditions  of  protracted  misery
and  torment,  to  lives  of  ease,  usefulness,  and  enjoyment.

The  case  of  Eleanor  Trant  appeared  to  present  a  com¬
plication  of  maladies,  which  had  defied  all  the  efforts  of
many  skilful  medical  practitioners.  She  had  been  a  bed¬
ridden  cripple  for  several  years,  utterly  unable  to  put  her
feet  to  the  ground.  The  only  nutriment  which  her  stomach
could  retain  was  a  little  fruit  and  milk,  and  the  paroxysms  of
tic  were  of  the  most  fearful  and  agonizing  character.

The  muscles  of  one  eye  had  become  gradually  contracted
until  sight  had  been  obscured,  and  in  this  deplorable  and
apparently  hopeless  condition — pronounced  indeed  hopeless
by  her  medical  attendants — she  had  lain  for  years :  when  she
was  happily  brought  under  the  healing  influence  of  mes¬
merism,  and  gradually,  but  surely,  she  has  been  restored  to
such  a  measure  of  health,  as  to  render  existence  no  longer  a
burden  but  a  blessing.

Susan  Coles's  case  affords  equal  proof  of  the  value  of
mesmerism.  Although  she  was  not  so  entirely  crippled,  nor
so  long  a  sufferer  as  Eleanor  Trant,  yet  her  sufferings  were
of  the  most  acute  description,  and  the  spasms  of  tic  so  vio¬
lent  and  frequent  as  to  render  her  an  object  of  the  most  dis¬
tressing  solicitude  and  care.  Her  gratitude,  and  that  of  her
family,  to  her  mesmeriser  is  unbounded.  It  is  only  wonder¬
ful  that,  with  such  cases,  open  to  the  investigation  of  every
candid  practitioner,  the  prejudices  of  the  profession,  and
the  culpable  silence  of  the  medical  journals  should  condemn
so  many  of  their  suffering  fellow  creatures  to  the  torments  of
protracted  disease,  without  affording  them  even  the  chance
of  alleviation  or  cure  by  mesmerism.  They  acknowledge,  as
in  the  case  of  Eleanor  Trant,  that  they  have  exhausted  the
resources  of  the  pharmacopoeia,  and  yet,  with  the  accumulated
evidence  poured  in  from  all  quarters  as  to  the  efficacy  of  mes¬
merism  in  the  relief  of  suffering  and  cure  of  disease,  they


Severe  Tic  Douloureux  cured  with  Mesmerism.  191

refuse  even  to  try  this  remedy,  on  the  plea  that  it  is  against
the  etiquette  and  dignity  of  the  profession  to  cure  their
patients  otherwise  than  by  college  rule  and  pharmaceutical
prescription.

Edmund  Fry.

I.  Eleanor  TranVs  Case.

“  To  Dr.  Elliotson.

“  West  Alvington,  May  14th,  1848.

“  Sir, — In  the  year  1836,  I  had  an  attack  of  influenza,
which  left  a  very  bad  effect  upon  me,  so  that  I  continued  in
a  state  far  from  being  well ;  shortly  after  this  I  had  an  attack
of  inflammation  on  the  chest,  for  which  I  was  blistered,
leeched,  and  took  medicine  in  addition ;  I  was  seized  with
cramp  spasms  in  the  stomach  also,  from  this  I  was  somewhat
restored.  In  November,  1838,  I  took  a  chill,  so  that  I  was
obliged  to  go  to  bed  earlier  than  usual ;  my  breathing  was
much  affected ;  I  was  again  seized  with  cramp  spasms  in  the
stomach ;  my  feet  and  hands  were  bathed  in  hot  water,  which
afforded  me  a  little  ease.  The  next  morning  the  spasms
returned  again  whilst  taking  breakfast.  At  this  time  I  was
drawn  most  violently ;  was  carried  to  bed  by  two  persons,  as
I  had  no  power  to  stand ;  the  feet  put  into  hot  water,  and
mustard  poultices  applied  to  the  chest.  In  the  evening  was
taken  much  worse,  when  a  physician  was  sent  for,  who  said
it  was  cramp  spasms  caught  by  a  chill ;  the  feet  were  then
put  into  hot  water  and  mustard,  a  draught  was  then  given
to  me,  which  caused  the  wind  to  break  in  the  stomach  so
loudly  that  I  was  heard  from  the  attic  down  in  the  parlour.
Medicine  was  ordered  to  be  taken  every  two  hours,  and  I  to  be
kept  very  still.  By  this  time  I  had  inflammation  on  the  lungs
and  chest,  for  which  I  was  again  blistered,  leeched,  and  took
a  quantity  of  medicine;  in  about  a  month  I  was  somewhat
restored,  still  being  very  weak :  my  native  air  and  strengthen¬
ing  medicine  was  recommended :  five  weeks  were  spent  at
home,  from  which  I  seemed  to  derive  great  benefit,  so  that
I  was  able  to  return  to  my  situation ;  however  in  less  than  a
week  I  was  seized  again  in  like  manner,  when  blistering  and
leeching  were  again  resorted  to.  I  now  had  violent  pain  in
the  head,  side,  and  stomach  :  my  feet  swelled  much :  I  was
attended  for  five  weeks,  at  the  expiration  of  which  I  was
much  better.  I  again  tried  to  follow  my  employment,  but  in
less  than  a  fortnight  I  became  much  worse,  when  the  phy¬
sician  was  again  sent  for ;  if  I  attempted  to  walk  across  the
room,  I  seemed  like  a  person  dying.  Eight  leeches  were
ordered  for  the  side,  likewise  a  large  blister,  which  relieved


192


Two  Cases  of  Severe  Tic  Douloureux


me ;  mercury  powders  were  taken,  when  I  was  slightly  sali¬
vated  ;  the  following  week  a  large  blister  was  applied  to  the
chest ;  my  tongue  by  this  time  was  almost  black  ;  change  of
air,  &c.,  was  again  recommended.  I  went  to  try  its  effect
once  more  on  the  17th  of  April,  1839 ;  being  so  weak  I  was
drawn  to  the  coach  in  a  chair.  The  side  was  very  weak  and
rubbed  with  ointment,  which  brought  out  something  similar
to  the  small  pox ;  leeches  were  again  applied  to  the  head ;
spasms  returned ;  I  was  so  weak  that  I  could  not  stand ;  if
I  attempted  to  put  the  legs  down,  the  spasms  would  seize  me
instantly ;  appetite  bad ;  whatever  I  took  in  was  immediately
thrown  up  again.  A  medical  gentleman  sounded  me,  who
said  he  never  saw  but  one  case  similar  to  mine ;  did  not  know
what  to  say  or  do  by  me.  I  could  not  rest  on  the  elbow
without  fainting.  I  now  commenced  a  course  of  Morrison’s
pills ;  at  the  expiration  of  seven  weeks  I  got  rather  better
and  could  stand  again ;  I  then  discontinued  the  pills,  when
I  began  to  swell  so  that  all  my  friends  thought  me  in  a  dropsy.
Every  remedy  was  tried,  which  proved  unsuccessful.  Change
of  air  was  tried  again,  which  benefitted  me  a  little,  still  suf¬
fering  much  pain.  Eor  twelve  months  I  continued  in  this
state,  when  I  was  seized  with  a  violent  shaking ;  after  ten
week’s  illness  I  got  rather  better.

“  March,  1842,  I  was  again  seized  in  like  manner,  when
another  medical  gentleman  was  called,  who  said  it  was  the
ague.  The  following  month  I  took  to  my  bed,  having  lost
the  use  of  both  legs,  attended  with  inflammation  on  the
lungs  and  chest.  An  abscess  was  now  forming  inside,  ex¬
tending  down  the  left  side  and  bowels :  there  was  no  dis¬
charge  of  water.  Have  had  as  many  as  five  injections  at  one
time.  My  subsistence  was  fruit  and  milk,  which  was  thrown
up  immediately  after  being  taken  in.

“October,  1843,  Iliad  an  attack  of  typhus  fever,  when
my  life  was  despaired  of.  Shortly  after  this  a  violent  pain
seized  my  head  and  cheek-bone.  I  now  lost  the  sight  of  my
right  eye,  which  seemed  to  be  drawing  out  of  my  head :  lock
jaw  followed  :  was  out  of  my  mind  for  hours  together.  My
medical  attendant  said  I  had  the  tic  douloureux ;  it  seemed
as  if  my  teeth  were  heaving  out,  attended  with  great  heat  in
the  head ;  the  pains  were  as  agonizing  as  if  nails  were  being
driven  into  my  head.  The  tic  sounded  like  the  beating  of  a
watch,  which  was  distinctly  heard  across  the  room  ;  in  a  few
months  it  extended  to  the  shoulder,  right  arm,  and  the  left
side  of  the  head,  so  that  for  several  hours  I  was  blind  in  both
eyes.  My  mother  could  not  leave  me  a  single  minute ;  another
individual  was  obliged  to  carry  every  thing  to  her :  was
watched  constantly  night  and  day.  The  moment  I  obtained


cured  with  Mesmerism,  by  Mr.  James  Harley.  193

relief  from  the  tic,  the  spasms  returned,  when  I  would  lie
like  a  person  dead  for  three  quarters  of  an  hour.  From
Sunday  to  Tuesday,  I  had  not  ten  minutes  ease ;  the  pains
would  commence  in  the  middle  of  the  day  and  continue  until
midnight.  No  one  liked  to  be  in  the  room  with  me.  Every
means  devised  was  tried  by  medical  men  and  others.  Thirty
drops  of  J eremy’s  opium  to  be  taken  every  night,  opium  pills,
likewise  the  liquor  of  arsenic :  I  could  not  sleep  by  night :
ointment  was  rubbed  in  the  head  and  face ;  hot  and  cold
baths,  salt  water  and  fresh ;  mustard  poultices  four  of  a
night  on  the  head,  shoulder,  arm,  and  neck.  I  then  tried
Ellises  embrocade,  which  afforded  me  a  little  ease,  but  this
soon  lost  its  effect  also.  Seventeen  teeth  ivere  extracted ;  the
upper  jaw-bone  quite  decayed  by  the  tic,  so  that  the  teeth
crumbled  away.  I  could  bear  nothing  now  but  cold  vinegar
bathing,  still  suffering  from  the  abscess.  I  was  so  ill  that
the  medical  gentleman  ordered  them  not  to  leave  me  a  minute,
as  he  expected  me  every  minute  to  breathe  for  the  last  time,
and  the  wheels  of  life  stand  still.  He  now  left,  declaring  he
could  do  nothing  more  for  me.  For  the  next  twenty-two
months  I  could  neither  keep  medicine  nor  any  thing  else  in
me ;  my  arms  were  quite  powerless,  so  that  I  was  fed  like  a
child ;  when  I  swallowed  any  liquid,  such  as  tea  and  milk,
they  gave  it  me  from  one  cup,  at  the  same  time  holding
another  to  catch  it.  I  invariably  threw  up  more  than  I
took  in,  which  was  white  and  as  thick  as  dough,

“  May,  1844,  I  was  now  advised  to  try  Godbald^s  balsam,
which  I  did.  My  case  was  a  complication  of  diseases;  what
did  me  good  for  one  thing  injured  me  in  another.  From  this
I  derived  benefit ;  the  tic  was  less  powerful,  so  that  I  could
partake  of  a  little  nourishing  food :  the  balsam  was  discon¬
tinued,  when  I  got  worse ;  had  an  abscess  in  the  inside,
which  broke ;  the  spasms  returned  when  I  resorted  to  the
balsam  again,  which  relieved  the  abscess.  In  the  fall  of  the
year  the  tic  returned  again,  which  extended  to  the  left  side,
attended  with  spasms  at  the  heart,  when  I  suffered  much
from  its  palpitation.  Brandy  cloths  were  applied  to  the  side,
and  vinegar  cloths  to  the  head.  1845,  another  abscess  formed.
I  now  discontinued  the  balsam,  when  all  the  former  com¬
plaints  returned  with  greater  violence  than  ever;  swellings  in
the  mouth,  which  would  burst ;  several  blood-vessels  broke  in
my  head  above  the  mouth.  I  commenced  taking  the  balsam
again,  which  healed  the  side,  so  that  I  was  able  to  take  a  little
fruit,  milk  diet,  bread  and  tea,  which  was  my  only  living  up
to  the  29th  of  January,  1848.  I  had  taken  in  the  whole
VOL.  vi.  o


194  Two  cases  of  severe  Tic  Douloureux

about  twenty-five  pounds  worth  of  the  balsam.  I  had  been
advised  to  try  mesmerism  three  years  previous,  but  could  not
make  up  my  mind.  A  lady  happening  to  call  to  see  me
related  a  striking  cure  by  mesmerism,  which  somewhat  re¬
moved  the  prejudices  from  my  mind.  In  the  commencement
of  the  present  year  I  was  suffering  most  intensely  from  the
tic,  which  had  taken  full  possession  of  the  entire  system ;  the
agonies  I  endured  were  beyond  description ;  I  had  not  stood
on  my  feet  for  the  last  six  years,  they  being  quite  useless ;
could  not  put  them  down  for  the  space  of  five  minutes  without
experiencing  a  return  of  the  spasms  :  was  bed-ridden  nearly  the
whole  of  that  time.  I  sent  at  once  for  Mr.  James  Harley,
who  I  heard  had  been  successful  in  curing  a  case  of  tic  by
mesmerism.  He  consented  to  mesmerise  me.  On  the  30th
of  January,  the  present  year,  I  was  mesmerised  twice,  the
result  of  which  was  I  slept  well  that  night ,  much  better  than
I  had  for  years  before.  The  tic  came  on  later  the  next  day,
when  my  sufferings  were  very  great,  which  lasted  for  hours,
until  Mr.  Harley  came  to  mesmerise  me ;  but  shortly  after
he  commenced  I  lost  all  consciousness  of  pain,  and  awoke
free  from  pain,  quite  easy,  and  very  comfortable  indeed.  Day
after  day  the  pains  became  less  powerful,  and  commenced  at
later  hours.  Finding  myself  getting  better,  I  continued  to
persevere  in  this  way  of  curing  disease.  My  restless  nights
were  less  and  less ;  my  spirits  got  better  daily ;  instead  of
sleepless  nights  I  slept  well ;  the  candle  was  no  longer  needed
during  the  hours  of  night ;  my  friends  could  take  their  rest
unbroken  without  being  disturbed.  I  discontinued  the  balsam
immediately,  submitting  entirely  to  the  power  of  mesmerism  :
have  been  regularly  mesmerised  for  the  last  fourteen  weeks,
except  twice,  up  to  the  8th  of  May.  I  have  no  return  of
the  tic ;  sleep  well ;  strength  of  body  and  mind  returning ;
the  stomach  is  much  stronger ;  sight  perfectly  restored,  which

followed  three  weeks  from  the  commencement :  mv  diet  alto-

*  «/

gether  of  a  different  kind ;  my  legs  are  quite  strong ;  can  sit
out  seven  and  eight  hours  a  day,  but  the  side  is  rather  weak;
have  walked  with  the  assistance  of  two ;  in  short,  I  am  alto¬
gether  a  different  person,  a  wonder  to  myself  and  the  whole
neighbourhood,  so  greatly  have  I  been  benefitted  by  mes¬
merism.  I  doubt  not,  ere  long,  I  shall  be  able  to  walk  out
and  visit  the  friends  who  have  so  kindly  invited  me  to  dine
with  them.

“  I  give  my  humble  testimony  to  the  world  for  the  sake
of  suffering  humanity,  that  others  may  be  induced  to  avail
themselves  of  the  same  remedy  which  by  the  blessing  of  God


cured  with  Mesmerism ,  by  Mr.  James  Harley.  195


has  proved  so  successful  in  my  almost  unparalleled  case.  I
beg  to  subscribe  myself  yours  most  respectfully,

“  Eleanor  Trant.

“  West  Alvington,  near  Kingsbridge,  Devon.

“  The  signatures  of  her  parents,

“  Nathaniel  March, H  West  Alvington,
“  Mary  March,  J  Devon.”

There  is  also  a  letter  to  Dr.  Elliotson  from  Mr.  Harley,
giving  an  account  of  his  treatment.  The  details  are  unneces¬
sary  to  our  readers,  and  would  be  tedious.  The  patient  ap¬
pears  to  have  gone  to  sleep  at  the  first  mesmerisation,  and  to
have  spoken  in  her  sleep-waking  on  the  fifth  day ;  and  to
have  had  some  of  her  cerebral  organs  capable  of  excitement
and  her  limbs  of  rigidity  by  mesmerism.

II.  Miss  Susan  Coles’s  Case.

“To  Dr.  Elliotson.

“About  the  latter  part  of  October,  1847,  Mrs.  Coles
made  application  to  me  to  mesmerise  her  daughter,  who  was
suffering  exceedingly  from  the  tic  douloureux.  She  has  been
mesmerised  about  one  hundred  times  in  the  whole.  The  tic
left  her  at  the  expiration  of  the  first  three  weeks.  Mes¬
merised  on  the  21st  of  October  for  the  first  time  :  slept  much
better  during  the  night :  whilst  under  the  influence  she  was
in  great  pain,  which  was  quite  apparent  from  the  lifting  of
the  hands  and  starting  repeatedly.  Mesmerised  twice  a  day
for  the  first  fortnight,  with  but  one  exception.  At  every  sit¬
ting  she  suffered  much,  having  no  knowledge  whatever  when
she  awoke  that  she  had  suffered  any  thing.  She  is  mesmerised
in  a  minute,  being  very  susceptible  :  it  is  only  for  me  to  look  at
her,  when  she  goes  to  sleep  without  any  difficulty.  She  gives
great  signs  of  traction,  but  not  the  least  sign  of  rigidity.
I  have  mesmerised  her  in  the  presence  of  several.  She  tells
who  enters  the  room  when  she  is  asleep ;  tells  when  any  one
removes  from  where  they  are  sitting.  When  Firmness  is  ex¬
cited,  she  rises  and  follows  me ;  if  I  walk  backward,  she  fol¬
lows  me,  not  having  the  power  to  turn  round ;  wherever  I
turn  she  follows  me  in  that  position.  When  Tune  is  excited,
she  sings,  Praise  God,  &c.  I  have  made  the  passes  before
and  behind  her,  when  she  could  neither  go  forward  nor
backward.  When  awake,  with  her  back  towards  me  at  the
other  end  of  the  room,  it  is  only  for  me  to  hold  my  hand
towards  her,  when  she  will  fall  towards  me  instantly.  I


196  Two  cases  of  severe  Tic  Douloureux,  fyc.


have  made  the  passes  before  her  whilst  she  was  sitting,  when
she  could  not  rise ;  behind  her  when  standing  up,  so  that  she
could  not  sit  down ;  have  walked  round  her,  when  she  could
not  move,  being  like  a  person  nailed  to  the  floor ;  at  times
she  cannot  be  lifted  from  the  spot  where  she  is  standing.
She  has  derived  great  benefit  from  mesmerism,  is  quite  cured
of  the  tic,  and  now  follows  her  employment  with  pleasure.
I  need  say  no  more,  her  own  testimony  being  quite  sufficient.

“  Believe  me,  dear  Sir,

“  Yours  most  respectfully,

“  James  Harley.


“  Kingsbridge,  Devon.”


The  testimony  of  Susan  Coles ,  Kingsbridge.

“  About  the  latter  end  of  October,  1846,  I  was  seized
with  a  violent  pain  in  my  face ;  I  thought  it  was  a  cold ;  I
treated  it  accordingly,  such  as  putting  my  feet  in  warm
water,  and  going  to  bed ;  but  the  warmer  I  kept  myself  the
worse  I  became  ;  do  what  I  would  I  obtained  no  relief.
Several  months  passed  away,  still  enduring  a  great  amount
of  suffering ;  the  violent  pains  I  had  on  my  cheek-bone  were
as  great  as  if  my  bones  were  being  pulled  out ;  the  pains
increased  in  my  head,  extending  down  the  neck  and  half  way
over  the  shoulder  and  back  ;  my  teeth  seemed  like  hot  irons  ;
my  tongue  swelled  to  that  degree  that  my  friends  feared  lest
1  should  be  choked.  I  made  application  to  professional  gen¬
tlemen  for  advice,  who  ordered  me  to  apply  mustard  poul¬
tices,  which  I  did,  but  it  only  increased  my  pain.  The  agonies
I  endured  nearly  took  me  off  my  legs,  so  that  I  was  obliged
to  give  over  work.  July  20th,  1847,  I  was  taken  still  worse;
I  had  not  five  minutes  ease  to  the  28th.  My  mother  was
almost  off  her  legs  in  watching  by  me ;  so  distressingly  did
I  suffer  that  night  after  night  I  was  out  of  my  mind.  I  could
badly  see  any  thing  with  my  right  eye.  I  bought  four  bottles
of  mixture,  at  Is.  IJd.  per  bottle,  to  take  and  rub  into  the
parts ;  mustard  poultices  and  blisters  were  applied  constantly  :
I  took  six  boxes  of  belladonna  pills,  and  all  to  no  purpose
whatever.  Night  and  day  bathing  the  parts  with  cold  water,
with  this  I  sometimes  experienced  a  little  ease ;  after  a  while
the  cold  water  had  no  effect  either.  I  had  often  made  up  my
mind  to  try  nothing  more,  but  continue  to  suffer :  nothing
else  was  expected  but  that  I  should  end  my  days  in  an  asylum.

“  I  continued  in  this  suffering  state  month  after  month.
One  day  in  the  month  of  August,  as  well  as  I  remember,  a
friend  called  to  see  my  father.  I  was  then  suffering  from  the
tic.  He  said  do  have  her  mesmerised,  it  will  do  her  good.


197


Case  of  Epilepsy  cured  with  Mesmerism .

After  he  left,  we  talked  about  it,  but  I  could  not  make  up
my  mind  to  it,  on  account  of  a  timid  nervous  feeling  which
had  possession  of  me,  which  made  me  afraid  of  it.  About
October  this  gentleman  called  again,  and  was  surprised  we
had  neglected  it  so  long.  I  at  once  made  up  my  mind.  My
mother  sent  for  Mr.  James  Harley,  and  laid  the  case  before
him,  who  consented  to  mesmerise  me.  Oct.  21st  I  was  mes¬
merised  about  1  o’clock,  and  again  in  the  evening.  To  the
surprise  of  myself  and  all  around  me  I  slept  well  all  night ,
it  being  the  first  good  nighfs  rest  for  twelve  months ;  awoke
in  the  morning  free  from  pain ;  during  the  next  day  I  expe¬
rienced  a  few  starts  and  jumps  in  my  face.  I  was  mesmerised
constantly  twice  a  day  (with  but  one  exception,  when  I  was
only  mesmerised  once)  for  a  fortnight,  and  once  a  day  after¬
wards.  In  that  short  time  I  was  a  wonder  to  myself  and  all
around  me.  At  the  end  of  three  weeks  I  was  quite  free  from
the  tic,  &c.  I  still  continued  it  until  I  had  been  mesmerised
in  the  whole  about  one  hundred  times.  I  am  happy  to  be
able  to  bear  my  humble  testimony  to  the  efficacy  of  mes¬
merism,  in  telling  the  public  that  I  am  perfectly  cured  of
that  monster  pain  the  tic,  by  the  extraordinary  power  of
mesmerism,  now  being  able  to  follow  my  employment  with
pleasure.  This  is  a  correct  statement  of  the  once  sufferer,
but  now  cured  by  mesmerism.

“  Susan  Coles.

“  Baptist  Lane,  Kingsbridge,  Devon.

“  The  signatures  of  her  parents,

“  William  Coles,

“  Susan  Coles.”


VIII.  Case  of  Epilepsy  cured  with  Mesmerism.  By  Mr.

Edmund  Ery.

Harriet - ,  aged  30,  in  the  service  of  Major  Northcote,  of

Yealmpton,  had  been  for  12  years  subject  to  epileptic  fits,
occurring  at  intervals  varying  from  a  week  to  a  month.  She
was  much  respected  and  valued  by  her  master  and  mistress,
who  were  unwilling  to  part  with  her ;  but  the  fits  appearing
to  increase  in  frequency  and  violence,  it  was  thought  that  she
would  be  unable  to  continue  the  duties  of  her  situation  and
she  would  shortly  have  been  discharged.  But,  in  December
last,  Mrs.  Northcote  was  advised  to  have  mesmerism  tried
for  her  as  a  last  resource  ;  and  accordingly  she  was  sent  into
Plymouth,  and  her  case  was  undertaken  by  me,  and  I  sue-


198


Mesmeric  Cure  of  Ulcers.

ceeded  after  two  or  three  sittings  in  inducing  the  mesmeric
sleep.  The  patient,  however,  never  lost  consciousness  nor
sensibility  to  pain ;  and  the  only  phenomenon  that  could  be
elicited  was  the  influence  of  traction.  She  was  mesmerised
12  times  in  about  15  days,  and  then  returned  to  her  situation,
feeling  decidedly  stronger  and  better  and  having  shown  no
tendency  to  any  return  of  the  fits.  She  has  remained  per¬
fectly  well  ever  since.  On  one  occasion,  about  six  weeks  ago,
having  been  imprudent  as  to  diet  at  supper,  she  felt  some
threatening  symptoms  in  the  night,  but  they  passed  off  with¬
out  a  fit;  and  she  came  to  Plymouth  a  few  days  since  to
thank  her  mesmeriser,  assuring  him  that  she  attributed  her
recovery  solely  to  mesmerism ;  and  by  her  improved  personal
appearance  showing  plainly  what  an  entire  change  had  been
effected  in  her  general  health.

In  this  case  the  aid  of  the  best  medical  skill  had  been
repeatedly  invoked  in  vain.  The  disease  had  decidedly  gained
ground  up  to  the  period  of  mesmerism  being  tried ;  and  from
the  period  of  the  first  application  of  this  despised  but  most
potent  remedy,  the  patient  has  been  entirely  relieved  from
her  cruel  and  distressing  malady.

Edmund  Fry.

Plymouth,  April  6th,  1848.


IX.  Mesmeric  Cure  of  Ulcers  of  long  standing.  By  a  Clergy¬
man  of  the  Church  of  England.  Communicated  by  Dr.
Elliotson.

“In  desperate  and  incurable  circumstances  they  knew  that  recourse  was  had  to  mesmerisers,
to  St.  John  Longs,  and  other  personages  of  the  same  kidney.” — Speech,  of  Mr.  Henry  Drum¬
mond  in  the  House  of  Commons.  Morning  Chronicle,  April  11,  1848.

“  We  are  apt  to  have  recourse  to  nostrum,  to  mesmerism,  to  St.  John  Long,  and  other
quacks.”— Speech  of  Air.  Henry  Drummond  in  the  House  of  Commons.  Times,  April  11,  1848.

I  am  always  particularly  happy  in  furnishing  mesmeric
cures  of  diseases  which  do  not  affect  the  nervous  system,  on
account  of  the  prevailing  error  that  mesmerism  is  only  fitted
for  nervous  diseases,  and  of  the  absurd  doctrine  anxiously
inculcated  by  certain  medical  men,  that  it  works  by  merely
influencing  the  imagination.  The  case  is  one  of  inveterate
ulcers  in  different  parts  of  the  head.  The  following  publica¬
tion  of  the  case  will  be  serviceable  in  controverting  these
fancies  :  and  it  gives  me  great  satisfaction  to  state  that  the
cure  was  wrought  by  a  friend  of  mine, — one  of  those  ministers
of  religion  whose  life  is  a  sermon  on  humility,  benevolence,
and  courageous  conscientiousness.


199


By  a  Clergyman  of  the  Church  of  England.

I  shall  give  first  the  poor  woman’s  honest  tale  in  her  own
homely  language  and  then  the  notes  of  her  benefactor.

John  Elliotson.


The  woman's  own  account.

“  My  health  declined  more  than  ten  years  ago.  I  have
been  afflicted  with  violent  pains  in  my  head  with  burning
heat,  pains  in  my  temples,  and  weight  over  my  eyes ;  worse
always  at  night.  It  will  be  a  month  or  six  weeks  gathering,
being  very  sore  and  bad  to  bear ;  then  the  places  will  break
and  discharge  more  like  hot  water  when  it  first  breaks,  than
when  it  has  kept  running  a  long  time.  It  has  run  more  than
two  years  at  once.  Since  then  I  have  had  three  broken  places
in  my  head,  and  two  in  my  forehead.  I  have  been  under
several  doctors  at  the  hospital,  and  several  out.  They  have
said  it  is  not  the  evil,  but  have  never  said  what  it  was.  I  have
been  very  poorly  in  my  health, — scarcely  able  to  do  for  myself
and  family.  Both  pills  and  draughts  have  been  given  me.
I  have  been  ordered  to  use  bread  poultices,  linseed  poultices,
ointments,  and  lotions,  at  different  times.  I  have  been  to
the  dispensary,  to  the  Canterbury  hospital,  and  have  had

advice  from  Mr. - ,  in  Canterbury.  I  think  it  was  in

February  you,  Sir,  took  me  in  hand ;  and  I  can  say  for  a
truth  you  have  done  me  more  good  than  all  the  doctors  I  have
been  under ;  for  which  I  feel  thankful  to  God  for  that  he  put
it  into  your  heart  to  do  me  so  much  good,  and  I  can  say  from
my  very  heart  I  have  great  cause  to  be  thankful.

“Mary  Ford.

“  I  had  omitted  to  say  I  have  had  three  pieces  of  bone
taken  out  of  my  head,  and  now  I  am  happy  to  say,  in  regard
to  health,  I  am  as  well  as  ever  I  was  in  my  life.  When  Mr.

- first  saw  me,  I  was  very  ill  with  my  head,  having  two

very  bad  sores  on  the  left  side  of  my  head,  that  I  had  not
lain  on  that  side  for  seven  or  eight  weeks,  and  very  ill  in  my
health,  very  often  troubled  with  a  rising  in  my  throat,  and  a
trembling  in  myself.

“  May  19th,  1848.”

Notes  of  the  operator.

“Feb.  29th,  1848.  Commenced  to  mesmerise  Mrs.  G.
Ford,  who,  for  ten  years,  has  had  ulcers  on  her  head.  One
of  them  has  penetrated  almost  through  the  skull.  She  has
been  several  times  a  patient  at  the  hospital,  but  has  found
only  temporary  relief.  She  is  pale,  weak,  and  seemingly
sinking.  She  went  into  sleep-waking  in  a  few  seconds.


200


Mesmeric  Cure  of  Ulcers.


i:  March  1st.  Mrs.  G.  Ford  informed  me  that  she  has
passed  a  good  night,  free  from  pain,  and  that  the  pain  in  her
head,  which  was  relieved  yesterday,  has  not  returned.  She
said  that  she  had  not  been  able,  for  a  long  time,  to  sleep  on
the  left  side  of  her  head,  where  there  is  a  had  ulcer ;  but
that  last  night  she  did  so  with  comfort.

“  March  2nd.  Mrs.  Ford  had  pain  in  her  head  when  she
came  this  morning,  which  was  soon  relieved.  She  told  me
that  she  has  been  long  accustomed  to  moan  in  the  night,
from  the  pain  and  uneasiness  in  her  head,  but  that  this  morn¬
ing  her  husband  said  to  her,  ‘  Why,  you  did  not  grunt  in
the  night ‘  No/  she  replied,  f  I  had  no  need  to  grunt /  She
passed  an  easy  night.

“  March  3rd.  Mrs.  F.  has  had  another  good  night,  and
says  she  feels  better.  The  ulcers  are  beginning  to  get  drier.
I  examined  them  this  morning.  The  large  ulcer  appears  to
penetrate  nearly  to  the  brain,  for  there  is  a  hole  almost
through  the  skull,

“  March  4th.  During  sleep-waking  this  morning,  Mrs.
F.  had,  what  she  has  been  long  accustomed  to,  a  painful
spasm  in  the  throat.  Not  being  able  to  describe  her  sensa¬
tions  she  became  alarmed  and  nervous,  and  after  she  awoke
was  a  little  hysterical.  It  soon,  however,  passed  off.

“  March  6th.  In  order  to  avoid  a  recurrence  of  this  spasm
in  the  throat,  I  kept  Mrs.  F.  a  shorter  time  in  sleep-waking,
which  was  very  quiet  and  refreshing  to  her.

March  7.  Very  quiet  to-day  and  no  return  of  unpleasant
symptoms.  She  slept  well,  has  quite  lost  the  pain  in  her
head,  and  can  sleep  equally  well  on  either  side  of  it.  She
considers  herself  very  much  better.

“  March  17th.  With  one  or  two  exceptions  I  have  mes¬
merised  Mrs.  G.  Ford  every  day,  and  she  has  uniformly  slept
quietly.  She  gains  strength,  sleeps  well,  is  quite  free  from
pain,  and  all  the  wounds  in  her  head  have  dried,  up.

“  March  18th.  Mrs.  G.  Ford  had  the  last  sitting  this
morning.  She  says  she  feels  quite  well ,  has  not  been  so  well
for  years ,  and  does  not  wish  to  feel  better.  She  has  a  healthy
colour.  When  dismissed  from  the  hospital,  she  has  always
been  dismissed  as  ‘  relieved but  never  as  ‘ cured  d  now,  at
present,  she  announces  herself  to  be  ‘ quite  well.’”

“  To  Dr.  Elliotson.

a  My  dear  Sir, — I  saw  Mrs.  G.  Ford  yesterday,  and  she
continues  as  well  as  she  was  when  I  left  off  mesmerising.  You


Cure  of  Lumbar  Abscess  and  disease  of  the  Spine.  201

are  perfectly  welcome  to  make  any  use  you  please  of  this
case.

“  Ever,  my  dear  Sir,

“  Very  faithfully  yours,

“  Kingstone,  “  T.  B.

“  May  16th,  1848.”

I  am  anxious  that  this  case  should  be  compared  with
similar  cures  of  ulcers  in  The  Zoist ,  Yol.  III.,  pp.  316,  519,
see  also  (in  my  pamphlet  on  Surgical  Operations  without
Pain,)  Mr.  Case’s  mesmeric  cure  of  a  diseased  finger  which
he  was  about  to  amputate,  but,  in  mesmerising  the  patient
to  produce  insensibility  for  the  operation,  the  finger  healed
and  no  amputation  was  required.

J .  E.


X.  Successful  treatment  of  Lumbar  Abscess  and  disease  of  the

Spine  with  Mesmerism ,  by  Mr.  James  Davis  Horne.

Communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson.

“  Till  about  the  yeare  1649  'twas  held  a  strange  presumption  for  a  Man  to  attempt  an  In¬
novation  in  Learnings:  and  not  to  be  good  Manners  to  be  more  knowing  than  his  Neighbours
and  Forefathers:  even  to  attempt  an  Improvement  in  Husbandry  (thoug  it  succeeded  with
profit)  was  look’d  upon  with  an  ill  Eie.  Quo  non  Livor  adit  ?  Their  Neighbours  did  scorn  to
follow  it,  though  not  to  doe  it  was  to  their  owne  Detriment.  ’Twas  held  a  Sinne  to  make  a
Scrutinie  into  the  Waies  of  Nature.”— Preface  to  Aubrey’s  MS.  in  the  Royal  Society,  re¬
ferred  to  in  my  Harveian  Oration,  p.  50. — J .  E.

Here  is  another  cure  of  a  disease,  not  at  all  of  the  nervous
system,  and  without  the  possibility  of  ascription  to  imagi¬
nation.

I  was  consulted  the  year  before  last  respecting  a  little  boy,
deformed  in  his  back,  bent  forward  with  his  hands  on  his
knees,  and  an  evident  large  collection  of  matter  in  his  loins,
pale,  with  a  hectic  flush — emaciated  and  feeble.  I  gave  no  hope,
for  I  had  never  seen  a  recovery  from  such  a  state  of  things.
When  afterwards  I  was  questioned  respecting  the  utility
of  mesmerism  in  the  case,  I  replied  that  I  certainly  would
recommend  a  good  persevering  trial  of  it,  because  I  was  con¬
tinually  seeing  it  effect  cures  which  absolutely  astonished  me,
and  which  nothing  else  could ;  and  because  I  felt  certain  that
no  medicines— nothing  in  the  routine  of  physic  or  surgery
— could  save  his  life  :  mesmerism  I  knew  would  support  his
strength,  and  might  enable  nature  to  get  the  better  of  the
disease.  I  subjoin  the  father’s  simple  history  of  the  cure.

“  In  the  summer  of  1845,  my  son,  Michael  Ford  Horne,
then  9  years  of  age,  had  a  fall ;  and  soon  after  complained  of
a  pain  in  his  back.  In  the  month  of  December,  a  bone  ap-


202  Cure  of  Lumbar  Abscess  and  disease  of  the  Spine.

peared  to  be  growing  out,  and  we  observed  a  swelling  in  his
back;  and  in  the  beginning  of  January,  1846,  I  took  him  to
Mr.  Norman,  of  Bath,  who  pronounced  the  disease  to  be  a
lumbar  abscess,  and  said  he  scarcely  ever  knew  a  person  to
recover  from  one.  Mr.  Norman  told  me  it  would  continue
to  increase  in  size  until  it  broke,  and  then  it  would  run  him
out ;  that  he  might  however  live  for  two  years ,  but  it  would
ultimately  cause  his  death.  Mr.  Norman  saw  him  after  this
three  or  four  times,  and  still  expressed  the  same  opinion.  I
was  ordered  by  Mr.  Norman  to  let  him  lie  in  bed;  and  Mr.
Norman  prescribed  some  strengthening  powders  and  a  box  of
ointment.  My  son  remained  until  the  month  of  May,  still
getting  worse.  At  this  time  he  could  not  walk  more  than
twenty  yards  at  a  time,  and  then  only  by  placing  his  hands
upon  his  knees.  I  soon  after  heard  from  Mr.  Yallence,  of
Bristol,  that  Dr.  Harrop,  at  Brighton,  was  very  skilful,  had
effected  many  cures  of  spinal  diseases,  and  amongst  others
in  one  of  his  own  family.  I  took  my  child  to  Brighton  and
shewed  him  to  Dr.  Harrop,  who  said  it  was  a  blood  tumor,
and  he  would  not  survive  long.  I  then  with  a  heavy  heart
returned  to  London  on  my  way  home ;  but  my  brother,  who
resides  there,  wished  me  to  have  further  advice  :  so  we  took
him  to  Dr.  Elliotson,  who  likewise  told  me  it  was  a  hopeless
case  of  diseased  spine  and  lumbar  abscess.  I  must  not  forget
to  speak  of  the  kindness  of  both  the  last-mentioned  gentle¬
men,  who  refused  to  accept  of  any  fee.  The  next  day  I
returned  home  with  my  child,  without  the  smallest  hope  of
recovery.  The  day  after  I  had  a  letter  from  my  brother,
stating  that  a  friend  of  his  had  advised  mesmerism  to  be
tried.  I  knew  nothing  about  mesmerism,  but  anxious  to
avail  myself  of  any  thing  that  promised  relief  to  my  dear
child,  I  again  returned  to  London.  This  friend  called  imme¬
diately  at  my  brother’s  and  made  the  passes  for  about  half  an
hour  daily,  without  producing  sleep.  He  was  anxious  that
sleep  should  be  produced  before  I  left  London  that  I  might
have  confidence  to  proceed  myself  on  my  return  to  the
country  :  and  with  this  view  recommended  me  to  Mr.  Hands,
of  Thayer  Street,  Manchester  Square,  who  mesmerised  him
daily  for  some  weeks:  but,  after  about  a  week  or  two,  no
attempt  was  made  to  produce  sleep,  the  passes  being  made
over  the  abscess.  While  under  Mr.  Hands’s  care,  the  abscess
broke  and  discharged  upwards  of  a  quart  of  matter.  The
mesmerism  was  still  continued,  and  the  child  remained
about  the  same  in  regard  to  his  health.  During  his  stay  in
London  he  was  seen  several  times  by  Earl  Ducie,  who  took  a
kind  interest  in  him,  Mr.  Hyatt,  M.P.,  Captain  James,  and


Cure  of  Epilepsy  and  severe  Nervous  Affection.  203

Major  Buckley.  Dr.  Elliotson  advised  me  to  persevere  with
mesmerism,  because,  though  he  feared  it  would  fail,  still  there
was  no  other  remedy.  Some  time  after  this,  Mr.  Hands's
health  compelled  him  to  go  into  the  country,  and  I  therefore
took  the  child  home  and  continued  the  passes  myself.  The
third  day  of  my  attempt  the  mesmeric  sleep  was  produced,
and  I  continued  to  produce  the  sleep  daily  until  the  following
spring.  It  .appeared  that  when  in  London  sleep  was  pre¬
vented  by  his  fear  lest  if  he  went  to  sleep  an  operation  would
be  performed  upon  him.  Some  time  after  his  return  home
another  abscess  formed  in  the  back,  broke  and  discharged  a
great  quantity  of  matter,  and  the  child  was  very  much  re¬
duced,  not  being  able  to  move.  He  was  in  such  a  dreadful
state  that  I  began  to  despair  of  saving  him  :  but  I  was  induced
to  persevere  with  the  mesmerism,  and  truly  thankful  I  am
that  I  did  so.  The  second  abscess  broke  in  November,  1846,
and  in  February,  1847,  a  decided  improvement  was  perceived.
From  that  time  the  child  continued  to  mend  rapidly :  by  still
continuing  my  exertions  he  gained  strength,  and  has  con¬
tinued  to  do  so  to  the  present  time.  The  abscesses  are,  I
may  say,  healed ;  for  there  is  scarcely  a  stain  upon  his  linen,
and  the  child  is  running  about  from  morning  to  night  in  per¬
fect  health,  and  quite  straight.  As  he  has  not  taken  any
medicine  whatever  during  all  this  time ,  I  attribute  his  cure
entirely,  under  the  blessing  of  God,  to  mesmerism.

“  James  Davis  Horne.

“  Cor  sham,  Wilts."


XI.  Cure  of  Epilepsy  and  severe  Nervous  Affection.

By  Dr.  Stoker.

In  August,  1846,  I  was  consulted  by  the  friends  of  a  young
lady,  19  years  of  age,  who  had  suffered  during  the  last  three
years  from  violent  hysterical  attacks  with  convulsions  which
had  been  viewed  and  treated  as  epilepsy  by  the  usual  family
attendant.  As  the  patient  resides  a  few  miles  in  the  country,
she  had  twice  been  brought  to  Bristol  to  be  under  the  care
of  different  medical  men,  but  the  treatment  adopted  proved
of  no  avail.  Her  friends  were  at  last  told  that  she  might
possibly  outgrow  her  complaints,  but  that  medicine  seemed
in  her  case  to  be  useless.  Whilst  in  Bristol  her  friends  were
attracted  to  some  mesmeric  lectures,  and  were  so  struck  with
what  they  heard  and  saw  that  they  determined  to  give  mes¬
merism  a  trial.  They  had  been  previously  recommended  to
do  so,  but  had  allowed  themselves  to  postpone  the  trial  in


204  Cure  of  Epilepsy  and  severe  Nervous  Affection.

deference  to  the  prejudices  of  the  medical  men ,  who  were
strongly  opposed  to  the  attempt.  At  the  time  I  first  saw  her
she  had  as  many  as  five  or  six  attacks  during  the  day.  She
would  be  suddenly  seized  with  giddiness  and  violent  spasms
of  the  neck  and  throat,  accompanied  by  general  hysteria,  so
strong  that  it  required  at  times  three  or  four  parties  to  manage
her.  These  attacks  lasted  from  ten  to  fifteen  minutes,  leaving
her  in  so  prostrate  a  condition  that  she  was  usually  confined
to  the  bed  or  sofa  all  day.  Throughout  her  illness  she  was
most  irregular  in  her  natural  periods,  and  this  with  spinal
irritation,  was  regarded  by  the  medical  men  as  the  latent
cause  of  her  sufferings.  All  ordinary  means  failed  to  have
any  effect.

Mesmerism  in  this  case  was  tried  regularly  for  a  week.
On  the  first  three  trials  there  appeared  to  be  such  an  increase
of  the  attacks  that  her  friends  did  not  like  the  idea  of  it
being  continued.  I  told  them  that  there  was  not  the  slightest
ground  of  fear,  but  that,  on  the  contrary,  such  effects  were
often  seen  in  violent  nervous  affections,  especially  in  epilepsy.
Good  however  began  to  shew  itself  after  the  fourth  visit :  a
deep  sleep  was  then  induced,  which  lasted  six  hours,  and
from  which  she  awoke  comparatively  refreshed.  Sleep  how¬
ever  did  not  invariably  follow ;  sometimes  only  a  drowsiness
was  induced ;  but  the  effects  were  shewn  in  the  improved
health  and  the  general  subsidence  of  the  irritability.  My
attendance  was  continued  for  a  month,  and  I  saw  her  after
the  first  week  every  second  day.  She  was  also  mesmerised
intermediately  by  a  member  of  her  family.  By  the  end  of  a
fortnight  she  was  quite  able  to  leave  the  sofa  and  take  gentle
exercise  in  the  air.  At  the  end  of  the  month  her  appearance
altogether  was  so  improved  that  her  friends  could  scarcely
credit  the  result.  She  had  but  one  severe  fit  after  the  month,
and  that  was  from  fright :  and,  from  that  period  to  the  present,
she  has  enjoyed  comparatively  excellent  health.  Mesmerism
under  my  directions  was  continued  for  six  weeks  longer,  and
its  powers,  truths,  and  usefulness  fully  admitted  by  the  family,
and  in  this  particular  case  always  had  recourse  to  when  any
occasion  seemed  to  indicate  its  use.

A  most  important  fact  in  this  and  many  other  cases  is  the
benefit  to  be  derived  from  mesmerism  at  particular  periods ;
occasional  mesmerising  setting  all  to  rights.  It  is  now  fully
eighteen  months  since  the  convalescence  of  this  lady,  and  I
have  seen  members  of  her  family  during  the  last  fortnight,
who  report  that  her  health  was  never  better.  During  my
attendance  no  medicines  whatever  was  prescribed ,  and  none
taken  except  an  occasional  dose  of  sal  volatile  at  first,  when


By  Dr.  Storer.


205


the  attacks  took  her  friends  too  much  by  surprise.  This  I
requested  might  gradually  be  discontinued.

I  have  had  several  cases  of  the  above  character,  some
even  more  severe,  as  reported  in  the  pages  of  your  journal :
and  I  am  happy  to  say  from  rather  an  extended  experience,
that  there  is  no  remedy  so  well  adapted  to  almost  all  affec¬
tions  of  the  nervous  system,  and  certainly  none  whose  effects
are  more  generally  permanent.  Every  medical  man  must
know  that  nervous  diseases  make  up  a  large  share  of  ordinary
practice,  and  their  treatment  in  many  cases  becomes  tedious
in  the  extreme.  Why  not  then  in  such  cases,  often  hopeless  by
ordinary  means,  give  their  patients  at  least  the  chance  of  a
recovery  ?  I  am  glad  to  find  a  more  liberal  spirit  is  beginning
to  shew  itself;  but,  in  the  majority  of  cases  in  which  I  have
been  consulted,  the  patients  or  their  friends  have  admitted  that
they  have  come  to  me  in  opposition  to  the  views  of  their  par¬
ticular  medical  men.


XII.  Great  Benefit  of  Mesmerism  in  severe  Inflammatory  Ex¬
citement  of  the  Brain.  Communicated  from  the  patient
to  Dr.  Storer,  and  by  him  to  Dr.  Elliotson.

9,  Coronation  Buildings,  Coronation  Boad,
Bristol,  February  20th,  1848.

My  dear  Sir, — I  again  beg  leave  to  return  you  my  sincere
thanks  for  the  unbounded  kindness  which  I  received  at  your
hands  during  my  late  illness ;  and  did  I  not  experience  a
great  degree  of  pleasure  in  thus  expressing  my  gratitude,  as
well  as  in  dwelling  on  the  curative  and  soothing  powers  of
that  beautiful,  though  much  persecuted  science,  mesmerism,
I  should  fail  in  attempting  to  describe  the  particulars  of  my
case.

Early  in  June,  1847,  I  caught  a  severe  cold,  from  which
I  suffered  much,  and  with  all  my  endeavours  was  unable  to
rid  myself  of  it.  On  the  7th  of  July,  being  so  very  unwell,
I  consulted  an  eminent  surgeon  in  the  city,  who  pronounced
me  to  be  in  a  high  state  of  fever,  ordered  me  to  bed  imme¬
diately,  half  a  dozen  leeches  to  the  temples, — the  seat  of
nearly  all  my  pain  being  centered  in  that  part  of  my  brain,
and  gave  me  an  aperient,  and  a  powder  every  four  hours  that
threw  me  into  a  violent  perspiration.  The  same  treatment
was  continued  for  the  space  of  three  or  four  days,  but  still
I  got  much  worse ;  the  pains  were  daily  on  the  increase  and
becoming  excruciating.

5th  day,  medicine  changed,  hair  ordered  to  be  cut  quite
close,  cold  water  cloths  laid  on  the  head,  and  leeches  to  be


206  Great  benefit  of  Mesmerism  in  severe  Inflammatory

daily  applied  to  the  part  affected,  and  a  blister  on  the  nape
of  the  neck.

8th  or  9th  day.  Fresh  medicines  were  given  which  threw
me  into  a  salivation.  My  mouth  became  much  ulcerated.  I
detested  the  sight  of  all  food.  The  window  was  nearly  dark¬
ened,  and  a  footstep  in  my  bed-room  almost  drove  me  to
distraction.

Whilst  I  lay  in  this  state  of  torment,  several  restless  days
and  sleepless  nights  passed  away.  Still

“  There  was  no  alleviation  of  pain,

No  remedy  to  cool  the  burning  brain.”

About  the  18th  day,  I  was  bled  freely  in  addition  to  daily
leeching.  Grew  much  worse  and  weaker ;  consequently  was
less  able  to  endure  the  violent  attacks  of  fever  which  were
daily  on  the  increase.  Opiates,  I  believe,  were  now  adminis¬
tered,  with  a  view  of  procuring  sleep,  but  without  effect.  I
was  occasionally  delirious,  and  often  imagined  that  a  host  of
insects  were  creeping  over  or  through  the  brain.

19th  day.  Found  not  the  least  relief  or  the  slightest  miti¬
gation  of  pain.  The  brain  became  more  confused  and  dis¬
tracted  than  ever.

On  the  morning  of  the  21st  day,  I  cannot  describe  the
dreadful  suffering  I  experienced ;  the  very  recollection  of  it
almost  overpowers  me.  My  agonies  were  now  insupportable.
My  surgeon  appeared  rather  concerned  on  my  behalf;  desired
my  sister  to  get  my  head  shaved,  and  apply  hot  poultices  to
the  calves  of  my  legs  immediately.  My  sister  anxiously
wished  his  candid  opinion  concerning  the  case.  He  very
kindly  complied  with  her  request,  and  said,  “We”  (alluding
to  a  medical  friend  whom  he  had  introduced  previously,)  “We
have  done  all  we  can  for  him,  and  must  now  leave  him  in  the
hands  of  the  Lord.”  He  had,  I  believe,  done  all  he  could
for  me ;  he  had  been  very  kind  and  attentive.  The  failure
was  not,  as  far  as  I  can  judge,  from  want  of  skill,  but  from
the  stubborn  nature  of  the  disease.  How  few  can  judge  what
my  feelings  were  on  hearing  the  departing  footsteps  of  my
surgeon  !  His  last  words,  which  I  happened  to  over-hear,
re-echoed  through  my  chamber,  “  I  have  done  all  I  can  for
him.”  There  I  lay  scarcely  able  to  articulate  a  sound ;  teeth
loose,  mouth  ulcerated,  and  tongue  much  discoloured,  suffer¬
ing  from  leeching,  blistering,  and  bleeding.  I  had  not,  I  be¬
lieve,  slept  more  than  six  or  seven  hours  for  three  whole  weeks ;
during  which  sleep  was  always  disturbed  from  the  effects  of
the  most  frightful  dreams,  such  as  being  in  the  act  of  falling
over  high  precipices,  being  shipwrecked,  &c.  And  now  the


Excitement  of  the  Brain,  by  Dr.  Storer.  207

last  spark  of  hope  had  fled,  right  welcome  would  have  been
the  long  sleep  of  death,  which  would  have  freed  my  taber¬
nacle  of  clay  from  all  pain  and  sorrow  here  below.

A  very  kind  gentleman  to  whom  I  shall  ever  feel  deeply
indebted  for  his  kindness  in  introducing  you  to  me,  had  that
morning  honoured  me  with  a  long  visit.  On  taking  leave  of
me,  he  mentioned  something  of  mesmerism,  and  said,  “Would
you  like  to  make  a  trial  of  it  as  a  last  resource  ?''  I  whis¬
pered  my  assent,  although  I  had  a  firm  conviction  that  nothing
short  of  a  miracle  could  save  me.  The  good  gentleman  left
about  12  or  1  o'clock,  p.m.  After  this  I  took  no  medicine  of
any  kind.  About  9  o'clock  the  same  evening,  my  sister
informed  me  that  he  was  returned,  and  that  Dr.  Storer  had
very  kindly  called  with  him.  “  Ah,  too  late,  too  late  !"
whispered  a  silent  monitor  from  within.  In  another  minute
you.  Sir,  were  at  my  bed-side,  and  having  previously,  below
stairs,  enquired  very  kindly  the  nature  of  my  case  from  my
sister,  commenced  mesmerising  me.

As  far  as  I  can  judge,  in  about  15  or  20  minutes  a  sort  of
stupor  or  sleepy  sensation  came  over  me,  when  my  eyes  in¬
voluntarily  gave  way  to  the  mesmeric  sleep.  After  a  short
time*  I  felt  a  sort  of  chill  or  soothing  sensation  passing  through
my  frame,  from  head  to  foot,  which  was,  I  suppose,  the  effect
of  the  passes.  I  very  soon  glided  from  this  state  of  semi¬
consciousness  into  a  natural  sleep,  in  which  I  remained  until
12  o’clock,  when  I  awoke,  I  believe  through  my  sister’s  en¬
tering  the  room,  anxious  to  see  whether  I  was  alive  or  dead.
I  then,  it  appears,  wished  for  a  draught  of  water,  then  slept
again  for  about  four  hours,  in  all  from  six  to  seven  hours,
which  was  more  than  I  had  slept  during  the  whole  three  pre¬
vious  weeks.

On  the  following  morning,  my  surgeon  sent  a  bottle  of
liquid  blister  (or  fire)*  to  be  well  rubbed,  with  a  brush,  all
over  my  head  and  temples,  after  which  my  head  seemed  quite
converted  into  an  engine  boiler  with  the  steam  up  to,  not
only  fever  heat,  but  boiling  heat,  the  remedy  being  worse,
if  possible,  than  the  disease.  At  night  the  name  of  Dr.
Storer  was  again  announced,  but  I  felt  quite  sure  that  sleep
was  out  of  the  question.  However,  on  awaking  the  next
morning,  I  found  from  the  length  of  time  I  had  slept,  that
the  effect  of  your  second  kind  visit  was  nothing  inferior  to
that  of  the  first,  but  that  even  the  painful  effect  of  the  blis¬
tering  was  much  soothed.  And  what  a  marked  difference  in
the  nature  of  the  dreams  already !  Since  mesmerism  had


*  No  doubt  a  solution  of  Spanish  flies  in  acetic  acid. — Zoist.


208  Fresh  instance  of  unconscious  Parturition  in  the

been  adopted  there  was  no  more  dreaming  of  shipwrecks,
falling  into  chasms,  over  cascades,  &c.  Such  as  these  gave
way  for  something  of  a  milder  nature,  such  as  being  lost  in
woods,  wandering  from  thence  into  green  fields,  church¬
yards  ;  when  at  last,  though  not  least,  the  sweet  tones  of  the
organ,  accompanied  by  a  full  choir,  would  burst  forth  on  my
afflicted  soul.  Oh  !  what  a  luxury.* *

If  you  omitted  seeing  me  a  night,  the  sleep  was  not  so
sound  and  was  less  refreshing;  and,  after  eight  or  ten  most
welcome  visits  from  you,  my  appetite  got  much  better ;  I  was
able  to  take  large  quantities  of  food,  but  was  still  very  weak,
for  there  had  been  no  slight  loss  to  the  system  from  perspira¬
tion,  salivation,  blistering,  bleeding,  and  daily  leeching.  After
enjoying  the  salubrious  Swansea  air  for  a  fortnight  later,  I
was  soon  able  to  follow  my  daily  occupation, — within  six
weeks  after  your  first  visit.

I  remain,  Sir,

Your  grateful  and  humble  servant,

Luke  Coleman.


XIII.  A  fresh  instance  of  unconscious  Parturition  in  the
Mesmeric  Sleep.  By  Mr.  T.  Chandler,  Surgeon.

Mrs.  Payne,  who  was  before  confined  in  the  mesmeric  sleep,
(see  Zoist,  Yol.  IV.,  p.  405,)  being  again  in  the  family  way,
was  taken  ill  on  the  9th  instant.  She  sent  for  me  about  twelve
o’clock  at  noon,  having  had  lingering  pains  for  some  hours.
I  found  matters  advancing  slowly.  I  sent  her  to  sleep  for  two
hours ;  but,  finding  on  awaking  her,  that  she  was  cramped
from  remaining  so  long  in  the  same  position,  I  left  her  awake
for  about  an  hour.  The  pains  continued  about  the  same

*  When  affected  many  years  ago  with  erysipelas  of  the  head,  and  unable  to
open  my  eyes,  I  incessantly  saw  hundreds  of  ugly  faces  as  long  as  the  disease  was
unabated,  and  by  no  effort  could  I  conjure  up  the  vision  of  a  pretty  face.  But
as  the  disease  declined  the  faces  became  less  ugly,  and  at  last  I  was  able  to  call
up  the  loveliest  faces  in  any  numbers.

It  may  be  useful  to  make  known  that  I  formerly  lost  so  large  a  number  of
cases  of  erysipelas  of  the  head,  whatever  treatment  I  adopted,  that  I  was  miser¬
able  whenever  I  had  a  case.  I  felt  assured  that  if  I  left  the  disease  to  nature  I
could  not  do  better.  But  now  for  eleven  years,  though  I  have  attended  many
and  very  bad  cases  too,  I  have  not  lost  a  single  case  except  one  which  I  did
not  see  till  a  few  hours  before  death,  when  rattling  had  begun  in  the  throat
and  all  treatment  was  necessarily  unavailing.  This  success  has  been  obtained
by  washing  the  inflamed  parts  fully,  and  during  the  first  day  perhaps  more  than
once  with  a  solution  of  nitrate  of  silver,  in  the  proportion  of  two  drachms  to
the  ounce, — a  practice  I  learnt  from  Mr.  Higginbottom,  of  Nottingham.  Usually
the  pulse  comes  down  in  a  few  hours,  and  no  other  treatment  is  required,  except
suitable  diet. — J.  Elliotson.


Mesmeric  State ,  by  Mr.  T.  Chandler.  209

during  the  sleeping  and  waking  states  :  only  with  this  differ¬
ence,  that  they  were  felt  and  complained  of  during  the
waking  state,  whereas  during  the  mesmeric  sleep  there  was  no
suffering,  or,  if  there  was  any,  there  remained  no  conscious¬
ness  of  it  when  she  awoke.

I  sent  her  into  the  sleep  for  the  last  time  about  4  o’clock,
and  the  efforts  of  parturition  continued  to  increase  until  half¬
past  5  o’clock,  when  my  patient  was  brought  to  bed  of  a  fine
girl,  though  perfectly  unconscious  of  the  fact,  and,  as  on  the
last  occasion,  scarcely  able  for  some  time  after  to  believe  that
she  had  been  brought  to  bed.

About  an  hour  after  all  was  over,  she  had  rather  a  severe
haemorrhage,  which  kept  her  in  a  weak  state  for  some  days.
She  is  now  doing  very  well.  The  same  unpleasant  accident
has  occurred  to  a  greater  or  less  extent  in  all  her  former
confinements.

It  will  be  seen  by  referring  to  her  last  confinement  that
she  was  seized  on  that  occasion  with  most  distressing  after-
pains  twenty-eight  hours  after  the  birth.  This  time,  though
the  pains  did  not  occur  in  the  usual  way,  she  was  attacked
with  most  excruciating  intermittent  pains  in  the  left  shoulder,
extending  down  to  the  elbow.  I  mesmerised  her  occasionally
for  a  short  time ;  but,  though  I  entirely  relieved  the  pain  for
the  time,  she  was  afraid  of  being  left  in  the  sleep,  as  she  felt
so  low  from  the  loss  of  blood  that  she  feared  she  might  die  in
it ;  and,  although  I  had  no  fear  of  such  a  result,  I  thought
it  best  to  let  her  have  her  own  way.

The  child — a  fine  girl — died  on  the  fourth  day  of  cyanosis.*
When  born  it  was  quite  black,  and  appeared  asphyxiated  for
some  minutes,  until  I  took  about  three  ounces  of  blood  from
the  umbilical  cord.  This  restored  animation,  but  it  never
lost  all  the  colour ;  the  extremities  remaining  almost  as  black
as  at  birth.  On  the  fourth  morning  it  was  seized  with
dyspnoea,  and  died  in  about  two  hours.

Though  this  case  is  not  quite  so  satisfactory  as  my  former

ones,  still,  as  far  as  the  unconscious  delivery  was  concerned,

it  was  perfect.  The  loss  of  the  child  could  have  nothing  to  do

with  the  mesmerism,  having  arisen,  as  must  be  obvious  to

many  general  and  all  professional  readers,  from  original  defect

in  the  heart :  and  the  hsemorrhage  in  the  mother  wras  not  only

accidental,  but  even  a  usual  occurrence  with  her ;  this  is  her
/  ,

eighth  child,  and  she  had  suffered  from  the  same  cause  m
most  of  her  former  confinements.

*  The  “  blue  disease  arising  from  malformation  of  the  heart,  allowing  the
black  and  red  blood  to  mingle.  The  greater  the  mixture  allowed  by  the  malform¬
ation,  the  sooner  do  the  poor  things  die. — Zoist.

YOL.  VI.


P


210


The  late  Mr.  Liston’s  letter


A  notice  of  the  case  appeared  in  the  Times  among  the
births.* *  But  the  officials  objected  to  my  name  this  time,  (it
having  been  appended  to  the  notice  of  Mrs.  Mosses  case  in
the  same  paper,)  considering  it  a  puff.  Nothing  could  be
more  at  variance  with  my  intentions  than  puffing.  I  abomi¬
nate  any  approach  to  it.  I  published  the  case  in  the  Times
for  the  benefit  of  our  much  abused,  though  now  advancing,
science,  and  only  wished  to  add  my  name  by  way  of  authen¬
tication.

Thomas  Chandler.

58,  Paradise  Street,  Rotherhithe,

June  22nd,  1848.


XIY.  A  Letter  of  the  late  Surgeon  Liston ,  exhibiting  his  out¬
rageous  joy  at  the  hope  of  Mesmerism  becoming  less
useful.  By  Dr.  Elliotson.

Dr.  Esdaile  remarks  that  between  the  period  of  Mr.
OfShaughnessy;s  praise  of  mesmerism  and  that  of  his  sneer¬
ing  at  it,  ether  had  come  to  his  aid :  and  asks  if  Dr.  Mouat
had  not  judged  it  more  expedient  to  withdraw  his  confidence
from  mesmerism  and  side  with  his  colleagues  after  ether  had
come  to  their  rescuef  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  dis¬
covery  of  the  power  of  inhaled  ether,  to  suspend  sensibility
to  mechanical  injuries,  filled  with  malignant  joy  all  those  who
saw  the  steady  spread  of  the  conviction  of  the  truth  and  in¬
estimable  benefits  of  mesmerism  and  turned  aside

For  envy  ;  yet  with  jealous  leer  malign

Ey’d  them  askance,  and  to  themselves  thus  plain’d :

‘  Sight  hateful,  sight  tormenting  !’

The  Medical  Gazette ,  published  by  Messrs.  Longman
and  Co.,  and  anxious  to  be  considered  a  pattern  of  candour
and  good  breeding,  thus  merrily  headed  its  article  announc¬
ing  the  discovery  of  ether,

“  ANIMAL  MAGNETISM  SUPERSEDED

The  Lancet  rejoiced  that  one  of  the  limbs  of  mesmerism
was  cut  away  by  ether.  “  The  destruction  of  one  limb  of  the


*  “Births. — On  the  9th  inst.,  at  Rotherhithe,  (in  the  unconsciousness  of
mesmeric  sleep,)  the  wife  of  Mr.  James  Payne,  of  a  daughter.” — Times ,  June
16th,  1848.

f  See  above,  pp.  161,  163.

X  April  12,  1845.  See  The  Zoist,  Vol.  IV.,  p.  579.  The  reputed  editor
is  Dr.  Alfred  Taylor,  of  Guy’s  Hospital.  In  the  number  for  April  12,  1845,  he
said  that  The  Zoist  “only  finds  circulation  among  the  class  of  impostors  who
record  their  own  doings  in  it.”


of  exultation.


211


mesmeric  quackery  will  be  one  not  inconsiderable  merit  of
this  most  valuable  discovery.*

But  the  most  lively  joy  was  experienced  by  poor  Mr.
Liston,  who  wrote  the  following  letter  to  a  friend.  The
friend,  Mr.  Miller,  a  surgeon  in  Edinburgh,  proved  a  cruel
friend,  for  he  allowed  it  to  transpire  into  a  periodical, — The
North  British  Review ,  No.  XIII.  May,  1847.

MR.  LISTON^S  LETTER  TO  MR.  MILLER.

“  Hurrah  !

“  Rejoice !  mesmerism,  and  its  professors,  have  met  with
a  heavy  blow  and  great  discouragement .  An  American  den¬
tist  has  used  ether  (inhalation  of  it)  to  destroy  sensation  in
his  operations,  and  the  plan  has  succeeded  in  the  hands
of  Warren,  Hayward,  and  others  in  Boston.  Yesterday,  I
amputated  a  thigh,  and  removed,  by  avulsion,  both  sides  of
the  great  toe-nail,  without  the  patient  being  aware  of  what  I
was  doing,  so  far  as  regards  pain.  The  amputation-man
heard,  he  says,  what  we  said,  and  was  conscious,  but  felt
neither  the  pain  of  the  incisions,  nor  that  of  trying  the  vessels.
In  short,  he  had  no  sensation  of  pain  in  the  operating  theatre.
I  mean  to  use  it  to-day  in  a  case  of  stone.  In  six  months  no
operation  will  be  performed  without  this  famous  preparation.
It  must  be  carefully  set  about.  The  ether  must  be  washed  and
purified  of  its  sulphurous  acid  and  alcohol.  Shall  I  desire
Squire  (a  most  capital  and  ingenious  chemist)  to  send  you  a
tool  for  the  purpose  ?  It  is  only  the  bottom  of  Nooth’s  ap¬
paratus,  with  a  funnel  above,  with  bits  of  sponge,  and  at  the
other  hole  a  flexible  tube.  Rejoice  !

“  Thine  always,

“R.  LA

It  is  an  instructive  fact  that,  within  my  knowledge,  all
the  most  enthusiastic  supporters  of  the  powers  of  ether  and
chloroform  to  prevent  surgical  pain  had  been  most  violent
scoffers  at  the  possibility  of  effecting  this  humane  object  by
any  means,  or  the  most  indifferent  to  this  object,  and  the  most
violent  scoffers  at  the  truth  of  mesmerism  and  the  possibility
of  hearing  and  being  conscious  and  yet  not  feeling  surgical
pain.  I  should  smile  at  their  enthusiasm  were  it  not  lament¬
able  to  find  so  large  a  body  of  men  the  victims  of  discredit¬
able  feeling,  and  thus  laid  open  to  the  strongest  suspicion  of
still  acting  in  the  case  of  ether  and  chloroform  from  passion
rather  than  from  reason  and  virtue.

John  ElliotsoN.


*  January,  1847  ;  p.  16.


212  Books  received  and  Notices  to  Correspondents-.

*  1  *  *  •

BOOKS  RECEIVED.

Report  of  Cases  treated  in  the  Mesmeric  Hospital  from  June  ta  December,
1847.  With  the  Reports  of  the  official  Visitors.  Printed  by  order  of  Govern¬
ment.  Calcutta,  1848.

A  Review  of  my  Reviewers.  By  James  Esdaile,  M.D.  Calcutta,  1848.

The  Ethnological  Journal.  A  Magazine  of  Ethnography,  Phrenology,  and
Archaeology,  considered  as  Elements  of  the  science  of  Races,  with  the  applica¬
tion  of  the  science  to  Education,  Legislation,  and  Social  Progress.  Edited  by
Luke  Burke,  Esq.  No.  I.  June,  1848.

Howitt’s  Journal.  From  April  to  July.

Mesmerism  and  its  Opponents.  By  George  Sandby,  M.A.,  Vicar  of  Flixton,
Suffolk.  Second  Edition,  considerably  enlarged.  With  an  Introductory  Chapter.
Part  II.  London,  1848.

This  work  is  now  concluded.  The  second  part  is  still  more  excellent  than  the
first,  and  justifies  our  former  earnest  recommendation,  to  all  who  take  an  interest
in  mesmerism,  to  pui'chase  so  cheap,  so  instructive  and  delightful  a  production.

The  second  part  contains  ample  directions  for  mesmerising ;  gives  the  reasons
why  mesmerism  is  not  to  be  trifled  with,  and  at  the  same  time  points  out  that  no
danger  of  any  sort  can  be  incurred,  if  the  process  is  properly  conducted,  and  by
suitable  persons  ;  and  that  in  no  instance  of  the  want  of  proper  knowledge  and
caution  has  there,  after  all,  been  any  serious  mischief.

Mr.  Sandby  discusses  the  subject  of  clairvoyance  at  great  length  and  in  a  most
satisfactory  manner.  He  allows  the  facts  of  clairvoyance,  but  he  points  out  the
great  errors  into  which  mesmerists  may  fall,  and  into  which  a  large  number  do
fall,  by  implicitly  believing  all  that  clairvoyants  say.  He  shows  how  easily  the
imagination  may  be  excited  and  led,  and  thus  statements,  which  are  merely  fancies,
be  credited  as  revelations.  Clairvoyance  is  a  subject  in  which  not  only  much
absurdity  is  committed,  but  much  imposition  is  practised,  every  day ;  and  we  cannot
too  seriously  commend  this  part  of  the  work  to  the  study  of  our  readers.

A  large  number  of  cases  which  exhibited  all  the  most  astounding  phenomena
of  mesmerism,  though  mesmerism  had  no  concern  in  them,  are  amassed  from
various  authors.  The  knowledge  of  these  cases  will  smooth  the  way  to  the  ad¬
mission  of  the  higher  phenomena  of  mesmeric  cases.  English  medical  men  seem
ignorant  of  such  diseases,  and  regard  the  accounts  of  them  as  belonging  to  the
same  class  with  Munchausen’s  travels.  English  medical  men  in  general  seem
ignorant  of  even  the  common  phenomena  of  somnambulism  ;  at  least  Sir  Benjamin
Brodie  in  the  Royal  Medical  and  Chirurgical  Society  referred  to  a  well  known  and
not  very  uncommon  instance  of  this  kind,  recorded  in  the  Philosophical  Trans¬
actions,  as  to  a  ridiculous  case  of  imposition,  and  the  Society  laughed  like  a  set
of  men  who  knew  no  more  of  these  forms  of  disease  than  he  did.  While,  there¬
fore,  Mr.  Sandby’ s  collection  of  various  kinds  of  cases  must  render  his  book
highly  entertaining  even  to  persons  uninterested  in  mesmerism,  it  is  calculated  to
supply  British  medical  men  with  solid  information  of  which  too  many  appear  to
stand  greatly  in  need.


NOTICES  TO  CORRESPONDENTS.

We  regret  being  compelled  to  postpone  several  valuable  contributions  till  our
next  number.

Dr.  Francis  Hawkins  will  be  left  to  the  tender  mercies  of  Dr.  Elliotson.  It
is  rather  too  late  in  the  day  to  sneer  at,  or  even  to  doubt,  or  be  ignorant  of,  the
truths  of  mesmerism.  Dr.  Shapter  has  been  treated  by  Mr.  Sandby,  pp.  206-7.


ERRATA  IN  COLONEL  BAGNOLD'S  PAPER.

pp.  250,  251,  for  Vergragyey,  read  Veyrayey.

251,  for  guern,  read  quern.

252,  tor  Facheer,  read  Fakeer ;  for  Hacheem,  read  Hucheem;  for  Our  das  verle ,  read

Oordoo  verb.

pp.  252,  253,  for  Muhumedan ,  read  Muhumedan.


••


■


ZOIST.


THE

No.  XXIII.


OCTOBER,  1848.


I.  Cure  of  a  true  Cancer  of  the  Female  Breast  with  Mesmerism.
By  Dr.  Elliotson.

“Do  not  quacks  hunt  out  the  vices  or  infirmities  of  mankind  to  turn  them
to  profit,  some  selecting  one  and  some  another  for  their  purpose  ?  Among
quacks,  the  impostors,  called  mesmerists,  are  in  my  opinion  the  especial
favourites  of  those,  both  male  and  female,  in  whom  the  sexual  passions
burn  strongly,  either  in  secret  or  notoriously.  Decency  forbids  me  to  be
more  explicit.

“  From  these  and  similar  artifices,  the  physician  should  be  carefully
removed  and  guarded :  and  this  can  hardly  be  accomplished  except  by  a  sound
education,  which  will  teach  him  to  thoroughly  abhor  all  deceit  and  trick.”* —
Harveian  Oration,  delivered  by  Dr.  F.  Hawkins  before  the  London  Col¬
lege  of  Physicians,  June  24,  1848.

“With  every  respect  for  the  vast  extent  of  human  credulity,  we  do  think
that  the  brood  of  mesmerism  are  its  own  natural  and  most  powerful  enemies,  and
that  they  must  in  no  long  time  utterly  destroy  their  loathsome  dam.” —
Mr.  Wakley,  Lancet ,  July  8,  1848. f

The  case  which  I  am  about  to  relate  is  one  of  the  most
splendid  triumphs  of  mesmerism,  and  is  the  most  splendid

*  “  Quin  etiam  vicia,  sive  infirmitates  hominum,  nonne  aucupantur,  et
qusestui  habent,  alii  alia,  Circumforanei  ?  De  genera  hoc,  prsestigiatores,  quos
vocant,  Mesmerici,  ni  fallor,  iis  prsecipue  arrident,  quos,  utriusque  sexus,  Mater
sseva  Cupidinum  aut  csecis  urit  ignibus,  aut  palam  exagitat.  Sed  ex  quibus  hoc
subintelligi  potest,  ea  pudoris  ergo,  sunt  reticenda.  Ab  his,  et  talibus  artificiis,
segregandus  est  Medicus  et  sepiendus  sedulo,  Quod  vix  prsestari  potest,  nisi
recta  et  bona  institutione,  ita  informetur,  ut  a  dolis  et  fallaciis  prorsus  abhorreat.”

t  The  brave  and  modest  modern  Falstaff  declared  in  1838  that  he  himself  had
killed  and  utterly  destroyed  mesmerism  for  ever.  Yes  ;  he  announced  grandi¬
loquently  to  the  world  its  final  extinction  by  his  own  right  hand  ten  years  ago.
“Life,  adventures,  and  death  of  Animal  Magnetism,”  was  the  title  of  the
editor’s  leader  on  the  cover  of  the  Lancet  for  Sept.  8,  1838.  “  Edited  by

Mr.  Wakley,  M.P.”  His  own  experiments,  he  declares,  “  entirely  destroyed
the  facts  adduced  in  this  country  in  favour  of  that  delusion.”  p.  836.  But  he
has  always  shone  more  in  boasting  than  in  extinguishing.

“  Falstaff, — With  a  thought  seven  of  the  eleven  I  paid.

“  P.  Henry. — 0,  monstrous.” — Henry  IV.,  Part  i.,  Act  ii .,  Sc.  iv.

“  Falstaff . — Yea,  and  I’ll  swear  I  killed  him.”- — Act  v.,  Sc.  iv.

VOL.  VI.


Q


214  Cure  of  true  Cancer  with  Mesmerism,

hitherto  accomplished  under  my  own  hands.  The  disease
was  malignant  and  structural,  and  such  as  the  art  of  medicine
has  never  been  known  to  cure  nor  the  powers  of  nature  to
shake  off.

The  patient  is  the  paternal  aunt  of  Miss  Rosina  Barber,
who  was  permanently  cured  by  me  of  violent  fits  many  years
ago,  after  the  failure  of  various  modes  of  treatment  and  various
practitioners,  and  whose  case,  with  all  its  exquisite  and  in¬
structive  mesmeric  phenomena,  is  detailed  in  the  second  volume
of  The  Zoist .*  One  phenomenon  in  the  niece’s  case  was  the
excitement  of  cerebral  organs  by  merely  pointing  at  them  : —
the  first  example  of  the  kind  in  the  annals  of  mesmerism,
and  so  conducted  as  to  prove  that  neither  unintentional  sug¬
gestion  nor  the  will  of  the  mesmeriser,  but  the  mesmeric
influence  spontaneously  emanating  from  the  fingers,  produced
the  astounding  effect.f

On  the  6th  of  March,  1843,  a  very  respectable-looking
person,  of  middle  height  and  age,J  fair,  rather  slender  and
delicate,  and  with  the  sallow  complexion  of  cancer,  called  to
solicit  my  advice  respecting  a  disease  of  her  right  breast.
I  found  an  intensely  hard  tumor  in  the  centre  of  the  breast,
circumscribed,  moveable,  and  apparently  about  five  or  six
inches  in  circumference ;  the  part  was  drawn  in  and  puck¬
ered,  as  though  a  string  attached  behind  the  skin  at  one
point  had  pulled  the  surface  inwards ;  and  upon  it  to  the
outer  side  of  the  nipple  was  a  dry,  rough,  warty-looking  sub¬
stance,  of  a  dirty  brown  and  greenish  colour.  She  com¬
plained  of  great  tenderness  in  the  tumor  and  the  arm-pit
when  I  applied  my  fingers,  and  said  that  she  had  sharp  stab¬
bing  pains  through  the  tumor  during  the  day,  and  was
continually  awakened  by  them  in  the  night.

She  informed  me  that  she  was  single  and  resided  with  her
mother,  and  was  dress-maker  to  many  ladies  of  the  truest
respectability.

I  at  once  saw  that  it  was  a  decided  cancer  in  the  stage
termed  scirrhus,  and  I  so  named  it  in  my  note  book ;  but  I
did  not  mention  its  nature  to  her.  On  her  return  home  she
applied  her  fingers  as  she  had  observed  me  do,  and  for  the
first  time  found  there  was  a  lump  in  her  breast.

Upon  minute  enquiry  into  the  origin,  course,  and  dura¬
tion  of  the  complaint,  I  found  that  one  day  in  November,
1841,  about  the  time  of  the  birth  of  the  Prince  of  Wales,

•  *  No.  VI.  Like  the  two  Okeys,  Miss  Critchly,  and  Miss  Abbot,  she  is
now  married.  See  No.  XI.,  p.  354.

f  No.  IV.,  pp.  222 — 8;  No.  III.,  pp.  242 — 4.

X  Elle  avoit  quarante  deux  ans.


by  Dr.  Elliotson.


215


while  sitting  to  rest  herself,  after  having  finished  some  dresses
for  Mrs.  Cardell,  of  Hampstead,  she  raised  her  right  hand
to  take  something  off  the  mantel  shelf  and  instantly  felt  a
sudden  and  momentary,  violent,  darting  pain  in  the  right
breast.  In  a  week,  while  playing  with  a  child,  she  felt  a
second,  equally  violent.  These  “  dreadful  dartings,”  to  use
her  own  words,  soon  ceased  to  be  solitary,  and  began  at  length
to  take  place  a  dozen  times  in  rapid  succession,  and  this  every
few  hours ;  and  they  gave  her  the  idea  of  “  a  penknife  jag¬
ging  her  breast.”  Her  nights  were  much  disturbed  by  them.
The  dartings  were  always  followed  by  pricking  sensations  and
tenderness.  The  part  now  began  to  look  drawn  together  and
puckered,  and  sometimes  a  little  red  and  to  feel  hot.  She
had  found  relief  from  fomenting  it  with  warm  water ;  and  in
doing  so  she  discovered  that  it  had  grown  hard.  Her  complexion
and  hands  had  gradually  grown  sallow  for  many  months.  She
mentioned  her  complaint  about  six  months  before  I  saw  her
to  her  medical  man,  Mr.  Powell,  of  Great  Coram  Street,
Brunswick  Square,  while  he  was  attending  her  mother,  but
declined  showing  it  to  him  as  he  was  a  young  man.

Her  father’s  mother  had  died  of  a  “  bleeding  cancer ”  of  the
breast,  as  I  afterwards  learnt.

As  she  had  witnessed  the  great  mesmeric  cure  of  her
niece,*  I  proposed  mesmerism  to  her,  and  offered  to  take  the
charge  of  the  case  myself.  My  purpose  was  to  render  her
insensible  to  the  pain  of  the  surgical  removal  of  the  breast,
seeing  no  other  chance  for  her ;  and  this  indeed  was  a  poor
chance,  for  cancer  invariably  returns  in  the  same  or  some
part  if  the  patient  survive  long  enough,  and  the  operation  is
not  to  be  recommended  unless  it  can  be  conducted  without
pain.  When  a  disease  termed  cancer  has  not  returned,  I
have  no  doubt  that  it  had  not  been  cancer ;  and  such  a  ter¬
rible  thing  as  the  removal  of  breasts  not  cancerous  has  always
been  but  too  frequent  among  surgeons.

Unwilling  to  make  her  unhappy,  1  said  no  more,  and
allowed  her  to  suppose  that  the  mesmerism  was  intended  to
cure  her  disease.  She  thankfully  accepted  my  offer  to  mes¬
merise  her,  and  returned  to  my  house  the  next  day  for  the
first  essay.  I  mesmerised  her  half  an  hour  daily  with  slow
passes  before  her  from  opposite  her  forehead  to  opposite  her
stomach,  and  my  fixed  look  at  her  eyes.  The  first  mesmeris-
ation  caused  a  mistiness  before  her  eyes  at  the  time,  and  a
much  better  night  than  usual.  In  a  few  days  she  became

*  The  facts  in  her  niece’s  treatment  detailed  at  pp.  197 — 99  of  No.  VI.,
prove  the  absurdity  of  the  ascription  of  the  phenomena  to  imagination,  and  of
the  cure  to  the  powers  of  nature.

Q  2


21 6  Cure  of  true  Cancer  with  Mesmerism ,

drowsy,  and  at  the  end  of  a  month  her  eyes  perfectly
closed  and  she  fell  asleep  near  the  expiration  of  the  half  hour.
The  sleep,  however,  was  so  light  that  a  word  addressed  to  her
or  the  least  touch  of  my  finger  awoke  her.  I  could  not  dis¬
tinguish  it  from  natural  sleep.  There  was  no  increase  of
effect  for  nine  months.  She  seldom  slept  much  longer  than
half  an  hour,  frequently  much  less  :  though  a  dozen  passes
were  sufficient  to  send  her  back  into  the  sleep.  The  pain
lessened,  so  that  her  nights  became  greatly  better,  and  her
health  and  spirits  improved.  The  sallowness  of  her  complexion
lessened.  But  for  six  months  she  continued  to  work  hard  in
taking  measure,  cutting  out,  making  up,  and  trying  on,  often
walking  considerable  distances  to  the  ladies,  so  that  she  once
fainted  at  Hampstead  after  walking  thither  and  trying  on
dresses  :  and  for  the  first  six  months  of  mesmerisation  the
tumor  increased ;  probably  not  from  increased  cancerous  ac¬
tion,  but  from  an  increase  of  simple  congestion  through  the
irritation  of  exertion,  since  every  other  symptom  improved ;
the  act  of  pushing  the  needle  through  hard  articles  gave  her
pain  to  the  very  elbow.  She  could  work  no  longer,  and  in
September  lost  the  whole  of  her  business.  For  a  niece  whom
she  had  benevolently  taken  to  support  eleven  years  before,
when  the  girl’s  mother  was  unexpectedly  left  with  nine  chil¬
dren,  and  had  supported  ever  since,  having  learnt  that  her
aunt’s  disease  was  a  cancer,  suddenly  left  her  without  any  in¬
timation,  never  returning  after  going  out  one  day  for  a  holiday,
nor  even  sending  an  apology.  It  afterwards  transpired  that
she  had  said  she  would  not  nurse  her  aunt  through  her  illness,
which  she  of  course  concluded  would  be  tedious  and  fatal.

I  had  felt  it  right  to  mention  the  nature  of  the  disease  to
her  niece’s  mother  without  loss  of  time;  and  all  the  family
thus  knew  it,  but  kept  the  secret.  A  fortnight  after  she
first  came  to  me,  one  of  the  ladies  who  employed  her,  the
wife  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  Sharpe,  rector  of  Allhallows  in  the  city,
hearing  that  I  had  said  the  disease  was  cancer,  out  of  kind¬
ness  begged  she  would  allow  a  connection  of  her  own,  Mr.
Brown,  practising  in  the  Edgware  Road,  to  see  it,  and  she
consented  without  my  knowledge.  He  pronounced  it  to  be
no  cancer,  but  a  common  glandular  swelling  from  a  strain,
and  wished  to  send  her  a  plaster.  He  saw  it  in  September
again  without  my  knowlege,  and  had  now  no  doubt  that  it
was  a  cancer.  This  candid  acknowledgment  was  highly  cre¬
ditable  to  him  :  no  less  than  his  remark  respecting  mesmerism.
He  spoke  against  a  surgical  operation,  adding  that,  if  Miss
Barber  were  his  sister,  she  should  not  submit  to  one  :  and,
not  being  able  to  suggest  a  remedy,  made  no  attempt  to


by  Dr.  Elliotson.


21 7


dissuade  her  from  the  continuance  of  mesmerism,  but  said
that  he  knew  nothing  about  it  and  therefore  should  say
nothing  against  it.  This  display  of  common  sense  is  de¬
serving  of  all  imitation  by  medical  men.

Soon  after  Mr.  Brown  had  seen  it  the  first  time,  she
shewed  it  at  her  mother’s  request  to  Mr.  Powell,  who  imme¬
diately  in  her  presence  pronounced  it  to  be  a  confirmed
incurable  cancer,  adding  that  if  it  were  not  cut  away  it
would  be  as  big  as  his  head  by  Christmas,  and  that  if  mes¬
merism  cured  it  he  would  believe  any  thing.  She  thus  learnt
the  distressing  truth,  which  I  had  so  anxiously  kept  from  her.

The  various  ladies  felt  so  much  for  her  that  they  anxiously
urged  her  to  undergo  the  operation,  some  begging  and  pray¬
ing,  and  some  most  kindly  offering  to  nurse  her  and  sit  up
with  her  after  it.  One,  a  relation  of  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie,
was  long  hurt  with  her  because  she  would  not  place  herself
under  his  care  :  and  another  related  what  an  immense  cancer
she  had  seen.  Like  a  true-hearted  woman,  she  resisted  all
these  well-intended  influences  behind  my  back  and  remained
firm  to  him  in  whom  from  her  experience  of  me  in  Bosina’s
case  she  had  placed  her  confidence.  Mrs.  Sharpe  -did  not
urge  her  to  act  contrary  to  her  judgment.  None  of  these
ladies  knew  me  or  could  know  the  medical  powers  of  mes¬
merism,  and  the  conduct  of  them  all  displayed  such  intense
interest  and  goodness  of  heart  as  are  truly  delightful  and
worthy  of  the  reflection  of  those  who  sweepingly  condemn
all  human  nature.  I  shall  have  to  record  more  of  their
goodness.

In  September  I  quitted  England  for  a  tour  in  the
Pyrenees  till  November,  and  left  her  to  be  mesmerised  daily
by  a  gentleman  whom  I  allowed  £200  per  annum  with  a
constant  place  at  my  table  to  mesmerise  for  me  gratuitously
and  investigate  the  subject  of  mesmerism  with  me.  During
the  early  part  of  my  absence  Mr.  Powell  saw  it  again  and
anxiously  urged  its  immediate  removal  with  the  knife.  He
mentioned  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie  and  Mr.  Liston  :  but  she
declined.  He  then  entreated  her  to  accompany  him  to  Mr.
Samuel  Cooper,  Professor  of  Surgery  at  University  College,
who  he  was  sure  would  see  her  without  a  fee ;  and  at  length
she  consented.  Mr.  Cooper  differed  from  Mr.  Powell  in
thinking  that  the  operation  could  not  be  safely  delayed  till
my  return,-  but  gave  a  decided  opinion  that  the  disease  was
cancer  and  that  the  operation  should  be  performed  as  soon
as  ever  I  came  back.  “  Poor  thing,”  said  this  good  and  kind
man,  “  if  she  wishes  to  wait  for  Dr.  Elliotson’s  return,  she
may ;  but  it  must  be  cut  away  then.”  The  great  anxiety


218


Cure  of  true  Cancer  with  Mesmerism,


displayed  by  Mr.  Powell  was  quite  disinterested  and  most
praiseworthy.

On  my  return  I  found  she  had  not  been  mesmerised  to
the  extent  I  wished,  and  was  therefore  not  so  susceptible  as
when  I  left  her.  But  I  took  her  in  hand  again  myself;  and
in  less  than  two  months  she  passed  into  genuine  sleep-waking,
with  perfect  insensibility  to  mechanical  injury.  When  I  ad¬
dressed  her  she  now  did  not  wake  but  answered  me ;  and
took  no  notice  if  I  touched  her,  not  even  if  I  pinched  or
pricked  her.  Mr.  Powell  called  upon  her  two  or  three  times,
wishing  to  see  the  breast  and  to  try  once  to  mesmerise  her ;
but  she  declined  and  he  has  ceased  to  call  upon  her :  nor  did  he
ever  communicate  with  me  upon  the  subject  of  her  case.  Her
health  continued  to  improve ;  the  pains  to  lessen ;  and  the  size
was  stationary.  In  February  she  one  day  did  not  come  to  my
house  as  usual,  and  I  went  to  see  her  at  her  mother's  lodgings
in  Nutford  Place,  Bryanstone  Square.  She  was  labouring
under  severe  pleurisy  of  the  right  side,  and  required  bleeding.
I  drove  off  to  Mr.  Powell,  and  related  this  circumstance  to
him,  begging  him  as  he  attended  the  family  to  go  with  me  and
bleed  her  and  attend  her  with  me  in  this  attack.  But  he  had
the  rheumatism  and  could  not  leave  the  house.  Without
her  knowing  it  she  was  bled  by  Mr.  Ebsworth,  a  former  pupil
of  Mr.  Symes,  and  this  little  episode  in  her  case  was  given
in  No.  V.,  p.  91.

“  Her  aunt  has  a  cancer  in  her  breast,  and  has  been  mesmerised
some  time  by  me,  with  the  effect  at  last  of  sleep-waking  and  insen¬
sibility  of  the  surface.  She  was  lately  seized  with  pleurisy.  I  sent
her  off  with  three  passes,  and  Mr.  Symes’s  late  pupil,  Mr.  Ebsworth,
bled  her  for  me  to  faintness  without  her  feeling  it.  Before  the  arm
was  bound  up,  she  opened  her  eyes  ;  but,  before  she  could  speak,
two  more  passes  sent  her  back  into  sleep,  and  she  did  not  wake  again
till  the  arm  was  bound  up ;  and  I  then  sent  her  to  sleep  a  third  time
and  left  her.  The  advantage  of  mesmerism  was  striking  and  most
gratifying.  Any  one  sends  her  to  sleep  and  with  very  little  trouble  :
some  of  us  with  two  or  three  passes,  though  she  seldom  sleeps  much
longer  than  half  an  hour.  During  this  illness  she  was  sent  to  sleep
by  those  around  her  continually  in  the  day  and  night,  so  that  she
had  abundance  of  the  sweetest  repose  without  any  narcotic.  Except
the  bleeding,  two  blisters,  and  four  doses  of  calomel,  and  some
syrup,  which  was  soon  left  off,  for  her  cough,  she  took  no  medicine.
As  soon  as  ever  she  coughed  upon  awaking,  they  sent  her  to  sleep  :
and,  dangerous  as  the  illness  was,  she  says  that  to  her  utter  aston¬
ishment  she  never  recovered  so  quickly  from  any  illness,  and  had
always  previously  taken  many  dozens  of  bottles  before  she  was
out  of  the  doctor’s  hands.  She  cannot  cease  wondering  at  it.”

The  venesection  had  been  followed  by  a  bruised  appear-


by  Dr.  Elliot  son.


219


ance  of  the  arm,  an  unimportant  circumstance  which  happens
if  the  skin  moves  over  the  cut  in  the  vein  so  that  a  little
blood  escapes  below  it.  To  remove  the  appearance,  I  advised
her  friends  to  rub  the  arm  downwards.  This  they  did  in  her
sleep,  and  found  rigidity  of  the  limb  take  place.  Any  part  of
her  could,  from  this  time,  be  made  perfectly  rigid.

She  was  soon  able  to  repeat  her  daily  visits  to  my  house.
Formerly  she  and  some  others  came  at  12  o^clock,  when  I
had  usually  finished  the  greater  part  of  my  home  practice,
and  they  were  all  allowed  to  sleep  half  an  hour  only,  as  I
was  obliged  to  leave  home  and  begin  my  round  about  one.
But,  being  anxious  to  give  them  the  full  benefit  of  mesmerism,
as  they  were  all  capable  of  sleep-waking  from  a  single  pass,
I  desired  them  all  to  come  at  10,  and  they  then  were  allowed
to  sleep  till  about  one;  and  if,  on  going  occasionally  into
the  room  where  they  were,  adjoining  my  library,  I  found
any  one  of  them  awake  spontaneously  before  that  time,  I
sent  her  off  again  by  a  single  pass.  I  recommended  that
her  mother  or  a  little  orphan  niece,  who  lived  with  them,
the  child  of  another  brother,  should  also  mesmerise  her
morning  and  evening ;  and  that  they  should  in  her  sleep¬
waking  make  contact  passes  upon  her  breast  over  the  linen.
I  did  this  myself,  over  her  dress,  at  every  opportunity  when
I  could  leave  my  library  for  a  few  or  more  minutes.

She  was  so  susceptible  that  not  merely  a  single  pass,  but
a  look,  always  caused  her  upper  eyelids  to  quiver  and  descend
and  close,  and  sleep-waking  to  come  on.  She  was  always
perfectly  relaxed  and  powerless  in  every  part,  and  always
perfectly  insensible  from  head  to  foot  to  mechanical  causes
of  pain.  Yet  she  felt  contact  or  resistance,  and  temperature,
whether  heat  or  cold.  I  recollect  the  incredulous  look  which
these  phenomena  of  feeling  excited  in  various  medical  men
to  whom  I  exhibited  them.  But  ether  and  chloroform  have
produced  the  same  phenomena,  and  not  a  single  medical  man
has,  in  a  single  instance,  expressed  a  single  doubt  upon  their
reality  when  produced  by  those  narcotic  drugs.*

It  is  a  common  thing  for  mesmeric  patients  to  be  insen¬
sible  to  pinching,  cutting,  pricking,  and  tearing,  and  yet
to  be  perfectly  sensible  of  the  temperature  of  cold  and  warm
substances  applied  to  the  very  same  part,  and  to  be  sensible
if  they  are  touched  or  pressed ;  and  to  reply,  if  asked  what


*  My  papers  in  No.  XVI.,  p.  576;  No.  XVII.,  p.  44,  contrasting  the  oppo¬
site  conduct  of  the  medical  profession  in  regard  to  ether  and  chloroform  on  the
one  hand  and  to  mesmerism  on  the  other,  the  evidence  being  the  same  in  both
cases,  will  be  imperishable  documents  in  the  history  of  medicine  and  surgery.


220


Cure  of  true  Cancer  with  Mesmerism ,


they  feel  when  you  press  or  pinch  them,  “  I  feel  you  are
touching  me,  that  is  all.*”

Hundreds  have  been  astonished  at  her  rigidity.  By  firm
contact  passes  down  her  arms,  as  she  lay  in  an  easy  chair,
I  stiffened  them ;  then  her  legs  first  held  up  at  a  right  angle
with  her  body ;  then  her  whole  trunk,  so  that  her  body  could
not  be  bent ;  then  her  neck,  so  that  her  head  could  not  be
bent ;  then  her  jaw,  so  that  she  could  not  speak ;  then  her
lips,  so  that  she  could  not  move  them  in  the  least.  Of  course
any  order  of  proceeding  could  be  adopted.  When  thus  made
all  of  a  piece,  she  might  be  moved  by  the  head  from  side  to
side  in  one  mass,  or  raised  forward  in  a  mass  by  my  pressing
upon  her  rigid  feet  or  legs.  This  rigidity  would  last  for  hours,
and,  though  the  sleep-waking  now  continued  much  longer
than  before,  perhaps  for  hours,  it  sometimes  ceased  while
the  rigidity  continued ;  and  it  was  laughable  to  see  her  lie
awake  with  her  eyes  open,  and  unable  to  move  a  limb  or  a
feature  except  the  ej^es  and  eyelids.  Sometimes  the  rigidity
ceased  before  the  sleep-waking.

This  state  of  rigidity  deepened  and  lengthened  the  sleep,
as  it  generally  does,  and  greatly  strengthened  her.  As  a  general
rule,  not  only  ought  patients  to  be  allowed  to  continue  in  the
sleep-waking  till  this  terminates  spontaneously,  but  they  should
be  stiffened  and  allowed  so  to  remain  for  the  purpose  of  greater
invigoration.  If  relaxation  comes  on,  they  should  be  stiffened
again.  When  patients  have  been  fairly  sent  into  sleep-waking,
so  that  contact  and  moving  them  do  not  awake  them,  firm
longitudinal  contact  passes  should  be  regularly  made  upon
their  limbs,  as  long  as  possible,  in  the  hope  of  at  length  in¬
ducing  the  phenomenon  of  rigidity.

Soon  this  rigidity  could  be  induced  in  any  part,  by  the
same  means,  in  her  waking  state :  and  the  part  always  be¬
came  at  the  same  time  insensible,  as  in  her  sleep-waking.
This  insensibility  often  occurs  without  rigidity :  but  usually
accompanies  rigidity.  Whether  awake  or  asleep  she  could  be
moulded  into  any  form  by  putting  one  or  more  limbs,  the
head,  or  the  body,  in  the  desired  position,  and  then  stiffening
it :  or  her  jaw  only  could  be  locked,  so  that  if  awake  she
could  look  and  walk  but  not  talk.  If  many  parts  were  stif¬
fened  in  her  waking  state,  sleep  soon  overpowered  her  and
lasted  long,  and  the  rigidity  still  continued.

If  a  relaxed  arm  was  bent  up  towards  the  shoulder,  and
contact  passes  made  inside  it  as  if  to  draw  it  towards  the
shoulder,  it  would  grow  rigid  thus  bent  upon  the  shoulder :
no  ordinary  force  would  draw  it  down.  By  pulling  it  you

*  See  my  facts  and  observations  in  No.  VI.,  p.  210,  and  No.  IX.,  p.  59.


by  Dr.  Elliot  son.


221


pulled  her  body  forwards,  but  not  the  arm  one  half  inch
from  the  body.  Yet  by  contact  passes  ever  so  gentle  upon
the  arm,  as  though  you  wished  to  bring  the  arm  down,  it
presently  loosened  and  then  fell  perfectly  relaxed  in  her  lap.
In  some  patients  the  part  drawn  does  not  relax  but  rigidly
assumes  the  new  position  into  which  you  bring  it.  In  detail¬
ing  Rosina^s  case  I  stated  that,

“  An  aunt  of  this  patient  has  a  cancer  in  her  breast,  and  I  have
succeeded  in  becoming  able  by  a  single  pass  to  throw  her  into  a
profound  sleep,  which  lasts  for  hours,  and  in  which  there  is  no
sensation  from  pinching,  cutting,  pricking,  &c.  Now  the  arms  can
be  stiffened  by  longitudinal  passes,  so  that  they  will  lie  rigid  like
two  wooden  cylinders  at  her  sides,  and  remain  thus  rigid  long  after
she  is  awake.  I  can  bend  up  her  arms  like  her  niece’s,  and  leave
the  fore-arms  half  bent  and  the  hands  bent  to  the  fore-arms  :  and
they  will  remain  in  this  position  for  hours,  which  every  one  who
attempts  finds  insupportable  for  very,  very  far  short  of  that  time.
Again,  so  far  from  fatigue  coming  on  and  lessening  these  effects,
the  longer  all  these  experiments  are  repeated  the  more  readily  do
the  effects  ensue,  and  the  more  energetic  are  they.”

The  phenomenon  of  traction  was  never  possible  in  her.
She  had  no  occult  power,  like  many,  of  feeling  the  attempt
at  traction.

But  the  phenomenon  of  traction  of  a  rigid  part  in  her
waking  state  was  possible :  yet  never  occurred  unless  she  saw
or  learnt  in  some  ordinary  mode  that  you  were  drawing  it.
If  I  stiffened  an  arm  and  then  made  tractive  passes  from  it,  and
she  saw  me  making  these  tractive  passes,  the  arm  always
ascended,  greatly  to  her  surprise,  and  without  her  being
conscious  that  she  willed  its  ascent.  She  was  astonished  to
see  it  ascend,  and  at  a  loss  to  understand  the  reason.  But
if  her  eves  were  covered  or  closed,  it  did  not  ascend  :  unless
the  idea  was  given  her  in  some  way  or  other  that  I  was  draw¬
ing  it,  and  even  then  it  usually  would  not  ascend,  though  I
was  trying  to  draw  it  and  clearly  let  her  know  this ;  and  it
occasionally  would  ascend  even  though  I  did  not  attempt  to
draw  it.

Now  here  was  no  deception :  but  an  instance  of  the  as¬
tonishing  fact,  long  ago  mentioned  by  me  in  rhe  Zoist,  that
perception  may  take  place  unconsciously,  and  the  will  be  ex¬
erted  unconsciously.

In  the  first  place,  I  will  stake  my  existence  from  daily
experience  of  her  for  five  years  and  a  half,  awake  and  in
sleep- waking,  when  happy  and  when  distressed,  even  when
she  considered  herself  at  the  point  of  death,  that  there  never
has  been  even  a  shadow  of  deception  or  even  of  exaggeration.


222


Cure  of  true  Cancer  • with  Mesmerism,


Secondly.  In  the  waking  state  with  her  eyes  open,  trac¬
tion,  however  long  continued,  never  drew  her  arms  unless  they
were  previously  stiffened.  A  deceiver  would  raise  her  arms,
stiffened  or  not  stiffened,  when  tractive  passes  are  made.*
Thirdly.  This  very  difference  occurs  in  other  patients,
and  in  truth  there  has  been  no  phenomenon  in  her  that  I  have
not  witnessed  in  others  of  both  sexes,  in  adult  age  and  in
childhood,  and  in  persons  perfectly  ignorant  of  mesmerism.

I  must  be  pardoned  for  quoting  from  former  papers  of
my  own.

“  It  is  to  me  certain,  from  great  observation  in  the  mesmeric  coma,
as  well  as  in  ordinary  sleep  and  the  waking  state,  that  the  brain  can
and  does  act  often  involuntarily,  and  can  and  does  act  often  un¬
consciously  ;  that  is,  that  we  may  not  be  able  to  resist  a  desire  to
order  or  to  will  a  motion,  and  that  willing  may  occur  with  such
wonderful  readiness,  such  instant  promptitude,  on  our  feeling  any¬
thing  to  excite  it,  that  we  are  quite  unconscious  of  willing  at  all, —
of  any  effort, — of  doing  anything  at  all.f

“  Some  patients  will  deny  that  their  limbs  are  moving,  so  uncon¬
scious  is  this  effort;  and  yet  the  character  of  the  movement,  especially
of  rising,  is  evidently  calculated  and  the  result  of  will.”f;

“  The  truth  is,  that  sleep-wakers  are  more  or  less  abstracted,
and  abstracted  in  regard  to  some  things  and  not  to  others  :  that
they,  through  unconscious  and  involuntary  inclinations,  may  not  be
consciously  percipient  of  many  things,  which  however  their  brains
really  perceive,  and  which  they  in  the  mesmeric  state,  and  some¬
times  in  the  ordinary  only,  may  never  afterwards  know  they  have
perceived ;  and  their  brains  may  have  various  internal  feelings,  and
will  many  things,  quite  unconsciously ;  and  afterwards  they  may
act  upon  and  be  influenced  by  the  knowledge  thus  unconsciously
received,  without  ever  suspecting  that  they  had  received  it.  I  must
request  the  reader  to  peruse  the  pages  referred  to  in  the  last  note
but  one.  Dr.  Engledue  never  hears  in  his  sleep  the  rattling  of  his
alarum  in  his  bed-room,  but  is  always  awakened  by  his  night-bell,
even  by  the  motion  of  the  wire  before  the  bell  actually  rings.  Mr.
Case  tells  me  that  he  does  not  hear  his  children  who  sleep  around
him  cry  in  the  night,  but  instantly  hears  his  night-bell.  One  lady
in  her  sleep-waking  who  hears  me  only,  does  not  hear  her  own
watch  tick  but  always  hears  mine.  Another  lady,  from  her  refusing
to  think  of  any  living  being  in  the  mesmeric  state  but  myself,  always
declared  most  solemnly  there  was  no  one  in  the  room  but  herself
and  me  ;  though  she  knew  her  sister  was  always  present  when  she

*  See  a  similar  reason,  p.  224.

f  “  See  my  Human  Physiology,  p.  484,  note  c.  I  believe  that  any  animal
faculty,  intellectual  or  affective,  that  even  mere  sensation  and  will,  are  of  all
degrees,  and  at  the  lowest  scarcely  if  at  all  discernible  ;  and  thus  that  will  may
really  run  down  insensibly  into  merely  automatic  motions,  so  that  it  may  be
indistinguishable  from  them.”

t  No.  V.,  p.  70.


by  Dr.  Elliotson.


223


was  mesmerised,  and  was  in  the  room  when  I  sent  her  off :  and  she
was  greatly  hurt  at  my  maintaining  that  her  sister  was  there.  She
would  tell  me  of  things  she  was  most  anxious  her  sister  should  not
know,  and  yet  I  kept  assuring  her  that  her  sister  was  present.  The
bagpipes  are  her  detestation  ;  but  they  would  be  played  screechingly
in  the  street  under  her  window,  and  she  never  noticed  them.

“  No  point  in  cerebral  physiology  is  more  curious  than  our
unconscious  reception  of  sensations  or  unconscious  prevention  of
consciousness  of  them,  and  the  influence  of  unconscious  knowledge
and  feelings  over  our  actions.  Materialism  only  can  explain  this.*
The  brain  acts  in  all  these  wonderful  ways  :  one  part  doing  what
another  is  ignorant  of.”f

This  unconscious  action  of  the  brain  is  exhibited  in  the
familiar  fact  of  our  waking  at  the  precise  time  at  which  we,
on  going  to  sleep,  determine,  or  rather  wish,  to  wake.
The  idea  is  in  our  brain  unconsciously  :  and  we  act  upon  it
unconsciously.  Persons  have  often  heard  and  seen  things
unconsciously,  and  remained  unconscious  of  having  seen  or
heard  them ;  and  at  some  distant  period  remembered  every
thing  in  the  most  minute  and  surprising  manner.  Persons
in  spontaneous  or  idiopathic  somnambulism  may  do  things  quite
unconsciously  and  far  better  than  when  awake.  Dr.  Aber¬
crombie  relates  a  case  in  which  the  person  was  conscious  of
the  general  perception,  but  unconscious  of  more  than  what
was  confused  and  disagreeable.

A  poor  girl,  when  seven  years  of  age,  looked  after  cattle  at  a
farmer’s,  and  slept  next  a  room  often  occupied  by  an  itinerant  fiddler
of  great  skill  and  addicted  to  playing  refined  pieces  at  night ;  but
his  performance  was  taken  notice  of  by  her  as  only  a  disagreeable
noise.  She  fell  ill,  and  was  removed  to  the  house  of  a  benevolent
lady,  whose  servant  she  became.  Some  years  after  this  change,
she  had  fits  of  sleep-waking,  in  which,  after  being  two  hours  in  bed,
she  became  restless  and  began  to  mutter ;  and,  after  uttering  sounds
precisely  like  the  tuning  of  a  violin,  would  make  a  prelude,  and
then  dash  off  into  elaborate  pieces  of  music,  most  clearly  and  accu¬
rately,  and  with  the  most  delicate  modulations.  She  sometimes
stopped,  made  the  sound  of  retuning  her  instrument,  and  began
exactly  where  she  had  left  off.  After  a  year  or  two  she  imitated  an

*  By  materialist,  I  do  not  mean  an  atheist,  or  even  a  doubter  of  any  doc¬
trine  of  the  Church  of  England  or  similar  denominations  :  but  one  who  considers
that  the  brain  is  the  organ  of  our  mental  phenomena,  and  each  of  these  the
result  of  an  action  of  some  particles  of  the  brain  :  that  all  earthly  mental  powers
are  cerebral  powers,  and  exist  no  more  without  it  than  the  power  of  gravitation
without  matter  or  life  without  living  substances.  The  man  who  believes  this  may
believe  in  a  great  first  personal  cause  and  in  a  reproduction  of  us  in  a  future
world.  He  humbly  learns  nature  from  observation  :  and  considers  the  office  of
revelation  can  be  only  to  give  him  information  of  what  is  beyond  nature — super¬
natural  and  inscrutable  to  his  faculties.  See  the  note  at  the  end  of  No.  XVI.

+  No.  XI.,  p.  361,  sq.


224


Cure  of  true  Cancer  with  Mesmerism,


old  piano  also,  which  she  was  accustomed  to  hear  in  her  present
residence  ;  and,  in  another  year,  began  to  talk,  descanting  fluently,
most  acutely,  and  wittily,  and  with  astonishing  mimickry  and  copious
illustrations  and  imagery,  on  political,  religious,  and  other  subjects.
For  several  years  she  was  ignorant  of  all  around  her  in  the  paroxysms  ;
but,  at  about  the  age  of  sixteen,  she  began  to  observe  those  who
were  in  her  apartment,  and  could  tell  their  number  accurately,  though
the  utmost  care  was  taken  to  have  the  room  darkened ;  and,  when
her  eye-lids  were  raised,  and  a  candle  was  brought  near  the  eye,
the  pupil  seemed  insensible  to  light.  She  soon  became  capable  of
answering  questions,  and  of  noticing  remarks  made  in  her  presence,
and  in  both  respects  showed  extraordinary  acuteness.  “  Her  obser¬
vations,  indeed,”  says  Dr.  Abercrombie,  “were  often  of  such  a
nature,  and  corresponded  so  exactly  with  characters  and  events,  that
by  the  country  people  she  was  believed  to  be  endowed  with  super¬
natural  power.

“  During  the  whole  period  of  this  remarkable  affection,  which
seems  to  have  gone  on  for  ten  or  eleven  years,  she  was,  when  awake,
a  dull  awkward  girl,  very  slow  in  receiving  instruction,  though  much
care  was  bestowed  upon  her ;  and,  in  point  of  intellect,  she  was
much  inferior  to  the  other  servants  of  the  family.  In  particular,
she  shewed  no  kind  of  turn  for  music.”*

I  am  certain,  though  in  Miss  Barber  the  perception  of
my  tractive  movements  occurred  consciously,  that  both  the
willing  to  obey  them  and  the  desire  to  will  occurred  quite
unconsciously.

M/

While  she  was  awake,  my  fixed  gaze  upon  her  hand  would
to  her  great  astonishment  stiffen  it  and  the  arm  and  render
them  insensible,  if  she  saw  what  I  was  doing :  but  not  unless
she  did  see.  In  her  sleep,  her  eyes  being  always  firmly
closed,  this  gaze  had  no  such  effect.  In  the  same  way  longi¬
tudinal  passes  over  her  arm  at  a  short  distance  while  she  was
awake  and  saw  me  had  the  same  effect :  but  not  if  her  eyes
were  covered.  If  the  passes  were  made  at  a  considerable
height  above  her  arms  as  these  lay  in  her  lap,  there  was  no
effect,  though  she  was  allowed  to  see  what  I  was  doing.

Any  part  could  be  readily  relaxed  by  breathing  upon  it ;
by  touching  it  with  even  the  point  of  a  finger,  or  with  an
inanimate  substance ;  by  perfectly  transverse  passes  across
it;  by  darting  the  hand  at  it;  or  by  contact  passes  in  the
opposite  direction  to  that  in  which  the  part  was  contracted  :
for  instance,  if  they  were  made  down  the  back  of  the  arms
while  these  were  bent  up  to  the  shoulders,  the  arms  pre¬
sently  dropped,  but  by  a  continuance  of  the  passes  again
became  rigid,  and  in  the  extended  position.  Yet  if  the  con¬
tact  passes  were  to  bring  an  extended  rigid  part  into  the

*  On  the  Intellectual  Powers,  p.  294.  Fourth  Edition.


by  Dr.  Elliotson.


225


bent  position,  there  was  no  preliminary  relaxation  but  an
immediate  rigid  flexion.*

I  have  now  to  record  a  striking  fact.  While  I  am  draw¬
ing  up  her  rigid  arm  in  the  waking  state  with  her  eyes  free,
she  sees  as  soon  as  the  limb  begins  to  ascend,  but  not  be¬
fore,  a  colourless  stream  pass  from  it  to  my  hand,  of  the
same  breadth  as  the  number  of  the  points  of  the  fingers
which  I  employ  at  the  moment.  Though  I  cover  the  part
with  a  shawl,  single  or  folded,  the  appearance  is  equal.  This
statement  may  be  relied  upon  as  securely  as  the  phenomena
in  the  chemist's  laboratory.  If  I  stiffen  her  body  and  then
make  tractive  passes  from  it,  as  soon  as  it  advances  the  stream
from  it  is  seen.  If  I  draw  with  both  hands,  there  are  two
streams  side  by  side  from  the  part.  The  farther  I  stand
from  her,  the  fainter  the  stream  appears ;  and,  if  at  a  great
distance,  there  is  no  visible  stream,  nor  traction.  She  compares
it  to  moonlight,  and  it  is  stronger  in  the  dark.  She  sees  the
same  from  my  hand  if  I  dart  it  at  a  stiffened  part,  but  not
till  this  begins  to  relax.  On  darting  my  hand  at  a  part
not  rigid,  there  is  no  such  appearance.  In  tractive  passes,
the  stream  seems  to  wave  back  towards  her  when  my  hand
moves  towards  her  again  before  the  next  tractive  pass.  If  I
breathe  upon  a  stiffened  part  she  sees  no  stream  of  light.

Very  lately  she  has  shewn  an  attraction  to  me,  so  that
when  she  is  asleep,  if  I  sit  before  her,  she  slowly  advances
forwards  in  her  chair  towards  me,  provided  she  is  first  ren¬
dered  rigid ;  and,  if  I  stand  to  one  side,  she  gradually  inclines
in  that  direction;  or  if  her  arm  is  rigidly  extended,  and  I
place  one  of  my  hands  to  one  side  of  it,  this  very  slowly
moves  towards  mine,  but  it  moves  in  the  direction  far  more

*  These  phenomena  occurred  in  Miss  Critchly  :  “  Transverse  passes  over  the
stiffened  limbs  of  this  patient ;  touching  her  immediately  with  any  thing ;  but
especially  breathing  upon  her  and  touching  her  with  the  hand  or  the  person,  in¬
stantly  relaxed  her.  In  breathing  upon  her  or  touching  her  with  the  hand,  or
any  inanimate  or  even  unmesmerised  object,  metal,  wood,  glass,  a  book,  cloth,  &c.
it  was  not  necessary  that  this  should  be  immediately  applied — that  no  covering
should  intervene  :  though  breathing  upon  her  and  touching  her  with  an  inanimate
substance  immediately  had  a  more  rapid  effect  than  if  a  covering  intervened ;  and,
when  any  thing  was  interposed,  the  hand  a  much  quicker  effect  than  inanimate
bodies.  If  I  pressed  any  inanimate  substance  upon  one  fore-arm,  and  the  points
of  my  fingers  on  the  other,  this  other  always  relaxed  the  sooner.  Even  to  hold
the  hand  near  her  without  immediate  contact  was  sufficient :  and  especially  to
point  at  the  part.  Darting  the  fingers  at  a  part,  without  touching  it,  quickly
drove  it  down  and  relaxed  it.  I  have  had  cases  in  which  relaxation  could  be
produced  by  making  passes  in  the  opposite  direction  to  those  which  had  or  might
have  produced  the  rigidity.  For  example,  when  the  arm  was  extended,  by  making
passes  upwards  along  the  inside,  as  if  to  bend  it, — when  it  would  all  relax,  and
then  a  continuance  of  the  passes  would  cause  opposite  contraction  and  bend  it
freely  :  or  when  bent,  it  might  be  unbent  and  relaxed  by  longitudinal  passes  made
along  its  outside,  as  if  to  unbend  it.” — Yol.  II.,  p.  71.


226  Cure  of  true  Cancer  with  Mesmerism,

quickly  if  I  place  myself  at  the  same  side  of  her  hand  as  that
on  which  my  hand  is  placed.  The  same  thing  occurs  if  she
is  awake  and  rendered  rigid.  But  during  the  attraction
she  sees  no  stream  as  in  traction,  perhaps  because  it  is  so
slow.  These  movements  of  attraction  are  as  unconsciously
voluntary  and  as  astonishing  to  her  as  those  of  traction.
A  youth,  the  son  of  Mr.  Adlard,  the  engraver  of  Hatton
Garden,  and  as  true,  straightforward,  and  good  a  young  man
as  exists,  in  his  sleep-waking  always  displayed  the  same  and
indeed  a  far  greater  attraction  to  me  in  a  room  full  of  com¬
pany.  While  I  was  mesmerising  him,  the  unconsciously  willed
attraction  would  take  place  before  the  sleep  was  induced.  I
slightly  mentioned  the  case  in  1844.*

“  I  have  a  patient  in  whose  mesmeric  sleep  there  is  a  powerful
attraction  to  me,  and  he  grasps  my  hands  firmly.  Before  he  is
asleep,  while  still  wide  awake,  looking  at  me  as  I  look  at  him  and
hold  one  of  his  hands  in  mine  while  the  other  is  on  his  forehead,
this  attraction  will  come  on,  so  that  his  hand  grasps  mine.  On  my
telling  him  of  this  the  first  time,  he  looked  down  and  saw  that  it
was  so  ;  but  he  did  not  know  it  before,  and  assured  me  he  had  not
consciously  grasped  my  hand.  On  subsequent  occasions  the  same
has  often  happened, — the  mesmeric  effect  in  the  feeling  of  friendship
taking  place  before  there  was  any  very  great  advance  towards  sleep  ;
but  he,  now  suspecting  the  matter  and  therefore  attending  to  the
point,  would  say,  *  Sir,  I  feel  my  fingers  curling  round  your  hand,
but  I  can’t  help  it ;  I  don’t  curl  them  round.’  However,  before  he
is  quite  asleep,  his  hand  is  firmly  grasping  mine,  nor  is  he  able  to
relax  it.  And  as  a  farther  illustration  that  this  was  the  emotion  of
attachment  and  an  unconscious  exertion  of  volition,  I  must  remark
that  when  squeezing  my  hands  with  painful  tightness  in  the  moments
of  deep  sleep,  he  would  frown  and  let  them  go  if  I  conversed  with
others,  and  would  not  take  them  again  while  I  continued  conversing.

I  am  certain  that  persons,  that  is,  the  brain,  can  unconsciously
receive  external  impressions,  and  unconsciously  act  upon  these  im¬
pressions  ;  so  unconsciously  as  to  deny,  with  no  falsehood  on  their
part,  that  they  received  the  impression  or  did  the  act  (supra,  p.  70)  ;
and  this  while  awake, — while  apparently  awake,  but,  I  should  say,
in  a  waking  state  with  a  dash  of  sleep  on  certain  feelings  and  exer¬
tions  of  what  we  call  will.  The  materialist  only,  who  is  the  only
true  cerebral  physiologist,  sees  the  simple  explanation  of  all  this  ;
sees  that  all  is  ascribable  to  partial  cerebral  activity, — that  one  por¬
tion,  or  some  portions,  of  the  brain  are  active  independently  of  the
rest,  without  the  knowledge  of  the  rest,  just  as  one  portion  of  the
surface  of  the  body  may  be  active  in  secreting,  and  the  rest  not,
and  partial  perspiration  is  the  result.”

The  summer  of  1844  passed  on.  The  cancerous  sallow -

*  No.  VI.,  p.  210.


227


by  Dr.  Elliot  son.

ness  disappeared :  she  had  less  pain  :  her  strength  increased :

and  the  warty-looking  growth  dropped  off,  leaving  a  sound
smooth  surface,  and  there  was  no  increase  of  the  diseased
substance.  A  surgical  operation  was  therefore  not  thought
of.  Dr.  Ashburner  saw  the  part,  had  no  hesitation  in  calling
the  disease  cancer,  and  was  delighted  at  the  favourable  pros¬
pect.  In  September  I  left  town  for  a  tour  in  the  north  of
Germany,  and  a  medical  friend  was  so  good  as  to  promise  to
mesmerise  her.  His  engagements  unfortunately  prevented
her  being  mesmerised  to  the  extent  I  wished  :  and  she  was
persuaded  to  wear  a  piece  of  mesmerised  leather  day  and
night  upon  her  breast.  This  irritated  the  part  exceedingly,
and  after  a  few  days  caused  a  very  painful  and  bleeding  sore,
which  did  not  heal  for  six  months.  On  my  return  at  the
end  of  October  I  found  this  and,  what  was  worse,  that  the
darting  pain  had  returned  and  the  diseased  mass  had  grown
firmly  to  the  ribs.  Mr.  D.  Hands  saw  the  breast :  and  Dr.
Ashburner  again  saw  it,  and  was  much  distressed  at  the  ap¬
parent  blight  of  the  poor  woman’s  happy  prospects.  However,
I  began  again :  and  in  her  daily  sleep-waking  I  diligently
made  contact  passes  over  her  dress  upon  the  diseased  side.
The  wound  at  length  healed,  though  the  surrounding  surface
continued  for  some  time  to  inflame  occasionally  from  the
slightest  irritating  cause.  Spermacete  ointment  only  was
applied  to  prevent  the  linen  from  rubbing  and  sticking  to  the
wound.  A  gland  enlarged  in  the  arm-pit.

She  slowly  improved  in  every  respect,  and  the  mass  began
to  diminish.  The  summer  of  1845  arrived.  Dr.  Engledue
examined  her  at  my  house,  and,  like  every  body  else,  pro¬
nounced  the  disease  to  be  cancer.  This  autumn  I  merelv

«/

went  on  a  visit  for  a  month  to  Dr.  Engledue’s  at  Southsea,
returning  to  town  for  one  day  in  a  week ;  and  on  this  day
I  always  mesmerised  her.  She  had  an  attack  of  bronchitis,
and  was  bled  without  knowing  it  towards  the  end  of  the
year.

The  summer  of  1846  arrived.  During  it  th e,  pain  entirely
ceased  for  good.  Near  the  end  of  August  she  had  a  severe
attack  of  pleuritis  and  bronchitis :  for  which  I  bled  without
her  knowledge  and  blistered  her  :  and,  on  leaving  town  for
Switzerland  in  the  beginning  of  September,  placed  her  in
the  hands  of  Mr.  Symes,  who  cheerfully  took  the  charge  of
her  for  me,  and  never  once  omitted,  whatever  was  the
weather,  to  visit  her  daily  during  the  whole  of  my  absence
till  the  end  of  October,  notwithstanding  the  distance.  She
often  expresses  her  sense  of  his  great  goodness.  He  for  the
first  time  now  saw  the  part,  and  saw  that  the  disease  was


228


Cure  of  true  Cancer  by  Mesmerism,


cancer.  These  inflammatory  attacks  were  all  produced  by
her  walking  through  the  wet  a  mile  to  my  house  and  sit¬
ting  in  wet  shoes.

On  my  return  I  determined  to  mesmerise  her  at  her
mother's  whenever  it  was  wet,  and  prevent  if  possible  these
chances  of  inflammation  of  the  chest.

During  the  year  1847,  the  disease  steadily  gave  way.
The  mass  had  become  not  only  much  less,  but  detached  from
the  ribs  and  moveable  again.  I  remained  in  town  all  the
autumn :  but  she  again  had  an  attack  of  inflammation  of  her
chest,  and  I  ever  afterwards  have  visited  her  and  not  allowed
her  to  come  to  my  house.

The  present  year  1848  arrived.  She  has  had  catarrh  and
a  fit  of  asthma  several  times  :  and  the  fit  of  asthma  was  always
removed  by  my  laying  my  hand  upon  her  chest  over  her
clothes  for  ten  minutes  in  her  mesmeric  state.  The  tumor
continued  to  decrease  and  the  tenderness  to  wear  off,  and  the
gland  in  the  arm-pit  disappeared.

The  cancerous  mass  is  now  completely  dissipated :  the  breast
is  perfectly  flat :  and  all  the  skin  rather  thicker  and  firmer
than  before  the  disease  existed.  Not  the  smallest  lump  is  to
be  found :  *  nor  is  there  the  slightest  tenderness  of  the  bosom  or
the  arm-pit.

I  shall  now  make  some  additional  statements  with  regard
to  the  phenomena  of  the  case.

She  could  always  be  awakened  as  readily  as  she  could  be
sent  to  sleep.  No  difficulty  ever  occurred  in  either  respect.
One  transverse  pass  on  her  eyebrows,  a  few  at  a  distance,  or
one  with  the  palm  of  one  hand  swept  off  the  back  of  the
other,  readily  woke  her.  The  habit  of  sleeping  and  waking
in  certain  circumstances  became  so  strong,  that  imagin¬
ation  was  sufficient  to  produce  either  state.  I  formerly
mentioned  the  effect  of  this  in  causing  sleep-waking*  and
in  waking. t  I  usually  awoke  her  by  distinct  transverse
passes,  in  making  which  I  drew  one  hand  upon  the  other.
At  last,  if  I  rubbed  them  together  behind  me,  or  without
making  any  pass,  she  instantly  awoke.  I  usually  blew  to¬
wards  her  at  the  same  time,  and  if  I  blew  in  another  direc¬
tion,  but  loud  enough  for  her  to  hear,  she  instantly  awoke
— exactly  as  a  medical  man  wakes  when  his  night -bell
rings,  but  is  not  aroused  by  other  loud  noises.  I  have  also
sent  her  into  sleep-waking  by  imagination. J  In  former
Numbers  I  pointed  out  the  error  of  some  mesmerists  who


*  No.  IX.,  p.  47.


f  No.  XII.,  p.  480.


t  No.  IX.,  pp.  47-8.


by  Dr.  Elliotson.


229


exclude  the  influence  of  imagination  in  mesmeric  phenomena;,
as  well  as  of  those  who  ascribe  all  mesmeric  effects  to  ima¬
gination.

In  1845  I  made  beautiful  experiments  upon  her  with
reference  to  the  power  exerted  in  the  waking  state  by  im¬
pressions  made  in  the  sleep-waking.  This  is  not  only  a  most
amusing,  but  a  most  important  subject,  both  as  to  the  phy¬
siological  facts  of  unconscious  impressions  and  as  to  the  pa¬
thological  facts  of  hallucination :  and  I  think  the  perusal  of
eleven  pages  in  the  third  volume*  worthy  of  the  deepest
consideration  of  cerebral  physiologists  and  medical  practi¬
tioners,  and  calculated  to  repay  any  one  who  has  not  already
read  them.

She  was  always  entirely  ignorant  in  her  waking  state  of
every  thing  which  had  passed  in  her  sleep-waking ;  though
in  this  she  remembered  every  thing  of  her  ordinary  waking
state.  The  personal  facts  of  pp.  216,  217,  233,  were  commu¬
nicated  to  me  in  her  sleep-waking.

She  could  be  rendered  rigid  by  contact-passes  on  a  part.
But  about  two  years  ago  her  tendency  to  rigidity  increased,
so  that  on  deepening  her  sleep  by  placing  the  points  of  my
fingers  on  the  eyes,  she  spoke  both  faintly  and  far  less,  and
became  rigid  in  her  limbs,  trunk,  neck,  and  jaw,  and  so
remained  the  best  part  of  an  hour.  In  the  general  rigid
state  she  now  manifests  attraction,  moving  towards  me  pre¬
cisely  as  Miss  Critchly  did.f  Very  lately,  she  has  shewn
tendency  to  rigidity  in  her  ordinary  degree  of  sleep-waking.

Though  susceptibility  of  mesmerism  runs  in  families,  it  is
modified  in  different  individuals.  The  niece,  Itosina,  was
to  the  last  never  sent  into  sleep-waking  under  several  minutes,
sometimes  not  for  nearly  half  an  hour :  and  could  not  be  sent
to  sleep  by  any  reasonable  number  of  passes  nor  by  staring,
but  required  my  pointing  the  fingers  close  to  her  eyes.  She
could  never  be  awakened  by  mesmeric  means ;  but  the  sleep
always  expended  itself :  all  I  could  do  to  hasten  her  waking
was  to  stand  at  a  distance  from  her  and  beg  every  one  else  to
do  the  same;  for  the  proximity  of  any  one  prolonged  her  sleep.
She  could  readily  be  drawn  and  had  an  occult  power  of  know¬
ing  that  we  were  making  tractive  passes.  Various  cerebral
organs  could  be  excited  mesmerically  in  her;  but  not  in  the
aunt,  though  the  latter  witnessed  her  phenomena  many  times,
and  those  of  Mary  Ann  and  Miss  Collins  daily  for  months.  J
She  was  insensible  only  up  to  her  collar-bone  :  the  aunt  uni¬
versally.  She  was  always  in  a  dream  :  the  aunt  never.  Nei-

*  No.  XII.,  pp.  368 — 379.  See  also  pp.  471-2.

+  No.  V.,  pp.  46-9.  %  No.  XII. ,p.  465.

VOL.  VI.


R


230


Cure  of  true  Cancer  with  Mesmerism,


ther  of  them  was  at  all  clairvoyant :  but  the  niece  had  an  oc¬
cult  faculty  not  only  of  knowing  when  an  attempt  at  traction
was  making,  but  of  distinguishing  her  mesmeriseris  touch
from  that  of  other  persons,  except  when  Destructiveness  or
Pride  was  excited,  and  then  she  was  made  to  mistake  me  for
some  one  whom  she  disliked :  the  aunt  possessed  neither
faculty.  They  both  agreed  in  this, — that  the  right  half  was
more  susceptible  than  the  left.

I  always  affected  the  aunt  more  readily  and  produced
greater  comfort  and  benefit  to  her  than  any  other  mesmer-
iser :  but  I  am  not  aware  whether  this  was  the  case  with
Rosina.  Many  have  told  me  the  same  thing.  The  circum¬
stance  has  probably  arisen  from  habits  of  gratitude  rendering
me  more  agreeable  than  others  to  them.

As  brutes  can  be  mesmerised  by  us,*  so  can  we  be  mes¬
merised  by  them.

**  Another  beautiful  set  of  experiments  was  made  with  brutes.
If  their  hand  was  brought  into  contact  with  a  brute,  the  rapidity  and
intensity  of  the  effect  was  always  proportionate  to  the  size  of  the
animal.  If  their  fingers  were  placed  under  the  wing  of  a  perroquet,
the  effect  was  much  inferior  to  what  it  was  if  they  were  placed
under  the  wings  of  a  cockatoo.  If  placed  on  the  nose  of  a  small
deer,  the  effect  was  inferior  to  what  it  was  if  placed  upon  a  lama
or  a  large  deer  : — a  mere  rigidity  and  contraction  of  the  head  in  the
first  instance,  stupefaction  and  at  last  perfect  insensibility  and  relax¬
ation  in  the  latter.  Contact  of  the  ends  of  the  fingers  with  the  dry
rough  trunk  of  the  elephant  had  no  effect  upon  the  elder :  but,  the
instant  she  touched  the  soft  moist  mucous  membrane  of  the  trunk  of
this  immense  beast,  she  dropt  senseless  and  snored  loudly,  and  did
not  become  sensible  for  ten  minutes. ”f

The  other  day  I  had  one  of  my  Newfoundland  dogs  with
me  when  visiting  Miss  Barber.  Her  arms  were  rigid.  I  called
my  dog  and  made  it  stand  so  near  her  that  its  breath  streamed
upon  her  hand  and  invariably  relaxed  it,  as  human  breath
would  have  done,  to  her  great  astonishment.

In  1847,  I  made  interesting  experiments  upon  her  with
the  magnet,  and  recorded  them  at  length  in  the  fourth  volume,
to  which  I  refer  my  readers .J

These  experiments  taught  me  the  advantage  of  the  mag¬
net  ;  and  I  have  lately  begged  her  to  place  it  in  her  bed,  on
account  of  constant  pain  of  one  hip  waking  her  from  her
mesmeric  sleep  in  the  night.  I  directed  her  to  place  the

*  Trials  of  Animal  Magnetism  on  the  Brute  Creation ,  by  Dr.  John  Wilson,
Physician  to  the  Middlesex  Hospital.  Sherwood,  Paternoster  Row.  1839.

f  See  my  Human  Physiology ,  p.  1176.

+  No.  XIII.,  pp.  107—110;  No.  XIV.,  pp.  278—284.


by  Dr.  Elliot  son.


231


magnet  against  the  seat  of  pain,  over  her  night  dresses.  The
magnet  kept  her  asleep  and  rigid,  and  at  last  dissipated  the
pain.  It  always  dispersed  the  pain  across  the  loins  and  front
to  the  other  side ;  and,  by  persevering  in  this  way,  the  pain
was  removed  from  its  original  seat  and  established  itself,  but
less  violently,  in  the  other  hip.  It  could  not,  however,  be  ap¬
plied  so  much  as  I  wished ;  for  it  produced,  if  long  applied,
an  excitement  on  her  awaking, — a  feeling  of  wildness  and
spite,  a  desire  to  injure  others  or  herself,  and  also  caused  a
taste  of  iron  in  her  mouth.  Its  application  was,  therefore,
of  necessity,  moderated.  Whenever  it  was  applied  long,  though
always  with  the  intervention  of  clothes,  these  effects  ensued.
In  the  day-time  it  was  placed  against  the  foot  of  the  af¬
fected  side  outside  the  shoe  and  stocking  in  her  sleep-waking,
and  thus  drew  the  pain,  first  to  the  thigh,  then  to  the  knee,
the  leg,  the  foot,  the  toes,  lessening  the  pain  all  the  time  in
the  whole  limb  till  none  was  felt  except  in  the  left  hip,  to
which  the  pain  had  been  dispersed  by  the  application  of  the
magnet  to  the  right  hip.  Its  application  to  the  left  foot,
all  the  time  of  her  day  sleep-waking  and  for  some  little  time
in  the  night,  at  length  removed  the  pain  altogether.  The
magnet  was  the  very  large  one  mentioned  by  me  formerly.*
1  left  it  with  her  in  consequence  of  the  unpleasant  effects  of
crystals  of  alum,  which  I  had  first  left  with  her  for  the  same
purpose  and  which  were  beginning  to  do  her  the  same  good.
The  crystalline  mass  is  nearly  a  foot  long  :  it  induces  rigidity
and  sleep  in  her,  as  in  so  many  others,  and  removes  pain ;
but,  though  applied  over  her  night  dresses  against  her  hip,  it
caused,  after  a  few  days,  rapidity  of  pulse,  heat,  thirst,  a
very  white  and  dry  tongue,  loss  of  appetite,  general  feeling
of  illness,  and  a  strong  taste  of  alum,  alvum  astrictam  et
suppressionem  menstruorum  in  quibus  per  plures  menses  fere
quotidie  fuerat.

To  ascertain  the  truth,  the  use  of  the  crystals  of  alum
was  omitted,  and  those  effects  all  ceased :  it  was  resumed*,
and  they  all  returned :  omitted  again,  and  they  ceased.  There
has,  however,  been  permanent  good  from  it  in  the  removal
of  the  last-mentioned  cause  of  debility.  I  have  another
patient  who,  if,  in  her  mesmeric  sleep-waking,  alum,  salt,
nitre,  carbonate  of  soda, — all  very  soluble  substances,  solid  or
in  solution,  acids,  oil,  or  a  solution  of  sugar,  &c.  is  placed
in  her  hand,  presently  tastes  them  and  names  them  accu-
rately,  though  not  only  are  her  eyes  closed  but  her  face  well
covered.  I  shall  detail  these  experiments  on  some  future
day.  All  these  facts  shew  that  in  the  mesmeric  state  there  is,

*  No.  XTV.,  p.  278.


232


Cure  of  true  Cancer  with  Mesmerism ,


at  least  in  some  persons,  a  greatly  increased  power  of  absorp¬
tion  :  and  this,  together  with  the  tendency  of  mesmerism  to
augment  the  power  of  the  body  to  shake  off  disease,  what¬
ever  be  its  nature,  explains  the  dissipation  of  the  cancer.
For  the  diseased  mass  was  dissipated  and  absorbed,  and  pain¬
lessly  and  imperceptibly :  not  discharged  by  ulceration  or
mortification,  as  hitherto  when  nature  has  got  rid  of  such  a
mass  or  art  has  succeeded  by  agonizing  corrosive  and  irritat¬
ing  substances  or  by  fire  :  after  which  rare  removals  the
wound  has  fallen  into  the  cancerous  state,  or  a  cancer  has
begun  in  some  other  part,  as  far  as  my  experience  and  reading
extend.*

This  case  proves  the  necessity  of  perseverance  in  mes¬
merising.  Five  years  and  upwards  was  Miss  Barber  mes¬
merised,  and  for  the  greater  part  of  the  period  three  times  a
day :  remaining  in  the  happy  trance  some  hours  each  time,
and  the  part  being  locally  mesmerised  in  her  morning  and
evening  mesmeric  sleep,  which  took  place  in  bed  ;  and  in  the
night  the  mesmeric  passed  into  the  natural  sleep. f  Most
patients  and  some  mesmerists  have  no  idea  of  the  necessity
of  perseverance.  J  I  have  no  patience  with  half  the  people
who  make  a  trial  of  mesmerism,  expecting  it  to  act  as  though
its  powers  were  miraculous  and  not  natural.  They  almost
deserve  to  suffer  on,

“ - For  miracles  are  ceased,

And  therefore  we  must  needs  admit  the  means,

How  things  are  perfected.”

Archbishop  of  Canterbury ,  in  King  Henry  V.,  Act.  i.,  Sc.  ii.

But  I  know  mesmerists  who  give  up  a  case  if  there  is  not
improvement  or  some  sensible  effect  after  a  mesmerisation  of

*  The  supposed  cure  of  a  cancer  by  mesmerism  recorded  in  No.  XIV.,
p.  218,  was  a  beautiful  cure,  but  the  disease  was  not  cancer,  though  this  name
was  given  to  it  in  the  Middlesex  Hospital  where  it  had  been  condemned  to  be  cut
out  as  incurable,  no  less  than  to  that  of  the  other  breast  which  had  been  cut  out
as  a  cancer  in  this  hospital.  It  was  readily  cured  by  a  little  mesmerism,  and  I
afterwards  saw  an  appearance  very  different  from  that  left  in  Miss  Barber — I  saw
a  full-sized  healthy  breast.  Messrs  Arnott,  Tuson,  and  Shaw,  surgeons  of  the
Middlesex  Hospital,  Mr.  Vincent,  surgeon  of  St.  Bartholomew’s  Hospital,
Messrs.  Aston  Key  and  Bransby  Cooper,  surgeons  of  Guy’s  Hospital,  Mr.
Cooper,  surgeon  of  the  Bloomsbury  Dispensary,  and  Mr.  Bishop,  surgeon  of
the  Northern  Dispensary,  had  all  pronounced  this  disease  to  be  true  cancer  :  so
that,  if  this  was  its  nature,  all  those  surgeons  must  acknowledge  that  mesmerism
cured  a  cancer.  But  Mr.  Morgan,  surgeon  of  Guy’s  Hospital,  did  not  regard  it
as  a  cancer,  nor  Mr.  Flintoff,  the  surgeon  who  mesmerised,  nor  apparently
Dr.  Nairne,  physician  of  St.  George’s  Hospital.  The  article  in  No.  XIV.  is
one  of  the  most  important  that  medical  men  can  read  :  far  more  important  than
a  dozen  volumes  on  diseased  breasts.  For  a  condemned  breast  was  cured  :  and,
if  the  disease  of  the  other  breast  had  been  the  same,  a  breast  which  had  been
cut  away  might  have  been  cured.

t  No.  XVIII.,  p.  116.  J  No.  VI.,  p.  197-8.


by  Dr.  Elliot  son.


233


a  quarter  of  an  hour  for  a  few  days  :  and  who  also  mesmerise
far  too  many  persons.  Greatrakes  and  Mr.  Loutherbourg
committed  these  faults,  and  thus  at  length  fell  into  disrepute.

I  shall  continue  the  mesmerism  with  Miss  Barber  for
months  to  come,  in  accordance  with  what  I  said  in  No.  XI.,
p.  364.

Miss  Barber,  with  her  mother  and  the  orphan  niece,  lodge
at  Mrs.  Gower’s,  No.  12,  New  Street,  Dorset  Square,  and  will
not  refuse,  I  am  certain,  to  give  every  information  respecting
her  case  to  any  lady  who  may  call  upon  her.  I  need  adduce
no  other  proof  of  the  respectability  of  this  very  excellent
woman  than  the  fact,  that,  when  she  could  work  no  longer,
a  number  of  her  customers,  at  the  head  of  whom  was  Mrs.
Sharpe,  made  her  a  regular  allowance ;  but  they  could  not  sup¬
pose  that  she  would  survive  a  very  long  time,  and  it  was  too
much  to  expect  that  they  would  all  continue  their  benevo¬
lence  year  after  year.  Accordingly,  her  little  income  is  now'
diminished  to  a  third,  and,  as  they  have  all  been  employing
fresh  dress-makers  for  five  years  and  are  suited,  I  fear  that
she  will  have  great  difficulty  in  regaining  a  business.  I  am
told  that  she  is  a  very  good  dress-maker  and  workwoman,
and  I  know  that  she  is  in  all  respects  most  conscientious ;
and  those  ladies,  who  feel  an  interest  in  her  case  and  could
conveniently  employ  her,  might  do  an  act  of  great  import¬
ance.  For  I  discovered  lately,  when  I  found  her  very  weak
notwithstanding  her  cure,  and  could  not  account  for  it,  qu’elle
n’avoit  pas  assez  a  manger.  She  was  too  patient  and  unob¬
trusive  to  divulge  this  before,  and  now  divulged  it  in  her  sleep¬
waking  and  reluctantly.


I  prefixed  to  this  narrative  an  extract  from  the  recent
Harveian  Oration  of  Dr.  F.  Hawkins,  one  of  the  physicians
of  the  Middlesex  Hospital.  I  will  now  adduce  a  few  passages
from  a  pamphlet  just  published  by  the  apothecary  of  the
Middlesex  Hospital,  whose  untiring  invectives  against  mes¬
merism  for  so  many  years  appear  to  have  been  Dr.  Hawkins’s
lessons.

“  From  what  I  have  witnessed  during  the  whole  period  that  these
delusions  of  the  devil  have  been  exercised,  I  never  heard  or  saw  any¬
thing  of  the  sort  go  forth  but  what  was  indecent ,  disgraceful ,  and
injurious.  All  the  patients  have  universally  expressed  themselves
worse  than  before ,  when  real  disease  existed  ;  and  when  nervous  dis¬
orders  only  were  present,  the  mind  has  been  worked  upon,  the  lascivi¬
ous  passions  have  been  excited,  and  the  will,  unable  to  control  the  animal
desires ,  has  lost  its  balance,  and  the  patient  has  then  been  momen-


234  Cure  of  true  Cancer  with  Mesmerism ,

tarily  stupified  by  the  300  or  400  passes  to  and  fro  before  the  eyes,
but  only  to  wake  to  a  more  libidinous  state  than  before,  and  this  has
sent  them,  sooner  or  later,  to  wander  about  the  streets  to  gratify
their  lusts ,  and  thus  have  they  become  open  prostitutes.”  p.  21

“  Every  Christian  mind  must  be  pained  at  the  frequent  assertions
which  you  (Dr.  Ashburner)  make  in  this  pamphlet,  that  mesmerism
is  a  “  power  from  God,  granted  unto  men  by  Him.”  I  hesitate  not
to  affirm  that  it  is  from  the  devil”  p.  31.

“  The  spirits  of  phrenology  and  of  mesmerism  are  true  devilss
co-partners,  fraternal  spirits  of  uncleanliness .”  p.  25.

“  This  power  of  mesmerism  is  called  natural  in  order  to  blind  the
understanding,  and  beguile  the  Christian  physician  into  the  adoption
of  its  satanic  art,  whereas  its  true  name  is  to  be  found  in  the  book
of  Revelation;  viz.,  ‘the  working  of  false  miracles,’  which  God
declared,  in  the  latter  day,  should  be  performed  by  devils  on  earth;
and  this  is  the  grand  primary  reason  that  such  a  burst  of  clamour
and  abuse  are  levelled  at  any  child  of  God  when  he  ventures  to  lift
up  this  revolting  mask.  It  will  be  asked  how  devils  can  work,  since
we  do  not  behold  them  with  our  naked  eye?”  p.  vii.  “It  is  my
firm  conviction  that  any  individual  who  ardently  pursues  such  a  tract
of  delusion,  &c.,  is  possessed  of  devils,”  &c.  p.  xiv.

“  The  strong  blasts  from  the  terrible  one  which  have  swept  over
my  soul,  as  I  have  read,  seen,  and  heard  related  the  varied  decep¬
tions  which  have  been  set  forth  by  the  disciples  of  mesmerism,  have
fully  convinced  me  that  it  is  an  infernal  system ,  whose  coming  is
after  the  working  of  Satan ,  with  all  power,  and  signs,  and  lying
wonders,  and  with  all  deceivableness  of  unrighteousness  in  them
that  receive  it,  entertain,  believe,  and  practise  it,”  p.  xiv.*

Dr.  James  Arthur  Wilson,  physician  of  St.  George’s  Hos¬
pital,  lately  burst  forth  suddenly  against  mesmerism  in  a
lecture  delivered  before  the  President,  who  is  Dr.  Paris,  and
assembled  College  of  Physicians.  It  is  not  printed ;  but  the
following  was  related  to  me  by  a  gentleman  present  according
to  the  best  of  his  recollection  :  and,  if  there  is  any  error,  I  shall
be  most  happy  to  correct  it  in  the  next  number  of  The  Zoist.

He  said  that  mesmerists  absurdly  talk  of  preventing  the  pain  of
surgical  operations  by  mesmerism  and  tell  us  of  a  man  in  Notting¬
hamshire  whose  leg  was  cut  off  without  his  feeling  pain,  but  who  was
like  Sir  Thomas  Hardy,  a  brave  fellow  and  one  who  could  bear  pain,
or  did  not  know  what  the  word  pain  meant.  And  then  he  de¬
scanted  upon  the  blessings  of  chloroform,  and  thought  the  bishops
ought  to  be  requested  to  draw  up  a  form  of  thanksgiving  to  God  for
having  vouchsafed  to  us  the  knowledge  of  chloroform  to  prevent
pain.  He  next  ridiculed  mesmerism  as  an  imposture  sometimes
shewn  in  drawing-rooms  to  fashionable  dowagers  with  not  half  the
sense  of  laundry-maids,  and  talked  about  Rosicrusian  parsons,  and
semi-delirious  butlers.


*  Mesmerism  tried,  by  the  louch-stone  of  Truth,  be.  By  George  Corfe.


by  Dr.  Elliot  son.


235


Could  he  forget  that  the  poor  Nottinghamshire  peasant
had  an  exquisite  sense  of  pain  and  suffered  agonies  in  his  limb
from  the  slightest  cause  when  not  in  the  mesmeric  state,  and
so  dreaded  pain  that,  when  he  awoke  and  found  the  operation
had  been  performed,  he  instantly  exclaimed,  “  I  bless  the
Lord  to  find  it’s  all  over?”*  Dr.  J.  A.  Wilson  well  knows
that  the  evidence  of  the  absence  of  pain  is  precisely  identical
in  the  cases  of  chloroform  and  of  mesmerism.

After  such  a  cure  as  that  of  Miss  Barber,  without  any
aid  from  annoying  medicines  or  painful  applications,  without
money  and  without  price,  I  can  afford  to  be  thus  reviled  by
Mr.  Corfe  and  Dr.  Francis  Hawkins,  by  Mr.  Wakley  and
Dr.  James  Arthur  Wilson :  and  equally  well  can  afford  it  the
great  body  of  mesmerists  who  now  labour  in  this  holy  cause,
and  some  of  whose  blessed  and  astonishing  deeds  are  recorded
in  the  three  and  twenty  numbers  of  The  Zoist.  I  quote  these
unjust  and  indelicate  invectives,  not  because  any  one  of  the
four  men  is  worthy  of  notice,  but  in  order  to  show  to  posterity
what  violent  and  unscrupulous  opposition  to  the  establishment
of  mesmerism  was  made  by  men  educated  at  Oxford,  as  well
as  by  men  educated  not  otherwise  than  the  apothecary  of
Dr.  Hawkins's  hospital,  or  than  Mr.  Wakley  whose  educa¬
tion  was  merely  reading,  writing,  and  arithmetic  at  a  village
school :  and  made  publicly  without  censure  before  the  Boyal
College  of  Physicians,  no  less  than  in  the  pages  of  the
Lancet ,  which,  though  published  for  five  and  twenty  years,
was  not  admitted  into  the  College  till  this  very  summer.

In  my  Harveian  Oration  delivered  before  the  College  of
Physicians  was  the  following  passage : —

“  Joannes  Riolanus,  a  celebrated  physician  and  anatomist  of
Paris,  was  the  only  writer  to  whom  Harvey  condescended  to  reply :
and  the  labour  was  thrown  away.  For  Riolanus  was  of  course  not
to  be  convinced,  and  wrote  again  diffusely  and  obscurely,  repeating
what  he  had  written  before,  and,  as  before,  giving  no  experiments
in  opposition  to  those  of  Harvey :  and,  on  our  great  countryman
condescending  to  reply  a  second  time,  he  wrote  again,  still  not
having  had  intellectual  activity  enough  to  make  a  single  experiment,
and  doubting  those  of  Harvey  merely  because  they  disagreed  with
his  own  fancies.  Harvey  wisely  took  no  farther  notice  of  him,  but
hopelessly  gave  him  up,  leaving  him  to  that  wise  ordination — death,
which  removes  men  and  all  their  settled  absurd  prejudices  together.

But  the  medical  profession  was  not  contented  with  denial  of  the
truth  ;  they  stigmatised  Harvey  as  a  fool :  and  the  world,  thinking
that  the  doctors  were  quite  able  to  judge,  philosophically  dispas-

*  Numerous  Cases  of  Surgical  Operations  without  Pain  in  the  Mesmeric
State ,  &c.  By  John  Elliotson,  M.D.,  Cantab,  F.R.S.,  &e.,  &c.  pp.  5,  6,  10.


236


Cure  of  true  Cancer  with  Mesmerism.


sionate,  truth-loving,  and  industrious  in  observing  and  experi¬
menting,  thought  that  he  therefore  must  be  a  fool,  and  did  not
consult  him  as  before.  His  friend,  Mr.  Aubrey,  says,  in  a  manu¬
script  preserved  in  the  Royal  Society,  ‘  He  told  me  himself,  that
upon  his  publishing  that  Booke,  he  fell  in  his  Practice  extremely .’
But,  before  he  published  his  work, — when  he  had  announced  his
views  to  his  friends  and  in  his  anatomical  lectures  only,  he  had  been
traduced.  He  tells  us  that  he  at  length  published,  partly  on  account
of  the  envy  of  persons  who,  receiving  unfavourably  and  not  compre¬
hending  his  statements ,  endeavoured  publicly  to  vilify  him.  He  was
soon  lampooned  from  one  end  of  Europe  to  the  other.  But  he  took
no  notice  of  his  enemies,  for  the  following,  he  tells  us  in  his  second
letter  to  Riolanus,  were  his  sentiments.  4  To  return  abuse  with
abuse,  I  consider  unworthy  of  a  philosopher  and  of  an  enquirer  into
truth  ;  and  it  seems  to  me  better  and  more  prudent  to  dissipate  such
evidences  of  bad  feeling  by  the  light  of  true  and  satisfactory  obser¬
vation.  Dogs  must  bark  and  vomit  forth  what  is  in  them,  and  cynics
will  be  found  among  philosophers  :  but  we  must  prevent  them  from
biting  or  infecting  with  their  maddening  venom,  or  gnawing  the
bones  and  foundations  of  truth.  I  resolved  never  to  read,  much
more  never  to  condescend  to  answer,  detractors ,  idle  carpers ,  and
writers  tainted  with  scurrility ,  from  whom  nothing  solid,  nothing
but  abuse,  could  be  expected .  Let  them  indulge  their  depraved  de
sires  :  I  cannot  think  they  will  find  many  respectable  readers ;  nor
does  the  Almighty  bestow  upon  the  bad  the  most  excellent  and
highly  to  be  desired  gift  of  wisdom.  Bet  them  continue  to  revile
till,  if  they  are  not  ashamed,  they  are  at  least  sick  and  tired?  ”

Those  of  the  medical  profession  who  indulge  their  indif¬
ference  to  human  welfare  and  their  unworthy  feelings  may  be
assured  that  mesmerism  is  now  established  with  the  public,
and  that  in  a  very  short  time  they  must  for  their  own  in¬
terests  desist  from  the  course  which  they  have  hitherto  pur¬
sued.  Let  them  learn  from  a  woman  who  is  qualified  to
instruct  them  and  thus  writes  in  the  present  year  : —

“  All  the  naval  surgeons  I  met  in  the  Mediterranean  know  the
truth  of  Mesmerism  as  well  as  I  do,  and  admit  its  importance;  so
do  some  eminent  naval  officers  there  ;  and  the  Physician  of  the
French  Embassy  in  Egypt ;  and  the  gentlemen  from  India  who  have
witnessed  what  Dr.  Esdaile  and  the  Bengal  Government  have  done  ;
and  Mr.  Lane,  and  the  Bishop  of  Jerusalem ;  and,  in  short,  every
man  of  education,  who  has  really  attended  to  the  subject.  Among
them,  there  are  some  who  think  most  of  the  curative  powers  of
Mesmerism  ;  but  there  are  others  who  see  how  infinitely  more
important  and  interesting  are  those  of  its  facts  which  belong  to
Mental  philosophy,  and  who  feel  what  an  illustrious  foreigner  ex¬
pressed  to  me,  in  London,  not  long  ago :  ‘  it  is  a  shame  for  your
country  that  it  should  be  behind  every  other  civilised  nation,  in
regard  to  this  portion  of  science.  It  is  strange  that  men  should  be


Mesmeric  Phenomena  in  her  own  Person.  237

slow  to  investigate  a  powerful  curative  means.  But  when  the  same
agent  shows  that  Man  has  a  new  faculty  of  the  mind, — a  faculty
hitherto  not  numbered  among  his  powers, — what  can  one  say  to
indifference  to  such  a  discovery  as  that, — the  greatest  that  Man  has
ever  made,  or  can  ever  make !  It  is  a  shame  for  your  country !’
If  others  of  our  countrymen  abroad  will  follow  Dr.  Esdaile’s  example
in  using  their  opportunities,  they  may  yet  redeem  us  from  the  dis¬
grace  we  lie  under  with  the  educated  classes  of  every  country  in
Europe,  for  our  want  of  a  true  philosophical  spirit  of  inquiry  and
teachableness  in  regard  to  the  facts  of  Mesmerism.  However,  we
are  wiser  than  we  were  a  few  years  ago  :  and  it  is  now  a  rare  thing,
I  believe,  to  meet  an  educated  person  who  does  not  regard  the
subject  with  seriousness  and  candour,  and,  after  inquiry,  with
undoubting  belief  to  a  greater  or  less  extent.”*

John  Elliotson.

17,  Conduit  Street,  Hanover  Square,

September  21st,  1848.


II.  Mesmeric  Phenomena  in  her  own  Person,  described  by
Miss  Aglionby,  Nunnery,  Penrith,  Cumberland,  in  a
letter  to  Dr.  Elliotson.

“  We  cannot  publish  any  paper  on  the  subject  of  such  an  odious  fraud  as
mesmerism. ” — Lancet ,  July  22nd,  1848.

“  Lord  Morpeth  is  the  head  of  the  Board.  He  is  a  high-minded  excellent
man,  and  on  any  other  public  matter  we  should  place  much  reliance  on  his  saga¬
city  and  judgment.  But,  alas  !  we  fear  that  we  behold  in  him  the  enemy,  though
not  an  ungenerous  one,  of  the  profession,  as  he  is  known  to  be  a  confirmed  believer
in  mesmerism.  Obviously  there  can  be  hut  little  hope  for  the  profession  in  such
a  quarter.” — Lancet,  September  9th,  1848.f

Dear  Sir, — Your  kindness  in  saying  that  you  would  not  object  to
receive  any  communication  from  me,  causes  me  to  trouble  you  with
an  account  of  my  personal  experience  in  mesmerism.  I  was  induced
to  try  it,  in  the  hope  that  it  might  restore  my  strength,  which  I
had  never  quite  recovered  after  a  feverish  attack  I  had  last  winter ;
and  I  have  already  received  much  benefit  from  it.  I  am  aware  that

*  Eastern  Life,  Present  and  Past,  by  Harriet  Martineau,  pp.  141-2.  1848.

f  Mr.  Wakley  is  very  uncomfortable  at  the  firm  and  great  advance  of  mes¬
merism.  In  the  House  of  Commons,  besides  Lord  Morpeth,  Lord  George  Ben-
tinck,  Sir  Richard  Vyvyan,  Bt.,  Sir  William  Molesworth,  Bt.,  The  Right  Hon.
Charles  Buller — the  head  of  the  Poor  Law  Commissioners,  The  Right  Hon.  R.  L.
Sheil,  Mr.  Aglionby — the  cousin  of  the  writer  of  the  following  communication,
Mr.  R.  Monckton  Milnes,  Mr.  W.  J.  Fox,  Mr.  Ewart,  Mr.  Langston,  Mr.
Moffatt,  Mr.  Bernal  and  Mr.  Bernal  Osborne — the  father  and  brother  of  the  lady
who  relates  her  case  in  No.  XIX.,  and  many  others,  are  satisfied  of  the  truth  of
mesmerism.  Poor  Mr.  Wakley  made  a  grand  and  irretrievable  blunder  and  false
calculation  when  he  listened  to  Mr.  Liston  and  the  desire  to  sell  his  Lancet,  and
started  suddenly  against  mesmerism.

What  will  Mr.  Aglionby  say  to  Mr.  Wakley’ s  accusation  of  Miss  Aglionby,
for  she  is  one  of  those  who  commit  the  “  odious  fraud'1  of  mesmerism  and  revere
the  “  loathsome  dam." — John  Elliotson.


238


Mesmeric  Phenomena  in  her  ovm  Person,


there  is  nothing  remarkable  in  the  little  record  that  I  send  you ;  but,
from  my  mind  remaining  perfectly  free  and  clear,  whilst  my  bodily
frame  and  senses  were  fully  under  the  influence  of  mesmerism,  I  am
enabled  to  give  a  more  distinct  account  of  my  sensations  than  is
perhaps  usually  the  case.  My  medical  friend,  Mr.  Nixon,  of  Wigton,
with  whose  name  you  are  already  acquainted,  was  kind  enough  to
mesmerise  me  daily  for  a  fortnight ;  but  our  seances  have  now  been
interrupted  by  my  leaving  my  aunt’s  residence  to  come  to  the  sea¬
side.  I  am  sure  you  will  join  me  in  wishing  that  all  the  profession
were  possessed  of  Mr.  Nixon’s  candour  and  intelligence.  Three
years  ago,  when  I  first  named  mesmerism  to  him,  he  shook  his
head  and  smiled  at  my  belief  in  it.  But,  by  listening  to  what  I
told  him  that  I  had  seen  and  done,  and  by  reading  The  Zoist  and
other  books  that  I  lent  him,  he  was  induced  to  try  for  himself ;  and
the  result  was  that  he  not  only  became  a  firm  believer  in  mesmerism,
but  has  also  been  enabled  to  relieve  in  many  instances  the  sufferings
of  his  patients  by  its  practice.*  Pray  make  any  use  you  please  of
the  papers  I  send  you.  There  is,  I  know,  little  value  in  them ;
and,  were  it  not  that  the  nature  of  mesmerism  is  as  yet  so  dark  and
hidden  as  to  make  even  the  most  trifling  remarks  on  it  occasionally
useful,  I  should  never  have  troubled  you  by  submitting  them  to
your  notice.  I  cannot  conclude  without  expressing  my  sense  of  the
kindness  with  which  you  have  received  the  letters  I  have  from  time
to  time  troubled  you  with.  I  would  also,  if  you  will  pardon  my
boldness,  express  a  deep  and  earnest  wish  that  you  may  long  enjoy
all  the  health  and  happiness  that  your  friends  and  the  admirers  of
your  philosophy  and  genius  (among  whom  I  would  fain  be  included)
could  possibly  desire  for  you.

I  remain,  dear  Sir,

Your’s  truly,

24th  June.  E.  A.  Aglionby.

Allonby,  near  Maryport,  Cumberland.


23rd  June,  1848.

On  7th  June,  I  was  mesmerised  by  Mr.  Nixon,  my  medical
attendant,  for  the  first  time.  My  eyes  closed  involuntarily,
my  limbs  became  useless,  and,  when  I  attempted  to  speak,  I
was  only  able  to  utter  a  word  or  two  with  extreme  difficulty ;
my  thoughts,  however,  remaining  perfectly  clear  and  distinct.
I  was  mesmerised  every  day  but  one  until  the  13th,  with
almost  exactly  the  same  effect.

13th.  After  being  thrown  into  my  usual  state,  Mr.  Nixon
retreated  a  few  steps  from  me,  when  I  felt  a  strange  sensa¬
tion  of  uneasiness,  and  my  arms  stretched  out,  pointing  which
ever  way  Mr.  Nixon  moved ;  my  mind  all  the  while  remaining
active  and  clear,  though  the  power  to  control  my  movements
was  entirely  gone  and  I  felt  drawn  irresistibly  as  the  needle

*  See  Mr.  Nixon’s  success  in  fracture  of  the  leg  and  in  fits,  in  No.  XV.,
p.  334. — Zoist.


by  Miss  Aglionby.


239


by  the  magnet.  After  a  time  my  uneasiness  increased,  and
I  rose  and  followed  the  movements  of  my  mesmeriser,  my
eyes  still  being  closely  shut.  As  he  reseated  me  on  the  sofa,

I  felt  a  shuddering  run  through  me  and  a  cold  atmosphere
surround  me  from  my  aunt’s  approaching  me,  of  which  I
was  otherwise  unaware.  At  last  she  touched  me,  which  sent
a  thrill  of  horror  through  my  frame,  and  I  called  out  so
loudly  that  Mr.  Nixon  demesmerised  me ;  and  so  ended  my
seance  for  the  evening.

14th.  Mr.  Nixon  was  later  than  usual  in  coming  this
evening,  and  we  had  almost  given  him  up,  when  I  felt  a
slight  mesmeric  influence  seeming  to  draw  me  forward,  as  it
were,  and  I  remarked  to  my  aunt  that  I  was  sure  he  was  com¬
ing  up  to  the  house ;  and  accordingly  in  two  or  three  minutes
he  made  his  appearance.  I  was  speedily  under  the  mesmeric
influence,  my  body  and  senses  subdued  and  under  control,
but  my  thoughts  as  usual  free  and  clear.  The  mesmeric  passes
made  at  a  few  yards’  distance  seem  to  possess  almost  a  greater
influence  than  when  close  to  me.  This  evening  I  followed
my  mesmeriser  unerringly  through  the  room  with  closed  eyes,
and  answered  correctly  to  pressure  over  several  of  the  organs
of  the  head.  When  an  organ  was  touched  over,  I  felt  irresist¬
ibly  impelled  to  follow  the  indication,  though  perfectly  aware
of  what  I  was  doing  :  for  instance,  Mr.  Nixon,  meaning  to
touch  Firmness,  happened  to  press  Veneration,  and  I  fell  on
my  knees,  my  thoughts  turning  to  God  and  heaven.  When
Firmness  was  really  touched,  I  was  compelled  to  draw  myself
up  to  my  full  height,  and  aspire  as  it  were  to  reach  the  very
ceiling.  When  Benevolence  is  pressed,  I  feel  unutterably
calm  and  happy.  I  cannot  express  any  of  my  emotions  in
words,  unless  the  organ  of  Language  is  excited,  and  then
my  tongue  is  loosened,  and  I  speak,  knowing  what  I  say,
though  saying  it  entirely  from  impulse.  Imitation  makes  me
follow  most  ludicrously  Mr.  Nixon’s  words  and  gestures.  By
making  passes  from  my  knees  to  my  feet,  the  latter  became  so
chained  to  the  ground  that  by  no  effort  could  I  move  them
or  stir  at  all.  When  in  this  state  Mr.  N.  left  me,  my  anxiety
to  follow  him  became  both  painful  and  absurd.  I  could  be
thus  chained  to  the  ground  with  equal  facility,  when  I  was
otherwise  free  from  mesmeric  influence.  All  that  I  have
mentioned  is  common  to  many  patients,  but,  from  my  mind
remaining  in  its  normal  state,  I  am  able  to  give  a  distinct
account  of  my  sensations,  which  I  believe  is  not  very  usual.

16th.  Mr.  Nixon  came  as  usual,  but  I  was  not  this  even¬
ing  warned  of  his  approach,  and  through  the  whole  seance  I
felt  his  influence  less  powerful,  which  he  afterwards  accounted


240  Mesmeric  Phenomena  in  her  own  Person,

for  by  saying  he  was  himself  much  harassed  and  fatigued.
He  excited  several  of  the  cerebral  organs,  but  the  impulse  I
felt  was  either  very  slight  or  none  at  all.  Cautiousness  made
me  rather  more  hesitating  in  my  walk.  Self-esteem  had  no
effect,  Firmness  but  little,  and  Combativeness  raised  but  a
trifling  irritation,  instead  of  the  spasm  of  anger  it  roused  in
me  last  night.  Mesmerised  gold  had  no  effect  upon  me,  and
I  failed  in  distinguishing  coins  that  were  and  were  not  mes¬
merised.  The  organ  of  language  had  its  full  effect,  a  single
touch  on  the  eyes  instantly  restoring  my  powers  of  speech.
A  touch  on  the  forehead  immediately  destroyed  them,  silenc¬
ing  me  even  in  the  middle  of  a  sentence,  which  I  wrould  con¬
tinue  unbroken,  after  any  lapse  of  time,  when  Language  was
again  excited.  My  mesmeriser,  by  taking  my  aunt  by  the
hand,  placed  her  en  rapport  with  me :  but  here  some  cross
mesmerism  seemed  to  take  place,  for  I  felt  confused,  and  alter¬
nately  repelled  from  and  attracted  to  both.  On  passes  being
made  from  my  knees  to  my  feet,  the  latter  grew  to  the  ground
as  firmly  as  before,  and  my  aunt,  aided  by  my  own  efforts,
was  unable  to  drag  them  away.  When  I  feel  my  voice  re¬
stored  to  me  through  the  medium  of  Language,  I  am  always
reminded  of  Zacharias  having  his  tongue  unloosed,  and  also
of  the  miracle  “  where  the  dumb  spake.”  Why  should  Bene¬
volence  being  touched  seal  me  again  in  silence,  and  annihi¬
late  the  power  of  Language  ?  Query,  would  the  mesmeric
excitement  of  any  of  the  other  organs  have  the  same  effect  ?

17th.  This  evening  I  was  aware  of  Mr.  Nixon’s  approach
several  minutes  before  he  actually  arrived.  Very  soon  after
he  came,  he  was  sent  for  to  a  patient  close  at  hand.  He
therefore  left  me  mesmerised  and  lying  on  the  sofa  with  the
organ  of  language  excited.  At  first  when  he  went  I  felt
somewhat  uneasy,  but  lay  perfectly  motionless,  my  limbs
having  been  mesmerically  bound  to  the  sofa.  After  a  short
time  my  powers  of  speech  (for  I  had  been  conversing  as  ra¬
tionally  as  in  my  normal  state  with  my  aunt)  died  away,  the
uneasiness  left  me,  and  I  lay  in  my  usual  spell-bound  state.
Mr.  Nixon  returned  to  me  in  about  half  an  hour;  but,  some
minutes  before  his  arrival,  I  felt  a  glow  of  warmth  and  a  pers¬
piration  all  over  me,  and  my  breathing  became  quick,  panting,
and  difficult.  So  soon  as  he  appeared,  this  uncomfortable
feeling  left  me.  It  had  no  doubt  arisen  from  his  having  made
passes  and  bent  his  thoughts  strongly  on  me  as  he  approached
the  house.  Nothing  else  new  occurred  in  this  evening’s
seance,  except  that,  when  Acquisitiveness  was  excited,  I  had
a  strong  desire  (indeed,  literally,  “  an  itching  palm”)  to
grasp  and  keep  every  thing  within  my  reach.  On  Conscien-


by  Miss  Aglionby.


241


tiousness  being  touched,  I  relaxed  hold  of  my  possessions.
My  mesmeriser  made  a  line  of  passes  along  the  floor,  which
seemed  to  raise  an  invisible  barrier  in  my  path,  and  it  was  not
till  he  forcibly  pulled  me  over  that  I  could  overcome  the
difficulty.  He  then  ordered  me  on  a  chair  which  my  aunt
had  just  left,  but,  until  he  had  made  a  few  passes  over  it,  I
was  so  repelled  as  to  be  unable  to  do  so.  Pressure  on  Bene¬
volence  always  destroys  the  power  of  speech ;  but  on  further
trial  we  find  that  excitement  of  the  other  organs  has  not  the
same  effect.  Why  this  should  be  so  I  cannot  tell.  But,  in¬
deed,  what  can  one  tell  of  mesmerism  ?  It  is  altogether  a
world  of  mysteries.

18th.  I  awoke  about  2  o’clock  this  morning,  (a  very  un¬
usual  thing  for  me,)  with  a  restless  feeling,  and  my  thoughts
full  of  mesmerism,  and  a  strong  conviction  that  Mr.  Nixon
was  passing  within  a  short  distance  of  me.  On  my  after¬
wards  asking  him,  he  said  that  he  had  passed  the  house  at
that  hour  on  his  road  to  a  patieut,  and  in  passing  had  bent
his  thoughts  strongly  on  me,  willing  me  under  his  mesmeric
influence.  It  was  some  time  after  this,  before  I  could  com¬
pose  myself  to  sleep ;  which,  after  it  did  come,  was  dreaming
and  confused.  This  evening,  whilst  sitting  after  tea  chatting
with  my  aunt  and  a  friend,  the  mesmeric  spell  came  over  my
eyes,  limbs,  and  voice,  and  it  was  with  difficulty  I  roused
myself  so  as  to  avoid  observation.  However,  Mr.  Nixon
soon  arrived,  and  owned  that  as  he  came  from  his  own  house
to  this,  he  had  been  mentally  mesmerising  me.  Nothing
very  new  occurred  in  my  seance  of  this  evening.  Excite¬
ment  of  Ideality  gave  me  the  power  of  speech,  but  caused
no  other  manifestation.  The  contact  of  my  mesmeriser’s
hand  with  my  throat  had  the  same  effect,  giving  back  power
to  the  organs  of  the  voice.  I  followed  Mr.  Nixon  with  closed
eyes  as  unerringly  as  if  I  could  see  him,  never  feeling  any
doubt  as  to  the  path  he  had  taken ;  and  I  stood  for  at  least
ten  minutes  with  my  arms  extended  at  right  angles  from  my
body,  without  feeling  it  an  exertion,  the  air  under  my  arms
feeling  heavy  and  supporting  them  as  water  would  do.
Generally,  during  a  seance ,  my  pulse  is  depressed  five  or  six
beats;  but  this  evening  it  was  raised  ten,  and  much  increased
in  volume.

19th.  As  I  was  sitting  this  forenoon  under  a  tree,  reading
a  book  of  argument  with  deep  attention,  my  eyes  closed  and
my  limbs  became  fixed  and  powerless,  but  my  mind  as  usual
remaining  free.  I  was  in  this  state  from  five  to  ten  minutes,
and  then  gradually  returned  to  my  normal  state.  Mr.
Nixon,  as  I  afterwards  learnt,  was  at  this  moment  bending


242


Mesmeric  Phenomena  in  her  own  Person,


his  thoughts  strongly  on  me.  My  seance  was  of  its  usual
character  this  evening ;  I  was  in  constant  action  for  nearly
an  hour,  yet  felt  no  fatigue.  When  Mr.  Nixon  sat  or  stood
near  my  aunt,  I  had  a  wish  to  follow  him,  and  yet  felt  a  fear
and  reluctance  to  approach.  From  this  sensation,  I  can
readily  imagine  that  a  crowded  public  room  must  be  very
unfavourable  to  the  display  of  mesmeric  powers.  When  my
mesmeriser  is  near  no  one,  I  can  follow  him,  and  even  his
wishes  unerringly;  but,  when  it  is  otherwise,  I  become  con¬
fused  and  distressed,  and  less  under  his  influence.  After  his
chaining  me  to  the  ground,  I  stood  as  usual  unable  to  move ;
suddenly  my  feet  were  loosened,  and  I  felt  impelled  to  walk
up  to  him.  He  had  mentally  ordered  me  to  do  so.  He  caused
me  a  great  feeling  of  distress  by  making  repulsive  passes  to¬
wards  the  region  of  Combativeness  and  Destructiveness ;  but
the  same  passes  directed  to  the  front  of  my  head  had  no  such
effect.  I  have  felt  lately  a  great  increase  of  strength  which
I  attribute  entirely  to  mesmerism,  and  the  more  exertion  I
use  whilst  under  its  influence,  the  more  benefit  I  seem  to
derive  from  it.

20th.  This  forenoon,  whilst  sitting  talking  to  my  aunt,
I  was  arrested  and  spell-bound  as  before.  This  arose  from
my  mesmeriser  having  been  thinking  what  effect  galvanism
would  have  on  me,  if  a  shock  was  given  me  whilst  in  the
trance.  This  evening's  seance  presented  its  usual  features.
My  mother  and  aunt  were  both  in  the  room  part  of  the  time,
and  the  discomfort  their  united  presence  gave  me  was  ex¬
treme.  Whilst  exciting  the  organ  of  Firmness,  an  idea  oc¬
curred  to  Mr.  Nixon,  that  spinal  distortion  might  be  much
benefitted  by  the  patient  being  placed  daily  in  the  trance,  and,
through  Firmness,  drawn  up  perfectly  straight,  or  to  either
side,  as  the  case  might  require.

21st.  This  morning  I  received  my  last  seance  before  going
to  the  sea.  Mr.  Nixon  brought  a  galvanic  machine,  and  sent
me  into  the  trance  whilst  I  was  receiving  the  shocks.  The
galvanizing  and  mesmerising  at  the  same  time  did  not  pro¬
duce  any  difference  in  my  sensations.

24th.  I  have  now  removed  to  the  sea-side,  twelve  miles
distance  from  Mr.  Nixon's  residence ;  but,  notwithstanding,
last  night,  at  about  a  quarter  past  10,  the  spell  came  upon
me,  whilst  my  maid  was  brushing  my  hair;  luckily  I  had
explained  to  her  something  of  mesmerism  and  its  influence
over  me,  or  she  would  have  been  much  alarmed.  That  elec¬
tricity,  or  something  akin  to  it,  may  be  imparted  from  body
to  body  by  contact  can  be  imagined ;  but  what  sort  of  power
is  it,  where  one  human  being,  by  mere  thought,  can  deprive


by  Miss  Aglionby.  243

another  of  sense  and  voluntary  movement,  and  that  too  at
many  miles  distance.

Allonby,  12th  July.

Dear  Sir, — I  was  much  gratified  by  receiving  your  kind  letter
yesterday.  I  shall  return  next  week  to  my  aunt’s,  where  I  shall
again  go  through  a  course  of  mesmeric  treatment.  All  the  experi¬
ments  that  you  have  had  the  goodness  to  suggest  shall  then  be  care¬
fully  tried,  and  the  result  shall  be  communicated  to  you.  I  have,
of  course,  no  objection  to  your  publishing  both  my  letter  and  journal,
or  any  thing  else  I  may  write  to  you,  that  you  may  think  proper.
In  the  present  state  of  feeling  about  mesmerism,  I  think  it  is  much
to  be  regretted  that  any  one  should  shrink  from  making  public  his  or
her  experience  in  it,  and  particularly  where  benefit  has  been  derived
from  it,  as  in  my  case.  When  I  copied  Mr.  Nixon’s  gestures  during
the  trance,  I  felt  impelled  to  act  as  he  was  acting,  but  I  was  not
aware,  until  told  afterwards,  that  I  was  imitating  him.  For  in¬
stance,  when  he  raised  his  arm,  I  felt  an  irresistible  impulse  to  raise
mine,  but  I  did  not  know  that  he  was  doing  so  at  the  same  time.

I  remain,  dear  Sir,

Yours,  with  every  sentiment  of  esteem,

E.  A.  Aglionby.

Miss  Peacock’s,  No.  1,  Cliff,
Scarborough,  12th  August.

My  dear  Sir, — As  you  so  kindly  desired  me  to  communicate  with
you  again,  I  send  you  a  few  more  papers  to  use  as  you  think  proper  ;
but  you  will  probably  find  them  too  similar  to  those  I  sent  before,
to  make  them  worth  much;  of  that  however  you  are  of  course  the  best
judge.  Mesmerism  has  been  of  the  greatest  service  to  me,  and  I
feel  truly  thankful  to  have  known  so  kind,  unprejudiced  and  intelli¬
gent  a  medical  man  as  Mr.  Nixon,  whose  interest  in  this  new  and
beautiful  addition  to  his  art ,  is  quite  intense.  He  has  now  other
mesmeric  patients  on  his  list  besides  myself.

I  remain,  dear  Sir,

Yours  with  every  sentiment  of  esteem,

E.  A.  Aglionby.

July  21st.  Yesterday  evening  I  resumed  my  mesmeric
seances.  Mr.  Nixon  excited  Firmness  and  Veneration  by
pointing  only,  the  latter  causing  me  to  sink  on  ray  knees  and
the  former  to  rise  and  draw  myself  up.  Neither  impulse  was,
however,  so  strong  as  when  the  organs  are  actually  touched.
I  obeyed  my  mesmeriser’s  will  (of  course  only  mentally
expressed)  with  great  precision.  For  instance,  I  walked
across  the  room  and  sat  down  on  the  seat  he  willed,  and  then
rose  up  and  closed  a  desk  that  was  on  the  table.  I  always
preserve  my  senses,  but  feel  a  wish  or  rather  an  impulse  to
perform  what  he  silently  wills.  Some  hours  before  I  saw
Mr.  Nixon,  I  was  mesmerically  affected,  which  had  arisen,  he


244  Mesmeric  Phenomena  in  her  own.  Person,

said,  from  his  having  been  at  that  hour  thinking  of  mesmerism,
and  naturally  of  me  in  connection  with  it,  though  without
the  intention  to  affect  me.  I  was  very  easily  affected  during
this  seance ,  hardly  being  able  to  sit  and  converse  with  Mr.
Nixon  on  general  topics  without  feeling  the  spell  steal
over  me.

22nd.  I  was  very  susceptible  during  this  seance  and  not
so  easily  freed  on  awakening  from  the  mesmeric  influence.
Mr.  Nixon  made  the  passes  consecutively  for  at  least  ten
minutes,  which  had  the  effect  of  deepening  the  bodily  torpor,
but  left  my  mind  as  clear  as  usual.  I  had  an  odd  feeling
as  if  my  head  were  a  sort  of  box,  in  which  my  thoughts  were
shut  up ;  but,  when  language  was  excited,  my  mouth  seemed
to  give  them  vent  in  words.  Three  glasses  were  placed
before  me,  only  one  being  mesmerised;  but  I  could  not  dis¬
tinguish  it  either  by  touch  or  taste.  I  again  answered  to
pointing  only  over  the  cerebral  organs.  Mr.  Nixon  drew  a
mesmeric  line  on  the  floor,  but  I  passed  it  without  conscious¬
ness  or  difficulty.

24th.  No  seance  on  Saturday,  but  this  evening  as  usual.
Some  instances  of  willing  failed,  but  they  chiefly  succeeded ;
pointing  over  the  organs  answers  perfectly.  After  being
thrown  into  the  trance  by  Mr,.  Nixon,  my  aunt  attempted  to
continue  the  mesmerising ;  but  this  caused  me  considerable
discomfort.

25th.  Veneration  was  in  this  seance  perfectly  excited  not
only  by  pointing,  but  in  two  instances  merely  by  willing.
This  organ  appears  to  be  more  easily  acted  on  than  any  other,
though  I  am  not  aware,  either  from  my  character  or  the
shape  of  my  head,  that  I  possess  it  in  any  unusual  degree.
Without  having  Imitation  excited,  I  followed  my  mesmeriser's
attitudes  wrhen  he  did  not  intend  me  to  do  so.  He  left  me
in  the  middle  of  the  room,  standing  and  powerless  to  fol¬
low  him,  though  wishing  it,  so  strongly  that  the  tears
streamed  down  my  cheeks  with  distress  at  my  inability.  He
mesmerised  my  arms,  which  made  them  feel  so  heavy  that  I
could  not  lift  them  till  he  drew  them  up  and  down  by  trac¬
tive  passes,  and  then  the  atmosphere  seemed  light  or  heavy
accordingly  as  they  were  depressed  or  raised.

26th.  The  only  new  occurrence  in  this  seance  was  the
great  attractive  power  which  a  large  piece  of  green  crystal  had
over  me.  When  Mr.  Nixon  took  it  in  his  hand,  my  eagerness  to
follow  him  increased ;  and,  when  he  laid  it  down,  I  was  more
anxious  to  be  near  it  than  him.  To  have  hold  of  it  and  to
press  it  between  my  hands  and  to  my  brow  produced  a  most
agreeable  sensation.  When  my  aunt  had  it,  the  wish  to


by  Miss  Aglionby.


/


245


possess  it  overcame  my  usual  repugnance  to  approach  her,
and  I  snatched  it  eagerly  from  her.  When  standing  near  my
mesmeriser,  he  suddenly  placed  his  hands  on  each  side  of  my
head,  which  so  violently  excited  Combativeness  and  Destruc¬
tiveness  that  I  screamed  out  aloud  and  could  not  be  composed
till  Benevolence  was  pressed.

28th.  One  seance  omitted,  but  this  evening,  as  usual,
I  was  suffering  from  weakness  in  my  voice  from  having
talked  too  much  the  day  before,  which  induced  my  mes¬
meriser  to  direct  his  attention  chiefly  to  giving  strength  to
the  organs  of  speech,  by  making  repeated  passes  over  my
throat.  This  had  completely  the  desired  effect,  all  weak¬
ness  and  discomfort  having  disappeared  when  I  came  out  of
the  trance.  These  repeated  passes  also  enabled  me  to  con¬
verse  more  than  common,  and  not  to  lose  my  voice  so  entirely
as  I  usually  do  when  under  the  spell.  I  obeyed  Mr.  Nixon's
mental  will  accurately.  When  he  wills  me  to  perform  any
particular  action,  I  do  not  know  that  he  wills  it,  but  I
merely  felt  a  verjr  strong  inclination  or  rather  impulse  to  do  it.

29th.  Drinking  a  small  cup  of  water  strongly  mesmerised
threw  me  into  the  trance  as  quickly  as  and  I  think  more  heavily
than  the  ordinary  passes.  The  water  seemed  to  have  rather
a  flatter  taste  than  usual ;  it  flew  up  into  my  head  and  warmed
me  all  over  like  strong  brandy  and  water.  We  again  tried  if
I  could  distinguish  between  substances  mesmerised  and
unmesmerised,  but  I  could  not.  I  talked  a  good  deal  to  Mr.
Nixon,  but  whenever  my  aunty  spoke  to  me,  I  could  not
answer  her.

30th.  A  cup  of  water  again  threw  me  into  a  heavy  trance,
which  was  deepened  by  passes ;  still  sleep  never  comes.  It  is
my  bodily  frame  only  that  is  affected,  not  rny  mind.  Mr.
Nixon  left  me  alone  for  about  ten  minutes.  I  sat  perfectly
motionless,  until  he  was  returning  towards  the  house,  and
then  my  breathing  became  difficult  and  I  felt  some  uneasi¬
ness.  Before  leaving,  Mr.  Nixon  mesmerised  a  cup  of  water,
which  I  drank  about  half  an  hour  afterwards  on  getting  into
bed.  It  threw  me  into  the  trance,  though  not  so  deeply  as
when  drunk  fresh  from  the  hand  of  the  mesmeriser.  From
the  trance  I  very  soon  merged  into  a  natural  sleep,  and  slept
soundly  all  night,  which  however  is  usual  with  me.  But  in
cases  of  light  and  broken  sleep  I  should  think  a  glass  of  mes¬
merised  water  taken  the  last  thing  might  be  useful.

Query — could  a  bad  appetite  be  improved  by  a  daily  mag¬
netic  excitement  of  Gustativeness  ?

31st.  Last  night,  from  Miss  Blamire  being  here,  my
seance  was  a  very  broken  one,  and  offered  no  new  features ;

VOL.  vi.  s


246


Mesmeric  Phenomena  in  her  own  Person,


and  to-day  Mr.  Nixon’s  engagements  have  prevented  his
coming  to  see  me.

2nd  August.  Yesterday  I  was  very  weak  and  languid,  I
fully  believe  from  the  want  of  mesmerism.  In  the  evening
Mr.  Nixon  came  up,  and  after  my  seance  (which  merely  pre¬
sented  the  usual  phenomena,  such  as  obeying  the  will,  &c.),
I  felt  quite  like  a  new  being.  Jane  Ritson,  a  girl  suffering
from  general  bad  health,  neuralgic  pains,  and  violent  palpi¬
tation  of  the  heart,  has  come  to  stay  in  the  house  to  receive
the  benefits  of  mesmerism  along  with  me.  She  had  her  first
seance  last  night,  when  she  was  suffering  severe  pain  of  the
arm,  side,  and  thigh.  She  was  easily  thrown  into  the  coma,
but  kept  her  eyes  open,  and  spoke  a  little.  When  she  was
aroused,  she  had  no  recollection  of  what  had  been  done,  and
her  pains  had  quite  left  her.

3rd.  Jane  and  I  have  had  two  seances  to-day  which  has
restored  my  strength  in  a  wonderful  degree,  and  quieted  her
pulsations,  improved  her  appetite  and  sleep,  and  destroyed
her  pains.  I  attempted  to  watch  Mr.  Nixon  mesmerising
Jane,  but  it  caused  me,  first  to  shed  tears  and  finally  to  fall
into  the  trance,  which  was  deepened  and  completed  by  a
draught  of  mesmerised  water.  Jane  is  very  lifeless,  the  mind
quite  gone,  her  limbs  relaxed  and  totally  insensible  to  pain.
The  cerebral  organs  are  incapable  of  excitement.  Her  eyes
glazed  and  open  but  sightless,  and  the  balls  insensible  even
to  touch.  In  the  evening,  she  displayed  some  degree  of  clair¬
voyance.  Mr.  Nixon  put  a  box  into  her  hand  containing  a
rosary,  he  himself  being  totally  ignorant  of  its  contents.  On
being  asked  what  it  contained,  she  said,  small  beads,  and
then  described  their  different  colours  and  their  being  con¬
nected  by  gilt  wire,  quite  correctly ;  except  that  she  called
the  green  beads  blue,  which  colour  they  appeared  also  to  us
by  the  lamp  light.  She  also  gave  us  a  long  account  of  what
was  passing  at  her  own  house,  but  of  course  we  could  not
ascertain  the  accuracy  of  it.

4th.  In  both  the  morniug  and  evening  seance ,  I  was  affected
as  usual.  Looking  at  Mr.  Nixon  mesmerising  Jane,  made
me  both  laugh  and  cry,  and  be  almost  hysterical  before  I  sunk
into  the  trance.  Jane  was  so  deep  in  the  coma,  that  she
could  not  speak  at  all,  though  she  could  walk  when  led  about.
Her  jaw  was  perfectly  rigid,  and  the  rest  of  her  frame  relaxed.
Though  she  could  not  speak,  she  laughed  loudly  and  abun¬
dantly.  Her  silence  of  course  prevented  any  further  trial  for
clairvoyance.  Mr.  Nixon,  by  using  the  stethoscope,  found
that  the  increased  action  of  the  heart  was  only  sympathetic.

5th.  This  morning’s  seance  displayed  only  its  usual  fea-


by  Miss  Aglionby.


247


tures  in  my  case,  but  many  most  curious  ones  in  Jane’s.  She
became  quite  under  the  influence  of  her  mesmeriser’s  will,
walking  round  and  round  the  room  and  sitting  down,  &c.,  as
he  directed.  Firmness  and  Veneration  appeared  to  be  the
only  organs  capable  of  excitement.  Combativeness  and  De¬
structiveness,  so  active  in  most  heads,  did  not  even  produce
a  change  of  countenance  in  her.  Firmness  caused  her  to
walk  quite  erect  and  even  on  tiptoe,  whilst  Veneration  made
her  throw  herself  into  a  complete  arch,  bowing  her  head  and
hands  so  as  to  touch  the  very  floor,  after  the  manner  of  an
eastern  Salaam.  These  organs  were  excited  by  pointing,
touching,  or  willing,  though  the  touch  had  certainly  the
readiest  effect.  She  talked  a  little  but  not  freely,  and  laughed,
as  usual,  a  good  deal.

In  the  hopes  of  bringing  forth  more  clairvoyance,  we  put
boxes  into  her  hands,  asking  her  what  they  contained.  But
she  appeared  quite  indignant  at  the  attempt,  throwing  them
on  the  floor  and  saying  angrily,  that  she  did  not  know  and
could  not  be  fashed.  Mr.  Nixon  left  her  in  the  trance,  out
of  which  she  awoke  spontaneously  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour
after  his  departure.  She  had  slept  more  than  two  hours,  and
after  she  awoke  was  unconscious  of  all  that  had  passed.  Mr.
Nixon  closed  her  eyes  by  pointing,  and  they  remained  shut
during  most  of  the  seance.  I  ought  to  mention  that  she  is  a
simple  country  girl  of  18,  totally  unacquainted  with  mes¬
merism  or  phrenology.  Drawing  a  mesmeric  line  across  the
floor  did  not  impede  her  in  walking.

6th.  Though  I  continue  daily  to  be  mesmerised  to  the
very  great  benefit  of  my  health,  I  shall  drop  my  own  history,
unless  I  display  some  new  phenomena.  Jane  was  very  lifeless
and  speechless  to-day  in  her  trance,  and  would  neither  walk
nor  talk  freely.  She,  however,  showed  some  beautiful  sam¬
ples  of  phreno-mesmerism.  Firmness  and  Veneration,  which
were  so  strongly  developed  yesterday,  would  not  act  at  all  to¬
day  ;  perhaps  from  having  been  rather  overworked.  Three
of  the  organs  were,  however,  easily  excited ;  Gustativeness
made  her  chew  and  move  her  jaws  and  tongue,  as  if  tasting
something.  Benevolence  caused  her  to  laugh  and  smile  joy¬
ously,  but  Tune  was  the  most  striking  in  its  results.  Three
different  times,  this  organ  being  touched,  she  sang  fragments
of  songs,  correctly  and  distinctly  both  as  to  words  and  time.
Before  leaving  her,  Mr.  Nixon  willed  her  to  clasp  her  hands
over  her  head  when  she  awoke.  Forty  minutes  after  his  de¬
parture  she  roused  up,  placing  her  hands  in  the  desired  atti¬
tude.  She  had  slept,  altogether,  nearly  three  hours.  She

s  2


248  Mesmeric  Phenomena  in  her  own  Person ,

said  she  was  very  hungry  when  she  awoke.  Could  this  be
from  Gustativeness  being  excited  during  the  trance?

7th.  This  evening  Jane  displayed  no  phenomena,  except
extraordinary  susceptibility  of  Tune;  all  the  other  organs
being  perfectly  unexcitable.  She  sang  in  a  loud,  clear,  dis¬
tinct  voice,  either  from  willing,  pointing,  or  touching ;  and,
when  she  was  in  the  middle  of  her  song,  her  mesmeriser  could
impose  instant  silence  on  her  by  his  will  alone.  I  also  could
cause  her  to  sing  by  willing,  but  I  could  not  arrest  her.
Aunty  tried,  but  could  not  influence  her  at  all.  I  probably
had  more  power  over  her  because  I  was  myself  in  the  trance,
and  therefore  was  possessed  of  the  same  magnetic  fluid  (or
whatever  it  may  be)  that  influenced  her.  All  the  songs  she
sang  were  sacred  to-night.  When  she  awoke  we  did  not  tell
her  she  had  been  singing,  but  merely  asked  her  if  she  knew
any  hymns  or  psalms  by  heart ;  she  said  that  when  she  was  a
child  she  had  learnt  a  good  many,  but  had  forgotten  them
now.  The  mesmeric  trance,  like  natural  somnambulism,
often  brings  the  lost  treasures  of  memory  to  light.

8th.  Again  no  phenomena  were  shown  in  our  lifeless  Jane,
except  excitement  of  the  organ  of  Tune.  Even  this  was  less
susceptible  than  usual,  as  it  would  answer  to  touch  alone.
We  had,  however,  a  beautiful  instance  of  the  influence  of
will.  Mr.  Nixon,  whilst  she  was  asleep,  willed  that  she
should  take  a  flower  from  a  glass  on  the  chimney-piece  on
awaking.  Accordingly,  when  she  awoke,  she  looked  round  at
the  flowers  most  wistfully,  as  if  struggling  against  her  wish
to  take  one.  At  last,  we  asked  her  what  she  wanted,  and  she
owned  that  she  desired  greatly  to  have  a  flower.

9th.  Mr.  Nixon  was  engaged  this  morning,  and,  as  Jane
had  a  bad  pain  in  her  side,  I  threw  her  into  the  coma,  in  which
she  remained  about  an  hour.  She  moaned  uneasily,  as  if
still  in  pain,  but,  by  locally  mesmerising  her  side,  this  appeared
to  leave  her.  When  she  awoke,  the  pain  was  quite  gone.
In  the  evening,  Mr.  Nixon  mesmerised  us  as  usual,  and
Jane’s  musical  organ  was  again  set  a  going;  but  no  other
phenomena  were  elicited.  After  she  awoke,  (she  had  no  idea
that  she  had  been  singing,)  we  talked  of  several  of  the  songs
she  had  regaled  us  with ;  but  she  did  not  appear  to  know  any¬
thing  of  them,  beyond  having  heard  them  sung,  and  one  she
said  she  had  only  heard  played.  I  forgot  to  mention  that  one
day  Mr.  Nixon  brought  a  very  powerful  magnet,  but  it  had
no  effect  on  either  Jane  or  me.

10th.  This  morning,  in  Mr.  Nixon’s  absence,  I  again
threw  Jane  into  the  trance.  I  could  excite  no  organ  but


249


by  Miss  Aglionby.

Gustativeness,  and  in  that  I  was  so  successful,  that,  whilst  I
had  my  finger  on  it,  she  willingly  chewed  and  swallowed  bis¬
cuit,  and  drank,  first  wine,  and  then  mesmerised  water.  She
seemed  very  greedy  of  the  latter,  and  took  a  whole  glass  of
it.  Of  course  I  held  both  it  and  the  biscuit  to  her  mouth.
When  Gustativeness  was  not  excited,  her  teeth  were  clenched,
and  she  would  allow  nothing  to  pass  her  lips.  I  have  no  doubt,
that,  by  these  means,  she  might,  if  necessary,  be  sustained
for  many  days  in  a  state  of  coma.  I  do  not  remember  ever
having  read  an  exactly  similar  effect  from  the  excitement  of
Gustativeness ;  but  very  probably  it  has  occurred.  Here
must  end  my  “  mesmeric  experiences”  for  the  present,  as  to¬
morrow  I  leave  Cumberland  for  Scarborough.  But  I  must
not  conclude  without  saying  how  very  much  good  I  have  re¬
ceived  from  mesmerism,  and  in  Janets  case  the  benefit  was
even  more  rapid  and  striking,  as  her  state  of  health  was  much
worse  than  mine.  I  must  also  add  how  truly  grateful  I  feel
for  Mr.  Nixon's  great  kindness  and  attention  to  me ;  and
how  much  it  is  to  be  wished  that  all  medical  men  would  imi¬
tate  his  intelligent  curiosity  and  unprejudiced  love  of  truth
and  science.

E.  A.  Aglionby.


NOTE  BY  DR.  ELLIQTSON.

The  importance  of  this  communication  is  evident.  No
one  will  dare  to  hint  that  the  narrator  and  subject  is  an  im¬
postor  or  even  a  weak-minded  person.  The  instances  of  mes¬
meric  sleep-waking  are  comparatively  rare  in  which  there  is
no  double  consciousness,  but  the  waking  state  and  sleep¬
waking  state  are  continuous  :  and  none  have  hitherto  occurred
in  any  of  my  own  patients.  We  have  decisive  proof  of  the
development  of  occult  faculties  by  which  the  brain  or  other
portion  of  the  nervous  system*  of  one  person,  though  the
eyes  be  perfectly  closed,  and  without  the  person  being  con¬
scious  of  the  mode  in  which  the  impression  is  made,  nay,
without  being  conscious  that  it  is  made,  is  impressed  by  the
actions  and  situation  of  another,  and  both  imitates  his  actions
by  will,  though  irresistibly,  being  pleasantly  impelled  towards
him  and  unpleasantly  repelled  from  others ;  and  is  impressed
by  his  will  or  thoughts,  though  these  are  not  outwardly
manifested  and  the  distance  between  the  two  parties  is  con¬
siderable.  We  have  proof  of  the  operator's  influence  upon
the  cerebral  organs  when  suggestion  in  any  way  is  impossible.

*  Gall.  Fonctions  du  Cerveau ,  t.  ii.,  pp.  84,  85 — a  remarkable  passage.


250


Mesmerism  in  India  Forty  Years  ago ,

The  opinion  of  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson  is  confirmed, — that  it  is
not  so  much  an  exertion  of  will  as  the  act  of  thinking  of  the
patient  and  the  effect  that  produces  the  effect.  Anomalous
and  unexpected  results  from  touching  particular  parts  of  the
head,  observed  now  and  then  in  others,*  took  place  here.  The
fact  noticed  by  me  in  Rosina — that  susceptibility  has  no
necessary  relation  to  magnitude — was  verified  in  Miss  Ag-
lionby.  In  Rosina  the  organ  of  Veneration  is  large,  but  I
never  could  excite  it :  in  Miss  Aglionby  it  is  not  large,  and
yet  is  the  most  susceptible  of  all  the  cerebral  organs.  The
remarkable  subsequent  increase  of  invigoration  in  proportion
to  excitement  and  exertion  in  the  mesmeric  state,  already
mentioned  by  me,t  was  fully  verified.


III.  Mesmerism  in  IndiaForty  Years  ago.  By  Colonel Bagn old.

Communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson.

My  dear  Sir, — I,  some  time  ago,  promised  you  I  would
commit  to  writing  a  few  facts  I  had  observed  during  a  long
residence  in  India ;  which,  at  the  time,  I  could  only  attri¬
bute  to  the  workings  of  imagination  or  religious  imposture,
but  which  I  now  feel  convinced,  from  what  I  have  seen  since
my  return  to  Europe,  were  what  is  now  practised  as  animal
magnetism.

I  will,  however,  relate  a  few  of  them  as  they  occurred,
and  think  you  must  agree  with  me  that  while  there  is  “  no¬
thing  new  under  the  sun,”  this  semi-barbarous  people  have
handed  down  traditionally  what  we,  with  all  our  pretensions
to  science  and  research,  have  either  overlooked,  or,  what  is
most  probable,  rejected,  through  sectarian  prejudice.

The  first  instance  I  can  recollect  occurred  to  me  so  far
back  as  1808,  yet  every  circumstance  attending  it  is  as  fresh
now  in  my  memory  as  though  but  yesterday.  A  poor  young
Hindoo  female  had  fallen  into  a  miserable  state  of  health,
the  effects  of  great  privation  during  the  previous  great  famine,
was  epileptic  and  subject  to  occasional  fits  of  insanity.  A
Vergraggey, — mendicant  devotee,  offered  to  undertake  her
cure,  by  performing  a  religious  ceremony  or  muntra;  and,  as
the  family  lived  in  the  same  building  with  me  and  my  military
detachment,  and  had  no  objection  to  my  being  present,  I
attended.  The  man  commenced  with  the  usual  Hindoo  offer¬
ings,  such  as  burning  frankincense,  breaking  a  cocoa-nut,  and
invoking  some  god,  and  particularly  Seetaram ;  seated  the


*  No.  XVI!.,  p.  9.


t  p.  220  ;  No.  V.,  p.  61.


by  Colonel  Bagnold.  251

woman  on  the  ground  with  her  back  and  head  against  the
wall ;  took  from  his  long  matted  hair  a  string  of  large  sandal¬
wood  beads,  which  he  held  up  before  her  eyes,  and  directed
hdr  to  look  at ;  then  made  passes  with  it  f  rom  her  head  down¬
wards,  occasionally  stopping  to  breathe  upon  or  lay  his  hand
upon  her  chest.  She  soon  became  drowsy  and  appeared  to
sleep,  when  a  handful  of  wood-ashes  were  called  for,  waved  over
her  head,  thrown  in  the  air,  and  the  charm  was  pronounced
complete ;  he  then  retired  to  a  little  distance,  and  sat  counting
the  beads,  but  with  his  eyes  attentively  fixed  on  her,  and  mut¬
tering  as  if  in  prayer.  In  about  half  an  hour  he  started  up,
snapped  his  fingers,  called  out  loudly,  “  Seetaram !  \”  which
was  loudly  responded  to  by  the  Hindoos  present ;  took  his
patient  by  the  hand  and  told  her  to  go  about  her  family
work.  To  the  astonishment  of  her  family  and  all  present,
she  obeyed,  walked  direct  to  the  guern,  or  handmill,  and
began  grinding  corn  for  the  evening’s  meal — a  work  I  am
certain  she  had  been  incapable  of  performing  for  months.
Looking  upon  this  as  mere  priestly  deception,  I  declined
being  present  at  any  future  visits.  However,  her  mother,
brother,  and  several  men  of  the  detachment,  assured  me
afterwards  that  this  man  not  only  put  her  to  sleep  whenever
he  came,  but  made  her  speak  during  that  sleep,  describe  her
disease,  and  what  would  cure  it.  Among  other  things  she
particularly  mentioned  animal  food,  eggs,  fowls,  &c.,  and
which  I  laughingly  advised  them  to  give  her  by  all  means.
I  laughed  at  the  poor  people  as  fools,  and  abused  the  man
as  a  knave.*  But  his  mild,  good-humoured,  rebuke  is  often
now  present  to  my  mind,  “  Youth  !  the  hair  on  your  chin  is
incomplete,  by  the  time  it  is  like  mine,  you  will  think  differ¬
ently  of  me/’  The  woman  recovered,  and  rapidly  so.

When  the  cholera  first  made  its  appearance  at  Surat,  in
1817  or  18,  I  was  one  day  active  in  assisting  the  native  ad¬
jutant  of  my  regiment  in  causing  the  poor  fellows  attacked  with
this  dreadful  disease  to  be  carried  as  quickly  as  possible  from  the
barrack-sheds  to  the  hospital.  I  found  one,  a  Sipahee  of  my
own  company,  lying  under  a  tree  with  one  of  these  V  ergraggeys,
exorcising  him,  as  I  thought,  with  a  bangle  or  ornamental
ring,  worn  on  the  wrist,  made  of  curiously-twisted  iron.
My  first  feeling  was  the  wish  to  roll  one  into  the  river  close
by,  and  carry  the  other  into  the  building.  However,  the
sufferer  called  out  lustily,  (t  Captain,  for  Grod  s  sake,^leave
us  alone,  he  is  doing  me  more  good  than  the  doctor  will.”  He

*  Mr.  Wakley,  Sir  B.  Brodie,  Dr.  J.  A.  Wilson,  and  id  genus  omne,  thus
see  they  have  been  forestalled,  and  that  there  is  nothing  new  under  the  sun,  not
even  in  prejudice  against  knowledge  and  in  false  accusation.  Zoist.


Mesmerism  in  India  Forty  Years  ago ,


got  over  the  attack,  as  I  dare  say  many  others  have  done,
without  medical  assistance ;  but  frequently  declared  to  me
his  conviction  that  the  Facheer  and  his  ring  had  cured  him,
for  he  felt  it  reducing  the  spasms.  Of  course  I  could  only
look  upon  this  as  the  effect  of  imagination,  and,  whenever
I  related  the  case,  always  attached  the  story  of  my  poor  old
rheumatic  aunt  and  her  metallic  tractors  of  the  year  ’97.

In  the  year  1826,  I  was  at  Mocha,  on  the  Red  Sea,  and
suffering  from  fever  without  any  European  medical  attendant.
My  native  Haclieem  or  doctor,  whom  I  only  valued  as  an
excellent  nurse,  introduced  a  certain  Syed  to  me  as  a  cele¬
brated  traveller,  but,  in  reality,  to  charm  me  to  sleep.  Per¬
fectly  unaware  of  his  intentions,  I  must  acknowledge  that
whenever  this  man  sat  before  me,  counting  his  beads  with  a
peculiar  fixed  look,  I  always  felt  a  strong  tendency  to  sleep;
and  once,  I  believe,  actually  fell  fast  asleep  before  him.  On
awaking  up  with  his  hand  upon  my  chest,  I  angrily  ordered
him  out  of  the  house,  when  the  Hacheem  confessed  the  de¬
ception.  The  fever,  however,  increased  until  delirium  came
on.  About  midnight  the  Hacheem  left  me  for  the  purpose
of  seeing  his  family.  The  moment  he  was  out  of  the  room,
I  flew  to  the  water  jars,  and  indulged  in  what  he  had  always
strenuously  interdicted,  a  cold  douche;  returned  to  bed  in
my  wet  shirt,  and  fell  asleep.  At  daylight  I  awoke,  and
found  the  poor  Hacheem  standing  by  the  bed,  his  hand  upon
my  pulse,  tears  in  his  eyes,  exclaiming,  “  O  thank  God,
thank  God,  your  fever  is  gone,  and  all  Abdulla,  the  madman,
told  me  is  true.”  In  explanation,  he  confessed  that,  becoming
alarmed  at  my  delirium,  he  had  gone  in  search  of  the  mad¬
man,  for  a  fall  or  prediction  as  to  my  eventual  recovery.  “  I
found  him,”  said  he,  “in  the  very  mood  I  wished  for,  moaning
and  talking  quietly  to  himself ;  and,  in  reply  to  my  question,
whether  you  would  recover,  he  said,  f  Away  with  you,  wretch,
the  captain  is  quite  well ;  I  see  him  now,  sleeping  under  the
white  curtains,  his  shirt  and  bed-clothes  wet,  a  towel  round,
his  head,  and,  his  servant  Kassim  watching  over  him.’  Guess
the  joy  of  your  slave  when  I  returned  and  found  you  exactly
as  he  had  said.”

When  at  Jidda,  the  following  year,  a  Turkish  Durveish
volunteered  to  cure  me  of  a  nervous  head-ache.  I  felt  relief,
but  as  the  pain  returned,  I  declined  his  further  services.  His
practice  was  to  make  passes  over  the  forehead  with  an  iron
stile,  as  if  writing  the  la  ilia,  &c.,  of  the  Mahumedan  creed.

The  process  of  Ootar — from  the  Oardas  verle  Ootarna,
to  take  down — is  common  all  over  India,  for  the  cure  of
snake  and  scorpion  bites.  I  will  relate  one  instance.  When


253


by  Colonel  Bagnold.

returning  from  Bombay  to  Aurungabad,  in  1845,  one  of  my
palanquin-bearers  was  bitten  in  the  foot  by  a  snake ;  but,  as
it  was  nearly  dark  and  the  reptile  escaping  into  a  hedge,  we
could  not  ascertain  its  class.  A  village  was  fortunately  at
hand,  and  a  charmer  was  sent  for.  He  came,  and,  for  the
promise  of  a  small  fee,  undertook  the  cure.  He  made  passes
over  the  leg ,  from  the  knee  downwards ,  sometimes  with  his
hand  merely ,  sometimes  with  wood-ashes,  which  he  also
sprinkled  on  the  wound,  but  principally  with  a  small  palm-
leaf  hand-broom,  used  commonly  for  sweeping  the  house
floors.  In  about  an  hour  the  pain  in  the  foot  and  numbness  of
the  leg  had  ceased ,  the  man  fell  asleep ,  and  the  next  morning
assisted  in  carrying  me  sixteen  or  eighteen  miles.  From  the
marks  of  the  teeth,  and  the  symptoms  which  followed  the
bite,  there  could,  I  think,  be  no  mistake  as  to  the  danger
the  man  was  in.

The  practice  of  “  Receiving  the  god  into  the  body”  is
common  among  the  Dhers  and  other  low  castes  among  the
Mahratta  tribes  of  the  western-side  of  India,  and  particularly
among  the  Syces  or  horse-keepers  in  the  cavalry  regiments.
The  person  receiving  this  rite  is  generally  washed  at  the
nearest  rivulet  or  even  well,  and  seated  in  a  circle  with  several
others,  each  of  them  supporting  with  one  hand  a  brass  dish,
containing  a  few  brass  images,  frankincence,  sandal-wood
paste,  cocoa-nut,  and  invariably  a  piece  of  turmeric.  The
bystanders,  with  a  Gooroo  or  priest,  commence  a  quick  but
monotonous  chant,  accompanied  with  the  sound  of  small
brass  bells,  cymbals,  and  tom-toms ;  the  seated  party  fre¬
quently  responding  with  loud  shouts,  and  raising  the  brass
dish  above  their  heads.  The  chief  actor  presently  begins  to
sway  himself  about,  sob,  hiccup,  and  even  roll  on  the  ground
in  sirauge  convulsions,  the  eyes  assuming  a  ghastly  appear¬
ance,  and  the  body  frequently  rigid.  Questions  are  now  put
to  him  about  his  own  or  some  other  person's  health,  good  or
bad  fortune,  absent  persons,  obtaining  offspring,  &c.,  and
the  replies  taken  as  oracular.  Sometimes  it  is  undertaken
as  a  vow  similar  to  the  swinging  ceremony  or  churruck  pooja.
I  have  once  or  twice  detected  imposture,  and  where  the  con¬
vulsions  were  only  feigned ;  but  I  declare  I  have  often  seen
these  men  perfectly  insensible  to  pinching,  beating,  pricking,
&c.  I  was  once  present  when  some  young  Mahumedans
rushed  in  and  tumbled  the  man  neck  and  heels  down  a  flight
of  stone  steps,  cut  and  bruised  him  severely ;  but  he  re¬
mained  insensible  for  some  time.  How  this  state  is  brought
about  I  cannot  conjecture.  Certainly  nothing  like  manipula¬
tion  or  mesmeric  passes  were  ever  resorted  to.  It  could  not  be


254


Mesmerism  in  India  Forty  Years  ago.

by  the  common  intoxication  of  bang  or  other  drugs,  because,
once  through  the  ceremony,  and  out  of  the  fit,  they  become
instantly  sensible,  but  forget  every  thing  that  has  passed.

When  interpreter  to  my  regiment  I  had  two  or  three  in¬
stances  of  complaints  to  investigate,  in  which  men  were  charged
with  witchcraft,  for  making  people  “  follow  them  about  in  a
foolish  half-stupid  manner I  had  never  then  heard  of  mes¬
merism.

I  can  only  now  regret  that  I  should  have  lost  so  many
excellent  opportunities  of  searching  into  these  and  similar
subjects.  An  officer,  formerly  of  the  Bombay  army,  and  I
believe  still  in  existence,  once  attempted  to  study  this  “ magic
but,  what  with  the  rigid  fasts  imposed  upon  him  by  his  in¬
structor  and  the  threats  of  his  commanding  officer,  he  gave
it  up.

I  remain,  my  dear  Sir,

Yours  very  sincerely,

23rd  July,  1848.  M.  E.  Bagnold.

28,  Hamilton  Terrace,  St.  John's  Wood.


NOTE  BY  DR.  ELLIOTSON.

^  .  _

The  manly  confession  of  Colonel  Bagnold  that  he  now
discovers  he  was  totally  in  error  and  lost  great  opportunities,
forty  years  ago,  reminds  me  of  similar  expressions  of  regret
uttered  by  Mr.  Chenevix,  and  recorded  by  me  in  my  article
on  mesmerism  in  the  first  number  of  The  Zoist ,  at  his  having
ridiculed  mesmerism  thirty  years  before.*

*  “  ‘  Whenever  animal  magnetism  was  mentioned,  I  joined,’  he  says,  ‘the
general  tribe  of  scoffers,  and  so  much  was  I  convinced  (! )  of  its  absurdity,  that,
being  at  Rotterdam  in  1797,  I  laughed  to  scorn  a  proposal  made  to  me  by  an
English  resident  there  to  witness  some  experiments  in  which  he  was  then  engaged.
The  respectability  and  general  understanding  of  this  person  left  no  mode  of  ac¬
counting  for  so  extraordinary  an  illusion,  but  to  suppose  him  labouring  under
a  monomania .’  In  1803  and  1804,  while  travelling  in  Germany,  he  continues,
*  I  heard  many  very  enlightened  men  of  the  universities  talk  of  animal  magnetism,
nearly  with  the  same  certainty  as  mineral  magnetism  ;  but  their  credulity  I  set
down  to  the  account  of  German  mysticity.  1  remained  an  unbeliever.''  At  length
after  nineteen  years,  Mr.  Chenevix  condescended  to  witness  mesmerism  in  the
person  of  a  young  lady  in  Paris.  ‘I  went  to  laugh,'  says  he,  ‘I  came  away  con¬
vinced.  To  suspect  any  thing  like  a  trick  in  the  parties  concerned  was  impossible.
They  were  of  the  highest  respectability  and  distinction,  and  some  of  them  I  had
known  for  many  years.  The  magnetiser  was,  indeed,  in  the  frivolous  French
metropolis,  called  a  charlatan,  which  made  me  suppose  he  was  not  so ;  and  the
event  proved  that  I  was  right.  He  was,  indeed,  poor  ;  he  exercised  his  art  for
money ;  he  gave  public  lectures  at  three  francs  a  ticket.  Many  young  physicians
have  as  fair  a  claim  to  the  title  as  he  had.  But  from  the  hour  above  alluded  to
till  the  period  of  his  death,  I  remained  acquainted  with  the  Abbe  Faria,  and
never  knew  a  man  to  whom  the  epithet  impostor  was  less  applicable.’

“  Presumptuous  ignorance  had  shut  in  his  own  face  the  door  of  a  science  more
directly  interesting  to  man  than  all  that  chemistry  and  astronomy  can  teach.


255


by  Colonel  Bagno  Id.

In  the  eighteenth  number,  p.  130,  are  remarkable  and
unquestionable  instances  of  clairvoyance  in  a  Brahmin,  from
Forbes's  Oriental  Memoirs.  Mr.  Forbes  has  no  doubt  of  the
existence  of  this  faculty  in  a  very  few  of  the  quiet,  retired,
literary  Brahmins,  who  are  as  a  distinct  from  the  fortune¬
telling  Brahmins  and  pretended  astrologers  of  India,"  as  the
public  impostors  who  infest  London  and  Paris  are  from  the
genuine  and  truthful  clairvoyants  occasionally  met  with,  who
never  pretend  to  be  clairvoyant  at  moments  when  they  do
not  find  themselves  in  the  state  of  clairvoyance.  Every
classic  remembers  the  instance  of  clairvoyance  in  an  Indian
mentioned  by  Cicero  in  the  second  book  of  his  treatise  De
Divinatione.

(t  Even  among  uncivilized  nations  foreknowledge  and
divination  exist  \  for  an  Indian ,  named  Calanus,  when  about
to  die,  and  ascending  the  burning  pile,  exclaimed,  ‘  O  what
a  glorious  removal  from  this  world ;  for,  as  in  the  case  of
Hercules,  my  mind  will  pass  into  life  when  my  mortal  body
is  burnt.'  On  Alexander  desiring  him  to  say  what  he  wished,

‘ Excellent  Sir,'  he  replied,  ‘I  shall  see  you  shortly  again.'
And  so  it  turned  out,  for  Alexander  died  at  Babylon  a  few
days  afterwards."*

*  Dr.  Esdaile  in  his  first  set  of  reports  spoke  of  the  mes¬
merism  practised  by  the  natives  of  India.  He  was  intro¬
duced  to  a  famous  magician  of  Bengal  who  agreed  to  show
his  process  for  assuaging  pain.

**  He  sent  for  a  brass  pot  full  of  water,  and  a  twig  with  three
or  four  leaves  upon  it,  about  a  span  long,  and  commenced  muttering
his  charm,  at  arm’s  length  from  the  patient.  In  a  short  time,  he
dipped  his  middle  finger  into  the  water,  and  flirted  it  with  his  thumb
into  the  eyes,  and  then  commenced  to  stroke  the  patient’s  body  from
crown  to  toe  with  a  long  drawing  motion  of  the  leaves,  and  I  saw
in  a  moment,  what  I  have  long  suspected,  that  if  these,  charmers
ever  do  good  by  such  means,  it  is  by  a  pure  mesmeric  process.
The  knuckles  almost  touched  the  body,  and  he  said,  that  he  would
continue  the  process  for  an  hour,  or  longer,  if  necessary.”

The  charge,  mentioned  by  Colonel  Bagnold,  occasionally

‘  Nine-tenths,’  he  continues,  ‘  who  may  read  will  laugh  at  this  as  I  did,  in  1797,
at  my  friend  in  Rotterdam.  Let  them  do  so ;  hut  while  they  laugh,  let  them
learn,  and  not,  thirty  years  afterwards,  have  to  lament  that  so  short  a  remnant
of  life  is  left  to  them  to  enjoy  this  new  and  valuable  secret  of  nature.’  ”

*  “  Est  profecto  quiddam  etiam  in  barbaris  gentibus  prsesentiens  atque  divi-
nans,  si  quidem  ad  mortem  proficiscens  Calanus  Indus,  quum  adscendeiet  in
rogum  ardentem,  1  O  prseclarum  discessum,’  inquit,  ‘  e  vita !  quum  ut  Heiculi
contigit,  mortali  corpore  cremato,  in  lucem  animus  excesserit.’  Quumque  Alex¬
ander  eum  rogaret,  si  quid  vellet,  ut  diceret,  ‘  Optime,’  inquit,  ‘  propediem  te
videbo.’  Quod  ita  contigit ;  nam  Babylone  paucis  post  diebus  Alexander  est
mortuus.” — De  Divinatione ,  1.  i.,  23.


256


Mesmerism  in  India  Forty  Years  ago ,


brought  against  natives  of  making  others  follow  them  about  in
a  foolish  half-stupid  manner  is  illustrated  by  the  following
account : —

“  About  a  fortnight  ago,  I  was  driving  through  the  Hooghly
bazaar,  and  saw  a  crowd  gathered  before  the  police  office,  and  stopped
to  enquire  the  cause.

“  The  people  told  me,  that  a  man  had  been  apprehended  in  the
act  of  carrying  off  a  boy,  and  that  the  parties  were  inside  the  guard¬
house.  Upon  hearing  this  I  entered  the  house,  and  found  a  boy  of
ten  or  twelve  years  old,  sitting  on  the  lap  of  a  man  who  was  said  to
have  rescued  him.

“  The  boy  was  half  stupid,  and  one  of  his  eyes  was  swollen ;
I  therefore  ordered  him  to  be  carried  over  to  the  hospital.

“  The  culprit  was  then  shewn  to  me,  who  said  that  he  was  a
barber,  and  a  bundle  containing  his  implements  of  trade  was  pro¬
duced.  This  I  carefully  examined,  but  found  nothing  but  the  usual
tools.  The  boy  soon  recovered  his  senses,  and  told  me  readily  and
consistently  the  following  tale,  which  I  again  heard  him  repeat  before
the  magistrate  in  a  different  sequence,  without  a  tittle  of  variation.
He  said,  that  early  in  the  morning  he  went  into  a  field  near  his
house  in  Hooghly,  and  that  shortly  after,  a  strange  man  left  the
road,  and  came  up  to  him :  as  soon  as  he  was  near  him  he  began  to
mutter  charms,  and  then  took  hold  of  his  hand  :  very  soon  after,  he
passed  his  hand  across  his  eyes,  and  thereupon  he  lost  his  senses  ;
he  only  recollected,  that  the  man  led  him  away  without  force,  and
that  he  felt  compelled  to  follow  him.  When  he  came  to  his  senses,
it  was  at  the  gate  of  Chandernagore,  two  miles  from  his  house ;  and

this  was  all  he  had  to  sav.

%/

“  He  had  not  eaten,  drunk  or  smoked  in  the  company  of  the
man,  and  his  master  and  friends  all  declared  that  he  was  a  clever
boy,  and  had  never  been  known  to  have  fits  or  walk  in  his  sleep.

“  I  then  examined  the  man,  who  was  said  to  have  rescued  him.
He  said,  that  on  the  morning  in  question,  he  saw  this  boy,  whom  he
knew  very  well,  following  a  strange  man  ;  that  he  stopped  him,  and
asked  what  he  was  doing  there  ?

“The  boy  made  no  answer,  and  appeared  to  be  idiotic.  Upon
this  he  became  alarmed,  and  brought  water  to  throw  in  his  face,  and
took  other  means  to  revive  him,  and  at  last  succeeded.  On  again
questioning  him,  he  said  that  he  did  not  know  why  he  was  there  ;
that  he  was  obliged  to  follow  that  man,  and  after  saying  so,  he  fell
down  and  bruised  his  eye  on  the  ground.

“In  the  mean  time,  the  man  was  making  off,  but  was  appre¬
hended,  and  brought  up  to  Hooghly.

“  I  then  called  in  the  barber,  and  this  was  his  story.  He  met
the  boy  on  the  road  stupid  and  crying  ;  and  on  asking  what  ailed
him,  he  said  that  he  had  lost  his  way.  Upon  hearing  this,  he  asked
the  boy  to  accompany  him  to  the  police  station,  and  that  the  police¬
man  would  take  him  home.

“  The  strange  nature  of  the  transaction,  whichever  side  was


by  Colonel  Baynold.


25  7


true,  strongly  arrested  my  attention,  and  the  trade  of  the  man
roused  my  suspicions  ;  as  I  had  heard,  that  barbers  in  this  country
could  put  people  to  sleep  while  performing  their  tedious  processes  of
cleaning  the  ears,  paring  the  nails,  shaving,  &c.

“  The  barbers  all  over  the  world  are  a  shrewd,  observing  race  of
men,  and  their  occupation  brings  them  into  close  contact  with  the
parts  of  the  body  most  sensitive  to  this  natural  influence  ;  and  they
are  therefore  very  likely  to  have  become  possessed  at  an  early  period
of  the  secret,  and  perhaps  it  has  descended  to  them  as  a  mystery  of
their  craft.

“ I  could  only  see  two  roads  out  of  the  dilemma  :  it  was  either  a
case  of  natural  or  artificial  somnambulism  ;  if  the  latter,  how  could
it  be  induced  unless  by  the  mesmeric  processes  ?  As  accident  had
made  me  a  witness  in  the  case,  I  anticipated  that  I  should  be  exa¬
mined  as  to  the  possibility  of  such  a  mode  of  abduction,  and  there¬
fore  instituted  experiments  to  satisfy  myself.

“  I  thought  it  probable,  that  if  this  could  be  done  by  mesmerism,

I  should  be  able  to  repeat  it,  as  the  greater  power  includes  the  less  ;
aud  that  I  had  only  to  stop  short  in  the  progress  to  total  insensibility
to  produce  like  effects,  if  obtainable  by  this  means.  I  therefore
went  to  the  jail  hospital,  and  mesmerised  a  man  who  had  been
treated  for  inflammation  of  the  eye  by  being  entranced,  and  only
went  to  the  extent  of  making  his  arms  cataleptic,  but  leaving  him
the  power  of  motion,  and  the  sense  of  hearing.  In  this  state  I
led  him,  and  allowed  him  to  walk  alone  all  round  the  hospital  en¬
closure,  making  him  say  his  prayers,  &c.,  and  on  awaking,  he  had
no  recollection  of  having  stirred  from  the  spot.  I  then  went  to  the
magistrate’s  court  to  which  I  had  been  summoned  as  a  witness,  and
on  being  asked,  ‘  If  I  thought  it  practicable  to  carry  off  a  person  in
the  way  described  V  I  replied,  that  ‘  I  thought  it  to  be  possible,  as
I  had  just  done  something  very  like  it,  having  made  a  prisoner  follow
me  round  the  hospital  enclosure  without  his  knowing  it.’  The
magistrate  committed  the  case.”

The  high  antiquity  of  mesmeric  means  to  cure  disease  is
obvious  from  the  passage  in  the  Bible,  in  which  the  Syrian
Naaman  is  represented  to  have  been  disappointed  at  Elisha
not  having  employed  mesmerism  to  cure  his  leprosy.

“Behold,  I  thought.  He  will  surely  come  out  to  me  and  call  on
the  name  of  the  Lord,  his  God,  and  strike  his  hand  over  the  place,
aud  recover  the  leper.” — II  Kings  v.  11.

The  Bev.  J.  D.  Marks,  the  Jewish  Rabbi  and  eminent
Hebrew  scholar,  informs  me  that  the  real  meaning  of  the
passage  is —

That  he  would  “wave  his  hand  near  the  place” — whether  up  and
down  or  from  side  to  side.

That  mesmerism  was  practised  in  Egypt  also  is  certain,
and  remains  of  it  still  present  themselves  to  travellers. '  Mr.


258


Mesmerism  in  India  Forty  Years  ago,


Lane’s  account  of  the  clairvoyance  which  he  saw  induced  in
boys  by  an  Egyptian  magician  has  been  read  by  every  body.

“  Neither  I  nor  others,”  says  he,  “  have  been  able  to  discover
any  clue  by  which  to  penetrate  the  mystery.”*

Miss  Martineau  likewise  saw  the  doings  of  an  Egyptian  ma¬
gician,  and,  being  acquainted  with  mesmerism,  refers  to  it
what  she  saw.

“  I  saw  in  the  boy,”  she  writes,  “  that  peculiar  quivering  of  the
eyelids  which  is  one  sign  of  the  presence  of  mesmeric  action.  The
magician  rested  the  tops  of  his  fingers  firmly  on  the  crown  of  the
boy’s  head  and  kept  them  there.”  “By  this  time  I  had  arrived  at
the  conclusion  which  I  now  hold ; — that  it  is  an  affair  of  mesmerism,
and  that  the  magician  himself  probably  does  not  know  it.  If  the
truth  were  understood,  I  have  no  doubt  it  would  appear  that,  in
the  first  instance,  a  capital  clairvoyant  did  see  and  tell  the  things
declared,  under  the  influence  of  the  old  man’s  power,  and  where
there  was  accidentally  a  rapport  established  between  the  questioner
and  the  boy.  I  am  disposed  to  think  that  there  was  originally  no
imposture  in  the  matter  :  that  the  magician  did  not  then  understand
the  causes  of  his  success,  and  does  not  now  understand  the  causes
of  his  failures.”  “  I  do  not  see  reason  to  suppose  that  it  is  a  case  of
imposture  from  beginning  to  end.”  As  to  her  own  trial  she  says,
“  The  perfumes  might  have  some  effect,  although  I  was  insensible
to  them ;  and  so  might  the  dead  silence,  and  my  steadfast  gazing
into  the  act.  But  that  there  was  also  a  strong  mesmeric  influence
present,  I  am  certain.  The  magician  is  a  powerful,  and,  no  doubt,  an
unconscious  mesmeriser.”  pp.  138 — 141.

Mr.  It.  Monckton  Milnes  was  at  Constantinople  in  1842,
and  visited  the  College  of  Derweeshes.

“There  is  no  doubt,”  he  writes  to  me,  “as  to  their  being  a
mesmeric  college.  The  sheik  administered  water  mesmerised  by  his
fingers  to  epileptic  children,  and  passed  his  foot  over  the  bodies  of
the  patients,  who  lay  on  their  stomachs  before  him.  The  other
Derweeshes  danced  and  screamed,  with  their  arms  round  one  another’s
necks,  whirling  in  a  circle,  till  the  motion  and  sound  were  quite  dis¬
tressing.  The  room  was  hung  with  knives  and  chains,  with  which
they  struck  and  cut  themselves  when  in  a  state  of  insensibility,  but
which  was  forbidden  by  the  police  when  I  was  there.”

In  Colonel  Bagnold’s  letter  we  have  the  production  of
sleep  and  sleep-waking,  and  even  of  clairvoyance  :  general
and  local  mesmerism,  both  by  passes  and  the  use  of  the  mes-
meriser’s  eyes,  and  a  wide-open  state  of  the  patient’s  eyes,
so  advantageous  to  the  mesmeriser.  For  I  always  found  in
Elizabeth  Okey  during  her  highest  susceptibility  that,  cceteris

*  An  Account  of  the  Manners  and  Customs  of  the  modern  Egyptians ,  &c.
By  Edward  Lane.  Vol.  I.,  p.  359.


by  Colonel  Bagnold.


259


paribus ,  a  smaller  number  of  passes  were  requisite  to  produce
sleep  exactly  in  proportion  to  the  open  condition  of  her  eyes  :
— so  that,  while  I  made  passes,  sleep  took  place  sooner  if  she
looked  straightforward  than  if  she  looked  down ;  sooner  if  she
looked  up  than  if  she  looked  straightfor wards  :  and  sooner
still  if  she  stared  upwards  to  the  utmost.  There  was  the
breathing  upon  the  patient  and  the  laying  on  of  the  hand.

In  the  process  of  “  receiving  the  god,”  the  effect  pro¬
bably  arose  from  high  excitement :  though  the  proximity,
movements,  and  gaze  of  the  others  might  cooperate.  The
Syed  appears  to  have  been  a  clairvoyant,  whether  sponta¬
neously  or  originally  by  art.

A  lady  who  resided  in  India  informed  me  that  one  even¬
ing  her  baby  could  not  be  got  to  sleep :  when  one  of  the
servants  remarked  that  a  certain  other  servant  could  send  it
to  sleep.  This  was  done  at  once,  and  she  understood  the
man  had  made  some  sort  of  manipulation.  A  gentleman
from  India  informed  me  that  native  thieves  when  robbing  a
house  while  the  inmates  are  asleep  are  said  to  make  passes
before  them  as  they  proceed  in  order  to  keep  them  asleep.
These  are  all  fragmentary  remains  of  mesmerism.

What  would  be  the  advantage  of  mesmerism  in  cholera
experience  only  can  decide.  But  the  case  mentioned  by
Colonel  Bagnold  is  interesting,  and  the  successful  employment
of  animal  heat  in  former  times,  both  in  it  and  other  states  of
exhaustion,  is  worthy  of  our  attention.

The  moderns  have  considered  their  predecessors  as  very
absurd  for  supposing  that  animal  heat  was  different  from
common  heat.  Heat  was  heat :  or  caloric,  as  they  once  said,
— the  matter  of  heat,  was  caloric.  I  have  no  doubt  that  our
forefathers  were  faithful  observers,  and  had  seen  good  reason
to  believe  that  the  communication  of  warmth  from  a  living
being  had  effects  which  the  communication  of  warmth  from
inanimate  substances  had  not.  The  simple  heat  must  clearly
be  the  same,  and  the  great  power  of  simple  heat  on  living
things  is  obvious.  But  is  there  not  something  besides  heat
in  the  matter  ?  Is  there  not  also  something  vital — something
mesmeric,  if  you  please — something  as  deserving  to  be  desig¬
nated  animal  heat,  as  the  mesmeric  phenomena  are  to  be
designated  animal  magnetism,  in  distinction  from  mere  heat
or  mere  magnetism  ?  The  straightforward  Sydenham^s  pow¬
erful  observation  of  phenomena,  his  unencumbered  saga¬
city  in  discerning  what  ought  to  be  done,  and  his  independ-
ance  and  courage  in  execution,  have  made  him  the  glory  of
English  pathology  as  Harvey  is  of  English  physiology,  al-


260


Mesmerism  in  India  Forty  Years  ago,


though  he  never  was  a  Fellow  of  our  College  of  Physicians.
Nor,  by  the  way,  was  Harvey  elected  President  till  five  and
thirty  years  had  elapsed  after  the  promulgation  of  his  discovery
to  the  assembled  College, — and  not  till  he  had  in  his  seventy-
sixth  year  presented  them  with  a  noble  Roman  edifice  and
a  library  :  and  he  then  very  properly  declined  an  honour  often
bestowed  upon  obscure  persons  to  whom  science  owes  no¬
thing.  Now  Sydenham  seems  to  have  had  an  idea  of  the
superiority  of  animal  heat.  For  in  a  MS.  of  the  Bodleian
Library  at  Oxford,  on  which  is  written,  Extracts  of  Syden¬
ham? s  Physick  Books  and  some  good  letters  on  various  subjects ,
and  which  were  written  by  a  friend  of  Sydenham  partly  from
his  dictation  and  partly  from  some  of  his  MSS.,  are  the  fol¬
lowing  histories  : —

**  DE  METHODO  MEDENDI  MORBOS  PER  ACCUBITUM  iunioris .*

CAP.  16.

tc  May  ye  19th  1662  I  was  called  in  ye  night  to  Mrs  Change,
whom  I  found  very  ill  of  a  Cholera  Morbus  ;  she  had  many  ugly
Symptoms,  as  coldness  of  the  Extreme  parts,  talking  a  little  idly,
intollerable  Sickness,  &  felt  a  tingling  in  her  Fingers  &  flesh  out¬
wardly.  I  judge  it  dangerous  to  use  Dilutients  especially  by  Clys¬
ters  in  a  Women  [sic]  soe  green  (she  having  not  lain  in  a  Month)  &
ye  Disease  pressing  soe  hard  upon  my  heels ;  Soe  I  ordered  her  to
take  a  warm  Cordial,  &  that  a  good  draught  of  it,  &  her  Husband
to  lie  close  to  her  Back  naked,  and  her  sonn  of  12  years  close  to  her
Belly,  &  to  lay  on  more  Cloths  &  to  warm  her  Leggs  &  Hands  wth
hot  Cloths  :  She  immediately  fell  into  a  moderate  Breathing,  &  all
Sympt.  ceased  :  &  after  enjoyning  her  to  keep  her  bed  ye  next  day,  &
to  eat  &  drink  nothing  save  a  small  Quantity  of  Barly-broth  a  day
for  2  days  she  perfectly  recovered.

“  February  1661  I  was  called  to  Mrs  Hulston,  who  after  a  very
Chronical  fever  was  fall’n  into  a  very  fatallike  Diarrhea ;  I  saw  it
was  to  noe  purpose  to  give  astringents  seeing  ye  Disease  proceeded
from  a  decay  of  natural  heat,  therefore  I  took  this  Course,  viz.  I
caused  her  Sonn  a  plump  hot  Lad  of  1 3  years  of  age,  &  her  Nurses
sonn  of  6  or  7  years  to  goe  to  bed  to  her  naked,  &  to  lie  ye  one
close  to  her  Belly,  ye  other  close  to  her  Back,  wch  they  did,  &  as
long  as  they  continued  wth  her  she  had  noe  stools :  but  ye  Boys  ris¬
ing  at  any  time  ye  Looseness  would  immediately  return.  I  com¬
manded  that  she  should  persist  in  ye  Course  till  her  cure  should  be
compleat,  (the  Boys  relieving  one  another  by  turns  in  ye  daytime)
&  soe  she  fully  recovered  not  only  of  her  Loosness  but  allso  of  her
Sickness  in  generall.

“  The  very  same  course  I  took  with  one  Ml  Little,  who  had  a  fever
abt  7  weeks,  &  at  yc  time  Aug.  1662,  soe  far  spent  y*  his  D1S  judged
him  a  Dead-Man :  he  was  ancient  &  having  been  much  purged  wth

*  “  Compare  Observ.  Med.  i.  4.  §  40.’ ’


by  Colonel  B'agnold.


261


violent  Medicaments,  he  was^as  weak  as  ever  I  saw  any  y{  reco¬
vered  ;  I  (having  to  noe  purpose  made  attempts  to  lay  his  fever  by
inward  Medicines  &  to  raise  his  strength  by  Cordials)  told  his  wife
that  nothing  could  preserve  his  life  but  ye  putting  a  Boy  to  bed  to
him :  soe  she  procured  a  Link  boy  to  lie  very  close  to  him  all  night,
&  ye  next  morning  I  found  his  fever  allmost  off,  &  his  Eye  &  Coun¬
tenance  more  lively,  upon  wch  I  pronounced  all  danger  to  be  over,
yett  afterwards  upon  my  giving  him  a  Clyster  &  upon  ye  recess  of  ye
Boy  he  began  to  relapse  ;  but  ye  Boy  being  gott  again  &  I  giving
noe  more  Clysters  he  perfectly  recovered.

“The  very  same  way  had  I  cured  before  Bp.  Monk’s* * * §  Lady,
who  was  an  aged  Woman  of  a  very  feeble  &  thin  habit  of  Body,  &
had  an  Ague  wch  (tho  gone)  had  soe  weakened  her  yt  her  Physician
Dr.  Ridgleyf  looked  upon  her  as  dead  ;  when  I  was  sent  for  she
had  allso  spitten  some  purulent  matter  &  blood  wc!l  they  shewed  me
in  abundance)  upon  ye  Napkin.  I  told  ye  Dr  y4  I  apprehended  yt
nothing  could  save  her  life,  but  a  speedy  transplantation  of  some
young  Spirits  upon  her,  to  wch  he  readily  agreed,  &  a  Girl  of  13
years  was  put  in  close  to  her  Breast,  upon  this  she  recovered  very
speedily  both  of  her  Unspiritedness  &  her  Coughing :  But  ye  Girl
fell  sick,  w,ch  was  attributed  to  her  lying  wth  ye  Lady,  tho  I  was  con¬
fident  to  ye  Contrary,  having  never  known  any  Mischief  y4  way ;
however  she  had  first  coining  out  upon  her  Petechiae,  &  afterwards
large  Ulcers  upon  her  Breech ;  But  Dr  Ridgley  &  I  recovered  her.”  J

In  Mr.  Aubrey's  MS.  in  the  Ashmolean  Museum  at
Oxford,  is  the  following  anecdote  of  a  physician  named
Butler,  born  at  Ipswich,  who  never  took  his  degree  but
practised  at  Cambridge,  and  “  came  to  be  the  most  popular
and  celebrated  practitioner  of  physic  in  the  kingdom, §  about
a  century  before  the  time  of  Sydenham.

“  A  clergyman  in  Cambridgeshire,  by  excessive  application  in
composing  a  learned  sermon,  which  he  was  to  preach  before  the
king  at  Newmarket,  had  brought  himself  into  such  a  way  that  he
could  not  sleep.  His  friends  were  advised  to  give  him  opium,  which
he  took  in  so  large  a  quantity,  that  it  threw  him  into  a  profound
lethargy.  Dr.  Butler  was  sent  for  from  Cambridge  ;  who,  upon
seeing  and  hearing  his  case,  flew  into  a  passion,  and  told  his  wife,
that  she  was  in  danger  of  being  hanged  for  killing  her  husband,  and
very  abruptly  left  the  room.  As  he  was  going  through  the  yard,  in
his  return  home,  he  saw  several  cows,  and  asked  her  to  whom  they


*  “  Probably  Nicholas  Monk,  brother  of  the  Duke  of  Albermarle,  who  was
Bishop  of  Hereford  for  about  a  year  in  1661.

t  “  Dr.  Ridgley’s  name  does  not  appear  in  the  Catalogue  of  Oxford  and
Cambridge  Graduates  in  Medicine  published  in  1695,  nor  in  that  of  the  London
College  of  Physicians."

+  Anecdota  Sydenhamiana :  Medical  Notes  and  Observations  of  Thomas
Sydenham,  M.D.,  hitherto  unpublished .  Oxford,  1845.

§  Biographical  Memoirs  of  Medicine  in  Great  Britain ,  from  the  Revival  of
Literature  to  the  time  of  Harvey.  By  John  Aikin,  Surgeon.  1780.

VOL.  VI.  T


262


Mesmerism  Forty  Years  ago.


belonged :  she  said,  to  her  husband.  Will  you,  says  the  doctor,
give  me  one  of  these  cows,  if  I  restore  him  to  life?  She  replied,
with  all  my  heart.  He  presently  ordered  a  cow  to  be  killed,  and  the
patient  to  be  put  into  the  warm  carcase,  which  in  a  short  time  re¬
covered  him.”

Formerly  it  was  the  practice,  and  this  no  doubt  still
lingers,  to  kill  birds  and  immediately  place  them  against  the
persons  of  the  sinking,  in  order  to  communicate  fresh  vital
power.  Perhaps  other  animals  also  were  employed :  for  I
have  known  internal  parts  of  sheep  and  oxen  applied  fresh
and  warm  to  the  sick  at  the  recommendation  of  nurses.  A
clergyman  who  had  neuralgic  pains  in  his  legs  assured  me,
some  years  ago,  that  animal  warmth  relieved  him  far  more
than  the  same  amount  of  heat  obtained  in  other  ways ;  as  he
discovered  by  finding  himself  always  so  much  better  when
sitting  in  a  stage  coach  between  two  persons.  Eastern  nations
had  the  same  persuasion.

“Now  king  David  was  old  and  stricken  in  years;  and  they
covered  him  with  clothes,  but  he  gal  no  heat.

“Wherefore  his  servants  said  unto  him,  Let  there  be  sought  for
my  lord  the  king  a  young  virgin  :  and  let  her  stand  before  the  king,
and  let  her  cherish  him,  and  let  her  lie  in  thy  bosom,  that  my  lord
the  king  may  get  heat.

“  So  they  sought  for  a  fair  damsel  throughout  all  the  coasts  of
Israel,  and  found  Abishag,  a  Shunammite,  and  brought  her  to  the
king.

“  And  the  damsel  was  very  fair,  and  cherished  the  king,  and
ministered  to  him.” — 1  Kings  i.  1 — 4.

Far  more  infants  die  among  those  brought  up  by  hand
than  among  the  suckled.*  The  child  before  birth  exists  in
living  mesmeric  substances  and  is  nourished  by  living  mes¬
merised  fluids.  After  birth  the  place  provided  for  it  is  its
mother’s  warm  mesmerising  bosom,  and  its  nourishment  is
her  warm  mesmerised  milk  :  and,  whatever  warmth  and  nour¬
ishment  it  may  have  without  vital  influence  from  both  these
sources,  it  usually  droops.  A  mother  necessarily  is  in  the
prime  of  life.  When  their  energies  have  lessened  with  age,
females  no  longer  become  mothers.  If  this  were  not  the
case,  their  offspring  would  suffer.  For  there  appears  to  be
a  tendency  to  an  equilibrium  of  vitality  in  living  beings,
just  as  there  is  to  one  of  temperature  among  substances  of  dif¬
ferent  temperatures  placed  together.  The  warm  substances
grow  cool,  and  the  cool  grow  warm.  If  beings  of  different
degrees  of  vital  energy  are  placed  together,  the  weak  grows


*  See  my  Human  Physiology ,  p,  957.


Mesmerism  in  India ,  and  Goethe’s  Clairvoyance.  263

stronger  at  the  expense  of  the  strong.  Dr.  Copland  very
justly  remarks  : —

“  A  not  uncommon  cause  of  depressed  vital  power  is  the  young
sleeping  with  the  aged.  This  fact,  however  explained,  has  been  long
remarked,  and  is  well  known  to  every  unprejudiced  observer.  But
it  has  been  most  unaccountably  overlooked  in  medicine.  I  have,  on
several  occasions,  met  with  the  counterpart  of  the  following  case : —
I  was,  a  few  years  since,  consulted  about  a  pale,  sickly,  and  thin
boy  of  about  five  or  six  years  of  age.  He  appeared  to  have  no
specific  ailment ;  but  there  was  a  slow  and  remarkable  decline  of
flesh  and  strength,  and  of  the  energy  of  all  the  functions — what  his
mother  very  aptly  termed  a  gradual  blight.  After  enquiry  into  the
history  of  the  case,  it  came  out  that  he  had  been  a  very  robust  and
plethoric  child  up  to  his  third  year,  when  his  grandmother,  a  very
aged  person,  took  him  to  sleep  with  her ;  that  he  soon  afterwards
lost  his  good  looks  ;  and  that  he  had  continued  to  decline  progres¬
sively  ever  since,  notwithstanding  medical  treatment.  I  directed
him  to  sleep  apart  from  his  aged  parent ;  and  prescribed  gentle
tonics,  change  of  air,  &c.  The  recovery  was  rapid.  But  it  is  not
in  children  only  that  debility  is  induced  by  this  mode  of  abstracting
vital  power.  Young  females  married  to  very  old  men  suffer  in  a
similar  manner,  although  seldom  to  so  great  an  extent ;  and  instances
have  come  to  my  knowledge,  where  they  have  suspected  the  cause
of  their  debilitated  state.  These  facts  are  often  well  known  to  the
aged  themselves,  who  consider  the  indulgence  favourable  to  longevity,
and  thereby  often  illustrate  the  selfishness  which,  in  some  persons,
increases  with  their  years.”* *

Thus  there  is  a  good  medical,  no  less  than  a  moral,  reason
for  the  wise  injunction  of  our  church  that  “a  man  shall  not
marry  his  grandmother.”


IV.  Mesmerism  in  India,  and  Goethe’s  Clairvoyance.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

Sir, — Are  the  two  following  extracts  in  point  for  The  Zoist?
One  is  from  Mr.  James  Forbes’s  Oriental  Memoirs ,j*  and  the
other  from  the  autobiography  of  Goethe.  J  It  is  not  generally
considered  how  numerous  are  the  purely  incidental  notices  of
peculiar  phenomena,  in  works  of  the  highest  character.

Alfred  Roffe.

48,  Ossulston  Street,  Somers  Town.

*  Dictionary  of  Practical  Medicine,  p  475.

t  A  remarkable  extract  from  the  Oriental  Memoirs,  furnished  by  another
correspondent,  has  already  appeared  in  Number  XVIII.  of  The  Zoist,  together
with  some  account  of  Mr.  Forbes.

+  Lately  published  by  Mr.  H.  Bohn.

T  2


264  Mesmerism  in  India,  and  Goethe’s  Clairvoyance.


MESMERISM  IN  INDIA.

From  J.  Forbes’s  Oriental  Memoirs,  Vol.  III.,  p.  248.

“  I  have  occasionally  mentioned  circumstances  irreconci¬
lable  to  Europeans,  constantly  occurring  among  the  Hindoos.
I  insert  another  anecdote  respecting  the  bite  of  a  serpent,
and  the  consequences  which  took  place  at  Baroche,  the  year
before  I  made  this  excursion.  I  shall  only  affirm  that  my
relation  is  an  unembellished  matter  of  fact,  from  which  I  do
not  pretend  to  draw  any  conclusion.

“  At  Baroche,  I  was  intimate  with  a  Brahmin  named
Lullabhy,  the  richest  man  in  the  city,  and  of  great  influence
in  the  Purgunna.  He  was  universally  believed  to  possess  the
power  of  curing  the  bite  of  venemous  serpents,  by  a  know¬
ledge  peculiar  to  himself,  which  he  never  imparted  to  another.
By  this  art  he  certainly  recovered  many  natives  from  a  des¬
perate  state,  after  being  wounded  by  the  cobra-di-capello,
and  the  scarlet  snake  of  Cubbeer-Burr,  without  touching  the
patient,  or  prescribing  anything  inwardly.  The  talent  of
Lullabhy  seemed  to  have  no  affinity  with  that  of  the  ancient
Psylli  or  the  modern  snake-charmers,  but  probably  was  not
unlike  the  science  professed  by  Mesmer,  or  Dr.  de  Mainauduc.
Be  that  as  it  may,  his  fame  for  effecting  these  cures  was
everywhere  established,  and  Mr.  Perrott,  then  second  in
council,  and  some  other  of  the  civil  servants  at  Baroche,
were  satisfied  with  a  cure  of  which  they  had  been  frequent
witnesses.

“  Of  all  the  Europeans  I  was  acquainted  with  in  India,
Mr.  Robert  Gambier,  at  that  time  chief  of  Baroche,  was
perhaps  the  most  incredulous  respecting  talismans,  charms,
divinations,  and  preternatural  pretensions  of  the  Brahmins.
His  opinion  of  Lullabhy* s  talent  was  publicly  known.  A
circumstance  in  his  own  garden  now  afforded  a  fair  oppor¬
tunity  of  detecting  its  fallacy.  One  of  the  under-gardeners
working  between  the  pavilions  was  bit  by  a  cobra-di-capello,
and  pronounced  to  be  in  danger.  Mr.  Gambier  was  then
holding  a  council  in  an  upper  pavilion,  and,  at  the  desire  of
Mr.  Perrott,  immediately  sent  for  Lullabhy,  without  inform¬
ing  him  of  'the  accident,  of  which  he  remained  ignorant  until
ushered  into  the  chief's  presence.  The  gardener  was  lying
on  a  slight  bed  of  coir-rope,  in  a  veranda  adjoining  the  coun¬
cil-room.  Being  asked  if  he  could  effect  a  cure,  Lullabhy
modestly  replied,  that  by  God’s  blessing  he  trusted  he  should
succeed.  The  poor  wretch  was  at  this  time  in  great  agon}'-
and  delirious ;  he  afterwards  became  torpid  and  speechless :
still  Lullabhy  was  not  permitted  to  commence  his  operation.


Mesmerism  in  India,  and  Goethe’s  Clairvoyance.  265

The  members  of  council  anxiously  awaited  the  chief's  per¬
mission,  especially  when  Lullabhy  asserted  that  any  further
loss  of  time  would  render  it  too  late.  Mr.  Gambier  examined
the  man's  pulse  by  a  stop-watch,  and,  when  convinced  his
dissolution  was  inevitably  approaching,  he  allowed  Lullabhy
to  exert  his  influence.  After  a  short  prayer,  Lullabhy,  in
presence  of  all  the  company,  waved  his  catarra,  or  short
dagger,  over  the  bed  of  the  expiring  man,  without  touching
him.  The  patient  continued  for  some  time  motionless ;  in
half  an  hour  his  heart  appeared  to  beat,  circulation  quick¬
ened;  within  the  hour  he  moved  his  limbs,  and  recovered
his  senses  ;  at  the  expiration  of  the  third  hour,  Lullabhy  had
effected  the  cure.  The  man  was  sent  home  to  his  family,
and  in  a  few  days  recovered  from  the  weakness  occasioned
by  convulsive  paroxysms,  which  probably  would  neither  have
been  so  severe  or  of  such  long  continuance,  had  the  counter¬
acting  power  been  sooner  applied."

CLAIRVOYANCE  (OR  SECOND  SIGHT).

From  Goethe's  Autobiography ,  Book  XI.

“  Amidst  all  this  pressure  and  confusion,  I  could  not  fail

to  see  Frederica  once  more . When  I  reached  her  my

hand  from  my  horse,  the  tears  stood  in  her  eyes,  and  I  felt
very  uneasy.  I  now  rode  along  the  footpath  towards  Drusen-
heim,  and  here  one  of  the  most  singular  forebodings  took
possession  of  me.  I  saw,  not  with  the  eyes  of  the  body,  but
with  those  of  the  mind,  my  own  figure  coming  towards  me
on  horseback,  and  on  the  same  road,  attired  in  a  dress  which
I  had  never  worn.  It  was  pike-grey,  with  somewhat  of
gold.  As  soon  as  I  shook  myself  out  of  this  dream,  the
figure  had  entirely  disappeared.  It  is  strange,  however,  that
eight  years  afterwards,  I  found  myself  on  the  very  road  to
pay  one  more  visit  to  Frederica,  in  the  dress  which  I  had
dreamed,  and  which  I  wore,  not  from  choice,  but  by  accident.
However  it  may  be  with  matters  of  this  kind  generally,  this
strange  illusion  calmed  me  at  the  moment  of  parting."


All  formation,  composition,  and  property  may  be  hereditary:
mesmeric  susceptibility  and  the  tendency  to  sleep-waking,
as  well  as  the  tendency  to  each  of  the  phenomena  producible
by  mesmerism,  whether  occurring  by  its  means  or  indepen¬
dently  of  it,  may  be  hereditary.  In  No.  XX.,  p.  344,  Mr.
Prideaux  furnished  an  example  of  clairvoj^ance  in  Goethe's
*  grandfather.- — Zoist.


(  266  )


Y.  On  the  Mesmeric  Excitement  of  Cerebral  Organs;  Sym¬
pathy  of  Taste  and  Mental  State;  the  Nervous  Fluid;
and  the  Source  of  Filial  Affection.  By  Mr.  Henry
Whitfeld,  Surgeon,  Ashford,  Kent.  Communicated
by  Dr.  Elliotson.

Dear  Sir, — A  few  months  since  you  were  pleased  to  for¬
ward  for  me  a  contribution  to  The  Zoist,  on  the  subject  of
mesmerism,  with  cases  illustrative  of  its  importance  as  a
curative  agent.  I  now  send  you  an  account  of  the  various
phenomena  witnessed  by  me  in  experiments  made  during  my
mesmeric  practice.

I.  Of  Phrenology .

Of  the  truth  of  this  science,  as  shewn  by  mesmerism,  I
have  had  ample  experience,  having  tested  it  upwards  of  one
thousand  times ;  but  my  patients  were  very  dissimilarly  af¬
fected.  The  faculties  of  some  individuals  were  easily  excited
by  the  near  approach  of  the  finger ;  with  others  it  was  neces¬
sary  to  touch  over  the  organ  ;*  the  effect  also  on  some  was
instantaneous,  and  as  quickly  disappeared ;  while  with  others
it  would  continue  for  a  whole  day  or  even  longer, t  and  the
quickness  or  permanence  of  the  effect  varied  also  with  the
nature  of  the  organ.  It  has  been  questioned  whether  the
will  of  the  mesmeriser  has  any  influence  in  exciting  a  faculty ;
my  experience  most  positively  denies  this,  as  I  have  frequently
roused  a  contiguous  organ  instead  of  the  one  I  wished;  for
instance,  Number  for  Time,  Conscientiousness  for  Hope,
Wit  for  Causality  :  and  I  have  often  tried  to  excite  an  organ
by  a  mere  exertion  of  the  will,  but  no  effect  was  produced.^
Respecting  Mr.  Prideaux's  “  Love  of  the  Past,”  the  fol¬
lowing  experiment  was  made.  Before  awaking  one  of  my
patients,  I  put  my  finger  on  the  situation  assigned  to  it,  be¬
tween  Imitation  and  Hope,  and  requested  her  to  inform  me
of  the  nature  of  the  faculty  which  I  had  thus  aroused,  and
this  she  promised  to  do  on  my  next  visit.  But,  on  my  seeing
her  again,  she  informed  me  that  she  knew  nothing  of  its
properties.  When,  however,  I  questioned  her  as  to  what
had  been  her  condition  of  mind  in  the  interval  since  the  ex¬
periment  was  tried,  she  replied  that  she  had  been  constantly

*  This  agrees  with  Dr.  Elliotson’s  observations  recorded  in  1843,  Vol.  I.,
p.  241  ;  see  also  his  details  in  Yol.  II.,  pp.  72,  78,  225  ;  Yol.  III.,  pp.  68,  70. —
Zoist.

f  See  Dr.  Elliotson’s  experience  in  Vol.  I.,  p.  241  ;  Yol.  II.,  pp.  72,  78,
222  ;  Vol.  III.,  p.  68. — Zoist.

J  See  Dr.  Elliotson’s  experiments  proving  the  same  truth  in  Vol.  I.,
pp.  242,  3,  4. — Zoist.


\


Mesmeric  Excitement  of  Cerebral  Organs ,  fyc.  267

recurring  to  past  scenes,  even  to  her  childhood.  The  test  of
this  faculty  has  been  repeated  on  different  persons  with  a
similar  result.

II.  Sympathy  of  Sensation  and  Mental  State.

Of  community  or  identity  of  taste  I  have  had  daily  evi¬
dence  ;  and  have  found  it  to  exist  in  some  degree  in  most
cases,  and  perfectly  in  others.  The  phenomenon  is  to  be
observed  in  a  variety  of  ways,  for  not  only  does  the  patient
taste  or  smell  that  which  is  applied  to  the  palate  or  nose  of
the  mesmeriser,  so  as  to  be  able  to  detect  that  which  is
secretly  put  into  the  mouth,  as  a  grape,  strawberry,  orange
peel,  dried  tongue,  &c. ;  but  the  feelings  and  sentiments  of
the  mind  will  be  much  influenced  by  the  mental  condition  of
the  mesmeriser.  This  important  fact  should  ever  be  remem¬
bered,  particularly  where  our  principal  object  is  to  leave  the
patient  composed  and  happy ;  for  a  restless  unhappy  condi¬
tion  of  the  mesmeriser  will  be  almost  sure  to  impart  uneasi¬
ness  of  mind,  succeeded  by  disturbed  dreams.

For  the  purpose  therefore  of  giving  tranquillity  to  the
mind  of  the  patient,  I  have  been  in  the  habit,  at  the  com¬
mencement  of  the  mesmeric  sleep,  of  repeating  emphatically,
though  inwardly,  one  or  two  verses  of  the  Evening  Hymn
or  Pope^s  Universal  Prayer,  and  the  effect  has  been  truly
delightful,  the  patient  awaking  in  the  happiest  state  of  mind,
and  feeling  the  full  influence  of  devotional  exercise.  Occa¬
sionally,  by  way  of  experiment,  I  have  in  like  manner  re¬
peated  passages  from  Shakespere  and  other  poets,  and  the
change  of  sentiment  was  immediately  detected.  Sometimes,
moreover,  opportunities  offered  themselves  for  witnessing  the
identity  of  feeling,  unexpected  and  uninvited ;  thus,  when
another  patient  caused  me  anxiety,  so  great  as  to  overcome
my  powers  of  abstraction,  a  feeling  of  unhappiness  lasting
for  hours  would  thereby  be  communicated  to  the  mesmerisee.
As  with  the  mind  so  with  the  body.  If  I  had  gone  for  some
time  without  food,  my  patients  would  awake  with  the  keenest
appetite;  or  if  I  were  fatigued,  less  strength  would  be  im¬
parted.  A  pain  in  the  stomach,  side,  or  head,  of  the  mes¬
meriser,  was  instantly  detected  by  the  mesmerisee ;  and  if
the  former  was  much  out  of  health,  he  would  injuriously  in¬
fluence  the  latter.  Several  instances  of  such  ill  effects  are
known  to  me.

III.  Nervous  Fluid.

As  it  has  often  been  questioned  whether  there  is  such  a
thing  as  nervous  fluid,  while  the  existence  of  galvanic  fluid


2G8  Nervous  Fluid,  fyc.,

is  not  denied;  I  will  briefly  mention  a  few  experiments  in
support  of  the  opinion  that  such  a  fluid  does  exist.  It  is
worthy  of  remark,  that  some  individuals,  when  in  the  mes¬
meric  sleep,  cannot  bear  the  operator  to  leave  them ;  with
such  I  have  however  contrived,  by  means  of  a  small  long
brass  chain,  to  stand  many  feet  from  them — they  holding
one  end  while  I  held  the  other — and  they  were  instantly  con¬
scious  of  my  relaxing  my  firm  grasp  of  the  chain.  A  similar
result  followed  when  a  walking-stick  was  substituted  for  the
chain.  I  find  wood  to  be  a  good  conductor  of  nervous  fluid,
being  able  to  strongly  mesmerise  the  head  and  arm  of  a
patient  through  it  as  a  medium.  This  fact  appears  to  me
fully  to  explain  why  Dr.  Hay  garth’s  wooden  “  tractors”  an¬
swered  as  a  curative  means  as  well  as  Mr.  Perkins’s  metallic;
and  to  shew  that  Dr.  Haygarth  was  in  error  when  he  attri¬
buted  the  cures  wholly  to  imagination ;  the  remedy  not  being
in  the  “  tractors,”  but  in  the  hand  that  held  them.  I  dis¬
covered  also  that  the  power  was  increased,  as  in  galvanism,
by  moistening  the  hands  with  water ;  and  that  the  fluid  passed
the  shortest  distance,  so  that  if  one  foot  were  taken  in  each
hand  of  the  operator,  the  lower  extremities,  being  mesmerised,
would  become  warm  and  the  head  become  cool.  If  again  the
mesmeriser  took  one  hand  in  one  of  his,  and  placed  his  other
hand  on  the  corresponding  shoulder,  the  principal  effect
would  be  confined  to  that  side.  Feeling  thus  satisfied  that  a
nervous  current  does  pass  from  one  individual  to  another,
and  seeing  also  that  the  power  could  be  increased  at  will,
and  was  influenced  by  the  health  of  the  mesmeriser,  I
inferred  by  analogy  the  possibility  of  producing  a  shock.
Having  therefore  put  a  patient  into  the  sleep-waking  state,
I  took  a  hand  in  each  of  my  own,  and  then,  relaxing  the
mesmeric  influence  for  about  fifteen  seconds,  I  suddenly
grasped  the  hands,  whereupon  the  arms  were  convulsed  with
the  sensation  of  an  electric  shock,  passing  through  the  chest.
The  phenomenon  is  even  more  remarkable  if  the  left  hand
and  right  foot  be  taken,  as  the  shock  will  be  sufficiently
strong  to  throw  the  opposite  arm  from  the  side.  A  shock
may  also  be  communicated  to  the  spine  or  any  part  of  the
frame,  by  grasping  one  hand  and  striking  simultaneously  the
part  with  the  united  points  of  the  fingers  and  thumb.  If
the  fingers  be  separated  the  sensation  of  an  electric  spark
will  be  communicated  from  each  finger.  These  experiments
have  been  repeated  by  me  some  hundreds  of  times,  and  on
as  many  as  one-third  of  those  readily  susceptible  of  mesmeric
influence,  but  more  particularly  on  those  who  can  be  ren¬
dered  cataleptic :  and  I  am  acquainted  with  six  individuals  of


269


by  Mr.  Whitfeld.

both  sexes  who  are  capable  of  imparting  these  shocks;  and  these
can  be  made  more  powerful  than  the  subjects  of  them  are  will¬
ing  to  bear.  It  is  as  well  again  to  observe,  that  the  power  is
increased,  as  in  galvanism,  by  the  hands  being  moistened.

Is  there  any  mesmeric  connection  between  the  earth  and
its  inhabitants  ?  and  does  the  comfort  of  clothing  ever  depend
on  this  connection  ?

Having  made  many  experiments  in  catalepsy,  and  fre¬
quently  by  a  mesmeric  pass  fixed  the  feet  of  a  patient  to  the
ground  and  the  hands  to  a  chain  or  door,  I  was  desirous  of
ascertaining  how  far  the  earth  was  an  agent  in  the  matter.
I  therefore  directed  a  patient  when  in  “  sleep-waking”  to
stand  on  the  glass  stool  of  an  electrifying  machine,  where¬
upon  she  complained  of  her  feet  feeling  cold.  I  then  endea¬
voured  to  fix  her  to  the  stool,  but  without  effect.  When,
however,  I  secretly  pushed  a  chair  in  contact  with  it,  the
feet  were  immediately,  by  means  of  a  pass,  firmly  fixed  to
the  stool.  Some  months  after  this  experiment  was  tried,  a
lady  informed  me  that,  on  visiting  our  National  School,  she
felt  quite  ill  from  the  excessive  coldness  of  the  pavement,
and  thought  it  must  be  very  injurious  to  the  children.  I
informed  her  that  it  was  formed  of  asphalte,  and  that  though
usually  considered  warm  from  being  a  bad  conductor  of  heat,
yet  probably  it  appeared  cold  to  her,  because,  by  reason  of
its  resinous  nature,  it  had  more  or  less  isolated  her  from  the
magnetic  current  of  the  earth.  In  the  course  of  a  few  weeks,
I  met  with  another  lady  who  was  similarly  affected  on  visiting
the  School,  and  who  was  surprised  that  her  friends  could
speak  of  the  asphalte  being  warm.  It  now  came  to  my  re¬
collection,  that  in  giving  directions  to  my  patients  on  the
subject  of  clothing,  I  found  some  few  individuals  to  complain
of  worsted  stockings  being  colder  than  cotton,  and  of  silk
being  very  disagreeable ;  some  also  felt  wretched  when  the
feet  rested  on  a  thick  carpet.  In  the  assurance  that  there
was  something  more  than  imagination  in  all  this,  the  following
experiments  were  made.  A  patient  having  been  thrown  into
the  mesmeric  sleep  was  directed  to  stand  on  a  stool  with  glass
legs:  she  instantly  felt  cold,  sick,  and  uncomfortable,  and
the  mesmeric  passes  would  not  fix  her  to  the  stool.  A  piece
of  wood  was  then  placed  so  as  to  connect  the  wooden  part  of
the  stool  with  the  floor,  and  she  could  be  now  fixed  to  the
former ;  and  upon  removing  the  piece  of  wood  the  feet  were
again  free.  She  was  next  made  to  stand  on  a  piece  of  as¬
phalte  :  she  felt  cold  and  sick,  but  could  however  be  fixed  to
it ;  which  latter  circumstance  is  owing,  I  suppose,  to  its  con¬
taining  a  certain  portion  of  non-electric  matter.  When


270  Phrenological  Experiment  tyc.,

standing  on  a  dry  silk  handkerchief,  twice  folded,  she  felt
excessively  cold  and  uncomfortable,  and  could  not  be  fixed
thereto.  On  substituting  for  the  silk  handkerchief  a  pair  of
worsted  stockings,  well-aired  and  folded,  I  found  the  result
the  same,  though  in  a  less  degree,  as  in  the  last  case.  I
lastly  requested  her  to  stand  on  cotton,  when  she  felt  very
comfortable,  and  was  easily  catalepsed.

The  next  day  I  met  with  an  intelligent  girl,  fifteen  years
of  age,  particularly  susceptible  of  mesmeric  influence.  I
requested  her,  in  her  natural  state,  to  stand  on  my  silk
handkerchief,  twice  folded ;  after  two  minutes  she  told  me
she  felt  nothing  except  that  it  was  very  cold.  She  was  then
directed  to  stand  on  the  damp  bricks ;  these,  she  said,  were
much  warmer.  I  now  dipped  the  silk  handkerchief  in  cold
water,  wrung  it,  and  folded  it  as  before ;  after  standing  upon
it,  she  soon  told  me  that  it  felt  comfortably  warm.  At  the
time  of  the  experiment  she  wore  a  light  pair  of  leather  shoes.

The  next  thing  to  be  ascertained  was  the  electrical  pro¬
perties  of  these  various  substances ;  for  which  purpose  I  used
the  ordinary  electrifying  machine ;  and  having  attached  my¬
self  to  the  conductor,  I  first  stood  on  the  glass  stool,  next
on  silk  handkerchiefs,  then  on  asphalte,  and  then  on  gutta
percha ;  and  I  found  that  electric  sparks  could  readily,  under
these  circumstances,  be  taken  from  my  hands,  &c. ;  and  also
in  a  slight  degree  when  I  was  standing  on  folded  worsted
stockings.  I  need  hardly  add  that  neither  wet  silk  nor  cotton
could  isolate  me  from  the  earth,  nor  could  electric  sparks  be
taken  when  they  were  used.  These  facts  satisfactorily  prove
that  the  coldness  of  the  asphalte,  silk,  and  worsted,  as  ex¬
perienced  by  some  persons,  arises  from  the  non-conducting
power  of  these  substances ;  and  that  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth  are  more  or  less  influenced  by  its  magnetic  condition,
and  some  in  a  very  remarkable  manner — their  temperature
depending  in  some  degree  thereupon.  It  will,  moreover,  be
generally  found,  that  the  health  of  such  individuals  is  sensibly
affected  by  electrical  changes  of  the  atmosphere  ;  some  being
able,  by  their  sensations,  to  foretell  the  approach  of  a  storm.

IY.  Phrenological  Experiment.

It  has  often  been  remarked,  and  with  surprise,  that  the
excessive  fondness  of  parents  for  their  children  is  not  sure  to
be  rewarded  by  a  return  of  filial  affection.  Being  firmly
convinced  of  the  existence  and  certainty  of  the  natural  law
relating  to  the  hereditary  transmission  of  faculties,  I  was
desirous  of  ascertaining  from  what  organs  arose  the  different
feelings  of  parental  and  filial  love.  I  accordingly  selected  an


271


by  Mr.  Whitfeld.

individual,  the  mother  of  one  child,  whose  organs  could  be
excited  by  merely  pointing  at  them  with  the  finger  ;  and,
sleep-waking  being  induced  by  her  husband,  he  was  directed
by  a  sign  to  point  at  Philoprogenitiveness.  The  feeling  be¬
came  active  in  a  few  seconds,  and  she  expressed  her  extreme
attachment  to  her  child  ;  upon  being  questioned,  she  said
she  loved  her  mother,  but  the  child  required  all  her  atten¬
tion,  and  should  have  it.  Self-esteem  was  then  roused  in
combination  with  Philoprogenitiveness,  and  upon  being  asked
whether  she  would  not  send  a  few  shillings  to  her  mother,
supposing  the  child  were  provided  with  the  necessaries  of  life,
she  replied,  no ;  she  should  like  to  see  her  child  handsomely,
even  superbly,  dressed ;  the  parish  could  provide  for  her
mother.  The  fingers  were  then  removed  from  these  organs,
and  made  to  rest  over  Conscientiousness,  and  in  a  few  seconds,
she  said  that  her  child  was  dependent  upon  and  required  her
care ;  but  still  she  would  give  up  all  the  time  she  could  pos¬
sibly  spare  to  make  her  mother  comfortable,  being  ever
mindful  of  the  great  kindness  she  had  all  her  life  received.
Veneration  being  excited  in  combination,  she  instantly  spoke
of  her  mother’s  age,  her  virtues,  and  the  respect  due  to  hei.
Benevolence  was  next  roused  in  combination  with  the  two
last-mentioned  organs,  whereupon  she  expressed  the  greatest
love,  respect,  and  gratitude  towards  her  mother.  Her  child
had  a  claim  on  her  attention,  and  she  would  never  neglect
it ;  but  as  long  as  her  mother  lived  she  would  bestow  all  pos¬
sible  kindness  upon  her,  for  she  dearly  loved  her.  It  is  then
evident  that  filial  affection  springs  from  Conscientiousness,
Benevolence,  and  Veneration,  feelings  of  the  highest  order;
and  that  fondness  for  our  children  is  merely  instinctive,  and
arises  from  a  separate  and  distinct  organ :  and  since  a  large
development  and  activity  of  Philoprogenitiveness  can  in  no
wav  transmit  Conscientiousness,  Veneration  and  Benevolence
to  the  offspring,  it  therefore  follows  that  married  persons,  to
ensure  support  and  comfort  in  their  latter  years,  must  act
towards  their  parents  as  they  would  wish  their  children  to
act  towards  them.  Each  faculty,  as  each  living  being,  pro¬
duces  its  like ;  and  in  proportion  to  the  size  and  energy  of
an  organ  in  the  parent,  will  be  the  development  and  activity
of  that  particular  organ  in  the  child.  Thus  filial  love  can
only  spring  from  a  similar  sentiment,  and  parental  affection
can  only  produce  its  like  instinctive  attachment.

In  performing  phrenological  experiments,  it  is  necessary,
for  satisfactory  results,  that  the  mind  of  the  operator  should
be  in  some  degree  passive,  so  that  no  faculty  of  his  own  be
more  than  ordinarily  excited  or  in  a  very  active  condition ;


272


Source  of  Filial  Affection,

as  it  follows  from  what  has  been  already  said  on  identity  of
taste  and  feeling,  that  it  will  be  almost  impossible  to  induce
a  sentiment  of  perfect  amiability  in  the  mesmerised,  when
the  mesmeriser  is  himself  irritated ;  or,  in  other  words,  his
organs  of  Combativeness  and  Destructiveness  are  brought
into  activity;  i.  e.,  by  the  rude  and  ill-natured  remarks  of
surrounding  sceptics.  For  this  reason,  large  assemblies  are
improper  places  for  these  experiments;  and  even,  if  the
operator  be  free  from  annoyance,  it  is  impossible  for  him  to
transmit  a  good  current  of  nervous  fluid  to  the  mesmerisee,
when  his  own  brain  is  exhausting  its  resources  through  ex¬
traordinary  mental  exertion.  In  illustration  of  the  above
statement,  I  have  frequently,  during  the  period  of  “  sleep¬
waking”  of  a  patient,  turned  my  thoughts  from  her,  and
engaged  myself  in  mental  arithmetic;  the  change  was  in¬
stantly  detected,  she  would  exclaim,  “  What  are  you  thinking
of?  you  are  not  thinking  of  me — I  feel  so  very  cold.”

I  must  now  conclude  this,  I  fear,  uninteresting  detail  of
a  few  facts ;  but  should  you  deem  them  worthy  of  insertion
in  The  Zoist,  among  the  valuable  contributions  of  other  mes¬
merists,  it  will  afford  me  pleasure  at  some  future  period,  to
send  you  the  result  of  my  later  experience.

I  remain,  dear  Sir,

Ever  yours,  truly  and  respectfully,
Ashford,  Kent,  Henry  Whitfeld.

August  21st,  1848.

NOTE  BY  DR.  ELLIOTSON.

Mr.  Whitfeld^s  view  of  filial  affection  is  the  true  doctrine
of  Gall,  proved  both  by  the  comparison  of  cerebral  develop¬
ment  with  character,  and  by  the  observation  of  our  moral
nature  simply.  The  parent,  human  or  brute,  at  once  blindly
and  inevitably  loves  the  being  which  it  believes  to  be  its  off¬
spring,  although  it  has  no  instinctive  recognition  of  its  off¬
spring.  But  the  offspring  has  no  instinctive  love  of  its  parent,
and  gradually  becomes  attached  to  those,  whoever  they  may
be,  with  whom  it  lives  and  who  administer  most  to  its  happi¬
ness.  In  addition  to  Conscientiousness,  Benevolence  and
Veneration,  mentioned  by  Mr.  Whitfeld,  the  mere  proneness
to  the  attachment  of  friendship,  or  mere  Adhesiveness,  as
Dr.  Spurzheim  named  it,  must  play  an  active  part ;  and  in
the  brute  must  be  almost  solely  concerned  :  at  least  Conscien¬
tiousness  is  not  discernible,  and  Benevolence  and  Venera¬
tion,  though  I  believe  I  see  their  manifestations  in  some
brutes,  can  hardly  have  more  than  a  trifling  share  in  exciting
the  love  of  the  offspring  to  the  parent.


by  Mr.  Whitfeld.


273


Mr.  Wliitfeld’s  physiological  argument  for  the  moral  duty
of  filial  affection  is  equally  sound ;  and  it  is  well  to  strengthen
good  dispositions  by  even  selfish  considerations.  But  it  does
not  follow  of  necessity  that  every  thing  which  is  well  developed
in  a  parent,  be  it  limb,  lung,  face,  vocal  or  digestive  organ,
or  individual  cerebral  organ,  shall  be  well  developed  in  the
offspring.  The  following  extracts  from  my  Human  Physiology
may  be  interesting.

“  Animated  beings  have  a  general  tendency  to  produce  offspring
resembling  themselves  and  progenitors,  in  form,  structure,  com¬
position,  and  all  qualities.  By  this  law  each  animal  exists  as  it  is:
— a  man  is  a  man  ;  a  horse  is  a  horse  ;  and  an  oak  is  an  oak.  Not
only  the  species,  but  the  varieties  and  the  minutest  peculiarities  of
the  individual  in  structure,  and  composition,  and  properties  are
transmitted: — the  most  delicate  shade  of  manner,  corns,  the  mode
of  affection  by  medicines,  and  morbid  poisons.

“  1  Fortes  creantur  fortibus  et  bonis  ;

Est  in  juvencis,  est  in  equis  patrura
Virtus  :  nec  imbellem  feroces
Progenerant  aquilse  columbam.’*

“  The  offspring  of  two  of  the  same  race  may  frequently  resemble
both  parents,  but  the  proportion  of  resemblance  to  each,  both  on
the  whole  and  in  regard  to  particular  parts,  is  various, — some  children
favouring  the  father  most,  some  the  mother,  though  usually  re¬
sembling  each  enough  to  preserve  a  family  likeness,  and  some
resembling  one  parent  almost  solely, f — some  parts  being  as  it  were  an

*  “  Horace,  lib.  iv.,  Od.  4.”

“  f  Dr.  Parsons  {Phil.  Trans,  vol.  lv.)  relates  that  in  Virginia  two  black
slaves  of  the  lady  from  whom  he  learnt  the  fact,  married  together,  and  produced
a  white  girl.  *  When  the  poor  woman  was  told  the  child  was  like  the  children  of
white  people,  she  was  in  great  dread  of  her  husband,  declaring  at  the  same  time,
that  she  never  had  anything  to  do  with  a  white  man  in  her  life,  and  therefore
begged  that  they  would  keep  the  place  dark,  that  he  might  not  see  it.  When  he
came  to  ask  how  she  did,  he  wanted  to  see  the  child,  and  wondered  why  the  room
was  shut  up,  as  it  was  not  usual.  The  woman’s  fears  increased  when  he  had  it
brought  into  the  light ;  but  while  he  looked  at  it  he  seemed  highly  pleased,  re¬
turned  the  child,  and  behaved  with  extraordinary  tenderness.  She  imagined  he
dissembled  his  resentment  till  she  should  be  able  to  go  about,  and  that  then  he
would  leave  her  ;  but  in  a  few  days  he  said  to  her,  ‘  You  are  afraid  of  me,  and
therefore  keep  the  room  dark,  because  my  child  is  white ;  but  I  love  it  the  better
for  that,  for  my  own  father  was  a  white  man,  though  my  grandfather  and  grand¬
mother  were  both  as  black  as  you  and  myself  ;  and  although  we  come  from  the
place  where  no  white  people  were  ever  seen,  yet  there  was  always  a  white  child  in
every  family  that  belonged  to  us.’  The  woman  did  well,  and  the  child  was  shown
about  as  a  curiosity;  and  was,  about  the  age  of  fifteen,  sold  to  Admiral  Ward,
and  brought  to  London  in  order  to  be  shown  to  the  Royal  Society.  Dr.  Parsons
received  an  account  from  an  eye-witness  of  a  white  woman  in  York  marrying  a
black,  and  producing  a  child  *  entirely  black,  and  in  every  particular  of  colour
and  features  resembling  the  father,  without  the  least  participation  from  the
mother.’  A  friend  of  Mr.  White’s,  named  Beazley,  met  a  Negress  in  a  stage
with  a  black  and  white  child,  the  production  of  her  English  husband.  (  On  the
Regular  Gradation ,  p.  123,  sq.)”


274


Duty  of  Parents,


equable  compound  of  the  same  in  both  parents,  (as  the  skin  in  the
mulatto  offspring  of  a  black  and  white,)  some  an  unequal  compound,
(as  when  the  offspring  of  a  black  and  white  is  white  with  patches  of
black  or  with  merely  a  black  colis,*)  and  others  again  similar  to  the
same  as  seen  in  one  parent  only:  and  it  is  remarkable  that  the  re¬
semblance  to  the  parents,  whether  in  regard  to  common  or  uncommon
peculiarity,  is  occasionally  not  observed  in  the  immediate  offspring,
but  re-appears  in  the  third  or  even  a  later  generation.

“  ‘  Fit  quoque,  ut  interdum  similes  existere  avorum
Possint,  et  referant  proavorum  ssepe  figuras,

Propterea,  quia  multa  modis  primordia  multis
Mista  sua  celant  in  corpore  ssepe  parentes,

Quae  patribus  patres  tradunt  a  stirpe  profecta.

Iride  venus  varia  producit  sorte  figuras ;

Majorumque  refert  vultus,  vocesque,  comasque. ’f

“  A  similar  circumstance  is  that  of  one  sex  transmitting  certain
qualities  of  its  parent  of  the  sex,  opposite  to  its  own  sex,  to  its
children  of  that  sex.  For  example,  a  mother  brings  forth  sons  with
such  modifications  of  the  sexual  organs  as  existed  in  her  father :  or
a  son  produces  daughters  with  the  sexual  peculiarities  of  his  mother.

‘  The  property  of  milking,’  in  the  words  of  an  experienced  breeder,

‘  is  inherited  as  readily  as  that  of  peculiarity  of  shape.’  ‘  In  the
selection  of  dulls,  besides  attending  to  those  properties  which  belong
to  the  male,  we  ought  to  be  careful  also,  that  they  are  descended
from  good  milkers,  at  least  if  we  wish  the  future  stock  to  possess
this  property. £’

“As  the  different  properties  of  both  parents  may  be  pretty  well

“  *Phil.  Trans.,  vol.  lv.

“  ‘  A  black  man,  servant  to  a  gentleman  who  lived  in  the  neighbourhood  of
Gray’s  Inn,  married  a  white  woman  who  lived  in  the  same  family ;  and  when  she
proved  with  child  took  a  lodging  for  her  in  Gray’s  Inn  Lane.  When  she  was  at
full  time  the  master  had  business  out  of  town,  and  took  his  man  with  him,  and
did  not  return  till  ten  or  twelve  days  after  this  woman  was  delivered  of  a  girl,
which  was  as  fair  a  child  to  look  at  as  any  born  of  white  parents,  and  her  features
exactly  like  the  mother.  The  black,  at  his  return,  was  very  much  disturbed  at
the  appearance  of  the  child,  and  swore  that  it  was  not  his  ;  but  the  nurse,  who
attended  the  woman,  soon  satisfied  him,  for  she  undressed  the  infant  and  showed
him  the  right  buttock  and  thigh,  which  were  as  black  as  the  father,  and  reconciled
him  immediately  to  both  mother  and  child.  I  was  informed  of  the  fact,  and  went
to  the  place,  where  I  examined  the  child  and  found  it  was  true.’  (Dr.  Parsons.)

“  A  man,  the  son  of  a  white  father  and  black  mother,  is  said  to  have  kept  a
public  house  in  Tooley  Street,  white  in  his  right  half  and  black  in  his  left :  a  man,
the  son  of  a  black  father  and  white  mother,  resident  in  Prescott  Street,  Good¬
man’s  Fields,  and  named  Clark,  to  have  been  black  below  his  navel,  and  white
above:  and  a  girl,  born  in  Somersetshire,  in  1759,  of  a  black  haired  father  and
carroty  mother,  to  have  had,  after  she  was  grown  up  a  little,  hair  of  jet  black  on
the  right  side  of  her  head,  and  carroty  on  the  left.  ( Zoological  Magaz.  vol.  xii.
p.  369,  quoted  by  White,  On  the  Regular  Gradation,  p.  122.)

“  Bartholin,  Hist.  Anat.

“  Schurig,  Spermatologia,  p.  146.

“+  Lucretius,  lib.  iv.  We  call  this  Atavism;  the  Germans,  RucJcshlag.

“  X  Mr.  Wilkinson,  in  Mr.  Walker’s  Intermarriage ,  p.  343.

[Miss  Barber’s  father  transmitted  his  mother’s  cancerous  disposition  of  breast
to  her  breast,  p.  215.]


by  Mr.  Whitfeld.


275


blended  in  the  offspring,  we  may  sometimes  by  breeding  successively
from  offspring  and  one  of  the  original  parents,  at  length  produce  an
offspring  exactly  resembling  this  parent.  Some  dissolute  Europeans
are  said  to  have  begun  with  a  black  woman,  and  had  intercourse
with  their  offspring  till  they  made  her  the  great-grandmother  of  a
white.

“  National  features,  form,  and  in  a  great  measure  even  character,
arise  from  a  nation  marrying  among  themselves,  and  will  be  more
marked  in  proportion  to  the  rarity  of  connection  with  foreigners.
Hence  the  amazing  peculiarity  of  the  Jewish  race.*

“  *  The  advantage  of  crossing  breeds  is  well  known,  and  may  be  explained
by  the  transmission  of  the  parent’s  qualities.  If  any  unfavourable  deviation  in
structure  or  constitution  occurs,  and  is  transmitted,  and  the  descendants  who
receive  it  hereditarily  intermarry,  the  deviation  is  doubly  enforced  in  their  off¬
spring,  whether  the  effects  have  manifested  themselves  in  both  parents,  in  one,
or  in  neither :  but,  if  a  connection  is  made  with  another  family  or  breed,  it  is,
on  the  contrary,  diluted.  The  brain  suffers  perhaps  more  than  any  other  organ.
The  Royal  families  of  Europe,  subjected  to  absurd  restrictive  rules  in  their  mar¬
riages,  are  a  lamentable  proof  of  the  ill  effects  of  the  marriage  of  relatives.  Im¬
becility  or  insanity,  in  one  degree  or  other,  occurs  in  nearly  every  Royal  family
of  Europe.  It  is  amusing,  when  travelling  on  the  Continent,  to  contrast  the
wretched  legitimate  heads  on  the  money  with  the  full  front  of  Napoleon.  The
rich  Jews  in  this  country  have  the  same  bad  custom  of  marrying  first  cousins  ;
and  I  never  saw  so  many  instances  of  squinting,  stammering,  peculiarity  of
manner,  imbecility  or  insanity  in  all  their  various  degrees,  intense  nervousness,
&c.,  in  an  equal  number  of  other  persons.  The  custom  in  Royalty  is  but  one  of
the  many  absurdities  to  which  barbarous  times  have  left  it  still  a  slave  :  in  the
Jews  it  arises  from  their  never  liking  to  marry  a  person  poorer  than  themselves,
their  desire  to  keep  their  money  in  their  own  families,  and  from  the  intensity  of
all  the  domestic  attachments  among  this  kindhearted  and  ill-used  people,  so  that
cousins  are  attached  before  love  begins,  and  this  is  but  a  little  transition.  Could
a  race,  however,  have  all  its  wants  well  supplied  and,  at  the  same  time,  have  no
unhealthy  habit,  so  as  to  acquire  no  tendency  to  unfavourable  deviation,  and
have  no  latent  disposition  from  old  progenitors  to  any,  I  do  not  think  that  the
soundness  of  breeds  would  require  crosses.  The  Arabians  never  allow  the  mares
of  the  noble  race  to  have  intercourse  with  any  but  horses  of  their  own  rank,  yet  the
excellence  of  the  race  is  maintained.  (D’Arvieux,  Travels  in  Arabia,  p.  168.)
Their  animals  have  every  comfort,  and  yet  are  not  subjected,  like  our  domestic
animals  and  most  of  ourselves,  to  unnatural  habits.  Mr.  M.  N.  Smith,  who
resided  long  in  Arabia,  says  that  the  animal  degenerates  if  the  in-and-in  breeding
is  very  close — incestuous,  for  three  or  four  generations — and  that  the  Arabs  breed
them  not  so  closely  as  this.  It  might  be  questioned  whether  the  ill-effects  of
close  in-and-in  breeding  does  not  depend  upon  the  want  of  selection  which  is  im¬
plied  in  it : — upon  not  observing  the  smallest  tendency  to  imperfection  the  moment
it  appears,  so  as  to  correct  it  before  it  becomes  a  defect ;  for  the  greater  the
range,  the  greater  of  course  the  possibility  of  selection.  ‘  Animals  kept  together,
as  Sir  John  Sebright  remarks,  are  all  subjected  to  the  operation  of  the  same  cir¬
cumstances,  and  consequently  rendered  liable  to  the  same  diseases ;  and  therefore,
for  close  in-and-in  breeding  to  be  safe,  the  breed  should  be  established  in  different
places,  and  thus  individuals  without  the  same  tendencies  to  disease  and  degeneration
be  brought  together.’  (Walker,  Intermarriage,  p.  298.,  London,  1838 ;  to
which  work  I  am  indebted  for  several  references.)  Certainly,  if  the  same  defect
occurring  in  both  parents  is  likely  to  be  entailed  on  the  offspring,  the  same  ex¬
cellence  in  both  is  as  likely  to  be  transmitted  in  great  force.  Again,  a  cross  may
be  as  injurious  as  an  intermarriage  between  relations,  if  the  same  evil  tendency
exist  in  both  parties.  Still,  as  few  families  are  without  faults  of  constitution,
evident  or  latent,  and  these,  should  they  be  latent,  are  likely  still  to  be  the  same


276


Duty  of  Parents,


"  It  appears  that,  when  animals  of  different  species  or  of  the
same  species  but  of  varieties  very  different  from  each  other,  are  con¬
nected,  the  offspring  is  of  an  intermediate  type, — a  mule:  but,  when
the  animals  are  of  different  varieties  only  and  varieties  not  very  dis¬
similar,  the  offspring  resembles  generally  one  parent  only  or  all  but
entirely.  Thus  an  Englishman  and  a  Negro  woman  produce  mules,
— mulattos;  but  the  half-caste  offspring  who  marry  with  a  white  will
produce  children,  some  entirely  white,  some  dark  like  itself.  M.
Coladon  of  Geneva  made  white  and  brown  mice  breed  together:  in
every  instance  the  young  were  purely  white  or  brown.  Mr.  Jefferson*
saw  two  albino  sisters  who  bore  black  children  to  black  men :  another
albiness  who  bore  an  albino  to  a  black  :  and  a  white  negress  also  a
black  daughter  to  a  black  man.  Thus,  if  an  individual  has  a  re¬
markable  peculiarity,  such  as  supernumerary  toes  or  fingers,  some
one  or  other  of  every  race  of  descendants  may  have  it,  though  they
do  not  intermarry.  If  the  offspring  of  parents  of  different  families
or  of  sub-varieties  only,  resembling  one  parent  entirely,  marry  with
another  of  the  same  sub-variety,  his  offspring  may  more  or  less  re¬
semble  his  parent, — the  grand-offspring  the  grand-parent.  Thus  a
white  sheep  produced  by  a  black  and  white  may,  by  uniting  with
another  white  sheep,  produce  one  either  black  or  with  black  patches.
A  friend  of  mine  in  the  East  Indies,  wishing  to  have  white  flocks,
bred  from  white  sheep  only;  but  many  of  these  were  the  offspring  of
one  black  parent,  and  black  lambs  were  continually  born  of  his  white
sheep.  Great  and  little  intellect,  good  and  bad  moral  qualities,
appear  in  children  who  in  this  particular  do  not  resemble  either
parent,  but  some  other  progenitor.  I  presume  that  re-appearance
of  resemblance  to  progenitors  is  more  likely  if  both  parents  are  des¬
cended  from  progenitors  having  the  same  peculiarity, — that  black
sheep  are  more  likely  to  appear  among  white,  if  both  the  white
parents  had  a  progenitor  more  or  less  black,  than  if  one  parent  only
had  a  black  progenitor. f

tc  We  do  not  often  know  the  limit  to  the  number  of  generations
after  which  a  peculiarity  may  re-appear.  But,  if,  in  every  instance


in  relatives,  family  marriages  are  to  be  discouraged.  Latent  evil  predisposition
exists  often  in  the  most  healthy  looking  families,  and  the  chances  of  coincidence
of  such  disposition  is  very  much  less  where  there  is  no  relationship.

‘  ‘  The  degeneracy  of  many  plants,  unless  their  soil  is  changed,  is  quite  another
circumstance ;  and  depends  upon  the  unwholesomeness  of  the  excrementitious
matter  of  every  plant  to  it,  whereas  this  is  good  nourishment  to  other  plants
which  succeed  to  its  place  in  the  soil.”

“*  Notes  on  Virginia,  p.  119.  Dr.  Winterbottom  also  (Account  of  the
Negroes  of  Sierra  Leone,  vol.  ii.  p.  170.)  mentions  a  white  Negro  and  black
Negress  producing  two  albinos  and  five  blacks ;  and  an  albiness,  born  of  black
parents,  and  married  to  a  black,  producing  blacks.”

“  f  Though  a  Jew  can  generally  be  recognised,  the  Jewish  features  have  great
diversity  ;  and,  from  the  nation  never  marrying  with  others,  every  peculiarity  is
little  diluted,  and  the  same  latent  peculiarity  will  often  meet  in  the  individuals
who  marry.  I  have  consequently  been  frequently  struck  with  the  diversity  of
Jewish  features  in  Hebrew  brothers  and  sisters,  and  the  diversity  from  even  both
parents;  all  the  diversities  of  Jewish  features  thus  springing  up  continually.”


277


by  Mr.  Whitfeld.

ot  its  re-appearance,  the  connection  is  with  another  individual  desti¬
tute  of  it,  probably  it  will  at  length  cease  to  appear.  In  the  human
race  this  seldom  happens.

“  If  one  nation  overcome  another  which  is  numerous  and  at  a
certain  degree  of  civilization,  it  cannot  extirpate  its  victims.  Hence
M.  Abel  Amusat  has  been  able,  by  comparing  language  with  history,
to  discover  nearly  all  the  nomadic  tribes  of  Asia  in  their  primitive
seats,  notwithstanding  the  numerous  revolutions  and  conquests  in
that  part  of  the  globe.  If  the  two  are  in  equal  numbers  and  mingle,
the  characteristics  of  each  will  mark  their  descendants;  but  will  not
be  blended  in  every  instance,  because  it  is  not  possible  for  every  pair
to  be  one  of  each  nation.  If  they  are  disproportionate,  the  charac¬
teristics  of  the  most  numerous  will  prevail ;  but  the  disproportion
must  be  extreme  and  the  two  must  greatly  mingle  for  the  characters
of  one  to  be  diluted  till  they  are  effaced ;  and  if  effaced,  their  dis¬
appearance  arises  probably  not  from  mere  mingling,  but  from  the
cruel  oppression  of  a  very  small  by  a  very  numerous  race  till  it  is
extinct.  The  difficulty  of  the  disappearance  of  a  type  will  be  in¬
creased  by  the  probability  of  each  people  inhabiting  some  particular
districts  and  so  not  mingling.  From  these  circumstances,  Dr.  Ed¬
wards  was  able  to  discover  the  type  of  the  ancient  Romans,  and
probably  of  the  band  of  the  founders  of  the  nation  and  their  sur¬
rounding  enemies,  in  the  papal  territory:  and  in  Tuscany,  this,
and  also  another  race  with  a  high  and  well-developed  forehead,  long
and  not  broad  head,  nose  curved  till  the  point  drooped,  prominent
chin,  and  tall  stature,  resembling  Dante,  the  busts  of  the  Medici
and  other  distinguished  men  of  the  republic  of  Florence,  and  trace¬
able  in  some  Etruscan  bas-reliefs,  and  met  with  by  him  at  Bologna,
Ferrara,  Padua,  Venice,  and  still  more  frequently  at  Milan,  as  well
as  on  this  side  of  the  Alps  at  Geneva  and  Chalons.  In  Burgundy,
Dauphiny,  and  Savoy,  another  type  with  rounded  head,  middling
forehead  retreating  at  the  temples,  straight  nose  and  features,  and
middling  stature,  prevailed  the  most.  These  two  types  were  the
posterity  of  two  Gaulish  tribes:  the  latter  the  descendants  of  the
ancient  Gauls,  and  the  former  of  the  Cimbri.  This  type  he  found
in  England,  and  therefore  infers  that  the  ancient  Britons,  whose
descendants  they  are,  were  never  exterminated.  It  exists  chiefly  in
the  north  of  France,  the  Belgium  of  Caesar,  and  Armorica.  In
France  the  Gaul  type  prevails,  and  hence  the  stumpy  French  sol¬
diers  ;  in  Normandy  and  Belgium  the  tall  men  with  long  faces  and
noses  show  the  Cimbrian  or  Kimbric  type  to  prevail.*

“  The  tendency  to  produce  like  is  not  so  great  but  that  some

*  “  Dr.  W.  F.  Edwards,  Des  Caracteres  Physiologiques  des  Races  Humaines.
Paris,  1829.  For  the  difference  of  the  intelligence  of  these  families, — the  Gothic
and  Celtic,  to  which  the  Cimbrian  and  Gaulic  especially  belong,  see  Dupin’s
Forces  productives  et  commerciales  de  France.  Paris,  1827.  In  the  north-east
of  France,  where  the  Gothic,  German,  or  Teutonic  head  prevails,  -JL.  went  to
school ;  in  the  western  and  interior  parts,  where  the  Gaulic  or  Celtic  head  prevails,
onty  i~4  3  went  to  school ;  and  in  the  southern,  where  the  Celtic  is  mixed,  _L_
were  at  school.”  4  4

VOL.  VI.


tr


278


Duty  of  Parents }


difference  occurs ;  brothers  and  sisters  are  all  different.  But  then
they  might  differ,  even  were  each  to  have  been  formed  exactly  ac¬
cording  to  the  undisturbed  force  of  hereditary  transmission  ;  because
the  proportions  of  transmission  from  each  parent  and  from  progeni¬
tors  might  be  endlessly  diversified.  Numberless  circumstances,
however,  disturb  the  operation  of  the  hereditary  tendency,  too
minute  in  their  production  of  slight  varieties  for  us  to  appreciate:
and  the  varieties  are  of  infinite  degrees  and  extent.  They  may  be
compatible  with  our  views  of  perfect  formation  and  soundness  of
health ;  and  not  strike  us  in  the  least,  because  a  certain  amount  of
variety  is  ordinary,  and  we  all  differ  infinitely.  Even  if  rather  strik¬
ing,  they  still  may  not  be  exceedingly  unusual  or  in  a  very  high  de¬
gree.  If  the  peculiarity,  whether  it  be  of  obvious  structure  or  of
property,  interfere  with  the  due  performance  of  function  or  with
health,  it  is  necessarily  considered  a  disease.  Thus  the  congenital
want  of  communication  between  the  kidney  and  bladder,  or  a  direct
communication  between  the  two  ventricles  of  the  heart,  is  an  organic
disease  ;  the  innate  tendency  to  gout,  dyspepsia,  or  phthisis,  is  a  func¬
tional  disease,  though  it  depend  no  doubt  on  a  morbid  variety  of
minute  composition.  The  tendency  to  any  disease  or  shadow  of
disease  may  be  hereditary.

“  I  must  here  remark  that  the  tendency  to  striking  deviation  may
be  operative  before  birth,  or  at  any  period  after  birth.  For,  just  as
development  of  the  truly  natural  structure  and  properties  takes  place
at  various  periods  of  life,  so  does  that  of  peculiarities.  The  cause
in  some  instances  may  be  that  a  certain  stage  of  natural  development
is  implied  in  the  peculiarity  :  for  example,  just  as  resemblances  to
the  father  in  beard  or  to  the  mother  in  the  uterine  functions  cannot
occur  before  puberty,  so  hereditary  diseased  conditions  of  these  parts
will  not  occur  at  an  earlier  age.  But  some  hereditary  tendencies
appear  to  be  morbid  affections  of  a  particular  stage  of  development.
Hereditary  cancer  seldom  affects  the  breast  before  about  the  40th
year  :  hereditary  cataract  most  frequently  after  the  60th.  In  some
instances  the  period  of  morbid  hereditary  tendency  is  very  precise  :
in  others  it  has  a  wider  range.  Hernia  takes  place  spontaneously  in
different  members  of  some  families  at  nearly  the  same  age.  Con¬
sumption  begins  in  the  members  of  some  families  at  nearly  the  same
age  :  in  those  of  others,  at  various  ages.  Occasionally  this  difference
may  arise  from  exciting  causes  having  strongly  operated  in  the  earlier
examples.  But  that  this  is  not  always  the  explanation  appears  from
the  visible  commencement  of  hereditary  diseases  not  influenced  by
external  causes.  I  have  been  consulted  by  members  of  two  families
in  which  some  of  the  fingers  became  permanently  bent  at  a  certain
time  of  life.  In  one  the  father  and  four  sons  had  the  little  finger
become  bent  by  the  rigid  shortening  of  the  tendon  :  and  in  all  the
sons  the  change  took  place  at  25  years  of  age.  In  the  other  family
the  right  ring  finger  of  the  mother  and  two  sons  was  fixed  down  in
the  same  way,  and  the  change  had  begun  in  the  mother  at  50;  in
the  second  son  at  48;  in  the  eldest  at  40.

“  An  exception,  of  more  or  less  amount,  to  the  tendency  to  pro-


279


by  Mr.  W hit f eld.

(luce  similar  progeny,  occasionally  occurs.  Something  disturbs  and
proves  too  much  for  the  tendency,  and  much  more  frequently,  we
are  told,  in  the  domestic  than  in  the  wild  state  ; — the  offspring  dif¬
fers  m  some  particular  from  the  parents ;  but  by  the  force  of  the
general  tendency  transmits  to  its  offspring  its  own  peculiarity.  By
selecting  such  examples,  a  breed  peculiar  in  colour,  figure,  the  form
o  some  0I\e  part,  or  in  some  mental  quality,  may  be  produced.
Ihus,  by  killing  all  the  black  individuals  which  appear  among  our
sheep  and  breeding  from  the  white  only,  our  flocks  are  generally
white  ;  while,  by  an  opposite  practice  pursued  in  some  countries,
t  ey  are  generally  black  :  thus  a  ram,  accidentally  produced  on  a
farm  in  Connecticut  with  elbow-shaped  fore-legs  and  a  great  short¬
ness  and  weakness  of  joint  indeed  in  all  four  extremities,  was  se¬
lected  for  propagation,  and  the  ayKwV  breed,  unable  to  climb  over
fences,  is  now  established  :*  thus  some  breeds  of  hares  have  horns
like  the  roebuck  :  the  Dorking  fowl  has  two  hind  claws  ;  and  fowls
in  short  are  bred  in  every  conceivable  variety.f  The  Imperial  family
of  Austria  is  remarkable  for  its  thick  upper  lip,  which  is  believed
to  have  been  introduced  into  it  centuries  ago  by  a  cross  with  the
ancient  house  of  Jagellon.J

In  some  tribes  of  plants  and  races  of  animals,  varieties  con¬
tinually  spring  up  and  cease  to  be  transmitted.  In  others  they  are
rarer  and  are  transmitted  permanently.”

The  next  extract  will  add  to  the  weight  of  Mr.  Whitfeld's
advice  to  parents.

There  is  no  question  that  the  cultivation  of  any  organ  or  power
of  the  parent  will  dispose  to  the  production  of  offspring  improved
in  the  same  particular.

“  Every  one  conversant  with  beasts  knows  that  not  only  their
natural,  but  many  of  their  acquired  qualities  are  transmitted  by
then  parents  to  their  offspring.  Perhaps  the  most  curious  example
of  the  latter  may  be  found  in  the  pointer.

“  This  animal  is  endowed  with  the  natural  instinct  of  winding
game,  and  stealing  upon  his  prey,  which  he  surprizes,  having  first
made  a  short  pause,  in  order  to  launch  himself  upon  it  with  more
security  of  success.  This  sort  of  semicolon  in  his  proceedings  man
converts  into  a  full  stop,  and  teaches  him  to  be  as  much  pleased  at
seeing  the  bird  or  beast  drop  by  the  shooter’s  gun  as  at  taking  it
nmself.  The  staunchest  dog  of  this  kind,  and  the  original  pointer,

*  Sometimes  a  peculiarity  is  transmitted  to  the  offspring  of  one  sex  only,
thus  the  peculiarity  of  the  skin  of  the  porcupine  family  is  restricted  to  the  males.
(supra,  p.  270.)  In  a  family  at  Iver,  for  nine  generations  there  were  no  fingers
except  first  phalanges,  and  a  first  and  second  joint  to  the  ring  finger  as  well  as
the  phalanx,  but  without  a  nail ;  and  the  women  only  transmitted  this  defect  to
their  offspring.  (Ed.  Med.  and  Surg.  Journ.,  vol.  iv.)

“  Where  the  organs  are  different  in  the  two  sexes,  as  the  genitals,  the  peculiarity
shows  itself  in  the  corresponding  parts.  Thus  the  enormous  nympho  of  some

African  tribes  have  a  counterpart  in  the  enormous  praeputium  of  the  male, — ‘  the
old  reproach  of  Egypt.’  ”

t  “  Thomson’s  Annals  of  Philosophy,  No.  2.

t  “  Coxe’s  Memoirs  of  the  House  of  Austria.

u  2


280


%

Duty  of  Parents,

is  of  Spanish  origin,  and  our  own  is  derived  from  this  race,  crossed
with  that  of  the  fox-hound  or  other  breed  of  dogs,  for  the  sake  of
improving  his  speed.  This  mixed  and  factitious  race  of  course
naturally  partakes  less  of  the  true  pointer  character ;  that  is  to  say,
is  less  disposed  to  stop,  or,  at  least,  he  makes  a  shorter  stop  at
game.  The  factitious  pointer  is,  however,  disciplined  in  this  country
into  staunchness ;  and  what  is  most  singular,  this  quality  is  in  a
great  degree  inherited  by  his  puppy,  who  may  be  seen  earnestly
standing  at  pigeons  or  swallows  in  a  farm-yard.  For  intuition,
though  it  leads  the  offspring  to  exercise  his  parent’s  faculties,  does
not  instruct  him  how  to  direct  them.  The  preference  of  his  master
afterwards  guides  him  in  his  selection,  and  teaches  him  what  game
is  better  worth  pursuit.  On  the  other  hand,  the  pointer  of  pure
Spanish  race,  unless  he  happens  to  be  well  broke  himself,  which  in
the  south  of  Europe  seldom  happens,  produces  a  race  which  are  all
but  unteachable,  according  to  our  notions  of  a  pointer’s  business.
They  will  make  a  stop  at  their  game  as  natural  instinct  prompts
them,  but  seem  incapable  of  being  drilled  into  the  habits  of  the
animal  which  education  has  formed  in  this  country,  and  has  rendered,
as  I  have  said,  in  some  degree,  capable  of  transmitting  his  acquire¬
ments  to  his  descendants.

“  Acquired  habits  are  hereditary  in  other  animals  besides  dogs.
English  sheep,  probably  from  the  greater  richness  of  our  pastures,
feed  very  much  together ;  while  the  Scotch  sheep  are  obliged  to
extend  and  scatter  themselves  over  their  hills  for  the  better  discovery
of  food.  Yet  the  English  sheep,  on  being  transferred  to  Scotland,
keep  their  old  habit  of  feeding  in  a  mass,  though  so  little  adapted
to  their  new  country  ;  so  do  their  descendants  ;  and  the  English
sheep  is  not  thoroughly  naturalized  into  the  necessities  of  his  place
till  the  third  generation.  The  same  thing  may  be  observed  as  to
the  nature  of  his  food,  that  is  observed  in  his  mode  of  eating  it.
When  turnips  were  introduced  from  England  into  Scotland,  it  was
only  the  third  generation  which  heartily  adopted  this  diet,  the  first
having  been  starved  into  an  acquiescence  in  it.  In  the  same  manner
it  required  some  years  to  establish  the  English  practice  of  bringing
up  calves  by  hand  in  Scotland  ;  the  first  who  were  so  fed  being  cheated
into  swallowing  milk,  as  the  English  calves  at  first  are,  by  dipping
the  finger  in  the  bowl  and  giving  it  the  animal  to  suck.  Nor  was
this  mode  of  administering  nourishment  (slowly  and  reluctantly  ad¬
mitted  by  Lowland  calves)  ever,  I  believe,  cordially  adopted  by  their
mountain  kindred.  The  Highland  beast  has  shown  himself  the
worthy  imitator  of  the  Highland  man,  and  is  as  obstinate  in  his
opposition  to  this,  as  his  Celtic  master  is  to  any  other  southern
improvement  which  can  be  offered  to  him.*

“  Mr.  Knight  many  years  agof  advanced  that  bees  and  every
species  of  domestic  animal  acquired  4  an  irresistible  propensity  to  do
that  which  their  predecessors  of  the  same  family  have  been  taught  to
do  through  many  successive  generations.’  He  stated,  4  that  a  young

*  “  Thoughts  and  Recollections  of  one  of  the  last  Century.

f  “Phil.  Trans. ,  1817.


by  Mr.  Whitfeld.


281


terrier,  whose  parents  had  been  much  employed  in  destroying  pole¬
cats,  and  a  young  springing  spaniel  whose  ancestry  through  many
generations  had  been  employed  in  finding  woodcocks,  were  reared
together  as  companions,  the  terrier  not  having  been  permitted  to  see
a  polecat  or  any  other  animal  of  a  similar  character,  and  the  spaniel
having  been  prevented  seeing  a  woodcock  or  any  other  kind  of  game  ;
and  that  the  terrier  evinced,  as  soon  as  it  perceived  the  scent  of  the
polecat,  very  violent  anger ;  and  as  soon  as  it  saw  the  polecat,
attacked  it  with  the  same  degree  of  fury  as  its  parents  would  have
done.  The  young  spaniel,  on  the  contrary,  looked  on  with  in¬
difference  ;  but  it  pursued  the  first  woodcock  which  it  ever  saw,
with  joy  and  exultation  of  which  its  companion  the  terrier  did  not  in
any  degree  partake.”*

*  “  Phil.  Trans.  1837.  p.  365.  ‘  Woodcocks  are  driven  in  frosty  weather,  as
is  well  known,  to  seek  their  food  in  springs  and  rills  of  unfrozen  water,  and  I
found  that  my  old  dogs  knew  about  as  well  as  I  did  the  degree  of  frost  which
would  drive  the  woodcocks  to  such  places  ;  and  this  knowledge  pro\  ed  very
troublesome  to  me,  for  I  could  not  sufficiently  restrain  them.  I  therefore  left
the  old  experienced  dogs  at  home,  and  took  only  the  wholly  inexperienced  young
dogs ;  but  to  my  astonishment,  some  of  these,  in  several  instances,  confined
themselves  as  closely  to  the  unfrozen  grounds  as  their  parents  would  have  done.”
(p.  366.)  “  The  most  extraordinary  instance,”  Mr.  Knight  adds,  “  of  the  power
of  instinctive  hereditary  propensity  which  I  have  ever  witnessed,  came  under  my
observation  in  the  case  of  a  young  dog  of  a  variety  usually  called  Retrievers.  The
proper  office  of  these  dogs  is  that  of  finding  and  recovering  wounded  game,  but
they  are  often  employed  for  more  extensive  purposes,  and  are  found  to  possess
very  great  sagacity.  I  obtained  a  very  young  puppy  (only  a  month  old)  of  this
family,  which  was  said  to  be  exceedingly  well  bred,  and  had  been  brought  to
me  from  a  distant  county.  I  had  walked  up  the  side  of  the  river  which  passes
by  my  house,  in  search  of  wild  ducks,  when  the  dog  above  mentioned  followed
me  unobserved,  and  contrary  to  my  wishes,  for  it  was  too  young  for  service,  not
being  then  quite  ten  months  old.  It  had  not  received  any  other  instruction  than
that  of  being  taught  to  bring  any  floating  body  off  a  pond,  and  I  do  not  think
that  it  had  ever  done  this  more  than  three  or  four  times.  It  walked  very  quietly
behind  my  gamekeeper  upon  the  opposite  side  of  the  river,  and  it  looked  on  with
apparent  indifference  while  I  killed  a  couple  of  mallards  and  widgeons,  but  it
leaped  into  the  river  instantly  upon  the  gamekeeper  pointing  out  the  birds  to  it,
and  it  brought  them  on  shore  and  to  the  foot  of  the  gamekeeper,  just  as  well  as
the  best  instructed  old  dog  could  have  done.  I  subsequently  shot  a  snipe,  which
fell  into  the  middle  of  a  large  nearly  stagnant  pool  of  water,  which  was  partially
frozen  over.  I  called  the  dog  from  the  other  side  of  the  river  and  caused  it  to
see  the  snipe,  which  could  not  be  done  without  difficulty ;  but,  as  soon  as  it  saw
it,  it  swam  to  it,  brought  it  to  me,  laid  it  down  at  my  feet,  and  again  swam
through  the  river  to  the  gamekeeper.  I  never  saw  a  dog  acquit  itself  so  well,
yet  it  was  wholly  untaught.  I  state  the  circumstances  with  reluctance  and  not
without  hesitation,  because  I  doubt  whether  I  could  believe  them  to  be  well
founded  upon  any  other  evidence  than  that  of  my  own  senses  ;  the  statement  is
nevertheless  perfectly  correct.’  (p.  367.  sq.)

“  Other  functional  changes  are  effected  in  the  offspring  through  the  parents
although  they  could  not  be  brought  about  in  the  parents  themselves.  Englishmen
carried  out  greyhounds  to  hunt  hares  in  Mexico.  The  great  platform  where  they
hunt  is  about  9,000  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  and  the  ordinary  height  of
the  barometer  is  19  inches.  The  greyhounds  could  not  support  a  long  chase  in
the  thin  atmosphere  ;  and  lay  down  gasping  before  they  came  up  with  their  prey.
But  their  whelps  do  not  suffer  in  the  least  from  the  attenuation  of  the  atmosphere,
and  run  down  the  hares  with  as  much  ease  as  the  best  hounds  in  England.
(Lyell.)


282


The  Laws  of  Hereditary  Descent.


“  It  is  impossible  not  to  suppose  that  similar  results  upon  human
offspring  by  educating  the  parents  may  be  obtained.  Mr.  Knight
thus  writes  to  Mr.  Walker.  4  A  celebrated  French  civil  engineer,
M.  Polonceau,  visited  me  some  years  ago,  bringing  with  him  a
young  French  gentleman  who  spoke  English  eloquently,  and
perfectly  like  an  Englishman,  though  he  had  been  in  England
only  two  years,  and,  as  he  assured  me,  knew  nothing  of  the  lan¬
guage  previously,  nor  had  ever  heard  it  spoken.  I  asked  him
whether  he  could  pronounce  the  English  name  Thisslethwaite  ;  and
he  instantly  pronounced  it  most  distinctly  and  perfectly.  The  next
day,  when  talking  of  other  matters,  he  said  that  he  had  some  Irish
relations  ;  and  it  appeared  that  his  grandmother,  on  the  female  side,
whom  he  had  never  seen,  was  an  Irishwoman.  Hence  arose,  I  do
not  at  all  doubt,  his  power  of  so  readily  pronouncing  the  word  I  had
prescribed.  A  French  gentleman  at  Paris  boasted  to  me  that  he
could  pronounce  correctly  any  English  word.  I  proposed  This¬
slethwaite  to  him,  when,  instead  of  trying,  he  exclaimed,  *  Ah
harhare  !’  ”*


VI.  An  Interesting  Case  in  reference  to  the  Laws  of  Hereditary
Descent.  From  Howitt’s  Journal.

“  As  I  went  to  Shottery,  I  met  with  a  little  incident  which
interested  me  greatly  by  its  unexpectedness.  As  I  was  about
to  pass  over  a  stile  at  the  end  of  Stratford,  into  the  fields
leading  to  that  village,  I  saw  the  master  of  the  national  school
mustering  his  scholars  to  their  tasks.  I  stopped,  being
pleased  with  the  look  of  the  old  man,  and  said,  “  You  seem
to  have  a  considerable  number  of  lads  here ;  shall  you  raise
another  Shakspeare  from  amongst  them,  think  you  ?’  ‘Why/
replied  the  master,  ‘  I  have  a  Shakspeare  now  in  the  school/
I  knew  that  Shakspeare  had  no  descendants  beyond  the  second
generation,  and  I  was  not  aware  that  there  were  any  of  his
family  remaining.  But  it  seems  that  the  posterity  of  his
sister  Joan  Hart,  who  is  mentioned  in  his  will,  yet  exist ;
part  under  her  marriage  name  of  Hart,  at  Tewkesbury,  and
a  familv  in  Stratford  of  the  name  of  Smith.

“  ‘  I  have  a  Shakspeare  here/  said  the  master,  with  evident
pride  and  pleasure.  ‘  Here,  boys,  here  V  He  quickly  mus¬
tered  his  laddish  troop  in  a  row,  and  said  to  me,  ‘  There  now.
Sir,  can  you  tell  which  is  a  Shakspeare  V  I  glanced  my  eye
along  the  line,  and  instantly  fixing  it  on  one  boy,  said,  ‘  That
is  the  Shakspeare/  ‘  You  are  right/  said  the  master,  ‘  that
is  the  Shakspeare ;  the  Shakspeare  cast  of  countenance  is
there.  That  is  William  Shakspeare  Smith,  a  lineal  descen¬
dant  of  the  poet’s  sister/

*  “Intermarriage,  p.  178,  sq,”


283


Benefit  of  Mesmerism  in  obstinate  Cough ,  fyc.

“  The  lad  was  a  fine  lad  of,  perhaps,  ten  years  of  age,
and,  certainly,  the  resemblance  to  the  bust  of  Shakspeare  in
the  church  at  Stratford  is  wonderful,  considering  he  is  not
descended  from  Shakspeare  himself,  but  from  his  sister ;  and
that  he  is  the  seventh  in  descent.  What  is  odd  enough  is,
whether  it  be  mere  accident  or  not,  that  the  colour  of  the
lad's  eyes,  a  light  hazel,  is  the  very  same  as  that  given  to
those  of  the  Shakspeare  bust,  which,  it  is  well  known,  was
originally  coloured  and  of  which  exact  copies  remain."
HowitVs  Journal ,  January  Number.

This  useful  periodical  commenced  the  new  year  with  en-
creased  vitality  and  vigour.  Placed  by  its  cheapness  within
the  reach  of  all  classes  of  the  community,  and  having  from
its  birth  achieved  a  success  that  was  to  be  expected  from  the
deservedly  high  reputation,  and  unceasing  energy  of  its  con¬
ductors,  and  which  has  ever  since  continued  to  increase ;  we
hail  it  at  the  present  moment  as  a  most  important  and  valua¬
ble  auxiliary  in  the  cause  of  progress.

Among  the  many  cheering  signs  of  the  times,  there  is
none  to  our  mind  more  satisfactory  than  the  very  improved
character  of  the  periodical  literature,  supported  by  the  opera¬
tive  classes.  In^William  Howitt  they  recognize  an  old  and
tried  friend, — one  whose  sympathies  are  ever  on  the  right
side, — a  man  full  of  generous  emotions,  whose  pulses  throb
in  unison  with  the  universal  heart  of  humanity, — and  who
has  ever  shown  himself  ready,  with  a  courage  and  boldness
not  to  be  surpassed,  to  attack  fraud  and  injustice  wherever
they  rear  their  hydra  heads.

William  Howitt’s  proudest  boast  is,  that  he  has  devoted
himself  emphatically  to  the  cause  of  the  people,  and  struggled
with  undeviating  consistency  on  behalf  of  Truth  and  Liberty ;
and  it  is  due  to  him  to  acknowledge  that  he  has  brought
talent  and  industry  of  no  common  order  to  the  cause  which
he  has  espoused.  In  the  description  of  natural  scenery,  he
stands  alone  amongst  living  English  authors.  No  such
truthful  life-like  landscape  painting  has  been  written  since
the  time  of  Scott  and  Byron.  R.  I.  E.  E.


VII.  Great  Benefit  of  Mesmerism  in  a  Case  of  obstinate  Cough
and  Contraction  of  a  Finger ;  and  in  one  of  Neuralgia  of  the
Leg,  with  various  exquisite  Phenomena.  By  Mr.  Mitchell.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

Sir, — About  two  years  ago  my  attention  was  directed  to  a  case
of  cure  of  diseased  lung  through  mesmerism  by  Mr.  Parsons,


284


Cure  of  Neuralgia  of  the  Leg ,

of  Brighton,*  which  induced  me  to  try  its  effects  upon  my
son,  a  very  delicate  child,  six  years  of  age,  who  had  been
for  some  iveeks  labouring  under  an  irritating  cough,  and  which
the  medicine  prescribed  failed  to  remove.  Its  success  was  very
striking.  Immediately  on  waking  from  the  sleep,  the  child
vomited  a  great  quantity  of  phlegm,  and  the  cough,  through¬
out  the  day,  was  much  less.  The  same  result  followed  on
mesmerising  him  the  following  day,  and  within  a  fortnight ,
the  child,  who  from  his  birth  has  been  exceedingly  delicate,
had  recovered  his  usual  health,  and  has  had  no  relapse.  The
fourth  finger  on  the  right  hand  had  been  contracted  from  his
birth,  so  much  so  that  the  point  nearly  touched  the  palm  of
the  hand.  I  had  taken  a  surgical  opinion  respecting  it,  but
was  advised,  on  account  of  the  child's  delicate  health  to  have
nothing  done  with  it  then,  but  to  delay  the  separation  of  the
tendon  till  he  gained  more  strength.  Two  or  three  days  after
the  mesmerism  had  been  left  off,  we  discovered  the  finger  was
quite  straight.  As  there  was  no  intention  to  affect  the  body
in  any  way,  but  simply  to  try  whether  the  mesmeric  sleep
would  relieve  the  cough,  the  precise  time  of  the  straightening
of  the  finger  was  not  noticed ;  but  I  have  no  doubt  myself
that  the  mesmerism  was  the  cause. f  The  child  was  singularly
susceptible,  and  in  a  few  minutes  the  extremities  became
quite  rigid,  without  the  usual  means  being  taken  to  produce
stiffening.

Previously  to  this  proof  of  the  value  of  mesmerism,  I
imagined  it  was  a  power  confined  to  a  favoured  few ;  which
this  trial  having  dispelled,  I  have  since  occasionally  employed
it  among  my  immediate  friends  with  more  or  less  success.

The  following  is  a  recent  case  of  cure  which  I  wish  had
fallen  into  experienced  hands,  as  then  the  phenomena  de¬
veloped  during  the  treatment  would  have  furnished  interesting
matter  for  your  readers.  The  grand  object,  however,  has
been  attained,  namely,  the  cure  of  intense  suffering,  which
had  baffled  medical  skill  to  remove.

The  individual  is  a  very  respectable  married  woman,  named
Caroline  Kemp,  residing  at  No.  32  in  Clarence  Gardens,
Regent's  Park,  a  dress  maker;  and  who  I  doubt  not  would
most  willingly  give  any  fellow-sufferer  full  information  re¬
specting  her  case  and  its  cure.

On  the  17th  of  July  last,  at  the  request  of  her  husband,
I  first  visited  Mrs.  Kemp.  She  had  experienced  great  relief
from  mesmerism  three  years  ago,  and  previously  to  making  the

*  See  No.  XIV.,  p.  249. — Zoist.

f  See  another  such  cure  in  No.  XI.,  p.  318. — Zoist.


with  various  exquisite  Phenomena,  by  Mr.  Mitchell.  285

attempt  she  gave  me  the  following  account.  “  In  July,  1845,
I  was  attacked  with  severe  pain  in  the  leg,  commencing  in
the  hip  and  extending  to  the  knee ;  which  was  so  bad  that  I
was  scarcely  able  to  walk,  for  directly  I  put  my  foot  to  the
ground  the  pain  was  intense.  I  was  advised  to  go  to  Mr.
Toynbee,  of  Argyle  Street,  and  he  said  it  was  a  physician's
case,  and  he  would  recommend  me  to  apply  to  the  St.  George's
and  St.  James's  Dispensary  in  King  Street,  Regent  Street,
which  I  did,  and  where  I  was  put  under  the  care  of  Sir  James
Eyre  and  Dr.  Latham.  They  prescribed  some  very  sir  one/
medicine  which  gave  me  no  relief  from  the  pain ;  they  after¬
wards  ordered  me  to  be  cupped,  and  a  blister  put  on  directly
after  the  glasses  came  off.  This  likewise  had  no  effect,  but
made  me  worse  ;  and  they  then  told  me  that  I  would  not  be
any  better,  but  that  it  would  extend  all  over  my  body ;  but  I
had  better  try  sea  bathing,  and  if  that  did  me  no  good,  nothing
would.  I  went  to  Brighton  for  a  month,  and  returned  some¬
what  better,  but  I  soon  got  worse  again ;  and  as  a  last  resource
I  was  advised  to  try  mesmerism."

I  am  given  to  understand  that  the  benefit  from  mesmerism
at  this  time  was  very  marked.  The  pain  soon  left  her,  and
she  was  enabled  to  follow  her  occupation.  From  an  unavoid¬
able  circumstance,  however,  the  mesmerism  was  suddenly
discontinued,  and  this  may  account  for  the  cure  being  less
perfect  than  if  it  had  been  left  off  gradually.  Be  this  as  it
may,  we  have  the  fact  of  three  years'  respite  from  acute  pain,
which  was  something  gained.

The  pain  had  returned  about  Christmas  last,  and  for  four
months  she  had  not  been  free  from  it  a  day, — not  even  an  hour,
and  night  after  night  it  woke  her  from  sleep  ;  indeed  on  two
or  three  occasioyis  she  had  sat  up  the  entire  night,  not  being
able  at  times  to  bear  the  weight  of  the  bed  clothes  upon  the
limb,  and  when  employed  at  her  needle,  she  kept  her  leg
resting  on  a  chair.  She  could  stand  but  a  very  short  time
unless  supporting  herself.

On  making  the  usual  passes  slowly  from  the  forehead  to
the  pit  of  the  stomach  for  the  space  of  twelve  minutes  she  fell
into  the  sleepwaking  state,  and  said  she  felt  very  comfortable.
I  next  proceeded  to  raise  the  leg  by  means  of  tractive  passes
upwards,  which  brought  the  leg  from  the  floor  into  the  hori¬
zontal  position,  when  a  few  passes  along  the  limb  from  the
hip  to  the  toe  rendered  it  perfectly  rigid,  and  in  that  state  I
have  generally  allowed  it  to  remain  from  half  an  hour  to  two
hours  at  this  and  each  subsequent  sitting.  On  this  occasion,
when  I  commenced  the  passes  along  the  limb,  the  pain  was
very  severe ;  if  the  finger  accidentally  touched  the  dress,  her
suffering  ivas  greatly  increased,  but  at  the  expiration  of  a


286


Cure  of  Neuralgia  of  the  Leg ,


quarter  of  an  hour  she  could  hear  a  moderate  pressure  on  the
part  most  affected .*  She  slept  an  hour  and  a  half,  when  I
woke  her  by  blowing  in  the  face.

The  next  day  she  told  me  that  she  had  had  a  better  night’s
rest  than  she  had  enjoyed  for  months,  and  the.  pain  had  been
much  less  throughout  the  day.  Six  minutes’  mesmerising
threw  her  into  sleepwaking,  and  on  placing  the  fingers  on  the
forehead  for  a  few  seconds,  the  head  gradually  fell  back,  and
she  sunk  into  the  deep  sleep.  I  continued  making  the  passes
from  the  hip  to  the  toe  for  half  an  hour,  and  after  allowing
her  to  sleep  two  hours,  awoke  her,  as  on  the  previous  evening,
by  blowing  in  the  face.

On  the  19th,  she  expressed  herself  as  most  grateful  for  the
relief  afforded,  said  she  had  not  woke  up  the  whole  of  the  previous
night ,  and  I  was  astonished  to  hear  that  she  had  that  day  walked
for  two  hours  with  very  little  inconvenience.  The  susceptibility
had  so  much  increased,  that  six  or  eight  passes  were  sufficient
to  produce  sleep,  and  having  proceeded,  as  on  the  two  pre¬
vious  occasions,  I  woke  her  by  the  same  means  as  before.

At  this  time  I  went  into  the  country,  and  was  absent
about  a  fortnight,  and  on  my  return  I  found  that  although
during  the  latter  part  of  that  period  the  pain  had  occasionally
annoyed  her,  it  was  nothing  in  point  of  severity  like  her  for¬
mer  sufferings,  and  two  hours’  mesmeric  sleep  removed  all
pain.  On  this  and  the  following  occasions  of  mesmerising  her
I  have  awoke  her  by  transverse  passes,  which  in  this  case
operate  more  gently  than  blowing  in  the  face, — the  latter
method  causes  her  to  wake  up  instantly  but  with  a  start,  while
with  the  former,  the  recovery  into  the  natural  state  is  exactly
the  same  as  a  person  rousing  up  from  deep  common  sleep.

*  See  the  Rev.  Mr.  Sandby’s  case  in  No.  XX.,  p.  398.  A  physician  and
surgeon  had  long  attended  the  lady,  and  did  her  no  good.  After  being  mes¬
merised  five  minutes,  she  went  into  a  deep  sleep  and  could  hear  the  leg  rubbed.
When  gold  was  applied  to  it,  l<  she  could  bear  the  leg  to  be  rubbed  hardly,  though
when  awake  a  touch  would  make  her  scream  with  pain.”  We  vouch  for  the  fol¬
lowing  facts.  A  girl’s  knee  and  adjacent  parts,  above  and  below,  became  very
hot,  swollen,  and  intensely  painful,  and  a  very  remarkable  eruption  appeared
upon  them  all.  The  slightest  touch  or  motion  caused  agony.  Nothing  proved  of
benefit.  The  medical  gentleman  proposed  mesmerism.  The  ignorant  parents
consented  with  difficulty  ;  and  the  girl  laughed  contemptuously  at  the  idea  of  it
doing  good,  but  consented  to  local  mesmerism.  In  twenty  minutes,  she  found,  to
her  great  astonishment,  that  her  leg  became  rigid  and  could  be  touched  without
pain.  It  was  steadily  improving,  when  her  absurd  parents  sent  for  Mr.  Lawrence.
The  gentleman  stated  that  he  had  desisted  from  all  useless  medicine,  and  was  now
successfully  employing  mesmerism.  “  Mesmerism  !  mesmerism  !”  exclaimed  the
quondam  ally  of  Mr.  Wakley,  “  I  don’t  believe  in  it — don’t  believe  in  it :  in  fact
I  don’t  know  anything  about  it,  and  I  don’t  believe  in  it.”  He  then,  very  unlike  a
gentleman,  turned  to  the  mother  and  said,  “  If  my  advice  is  followed,  mesmerism
will  be  dropped.  If  she  was  my  daughter,  I  would  not  permit  it :  no.”  “  Well,”
thought  the  gentleman  to  himself,  “  Can  this  be  the  great  Lawrence?”  We
answer.  It  was  Surgeon  Lawrence,  of  Bartholomew’s  Hospital,  all  over. — Zoiat.


with  various  exquisite  Phenomena,  by  Mr.  Mitchell.  28 7

The  mesmerism  has  been  continued  for  six  weeks,  and
having  experienced  no  pain  for  the  last  three  weeks,  she  con¬
siders  herself  cured,  but  I  purpose  continuing  it  occasionally
for  some  weeks  in  order  to  give  her  the  full  benefit  of  it.
There  is  now  no  trouble  attending  it,  for  a  fixed  look  for  a  few
seconds  sends  her  at  once  into  the  sleepwaking  state.

It  is  to  be  noted  that  her  general  health  has  greatly  im¬
proved  during  the  treatment,  and  her  altered  looks  have  been
noticed  by  her  friends,  some  of  whom  were  ignorant  of  the
means  that  had  been  adopted  for  her  relief.  She  has  every
appearance  of  a  person  in  robust  health.

The  phenomena  developed  in  this  case  were  highly  inter¬
esting,  and  bore  a  striking  resemblance  to  the  case  of  cure  of
contracted  foot,  by  Dr.  Elliotson,  and  given  at  great  length
in  Yol.  III.  of  The  Zoist.  From  the  first  time  of  mesmerising
up  to  the  present,  sleepwaking  has  been  induced,  and,  as  in
Miss  Collins's  case,  while  in  this  state  she  knows  the  time
and  place,  and  converses  freely  and  rationally,  sees  every  one
in  the  room  and  even  small  objects,  such  as  books,  &c.,  though
her  eyes  are  closed.  On  being  questioned  as  to  the  degree  of
vision,  she  says  that  she  can  “  see  every  thing  in  the  room,  but
all  seems  covered  with  a  thin  mist."  The  exalted  expression  of
the  countenance  and  inimitable  repose  depicted  on  every  fea¬
ture,  both  in  the  sleepwaking  and  deep  sleep,  has  drawn  forth
wonder  and  admiration  from  all  who  have  seen  her  in  the  sleep.

Those  who  would  account  for  the  wonders  of  mesmerism
by  attributing  them  to  a  disordered  imagination  would  feel
greatly  at  a  loss  on  looking  at  this  case ;  to  see  the  patient's
stiffened  leg  stretched  from  the  chair,  and  her  two  arms  ex¬
tended  at  the  same  time,  for  an  entire  hour,  and  so  far  from
evincing  anything  like  pain  or  effort,  every  feature  character¬
ised  by  the  sweet  composure  which  we  might  look  for  in  vain
except  in  the  infant  reposing  on  its  mother's  bosom.  Another
fact,  still  more  convincing — evidence  which  could  be  felt  as
well  as  seen — is,  that,  while  the  foot  has  been  on  the  floor,  a
friend  who  had  never  seen  a  case  of  mesmerism  before,  placed
his  hand  upon  her  foot  in  order  to  test  the  amount  of  resist¬
ance  while  I  made  the  upward  tractive  movements,  and
although  using  considerable  power,  as  much  indeed  as  he  felt
he  could  without  producing  mechanical  injury,  totally  failed
in  preventing  the  leg  from  obeying  the  traction.

The  contact  of  all  metals  is  very  unpleasant  to  her,  whether
touched  by  herself  or  the  mesmeriser.  Gold  seems  the
most  objectionable.  If  a  piece  of  gold  be  laid  upon  her  dress,
it  is  shaken  off  to  the  floor  instantly,  and  she  shews  signs  of


288


Cure  of  Neuralgia  of  the  Leg,


pain.  On  one  occasion,  while  in  the  sleep,  she  took  a  bunch
of  keys  from  her  pocket  and  threw  them  from  her.  These
effects  have  frequently  shewn  themselves  without  any  inten¬
tion  on  my  part;  for  instance,  when  opening  a  door,  taking
up  a  key,  the  snuffers,  or  other  metallic  substance.

The  sympathy  of  taste  is  also  very  striking.  The  first
time  of  noticing  this,  I  happened,  whilst  my  back  was  turned
towards  her,  to  take  a  pinch  of  snuff.  Her  husband  directed
my  attention  to  her,  when  I  saw  her  hands  raised  to  her  nose,
and  she,  apparently,  suffering  all  the  inconvenience  which  a
person  unaccustomed  to  that  bad  habit  would  experience.  I
then,  without  the  possibility  of  her  seeing  what  I  did,  put  a
little  salt  upon  my  tongue,  when  she  exclaimed,  “  That's  too
bad, — first  you  put  snuff  up  my  nose,  and  then  salt  in  my
mouth."  This  power  has  been  tested  repeatedly,  in  a  variety
of  ways,  and  even  with  a  single  caraway  seed,  with  but  one
failure,  and  that  I  have  no  doubt  arose  from  one  experiment
being  too  quickly  followed  by  another.

She  manifests  great  displeasure  if  her  veracity  is  called  in
question.  One  evening  a  lady  left  the  room  and  returned
with  something  covered  over  with  a  handkerchief,  which
proved  to  be  a  milk  pot  containing  milk,  which  she  presented
to  me  to  drink.  It  was  so  concealed  that  I  was  ignorant  of
the  contents  till  I  had  tasted  it.  On  asking  Mrs.  K.  what  it
was,  she  would  not  tell  me,  but  with  an  expression  of  con¬
siderable  indignity  told  me,  I  had  tasted  it  as  well  as  herself,
— that  she  knew  what  it  was  but  would  not  satisfy  me,  adding

that  if  I  were  so  desirous  of  knowing,  Mrs. -  could  tell

me,  as  she  took  great  care  to  cover  it  up  with  her  handkerchief.
From  the  way  in  which  this  was  managed,  it  was  impossible
that  she  could  see  either  the  vessel  or  its  contents.  At  the
next  mesmerisation,  on  her  being  asked  the  reason  why  she

refused  to  tell  me,  she  replied,  “  Because  it  seemed  Mrs. -

thought  I  was  trying  to  deceive."

Her  attachment  to  the  mesmeriser  is  very  great,  but  it  is
an  attachment  of  a  very  exalted  character.  It  has,  as  Hr.
Elliotson  justly  observes  in  the  detail  of  one  of  his  interesting
cures,  “  nothing  sexual  in  it;  but  it  is  of  the  purest  kind,  sim¬
ple  friendship,  and  indeed  exactly  like  the  love  of  a  young
child  to  its  mother ;  for  it  seems  characterised  by  a  feeling  of
safety  when  with  the  mesmeriser,  and  of  fear  of  others."*  In
the  deep  sleep  she  is  quite  insensible  to  pinching,  pricking,
&c.,  by  me,  but  the  slightest  contact  of  another  with  me

*  Zoist ,  No.  IX.,  p.  55.  See  also  Mesmerism  and  its  Opponents,  by  the
Rev.  G.  Sandby,  p.  230  ;  a  work  which  all  should  read,  and  which  cannot  fail  to
remove  much  of  the  ignorant  prejudice  against  mesmerism.


with  various  exquisite  Phenomena,  by  Mr.  Mitchell.  289

produces  great  disturbance  in  her  feelings,  which  requires
some  little  time  to  allay.  So  astonishingly  susceptible  is  she
in  this  respect,  that  even  touching  my  clothing,  brings  out  the
phenomenon  the  same  as  if  another  took  me  by  the  hand.

A  friend  who  happened  to  be  present  on  one  occasion,
asked  me  whether  I  had  made  trial  of  the  influence  of  the
will.  Now  although  I  had  read  several  well-attested  cases  of
this,  I  confess  I  felt  rather  sceptical  on  the  subject ;  but  at
that  moment,  acting  upon  his  suggestion,  I  applied  my  will
to  her  raised  arms,  with  the  intention,  first,  that  the  right
arm  should  fall,  which,  before  the  lapse  of  a  minute,  it  did  ;
then,  that  the  left  should  fall,  and  it  obeyed  the  influence  in
like  manner.  The  next  experiment  was  to  will  the  leg  to  rise
from  the  floor,  and  then  to  descend ;  the  result  was  that  the
leg  rose  to  the  horizontal  position,  and,  remaining  stationary
for  an  instant,  gently  fell  to  the  floor  again.  I  then  willed
that  she  should  rise  from  the  sofa  on  which  she  was  sitting
and  come  to  me ;  and,  although  my  attention  was  diverted  by
her  asking  questions  two  or  three  times,  within  three  or  four
minutes  she  rose  from  her  seat,  went  to  a  chest  of  drawers
and  took  out  a  small  article,  which  she  brought  to  shew  me,
taking  her  stand  by  the  side  of  me  as  I  had  wished  her  to  do,
and  on  being  questioned  afterwards,  she  said,  she  desired  to
come  and  stand  by  me,  and  made  that  an  excuse  for  doing
so.  She  has  subsequently  said,  on  repeating  the  like  experi¬
ments,  that  I  tell  her  she  must  come,  or  that  she  must  per¬
form  certain  movements.

In  her  waking  state,  she  is  totally  ignorant  of  what  passes
in  the  mesmeric  state  ;  but  any  promise  made  in  the  mesmeric
sleep,  for  instance,  to  remove  any  article  in  the  room  from
one  place  to  another  within  a  given  time,  after  being  awoke,
she  invariably  performs.

Rigidity  can  be  produced  in  her  waking  state,  almost  as
readily  as  in  the  mesmeric,  a  few  passes  along  the  limb  being
sufficient  to  stiffen  a  leg  or  an  arm.

Although  I  have  endeavoured  to  confine  myself  to  a  sim¬
ple  statement  of  facts,  this  communication  has  exceeded  the
limits  I  purposed  it  should  occupy  :  and  astounding  as  they
are,  I  am  aware  it  is  but  repeating  that  which  has  been  so
much  better  set  forth  repeatedly  throughout  the  five  published
volumes  of  your  Journal;  however,  should  you  deem  it  worth
anything  in  the  scale  of  evidence  in  attestation  of  the  truth
of  mesmerism,  it  is  at  your  service.  And  I  have  the  pleasure
of  adding,  in  conclusion,  that  the  foregoing  phenomena  have
been  witnessed  by  several  persons  capable  of  forming  a  correct
judgment  on  the  matter,  and  some  of  whom  have  hitherto


290


Cure  of  Lock-jaw  in  Master  Chapman.


been  among  the  number  of  scoffers,  but  who  frankly  admitted
that  what  they  witnessed  had  brought  forth  conviction  of  the
reality  of  mesmerism.

I  remain,  Sir,

Yours  respectfully,

24,  Wardour  Street,  J.  Mitchell.

Sept.  9th,  1848.


VIII.  Prediction  and  Cure  of  Lock-jaw  in  Master  Chapman .

By  Lieutenant  Hare,  R.N.

About  the  end  of  last  June,  Master  Chapman,  aged  about
16  or  17,  whose  case  was  reported  in  a  former  number  of  The
Zoist ,*  came  to  me  to  be  mesmerised.  He  told  me,  in  the
sleepwaking  state,  that  he  should  shortly  have  an  attack  of
lock-jaw  and  wished  me  to  break  the  news  to  his  mother,  and
to  tell  her  that  he  should  recover  from  it.  I  met  him  several
days  after  quite  well,  and,  thinking  he  had  deceived  himself,
I  related  what  he  had  told  me ;  at  which  he  laughed,  as  he  felt
well  and  had  no  pain  in  the  jaw.  However,  on  the  12th  of
July  last,  his  mother  sent  about  half-past  seven,  a.m.  to  ask
me  if  I  could  see  her  son  at  my  house,  as  he  was  very  ill.
He  was  brought  about  8,  a.m.  when  his  jaw  was  firmly  locked,
and  it  had  been  so  since  the  previous  night.  He  seemed  in
pain,  distressed,  and  in  tears  :  his  cheeks  were  scratched  from
his  digging  his  nails  into  them.  I  mesmerised  him  at  once
after  trying  to  soothe  him  by  words.  He  went  into  the  sleep
but  the  muscles  of  the  jaw  did  not  relax,  though  all  mental
irritation  subsided  and  he  became  calm.  His  limbs  could  not
be  made  rigid  as  usual ;  passes  even  with  contact  had  no  visi¬
ble  effect  on  them.  I  used  every  means  to  relax  the  muscles
of  the  jaw  for  half  an  hour,  when  I  left  him  in  charge  of  his
mother,  in  order  to  go  to  breakfast.  During  my  absence,
he  asked  by  signs  for  writing  materials,  and  wrote  on  a  slate,
“  Oh,  if  I  had  some  salt ;  quick,  or  it  will  be  too  late.”  When
it  was  brought  to  him,  he  took  up  about  a  teaspoonful,  thrust
it  between  his  lips,  and  sucked  some  between  the  teeth.  In
about  one  or  two  minutes  the  jaw  suddenly  relaxed,  and  the
mouth  instantly  yielded  to  the  boy’s  efforts  to  open  it.  He
spoke  as  freely  as  usual,  but  complained  of  his  jaws  and  teeth
aching  ;  the  latter  he  described  as  feeling  as  if  forced  into  the
gums.  I  sent  him  to  sleep  again,  when  the  limbs  were  easily

*  No.  XVI.,  p.  449.  He  was  cured  of  epilepsy  with  mesmerism,  after  Dr.
Barlow  and  other  medical  men  of  Bath  had  pronounced  his  case  hopeless.  Va¬
rious  phenomena  are  on  record  in  No.  XIX.,  p.  308,  by  Lieut.  Hare. — Zoist.


Ordinary  Method  of  estimating  Cerebral  Development .  291

made  rigid  by  passes.  He  awoke  quite  well.  I  did  not  see
him  again  as  I  left  Bath  the  day  after,  but  by  letter  he  has
informed  me  he  has  been  quite  well.  I  am  ignorant  as  to
what  could  induce  this  attack.  He  some  days  before  fell  on
his  face  on  the  carpet,  from  a  pass  having  made  his  body  and
legs  rigid ;  but  his  fall  was  like  an  actor’s  on  the  stage,  and
he  assured  me  he  did  not  hurt  himself  or  feel  jarred.

I  do  not  mention  many  cases  of  head-ache  relieved  by
passes,  because  they  are  common  to  every  mesmerist.  I
lately  tried  it  in  hiccough,  which  subsided  when  I  placed  one
hand  on  the  head,  the  other  on  the  region  of  the  stomach.

A  case  of  cancer  will  prove  fatal  in  time,  for  I  could  not
prevail  on  the  lady  or  her  friends  to  continue  mesmerism,
in  which  neither  she  nor  they  had  confidence.

Bichard  Hare,

No.  6,  Somerset  Place,  Bath,  Sept.  9.


IX.  Notes  on  the  Ordinary  Method  of  estimating  Cerebral
Development.  By  Mr.  James  Straton,  Aberdeen.

Phrenologists  and  non-phrenologists  have  recently  reached
a  very  unwonted  degree  of  unanimity  on  two  points ;  the  first,
that  the  department  of  our  science  which  we  propose  to  dis¬
cuss  for  a  little,  is  in  a  very  imperfect  state ;  and  the  second,
that  improvements  are  not  to  be  looked  for,  in  the  meantime
at  least  according  to  the  one,  and  at  no  future  period  accord¬
ing  to  the  other.  The  former  maintain,  that  the  very  nature
of  our  subject  precludes  an  accurate  appreciation  of  size, — the
prime  element  of  our  science ;  the  latter  rail  at  our  “  slipping
facts,”  and  require  us,  either  to  speak  in  more  intelligible
terms,  or  renounce  the  right  to  be  heard :  the  former  main¬
tain  that  a  degree  of  accuracy,  sufficient  for  all  practical  pur¬
poses,  has  already  been  attained ;  the  latter  doubt  whether
our  facts,  if  facts  they  be,  are  exponents  of  the  rule  or  the
exceptions  to  the  rule,  declare  our  system  of  observing  and
recording  unfit  for  philosophical  purposes,  and,  as  regards  im¬
provements,  that  the  entire  school  is  non  compos  mentis .*  If
either  party  is  right,  my  task  is  hopeless.  I,  of  course,  do
not  think  so.  On  the  contrary,  I  hope  to  convince  both
parties,  that  less  precipitate  conclusions  and  more  patience
with  the  premises,  would  have  been  more  consistent  with  their
duty  to  truth,  and  more  conducive  to  the  interests  of  hu¬
manity.

The  charge  of  the  latter  class  precludes  reply  on  our  part,
and  we  leave  them  with  the  passing  remark,  that,  if  phreno-

*  Phrenological  Journal ,  vol.  XX.,  p.  56.


292  Ordinary  Method  of  estimating  Cerebral  Development,

logy  is  ever  to  be  improved,  a  different  class  of  minds  from
those  who  have  hitherto  constituted  the  anti-phrenological
school  must  do  the  work.  In  the  numerous  pages  that  have
been  written  to  expound  their  views  during  the  last  30  or  40
years,  we  search  in  vain  for  a  single  hint  that  is  worth  having.
Even  on  the  score  of  errors  and  imperfections,  (pardonable
surely  in  an  infant  science,)  we  find  only  the  vague,  indefi¬
nite  approaches  to  truth  which  so  clearly  marks  the  incompe¬
tency  of  writers  to  do  their  own  cause  justice.

If  it  can  be  maintained  that  the  Mr.  Boyd  and  Mrs.
Hamilton  class  of  “  professing”  phrenologists  fairly  represent
the  phrenological  school,  I  give  up  the  case ;  but  I  do  not
believe  they  do  so  any  more  than  the  compounders  of  Hollo¬
way’s  ointment  and  Parr’s  pills  represent  the  medical  pro¬
fession.  From  them  nothing  need  be  expected  but  due  atten¬
tion  to  number  one.  It  is  more  difficult,  however,  to  account
for  the  neglect  with  which  the  observation  department  of
phrenology  has  been  treated  by  the  gifted  minds  familiar  with,
and  favourably  disposed  towards  it.

The  instructions  for  observing  and  recording  cerebral
development  chiefly  followed  in  this  county,  are  given  in  the
works  of  Mr.  Combe,  Dr.  Macnish,  Mr.  Sidney  Smith,  and
various  minor  publications.  Presuming  that  these  are  familiar
to  phrenologists,  I  shall,  for  the  sake  of  brevity,  quote  ver¬
batim  only  as  much  as  may  occasionally  be  necessary  to  the
full  understanding  of  the  point  in  hand.

It  is  admitted,  as  I  have  said,  that  the  observation  de¬
partment  of  phrenology  is  not  in  so  satisfactory  a  state  as
might  be  wished ;  but  it  is  also  reiterated,  on  all  occasions
when  greater  accuracy  is  the  question  discussed,  that  the  brain,
being  a  living  organic  mass,  does  not  admit  of  accurate  esti¬
mate,  such  as  is  practised  in  mechanics,  chemistry,  and  other
sciences,  in  which  inert  matter,  in  various  conditions,  forms
the  objects  of  research.  This  appears  to  me  to  be  one  of  the
most  inconsiderate  statements  to  be  found  in  the  phrenological
writings  of  talented  and  justly  esteemed  authors.

It  is  quite  true  that  the  brain  cannot,  during  life,  be  de¬
nuded  of  its  coverings  and  measured,  either  as  a  whole  or  in
parts,  by  any  conceivable  means ;  neither  has  it  ever  been
thought  necessary  to  do  so.  But,  enclosed  as  it  is  during  life
in  a  firm,  unyielding  case,  accurately  fitted  by  nature  round
all  parts  of  the  object  enclosed — the  brain,  the  living  head,
the  dead  cranium,  and  the  stucco  representatives  of  both  the
living  and  the  dead,  afford  precisely  the  same  facilities  for
accurate  measurement  as  any  similar  mass  of  wood,  stone,
iron,  bone,  or  other  inert  and  solid  substance.  Every  variety


by  Mr.  James  Sir  at  on.


293


of  size  and  form  of  the  whole  and  of  all  its  parts,  every  pro¬
minence  and  every  hollow,  large  and  small,  long  and  short,
broad  and  narrow,  which  the  eye  can  see,  the  hand  feel,  and
the  mind  of  the  observer  appreciate,  can  be  measured  with
any  appropriate  instrument,  to  any  degree  of  accuracy.  The
dimensions  indicated  can  be  recorded  in  the  terms  of  any
scale  used  in  science  for  similar  purposes.  These  terms,  (say
inches  and  fractions)  being  the  universally  recognized  language
of  science,  have  definite  meaning,  uniform  value,  and  are
available  under  established  conditions  to  evolve  superficial
area,  cubic  dimension,  average  results,  and  all  the  other  func¬
tions  which  the  interests  of  science  may  require.

I  do  not  perceive  that  the  foregoing  facts  warrant  the  as¬
sumption  of  accuracy  being  impossible  in  estimating  develop¬
ment.  I  have  failed  to  discover  the  justice  of  passing  sentence
of  hopeless  imperfection  on  nature  and  phrenology, —  failed
to  discover  the  propriety  of  authoritatively  foreclosing  exer¬
tions  to  improve,  and  devolving  on  those  who  attempt  it  the
disagreeable  necessity  of  introducing  their  subject  by  setting
aside  unwarranted  assertions.  Assertions  already  hallowed  by
time  and  kept  current  by  respected  names  all  the  while  must
want  the  stamp  of  truth,  until  every  possible  method  of  ac¬
curate  estimate  has  been  tried  and  found  inapplicable.

The  aim  of  the  phrenologist,  in  observing  and  estimating
the  size,  form,  or  extent  of  development  of  the  head,  cranium,
or  brain,  is  from  thence  to  determine,  infer,  or  deduce  men¬
tal — that  is,  intellectual  and  moral — function,  capability  and
tendency.

Capability . — Mental  capability,  power,  force,  or  capacity
of  manifestation,  is,  cceteris  paribus,  measured  by  the  positive
or  absolute  amount,  degree,  or  extent  of  development  of  each
and  all  the  parts  or  organs,  individually  and  collectively,  of
the  cerebral  mass.  To  determine  capability,  we  must  ascer¬
tain  absolute  size  or  extent  of  development  and  concomitant
manifestation;  we  must  trace  these  through  all  their  gradations,
from  the  smallest  infant  to  the  largest  adult,  from  the  lowest
stage  of  idiotic  imbecility  to  the  highest  moral  and  intellectual
specimens  of  human  nature.

Tendency. — Mental  tendency,  predisposition,  bent,  or  in¬
clination  is  measured  by  the  comparative  or  relative,  i.e.,  the
difference  between  the  absolute  degrees  of  development  of  the
different  parts  or  organs  composing  the  same  head.  When
the  degrees  of  development  of  all  the  organs  are  the  same,
the  tendency  is  not  organic ;  and  it  increases  in  proportion  as
the  organs  diverge  from  the  equal  balance  development.  To
discover  tendency,  we  must  estimate  the  comparative  develop-

VOL.  VI.  X


294  Ordinary  Method  of  estimating  Cerebral  Development,

ment  of  each  organ,  tracing  it  through  all  its  stages  from  the
equal  balance  proportion,  constituting  the  creature  of  cir¬
cumstances  to  the  most  unequally  balanced  beings,  the  crea¬
tures  of  organization  only,  whom  no  training  or  circumstances
can  control  or  influence.

Function. — The  function  or  faculty  of  each  organ  is  the
manifestation  of  capability,  and  is  in  general  most  easily  dis¬
covered  by  observing  tendency  and  the  concomitant  degrees
of  development.

In  conducting  observation  it  is  necessary  to  determine
with  whatever  accuracy  is  required  to  attain  ends  aimed  at, —
first,  either  the  absolute  size  or  the  degree  of  development  of
each  organ ;  second,  the  ratio  or  proportion  of  those  organs
which  constitute  the  equal  balance,  the  non-tendency  develop¬
ment  ;  third,  the  absolute  size  of  equally-balanced  heads,  casts,
and  crania.

The  difference  between  the  absolute  development  of  each
of  the  organs,  is  the  relative  development.  The  absolute  de¬
velopment  is  the  measure  of  capability  ;  the  relative  develop¬
ment,  the  measure  of  tendency.

Equal  Balance. — If  the  given  head  present  all  the  organs
in  the  equal  balance,  the  non-tendency  proportion,  the  size
of  the  head  accurately  ascertained  is  a  perfect  index  of  the
degree,  amount,  or  extent  of  development  of  each  region  and
organ,  be  their  sizes  what  they  may;  and  the  same  term
which  perfectly  expresses  the  size  of  the  head,  (say  110,  150,
or  190,)  may,  with  equal  propriety,  be  employed  to  express
the  degree  of  development  of  each  organ  or  part  of  the  head,
and  the  capability,  individually  and  collectively.

Unequal  Balance. — If  a  given  head  have  all  the  organs
unequally  balanced,  the  size  of  the  head  is  no  index  to  the
degree  of  development  of  any  of  the  regions  or  organs.  The
size  of  the  head  is,  therefore,  no  index  of  either  capability  or
tendency.

In  practice,  it  is  held  that  the  great  majority  of  heads,
the  mass  of  ordinary  heads,  exhibit  the  greater  part  of  the
organs  in  equal-balance  development ;  the  other  organs  rang¬
ing  some  above  and  others  below  that  development.  The  rule
cannot  be  correctly  applicable  to  all  tribes  and  nations,  if  in¬
deed  it  is  so  to  any ;  but  we  will  take  it  for  granted  that  it  is
sufficiently  near  the  truth  in  this  country.  The  same  term,
then,  which  correctly  expresses  the  size  of  the  head,  indicates,
with  equal  accuracy,  the  degree  of  development  and  the  capa¬
bility  of  the  medium  organs.  The  excess  in  some  and  defi¬
ciency  of  other  organs  must,  in  such  cases,  be  estimated
without  reference  to  the  size  of  the  head.


by  Mr.  James  Straton.


295


To  determine  the  size  of  the  head,  cast,  or  cranium,  with
accuracy,  is  the  first  important  step  in  estimating  cerebral
development.  For  this  purpose,  some  measure  in  various  direc¬
tions  with  a  tape  line,  others  with  callipers,  and  some  use  both.

Tape  Line  Measurement . — Suppose  a  given  head  measures
22J  inches  round  Philoprogenitiveness,  Destructiveness,  and
Individuality,  and  13|  from  the  occipital  spine  over  the  top  to
the  root  of  the  nose,  (two  very  common  measurements,  and
as  good  as  any  that  can  be  taken  by  the  same  means,) — the
actual  size ;  the  cubic  bulk  may  be  either  that  of  a  moderate
sized  female,  or  the  rather  large  male  head  or  any  of  the  many
gradations  between  these  extremes,  accordingly  as  the  head  is
long  or  short,  high  or  low,  broad  or  narrow ;  the  larger  being
a  fourth  part  of  its  entire  size  more  than  the  smaller,  or  as
120  to  160  cubic  inches.

Callipers . — It  is  very  common  to  attempt  to  estimate  the
size  of  the  head  by  a  series  of  calliper  measurements,  (four,
five,  six,  or  more,)  taken,  some  from  back  to  front,  some  from
side  to  side,  and  others  from  the  ear  to  various  points  along  the
middle  line.  Some  of  these  measurements  are  perfectly  ap¬
propriate,  so  far  as  they  go,  for  the  purpose  intended ;  others
are  not  so,  and  the  best  of  them  are  vitiated  by  neglecting
conditions  essential  to  accuracy.  There  is,  therefore,  no  ne¬
cessary,  no  constant  relation  between  the  measurements  and
the  size  of  the  object  measured.*

We  attempt,  by  contemplating  a  series  of  linear  measure¬
ments, — be  they  few  or  many,  by  line  or  by  callipers,  separate
or  combined, — to  deduce  the  cubic  dimensions  of  cubic  masses,
viz.,  heads,  casts,  and  crania.  It  requires  a  mind  very
thoroughly  conversant  with  cubic  measure  to  appreciate  the
cubic  value  of  linear  dimensions,  as  may  be  seen  by  a  very
simple  experiment.  Let  6,  4,  and  2  inches,  be  average  cal¬
liper  measurements,  accurately  representing  the  length,
breadth,  and  height  of  a  head  or  any  similar  object,  and  let
8,  6,  and  4  inches  be  the  homologous  lines  of  a  precisely  similar
object.  Every  one  will  understand  at  a  glance  that  the  latter
is  considerably  larger  than  the  former,  some  will  probably
think  it  about  twice  the  size,  some  rather  more  and  others
rather  less  perhaps :  very  few  will  see  at  once,  or  even  admit
previously  to  trial,  that  the  latter  is  four  times  the  size  of  the
other,  for  such  it  really  is, — the  one  being  48  and  the  other
192  cubic  inches.

It  is  not,  in  one  sense,  necessary  that  we  use  the  national
scale  of  lineal,  superficial,  and  solid  measure  in  observing
and  recording  size,  though  that,  being  the  standard  language

*  This  is  exemplified  in  The  Zoist,  No.  XII.,  pp.  442-3.

x  2


296  Ordinary  Method  of  estimating  Cerebral  Development,

of  science  and  its  terms  being  of  definite  and  known  value,
possesses  advantages  of  such  vast  importance,  that  it  is  doing
phrenology  great  injustice  to  reject  them,  if  they  can  be  made
available.  We  might  take  7,  14,  140,  or  any  other  number,
term,  word,  or  sentence  to  represent  the  medium  term  of  a
conventional  scale,  and  higher  and  lower  terms  for  the  larger
and  smaller  sizes.  It  matters  little  in  some  respects,  provided
the  value  of  each  term  was  clearly  defined,  and  the  same
term  used  to  designate  the  same  size  only ,  by  all  parties,  at  all
times,  in  all  places.  Instead  of  the  scientific,  we  use  a  con¬
ventional  scale,  or  rather,  scales ;  for  I  have  seen  some  half
dozen  used,  and  know  not  how  many  more  may  be  in  use.
Instead  of  each  term  having  a  definite  and  invariable  meaning
or  value,  the  value  of  no  one  term  of  any  of  the  scales  has
ever  been  defined.  It  is  not  pretended  by  any  one  that  they
are  so :  on  the  contrary,  I  have  seen  it  stated  that  none  of
the  terms  have  a  definite,  that  is,  a  positive  or  absolute  mean¬
ing  or  value,  but  that  they  are  all  used  in  a  comparative  sense
only.  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  repeat  an  obvious  truism,
that  one  term,  (all  indeed  strictly  speaking,)  must  have  a
positive  meaning,  real  or  imaginary,  fixed  or  fleeting,  in  all
cases,  whether  applied  to  heads,  regions,  or  organs ;  or  there
would  be  no  comparative  meaning.  In  point  of  fact,  every
observer  does  attach  a  positive  meaning  to  the  medium  term
at  least,  and  to  the  others  as  soon  as  he  is  able ;  and  every
learner  feels  that,  until  he  is  able  to  attach  some  positve  mean¬
ing  to  one  or  more  of  the  terms,  they  are  to  him  mere  sounds
without  sense, — figures,  without  facts.

It  is  quite  true,  however,  that  no  one  of  the  terms  of  the
scales,  in  common  use,  has  a  fixed,  positive,  clearly  defined,
and  invariable  meaning  or  value  ;  and  here  we  reach  one  of
the  most,  if  not  the  most,  vexatious,  and  as  many  say,  dis¬
creditable  and  detrimental  anomalies  connected  with  the  sub¬
ject  in  hand.

The  terms  of  our  scales  being  indefinite,  every  observer
must  find  a  meaning  for  himself,  with  or  without  the  assist¬
ance  of  others,  as  he  best  can.  Every  observer  calls  that  a
medium  head  which  he  is  accustomed  to  see  most  frequently
in  the  mass  of  persons  among  whom  he  is  in  practice  for  the
time  being ;  and  to  the  other  terms  of  the  scale,  he  ap¬
propriates  the  other  gradations  of  size  which  he  thinks  most
suitable.

Now  it  is  a  well-known  fact  that  the  medium  or  aver¬
age  size  of  head  is  different  in  different  localities ;  to  what
extent  we  do  not  know,  (which  only  makes  bad  worse.)  But
the  fact  is  certain,  that  the  Scotch  differ  from  the  English,


by  Mr.  James  Straton.


297


and  both  from  the  Irish  ;  that  England  differs  in  this  parti¬
cular  from  France,  France  from  Germany,  and  all  three  from
the  more  northern,  southern,  and  eastern  portions  of  Europe;
that  Europe  differs  from  Asia,  and  so  on  in  endless  variety,
whether  we  compare  large  masses  or  small  classes  of  human
beings.  The  population  on  the  east  of  Scotland  differ  from
those  on  the  west,  the  sea-coast  fishers  from  the  city  popula¬
tion,  and  both  from  the  agricultural.  Yea,  farther;  if  we  con¬
fine  our  attention  to  a  single  city  of  40  or  50  thousand  in¬
habitants,  we  find  the  different  classes  which  compose  the
population,  first,  the  educated  classes,  the  merchants,  manu¬
facturers,  ship  owners,  &c. ;  second,  the  unskilled  labourers ;
and  third,  the  pauper  class ;  all  differing  from  each  other  in
size  of  head,  nearly  as  much  as  the  British  from  the  Hindoo
average :  and  these  differences  are  constant  from  infancy  to
old  age.  Of  these  facts  more  hereafter ;  I  can  only  state
them  in  the  mean  time  as  facts,  and  note  their  bearings  on
the  point  in  hand.

If  we  bear  in  mind  that  value  of  the  medium  terms  of  the
scales  is,  by  every  observer,  regulated  by  the  average  of  the
heads  among  whom  he  is  in  practice  for  the  time  being,  it  is
easy  to  understand  how  the  same  term  has  a  different  value
in  the  mind  of  the  same  observer  at  different  times,  in  different
places,  or  among  different  classes  in  the  same  place,  and  how
different  observers  must  vary  (to  what  extent  we  do  not  know)
in  the  value  they  attach  to  the  same  terms,  at  all  times,  in
all  places  ; — a  difference  not  trifling  and  unimportant,  as  some
seem  to  believe,  but  amounting  in  the  mature  male  heads  of
proximate  localities  to  the  mean  difference  between  the  boy  at
10  and  the  man  at  40  years  of  age.  If  we  bear  in  mind
also  that  the  measurements  in  ordinary  use  are  frequently
different  for  the  same  size  of  head,  and  the  same  for  different
sizes  of  heads,  the  conclusions  seem  inevitable,  that,  in  the
practice  of  observation  by  the  ordinary  means,  accuracy  is
impracticable  and  uniformity  impossible.

That  our  ordinary  series  of  measurements  is  fallacious,  is
a  fact  recognized  and  acknowledged  by  some  of  our  ablest
phrenologists.  They  first  begin  to  suspect  that  their  measure¬
ments  and  the  estimate  of  their  eye  are  at  variance ;  con¬
tinued  practice  ripens  their  suspicions  into  certainty ;  their
confidence  is  destroyed,  and  they  cease  to  take  measurements
or  only  take  a  few  in  peculiar  cases.  The  want  of  uniformity
is  recognized  by  all,  and  regretted  also  to  some  extent ;  but,
upon  the  whole,  submitted  to  with  exemplary  patience  and
philosophic  resignation,  (considering  the  important  conse¬
quences  involved,)  as  an  imperfection  inseparable  from  phre¬
nology.


298  Ordinary  Method  of  estimating  Cerebral  Development,

Estimate  of  Regions. — An  accurate  estimate  of  the  regions,
groups,  or  clusters  of  organs,  is  at  once  the  most  important
and  the  most  difficult  of  any  by  the  ordinary  method.  That
it  is  rarely  well  done,  the  different  model  heads  or  marked
busts  which  I  have  seen  abundantly  testify ;  their  chief  differ¬
ences  consisting  in  the  different  degrees  of  development  of
groups  of  organs.

Many  observers  endeavour  to  aid  their  eye  by  calliper
measurements  from  the  external  opening  of  the  ear  to  various
points  on  the  head.  Nothing  could  be  more  appropriate  for
the  purpose ;  but  the  neglect  of  one  condition  vitiates  all  the
measurements  taken  from  the  middle  line  and  the  points
beyond  it.  It  is  taken  for  granted  that  the  line  through  the
base  of  the  cranium  from  ear  to  ear  is  constant,  in  proportion
to  the  size  of  the  head ;  whilst  it  so  happens  that  it  is  as  vari¬
able  as  any  other  line  whatever.  In  the  ordinary  male  head,
the  measurement  varies  from  46  to  53  inches :  the  calliper
measurement  from  the  ear  to  Veneration  or  Eventuality  is,
therefore,  influenced  as  much  by  the  distance  of  the  ears
from  each  other  as  by  the  development  of  the  cerebral  mass
upward  and  forward.

Development  of  organs. — As  to  the  mode  of  estimating
individual  organs,  I  find  it  equally  difficult  to  discover,  from
the  instructions  given  in  elementary  books,  either  what  we
are  to  do  or  how  we  are  to  do  it.  Mr.  Sidney  Smith  tells  us
in  his  principles  of  phrenology,  p.  72,  “  If,  without  reference
to  the  size  of  the  organs  in  the  abstract,  we  confine  our  atten¬
tion  to  the  case  of  a  single  individual,  we  find  that  each  organ
has  a  natural  size  of  its  own,  [no  doubt  it  is  the  size  which
nature  made  it,  be  it  what  it  may ;  very  few  would  refuse  to
take  the  fact  for  granted] ;  that  it  bears  a  certain  relative  pro¬
portion  to  the  others  in  the  same  head,  [this  follows  as  a  mat¬
ter  of  course, — every  object  in  nature  bears  a  certain  relative
proportion  to  every  other  object]  ;  that,  wherever  it  exceeds
this  proportion  [in  the  same  head, — our  attention  is  expressly
confined  ‘  to  the  case  of  a  single  individual/]  it  is  more
powerful,  and,  whenever  it  falls  short  of  this,  it  is  more  feeble,
than  those  which  preserve  their  relative  proportion  to  the
general  size  of  the  particular  cranium.”  Does  each  organ  “of
the  particular  cranium,”  in  a  fit  of  caprice,  occasionally  leave
the  “  natural  size  of  its  own,”  and  assume  that  of  another  ?
Does  it  rise  and  fall  like  the  tide,  or  wax  and  wane  with  the
moon?  Mr.  Smith  has  probably  found  the  key  to  “lunacy.”
But  let  us  hear  him  farther.  “  It  is  its  size,  relative  to  that
of  the  rest  in  the  same  head  and  not  the  abstract  amount  of
cerebral  matter  which  it  occupies.”  Here  we  have  something


299


by  Mr.  James  Straton.

new, — something  “  clear,  sensible,  and  judicious”  perhaps.
If  it  is  not  the  “  amount  of  cerebral  matter  which  it  occupies,”
which  constitutes  the  size  of  an  organ  both  absolutely  and
relatively,  we  may  give  up  the  case,  abandon  phrenology  in
despair,  and  send  every  professor  in  the  world  (excepting  Mr.
Smith,  perhaps)  to  school  to  begin  again,  instead  of  having
finished  his  education.

It  appears  to  me  that  much  of  the  confusion  which  per¬
vades  our  instructions  for  conducting  observation  may  be
traced  to  an  indiscriminate  use  of  the  word  size.  When  we
speak  of  the  size  of  the  head,  we  use  the  word  in  the  ordi¬
nary,  the  universally  acknowledged  sense,  and  therefore  with
perfect  propriety ;  but  to  use  the  word  size,  when  we  make  no
reference  whatever  to  the  actual  dimensions,  bulk,  or  mea¬
surement,  of  the  object  (the  organ  or  organs)  spoken  of,  when
we  simply  mean  the  degree,  amount,  or  extent  of  develop¬
ment,  be  the  size  of  the  organ  what  it  may, — be  it  that  of
Firmness  in  the  largest,  or  of  Form  in  the  smallest  head,  is
to  attach  two  meanings  to  the  same  term  while  treating  the
same  subject,  frequently  indeed  in  the  same  sentence,  that
no  conventional  usage  can  justify  or  extenuate.  Mr.  Smith
is  a  striking  example  of  how  far  carelessness  or  latitudinari-
anism,  in  the  use  of  terms,  is  calculated  to  bewilder  and
mystify :  and  it  unfortunately  happens  that  he  is  not  singular
in  this  respect.

Dr.  Macnish  quotes  and  adopts  Mr.  Combe's  instruc¬
tions  to  observers  :  in  discussing  the  one,  therefore,  we  dis¬
pose  of  both.  In  the  System  of  Phrenology ,  fourth  edition,
1836,  nearly  100  pages  are  occupied  with  instructions  how  to
observe.  Many  of  the  particulars  are  treated  with  great
clearness,  and  are  worthy  of  being  implicitly  followed ;  but
in  one  passage,  where  he  sums  up  his  instructions  for  observ¬
ing  individual  organs,  I  have  possibly  failed  to  understand
him.  At  page  128  and  158,  fifth  edition,  1843,  we  read,
“  It  ought  to  be  kept  constantly  in  view  in  the  practical  appli¬
cation  of  phrenology,  that  it  is  the  size  of  each  organ  in  pro¬
portion  to  the  others  in  the  head  of  the  individual  observed ,
and  not  their  absolute  size,  [the  size  of  any  one  organ  in  pro-
-  portion  to  another — taking  the  phrase  in  its  common  accep¬
tation — or  of  any  one  object  in  proportion  to  another,  is
determined  by  the  absolute  size  of  each  of  the  objects,  and
by  no  other  consideration  whatever ;  it  is  the  difference  between
the  absolute  sizes  of  the  objects  compared,  or  the  quotient  of
the  greater  divided  by  the  lesser]  nor  their  size  in  reference
to  any  standard  head,  that  determines  their  predominance  in
him  of  particular  talents  or  dispositions.”  Quite  true  :  it  is


300  Ordinary  Method  of  estimating  Cerebral  Development ,

not  their  absolute  size ,  neither  is  it,  therefore,  their  relative
size ;  that  is,  their  proportion  to  the  others  in  the  head  of  the
individual  observed.  But  it  is  the  degree,  amount,  or  extent
of  development, — some  more  and  others  less,  as  compared
with  a  standard  head,  real  or  imaginary,  mental  or  material,
ascertained  or  conjectured, — viz.,  compared  with  an  ordinary,
an  average,  or  equally  balanced  head ;  it  is  the  excess  in  de¬
velopment  of  some  of  the  organs  and  deficiency  of  others,
that  determines  in  him  the  predominance  of  particular  talents
and  dispositions.  Such,  it  appears  to  me,  is,  or  must  be  in¬
tended  as,  the  meaning  of  the  sentence  quoted :  but  I  confess
that  my  confidence  in  the  interpretation  given  was  considera¬
bly  shaken  by  a  recent  illustration  given  to  make  the  point
we  are  considering  very  plain.*  It  reads  thus, — “  Hold  up
your  hand,  stretch  out  the  fingers  and  thumb  and  look  at
them ;  ask  a  child  of  three  years  of  age  to  do  the  same ;  and
then  report  whether  the  terms  ‘  small*  applied  to  the  little
finger,  ‘  full*  applied  to  the  ring  finger,  and  ‘  large*  applied
to  the  middle  finger  be  not  clear,  intelligible,  and  accurate
expressions,  designative  of  their  relative  sizes,  both  in  your
hand  and  in  that  of  the  child :  having  got  your  answer  we
request  you  next  to  inform  us  what  is  the  size  of  the  human
hand  ?  what  is  the  size  of  each  of  the  human  fingers  ?  Do
we  need  to  know  the  standard  size  of  these  in  the  human  body
generally,  in  order  to  discover  that  your  little  finger  is  less
than  your  middle  finger,  and  that  in  the  child  also  the  little
finger  is  less  than  the  middle  finger  ?  Is  it  necessary  that
some  exact  man  of  science  should  tell  you  the  measurements
before  you  can  pronounce  on  the  relative  proportions  of  the
fingers  in  the  respective  hands  ?  Again,  look  at  the  fingers
attentively,  and  say  whether  the  size  of  each  does  not  include
both  length  and  breadth,  and  whether  they  do  not  differ  in
both  these  dimensions  in  correspondence  with  the  terms.  Is
not  the  little  finger  ‘  smaller*  both  in  length  and  thickness
than  the  ring  finger?  and  so  with  the  other  ?  Yet  where  are
the  ‘  measurements*  of  the  length  and  breadth  which  enables
you  to  answer  these  questions  ?  No  man  of  common  sense
finds  measurements  necessary.  We  admit,  that,  if  in  each
individual  hand  the  sizes  of  the  fingers  were  mathematically
measured,  our  knowledge  of  their  relative  sizes  would  be
more  exact ;  but  it  would  scarcely  be  more  useful.  The  esti¬
mate  of  their  dimensions,  made  by  the  eye  and  the  under¬
standing,  enables  us  to  discriminate  the  differences  with  a
degree  of  precision  sufficient  for  all  practical  purposes.

“This  mode  of  investigation,  namely, — estimating  size
and  proportions  by  the  eye,  hand,  and  intellect, — is  nearly
*  Phrenological  Journal ,  Vol.  XX.,  pp.  65 — 7.


301


by  Mr.  James  Stralon.

the  only  one  applicable  in  physiological  science.”  “  The  ap¬
plication  of  these  observations  to  phrenology  is  direct  and
easily  made.  Like  the  hand,  the  head  of  one  individual
differs  in  size  from  that  of  another.  The  phrenologist  by
measuring  heads  by  callipers  or  otherwise,  ascertains  as  ac¬
curately  as  possible  the  aggregate  size  of  each ;  the  record  of
the  measurement  indicates  whether  we  are  describing  a  small
head,  a  medium,  or  a  large  head.  All  this  could  be  done,
and  with  the  same  results,  in  regard  to  the  hand.  In  the
case  of  the  hand,  it  is  the  size  of  the  different  fingers  in  rela¬
tion  to  the  others  in  the  same  hand,  which  is  indicated  by  the
terms  '  small/  -'full/  ‘  large/  and  not  the  size  of  each  finger,
in  relation  to  the  fingers  of  any  other  hand,  either  individual
or  standard.  In  the  case  of  the  head  it  is  the  size  of  the
different  organs,  in  relation  to  the  others  in  the  same  head ,
which  is  indicated  by  these  words ;  and  the  doctrine  is,  that,
cceteris  paribus ,  the  power  of  the  faculties  in  relation  to  each
other  corresponds  with  the  relative  magnitudes  of  the  organs.”
If  this  illustration  is  in  harmony  with  the  instructions  pre¬
viously  quoted,  then  both  are  at  irreconcilable  variance  with
that  which  every  phrenologist  must  do  on  all  occasions  in  the
practice  of  observation.  This  will  be  plain  in  a  moment.
Hold  up  your  hand  again,  if  you  please ;  it  is  any  ordinary
hand  ;  if  it  were  otherwise  it  would  be  useless  for  the  purpose
in  view.  All  the  fingers  exhibit  the  common,  the  average,
or  equal  balance  proportions.  Now  instead  of  calling  the
little  finger  “  small,”  the  ring  finger  “  full,”  and  the  middle
finger  “  large,”  we  must,  if  we  would  estimate  the  fingers  as
we  do  the  cerebral  organs,  call  all  the  three  one  and  the  same
size ;  or  development  rather  is  the  word  which  I  prefer.  It
matters  little,  in  one  sense,  what  term  we  use  to  designate
the  extent  of  development, — “  moderate,”  (e  full,”  “  medium,”
or  any  other  of  similar  import ;  but  the  same  term  must  be
used  to  designate  the  development  of  each  of  the  fingers.
Now  look  at  my  hand,  and  you  observe  that  my  little  finger
is  larger  than  usual,  my  middle  finger  is  smaller  than  usual,
and  my  ring  finger  is  just  the  common,  the  average  size,  in
proportion  to  the  hand ;  estimating  the  fingers  phrenologically
once  more,  I  must  call  my  little  finger  “  large,”  my  middle
finger  “  small,”  and  my  ring  finger  “  full ;”  all  the  while  the
middle  is  considerably  larger  than  the  ring  finger,  and  nearly
twice  the  size  of  the  little  finger; — no  matter,  we  do  not
think  it  necessary  to  note  either  the  absolute  or  the  relative
size  of  the  cerebral  organs,  except  in  the  manner  I  have  done
my  fingers.  In  a  given  head  we  may  call  the  organ  of  Colour
“  very  large,”  and  that  of  Cautiousness  “  very  small,”  the


302  Ordinary  Method  of  estimating  Cerebral  Development ,

latter  being  in  reality  some  eight  or  ten  times  the  size  of  the
former.  It  is,  I  repeat,  the  extent  of  development,  more  or
less,  above  or  below  the  common,  the  ordinary,  the  average,
(the  equal  balance  it  ought  to  be,  but  it  is  the  standard,
be  what  it  may,  which  every  observer  has  acquired  as  a  first
step  and  must  continue  to  use  consciously  or  unconsciously,)
and  that  only  which  he  attempts  to  estimate  in  the  common
mode  of  observation.

Equal  Balance. — As  the  equal  balance, — the  non-tendency
proportion  of  the  organs  is  the  starting  point  and  the  stand¬
ard  that  must  guide  us  in  all  our  estimates  of  development,
by  whatever  method  we  pursue  our  observations :  as  we  can
make  no  progress  in  estimating  the  degrees  of  unequal  deve¬
lopment  until  we  first  know  what  the  equal-balance  develop¬
ment  is,  the  question  has,  unlike  all  others  in  this  department,
attracted  a  degree  of  attention  somewhat  commensurate  with
its  importance ;  and  the  progress  made  is  satisfactory  in  some
points  of  view  at  least.  Information  from  sources  on  which
I  can  place  the  most  implicit  reliance  enables  me  to  state,
that  in  America  every  professor  of  phrenology  produces  a  new
model  bust.  In  England  the  praiseworthy  example  is  well
followed  up.  Mr.  Deville,  of  London,  published  a  bust ;  Mr.
O’Neil,  of  Edinburgh,  published  one;  and  in  Paris  they  use
a  bust  considerably  different  from  both.  The  teacher  of  the
“  London  School  of  Phrenology/’  rejects  the  whole,  and
promises  to  publish  one  superior  to  any  which  has  yet  ap¬
peared.  All  this  is  right  in  one  sense, — quite  as  it  should  be ;
deplorable  and  humiliating  though  it  may  be.  Phrenologists
can  make  no  more  instructive  collections  than  that  of  model
busts.  That  they  will  continue  to  increase  as  rapidly  as  they
have  done,  is  equally  to  be  expected  and  desired:  they  embody
evidence  which  will  rouse  phrenologists  to  examine  their  sys¬
tem  of  observation  anew,  and  ascertain  its  real  value, — a  sys¬
tem  more  completely  adapted  to  conceal  its  own  defects  than
to  serve  any  scientific  purpose.  If  scientific  minds  will  con¬
tinue  to  overlook,  or  refuse  to  investigate  the  matter  for  some
time  yet,  be  it  so.  Phrenology  will  vindicate  its  own  cause.
Accumulating  error  must  ultimately  become  “  plain  to  the
meanest  capacity  then,  if  not  before,  the  system  will  sink
under  the  weight  of  its  own  infirmities  and  be  buried  in  its
useless  stucco.  The  point  on  which  unanimity  is  most  to  be
desired,  namely,  the  development  which  constitutes  the  equal
balance  of  faculties,  is  the  very  point  on  which  the  want  of
unanimity,  and  the  impossibility  of  ever  attaining  it  by  the
present  system  of  observation  and  record,  is  testified  by  the
most  abundant  evidence.  Twenty,  thirty,  or  forty  observers


by  Mr.  James  Sira  ton.


303


produce  each  a  “  model  bust,”  an  equally  balanced  head,
cast,  or  cranium ;  they  all  differ  from  each  other  to  a  greater
or  less  extent,  some  in  one  particular,  some  in  another ;  many
of  the  observers  were  honest  we  are  bound  to  believe,  and
each  is  confident  as  a  matter  of  course.  But  whence  this
disparity  where  all  should  be  harmony  ?  Some  attempt  to
account  for  it  by  the  different  forms  of  national  heads.  That
may  go  a  little  way ;  but  I  greatly  doubt  if  it  does  go  any.
It  is  hardly  possible  to  conceive  that  a  greater  difference  could
exist  between  any  two  than  the  Paris  and  Edinburgh  busts
exhibit:  yet  they  can  be  matched*  inform ,  (the  all  important
particular,)  by  living  heads  in  hundreds,  any  day,  in  any
of  the  principal  cities  of  Scotland.  I  repeat  the  question
then,  Whence  the  disparity  where  all  should  be  harmony  ?
Who  of  the  many  observers  is  right,  and  who  are  wrong?
If  we  appeal  to  nature  so  did  they  ;  and  the  answers  they  re¬
ceived,  the  results  they  arrived  at,  are  before  us  in  tangible
plaster.  Some  of  the  specimens  may,  or  rather  I  should  say
undoubtedly  do,  embody  the  results  of  very  extensive  and
careful  observation ;  some  of  them  may  embody  the  very  truths
we  are  in  search  of ;  and  others  represent  little  or  nothing
above  the  whims  and  conjectures  of  arrant  quackery,  and
may  be  just  on  a  scientific  level  with  the  Elixir  of  Life  of
Mrs.  Hamilton  and  the  weather  prognostics  of  Moore  and
Partridge.  If  we  refer  the  question  to  “  universal  suffrage
and  vote  by  ballot/’  the  quack  will  “  go  in  at  the  top  of  the
poll  /’  for  with  the  multitude  the  boldest  assertion  is  always
the  best  reason.  None  can  demonstrate  either  that  he  is
right  or  the  others  are  wrong.  Here  the  imperfection,  the  in¬
justice  of  our  ordinary  means  of  observing  and  recording,
stands  out  in  very  bold  relief.  The  honest,  assiduous  phi¬
losopher  is  helpless  by  the  side  of  the  veriest  charlatan.  He
who  has  spent  his  life  in  the  service  of  science,  and  has  given
to  the  world  the  fruits  of  his  honest  and  honourable  industry,
cannot  either  vindicate  his  rectitude  or  manifest  his  superiority
over  those  who  are  as  ignorant  of  the  phrenology  taught  by
Gall  as  they  are  of  every  other  department  of  science.  Each
can  tell  of  the  care  he  has  taken,  the  labour  he  has  bestowed,
and  the  money  he  has  spent,  to  reach  the  truth  and  secure
accuracy.  All  very  good  so  far  as  it  goes,  all  very  excellent  so
far  as  it  is  true.  But  twenty,  thirty,  or  forty  terms  of  average
results,  science  in  the  language  of  science,  facts  in  intelligible
figures,  is  the  evidence  wanting  to  settle  the  point.  Until
these  are  produced,  controversy  is  useless;  and  equally  so
afterwards,  though  for  a  very  different  reason.

*  Excepting  the  usual  slight  individual  peculiarities.


304


Case  of  supposed  Hydrophobia,


In  another  paper  the  notes  will  be  continued  on  this  and
other  points  not  yet  adverted  to.

3,  Kingsland  Place,  Aberdeen,

September,  1848.


X.  A  Case  of  supposed  Hydrophobia.  By  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson,

Fairfield  House,  Yorkshire.

On  Friday  the  4th  August,  1848,  I  saw  Dr.  Simpson  in
York,  who  told  me  that  a  Mr.  Coates  had  a  patient  at  Dring-
houses,  near  York,  who  was  supposed  to  have  an  attack  of
hydrophobia.  I  expressed  a  wish  to  see  the  patient  in  case  I
should  be  allowed  to  try  the  effect  of  mesmerism  upon  him.
Dr.  Simpson  said  that  he  thought  there  would  be  no  objection
to  that,  and  offered  to  introduce  me  to  Mr.  Coates,  which  he
did ;  and  Mr.  Coates,  in  my  conversation  with  him,  as  nearly
as  I  can  recollect,  stated  as  follows. — That  the  boy  since
the  Monday  previous  had  exhibited  undoubted  symptoms  of
hydrophobia,  had  constant  paroxysms  and  involuntary  spasms
of  the  muscles  of  different  parts  of  the  body,  more  espe¬
cially  of  the  muscles  of  the  throat,  jaws,  back  and  arms ;  that
generally  (though  not  always)  water  or  anything  which  he
attempted  to  swallow  was  ejected  forcibly  and  involuntarily
from  his  throat,  though  at  times  he  had  swallowed  food  and
water  without  much  difficulty ;  that  he  was  in  a  highly  ex¬
cited  irritable  state,  suspicious  and  annoyed  at  all  who  came
near  him ;  that  his  paroxysms  were  most  violent,  and  it  had
been  ascertained  that  he  had  been  bitten  by  a  dog  on  the
thumb  about  ten  weeks  before ;  (the  dog,  however,  is  still
alive,  and  has  never  shewn  any  symptoms  of  madness ;)  that
he  himself  thought  it  was  a  case  of  hydrophobia,  and  that
Dr.  Belcombe,  whom  he  had  called  in,  and  who  was  most
conversant  with  the  symptoms  of  that  disease,  having  wit¬
nessed  ten  or  twelve  cases,  had  no  doubt  whatever  of  its  na¬
ture  ;  that  they  had  been  trying  opiates  in  the  hope  of  miti¬
gating  the  paroxysms ;  that  already  the  patient  had  taken
enough  to  kill  three  men*  and  that,  with  the  accession  of  the
paroxysms,  which  were  increasing  in  violence,  they  had
thought  it  advisable  to  double  the  quantity,  and  were  then
giving  him  one  grain  of  morphia  every  half  hour.

I  must  here  remark  that  Dr.  Simpson,  who  had  seen  the
patient  also,  observed  that  he  thought  there  was  something
anomalous  in  the  case ;  and  from  other  remarks  it  appeared

*  Three  ounces  of  laudanum.


by  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson.


305


to  me  that  he  did  entertain  a  strong  doubt  of  its  being  hy¬
drophobia.  Mr.  Coates  said  he  thought  the  boy's  friends
would  have  no  objection  to  my  trying  mesmerism ;  indeed,
that  they  would  be  but  too  happy,  if,  by  any  means,  his  suf¬
ferings  could  be  mitigated.  I  agreed  to  pay  the  boy  a  visit
in  the  course  of  an  hour  or  two.  I  have  now  stated  as  far  as
I  can  recollect  what  was  said  by  Mr.  Coates  at  my  interview
with  him;  but,  as  there  was  a  paragraph  in  the  York  papers  of
that  day  which  I  took  for  granted  must  have  been  furnished
by  that  gentleman,  it  will  be  as  well  to  insert  it  here.

“Distressing  case  of  Hydrophobia

“We  have  this  week  to  narrate  the  painful  particulars  of  a  case
where  a  youth  has  been  bit  by  a  dog  while  in  a  state  of  madness,
the  result  of  which  no  doubt  will  end  in  the  death  of  him.  Richard
Archer,  about  15  years  of  age,  and  an  apprentice  to  Mr.  Harrison,
joiner,  of  this  city,  it  appears  on  Saturday  last  was  in  some  way
singularly  affected,  which  was  observed  by  his  master.  The  boy
went  home  to  his  father’s  house,  who  is  a  farmer  residing  at  Dring-
houses,  after  he  had  finished  his  work,  and  on  the  following  day
(Sunday)  he  was  so  much  worse  that  his  parents  deemed  it  expe¬
dient  to  send  for  their  surgeon,  Mr.  Coates,  who  resides  near  Ouse
Bridge.  That  gentleman  on  looking  at  the  patient,  perceived  a
peculiar  fierceness  about  his  eyes,  and  upon  inquiring  into  the  cause
found  that  he  was  labouring  under  very  serious  wandering  pains
about  his  body.  Mr.  Coates,  however,  saw  there  was  something
extraordinary  about  his  case,  and  consequently  ordered  his  father  to
keep  a  proper  restraint  upon  him,  and  administered  to  him  a  small
aperient,  which  rather  alleviated  his  pain  for  the  time  being.  Mr.
Coates  visited  him  again  the  next  morning,  and  he  was  then  com¬
plaining  of  spasmodic  twitchings  about  the  throat,  and  there  was  an
accumulation  of  saliva,  and  he  afterwards  became  rather  unmanage¬
able.  Small  doses  of  morphia  were  prescribed  for  him  that  day,
and  on  the  following  morning,  on  being  visited  by  the  surgeon,  he
was  decidedly  worse.  His  eyes  looked  particularly  fierce,  and  there
was  a  convulsive  twitching  of  the  muscles  generally,  and  was  con¬
stantly  spitting  viscid  mucus.  Mr.  Coates  placed  him  in  a  chair,
and  he  became  very  unmanageable.  A  glass  of  water  was  placed
before  him,  which  he  seemed  to  have  a  great  aversion  against,  when
all  in  a  moment  he  seized  the  glass  and  got  two  mouthfuls  of  water,
but  from  the  contraction  of  the  throat  half  of  the  water  came  back
again,  and  he  fell  back  in  the  chair  in  a  convulsive  paroxysm.  On
his  recovering  a  little,  Mr.  Coates  questioned  him  as  to  whether  he
had  been  bit  by  a  dog  or  not,  and  after  a  short  lapse  of  time  he  said
that  he  had  been  bit  by  Mr.  Hood’s  dog,  spirit  merchant,  Micklegate,
some  two  or  three  months  ago,  and  showed  him  a  sore  which  was  on
the  side  of  the  nail  of  the  thumb  on  the  left  hand.  On  examination
of  the  thumb  there  appeared  a  small  indentation  just  at  the  side  of


306


Case  of  supposed  Hydrophobia ,


the  nail  as  if  it  had  been  produced  by  a  dog’s  teeth,  and  slightly
inflamed.  He  complained  of  it  being  very  sore,  and  consequently,
at  five  in  the  evening,  Mr.  Coates  thought  it  advisable  to  call  in
Dr.  Belcome,  and  it  was  his  most  decided  opinion  that  it  wa^  a  very
shocking  case  of  hydrophobia.  Since  that  period  the  youth  has  been
visited  by  various  other  medical  gentlemen  of  our  city,  who  were  of
the  same  opinion  as  Dr.  Belcombe  and  Mr.  Coates.  The  boy  still
continues  in  a  state  of  furious  delirium,  and  we  understand  there
are  very  slight  hopes  indeed  of  the  case.”

A  little  after  3  o’ clock,  p.m.  that  day,  I  arrived  at  the
boy’s  house.  I  found  that  Dr.  Simpson  and  Mr.  Coates,
(whom  I  was  in  hopes  to  have  met  there)  had  just  left  before
my  arrival ;  but  the  attendants  informed  me  that  they  left
the  patient  in  pretty  nearly  the  state  in  which  I  found  him,
and  which  was  as  follows. — He  was  in  a  most  furious  state,
confined  in  a  straight  waistcoat,  and  his  legs  tied  to  the  bed
posts ;  at  intervals  he  made  frantic  attempts  to  release  him¬
self.  In  spite  of  the  restraint  he  was  under,  persons  were
obliged  to  hold  him  down  by  the  arms ;  he  spat  quantities  of
frothy  saliva  in  every  direction,  and  at  every  one  who  at¬
tempted  to  approach  him ;  there  was  a  wild  and  sparkling
expression  of  his  eyes,  frequent  spasmodic  contraction  of  the
throat,  neck  and  arms,  more  particularly  of  the  left  arm  (it
was  the  thumb  of  the  left  hand  which  had  been  bitten) ;  for  a
few  moments  he  would  remain  quiet,  looking  suspiciously  at
all  around  him,  endeavouring  as  far  as  his  bonds  would  allow  to
crouch  himself  up,  and  then,  on  the  motion  of  any  one  in  the
room,  or  sometimes  upon  a  mere  observation  being  made,  he
would  writhe  about  in  a  frenzy,  with  a  terrific  expression  of
countenance,  using  horrible  language  and  spitting  and  trying
to  attack  any  who  were  near  him.  I  had  walked  into  the
room  nearly  unobserved,  and,  as  I  stood  watching  him,  one  of
the  attendants,  not  knowing  me  and  thinking  I  was  a  medical
man,  accosted  me  thus, — “Well  I  suppose  you  are  another  of
them,  you  all  come  looking  and  gaping  at  him,  but  you  do
him  no  good,  and  all  you  do  only  makes  him  worse.”  I  said
that  I  was  not  a  medical  man,  that  I  had  enquired  before  I
came  whether  I  might  be  permitted  to  see  the  patient,  and
that,  with  the  father’s  consent,  I  would  try  an  experiment
upon  the  boy.  The  father  at  once  granted  his  permission.
On  my  attempting  to  approach  the  boy,  he  conducted  himself
with  the  greatest  violence,  swearing  he  would  bite  me,  and
spitting  at  me  in  fury.  I  asked  some  of  the  attendants  to
stand  a  little  back  from  me.  I  then  fixed  my  eyes  on  the
countenance  of  the  boy ;  for  a  second  or  two  he  stared  at  me
wildly,  and  then  shrunk  from  my  gaze.  In  a  few  minutes  he


by  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson.


30  7


seemed  as  if  he  could  not  keep  his  eyes  off  me,  and  lost
somewhat  of  his  frenzied  appearance.  I  then  began  to  ap¬
proach  him,  extending  my  hand  towards  him.  He  at  first
shrunk  from  me,  and  turned  his  back  to  me  as  far  as  he  was
able.  But  in  a  short  time  he  began  to  say,  “  Oh  that  is  nice
and  cool,  you  rub  nice  olive  oil  over  me ;”  and  continued
repeating  these  and  similar  expressions  in  a  quiet  voice,
though  the  movement  of  any  one  still  seemed  to  .arouse  and
excite  him,  and  he  would  spit  at  them  if  they  approached.
He  however  gradually  got  quiet  and  was  soon  perfectly  con¬
trollable.  I  had  his  hands  loosened;  and  sat  on  his  bed  by  his
side,  making  passes  over  him.  I  observed  for  some  time
twitchings  and  contractions  of  the  muscles  of  the  neck  and
face,  arms  and  back.  I  asked  him  if  he  suffered  any  pain.
He  said  he  had  a  burning  heat  in  his  head,  and  in  the  pit
of  his  stomach,  attended  with  pain  there ;  aching  pains  also
in  his  limbs  and  back,  and  pain  in  the  thumb,  which  was
rather  red  and  inflamed  (on  the  part  which  had  been  injured)  ;
but  he  said,  that  the  “  olive  oil,”  I  rubbed  over  him  was
taking  away  all  his  pains.  I  continued  this  process  until  he
said  he  was  quite  easy,  and  I  observed  no  more  contractions
of  the  muscles  of  the  throat,  &c.  When  I  first  saw  him,  he
called  perpetually  for  water,  on  which  being  presented  to
him  in  a  tin,  he  seized  the  tin  convulsively  with  his  teeth,
and,  on  attempting  to  drink  the  water,  sometimes  did  so
without  much  difficulty,  at  others  ejected  it.  I  gave  him
small  quantities  of  water  repeatedly  after  I  had  continued
the  passes  for  about  twenty  minutes.  I  made  passes  over  the
water  also,  and  he  called  it  nice  sherry  wine,  and,  if  I  omitted
to  mesmerise  the  water,  he  would  request  me  to  put  a  little
sherry  into  it.  He  then  drank  without  any  spasm,  and  took
the  water  quite  quietly.  I  remained  with  him  two  hours
after  I  had  obtained  this  control  over  him,  during  which  time
he  was  a  little  excited  like  a  person  who  was  slightly  intoxi¬
cated;  but  was  perfectly  quiet  and  controllable.  He  did  not
like  the  doctors  to  be  mentioned.  He  said,  he  should  like  to
rub  them  over  with  sulphuric  acid, — that  would  warm  their
jackets ;  and  give  them  a  pound  of  sulphur  internally,  and
then  set  them  alight :  they  would  then  know  what  burning
pains  they  had  given  him  in  his  head  and  stomach.

On  Saturday,  5th  August,  I  called  on  Mr.  Coates,  and
we  went  to  see  the  boy  together.  We  understood  that  he
had  a  violent  paroxysm  for  some  time  after  I  left  him,  during
which  he  repeatedly  requested  them  to  send  for  me,  and  the
attendants  attributed  the  attack  to  the  annoyance  he  felt  at
my  leaving  him ;  however,  he  slept  for  several  hours,  longer


308


Case  of  supposed  Hydrophobia,


than  he  had  ever  done  since  his  attack,  and  when  we  arrived
we  found  him  comparatively  quiet.  It  was  thought  advisable
to  let  me  see  the  boy  first  by  myself,  for  fear  the  sight  of
Mr.  Coates  should  bring  on  a  paroxysm.  The  boy  was  a
little  excited,  and  objected  to  the  introduction  of  the  doctor ;
but  I  soon  soothed  him,  and  Mr.  Coates  on  seeing  him  seemed
surprized  at  the  complete  control  and  subjection  he  was  under,
and  expressed  himself  to  me  as  perfectly  satisfied  of  the  in¬
fluence  of  mesmerism  over  the  patient.  I  remarked  that  I
was  sorry  he  was  not  with  me  the  day  before,  as  he  would
then  have  witnessed  a  positive  and  wonderful  effect  upon
the  patient ;  but  I  could  see  little  that  was  striking  in  its
effects  that  day,  as  the  patient  was  comparatively  quiet.  How¬
ever  it  was  quite  evident  the  boy  was  soothed  and  gratified  by
my  making  passes  over  him,  and  it  removed  a  little  aching  of
the  limbs  which  he  complained  of.  I  called  on  Dr.  Simpson
this  day,  and  requested  him  to  go  with  me  on  the  following
day  (Sunday,  6th).  The  patient  had  not  taken  all  the  pills
of  morphia  since  I  saw  him ;  but  I  thought  that  what  he  was
taking  would  be  at  least  useless,  if  not  extremely  injurious
to  him,  and  I  trusted  Dr.  Simpson  would  see  the  propriety
of  suggesting  some  alteration  in  the  doses,  which  would  be
more  agreeable  to  me  than  my  making  any  remarks  on  the
subject  to  Mr.  Coates.  Dr.  Simpson  and  Mr.  Coates  attended
the  patient  on  the  Sunday  with  me,  and  Dr.  Simpson  sug¬
gested  a  reduction  in  the  doses  of  morphia  to  about  one  eighth
the  amount,  that  is  to  say,  to  half  the  quantity,  at  an  interval
of  three  or  four  hours  instead  of  every  half  hour,  and  that
it  should  be  discontinued  altogether  if  the  patient  still  pro¬
gressed  as  he  had  done.  That  night  the  boy  slept  well,  and
was  much  better  the  next  morning.  The  morphia  was  dis¬
continued,  and  the  boy  had  quite  recovered  in  a  few  days.

I  never  put  the  boy  to  sleep  by  the  operation  of  mesmerism ;
the  effects  upon  him  were  these — dissipating  the  spasms  and
contraction  of  the  muscles,  soothing  and  quieting  the  patient,
and  making  him  perfectly  controllable  when  in  a  furious  state
of  delirium,  and  removing  all  pains  from  his  limbs  and  back,
and  the  sense  of  heat  from  the  head  and  stomach,  and  pro¬
ducing  a  tickling  sensation  on  the  skin  that  remained  for
some  hours,  and  also  taking  the  pain  out  of  his  thumb  and
arm  that  he  much  complained  of.  I  met  Mr.  Coates  on  the
Tuesday  or  Wednesday,  when  the  boy  was  pronounced  well
by  him.  He  told  me  then,  that  I  had  had  no  effect  on  the
boy  by  mesmerism  !  because  I  had  not  put  him  to  sleep  !  I
told  him  it  was  useless  arguing  with  one  perfectly  ignorant
upon  the  subject,  but  I  asked  him  whether,  if  he  bled  a


by  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson.


309


person  in  an  inflammation,  or  administered  some  medicine
in  an  acute  disease,  and  an  immediate  abatement  of  the  symp¬
toms  took  place,  would  he  attribute  this  to  the  means  he  had
used  ?  He  replied,  to  be  sure  he  should.  I  said,  for  the
same  reason  I  attribute  this  boy's  cure  to  mesmerism,  and
not  to  morphia,  for  the  effects  wrere  instantaneous ;  and  in  a
few  minutes  I  acquired  an  influence  over  him  that  you  had
not  been  able  to  do  in  four  days  by  the  exhibition  of  all  your
enormous  doses  of  opium.  He  said  the  boy  was  getting  well
when  I  saw  him  !  !  but  was  it  not  strange  that  I  should  hit
upon  the  precise  moment  for  trying  mesmerism  upon  him,
when  the  opium  first  began  to  effect  its  wondrous  cure.  For
it  appeared  to  me  that  Mr.  Coates  considered  the  case  as
hopeless  when  I  first  spoke  to  him  upon  it  (an  hour  or  two
only  before  I  saw  the  boy) .  I  asked  Mr.  Coates  what  he  now
considered  the  case  to  be ;  he  said,  “  one  of  hydrophobia."
If  it  was  indeed  a  case  of  hydrophobia,  then  mesmerism  will
be  the  only  known  means  of  curing  that  direful  malady,  for
I  believe  it  is  not  on  record  that  a  real  case  of  hydrophobia
has  ever  been  cured  by  opium,  though  it  has  been  frequently
tried.  If  it  was  not  hydrophobia,  then  it  was  one  of  mania,
and  I  should  imagine  the  exhibition  of  such  enormous  quan¬
tities  of  opium  in  that  malady  is  rather  an  unusual  practice.

The  impression  on  my  mind  when  I  first  saw  the  boy  was
that  it  was  mania,  and  that  the  hydrophobic  symptoms  had
been  superinduced  by  a  mental  impression  acting  upon  that
supposition.  As  soon  as  I  had  acquired  an  influence  over
him,  I  endeavoured  to  divest  the  boy's  mind  of  that  idea.
I  happily  succeeded  in  this,  and  I  am  not  aware  that  he  ever
exhibited  any  hydrophobic  symptoms  after  (though  he  had
an  attack  of  frenzy),  unless  indeed  an  extraordinary  secretion
of  saliva  mixed  with  a  thick  mucus  could  be  so  considered :
this  subsided  gradually  in  the  course  of  a  few  days.

In  the  first  account,  which  I  suppose  was  published  by
Mr.  Coates,  dated  4th  August,  it  is  evident  (and  that  was
the  day  on  which  I  first  saw  the  boy)  that  he  was  not  very
sanguine  of  a  favourable  issue ;  in  his  second  account,  August
12th,  in  a  letter  to  the  editor  of  the  Yorkshireman ,  he  says,

“  Sir, — Having  recently  met  with  a  case  that  presented  in  a
marked  degree  many  of  the  peculiar  symptoms  of  hydrophobia,
which,  however,  yielded  to  the  means  adopted,  as  almost  to  pre¬
clude  the  idea  of  its  having  really  been  that  disease,  I  have  for¬
warded  to  you  a  brief  history  of  it.

“  On  the  30th  of  July,  I  was  called  to  see  Richard  Archer,  aged
15,  son  of  Mr.  Archer,  of  Dringhouses.  He  complained  of  pains
all  over  him,  restlessness,  and  disturbed  sleep.  I  observed  a  pecu-

VOL.  VI.  Y


310


Case  of  supposed  Hydrophobia ,


liar  fierceness  of  his  eyes,  and  his  answers  were  particularly  quick
and  loud.  I  prescribed  for  him,  and,  on  the  following  morning,
found  that  he  had  passed  rather  a  better  night,  had  been  disturbed
in  his  sleep  by  frightful  dreams,  appeared  very  restless,  had  the
bowels  copiously  moved,  became  rather  unruly,  complained  of  con¬
striction  in  the  throat,  and  difficulty  in  swallowing.  On  the  1st
August,  I  observed  that  his  symptoms  were  much  increased,  and
more  developed  than  before.  He  was  constantly  spitting  viscid
mucus,  and  had  convulsive  spasms  of  the  muscles  and  constriction
of  the  throat,  which  was  drawn  in  different  attitudes  from  the  rigi¬
dity  of  the  muscles  of  the  neck,  shoulders,  and  arms.  I  attempted
to  give  him  a  glass  of  water,  which  he  had  great  aversion  to  ;  but,
on  placing  it  to  his  mouth,  he  made  two  or  three  gulps  in  the
greediest  manner  imaginable,  the  water  being  thrown  back,  from
constriction  of  the  throat,  and  he  fell  back  in  a  violent  convulsive
paroxysm.

“  It  was  from  the  symptoms  which  I  had  now  observed  that  I
was  led  to  investigate  further  into  the  history  of  the  case,  and  was
strongly  impressed  on  my  mind  that  it  exhibited  many  of  the  pecu¬
liar  symptoms  of  hydrophobia.  On  the  patient  being  asked  if  he
had  been  bitten  by  a  dog,  he  stated  that  he  was  bitten  by  one  some
three  months  ago,  and  immediately  pointed  to  a  sore  on  the  thumb
of  the  left  hand.  I  examined  the  sore,  and  found  it  to  be  in  a  state
of  suppuration,  and  that  it  had  the  appearance  of  having  been  done
by  a  dog’s  tooth.  He  complained  of  its  being  very  sore :  his  symp¬
toms  became  much  worse,  and  was  exceedingly  unmanageable.

“  Five  p.m.  Dr.  Belcombe  and  I  visited  him.  He  was  violently
attacked  with  convulsive  contractions  of  the  muscles  of  the  face,
neck,  shoulders,  and  arms  ;  constantly  spitting  mucus,  with  fierce¬
ness  of  the  eyes,  and  he  became  so  unmanageable  as  to  render  it
necessary  that  he  should  be  placed  under  restraint.

“Ten  p.m.  visit.  Still  continued  violent,  with  all  the  symptoms
before  described.

“  August  2,  visit  nine  in  the  morning.  Dr.  Belcombe  and  I  saw
the  patient  again.  He  had  passed  a  very  restless  night,  but  had
slept  sound  from  half-past  seven  until  a  few  minutes  after  nine,  when
he  awoke  and  continued  in  a  violent  mania,  constantly  spitting,  com¬
plaining  of  incessant  thirst,  and  heat  in  the  throat.  Water  was
given,  but  could  not  swallow  the  greater  part  of  it.  In  the  evening
I  found  him  furious,  constantly  spitting  mucus ;  he  had  had  no  sleep
since  nine  in  the  morning,  notwithstanding  the  quantity  of  opium  I
had  prescribed.

August  3,  visit  ten  in  the  morning. — He  had  been  very  restless
the  fore  part  of  the  night,  slept  sound  from  five  until  nine  ;  awoke,
and  was  exceedingly  furious,  constantly  spitting,  with  fierceness  of
the  eyes,  and  snatching  with  the  mouth.

“  Three,  p.m.  visit. — The  bowels  had  been  moved  freely,  and  he
became  calm  and  tractable  so  as  to  admit  of  the  straight  waistcoat
being  removed.  There  were  now  appearances  of  depression,  which,


by  Mr .  H.  S.  Thompson.  311

no  doubt,  arose  from  the  purgative ;  had  slept  two  hours  since  my
visit  in  the  morning.

“  Seven,  p.m.  visit. — Furious  mania ;  spitting  ceased  in  a  great
measure.

“  August  4,  visit. — Still  in  a  furious  state  of  mania  ;  slept  from
three  in  the  morning  until  five ;  complained  of  great  heat  in  the
throat  and  thirst,  constantly  calling  for  water,  which,  on  being
poured  into  his  mouth,  was  mostly  thrown  back  from  constriction  of
the  throat;  frequently  spitting  a  thick  mucus.

“  Nine,  p.m.  visit. — Dr.  Belcome  and  I  saw  the  patient,  who
continued  in  a  furious  state.

“  August  5,  visit  at  eleven  in  the  morning. — Continued  furious
during  the  former  part  of  the  night;  slept  sound  from  five  until
twelve;  awoke,  and  was  much  better;  furious  mania  had  abated;
became  quite  collected,  recollecting  the  whole  treatment  he  had  gone
through.  Answered  any  question  correctly;  felt  considerable  itching
in  the  skin,  and  expressed  himself  much  better;  drank  plentifully
of  cold  water.

“  August  6,  visit. — Had  been  a  little  delirious,  but  nothing  to
speak  of;  was  perfectly  calm  and  collected;  the  expression  of  his
countenance  and  eyes  had  become  more  natural;  in  fact,  he  had  con¬
tinued  to  improve  since  the  5th,  on  which  day  he  became  more
tranquil,  and  slept  seven  hours,  no  doubt  the  effects  of  the  morphia,
&c.,  administered  to  him.

“  August  7. — Continued  improving,  recollecting  every  thing  that
had  been  done  for  him  during  his  illness;  convalescent.

“  Of  course,  it  is  impossible  to  decide  positively  whether  or  not
this  was  really  hydrophobia;  yet,  as  I  am  not  aware  that  any  other
disease  ever  exhibited  the  peculiar  symptoms  that  were  present  in
this  case,  and  as  it  followed — I  will  not  say,  arose — in  consequence

of  the  bite  of  the  dog,  I  am  at  a  loss  what  to  call  it.

“William  Coates.

“  6,  New  Bridge-street,  York.”

I  think  it  is  a  pity  (since  he  was  so  positive  that  the  mor¬
phia  had  performed  the  cure)  that  he  did  not  publish  the
whole  of  the  treatment  for  the  benefit  of  others  who  may  be
similarly  afflicted.  What  the  nature  of  the  complaint  was  I
do  not  presume  to  give  an  opinion ;  I  had  never  examined  a
case  of  hydrophobia,  and  all  I  knew  of  the  malady  was  from
what  I  had  read  on  the  subject.  These  were  doubtless  some
of  the  symptoms  of  hydrophobia :  the  contraction  of  the  mus¬
cles,  and  spasms  when  swallowing  or  attempting  to  swallow ;
the  slightest  irritation  of  any  sort  often  causing  a  paroxysm ;
the  enormous  secretion  of  saliva;  and  the  manner  in  which
the  patient  conducted  himself.  There  are  other  symptoms
equally  indicative  of  hydrophobia,  of  which  I  was  not  aware
at  the  time,  viz. :  such  extreme  sensitiveness  to  light  or  to  the
slightest  breath  of  air,  that  either  seems  to  give  intense  pain


312  Appendix  to  Dr.  Elliot  son’s  Case  of  Cure  of  Cancer

and  annoyance,  and  is  frequently  sufficient  to  cause  a  pa¬
roxysm.  Whether  the  patient  exhibited  these  symptoms  I
cannot  say;  I  certainly  observed  that  he  was  excited  by
persons  moving  about,  but  I  did  not  observe  in  him  any
dislike  to  light,  or  any  annoyance  from  air  blowing  upon  him,
though  he  was  extremely  sensitive  to  the  mesmeric  passes
when  I  first  commenced  them.

In  conclusion,  whatever  the  opinion  of  others  may  be,
whether  it  was  hydrophobia  or  whether  it  was  not,  1  feel
pretty  certain  that,  if  mesmerism  had  not  been  tried,  the  poor
boy  would  have  furnished  the  papers  with  “  a  melancholy  case
of  death  by  hydrophobia.”

Henry  S.  Thompson.

Fairfield,  near  York.

***  Mr.  Coates  must  be  as  brilliant  a  genius  as  Mr.
Greenhow,  the  attendant  of  Miss  Martineau:  see  No.  IX. —
Zoist.


XI.  Appendix  to  Dr.  Elliotson’s  Case  of  the  Cure  of  Cancer.

I  have  thought  it  advisable  to  procure  certificates  of  Miss
Barber’s  present  state  from  those  gentlemen  who  saw  her
long  ago  and  pronounced  her  case  to  be  cancer.

From  Dr.  ASHBURNER,  (p.  227.)

“  65,  Grosvenor  Street,
“  22nd  Sept.,  1848.

“  My  dear  Dr.  Elliotson, — I  have  been  to-day  to  see  Miss  Barber,
your  most  interesting  case  of  cancer  of  the  right  breast,  cured  by
mesmerism.  Having  been  allowed,  by  your  kindness,  to  watch  the
progress  of  the  disease  under  your  treatment,  I  have  repeatedly
spoken  of  it  to  medical  men,  but  as  the  world  yet  remains  a  large
lunatic  asylum,  and  as  our  profession  gloats  in  its  own  ignorance,  I
have  failed  in  my  attempts  to  draw  attention  to  it.  There  can  be  no
doubt  of  the  nature  of  Miss  Barber’s  case.  When  in  the  cancer
ward  of  the  Middlesex  Hospital,  a  woman  is  seen  with  such  a  breast
as  she  had,  accompanied  by  such  a  swollen  state  of  arm  and  hand,
and  such  indurated  glands  in  the  axilla,  the  pupils  would  be  taught,
that  there  remains  no  hope  of  recovery  for  her ;  she  is  beyond  the
reach  of  operation.  Then,  when  we  reflect  on  the  experience  of  the
best  surgeons  on  the  subject  of  the  recurrence  of  the  disease  in  the
apparently  most  favourable  cases,  after  the  operation  of  removing
the  breast,  we  must  be  led  to  congratulate  you  on  an  additional  most
important  contribution  to  medical  science  by  the  cure  of  Miss  Barber.
When  I  first  saw  the  breast  in  this  case,  it  was  a  large  scirrhus,
with  retracted  nipple  and  indurated  axillary  glands.  There  was  a


Appendix  to  Dr.  Elliotson}s  Case  of  Cure  of  Cancer.  313

cancerous  condition  of  skin  that  cannot  be  mistaken  by  any  one  ac¬
customed  to  see  the  disease,  so  that  there  could  be  no  possible  doubt
on  the  matter.  During  the  progress  of  the  cure,  the  induration  van¬
ished,  and  the  skin  became  soft,  the  tumefaction  of  the  hand  and  arm
subsided,  and  to-day  I  find  the  breast  quite  flat,  with  a  very  slight
hardness  of  the  skin  round  the  nipple,  where  a  scar  remains  from  the
excoriation  that  existed  at  one  time,  occupying  the  position  of  the
areola.  The  hardness  of  the  gland  in  the  arm  pit  is  gone,  and  Miss
Barber  is  cured, — a  fact,  about  which  there  is  no  mistake.  I  can¬
not  help  sympathizing  with  you  in  your  joyful  gratification  at  this
result,  establishing  your  right  to  a  victory  over  a  disease  which  has
been  always  deemed  incurable.  I  pity  the  man  who  cannot  rejoice
at  your  success.  Let  the  orators  of  the  College  of  Physicians  prattle
in  their  pretty  Latin  against  mesmerism  and  mesmerists.  Such
cases  as  these  form  the  best  answer  to  their  ignorance  and  folly,  and
establish  the  real  dignity  of  the  profession, — a  dignity  for  the  main¬
tenance  of  which  the  college  was  instituted,  and  the  oath  is  adminis¬
tered  to  its  members.  You  have  vindicated  that  dignity  by  your
labours  in  the  cause  of  mesmerism,  and  long  may  you  enjoy  the
triumphant  satisfaction  which  you  must  feel,  mingled  although  it
may  be  with  melancholy  at  the  stolidity,  or  something  worse,  of
those  physicians  who  refuse  their  assent  to  the  truth,  and  who  can¬
not  respond  to  that  eloquent  appeal  you  addressed  to  them  in  your
Harveian  Oration.  Let  effeminate  minds  throw  their  silly  insults
at  you.  It  is  but  a  paltry  persecution  levelled  at  a  man  of  whom  it
will  be  said,  as  Charles  Fox  said  on  the  analogous  case  of  the  per¬
secution  of  Locke  by  the  University  of  Oxford;  they  wronged  a
man  ‘  who  is  now  their  chiefest  glory.’

“  I  remain,  my  dear  Dr.  Elliotson,

“Yours  sincerely,

“John  Ashburner.”


From  Dr.  ENGLEDUE,  (p.  227.)

“  I  hereby  certify  that  I  saw  Miss  Barber,  in  1845,  and  that  I
carefully  examined  the  state  of  her  breast.  It  presented  all  the
characteristic  signs  of  cancer,  and  I  did  not  entertain  a  doubt  on

“I  have  just  seen  her  again,  and  I  find  the  disease  entirely  re¬
moved.  The  breast  appears  to  me  to  be  entirely  absorbed.  The
skin  is  perfectly  flat  and  smooth,  and  viewing  it  from  a  short  dis¬
tance  and  contrasting  it  with  the  opposite  side,  any  person  would
suppose  that  the  gland  had  been  removed  by  surgical  operation.

“W.  C.  Engledue,  M.D.


“  Soutlisea,  Sept.  25th,  1848.”


314  Appendix  to  Dr.  Elliot  sorts  Case  of  Cure  of  Cancer.

From  Mr.  SYMES,  (p.  227.)

“  77,  Grosvenor  Street.

“  Sept.  26th,  1848.

“  My  dear  Dr.  Elliotson, — I  have  this  day  examined  the  breast
of  Miss  Barber,  in  which  a  cancer  formerly  existed.  The  cancer  is
now  cured.  The  breast  has  shrunk  away,  leaving  only  a  little  thick¬
ened  skin  around  the  nipple,  perfectly  moveable  upon  the  ribs.
There  is  no  tumor  whatever.

“  I  remain,

“  Yours  very  sincerely,

“E.  S.  Symes.”


From  Mr.  DECIMUS  HANDS,  (p.  227.)

“My  dear  Dr.  Elliotson, — On  leaving  you  this  morning,  I  has¬
tened  to  visit  Miss  Barber,  and  words  are  inadequate  to  convey  my
surprize  and  delight,  after  the  strictest  investigation,  at  not  being
able  to  discover  the  slightest  appearance  or  vestige  of  cancer;  whereas,
when  I  last  saw  the  case,  there  was  a  large  hard  tumor.  The  result
must  be  sufficient  evidence  to  any  sincere  and  candid  enquirer  as  to
the  efficacy  of  the  means  employed;  as  for  other  persons,  we  know
that  if  one  came  from  the  dead  they  would  not  believe.

**  I  remain,  my  dear  Dr.  Elliotson,

“  Yours  very  truly,

“  September  28,  1848.  “D.  Hands.

“  22,  Thayer  Street,  Manchester  Square.”


These  four  gentlemen  are  all  well  acquainted  with  mes¬
merism,  and  prescribe  it.  The  three  whose  certificates  follow
are  not  mesmerists.  Mr.  Powell  has  witnessed  it,  and  now
perfectly  admits  its  truth,  but  that  is  all :  Mr.  Samuel  Cooper,
I  believe,  has  never  seen  a  mesmeric  phenomenon :  nor  had
Mr.  Brown  till  the  day  on  which  he  kindly  wrote  the  certi¬
ficate.  The  conduct  of  all  three  gentlemen  has  been  most
handsome,  liberal,  and  rational.  I  cannot  thank  them  too
warmly.

From  Mr.  POWELL,  (p.  217.)

"  16,  Great  Coram  Street,
“  Sept.  26th,  1848.

“  Dear  Sir, — It  was  with  great  satisfaction  I  saw  to-day  how  en¬
tirely  Miss  Barber  had  lost  a  disease,  which  some  years  ago  I  had
considered  incurable.  I  do  not  exactly  remember  the  date,  but  I
suppose  fully  five  years  back,  I  examined  her  breast  on  account  of
her  complaining  of  a  lump,  and  such  acute  stabbing  pains  in  it  at
night,  that  she  could  not  sleep.  I  considered  it  to  be  scirrhus,  and
that  the  only  cure,  and  in  fact  only  chance  of  saving  her  life,  was  to
have  it  removed  by  the  knife.  She  was  seen  by  one  or  two  surgeons
of  more  eminence  than  myself,  who,  I  understood,  gave  a  similar


Appendix  to  Dr.  Elliotson’ s  Case  of  Cure  of  Cancer.  315

opinion.  She  saw  you,  I  believe,  at  the  same  time,  and  I  know
that  your  opinion  was  that  it  was  scirrhus,  and  I  understood  you
recommended  her  to  be  mesmerised,  so  as  to  enable  her  to  undergo
the  operation.  She  was,  at  that  time,  in  very  ill  health,  very  thin,
with  a  quick,  irritable  pulse,  frequent  attacks  of  bronchitis,  sometimes
with  pleurisy.  The  breast  was  painful  whenever  her  arm  was  moved,
and  a  distinct,  very  hard  tumor, — and  at  the  time  I  saw  it,  moveable
—was  to  be  felt  in  the  right  breast ;  to  the  best  of  my  recollection
it  was  the  size  of  a  small  egg,  but  it  is  so  long  since,  that  I  do  not
remember  the  size.  After  she  had  been  mesmerised  for  some  months,
I  saw  her,  and  found  her  general  health  very  much  improved  and
she  said  there  was  less  pain  in  the  breast.  The  mesmerism  just
affected  her,  but  only  to  send  her  to  sleep  for  a  few  seconds.  I  saw
her  once  after  this  and  she  told  me  she  was  much  better,  but  I  did
not  see  the  breast,  and  I  have  not  seen  her  since  till  to-day.  Allow
me,  once  more,  to  express  my  gratification  at  the  successful  result
of  this  case,  and

“  Believe  me,  yours  faithfully,

“  To  J.  Elliotson,  M.D.”  “  James  Powell.


From  Mr.  BROWN,  (p.  216.)

“  27,  Oxford  Square,  Hyde  Park,
“  September  26th,  1848.

«  My  dear  Sir,— About  five  years  since,  I  saw  your  patient,  Miss
Barber,  and  found  her  suffering  from  scirrhus  of  the  right  breast.  1
have  seen  her  this  day  and  can  find  no  remains  of  the  disease,  and

she  is,  in  other  respects,  in  good  health.

“  I  am,  dear  Sir,

“  Yours  faithfully,

“To  Dr.  Elliotson.”  “ I-  B.  Brown,  F.R.C.S.


From  Mr.  S.  COOPER,  F.R.S.,  late  Prof lessor  of  Surgery  in  University  College,
and  Life  Member  of  the  Council ,  and  an  Examiner  of  the  Royal  College  of
Surgeons,  (p.  217.)

“My  dear  Sir, — I  have  examined  the  breast  of  Miss  Barber,
residing  at  12,  New  Street,  Dorset  Square,  and  I  find  her  to  be
perfectly  recovered  from  the  painful  tumor  which  she  consulted  me
about  some  years  ago,  and  which  was  then  believed  to  be  of  a  can¬
cerous  nature.

“  I  am,  my  dear  Sir,

“  Yours  very  truly,

“  Samuel  Cooper.

“  Shepperton,  September  28th,  1848.”


In  my  account  of  the  symptoms,  I  omitted  the  swelling
of  the  right  arm  and  hand :  this  existed  when  she  first  called
upon  me  and  was  noticed  by  every  one  :  it  lessened  as  the


316  Appendix  to  Dr.  Eiliotson’s  Case  of  Cure  of  Cancer .

cancer  lessened,  and  ultimately  disappeared.  The  warty  sub¬
stance,  I  find,  had  existed  from  her  earliest  childhood  :  and
under  mesmerism  it  gradually  dropped  off,  particle  by  particle.
Perhaps  mesmerism  would  prove  a  remedy  for  most  warts :
they  are  a  slight  organic  growth,  and,  to  my  own  know¬
ledge,  are  often  readily  removed  by  what  is  termed  charming ,
- — that  is  by  the  influence  of  mere  imagination.  As  regards
the  bleeding  sore  or  excoriation,  induced  by  the  leather :  if  I
had  applied  mesmerised  water  to  it,  or  had  mesmerised  the
ointment,  I  fancy  it  would  soon  have  healed.  In  my  account
of  her  present  state,  I  omitted  to  mention  that  the  skin  is
now  all  smooth  and  moveable,  as  well  as  perfectly  flat.

If  I  could  have  found  time  to  make  passes  myself  over
the  part,  in  her  sleepwaking,  for  about  half  an  hour  daily,
I  do  not  believe  that  five  years  would  have  been  required  for
her  cure.

In  my  account  of  the  phenomena,  I  should  have  stated  that,
in  the  deep  sleepwaking  (p.  229)  she  remembers  everything
which  occurred  at  any  time  in  the  light  sleepwaking ;  but
in  the  light  is  ignorant  of  all  that  occurred  in  the  deep :  just
as  in  the  waking  state,  from  which  the  light  sleep  is  less  re¬
moved  than  the  deep,  she  is  ignorant  of  all  the  occurrences
of  even  the  light  sleepwaking.  The  more  intense  the  mes¬
meric  state  of  patients,  the  greater  in  general  are  the  powers
manifested  in  it.  I  stated  how  readily  she  is  awakened  from
the  light  sleepwaking ;  but  several  transverse  passes  are  re¬
quired  to  bring  her  out  of  the  deep  into  the  light,  and  this
change  may  be  effected  also  by  relaxing  the  stiffened  con¬
dition  of  her  deep  state  through  breathing,  or  touching,  or
making  transverse  passes  before  some  of  the  stiffened  parts.
In  whichever  of  these  modes  the  deep  state  is  removed,  she
fetches  a  sigh  and  goes  into  the  light  state :  from  which  one
pass  will  wake  her  into  her  ordinary  condition.


It  may  be  amusing  to  those  who  have  admired  the  public
language  of  Dr.  Francis  Hawkins  in  reference  to  me  as  a
mesmerist,  to  read  the  letter  which  he,  as  Clerk,  or  Registrar
as  he  is  politely  called,  of  the  College  of  Physicians,  wrote
to  me,  when  it  became  my  turn  to  deliver  the  Harveian
Oration.  When  he  wrote  it,  I  was  as  conspicuous  as  a  mes¬
merist  as  when  he  afterwards  vented  forth  his  abuse.

“  18,  Bolton  Street,  Piccadilly,
“June  26th,  1845.

“  Dear  Sir, — I  am  desired  by  the  President  of  our  College  to
inform  you  that  it  has  devolved  to  your  turn  to  deliver  the  Harveian


Appendix  to  Dr.  Elliotson’s  Case  of  Cure  of  Cancer.  317

Oration  in  the  ensuing  year;  and  he  hopes,  and  I  am  sure  the  wish
will  be  generally  and  strongly  felt,  that  you  will  accept  this  ancient
and  honourable  office.

“It  is  my  duty  to  mention,  (although,  in  your  case,  I  trust  it
is  unnecessary,)  that,  by  a  standing  order  of  the  College,  each
Fellow,  when  thus  informed  by  the  President  that  the  office  of  Har-
veian  Orator  has  fallen  to  his  turn,  must  signify,  within  a  fortnight,
whether  he  accepts  or  declines  it.  If  he  declines  it,  he  must  pay  a
fine  of  £10  to  the  College:  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  a  honorarium
of  £10  for  the  Orator.

“I  hope  I  shall  soon  have  the  satisfaction  of  reporting  to  the
President  that  you  will  oblige  the  College  by  undertaking  to  deliver
the  Oration  on  the  25th  of  June,  in  184G.

“  I  am,  my  dear  Sir,

“  Yours,  very  faithfully,

“  Francis  Hawkins.

“To  Hr.  Elliotson,  F.R.S.,  &c.,  &c.,  &c.”


In  page  237,  at  the  head  of  a  list  of  several  members  of  the
House  of  Commons,  whose  names  occurred  to  me  at  the  moment,  I
placed  a  most  high-minded,  sincere,  estimable,  firm,  acute,  and
indefatigable  nobleman,  who,  alas  !  since  then  has  paid  the  debt
of  nature.  In  his  place  I  may  substitute  another  nobleman,— Lord
Adare,  who  has  advocated  mesmerism,  on  all  occasions,  from  the
day  on  which,  some  years  ago,  he  brought  a  letter  of  introduction
to  me  from  Lord  Ross,  the  proximate  President  of  the  Royal  Society,
who  had  been  greatly  struck  with  mesmeric  facts  which  I  demon¬
strated  to  him  at  my  house.

The  necessary  mention  of  the  decease  of  Lord  George  Bentinck
renders  it  impossible  for  me  longer  to  defer  a  duty  towards  a  lady
to  whom  mesmerism  is  greatly  indebted,  though  the  mesmeric  world
know  it  not,  and  who  resembles  her  lamented  brother  in  all  his  ex¬
cellent  qualities,  as  the  honour  of  an  unvarying  friendship  for  ten
years  enables  me  well  to  know.  I  may  be  doing  what  is  not  quite
agreeable  to  her  ladyship’s  feelings  ;  but  justice  must  one  day  be
done  her,  as  it  has  been  done  to  Lady  Mary  Wortley  Montague
who  set  herself  in  opposition  to  the  prejudices  of  the  medical  pro¬
fession  and  overcame  them  for  the  good  of  mankind  after  much
abuse.  I  am  the  most  proper  person  to  set  the  example  of  doing
justice  to  Lady  Mary  Bentinck  ;  and  I  shall  do  it  now,  as  in  the
course  of  nature  I  shall  be  the  first  to  die ;  and  symptoms,  in  more
organs  of  my  frame  than  one,  remind  me  that  in  the  midst  of  life
I  am  in  death,  and  that  I  stand  in  jeopardy  every  hour.

After  supposing,  from  hearsay,  that  mesmerism  was  a  delusion,
she  determined  at  my  instance  to  witness  it  and  judge  for  herself  ;
at  once  saw  it  was  no  delusion,  but  a  great  reality ;  and  from  that
time  has  practised  it  upon  the  poor,  and  defended  it  and  promoted
it  in  every  way.  She  resolved  to  do  her  best  towards  the  performance.

VOL.  vi.  z


818  Books  received,  Notices  to  Correspondents,  fyc.

of  a  great  surgical  operation  in  the  insensibility  induced  by  it.  She
obtained  from  Mr.  William  Squire  Ward,  the  surgeon  of  a  little
hospital  to  which  she  belonged,  in  Nottinghamshire,  a  promise  that  he
would  perform  his  next  surgical  operation  in  the  mesmeric  insensi¬
bility,  if  this  was  induced  for  him  and  the  absence  of  danger  insured.
The  next  operation  was  to  be  an  amputation  of  the  leg.

Lady  Mary  wrote  to  me,  and  I  gave  my  opinion  that  an
operation  might  be  performed  with  safety  in  the  mesmeric  insensi¬
bility.  I  then  left  England  for  a  tour  in  Switzerland.  The  special
case  was  sent  with  a  fee  to  Dr.  John  Wilson*  and  another  medical
gentleman  conversant  with  mesmerism,  for  their  written  opinion
of  the  safety  of  the  operation  in  the  mesmeric  sleepwaking.  For¬
tified  with  their  opinions  in  the  affirmative,  Mr.  Ward  consented
to  operate,  though  not  believing  in  the  truth  of  mesmerism.
Indeed  a  gentleman  informed  me  that  he  was  at  a  dinner-party,
when  Mr.  Ward  said  he  was  going  to  operate  in  the  alleged  in¬
sensibility  of  that  absurdity  and  imposition  called  mesmerism,  to
please  a  patient  of  high  rank.  But  Mr.  Topham  mesmerised  the
man  successfully,  and  Mr.  Ward,  to  his  lasting  credit,  not  only
became  a  convert,  but  afterwards,  in  conjunction  with  Mr.  Topham,
drew  up  the  case,  presented  it  to  the  Medical  and  Chirurgical  Society,
and  attended  the  Meeting,  witnessing  its  cruel  reception.

The  first  painless  mesmeric  operation  in  this  country  was,  under
my  direction,  on  Elizabeth  Okey,-)-  but  it  was  only  the  introduction
of  a  seton,  and  attracted  no  notice.  That  for  which  we  are  indebted
to  Lady  Mary  Bentinck  was  one  of  the  operations  termed  capital,  and
excited  the  notice  and  contempt  of  the  medical  profession.  Other
capital  operations  now  followed  both  in  this  and  other  countries.

John  Elliotson.


BOOKS  RECEIVED.

The  Ethnological  Journal.  Three  numbers  for  July,  August,  and  September.
A  few  plain  directions  for  the  Homoeopathic  treatment  and  prevention  of
British  and  Asiatic  Cholera  and  also  Cholerine,  &c.

Speech  of  Sir  William  Molesworth,  Bt.,  M.P.,  in  the  House  of  Commons
on  Tuesday  25th  July,  1848,  on  Colonial  Expenditure  and  Government.

Speech  of  Ralph  Osborne,  Esq.,  M.P.,  on  Mr.  Hume’s  motion  for  Reform
in  Parliament,  July  6,  1848.

Doings  of  a  lunatic  Aristocracy  and  the  subsequent  results  of  Universal
Suffrage  in  the  Moon :  to  which  is  appended  The  Poor  Man’s  Legacy.  By
William  Lovett.

Some  of  the  evils  of  Class  Legislation.  By  Arthur  Trevelyan.

What  is  Religion  ?  The  question  answered.  By  Henry  Colman.

Emigration.  With  Advice  to  Emigrants  :  especially  those  with  small  capital.
Addressed  to  the  Society  for  promoting  Colonization.  By  Captain  Maconochie.
R.N.,  K.  H.

The  Foretic  Journal.  Edited  by  A.  J.  Elis,  B.A.

Some  account  of  Cretinism  and  the  Institution  for  its  cure,  in  the  Abendberg,
near  Interlaken  in  Switzerland.  By  William  Twining,  M.D,  late  of  Baliol
College,  Oxford.

L’ Abendberg,  etablissement  pour  laguerison  et  1’ education  der  Enfans  Cretins,
a  Interlachen,  Canton  de  Berne.  Par  le  D.  Guggenbiihl.

*  p.  230.  f  Numerous  Cases  of  Surgical  Operations  without  Pain ,  fyc.,  p.  65.


Books  received Notices  to  Correspondents ,  tyc,  319


The  Principle  of  Health  Transferable ;  or,  how  to  obtain  immediate  relief
from  pain,  and  a  speedy  cure  in  disease.  Addressed  to  all  who  are  sick  and
suffering.

***  This  little  tract,  by  Mr.  Barth  of  Camden  Town,  is  a  spirited  exhor¬
tation  to  the  afflicted  to  avail  themselves  of  the  ready  and  powerful  aid  of  mes¬
merism  :  and  its  distribution  is  likely  to  be  of  much  use.

The  Philosophy  which  shows  the  Physiology  of  Mesmerism,  and  explains  the
Phenomenon  of  Clairvoyance.  By  T.  H.  Pasley.

***  Our  author  is  a  bold  and  adventurous  man.  Not  content  with  discussing  the
physiology  of  mesmerism,  and  with  offering  a  theory  of  his  own  in  explanation
of  clairvoyance,  Mr.  Pasley  assails  the  whole  range  of  ‘  ‘  established  philosophy,’  ’
and  would  seem  to  think  that  our  great  authorities  in  the  province  of  nature  and
science  have  been  nearly  all  mistaken  from  first  to  last.  “  Bacon,  Newton,  Black,
Reid,  Davy,  & c.,  all  experimented  under  the  most  favourable  auspices,  but
all  on  false  principles11  (p.  13).  “  Modern  philosophy,”  he  says  again,  “is  not

the  philosophy  of  physical  nature.”  The  received  principles  of  attraction  and
gravitation  would,  according  to  Mr.  Pasley,  appear  to  be  an  error  ;  latent  heat
should  be  “  nomenclatured  absurd  heat the  constitution  of  water  proceeds  on
a  different  process  to  that  generally  understood ;  the  theory  of  optics  requires
complete  revision,  and  a  complete  change  of  terms  ;  while  planets  and  comets
are  “  natural  productions,”  at  the  creation  of  which,  our  author,  from  his  inti¬
mate  acquaintance  with  their  composition  and  formation,  would  appear  to  have
been  present  more  than  once.  All  this  is  very  startling  and  daring  :  and  it  only
remains  to  be  added,  that  the  one  great  and  newly-discovered  principle,  by  which
all  nature  is  really  brought  into  action  and  kept  in  being,  is  of  course  the  prin¬
ciple  which  explains  the  passes  of  mesmerism  and  “  bears  so  strongly  and  une¬
quivocally  on  the  physiology  of  clairvoyance.”

For  our  own  parts,  we  are  generally  satisfied  with  walking  in  the  humble  path
of  observing  and  registering  facts,  without  indulging  in  anything  as  to  their
origin  :  at  the  same  time,  if,  as  critics,  we  must  venture  on  an  opinion,  we  are
inclined  to  think  that  the  principle  of  clairvoyance,  when  it  is  discovered,  will  be
found  to  exist  in  strictest  harmony  with  those  great  principles  of  nature  which
the  founders  of  modern  science  have  from  time  to  time  propounded  and  disclosed,
and  not  in  opposition  to  them ;  though,  probably,  certain  laws,  hitherto  un¬
known,  will  be  superadded  in  our  course  to  the  former  stock  of  knowledge  in
immediate  explanation  of  the  phenomena  with  which  they  will  be  seen  to  be  in
consistent  connexion.

Our  readers  are,  perhaps,  by  this  time,  somewhat  curious  to  learn,  what  is
that  discovery,  compared  to  which,  all  our  older  philosophy  “  will  be  valued  by
the  world  as  a  garment  with  more  holes  than  threads.”  Pressure,  “which  has
been  always  looked  upon  as  a  mere  adjunct  to  the  imagined  numerous  powers  of
nature”  (p.  22).  Pressure  is  the  secret.  General  pressure  is  the  principle
that  pervades,  that  rules,  that  connects,  that  explains,  every  thing.  There  is
no  cause  of  motion  but  physical  impulse.  There  is  no  power  but  impulsive
pressure.  Pressure  is  the  cause  of  planetary  and  terrestrial  motion.  A  candle
is  lighted,  or  blown  out,  by  pressure.  “  On  the  meeting  of  certain  clouds,
where  the  gases  could  not  have  equal  elevation,  water  is  formed”  by  pressure :
and  pressure  is,  again,  the  agent  which  explains  the  phenomena  of  clairvoyance.

In  leaving,  however,  the  main  question  to  the  general  philosopher,  and  con¬
fining  ourselves  to  our  own  province,  we  must  first  observe  that  our  author  (who
brings  a  good  deal  of  scientific  knowledge  to  bear  in  support  of  his  hypothesis)
is  not  sufficiently  clear  in  explaining,  how  it  is  that  pressure  acts  through  and
from  the  mesmeric  passes,  and  ultimately  produces  clairvoyance  as  a  result.  We
quite  agree  with  him  in  believing  that  clairvoyance  is  a  “  cerebral  effect.”  We
fully  expect  that  future  discovery  will  confirm  the  not  uncommon  notion,  that
the  brain  is  the  medium,  through  which,  in  a  highly  active  or  exalted  state,  the
facts  and  marvels  of  introvision  and  precision  are  obtained  and  wrought  out ;  but
we  are  not  satisfied  that  Mr.  Pasley  has  proved  his  position  that  “  only  by  pressure,
degress,  and  changes  of  pressure  the  nervous  fluid  acts  on  the  optic  cerebral
organ.”  The  modus  operandi  is  not  established  in  this  case,  even  if  the  general
principle  be  previously  admitted.  Mr.  Pasley  says,  indeed,  that  “the  imme-


320  Books  received Notices  to  Correspondents ,  tyc.

iliate  effect  of  the  passes  is  de-electrization  of  the  nerves,  i.e.  of  their  contents.  ”
In  other  words,  the  nerves  being  denuded  of  impeding  electric  matter,  the
nervous  fluid  is  enabled  to  act  on  the  brain  ;  that  which  reduced  the  exciting
pressure  of  the  brain  is  removed,  and  pressure  has  full  scope ;  while,  every  visual
intercepting  electric  matter  being  also  removed,  the  nervous  fluid  proceeds  con¬
tinuously  from  the  brain  to  the  external  body,  no  matter  how  many  opaque
objects  lie  between, — and  clairvoyance  is  obtained.  All  this  is  very  ingenious
and  clever,  but  requires  more  proof  than  our  author  has  furnished ;  neither  does
he  always  sufficiently  distinguish  between  conjecture  and  fact, — nor  separate  a
premise  that  is  only  assumed  by  himself  from  premises  that  are  universally  ad¬
mitted  by  the  philosophic  world ;  still  it  must  be  said  that  provided  his  first
general  principle  could  obtain  confirmation,  (which,  after  all,  is  the  question,)
his  subsequent  reasoning  respecting  clairvoyance  would  well  merit  consideration.

Mr.  Pasley  says,  “in  the  ordinary  condition,  the  contents  of  the  nerves  may
be  likened  to  milky  water  in  a  barometer  tube ;  in  natural  sleep,  to  the  same,
with  a  less  degree  of  milkiness,  the  latter  subsiding  from  the  ends  to  the  middle
portion  of  the  water ;  and  in  the  clairvoyant  condition  of  the  nerves ,  to  the
milkiness  having  so  completely  subsided  as  to  leave  the  water  above  and  below
the  middle  of  the  tube  transparent.”  (p.  81.)  Where  has  our  author  obtained
the  proof  of  these  statements  ?

At  page  66,  he  gives  us  a  “theory  of  sleep  described  from  immediate  per¬
sonal  observation,”  on  the  occasion  when  a  sudden  slam  of  a  door  drove  away
all  somnolency,  with  particular  sensations.  Surely,  it  is  a  hasty  course  for  a
philosopher  to  generalize  from  one  accidental  circumstance !

At  p.  69,  he  says  that  “a  patient  on  being  awakened  from  mesmeric  sleep
by  demagnetizing  the  extremities  is  rather  debilitated  than  refreshed.”  Is  this
the  case  generally  ?  or  is  it  not  rather  an  exception  ?  At  any  rate,  can  it  be
affirmed  as  a  rule  ?

Again  he  says,  that  to  conduct  “  the  passes  from  head  to  foot  is  unscientific,
and  might  be  prejudicial :  the  central  region  of  the  body  should  be  considered
the  mesmeric  insuperable  line.”  (p.  69.)  Surely  our  author  is  too  hastily  op¬
posing  experience,  and  establishing  a  general  rule  for  the  convenience  of  a  par¬
ticular  hypothesis  !

We  have  thought  it  our  duty  to  say  these  few  words  on  a  treatise,  which
from  its  title  has  probably  attracted  some  little  attention  in  the  mesmeric  world.
Clairvoyance  is  a  great  fact  in  nature,  respecting  which  none  but  those  who
decline  all  personal  inquiry  into  the  subject  can  much  longer  entertain  any  rea¬
sonable  doubt.  Still  it  is  surrounded  with  sei'ious  difficulties,  both  practically
and  theoretically ;  it  is  constantly  attended  by  imposture  and  exaggeration  ;  it  is
too  often  studied  by  those  who  make  not  a  pretence  to  philosophic  precision
or  capability  ;  and  weak  men  and  artful  women  are  for  ever  bringing  it  into  dis¬
credit  and  contempt.  But  it  remains  a  great  truth  in  physics  ;  and  any  contri¬
bution  towards  a  better  understanding  of  its  principles  will  be  always  thankfully
received  by  us.  With  this  feeling  we  have  welcomed  Mr.  Pasley  into  the  field  ;
and,  while  we  respect  him  for  his  scientific  attainments, — for  his  boldness,  his
truthfulness  and  his  zeal,  and  have  given  his  arguments  an  honest  perusal,  we
could  have  wished  to  perceive  on  his  part  a  little  more  humility  and  self-distrust,
— a  little  more  caution  in  the  enunciation  of  his  theories, — and  a  little  more  care
in  the  arrangement  of  his  evidence, — especially  when  it  is  borne  in  mind  from
whom  it  is  that  he  has  not  scrupled  to  dissent, — even  (to  use  his  own  language)
from  “the  ancient  and  modern  fathers  of  science”  themselves.

G.  S.

NOTICES  TO  CORRESPONDENTS.

We  regret  the  want  of  room  compels  us  to  postpone  till  next  number  a  very
valuable  and  voluminous  paper  from  Mr.  Parsons,  of  Brighton ;  as  well  as  one
of  great  interest  from  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson,  to  whose  intelligence,  power,  and
indefatigable  exertion  we  owe  so  much :  an  Essay  on  the  Ancient  and  Magic
Crystal,  and  its  probable  Connexion  with  Mesmerism :  Accounts  of  several  Pain¬
less  Teeth  Extractions  ;  an  Original  Letter  of  Gall’s,  furaished  to  us  by  Mr.
Noel,  whose  proffered  communication  we  shall  be  most  happy  to  receive;  an
important  case  from  Mr.  Timmins,  at  Cheltenham  ;  and  some  others.


THE  ZOIST.


No.  XXIV.


JANUARY,  1849.


I.  Cure  of  Cataleptic  Insanity  through  Mesmerism,  with
interesting  Phenomena.  By  Mr.  Parsons,  Boyal  Marine
Library,  Brighton.

Sir, — I  forward  the  particulars  of  a  curious  case,  which
I  hope  will  be  found  sufficiently  interesting  to  deserve  a  place
in  your  journal  of  mesmeric  cures  and  experiences.

It  was  on  Monday  the  8th  of  May,  at  12  o’clock,  that
I  first  went  to  see  a  lad,  whose  peculiar  illness  had  much  in¬
terested  the  medical  attendants  who  were  endeavouring  to
cure  him.  Mr.  Wilton  was  the  apothecary  who  had  the  care
of  him  from  the  beginning,  and  Dr.  King  was  the  physician
whose  aid  had  been  called  in.  From  the  latter  gentleman
I  had  heard  many  particulars  which  made  him  and  myself
class  the  case  with  those  in  which  mesmerism  had  been  suc¬
cessful  when  other  means  had  failed ;  and  he  much  wished
that  I  should  make  trial  of  it,  as  all  their  skill  had  been  ex¬
hausted  without  doing  any  good ;  on  the  contrary,  the  lad
was  evidently  sinking.  His  disease  was  what  I  will  desig¬
nate  cataleptic  insanity,  and  was  brought  upon  him  by  the
following  circumstances.

He  had  been  for  some  months  what  is  called  a  “  pupil
teacher”  in  the  Bev.  Mr.  Drummond’s  St.  John’s  Schools,
where  several  hundred  poor  children  receive  instruction.  The
boy  was  very  intelligent  and  ambitious  of  distinction,  and
had  much  interested  those  who  have  the  management  of  the
schools,  by  his  conduct  generally,  as  well  as  by  his  zeal  and
ability.  His  health  had  been  suffering  in  consequence  of
close  application,  so  that  he  had  been  under  medical  treat¬
ment  occasionally  for  several  months.  But  what  I  attributed
his  illness  to,  more  than  to  the  close  application,  was  an
VOL.  vi.  a  A


322  Cure  of  Cataleptic  Insanity  through  Mesmerism,

anxiety  occasioned  by  the  wish  he  had  most  at  heart  being
disappointed  or  so  hopelessly  deferred  as  to  amount  to  a  dis¬
appointment.  He  had  expected  that  he  should  be  perma¬
nently  and  regularly  engaged  as  a  salaried  tutor  in  the  school,
for  hitherto  his  services  had  been  gratuitous ;  the  premium
in  expectation  being  his  engagement  when  he  had  become
qualified  for  it.  His  mother  was  very  poor,  and  he  felt  that
she  could  not  keep  him  much  longer  without  some  assistance
from  himself ;  and,  he  being  a  boy  of  a  proud  disposition  with
much  natural  refinement,  this  wras  a  continual  weight  upon
his  mind,  and  brought  on  an  attack  of  liver  complaint,  which
he  had  been  suffering  from  during  the  month  previous  to  his
last  illness.  He  had  an  engagement  to  read  for  an  hour  a
day  to  an  invalid,  (his  only  remunerating  labour.)  About
this  time  his  mind  was  still  more  excited  by  the  expected
visit  of  an  inspector,  who  was  coming  officially  to  examine
the  schools  and  test  the  capabilities  of  the  teachers  by  the
progress  of  the  children.  This  he  had  looked  forward  to
with  anxious  hope  as  an  occasion  of  distinguishing  himself
and  thus  obtaining  promotion.  On  the  day  the  inspector
came,  he  had  been  occupied  closely  with  his  class,  preparing
them  for  the  examination,  had  left  the  school  too  late  to  go
home  for  his  dinner,  and  gone  instead  to  read  for  an  hour  to
the  invalid.  He  then  returned  home,  complaining  of  his  head ;
but,  before  he  could  take  any  refreshment,  a  message  arrived
requiring  his  presence  at  the  school.  The  inspector  had
arrived ;  the  boy  went ;  at  once  had  to  undergo  a  harassing
examination,  both  of  his  class  and  of  himself;  and  was  so
prostrated,  by  the  fatigue  and  excitement,  that  he  lost  him¬
self,  and  was  unable  to  answer  questions  of  the  simplest
kind  and  which  he  was  fully  equal  to  at  other  times.  The
boy  returned  to  his  mother  completely  knocked  up ;  his  mind
humbled  and  crushed  to  the  last  degree,  and  his  body  in
pain.  He  complained  of  severe  pain  in  his  head,  and  went
to  lie  down  on  his  bed ;  but  had  not  been  there  long  be¬
fore  he  was  very  sick.  His  mother  was  going  out  for  Mr.
Wilton,  when  she  was  arrested  by  hearing  a  loud  scream
from  him  :  she  went  up,  and  found  him  doubled  up  in  a  fit,
his  legs  and  arms  contracted,  and  his  face  and  hands  almost
black.  She  called  to  him,  and  he  seemed  somewhat  to  re¬
vive  ;  but  from  that  time  he  was  continually  either  cataleptic
or  insane.  The  usual  course  of  his  attack  was  this  : — He
would  rave  of  different  subjects,  walk  about  the  house,  chiefly
imagining  himself  in  the  school ;  or  he  would  mutter  chapters
of  the  bible,  preach  sermons,  and  in  various  other  ways  de¬
monstrate  his  maniacal  condition.  This  would  last  for  an


by  Mr.  Parsons ,  Royal  Marine  Library,  Brighton.  323

hour  or  more,  in  which  state  he  walked  firmly  and  briskly
about ;  but,  towards  the  close  of  the  maniacal  state,  twitch-
ings  in  the  knees  would  give  warning  he  was  about  to  fall,
and  down  he  would  drop,  utterly  collapsed  and  flaccid;  so
that,  if  he  went  off  while  sitting  in  a  chair,  his  head  would
hang  down  to  the  floor,  while  he  still  retained  his  sitting  pos¬
ture  with  the  lower  limbs  and  lower  part  of  the  body.  In
this  condition,  which  lasted  only  a  few  minutes,  he  was  sen¬
sible,  but  utterly  without  strength :  he  would  speak  in  the
feeblest  whisper  to  his  mother  what  he  wished  to  say.  Then
the  spasmodic  stage  came  on,  in  which  he  would  remain
sometimes  rigid  for  hours ;  sometimes  convulsed  violently  ;
often  purely  cataleptic,  the  whole  body  plastic  and  easily
controlled,  but  remaining  fixed  in  whatever  position  he  was
placed.  After  a  time  the  mania  would  come  on,  and  the  same
order  of  symptoms  recur  continually.  Thus  had  he  been
gradually  getting  worse  for  six  weeks.

When  I  went  up  stairs  I  found  him  in  bed.  Dr.  King  was
expected;  but,  as  I  had  waited  some  minutes,  I  determined
to  begin  at  once.

His  appearance  was  highly  interesting.  The  head,  which
had  been  shaved  when  he  was  first  attacked,  was  remarkably
well  formed  and  developed ;  the  countenance,  very  intellec¬
tual  ;  the  forehead,  broad ;  and  the  features,  very  regular
and  handsome.  I  should  have  thought  him  a  pretty  young
woman,  twenty  years  of  age,  (he  is  between  14  and  15  ;)
and  the  strait-waistcoat  which  he  wore,  and  which  was  full
in  the  bosom,  completed  the  resemblance.  The  strait-waist-
coat  was  not  controlling  him,  the  hands  being  free ;  fair
feminine  hands  with  taper  fingers.

He  was  quiet  when  I  entered  the  room,  but  soon  began
to  mutter  fast,  and  presently  to  sing  “  Twinkle,  twinkle,
little  star,”  in  a  childish  way,  as  if  he  was  imitating  an  in¬
fant  ;  this  was  followed  by  “  Greenland’s  Icy  Mountains,”
in  the  same  style.  His  face  was  turned  rather  away  from
me  as  he  lay  on  his  back,  and  he  took  no  notice  of  me  nor
of  what  I  did.  His  eyes  were  half  closed,  and,  as  they  never
moved,  I  believe  they  were  unconscious.

I  mesmerised  him  by  passes  for  more  than  an  hour ;  he
lay  quiet  all  the  while ;  but  his  condition  did  not  appear
altered.  Dr.  King  came  in  before  I  concluded,  and  all  pre¬
sent  agreed  that  he  had  never  been  known  to  lie  so  quiet  for
half  the  time  he  had  now  done.

He  has  taken  aconite  and  digitalis  during  his  illness,  and
he  appeared  under  the  influence  of  the  latter  drug.  I  left

A  A  2


324  Cure  of  Cataleptic  Insanity  through  Mesmerism ,

him  without  perceiving  that  I  had  produced  any  mesmeric
effect  on  him,  unless  the  unusual  tranquillity  was  such.

At  six  in  the  evening  Mr.  Wilton's  assistant  came  to
me ;  the  mother  had  sent  to  him  in  great  distress  :  the  boy
had  waked  up  about  four  o'clock,  and  dressed  himself  in  her
clothes,  and  was  walking  about  the  house  with  a  bonnet  on
and  a  parasol  over  his  head,  and  she  could  do  nothing  with
him.*  I  could  not  immediately  leave  home ;  and  when  I  went
to  him  he  had  dressed  himself  in  his  own  clothes  again,  all
but  the  bonnet,  which  he  still  retained  when  I  entered.  This

he  took  off,  saying,  “  Dear  me  !  what  could  Miss  D - mean

by  dressing  me  up  in  this  ridiculous  manner?"  He  now
dressed  himself  entirety,  put  on  his  gloves,  and  rushed  up
stairs  suddenly  for  his  hat ;  his  mother  and  a  young  woman
following  him  in  great  perplexity.  He  put  on  his  hat,  took
his  cane  under  his  arm,  and  with  a  most  magnificent  strut,
and  a  volume  of  Shakspere  in  his  hand,  paced  up  and  down
the  room,  the  very  incarnation  of  Self-esteem.  From  time  to
time  he  startled  us  by  giving  smart  blows  suddenly  with  his
cane  upon  the  wainscot  or  chairs,  for  the  correction  of  ima¬
ginary  boys,  accompanied  with  arrogant  reproofs.  He  took
no  notice  of  any  one,  but  if  any  one  touched  him  he  gave  a
strange  cry ;  so  they  got  carefully  out  of  his  way.  Before
he  had  his  hat  on,  I  put  my  hand  on  his  head,  without  at
all  disconcerting  him ;  but  afterwards,  when  I  attempted  to
detain  him  up  stairs,  as  he  was  about  to  run  down,  by  taking
his  arm,  he  uttered  the  same  wild  cry.

He  continued  to  walk  about  in  this  way,  enacting  the
parts  of  teacher,  master,  and  clergyman,  till  he  betrayed,
by  the  twitchings  of  the  knee,  that  he  was  about  to  fall,
having  been  nearly  four  times  as  long  as  usual  in  his  active
maniacal  state.  He  now  frowned  and  looked  vexed,  evidently
struggling  against  the  weakness  which  was  overpowering  him ;
and,  after  a  staggering  turn  or  two,  sunk  or  melted  down,
supported  by  his  mother  and  the  young  woman,  who  had
watched  for  his  fall.  As  he  was  now  perfectly  limp  and  in¬
sensible,  I  had  him  taken  to  his  bed  and  undressed;  and
again  mesmerised  him.

He  almost  immediately  put  on  a  calm  look,  though  he
roused  once  or  twice,  champing  with  his  lips  and  foaming  at

*  When  speaking  with  Dr.  King  at  the  bedside*  I  several  times  remarked
how  much  I  was  struck  with  his  appearance,  and  that  he  looked  like  a  very  pretty
young  woman.  I  have  no  doubt  that  this  was  unconsciously  apprehended  by  the
brain,  and  led  to  his  dressing  himself  in  female  apparel,  a  thing  he  had  never
before  done.


by  Mr.  Parsons,  Royal  Marine  Library,  Brighton .  325

the  mouth;  and,  at  intervals,  talking  to  the  boys.  I  mes¬
merised  him  for  more  than  an  hour,  and  towards  the  end  of
half  that  time  found  his  arms  cataleptic.  I  lifted  the  arm
up,  and  it  remained  up ;  the  fingers  also,  in  whatever  position
I  twisted  them,  remained  like  wax :  although  after  a  time
the  arm  would  fall  suddenly  quite  relaxed.  As  I  did  not  yet
know  if  this  state  was  the  result  of  the  mesmerism  or  one  of
the  spontaneous  fits  of  catalepsy,  I  thought  it  would  decide
the  matter  if  attraction  existed.  I,  to  ascertain  this,  made
tractive  pluckings  above  the  arm,  without  contact,  and  raised
it  up  by  them.  As  I  continued  this  test,  the  obedience  was
rendered  more  and  more  promptly.*  I  next  pointed  my  hand
towards  the  pit  of  his  stomach,  as  he  lay  in  bed,  at  the  dis¬
tance  of  two  feet :  the  body  was  slowly  raised,  without  any
apparent  effort,  projecting  in  an  arched  form  till  my  hand
was  touched,  when  he  remained  immoveably  fixed  as  long
as  I  held  my  hands  there.  I  now  determined  on  an  experi¬
ment,  so  decisive  as  to  leave  no  doubt.  I  walked  out  of  the
room  into  the  passage,  and  made  tractive  passes  to  draw  him
towards  me  through  the  partition.  When  I  returned  to  the
room,  I  found  him  with  his  hands  thrown  against  the  wain¬
scot,  and  his  body  also  thrown  forward  thither,  in  as  awkward
and  irksome  a  position  as  can  be  imagined,  and  exactly  at
the  spot  to  which  I  had  drawn  him  from  the  passage.  I  now
endeavoured  to  get  him  to  speak,  as  I  deemed  the  obedience
a  sign  that  I  had  him  sufficiently  under  influence.  I  asked,
“  Frank,  how  do  you  feel  V’  He  made  a  hiss  in  reply.  This
was  encouraging.  I  asked  him  several  other  questions,  to
all  of  which  he  evidently  made  an  effort  to  reply  in  the  same
hissing  sounds.  It  now  occurred  to  me  that  the  organs  of
speech  might  be  rigid :  and  I  demesmerised  the  lips,  opened
the  mouth,  and  blew  upon  the  tongue.  The  result  confirmed
my  conjecture,  for  he  could  now  speak  so  as  to  be  understood.
“  How  are  you,  Frank  V*  “  Better,”  was  the  answer.  “  Are
you  comfortable?”  “  Yes.”  “Will  this  do  you  good?”
“  Yes.”  “  Will  it  be  better  to  leave  you  asleep,  or  to  wake
you  before  I  go?”  “Leave  me  asleep.”  “If  I  wake  you
shall  you  wake  sensible ?”  “No.”  “If  I  leave  you  asleep,

will  it  hurt  you  for  others  to  come  near  you  ?”  “  No.”  “  How
long  will  you  sleep  if  I  leave  you?”  “An  hour.”  “How


*  I  here  observed  a  phenomenon  I  had  formerly  heard  of  in  cataleptic  pa¬
tients,  and  in  witches, — that  the  limbs  appeared  to  be  specifically  lighter  than  or¬
dinary  : — if  I  lifted  the  arm,  it  seemed  without  weight,  it  came  up  as  if  it  were
only  the  sleeve  of  the  shirt.  This  I  attribute  to  the  simultaneous  but  unconscious
volition  of  the  patient  with  my  own  efforts.  See  Mr.  Sandby’s  instances,  at
p.  361  of  his  work.


326  Cure  of  Cataleptic  Insanity  through  Mesmerism ,

will  you  wake  ?”  “  Sensible.”  “  Shall  I  come  again  to  you

to-morrow  ?”  “  Yes.”

He  stated  how  long  he  would  remain  sensible  before  the
mania  returned :  but  I  did  not  make  a  note  of  it,  and  forgot
all,  except  that  his  mother  told  me  the  next  day  that  he  had
been  quite  right  to  a  minute  in  the  time  he  had  stated.

I  had  now  achieved  an  important  step  :  the  patient,  hitherto
insane  except  at  lucid  intervals  of  a  few  minutes  in  the  day,
was  now  in  that  state  that  his  sane  powers  of  reflection  could
be  appealed  to  at  will.

Tuesday;  May  9th.  I  found  him  sitting  at  12  o'clock
reading  a  book ;  he  was  dressed,  but  quite  maniacal.  He  pre¬
sently  got  up  with  a  bounce,  and  briskly  opened  the  cupboard
in  the  room.  I  now  made  tractive  passes  from  behind  him ;
he  started  as  soon  as  I  began,  looked  fixed,  and  inclined
towards  me,  moving  his  legs  sideways  till  he  touched  me.
I  made  a  few  passes  over  his  head,  led  him  to  a  chair  and
seated  him.  He  was  beautifully  cataleptic,  and  his  hands,
arms,  body  or  head  obeyed  perfectly  my  own  hands,  so  that
if  I  placed  one  hand  in  front  to  bring  his  body  towards  it, —
and,  while  this  was  moving  towards  it,  placed  the  other  hand
behind  his  head  so  as  not  to  be  observed,  (a  precaution  only
necessary  for  lookers  on,  for  he  could  not  see  at  all  with  his
eyes,)  his  head  would  begin  to  move  back,  while  his  body
still  continued  to  project  forward,  till  both  points  were  reached.
Nor  did  this  depend  on  my  will,  for,  sometimes  when  I  was
not  thinking  of  producing  such  effects,  the  placing  one  of  my
hands  accidentally  near  one  of  his  arms  or  his  head  would
immediately  cause  them  to  swerve  in  that  direction.  It  will
be  seen  in  the  course  of  the  narration  how  wonderfully  this
influence  was  extended.

I  now  had  again  (and  at  all  subsequent  sittings)  to  demes-
merise  the  organs  of  Speech  before  he  could  answer  me.
“  How  are  you  ?”  “  Better.”  “  How  have  you  slept  ?”  “Very
well.”  His  mother  told  me  he  had  slept  all  the  night , — a
thing  he  had  not  done  till  this  time.

Q.  Where  do  you  feel  worst  ?

A.  In  my  head.

Q.  What  part  ?  He  slowly  raised  his  hand  and  placed  it
on  the  back  part  of  his  head,  over  Self-esteem.  My  view
was  yesterday,  as  I  expressed,  that  the  boy’s  Self-esteem
had  been  much  shocked :  the  reasons  I  have  given  in  the
introduction.

Q.  What  made  your  head  bad  ?

A.  Abuse ;  I’ve  been  abused  at  the  school ;  I’ve  been
hurt  bv  it.


by  Mr.  Parsons,  Royal  Marine  Library,  Brighton.  327

Q.  Has  your  pride  been  hurt  in  the  failure  with  the
inspector  ?

A.  Yes ;  through  my  illness  I  could  not  acquit  myself.

Q.  Can  you  see  your  head  ?

A.  Yes,  a  little.

Q.  How  does  it  look  where  it  is  bad  ?

A.  It  looks  black.

I  now  mesmerised  this  part  of  the  head,  and  he  said  that
an  alteration  took  place  in  the  appearance  from  my  doing  so ;
I  made  it  whiter ;  that  is,  I  changed  it  from  black  to  brown
by  the  passes,  which  made  it  continually  lighter  in  colour.

Q.  Can  you  see  anything  not  in  the  room;  anything
beyond  this  room  ?

A.  Yes ;  I  can  see  human  bodies ;  nothing  else.

A  lady  had  come  in,  and  went  with  his  mother  into  the
back  room ;  I  asked  him  if  he  could  see  into  that  room  ?

A.  Yes;  I  can  see  Miss  F - -  and  my  mother.

Q.  How  do  you  see  them  ?

A.  I  see  their  bodies.

Q.  Shall  I  cure  you  by  mesmerism  ?

A.  Yes.

Q.  How  long  will  it  be  before  you  become  sensible  ?

A.  Yesterday  week  I  shall  be  so.

Q.  How  often  and  for  how  long  a  time  will  it  be  neces¬
sary  to  mesmerise  you  ?

A.  Once  a  day,  at  12  o’clock,  for  half  an  hour.

Q.  How  long  will  you  be  in  this  state  when  I  leave  you,
and  must  I  wake  you  or  leave  you  as  you  are  ?

A.  If  you  try  to  wake  me  it  hurts  my  head ;  leave  me
asleep,  and  I  shall  wake  up  ten  minutes  after  you  leave  me,
sensible.  I  shall  remain  sensible  five  minutes,  and  then  I
shall  become  as  I  have  been,  maniacal  again.

Any  noise  of  talking  hurts  his  head,  and  he  starts  if
several  persons  talk  in  the  room,  unless  I  put  my  hand  on  the
crown  of  his  head,  and  then  he  is  indifferent  to  it.  Through
the  whole  course  of  his  attack  he  has  manifested  great  sensi¬
tiveness  to  noise  before  I  came  to  him,  I  am  told.

Q.  What  will  you  have  for  your  dinner  ?

A.  Young  spring  onions  raw,  with  bread  and  salt.

Q.  When  is  this  to  be  given  to  you  ?

A.  In  the  five  minutes  while  I  am  sensible.

I  directed  that  these  should  be  sent  for  and  be  ready  in
the  next  room,  into  which  I  led  him.  I  had  to  breathe  on
his  knees  to  remove  the  stiffness,  and,  while  walking  along
the  passage,  he  started  at  a  noise  and  stood  still.

Q.  Why  do  you  hesitate  ?

A.  The  noise  has  hurt  my  knees ;  they  are  stiffened.


328  Cure  of  Cataleptic  Insanity  through  Mesmerism ,

I  tried  them,  and  found  them  perfectly  rigid,  and  had
again  to  release  him  as  before.  I  put  him  into  an  arm-chair
to  leave  him,  as  he  said  that  when  awake  he  should  fall
out  of  the  common  chair,  being  quite  relaxed  when  sensible.
He  directed  that  he  should  have  an  egg  with  his  tea ;  he  was
to  be  taken  out  into  the  air,  when  the  sun  was  down ;  he
would  be  insane,  but  not  violent  any  more ;  his  mother  was
to  go  with  him,  but  be  careful  not  to  touch  him ;  and  he
should  walk  quietly  as  far  as  the  school  and  back  very  safely ;
he  said,  “  I  can  see  the  carcass  of  the  school-room  now.”

Wednesday,  May  10th.  On  my  arrival  I  found  the  house
full  of  gentlemen  waiting  to  see  the  case,  and  I  feared  my
patient  would  suffer  in  consequence.  The  details  of  the  day
are  as  follows  :  He  awoke  yesterday  after  ten  minutes ;  ate
his  onions  and  bread  in  the  lucid  interval, — which  lasted  just
five  minutes, — at  the  expiration  of  which  he  jumped  up  and
ran  up  stairs  as  fast  as  he  could  go,  as  mad  as  ever,  and  in
this  state  he  ate  the  dinner  which  was  prepared  for  his  brother,
and  which  ought  to  have  been  kept  out  of  his  sight.  He
took  his  walk  as  bespoken ;  went  to  the  school  and  back ;
extended  his  walk  considerably ;  and  returned  home  without
any  accident  or  disturbance.

To-day  I  found  him  occupied  with  writing  materials ;  his
pen  was  in  his  mouth.  He  turned  rapidly  round  and  looked
about  him,  but  did  not  seem  to  heed  people,  and  yet  had  a
more  conscious  look  in  his  eye  to-day.  Yesterday  you  felt
that  he  did  not  see  you ;  to-day  you  were  not  quite  comfort¬
able  about  it.

I  brought  him  to  me  by  tractive  passes  as  before,  and
mesmerised  him.  In  answer  to  my  questions,  he  said  he
was  much  better ;  his  head  was  not  so  dark-coloured ;  he  had
slept  well;  could  see,  but  not  very  distinctly  (clairvoyant) ;
he  saw  the  school  rooms  at  Mr.  Drummond's  request,  and
described  particulars  which  Mr.  D.  said  were  not  correct.  A
messenger  was  sent  to  ascertain,  and  the  boy  was  right  and
Mr.  Drummond  wrong,  though  the  latter  had  seen  the  school¬
room  only  an  hour  before.

He  was  annoyed  when  any  gentleman  spoke  to  another
in  the  room,  but  not  when  the  conversation  was  carried  on
between  such  an  one  and  myself.  After  a  few  minutes  his
sensitiveness  so  increased  that  he  was  annoyed  if  any  spoke
to  me  unless  I  had  first  spoken  to  him ,  and  thus  established
a  legitimate  rapport ;  it  communicated  a  shock  to  him  like
electricity.  Altogether  I  perceive  a  growing  disturbance  from
the  number  in  the  room  and  I  must  abate  it  for  my  patient's
sake.

In  making  a  clairvoyant  inspection,  he  inclined  his  body


by  Mr.  Parsons ,  Royal  Marine  Library ,  Brighton.  329

to  the  right.  I  only  asked  him  to  do  it  twice ;  once  to  see
the  school  room,  and  afterwards  to  find  his  brother,  who  was
at  54,  Lavender  Street  he  said.  This  was  correct  also.

I  asked  him  how  long  I  should  mesmerise  him,  and  he
said  half  an  hour.  In  the  number  of  questions  and  answers
I  had  overpassed  the  time.  I  noticed  it  to  him,  and  said,
“  But  that  is  of  no  consequence,  it  will  not  hurt  you.”  His
reply  was,  “Yes  it  will.”  He  predicted  he  would  awake  in
a  quarter  of  an  hour,  and  be  sensible  ten  minutes.

As  my  wife  said  that,  when  she  called  an  hour  afterwards,
she  found  several  persons  all  around  him,  occasionally  touch¬
ing  him,  for  the  amusement  afforded  by  the  shock  it  produced
on  him,  I  was  much  annoyed,  and  wrote  a  note  requesting
that  no  person  might  be  allowed  to  see  him,  or  be  near  him
after  I  left,  or  at  any  time  except  when  I  was  there,  as  it
might  injure  the  boy.  I  went  again  myself  at  9  in  the  even¬
ing  ;  Frank  was  dressed  in  his  mother's  clothes,  and  sitting
very  calmly  reading  a  book ;  he  presently  took  down  a  bonnet
with  a  veil  on  it,  and  proceeded  in  the  most  business-like
feminine  manner  to  pinch  and  pat  it  into  shape  on  his  head ;
he  then  took  it  off  and  smelt  it,  saying  to  himself,  “  Oh,  I
know  who  made  this  bonnet, — I  think  I  know, — but  I  shall
be  more  certain  presently.”  He  then  twisted  it  round,  smelt
it  more  carefully,  and  at  last  decided  that  it  was  made  by  the

daughter  of  a  man  who  lives  at  the  top  of  - Street ;

her  name  is  B - .  This  was  the  young  woman  I  had

seen  with  his  mother ;  she  was  in  the  room,  and  smiled,  say¬
ing,  “  He's  right ;  I  did  make  the  bonnet  myself.”

His  mother  tells  me  that  he  smells  about  for  every  thing
he  wants,  and  smells  everything  before  he  eats  it ;  and,  since
he  has  been  mesmerised,  he  passes  his  hands  over  his  food
before  he  eats  it,  as  if  that  made  it  taste  pleasanter ;  he  also
made  passes  before  his  own  chest  in  which  he  felt  pain.  He
told  his  mother,  before  I  came,  that  on  Sunday  at  12  o'clock
he  shall  be  restored  to  his  senses ;  he  also  made  communica¬
tions  to  her  concerning  her  other  son,  who  was  expected  and
had  not  arrived,  and  about  whom  she  was  anxious ;  he  said
that  his  brother  had  met  with  some  accident  and  been  de¬
tained.  It  was  afterwards  discovered  that  it  was  by  illness.
He  often,  expressed  a  wish  that  somebody  might  be  with  him,
to  whom  he  might  impart  some  most  important  revelations
that  were  made  known  to  him,  “  which  would  do  good  to
thousands.”

He  now  put  on  a  shawl  and  began  to  walk  musingly  to
and  fro  in  the  room.  When  his  back  was  turned,  I  mesmerised
my  walking  stick,  and  put  it  down  in  his  path.  As  soon  as


330  Cure  of  Cataleptic  Insanity  through  Mesmerism ,

his  feet  touched  it,  he  started,  and  became  cataleptic  till  I
withdrew  it,  when  he  suddenly  recovered  after  a  minute,  and,
as  if  the  peculiar  thrill  the  shock  had  caused  made  him  re¬
member  something  like  it,  he  began  to  sniff  about  the  mantel¬
piece,  taking  up  one  thing  after  another,  holding  each  doubt¬
fully  in  his  hand  and  then  replacing  it,  till  he  found  the  letter
I  had  written  and  which  he  had  never  before  seen.  As  soon
as  his  fingers  touched  it,  a  joyous  smile  broke  over  his  face  ;
he  put  it  to  his  nose,  nodded  his  head,  and  then  became
perfectly  cataleptic,  holding  the  letter  folded  in  the  envelope
in  his  right  hand  hanging  down  at  his  side.  He  then  gave
a  slight  start,  said  “  thoroughly  right,”  as  if  the  contents  of
the  note  had  his  entire  approbation,  and  replaced  it  on  the
mantel-shelf ;  he  had  not  attempted  to  open  it,  but  he  had
read  it  through,  as  I  found  the  next  day,  by  questioning  him,
while  he  held  it  thus.

He  now  went  to  the  cupboard  and  got  some  toast  and
water,  and,  after  he  had  drunk  one  glass,  I  filled  the  tumbler
again  (his  back  was  turned),  carefully  mesmerised  it,  and
placed  it  on  the  table.  He  had  turned  to  his  book  and  taken
no  notice  of  it,  but  presently  his  eyes  were  attracted  as  if  by
something  peculiar  in  the  glass ;  he  started,  and  gradually
leaned  forward  towards  it,  precisely  as  if  it  drew  him  down
without  his  own  volition  ;  he  looked  fascinated ;  nearer  and
nearer  he  went,  till  his  face  touched  the  glass,  when  he  gave
a  slight  start ;  gradually  approached  it  with  his  hands,  which,
when  they  grasped  it,  were  so  affected  with  catalepsy  that
he  could  with  difficulty  carry  them  to  his  mouth.  The  glass
rested  when  within  an  inch  of  his  mouth,  and  he  became
apparently  mesmerised ;  he,  however,  made  a  violent  effort,
and  swallowed  the  whole  down  greedily,  remaining  mes¬
merised,  with  the  glass  upturned,  in  the  drinking  attitude
for  a  considerable  time.  He  then  recovered  himself,  looked
very  merry,  patted  his  chest  laughing,  and  said,  “  Ah,  that
does  my  chest  good.”

I  left  him  very  calm  and  happy  at  half-past  9,  his  mother
tellingme  he  had  announced  his  intention  of  sittingup  all  night.

Thursday,  May  11th.  I  found  him  walking  up  and  down
the  room.  I  made  three  passes  on  the  floor  behind  him,  and,
when  his  feet  touched  the  place,  he  became  cataleptic ;  I
drew  him  to  a  chair  and  mesmerised  him.

He  directed  mesmerism  for  only  twenty  minutes,  and  said
that  he  would  wake  twenty  minutes  afterwards,  and  be  sen¬
sible  a  quarter  of  an  hour ;  during  which  he  was  to  have  a
slice  of  bread  only  for  his  dinner.  He  said  that  keeping  him
asleep  longer  than  he  directed  yesterday  had  made  him  heavy,


hy  Mr.  Parsons,  Royal  Marine  Library,  Brighton.  331

overcharged  him,  and  that  my  wish  that  he  would  lie  down
and  go  to  bed  (which  I  had  more  felt  than  expressed)  and
which  he  had  done  at  2  o’clock  in  the  morning,  instead  of
sitting  up  all  night,  as  he  otherwise  would  have  done,  had
hurt  his  chest,  for  it  would  have  been  better  if  he  had  not
lain  down  at  all.

Dr.  H - who  was  present,  wishing  to  ascertain  if  his

eyes,  which  were  only  half  closed  (as  they  always  were  in  his
somnambulism),  were  incapable  of  vision,  as  I  asserted,  moved
his  fingers  so  near  to  him  as  to  affect  him  with  a  nervous
trembling,  and,  although  I  soon  caused  this  to  cease,  his
clairvoyance  was  interrupted  during  this  seance  by  the  dis¬
turbance.

I  was  careful  to-day  to  leave  him  at  the  right  time,  and
his  waking  and  lucid  interval  occurred  as  predicted.  He  falls
like  a  wet  rag  over  the  chair  as  soon  as  he  quits  the  som¬
nambulic  condition,  so  that  his  body  will  double  over  the
back  of  a  chair  as  if  there  were  no  bones  in  it.

He  told  me  to-day  that  I  must  come  to  him  at  11  o’clock
on  Sunday,  for  he  should  regain  his  senses  at  12  o’clock  on
that  day.  I  asked  if  he  would  be  cured ;  “  very  nearly,”  was
his  answer.

Friday,  May  12th.  I  promised  for  the  satisfaction  of

Dr.  H - that  I  would  to-day,  on  my  arrival,  without  going

into  the  room  where  the  boy  was,  draw  him  from  his  seat  to
any  part  of  the  wall  Dr.  H.  chose  to  point  out,  by  tractive
passes,  I  being  in  the  other  room.

I  made  the  attempt  while  Dr.  H -  and  Mr.  H - ,

another  medical  gentleman  present,  remained  at  the  door  of
the  room  where  the  boy  was  to  watch  the  effect  produced.
I  continued  for  some  seconds ;  but,  as  no  effect  appeared,  I  first
endeavoured  by  downward  passes  to  mesmerise  him  and  then
renewed  the  traction.  I  now  succeeded  in  drawing  him  from
his  chair  at  the  opposite  side  of  the  room,  he  walking  slowly
backwards  towards  the  wall  behind  which  I  was :  but,  not
knowing  how  far  I  was  succeeding,  I  left  off  and  came  to  the
other  room,  and  he  was  immediately  released  from  the  spell
and  walked  back  to  the  chair.

.  As  the  time  to  mesmerise  had  arrived,  I  proceeded  as
usual.  When  in  his  sleep,  he  was  much  disturbed.  “  How  are
you  ?”  “  Not  at  all  well.”  “  Why  ?”  “  Because  you  called

me.”  “When  did  I  call  you?”  “With  your  hands  just
now.”  “  Why  did  you  not  come  then,  when  I  called  you  ?”
“  Because  those  persons  who  were  standing  at  the  door  kept
me  in  my  seat.”  “  Should  you  have  obeyed  me  if  they  had
not  been  there  ?”  “  Yes,  certainly.”


332  Cure  of  Cataleptic  Insanity  through  Mesmerism ,


Dr.  H - was  not  at  all  satisfied  with  the  experiment,

though  the  boy  had  no  previous  knowledge  of  my  intention,
and  yet  in  his  sleep  gave  these  precise  reasons  for  not
obeying  an  influence  which  he  would  have  been  quite  igno¬
rant  of  my  having  attempted  to  exercise  over  him  if  what
I  had  contended  for  had  not  been  true :  namely,  that  I  could
influence  the  boy  without  being  seen  by  him.  From  this
time  I  made  up  my  mind  to  a  certain  course, — to  cure  the  boy,
and  eschew  all  experiments  to  convince  unbelievers.  There
are  so  many  circumstances  which  tend  to  vary  the  result
when  dealing  with  such  a  delicate  instrument  as  a  somnam-
bule  may  be  called,  that  we  can  never  be  sure  of  uniformity,
and,  if  anything  other  than  what  has  been  promiseel  should
occur,  sceptics  leave  out  of  the  question  all  the  startling
things  which  have  occurred,  and  w7hich  they  are  equally
unable  to  account  for,  and  call  the  whole  experiment  a
failure.  A  mesmeriser  only  gets  vexation,  his  patient  dis¬
turbance,  and  the  sceptic  what  he  thinks  a  triumph,  though
the  facts  to  an  unprejudiced  mind  are  fully  convincing  of  the
truth  of  what  has  been  averred.

His  sleep  to-day  was  to  be  a  quarter  of  an  hour;  his
head  looked  much  lighter  coloured;  his  liver  dark;  he  directed
for  that,  on  Sunday,  “  a  pennyworth  of  jalap  from  Savaged
shop ;”  a  common  pennyworth  at  that  shop,  he  called  a
“  strong  dose  of  jalap  he  would  remain  twenty- five
minutes  asleep,  would  have  a  slice  of  bread  and  butter  for  his
dinner,  would  not  eat  in  his  insensibility  to-day,  and  would
require  nothing  for  tea.  He  would  sleep  in  bed  if  he  sat  up,
but  not  if  he  lay  down,  because  lying  down  will  hurt  him  ;
he  would  require  only  ten  minutes  mesmerism  to-morrow,
“  because  he  was  full.”  I  took  him  into  the  other  room  and

left  him,  and  resumed  a  conversation  with  Dr.  H - and

Mr.  H - ,  in  which  the  former  stated  he  was  very  incredul¬

ous  of  the  traction  being  a  genuine  matter,  “  as  it  had  not
succeeded  as  I  promised  it  would.”  In  five  minutes  word
was  brought  from  the  other  room  that  Frank  had  fallen  out
of  his  chair.  I  went,  and  found  him  in  a  great  trembling,
and  remained  with  him,  as  I  found  he  was  so  agitated  by  the
contention  which  I  had  taken  part  in,  although  apparently
unconscious  of  it,  that  I  could  not  leave  him  comfortably.
The  “  Atmosphere  d} Incredule,”  had  violently  affected  him  :
this  I  afterwards  ascertained  from  himself.

I  would  never  willingly  shew  a  patient  to  any  person  but
those  conversant  with  mesmerism,  when  the  health  of  the
patient  is  likely  to  be  affected.  As  the  objections  they  make,
from  want  of  acquaintance  with  the  ordinary  phenomena,  to


by  Mr.  Parsons ,  Royal  Marine  Library,  Brighton,  333

,  -  •/

some  simple  unimportant  irregularity  in  a  class  of  facts  fami¬
liar  to  every  mesmeriser,  draw  the  attention  of  the  operator
away  from  his  business.

While  my  patient  was  under  my  hands,  and  the  medical
gentlemen  had  left  the  room,  Frank's  head  became  slowly
turned  over  his  left  shoulder,  and  he  explained  that  he  was
drawn  there;  that  the  passes  I  had  made  at  the  wall,  or,  as  he
phrased  it,  “the  power  I  had  left,"  had  that  effect.  He
trembled  very  much  and  was  evidently  not  in  his  usual  com¬
fortable  state"  after  mesmerism  ;  and  at  the  end  of  twenty-five
minutes  from  the  time  I  left  him  he  raised  himself  and  looked
fixedly  with  his  eyes  open  straight  before  him.  As  the  time
was  come  for  him  to  have  his  bread  and  butter,  I  asked  his
mother  to  speak  to  him.  She  did  so  and  found  him  sensible ;
but  evidently  things  were  not  going  right.  I  demesmerised
him  to  see  if  that  would  do  any  good ;  and  it  relieved  him,
and  he  fell  relaxed,  and  began  to  eat  his  bread  and  butter.
I  then  left  him,  but  presently  he  got  up  again,  and  stood
upright  on  a  certain  spot  on  the  floor.  I  was  called  again ;  I
went,  and,  at  his  direction  as  he  pointed  to  it  saying  some¬
thing  drew  him  there ,  (it  was  where  my  feet  had  rested,  while
I  was  sitting  in  the  room,  till  I  moved  more  to  the  wall),  I
demesmerised  the  floor  and  his  feet,  and  he  seemed  suddenly
to  melt  down  all  to  pieces  again,  quite  relaxed.

It  was  thus  that  in  the  first  instance  was  developed  that
intense  attraction  which  afterwards  became  so  conspicuous
and  indeed  embarrassing.  I  now  left  the  room  again  and
retired  to  the  next :  but  shortly  he  arose  and  walked  to  the
door,  shewing  that  while  I  was  in  the  house  he  would  be
drawn  towards  me.  I  then  demesmerised  him  energetically,
although  he  had  not  directed  it,  and  left  the  house  with  the
doctors.  I  may  here  notice  that  on  a  subsequent  occasion  I
made  an  attempt  to  demesmerise  him  entirely  for  a  long  time,
thinking  that  it  would  be  better  to  leave  him  so :  but  I  could
not  succeed,  and,  as  every  minute  of  the  attempt  brought
back  some  old  symptom  which  the  mesmerism  had  removed,
without  giving  any  indication  of  a  better  state,  I  discon¬
tinued,  mesmerised  him  anew,  and  left  him.  I  never  after¬
wards  did  more  than  remove  a  superfluity  when  he  said,  “  I'm
a  little  too  full  Sir,"  which  was  the  phrase  he  always  used
to  express  this  condition.

As  every  thing  which  came  from  me  or  which  I  had
touched  now  exercised  a  mesmeric  power  over  him,  I  gave
him  a  card  from  my  card  case,  and  of  this  and  the  letter  I
.  have  already  mentioned  he  made  the  following  use  : — when¬
ever  he  wishes  to  find  anything  that  he  has  been  searching


334  Cure  of  Cataleptic  Insanity  through  Mesmerism ,

for  in  vain,  he  gets  the  card  and  note  and  places  them  on  his
forehead;  he  becomes  immediately  cataleptic  for  a  few  seconds,
and  then  darts  away  straight  to  the  place  where  the  thing  is ;
a  state  of  mesmeric  clairvoyance  is  induced  by  these  talismans,
and  by  their  assistance  he  can  detect  almost  every  thing.
Thus,  for  example,  he  found  two  eggs  in  the  cupboard ;  he  put
the  card  on  his  forehead,  and  each  egg  in  turn  against  it,  and
told  precisely  where  they  came  from,  the  two  eggs  having
been  sent  from  two  different  places.  He  applies  this  test
together  with  smell  to  every  thing  he  eats  or  drinks,  and,
during  the  intervals  of  his  mouthful,  he  will,  as  if  to  himself,
say  in  an  under  tone  where  it  all  came  from,  naming  the
place  where  the  flour  was  grown,  the  man  who  made  the
bread,  and  the  place  where  it  was  bought.

I  have  usually  set  my  watch  by  the  chronometer  at  Mr.
Lawson's,  where  the  true  time  by  Greenwich  is  always  kept,
and  I  was  consequently  rather  surprised  to  find  the  little
Dutch  clock  in  the  widow's  cottage  exactly  with  me  yesterday ;
to-day  I  observed  the  same  coincidence  and  could  not  help
remarking  how  very  truly  the  clock  kept  time.  His  mother
replied,  “  Bless  you  Sir !"  he  sets  it  after  you  are  gone,  and
several  times  a  day  he  will  go  out  and  look  at  the  sun,  and
then  come  in  and  set  the  clock  on  (for  it  loses),  and  he  said
yesterday  when  he  had  done  it,  “  There,  that  is  the  time  by
Greenwich  :  if  you  could  see  Greenwich  Observatory  time
you  would  find  that  exactly  right."

Whenever  he  comes  to  any  spot  that  I  have  stood  upon,
he  stops  and  falls  asleep.  I  bought  him  two  sprigs  of  gera¬
nium  as  he  is  fond  of  flowers,  and  mesmerised  them  as  I
came  along.  I  put  them  into  his  two  little  jars  in  which  he
had  placed  only  a  bit  of  mint  in  water,  and,  as  he  was  out  of
the  room  when  I  did  so,  it  was  a  fair  trial.  When  he  entered
the  room,  he  looked  indifferently  around  till  his  eyes  glanced
on  the  flowers,  when  he  started  slightly  and  became  fasci¬
nated,  his  fingers  were  drawn  gradually  towards  them,  and
he  went  to  sleep  directly  he  touched  them.

His  divining  talismans,  my  letter  and  card,  were  very  highly
prized  by  him,  but  he  said  the  card  had  nearly  lost  its  virtue.

I  therefore  gave  him  a  fresh  one,  and,  as  it  put  him  to  sleep
whenever  he  touched  it,  it  was  amusing  to  behold  the
manoeuvres  he  was  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  in  order  to
prevent  this.  He  took  it  up  in  the  folds  of  his  dressing
gown  or  with  his  handkerchief,  and  once  when  he  wanted  to
climb  over  the  gate  of  the  back  garden,  as  he  was  obliged  to
lift  up  his  dressing  gown,  he  popped  the  card  between  his
teeth,  and  immediately  sank  down  fast  asleep  against  the  gate.


by  Mr.  Parsons,  Royal  Marine  Library,  Brighton.  335

His  mother  was  unable  to  prevent  him  from  eating  every
thing  he  could  find  of  an  eatable  nature ;  since,  hide  it  where
she  could,  he  discovered  it  by  the  means  I  have  described.
The  best  place  in  this  hot  weather  was  the  celler,  but  it  was
of  no  use  to  put  any  thing  there.

This  was  very  annoying,  because  he  said  in  his  sleep  that
things  he  had  eaten  in  his  maniacal  state  had  done  him  harm
occasionally.  I  said  to  him,  in  reply,  “  You  must  not  eat  it
then  !”  “  But  I  will  eat  whatever  I  can  get  hold  of  when  I

am  in  the  mania ;  they  must  put  things  out  of  my  way.”
“  But  they  can’t,  you  find  them  wherever  they  are  put.”
“Then  they  must  put  the  things  in  another  house. ”

As  this,  however,  was  out  of  the  question,  I  thought  of
a  different  plan.  The  descent  to  the  cellars  was  from  the
kitchen,  through  a  door  at  the  head  of  the  stairs.  I  made
some  strong  passes  over  the  sill  of  this  door,  with  intention
to  prevent  him  from  going  down.  He  was  in  the  garden
when  I  did  it,  and  could  not  observe  me,  for  there  was  a
building  between  us.  I  went  again  to  him  at  nine  o’  clock
in  the  evening  and  found  him  quiet.  I  had  sent  to  him  in
the  afternoon  a  letter  which  I  wished  him  to  read  without
opening :  but  he  would  not  attempt  it.  He  said  it  was  to
satisfy  that  person  who  did  not  believe,  and  he  could  not  do
it,  because  that  person  had  doubted  my  word;  and,  what  was
remarkable,  that  letter  was  the  only  thing  from  me  that
did  not  seem  to  possess  a  soothing,  or  the  ordinary  mes¬
meric,  influence  upon  the  boy ;  it  produced,  on  the  contrary,
an  unpleasant  feeling  directly  he  touched  it,  before  he  had
read  what  was  outside, — “  To  be  read  without  being  opened.”

His  mother  told  me  that  he  had  tried  in  vain  to  go  down
the  cellar  stairs  fifty  times,  and  was  very  angry  because  he
could  not  pass  over  the  door  sill.  While  I  was  there  he
suddenly  seized  the  candle  and  made  a  rush  at  the  stairs,  as
if  determined  to  overcome  all  opposition,  with  such  violence
that  I  thought  it  impossible  for  him  to  avoid  falling  headlong
down  without  such  an  effort  of  the  reverse  muscles  as  lie
was  incapable  of  in  his  weak  state.  But,  as  soon  as  he
reached  the  sill  of  the  door,  he  rebounded  back  as  if  he  had
struck  some  firm  obstacle.  He  then  muttered  to  himself,
“  What  the  deuce  is  there.  I  will  go  down.”  He  made
another  plunge,  followed  by  the  same  recoil,  and  then  shook
his  fist  at  it  and  gave  it  up.

As  he  drinks  ginger-beer  whenever  he  can  get  it  and
asked  for  some  now,  I  mesmerised  some  water,  with  which
he  had  filled  a  ginger-beer  bottle,  with  the  intention  that  it
should  seem  ginger-beer  to  him.  He  took  the  bottle  up  and


336  Cure  of  Cataleptic  Insanity  through  Mesmerism,

shook  it  gleefully,  as  he  had  done  before  when  it  was  only
water  to  him ;  but  this  time  the  water  in  the  bottle  mes¬
merised  him  and  he  went  fast  asleep.

Every  thing  that  I  have  touched  sends  him  to  sleep  for
a  few  seconds.  But  a  piece  of  bread  which  I  mesmerised
plagued  him  sorely,  for  every  mouthful  he  ate  put  him  to
sleep  three  times  : — first  when  he  touched  it ;  after  a  few
seconds  he  would  arouse  and  bite  a  bit  off  and  after  chewing
it  a  moment  he  was  asleep  again ;  again  he  aroused,  and,  as
soon  as  it  was  fairly  swallowred,  again  he  was  asleep.  “  What
the  deuce  is  it,”  said  he,  “  I  like  the  taste  of  it,  and  yet  I
can^t  help  going  to  sleep  :  I  must  seem  very  impolite.”  I
now  took  the  plate  away ;  when  his  back  was  turned,  I  blew
strongly  upon  the  bread  that  remained,  and  replaced  it,  and
he  ate  it  up  without  any  more  trouble.  He  now  took  up  his
ginger-beer  bottle,  poured  from  it  into  a  tea-cup,  and,  as  soon
as  he  turned  it  up,  on  drinking  it,  he  became  fixed  in  that
position  for  several  minutes,  fast  asleep ;  and,  when  he  was
released,  put  it  down,  saying  very  gently  to  himself,  “  Deli¬
cious  ginger-beer.”

Occasionally  he  collapses  and  falls  together  in  a  heap,
with  violent  shakings  all  over  him,  and  then,  as  suddenly,
recovers  himself  and  begins  to  move  about  briskly  as  before.
He  appears  to  take  no  notice  of  any  body,  and,  if  one  speaks
to  him,  gives  a  low  cry  as  if  in  pain,  and  appears  like  a
person  frightened  in  a  dream.  And  yet  if  he  speaks  first  to

his  mother,  or  her  young  friend,  Maria  B - ,  by  their

names,  he  will  hear  their  reply  and  make  a  pertinent  re¬
joinder,  but  never  hears  them  unless  he  has  first  addressed
them ;  and,  if  they  inadvertently  neglect  this  precaution,  he
is  seized  with  violent  trembling.  His  mother  he  calls  by  a
strange  nick  name,  “Old  mother  Bradget,”  and  his  fancy
is  that  she  is  a  char-woman  he  has  in  to  take  care  of  his
house.  All  the  inmates  of  the  family  and  household  have
also  fanciful  soubriquets,  by  which  he  invariably  distinguishes
each.

He  was  sensible  for  about  an  hour  yesterday — from  7  in
the  evening  till  8.

Saturday,  May  13th.  Mesmerised  and  questioned,  “  How
are  you?”  “Not  so  well  as  yesterday.”  “Why?”  “That
person  made  me  ill :  my  head  looks  worse.”  I  removed  the
bad  effects  by  mesmerising  him  carefully,  leaving  him  com¬
fortable.  I  asked  him  what  I  gave  him  yesterday;  he  an¬
swered,  “  Ginger-beer,  and  very  nice  indeed  it  was.”  He
was  to  be  mesmerised  half  an  hour,  he  would  then  remain
half  an  hour  in  the  state,  and  would  be  sensible  half  an  hour


by  Mr.  Parsons,  Royal  Marine  Library ,  Brighton.  337

when  he  awoke,  during  which  he  was  to  have  for  his  dinner
bread  and  butter  and  some  of  my  ginger-beer .  I  mesmerised
with  this  intention  some  water  for  him;  and  after  the  half-
hour  he  awoke,  ate  his  bread  and  butter,  and  drank  the  water
with  great  relish,  calling  it,  “  Excellent  ginger-beer,  and
rather  sharp,”  when  in  his  lucid  interval  or  sensible  condition.
lie  still  adheres  to  his  former  opinion,  that  he  will  recover
his  senses  to-morrow,  at  12;  and  I  am  to  come  at  11.

Sunday,  May  14.  On  my  arrival  at  11,  his  mother  told
me  that  he  had  been  muttering  something  of  having  made  a
mistake,  and  that  it  was  not  to-day  he  was  to  come  to  his
senses,  but  to-morrow ;  and  when  mesmerised  he  confirmed
this  in  the  following  words.

“  I  have  made  a  mistake  in  saying  I  shall  be  well  to-day ;
the  mistake  was  due  to  my  being  mesmerised  too  long,  and
becoming  too  full,  I  now  see  I  shall  not  be  well  till  to¬
morrow,  at  seven  minutes  past  12.”

Q.  How  do  you  see  it.

A.  There  is  a  book  at  my  side,  a  large  book,  it  is  open,
and  I  see  written  in  it,  “  It  is  ordained  that  you  shall  be
under  the  hand  of  affliction  fifty-one  days;”  it  says  also  that
“  I  am  to  be  under  you  ten  thousand  and  eighty  minutes  to
recover  my  senses,”  and  that  will  be  exactly  at  seven  minutes
past  12,  on  Monday,  as  you  began  on  that  day,  at  that  time ;
but,  being  mesmerised  too  long  one  day,  I  became  confused.”

This  is  perfectly  correct,  as  will  be  seen  on  reference.  His
first  prediction  was  on  Tuesday, — that  he  would  be  restored
to  his  senses  “  yesterday-week,”  which  would  be  the  follow¬
ing  Monday.  On  Wednesday,  the  10th,  he  was  mesmerised
ten  minutes  longer  than  he  directed ;  he  said  then,  on  my
remarking  it,  that  it  would  hurt  him,  and  it  was  on  the  fol¬
lowing  day  that  he  announced  Sunday  to  be  the  day,  so  that
he  has  now  returned  to  the  day  which  he  named  at  first.

He  says  that  it  has  been  a  trance ,  and  it  will  last  fifty-one
days  from  his  first  attack.

Q.  How  will  you  awake  at  the  expiration  of  the  time  ?

A .  Perfectly  well,  quite  well,  and  restored  to  my  senses.

Q.  How  long  would  the  state  have  endured  in  which  you
have  been,  if  you  had  not  been  mesmerised.

A.  All  my  life.

Q.  Do  you  ever  see  any  other  beings  than  living  human
beings  in  this  state.

A.  Yes,  Sir;  I  saw  a  man  in  black  this  morning,  before
you  came,  in  this  room,  very  ghastly  in  countenance.  He
pointed  to  this  book,  which  lay  in  the  air :  it  was  shut,  and
it  . was  not  opened  till  you  came.  I  see  your  likeness  in  it,

YOL.  VI.  B  B


338  Cure  of  Cataleptic  Insanity  through  Mesmerism,

and  under  it  is  written  that  I  am  to  be  under  you  ten  thou¬
sand  and  eighty  minutes,  to  recover  my  senses.

Q.  Did  you  ever  see  any  such  beings  as  you  describe  before?

A.  Yes,  Sir ;  Mr.  M - tried  to  mesmerise  me,  and,

although  I  did  not  go  to  sleep,  I  saw  a  figure  clad  in  white,
and  I  was  very  much  frightened ;  it  did  me  harm,  it  hurt
my  eyes.

(His  mother  told  me  that  Mr.  M -  had  mesmerised

him,  and  he  has  spoken  during  his  mania  about  a  figure
which  he  saw,  but  he  never  mentioned  it  before  the  mania.)

Q.  Did  you  ever  mention  this  ?

A.  No,  Sir;  I  do  not  know  it  when  I  am  awake,  not  till  I
am  in  this  state ;  I  now  know  what  it  was  I  saiv.

Q.  Your  mother  says  you  set  the  clock  right  by  the  sun
and  a  glass  of  ivater.  How  do  you  do  that?

A.  I  only  did  it  once,  Sir.

Q.  How  did  you  do  it  then  ?

A.  I  took  out  a  glass  of  water,  and  drew  a  dial  with  iny
finger  over  it,  and  I  could  see,  by  the  shade  which  the  sun
casts,  what  o’clock  it  was,  and  I  came  in  and  corrected  our
clock.

He  was  to  be  kept  asleep  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  would
remain  twenty  minutes  asleep,  and  ten  minutes  sensible ;  he
would  eat  his  dinner  in  his  maniacal  state,  and  it  would  be
sent  in  to  him  at  1  o’clock.

All  occurred  precisely  as  he  said.

I  remained  till  nearly  2  o’clock  observing  him.  He  carries
wherever  he  goes  the  little  jars  of  geranium  flowers  which  I
gave  him  :  he  has  put  one  of  my  cards  on  each  bunch  of  flowers,
and  makes  constant  use  of  them  in  discovering  any  thing  he
wishes  to  know.  He  has  never  been  down  the  cellar  stairs
since  I  made  the  passes  over  the  sill ;  and,  while  I  was  here,
he  made  an  effort  to  go,  and  failed.  He  brought  his  two
talismans  in  the  other  day,  thinking  by  their  means  to  get  over
the  difficulty ;  but  with  them  he  could  not  approach  within
a  yard  of  the  door,  and  instantly  ran  back  with  them,  exclaim¬
ing,  “  Good  gracious  !  good  gracious  !  it’s  worse  than  ever  !”
While  I  was  still  sitting  here,  however,  he  made  another

attempt  just  as  Maria  B - was  going  down;  and,  whether

that  facilitated  it,  or  the  charm  was  worn  out,  (for  this  is
the  third  day  since  I  made  the  barrier  with  three  strokes  of
my  hand,)  or  whether  any  misgiving  in  my  own  mind  while
looking  on  assisted  him,  I  know  not,  but  lie  went  down  with
apparent  ease,  and  rushed  to  the  bottom  with  a  scream  of
triumph,  quickly  returning  laden  with  spoils  in  the  form  of
a  plateful  of  provisions.  But  now  he  was  to  pay  for  his  te-


by  Mr.  Parsons,  Royal  Marine  Library,  Brighton.  339

merity.  His  feet  ached  so  that  he  was  obliged  to  take  his
boots  off ;  and  he  observed  that  going  down  had  “  cut  his  feet
so”  that  he  did  not  think  he  would  try  that  again.  When
his  attention  was  otherwise  directed,  I  made  some  fresh
passes  over  the  sill.

He  gave  to-day  an  amusing  instance  of  the  electric  con¬
dition  he  was  in.  He  took  a  cane  to  thrash  Maria  B - ,

for  not  doing  something  he  wished ;  but,  as  soon  as  the  cane
touched  her  arm,  he  threw  it  out  of  his  hand  as  if  it  had
stung  him,  and  began  to  shake  his  hand  and  rub  it  with  my
card  to  remove  the  effect.  The  cane  had  acted  as  a  conductor.

Mr.  W - took  up  one  of  my  cards  inadvertently,  while

his  back  was  turned,  not  aware  of  the  mischief  he  was  doing,
for  in  touching  it  he  had  ruined  one  of  his  cherished  talis¬
mans.  Frank  cried  out,  and  turned  sharp  round,  as  if  he

had  been  struck ;  Mr.  W -  instantly  dropped  it  on  the

table.  a  Somebody's  been  touching  my  property,”  cried  the
boy.  “  I'll  soon  find  out,”  and  he  got  his  vases  and  flowers,
and,  as  soon  as  he  touched  this  card,  he  lamented  over  it,
tore  it  up,  and  tossed  the  pieces  into  the  fire-place ;  but,
quickly  recollecting  himself,  said,  “  I'll  find  out  who  it  is,

though,”  and  began  to  sniff  about  till  he  took  up  Mr.  W - 's

hat.  He  then  raked  in  the  coals  for  the  bits  of  card,  put
them  and  the  hat  together,  placed  the  flower  jars  over  them,
deciding  thereby  that  the  wearer  of  that  hat  was  he  who  had
touched  his  card.  He  then  ran  away  and  locked  himself  in
the  other  room  for  a  few  minutes.  When  he  came  back  he
had  cut  the  remaining  card  in  two  equal  halves,  and  put  one
on  each  jar,  to  restore  the  symmetry.

He  is  now  becoming  very  sensitive  to  the  touch  of  copper
and  brass,  and,  if  he  accidentally  touches  either,  is  in  a  ter¬
rible  agitation,  and  nothing  will  purify  his  fingers  but  the
talismans.

He  took  up  my  hat  when  he  was  sniffing  about;  but  that
put  him  to  sleep,  and,  when  he  recovered,  he  put  it  reverently
down,  and  made  an  obeisance  to  it.

When  I  went  in  the  evening,  I  found  a  grand  display ;  for
he  had  invited  company  to  tea,  and  he  had  set  the  table  forth
with  decorative  arrangements,  which  shewed  a  great  talent
for  it,  considering  the  limited  means  at  his  disposal.  The
company,  the  inhabitants  of  the  house,  had  then  to  go  out¬
side  into  the  street,  each  in  turn  knock  and  arrive  as  com¬
pany.  I  was  admitted  with  Maria  B - ,  whom  I  found

outside  the  door,  on  that  expedition,  as  Miss  Ilolcombar ;
Lady  Amelia  Graystock  had  just  preceded  her,  the  name  lie
gives  to  the  lodger;  and  Old  Mother  Bradget,  his  mother,

b  b  2


340  Cure  of  Cataleptic  Insanity  through  Mesmerism,

and  f‘  Little  Tommy  Clutterbuck,”  his  brother,  were  already
there,  being  specially  invited  to  Lord  Ecclesfiekbs  evening
party,  which  is  the  name  he  gives  himself,  writing  all  his
letters  with  that  signature.  It  was  really  interesting  to  watch
the  boy.

The  tea  was  to  be  wetted  at  9,  and  as  he  was  impatient
he  put  the  clock  ten  minutes  on.

All  was  going  very  pleasantly  when  Mr.  W - (the  de¬

linquent  of  the  morning)  came  in.  This  he  should  not  have
done,  as  he  did  not  know  I  was  there,  and  it  was  soon  evi¬
dent  that  things  were  now  askew.  The  boy  began  to  be  very
much  disturbed.  “  Somebody  was  there  not  invited,”  and
he  went  into  the  other  room,  calling  out  in  addition,  “  and
unwanted  too.”  He  now  took  his  talismans  round  the  room,
then  rummaged  for  the  torn  card,  and  discovered  his  foe  of

the  morning  by  the  identity  of  the  fluid.  As  Mr.  W -

did  not  take  the  hint,  wishing  to  remain  and  witness  the
performance,  the  boy  got  more  and  more  excited  and  violent,
till  at  last  he  seized  the  tongs  and  rushed  at  him  to  drive  him
out ;  and  I,  fearing  the  boy  would  be  injured,  requested  him
to  go.

After  his  departure  the  boy  seemed  much  distressed,  and
his  countenance  had  a  worn  and  haggard  look,  which  it  was
painful  to  contemplate.  I  placed  my  hand  on  him  to  calm
him,  and,  as  if  he  instinctively  sought  what  was  necessary  to
him,  after  this  he  was  twice  drawn  towards  me  like  a  needle  to
a  magnet,  when  he  immediately  sank  into  a  deep  and  insen¬
sible  sleep.  I  removed  his  agitation,  but,  not  liking  to  mes¬
merise  him  out  of  the  course,  lest  it  should  interfere  with
to-morrow,  I  put  him  into  his  chair  and  withdrew  from  him.
I  then  tried  his  susceptibility  by  speaking  to  him  while  in
his  usual  maniacal  state,  but,  on  my  doing  so  he  instantly  fell
forward  mesmerised,  with  his  face  in  the  tea  tray.

I  left  him  rather  anxiously.

Monday,  May  15.  At  ten  minutes  to  12,  having  verified
my  watch  by  Lawson’s  chronometer,  I  went  to  him.  He
was  lying  on  his  back,  with  his  head  on  the  floor,  on  a  bed
which  he  had  made  of  a  blanket  four-times  folded,  and  a
pillow  at  the  end.

He  was  shaking  violently,  and  the  arms  and  legs  twitching
convulsively  against  the  floor,  as  he  lay  across  his  bed.  By
and  bye  he  began  to  draw  long  breaths  and  to  be  more  still,
drawing  his  breath  more  deeply,  till,  at  the  precise  time  he
was  to  become  sensible,  he  ceased  and  closed  his  eyes,  re¬
maining  so  for  some  minutes ;  at  sixteen  minutes  past  12  he
raised  himself  up  (which  he  had  been  endeavouring  to  do


by  Mr.  Parsons,  Royal  Marine  Library,  Brighton.  341

once  or  twice  before)  and  spoke  to  his  mother  in  a  natural
tone  of  voice.

His  mother  answered — he  was  quite  sensible — and,  when
he  had  expressed  his  surprise  at  finding  himself  down  stairs,
she  put  her  arm  round  him  to  prevent  him  from  falling,
and  he  immediately  collapsed  and  became  convulsed.  I  now
came  forward  and  mesmerised  him.

Q.  Well,  Frank,  how  are  you?

A.  Quite  well,  Sir,  and  I  am  very  much  obliged  to  you.

Q.  You  are  quite  welcome,  my  boy,  to  my  efforts  for
you ;  but  are  you  now  restored  to  your  senses,  as  you  said  ?

A.  Yes,  Sir.  I  shall  not  be  insensible  any  more.

Q.  But  you  were  not  quite  to  your  time,  were  you?

A.  Yes,  Sir.  I  became  sensible  at  seven  minutes  past  12
in  my  sleep,  seven  minutes  before  I  awoke.

Q.  Did  you  speak  to  your  mother  directly  you  awoke  ?

A.  No,  Sir.  I  was  awake  two  minutes  before  I  spoke.

This  makes  the  event  perfectly  in  accordance  with  his
prediction ;  for  that  quite  accounts  for  the  nine  minutes
difference  which  my  watch  gave  as  the  time  of  his  speaking,
beyond  the  seven  minutes  past  12.

Q.  Shall  you  be  able  to  touch  any  body  now  ?

A.  No,  Sir.  It  will  throw  me  again  into  the  maniacal
state.

Q.  But  how  will  that  do  ?  you  cannot  walk  about  if  that
is  the  case.  You  will  not  be  well.

A.  This  will  be  only  while  the  mesmerism  is  continued,
which  must  be  for  some  time  yet :  but  these  fits  will  only  last
a  short  time,  and  I  shall  come  out  of  them  well.  In  other
respects  I  shall  be  quite  well.

Q.  How  long  must  you  be  mesmerised  every  day,  now  ?

A.  For  half  an  hour,  if  you  will  be  so  good,  Sir.

Q.  Will  it  signify  whether  I  now  exceed  the  time  ?

A.  It  will  make  me  feel  weaker  when  I  awake,  if  you  do ;
the  mesmerism  will  make  me  heavy.

I  now  examined  him  (clairvoyant)  concerning  the  state  of
his  own  body,  which  he  described  thus, —

His  liver  was  lighter,  but  wanted  relief,  and  he  prescribed
seven  grains  of  jalap.  His  stomach,  and  underneath  it,
looked  dark ;  the  darkness  began  from  the  pit  of  the  stomach
downwards.  My  liver  looked  much  lighter  than  his  own,
but  he  could  not  see  my  brain.

He  would  sleep  25  minutes  after  I  left  him  and  would
awake  sensible  and  continue  so.

I  saw  him  again  at  half-past  3  ;  he  was  in  bed.  He  had
undressed  himself  because  he  found  himself  too  weak  to  be


342  Cure  of  Cataleptic  Insanity  through  Mesmerism ,

about.  The  excitement  being  removed,  the  actual  debility
was  made  manifest;  he  had  been  quite  collected  and  sensible,
but  exceedingly  nervous,  so  that  he  fell  into  a  violent  trem¬
bling  when  the  door  was  opened.  As  he  was  in  natural  sleep,
I  placed  my  hand  on  him  to  mesmerise  him  sufficiently  to
get  an  answer  and  asked  him  if  he  would  not  be  better  alto¬
gether  in  bed  for  a  time  ;  he  agreed  to  it.  His  mother  sug¬
gested  that  he  should  occupy  the  room  at  the  top  of  the  house,
as  it  was  his  own  and  he  usually  preferred  it :  moreover  it  was
never  passed  or  approached  by  any  body  else,  whereas  this
was  like  a  thoroughfare  all  day.  He  said  it  would  be  better  he
should  remove  to  it.  He  continued  to  sleep  when  I  came  away.

Tuesday,  May  16th.  My  patient  was  in  mesmeric  sleep
when  I  came.  I  mesmerised  him  half  an  hour.  He  said  he
was  quite  cured  and  would  now  only  want  rest  and  the  mes¬
merism  to  give  him  strength.  His  liver  was  quite  well;  the
jalap  had  done  good ;  but  my  putting  my  hand  there  had
done  more  good,  and  the  jalap  might  have  been  dispensed
with  if  he  had  directed  the  local  mesmerism  for  it.  The  sto¬
mach  below  was  a  little  dark ;  but  placing  my  hand  over  it
made  it  lighter.  His  heart  was  much  excited,  and  that  I
shall  not  be  able  to  remedy.  He  has  had  disease  of  the  heart
all  his  life,  and  it  is  beyond  the  reach  of  any  remedy ;  but  it
will  not  necessarily  shorten  life,  unless  combined  with  unfor-
tunate  circumstances ;  it  will  always  make  him  unsafe,  unless
he  takes  great  care  to  avoid  sudden  shocks,  and  strong  and
violent  exercise.  I  could  not  cure  it :  his  reason  for  saying  so
was,  that  the  smoke  from  my  hand  did  not  go  to  it,  but  seemed
to  be  repelled  from  it.  “  It  was  an  incurable  state,  which  has
always  existed.  His  mother  is  very  nervous;  I  should  do  her

good.  Miss  F - is  insane;  I  could  do  her  good  also,  make

her  much  better  even  if  I  did  not  cure  her.”

He  sees  a  smoke  and  feels  a  wind  from  my  hand,  and  sees
this  smoke  enveloping  me.  He  was  not  able  to  see  beyond
the  room  to-day,  “  because  he  is  cured.”  He  could  still  see
the  interiors  of  the  bodies  of  all  persons  in  the  room.  If  I
spoke  to  him  when  he  was  awake,  it  would  instantly  send  him
into  the  mesmeric  sleep ;  not  however  if  I  spoke  what  I  had
to  say  to  any  other  person  in  the  room ;  he  would  hear  it
then  without  being  so  influenced.  If  I  from  my  own  house
drew  him  strongly  towards  me,  he  would  feel  it,  but  not
come  to  me,  other  things  would  prevent  him  now  ;  he  would
come  as  far  as  the  door,  but  not  farther.  My  drawing  him
would  have  this  effect  from  any  distance,  from  the  other  side
of  the  world.  I  could  not  mesmerise  him  from  any  distance,
but  could  exert  this  influence.


by  Mr.  Parsons,  Royal  Marine  Library,  Brighton.  343

Not  many  persons  could  mesmerise  like  myself;  because
they  did  not  believe  so  much  as  I  did ;  want  of  faith  in  many
things  prevented  their  action;  it  made  a  difference  in  the
quality  of  the  fluid.  Wicked  men  could  not  mesmerise  like
good  men,  to  do  the  same  good  to  their  patients.  He  will
prefer  to  have  all  his  meals  brought  to  him  and  put  down
into  the  front  parlour,  where  he  will  live  and  sleep  also.  He
will  take  down  his  own  bed  there  as  nobody  must  touch  it.
He  will  be  able  to  see  people  and  talk  with  them  without
injury,  if  they  do  not  touch  him.  In  a  week  he  will  have
recovered  his  strength  and  be  less  susceptible.  He  must  be
mesmerised  daily  for  half  an  hour ;  he  will  sleep  twenty-five
minutes  after  I  leave  him.

His  mother  relates  that  she  was  in  the  room  when  he
awoke,  and  that  he  was  perfectly  sensible.  He  asked  if  she
had  taken  her  tea,  and  he  expressed  a  wish  for  some  himself.
She  brought  it  to  him  and  put  it  on  the  bed :  but  he  was  so
sensitive  that,  when  she  had  done  so,  he  said,  “  I  don’t  know
how  it  is,  mother,  but  I  can’t  rest  since  you  have  put  the
tea  on  the  bed  :  I  must  get  up  :  I  think  in  future  you  must
always  put  my  meals  on  the  table  and  not  touch  the  bed.”
He  was  obliged  to  leave  the  bed.  He  got  up  and  dressed  and
went  down  stairs,  was  much  struck  with  the  alterations  of
the  furniture  (which  he  had  himself  insisted  on),  and  with
the  decorations  of  the  room,  made  by  himself  and  consisting
of  coloured  paper  cut  into  various  forms  and  pinned  in  sys¬
tematic  arrangements  and  devices  on  the  walls  and  of  flowers
symmetrically  distributed  on  the  table  and  the  mantel-piece  :
but  more  astonished  at  the  slips  of  writing  in  his  own  hand.
His  mother  explained  that  he  had  done  all  these  things  him¬
self  in  those  “  bad  sleeps ”  which  he  used  to  have  sometimes,
and  which  he  had  been  having  lately.  “Well,  I  suppose  it
must  be  so ;”  he  remarked,  “  but  take  all  these  flowers  and
put  them  into  a  basin,  and  put  all  these  things  away.  I  don’t
want  any  of  this  nonsense  now.”  He  appears  then  to  have
gone  to  bed  and  has  slept  nearly  all  the  intervals  of  my
absence  ;  and  he  is  better  and  stronger.

I  went  in  the  evening  to  him  ;  but  he  was  in  a  very  un¬
satisfactory  state,  trembling  in  his  chair,  and  seeming,  as
his  mother  said,  “  very  strange.”

He  had  been  rational,  but  the  least  noise  threw  him  into
a  nervous  trembling,  and,  after  I  had  been  there  a  few
minutes,  his  head  fell  and  the  usual  shakings  which  were
the  precursors  of  his  cataleptic  fits  came  on.  I  mesmerised
him,  but  still  he  did  not  become  quiet  at  once.  I  asked  him
the  reason  of  it.  He  did  not  know.  It  was  on  this  occasion


344  Cure  of  Cataleptic  Insanity  through  Mesmerism,

that  I  made  the  effort  to  demesmerise  him  entirely,  hoping
by  that  means  to  remove  the  extreme  sensitiveness  he  mani¬
fested  to  the  approach  of  other  persons.  He  neither  advised
nor  refused  it :  did  not  know  what  effect  it  would  have.  I
tried  for  twenty  minutes  to  demesmerise  him ;  with  this
result : — he  seemed  stage  by  stage  to  recede  into  the  con¬
dition  he  had  escaped  from,  till  his  head  turned  over  one
shoulder  and  his  jaws  began  to  chatter,  as  in  his  worst  state ;
and  as  it  appeared  to  me  that  I  was  dissipating  all  the  good  I
had  done,  I  desisted  and  mesmerised  him  afresh.  In  doing
so  I  was  strongly  conscious  of  a  current  of  fluid  as  I  made
the  downward  passes  :  as  if  in  demesmerising  I  had  given  an
upward  tendency  to  them,  and  was  now  working  against  the
stream.  When  he  was  fairly  asleep  and  could  reply  to  my
questions,  he  said,  “  I  am  very  poorly,  and  shall  have  a  strong
tit  (cataleptic)  soon  after  you  leave  me.  I  shall  sit  in  the
chair  and  be  quite  stiffened,  so  that  I  shall  not  fall  out  of  it.
I  require  air :  taking  the  air  out  of  doors  will  do  me  good.”

He  said  he  could  go  early  in  the  morning  before  people
were  up,  to  avoid  the  evil  consequence  of  meeting  any  body,
but  I  thought  that  could  not  be  allowed  and  promised  to  come
for  him  at  7  in  the  morning  myself.

Wednesday,  May  17.  I  called  for  him,  but  he  was  too  ill
to  get  up.  I  mesmerised  him  and  found  him  very  weak  and
ill  from  the  violence  of  the  fit,  which  his  mother  described  as
the  most  severe  one  she  had  ever  seen  him  in  :  it  endured
more  than  an  hour.

I  mesmerised  him  at  twelve  o’clock  for  half  an  hour.  He
said  that  he  suffered  from  the  effects  of  this  fit,  but  that  his
recovery  will  not  be  prevented  by  it.

I  have  given  him  certain  directions  in  sleep  for  self¬
management  when  I  am  away  :  but  he  does  not  appear  influ¬
enced  by  these  commands  when  awake,  and  I  was  therefore
obliged  to  write  a  letter  to  him  containing  the  directions  I
wished  to  give  him — that,  to  avoid  being  constantly  agitated
by  touching  things  which  have  come  through  other  hands
recently,  he  was  to  do  all  he  could  for  himself,  to  get  his  own
cup  and  saucer,  plate,  &c.,  to  bring  down  his  bed  into  the
front  room  himself  if  he  could,  and,  when  anything  had  been
touched  by  another,  to  blow  on  it  strongly,  and  thus  dispel
the  hostile  influence.

He  said  that  he  did  not  foresee  the  fit  till  a  little  while
before  it  came  on.  I  asked  him  how  he  was  enabled  to  foresee
it  at  all.  He  replied,  “  By  a  general  darkness  in  the  nerves,
particularly  about  the  waist”  (the  solar  plexus).  I  then
asked.


by  Mr.  Parsons,  Royal  Marine  Library,  Brighton.  345

Q.  How  long  can  you  foresee  one  ?

A.  (assuming  an  inclined  position  to  the  right)  Two  days.

Mr.  H - ,  a  medical  gentleman,  who  has  known  the

case  as  long  as  I  have,  remarks  already  a  great  improvement

in  his  appearance  and  an  evident  gain  of  flesh.  Mr.  H - ,

by  the  way,  is  a  remarkable  person,  by  whose  permission  I
hope  to  enrich  the  pages  of  The  Zoist  with  an  interesting
instance  of  spontaneous  clairvoyance  which  he  himself  was
gifted  with  when  suffering  from  disease.  He  saw  his  own
interior  and  particularly  the  spinal  marrow  and  brain ;  but,
as  he  has  promised  to  give  me  a  full  description  of  the  circum¬
stances,  I  need  make  no  more  extended  mention  of  it  here,
except  to  say  that  the  internal  vision  was  exercised  in  his
natural  waking  state.

I  saw  Frank  in  the  evening.  When  awake,  he  has  ex¬
pressed  much  annoyance  at  the  directions  which  he  himself
gave  in  sleep.  He  said  he  could  not  possibly  sleep  in  that
room,  he  should  be  so  cold ;  and  complained  that  he  was  so
hungry  that  he  wanted  something  more  than  bread  and
butter,  which  he  had  directed  for  his  dinner.  He  is  quite
another  individual  when  awake,  and  is  opposed  as  much  as
possible  to  himself  in  the  mesmeric  state.

I  now  never  see  him  except  in  his  mesmeric  sleep.  I  am
the  only  person  unable  to  compare  the  two  states ;  for  the
instant  I  enter  the  house  he  sleeps.

Thursday,  May  18.  He  has  slept  tolerably  well.  I  mes¬
merised  him  not  quite  half  an  hour,  as  he  said  he  had  enough.
Much  better  to-day  and  more  cheerful.  Thinks  it  might  be
advantageous  if  he  were  mesmerised  twice  a  day,  a  quarter
of  an  hour  morning  and  evening ;  as,  if  mesmerised  too  long
at  a  time,  he  feels  heavy.

He  could  not  see  to-day  :  and,  on  my  asking  him  a  ques¬
tion,  he  assumed  the  inclined  position.  I  asked  him  why.

A.  When  I  do  that  I  see  a  smoke,  which  enables  me  to
see  when  I  can  see.  I  see  the  smoke  when  I  do  it  now ;  but
I  cannot  see  anything  outwardly  by  it  to-day.

Q.  Is  the  smoke  a  light  ?

A.  Yes,  Sir.

Q.  Shall  you  be  able  at  some  other  time  to  see  by  means
of  it?

A.  Yes,  Sir;  but  I  cannot  say  when.

Since  he  has  been  rational  he  has  complained  of  the  pain  he
suffers  in  going  over  the  sill  of  the  cellar-door.  It  quite  hurts
his  feet,  and  he  is  astonished  at  it,  wondering  what  can  be  the
reason.  This  is  an  interesting  fact,  as  establishing  the  reality
of  the  influence  of  this,  to  ordinary  perceptions,  imaginary


346  Cure  of  Cataleptic  Insanity  through  Mesmerism,

barrier,  which  I  had  created  to  prevent  him  in  his  mania
from  descending  the  stairs.

I  to-night  put  his  bed  up  myself,  as  he  is  too  weak  for  it,
and  it  hurts  him  for  any  other  person  to  touch  the  bed¬
clothes.

I  am  curious  to  ascertain  when  he  goes  to  sleep  on  my
approach ;  for  he  appears  to  have  been  some  time  in  that  state
now  when  I  see  him.

As  he  had  just  had  another  fit,  I  mesmerised  him  ten
minutes  and  questioned  him.

Q.  How  are  you  to-night  ?

A.  Not  very  well,  Sir  :  the  fit  has  made  me  feel  ill.

Q.  How  was  it  that  you  did  not  foresee  this  fit  in  the
morning  ?

A.  I  could  not  see  anything  this  morning,  Sir  ?  I  could
not  come  in  contact  with  the  light.  I  can  see  now  (he  assumed
an  inclined  position) .  I  can  see  a  house,  an  interior ;  there  is
a  room  with  four  ladies  and  two  gentlemen  in  it,  they  are
drinking  wine — they  are  playing  cards  too.

Q.  Where  is  the  house,  and  what  is  there  that  brings  it
before  you  ?  has  it  any  possible  connexion  with  yourself?

A.  I  don't  know  where  it  is :  it  comes  to  me  :  I  see  it  all
at  once,  I  don't  know  why,  when  I  can  touch  the  light.

Q.  What  is  that  light,  and  whence  does  it  emanate  ?

A.  It  comes  from  you,  Sir.  This  morning  I  could  see  it,
but  it  turned  away  from  me :  now  it  falls  on  my  body.

I  remark  here  that,  this  being  the  only  time  he  has  spoken
of  this  phenomenon  in  the  night  time ,  he  calls  it  the  light ;  at
all  other  times,  having  seen  it  only  in  the  day,  he  called  it
a  smoke.

Q.  Shall  you  have  any  more  fits  ?

A.  Yes,  three  more  during  the  night.

Q.  It  is  very  embarrassing  that  I  can  never  come  near  you
without  producing  sleep.  How  long  will  this  great  suscep¬
tibility  endure  ?  try  and  discover.

He  took  the  inclined  position  and  twisted  himself  slowly
in  different  ways  :  then  sat  up  and  replied,

A.  Next  Monday.

Q.  How  do  you  ascertain  this  ?

A.  When  I  get  into  the  light,  I  see  it  written :  the  ques¬
tion  is  written  and  the  answer  under  it.

Friday,  May  19.  Mesmerised  at  12  for  a  quarter  of  an
hour.  He  is  not  so  well  owing  to  the  fits  :  he  had  the  three
he  predicted  :  the  first  lasted  twenty  minutes,  the  second  fif¬
teen  minutes,  the  third  ten  minutes.  I  asked  him,

Q.  Can  you  see  the  light,  or  come  in  contact  with  it  ?


by  Mr.  Parsons ,  Royal  Marine  Library,  Brighton.  347

A.  No,  Sir ;  I  cannot  see  it  even.

Q.  Do  you  think  you  can  tell  me  what  this  light  is  ?  and
do  you  think  if  I  move  you  into  a  different  position  it  will
assist  you  to  come  in  contact  with  it  ?

A.  I  do  not  know,  Sir.  It  comes  from  you  and  it  is  a
sort  of  smoke  with  a  light  in  the  middle.

I  now  moved  him  so  as  to  be  in  a  line  with  me  north  and
south.  He  could  see  the  light  now  :  it  was  behind  him.  I
moved  him  again,  so  that  I  was  east  and  he  west :  he  now
exclaimed,  “  I  touch  the  light,”  and,  immediately  inclining
his  body  to  the  left  (he  had  always  before  inclined  to  the  right),
he  said,  “  I  can  see  the  same  party  I  saw  last  night :  they
are  at  breakfast  now.

Q.  Rather  a  late  breakfast,  eh  ?  (it  was  past  12.)

A.  It  is  a  wedding  breakfast.

Q.  Oh  !  indeed,  can  you  see  the  bride  ?

A.  Yes,  she  is  very  pretty ;  23  years  of  age ;  the  bride¬
groom  is  45  ;  he  is  a  dark  man,  with  a  scar  on  his  cheek.

Q.  How  many  are  present  ?

A.  There  are  48  persons  present.  They  are  not  relations,
they  are  acquaintances ;  there  are  no  relations :  the  lady’s
name  is  Whiteman,  the  gentleman’s  name  is  Oporto ;  he  is  a
foreigner,  she  is  English.

Q.  Can  you  find  out  by  anything  where  they  are ;  is  it  in

Brighton  or  any  other  place  ?

A.  I  have  an  idea  it  is  at  Hastings  :  I  see  a  van  at  the
door  with  “  Hastings  to  Brighton”  on  the  back  of  it.  I
cannot  see  any  name :  I  can  look  out  at  the  window  into  the
street ;  it  is  dark,  there  is  a  fog  I  mean.

As  his  quarter  of  an  hour  (the  time  he  directed)  was  ex¬
pired,  I  ceased  to  question  him,  and  left  him.

His  mother  was  much  astonished  at  what  he  had  uttered.
She  said  there  was  a  lady  of  that  name  married  at  Hastings
whom  she  knew,  and  the  ages  tallied  exactly.  The  lady  was
23  and  the  gentleman  45.  He  was  a  dark  man,  and  had  a
scar  on  his  cheek,  and  was  a  foreigner ;  but  she  did  not  know
his  name,  nor  should  she  know  it  if  it  were  mentioned  to
her,  for  she  thinks  the  event  must  have  occurred  26  years  ago.

I  asked  if  any  circumstance  connected  it  with  herself,  or
if  he  had  ever  heard  her  speak  of  it.  Her  reply  was,  “  Oh
dear  no,  Sir ;  I  should  not  have  remembered  it  if  he  had  not
said  what  he  has.  I  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  wedding  :
but  I  remember  it  being  talked  of  at  the  time.”

I  have  made  enquiry  by  letter  at  Hastings  to  ascertain  if
any  such  wedding  had  recently  taken  place,  but  nothing  is
known  of  it.


348  Care  of  Cataleptic  Insanity  through  Mesmerism,

As  my  patient  is  invariably  asleep  when  I  arrive,  I  made

an  arrangement  with  Mr.  H - to  ascertain  to-morrow  when

he  begins  to  feel  my  approach.  He  was  to  be  there  a  few
minutes  before  the  time  of  my  arrival,  watch  the  boy,  and
note  when  the  change  took  place.

He  has  been  very  flighty  in  his  manner  to-day,  and,  when
I  went  up  at  nine  in  the  evening,  his  mother  told  me  he  had
previously  a  strong  fit.  I  mesmerised  him  and  turned  him
to  the  east.  He  saw  the  light  directly  :  but  it  looked  darker,
and  presently  he  gradually  inclined  himself  so  much  that  he
would  have  fallen  out  of  his  chair  if  I  had  not  saved  him.
I  then  questioned  him,

Q.  How  are  you  to-night,  Frank  ?

A.  Not  so  well.  I  have  had  another  fit.  They  weaken  me.

Q.  Try  and  find  out  how  this  is,  and  what  is  the  cause  of
your  going  back  so,  (the  clock  now  struck  nine,  and  he  gave
a  sharp  scream  which  almost  electrified  us  all.)  What  is  the
matter,  my  dear  boy  ?

A.  (much  agitated)  I  see  it  point! — the  hand ! — a  very
white  and  ghastly  hand — to  these  words,

“ - The  hand  that  struck  before,

Strikes  again,  but  strikes  no  more.”

I  see  more  writing — it  says,  “  You  are  ordained  to  be  under
the  hand  of  affliction  three  thousand  six  hundred  minutes
from  12  o’clock  to-night.”  It  means,  Sir,  that  I  shall  be  a
maniac  again.  The  time  will  expire  at  12  o’clock  on  Monday,
when  I  shall  be  quite  well.

Q.  What  is  the  reason  you  are  not  yet  cured  ?  and  why
does  the  time  point  to  that  hour  always  ?

A.  I  have  an  idea  that  I  was  first  taken  ill  at  12  o’clock  :
and  this  second  attack  has  been  hanging  about  me  all  the
week  :  the  brain  looks  dark  also  in  the  same  place  as  before.

He  was  now  so  agitated  with  the  light  which  followed  him,
he  said,  the  hand  still  pointing  to  the  same  words,  that  I
altered  his  position  to  take  him  out  of  the  line  of  magnetic
relation,  and  he  lost  sight  of  it.  But,  as  he  still  continued
much  disturbed,  I  laid  him  on  the  bed,  which  being  nearly
in  the  magnetic  line,  he  touched  the  light  again.  I  asked
him  about  this  light  once  more,  and  he  rose  in  his  bed,  and
said,  “The  light  is  the  virtue  of  the  mesmerism.  I  can  see
it  written  now  with  the  question.”

While  he  was  on  the  bed  I  made  a  few  long  passes  to  the
feet,  and  he  almost  lost  his  power  of  answering.

He  said  he  would  get  up  soon  after  he  became  mad  again,
and  walk  about  the  house,  but  he  would  not  come  to  any


by  Mr.  Parsons ,  Royal  Marine  Library ,  Brighton.  349

harm  in  that  state.  His  bowels  have  been  much  relaxed,  but
it  had  done  him  good ;  it  was  the  seltzer  water,  and  this  was
much  better  than  the  jalap  :  this  mania  he  thinks  is  the
remains  of  the  trance.

I  mesmerised  him  25  minutes,  when  he  said  he  was  quite

full.

Saturday,  May  20.  Exactly  at  12  o’clock  last  night,  he
got  up  quite  mad,  but  went  to  bed  again  at  half-past  2  and
had  a  pretty  good  night’s  sleep.  His  mania  is  much  less  vio¬
lent  than  formerly,  and  he  sometimes  rational^  answers  ques¬
tions  put  to  him.

As  agreed  between  Mr.  H - and  myself,  I  started  from

my  house,  observing  the  time  when  I  did  so ;  it  was  just  five

minutes  to  12.  When  I  got  to  my  patient  I  found  Mr.  H -

there,  watch  in  hand.  1  looked  at  my  watch  :  I  had  been
four  minutes  walking  thither :  the  boy  was  asleep.

Mr.  H  —  reported  that,  on  his  arrival,  Frank  was  walk¬
ing  briskly  about,  evidently  quite  maniacal,  and  continued
so  till  just  four  minutes  before  my  arrival,  when  he  suddenly
started,  shuddered,  and,  staggering,  fell  into  his  chair  fast
asleep  as  I  found  him.

On  mesmerising  him,  he  said  that  he  went  asleep  as  soon
as  I  left  my  home  to  come  to  him ;  he  knew  it  because  he
was  in  union  with  me  from  that  time.

He  directed  mesmerism  twenty  minutes,  particularly  to
the  head,  which  looked  very  bad.  When  the  time  was  up,
he  said,  “  That  will  do,  Sir ;  I’m  quite  full.”

He  tried  to-day  to  get  out  of  the  light,  as  he  said  it  was  too
strong  for  him  and  was  so  hot ;  it  came  from  me,  (I  was  my¬
self  feverish  and  bilious  that  morning,  and  felt  altogether  un¬
well).  The  feeling  was  abated  when  I  threw  my  head  back
to  a  distance  from  him.  He  saw  the  same  words  he  had  seen
last  night ;  the  light  was  so  strong  he  could  see  nothing  else,
not  even  me.

Sunday,  May  21.  In  the  morning  he  fell  asleep  at  the
time  I  left  the  chapel  to  go  to  him.  But  in  the  evening  I
caught  him  awake.  He  was  talking  when  I  entered,  and  was
very  merry.  He  had  just  boxed  Maria  B  s  ears  foi
fun.  He  did  not  seem  to  notice  me ;  and  it  was  only  when
I  looked  at  him  that  his  eyes  closed,  and  then,  slowly  rising,
he  came  towards  me  till  he  touched  me,  like  a  needle  to  a
magnet.

He  had  risen  to-day  at  four  in  the  morning  and  walked
for  two  hours  and  a  half  on  the  Race-hill.  This  had  done
him  good.  His  mother  and  the  lodger  went  with  him.  He
was  very  merry.


350  Cure  of  Cataleptic  Insanity  through  Mesmerism ,

Monday,  May  22.  As  this  was  the  day  on  which  his  attack
was  to  terminate,  I  waited  for  the  development  of  reason  at
12  o’clock.

He  was  writing  when  I  arrived,  and,  as  1  passed  into  the
back  room,  he  did  not  cease  bat  became  very  sleepy.  Pre¬
sently  he  cried  out  twice.  I  went  to  him  and  found  him  with
his  head  hanging  nearly  on  the  floor,  his  jaws  chattering.  I
lifted  him,  not  wishing  to  mesmerise  him  till  12  o’clock.

I  sat  still,  endeavouring  to  remain  passive ;  but  he  was
attracted  towards  me,  and  stood  between  my  knees  in  front
of  me.  Mr.  Wilton,  the  assistant,  came  in  about  two  minutes
before  12 ;  and  he  staggered  back  into  the  chair  at  12  pre¬
cisely.  He  then  gave  a  cry,  stood  upright  with  his  eyes  open
and  a  strong  squint  in  them,  and  came  to  me.  I  now  mes¬
merised  him  with  a  few  passes  and  placed  him  as  usual.

In  answer  to  my  questions,  he  said  he  was  much  better,
and  that  he  was  out  of  the  trance,  but  that  he  would  not
know  any  body  for  three  days,  and  on  Thursday,  at  12  o’clock,
he  would  be  quite  recovered ;  he  must  be  mesmerised  a  quarter
of  an  hour.

Q.  You  told  me  you  would  recover  your  senses  to-day
at  12.

A.  I  shall  be  out  of  the  trance.

He  reminded  me  that  there  was  other  writing  which  he
could  not  see,  when  he  told  what  he  did  see  beginning  with
“The  hand  which  struck  before,  &c.,”  but  now  he  saw  that  he
was  to  be  three  days  in  a  sort  of  dream,  only  the  madness.

I  told  him  the  madness  appeared  to  me  the  important
thing  to  be  got  rid  of,  and  that  I  was  disappointed  as  I  ex¬
pected  he  would  be  quite  recovered.  His  rejoinder  was,  “  It
is  much  better  as  it  is,  for  in  my  irrational  state  I  recover  my
strength  much  faster  than  if  I  were  sensible,  and  I  shall  be
better  now  than  I  was  even  before  I  was  taken  ill.”

Q.  How  long  will  your  great  susceptibility  remain  ?

A.  As  long  as  you  continue  to  mesmerise  me.  I  shall  not
need  it  now  any  longer,  and  it  will  go  off  in  about  a  week.

In  the  evening  I  again  mesmerised  him  and  questioned
him  ;  and  he  gave  as  his  reason,  that  it  was  better  for  him  to
be  in  his  maniacal  than  in  his  rational  state,  while  the  mes¬
merism  was  continued,  “the  fluid  entering  more  perfectly
into  my  system  in  that  state  and  in  the  trance,  (out  of  which
he  says  he  now  is,  though  the  alteration  is  not  noticeable,)
and  in  the  sensible  state  it  goes  away  from  me,  and  by  enter¬
ing  more  perfectly  it  strengthens  me  so  much  more  than  if  I
were  sensible.”

When  I  left  him,  I  told  him  not  to  get  up  and  follow  me


by  Mr.  Parsons,  Royal  Marine  Library,  Brighton.  351

He  replied,  “  I  can’t  help  it,  Sir ;  I  wish  I  could  sometimes  :
you  are  like  a  loadstone  to  me.”

Tuesday,  May  23.  When  I  went  to  him,  I  heard  that  he
had  not  been  to  bed  all  night.  When  asked  the  reason,  he
said,  “  I  cannot  lie  down,  Sir ;  it  hurts  me  ;  the  mesmerism
fills  my  chest.”

Q.  Can  you  see  to-day  ?

A.  Yes,  Sir,  I  see  the  light.

Q.  Who  is  that  at  the  door,  (somebody  had  knocked).

A.  (slowly)  It  is  R - H - H - ;  I  cannot  see  the

last  name ;  it  is  Richard  Holmes  something ;  it  is  the  school¬
master;  he  teased  me  very  much  last  night,  asking  questions.

Q.  Do  you  know  the  gentleman  in  the  room  ?

A.  Yes,  Mr.  H - .  (It  is  to  be  remarked  here  that  he

pronounced  this  name  differently  from  myself  or  any  other

person  I  had  heard  speak  it ;  and  Mr.  H -  immediately

said,  “  The  boy  has  pronounced  my  name  correctly,  which  no
one  else  has  done  since  I  have  been  in  Brighton.”)

Q.  How  do  you  know  it  ?

A.  I  see  it  written  under  the  question.

Q.  He  has  had  something  remarkable  the  matter  with
him  :  what  was  it  that  occurred  ?

A.  Yes,  he  saw  his  own  back.  (Mr.  H -  remarked

that  he  thinks  he  said  this  once  in  the  boy’s  presence.)

Q.  Anything  else  ?

A.  Yes,  he  saw  his  own  brain.  I  see  it  written.  (This
also  Mr.  H - said  he  had  mentioned  before  him,  and  sug¬

gested  that  I  should  ask  how  long  he  had  been  ill.)  I  did  so,
and  he  replied ; —

A.  A  long  time ;  nearly  six  months.

This  was  quite  true,  and  Mr.  H - confirmed  it  by  say¬

ing  that  it  was  not  quite  six  months,  and  he  was,  moreover,
quite  sure  that  he  had  not  mentioned  this  in  his  hearing.

His  susceptiblity  to  my  presence  is  now  so  great  that  I
am  compelled  to  leave  the  room  quickly  and  pull  the  door
to  after  me,  in  order  to  prevent  his  escaping  with  me.

His  mother  was  to-day  speaking  to  me  something  con¬
cerning  himself,  when  he  shrieked  out,  and  said,  “  It  is  wrong,
Mrs.  Bradget  has  made  a  mistake.”  Mrs.  who  ?  said  I,  for
I  never  heard  him  call  his  mother  by  this  name,  except  in  his
mad  state.  “Mrs  Bradget, — I  mean  Mrs.  Walker,  Sir.”

It  struck  me  here  that  the  mad  state  was  in  some  degree
confusedly  mixed  up  with  the  mesmeric  state,  and  for  this
reason  : — I  had  left  a  lady  and  gentleman  in  the  room  when
I  made  my  hurried  exit,  and,  when  I  got  to  the  end  of  the
street,  I  reconsidered  that  it  was  improper  to  leave  any  body


352  Cure  of  Cataleptic  Insanity  through  Mesmerism,

with  him,  especially  strangers ;  and  I  returned.  He  said,  I
had  not  been  far,  for  he  had  not  been  able  to  wake  quite, —
in  consequence  of  my  near  neighbourhood :  so  that  the  mad
state  supervened  without  the  mesmeric  being  dissipated.  His
mother  says  that,  a  minute  after  I  left  the  room  and  he  had
rushed  against  the  door  to  follow  instead  of  going  to  his  chair
as  usual,  he  suddenly  darted  to  the  opposite  corner  of  the
room,  (which  was  nearest  in  the  direct  line  to  the  end  of  the
street  where  I  paused  to  deliberate  before  I  returned,)  and,
on  her  speaking  to  him,  he  had  been  able  to  hear  her  and
annoyed  at  what  she  said ;  so  that,  when  I  arrived,  I  found
the  two  states  fused  as  it  were,  and  his  hallucination  mingled
with  his  reasonable  replies  to  myself.  I  asked  him  if  he  still
kept  to  the  opinion  that  he  would  be  well  to-morrow.

A .  Yes,  Sir ;  if  nothing  opposite  occurs , — nothing  to  put
me  back.  (He  now  came  so  close  to  me  as  almost  to  push  me
off  my  chair.)

Q.  Where  do  you  want  to  get,  Frank  ?

A.  I  want  to  come  close  to  you,  sir  :  I  can’t  help  it.

Q.  Close  ! — one  would  think  you  wanted  to  get  inside  of

me.

A.  (smiling)  Well,  sir,  I  do  seem  to  want  to  get  there.

Q.  But  that  is  inconvenient,  my  boy :  this  makes  it  less
comfortable  for  me  to  come  and  see  you.

If  a  young  woman  had  shewn  this  mesmeric  attachment,
it  would  doubtless  have  been  attributed  by  opponents  to  an
impure  motive.  I  have  mesmerised  young  women  who  have
shewn  it  very  strongly,  but  never  so  strongly  as  this  lad  ma¬
nifested  it,  because  of  the  difference  of  sex,  oddly  as  it  may
read.  The  lad  yielded  at  once  to  the  instinct.  The  young
woman  felt  the  same  impulse,  but  the  innate  modesty  and
reserve,  as  conspicuous  in  this  state  as  in  the  waking  state,
restrained  her,  for  fear  of  misconstruction.  “  None  were
ever  so  fond  of  me  as  this  boy,”  I  said,  smiling.  The  boy
now  came  and  put  his  arms  round  me,  as  if  what  I  said  had
influenced  him  to  shew  his  love.  Yet,  as  I  did  not  speak  to
him,  and  as  he  always  says  he  has  never  heard  a  word  in  such
cases,  when  I  have  questioned  him,  it  may  have  been  un¬
consciously  apprehended.  This  is  often  the  case  when  talking
is  going  on  around,  and  the  patient  will  manifest  afterwards
that  the  matter  has  been  apprehended,  although  not  conscious
at  the  time  of  hearing  any  thing.

This  makes  them  liable  to  the  charge  of  duplicity  and
falsehood,  and  of  keeping  up  a  fictitious  state, — a  charge
often  enough  brought  against  them  by  persons  not  conversant
with  mesmeric  phenomena.


by  Mr.  Parsons ,  Royal  Marine  Library,  Brighton.  353

That  his  brain  is  perfectly  impressed  with  anything  which
occurs  in  the  mad  state,  is  proved  by  his  narrating  to  me  in
sleep-waking  what  has  occurred  during  liis  mania,  such  as — -
who  have  been  to  see  him,  and  what  he  has  said.

Thursday,  May  25.  As  I  half  expected,  the  boy  has  dis¬
appointed  me ;  he  has  not  only  not  recovered  his  senses,  but
he  appears  farther  from  it  than  ever :  he  looks  ill,  and  says
that  his  sleep  last  night  hurt  him  very  much,  for  the  fluid
runs  into  his  chest  when  he  lies  down.

He  shrieked  several  times,  and  was  in  fits  before  1 2  o’clock,
and  afterwards;  but  no  other  changes  took  place.

I  began  to  mesmerise  him  a  little  before  12,  to  calm  him,
leaving  him  again  to  come  to  his  crisis.

His  mother  had  heard  him  say  that  he  felt  very  dread¬
fully,  as  if  he  was  going  to  be  disappointed.

After  the  time  was  overpast  two  minutes,  I  asked  him  if
he  was  come  to  his  senses.  His  reply  was,  “It  is  not  12
o’clock  yet.”  I  waited  till  he  said,  “  It  is  four  minutes  past
12  now,”  and  looking  at  my  watch  found  it  six  minutes.  I
noticed  this,  and  he  rejoined,  “  Your  watch  is  wrong,  sir.”

I  asked  him  now  if  he  could  see  any  direction  in  his  case,
and  he  said,  “  I  can  only  see  this :  f  My  ways  are  not  your
ways,  nor  my  thoughts  your  thoughts :  for  as  high  as  the
heavens  are  above  the  earth,  so  are  my  ways  above  your  ways,
and  my  thoughts  above  your  thoughts.’  ”  He  also  saw,  “  By
faith  Abraham,  when  he  was  tried,  offered  up  Isaac.” —
“  Well,”  I  remarked,  “  what  application  is  there  of  these
passages  to  your  case?  I  cannot  see  any  bearing  at  all.”

This  was  all  I  could  get.  So  having  followed  the  ignis
fatuus,  as  I  now  was  disposed  to  consider  his  predictory  power,
notwithstanding  the  many  correct  hits  he  had  made  up  to
this  point,  till  it  left  me  in  the  swamp  of  disappointment,  I
had  now  no  resource  but  to  follow  my  own  judgment,  and  to
trust  that  the  case  would  yet  develope  favourably  with  patient
mesmerism.

It  was  evident  the  lucidity  had  fallen  through  and  failed,
and  there  was  an  end  of  it.  The  alteration  on  Monday  had
prepared  me  for  this,  and,  though  I  hoped  it  might  redeem
itself,  I  ro  longer  trusted  it.

Mr.  H - says,  that  to  him,  as  a  medical  man,  the

case  would  be  clear;  the  boy  cannot  live,  and  he  expects
there  will  be  effusion  on  the  brain,  particularly  as  he  has  had
heart  disease :  and,  as  to  those  shrieks,  if  he  had  heard  them
from  the  street,  he  would  have  said  they  were  uttered  by  a
child  suffering  from  hydrocephalus.  The  case  will  either  ter-
,  VOL.  vi.  c  c


354  Case  of  Cataleptic  Insanity  treated  Mesmerically,

minate  in  death  or  madness;  this  is  his  opinion  medically:
what  mesmerism  might  effect  was  another  thing.

He  now  and  for  some  days  directed  that  I  should  demes¬
ne!  erise  him  slightly  before  going  from  him,  as  this  enabled
him  to  touch  others  without  discomfort.

Saturday,  May  27.  Had  another  fit,  but  says  he  is  better.
His  mother  asked  if  it  was  not  wrong  to  play  with  the  boy  so
much,  for  he  is  very  much  inclined  to  it.  I  told  her  that
following  his  humour  was  much  better  than  opposing  it,  and
it  would  do  no  harm  to  have  as  much  merriment  with  him  as
he  invited ;  but  that  they  should  avoid  leading  him  to  it.  I
then  asked  the  boy  himself,  and  he  confirmed  this,  adding,
“  it  would  be  much  worse  if  they  refused.”

If  his  mother  is  talking  of  him  in  the  room,  it  hardly
ever  fails  to  throw  him  into  the  trembling  fit :  so  that  I  have
forbidden  her  to  do  so.

Sunday,  May  28.  Complained  of  tooth-ache,  which  I
removed  in  a  minute  by  putting  my  hand  on  his  cheek.

Monday  29.  More  lucid  to-day ;  could  see  others  in  the
room,  but  very  dimly.  His  appearance  is  much  improved,
but  he  is  very  fitly,  as  he  calls  it.  He  had  a  cataleptic  fit  in
the  night.

Tuesday  30.  Skin  much  hotter  again.  His  lucidity  out¬
wardly  returning.  Thinks  he  is  gradually  and  surely  reco¬
vering.

Wednesday,  May  31.  Found  him  pen  in  hand  as  usual;
for  he  has  lately  been  incessantly  so  employed.  His  occupa¬
tion  is  writing  verses,  which  he  transcribes  into  little  books  of
lace  paper,  tastefully  interleaved  with  coloured  tissue  and
tied  up  with  silk  ribbon.  These  he  letters  outside,  “  Fugitive
Poetry,  by  Frank  Ecclesfield” — his  fancy  name.

He  has  written  many  pages  of  this  poetry,  which  bear  the
stamp  of  originality,  and  which  he  says  he  has  composed  him¬
self,  during  his  mania.  Certainly  they  are  not  copied  from
any  book,  and,  if  not  original,  are  written  from  memory;
and,  as  none  of  them  are  known  to  the  teachers  of  the  school,
with  the  exception  of  one  poem,  which  he  says  was  taken
from  a  magazine,  four  years  ago,  the  circumstance  is  inter¬
esting  in  whatever  way  it  is  viewed.  Moreover  his  mother
assures  me  that  in  his  sane  state  he  never  cared  anything
about  poetry.

I  suspected  that  some  activity  in  the  lateral  portions  of
the  brain  accounted  for  this,  and  directed  his  attention  to  it.
“  The  sides  are  darker  than  they  should  be,”  he  said,  placing
his  hand  on  the  region  of  Ideality.  I  found  the  parts  very
hot  to  the  touch,  and  mesmerised  them  accordingly.


by  Mr.  Parsons,  Royal  Marine  Library,  Brighton.  355


Thursday,  June  1st.  As  he  said  he  could  see  to-day,  I
directed  him  to  the  school-room.  His  description  was  as
follows  :  “They  are  deserted;  No,  there  are  some  boys  in  the
boys'  school.  Oh,  I  see ;  the  rest  are  in  church.  I  can  see
the  infants  coming  out  now.  Miss  Dixon  is  standing  at  the
school  room  door,  seeing  them  go;  she  has  a  card  in  her  hand
with  the  residences  written  on  it :  now  she  is  calling  to  one
of  them.  I  cannot  hear  what  she  says.  I  am  full  now,  Sir.”

As  I  left  him  immediately  and  the  school  was  in  the  direc¬
tion  I  intended  to  walk,  I  determined  to  verify  this  clairvoy¬
ance.  I  enquired  for  and  found  the  school,  which  I  had  never
before  seen,  and  it  occupied  such  a  situation  as  made  the  be¬
holding  it  with  the  natural  eye  a  feat  utterly  impossible  from
my  patient's  house  or  street.

I  found  the  last  of  a  stream  of  infants  coming  out  of  the
door;  and,  as  a  bigger  girl  came  to  the  door,  I  asked  her
which  was  Miss  Dixon.  She  pointed  to  a  lady  at  the  far  end
of  a  long  passage,  who  presently  came  herself  to  the  door,
and  I  saw  that  she  had  a  card  in  her  hand.

I  made  myself  and  the  object  of  my  visit  known  to  her.  She
was  much  astonished  and  interested,  for  all  that  Drank  had
said  was  as  precisely  correct  as  if  he  had  been  on  the  spot.

She  said  that  she  was  much  later  than  usual  in  getting  the
children  off,  and,  as  she  was  sending  the  children  off  herself,
not  the  usual  course  though  not  unfrequent,  she  got  the  card
because  she  did  not  know  their  residences  without  it.

The  rest  of  the  boys  were  in  church ,  because  it  was  Ascen¬
sion-day  ;  otherwise,  they  never  went  to  church  on  that  day
of  the  week.  When  I  mentioned  the  circumstance  of  her
calling  to  some  girl,  she  smiled  and  said,  “  Yes,  I  was  calling
to  Jemima.”

Friday,  June  2.  To  be  mesmerised  only  five  minutes.
When  it  was  up,  he  told  me  exactly  to  a  second.  He  was
much  better.  In  the  evening  I  went  and  found  his  mother  in
trouble,  for  he  had  avowed  his  determination  to  see  the  fair.
I  asked  him,  when  mesmerised,  if  he  still  so  intended.

A.  I  do'nt  want  to  go  in  this  state,  but  I  do  in  my  mad
state.

Q.  It  will  not  do  for  you  to  go  :  you  cannot  avoid  touching
people  and  it  will  hurt  you  ?

A.  Not  if  you  demesmerise  me  a  good  deal.  It  is  a  good
thing  you  came  :  for  if  I  had  gone  as  I  was,  it  would  have
hurt  me.

Q.  Can  you  see  the  fair  ?

A.  (turning  himself,  like  a  bottle-jack,  first  one  way,  then
another)  Yes,  Sir.

c  c  2


356  Case  of  Cataleptic  Insanity  treated  Mesmerically ,

He  then  described  the  fair  accurately,  from  beginning  to
end  ;  mentioning  the  names  on  the  booths  and  on  the  signs
of  the  drinking  and  dancing  booths,  some  of  which  were
peculiar.  I  walked  through  the  fair  afterwards,  and  was
highly  interested  at  recognizing  the  names  and  situations
which  he  had  named  with  such  particularity  as  left  no  room
for  doubt.

Saturday,  June  3.  He  had  been  to  the  fair  last  night  and
returned  without  accident.  I  asked  him  how  he  liked  it,  he
replied,  “  I  liked  seeing  it  with  you  best.  I  saw  it  much
better  with  you  here,  than  I  did  when  I  was  there  last  night/’
This  I  can  believe,  as  he  was  sane  during  one  inspection,  in¬
sane  during  the  other.

Q.  Well,  see  it  again  now,  and  tell  me  what  you  see.  ?

He  began  to  describe  till  he  came  to  a  booth  where  was  a
learned  pig,  and  then  he  said,  “  He  is  telling  the  time  of  day,
— he  grunts  it,  (he  then  nodded  his  own  head  as  if  counting
the  pig’s  grunts ;)  he  has  grunted  twelve  times,  (he  nodded
again;)  now  he  has  grunted  again  nineteen  times ;  he  means
nineteen  minutes  past  12.  The  man  shews  him  the  watch.”
(I  here  took  out  mine,  which  shewed  nineteen  minutes  past  12
precisely.)

He  now  went  into  Womb  well’s  wild  beast  show,  and  be¬
ginning  at  the  left  hand  side,  he  described  the  animals  and
the  situations  of  their  dens  throughout.  I  went  afterwards
myself  and  compared  the  reality  with  the  description.  He
was  wrong  in  one  particular  only.  He  mentioned  a  giraffe, —
a  very  young  one, — in  a  certain  situation ;  and  there  was  no
such  animal.  But  in  that  situation  was  a  lama,  an  animal
with  a  long  neck,  and  which  I  have  no  doubt  he  saw,  and
mistook  for  a  giraffe.  It  was  odd  that  he  saw  the  large  den
at  the  end,  with  a  bell  at  the  top  and  a  little  gate  to  it,  but
could  not  see  the  elephant  in  this  den.  He  said  it  was  empty,
till  at  last  he  started  and  said,  ff  There  is  a  man  coming  out
of  the  den ;  it  is  the  same  that  I  saw  at  the  entrance.  Oh  !
I  see  now,  it  is  the  elephant’s  den,  and  I  can  see  him  too.”
Had  he  been  guessing,  he  would  have  guessed  the  elephant
before  the  den  and  its  peculiarities,  one  would  think.

He  was  also  singularly  accurate  in  describing,  in  one  den,
two  lionesses,  but  afterwards  corrected  himself,  that  one  was
a  lion,  but  it  had  no  mane  and  looked  like  a  lioness.  This  was
perfectly  correct,  as  was  every  other  part  of  his  description.

Monday,  June  5.  Mesmerised  seven  minutes.  Much
better.  But  he  has  had  two  fits,' — one  last  night,  another
this  morning.  He  says  they  worry  him  by  talking  about  him
whenever  he  goes  into  these  fits  :  for  he  can  hear  all  they  say.


by  Mr.  Parsons ,  Royal  Marine  Library ,  Brighton.  357

He  knows  he  is  getting  well  by  the  dark  appearance  of  himself
getting  gradually  lighter.

Tuesday,  June  6.  Various  feats  of  clairvoyance,  concern¬
ing  the  school  which  we  verified :  and,  strange  to  say,  the
things  had  been  accurately  described,  but  had  happened  and
ceased  half  an  hour  before  he  described  them  to  us  as  passing
at  the  moment.

I  got  him  to  search  for  the  married  couple  we  are  ac¬
quainted  with  in  these  pages,  and  to  find  out  where  the  break¬
fast  took  place.  He  found  it  was  in  London,  in  a  street  which

has  a  view  of  St.  Paul’s  Cathedral.

This  would  account  for  the  darkness  which,  he  said  was
owing  to  a  fog ;  for,  on  the  day  he  said  this,  it  was  a  fine
bright  day  in  Brighton.

The  couple  were  gone  to  Scotland :  they  were  near  some
canal.  This  was  all  he  could  see  to-night.

June  7.  Out  of  sorts,  owing  to  a  great  rage  he  had  put

himself  into,  because  Maria  B - ,  who  has  hitherto  given

up  all  her  time  to  him,  is  obliged  to  leave  him  and  go  to  work.

June  8.  Much  better,  and  reading  JEsop’ s  Fables.  Pound
the  married  couple :  they  had  passed  the  Cheviot  Hills,  and
had  got  down  to  the  sea  side :  they  were  now  in  a  sailing  boat
which  was  going  in  the  direction  of  Ireland :  but,  as  the  vessel
was  small  and  there  was  no  luggage  in  it,  they  could  not  be
going  to  Ireland.  The  lady  was  dressed  in  a  shot  silk  (he
named  the  colour),  a  white  shawl,  and  a  c<  bird  s  eye  straw
bonnet she  wore  a  curious  brooch  with  hair  in  it  and  the
word  “  Lucy”  engraved  on  the  back  :  she  was  reading  a  book  :
it  was  bound  in  leather,  and  on  the  back,  White  s  Travels :
on  the  page  open  before  her,  he  could  read  these  words,

“  He  raised  his  weary  eye.”

He  thought  it  was  part  of  a  piece  of  poetry  in  the  book.
There  appeared  to  be  three  other  volumes  of  the  same  set :
on  one  of  them  was  Asia,  on  the  lady’s,  Africa.  The  lady
felt  sea-sick.

The  gentleman  wore  striped  trousers  and  dancing  pumps,
a  white  waistcoat,  and  curious  straw  hat :  had  a  gold  chain
round  his  neck  with  an  eye-glass  attached,  and  on  the  handle
of  the  eye-glass  the  word  “  Lucy”  engraved.  There  were
four  others  in  the  boat  in  blue  jackets  and  white  trousers  and
straw  hats  :  one  of  them  had  a  sort  of  cocked  hat  on,  some¬
thing  like  Napoleon  is  represented  with.  Now  he  lost  sight

of  it  all.  .

June  9.  Pound  them  again  :  they  were  in  a  house  in  a  small,

dirty  street,  in  some  town  in  Scotland,  a  much  smaller  and


358  Case  of  Cataleptic  Insanity  treated  Mesmerically,

meaner  house  than  they  had  been  in  before.  He  thought
they  were  making  a  call.  Yes,  it  was  a  relative  of  the  lady :
she  was  telling  them  that  they  were  about  to  leave  in  an
hour’s  time  :  they  were  going  to  make  a  voyage  to  Germany.
The  name  of  the  person  living  in  the  house  was  Withersfield  :
a  picture  was  hanging  in  the  room  with  J.  Withersfield  under
it :  he  was  not  Scotch,  but  it  was  a  Scotch  girl  who  was  wait¬
ing  on  them.  They  were  drinking  wine.  The  name  of  the
street  was  Scott  street.  While  he  was  trying  to  find  out  the
name  of  the  place,  it  all  went  away.

His  mouth  is  always  rendered  rigid  when  he  has  to  say
the  mame  of  any  person  or  place,  and  I  am  obliged  to  free  it
by  transverse  passes  continually  while  he  makes  the  effort.

June  13.  Going  on  steadily  to  this  day.

His  mother  tells  me  that,  for  the  last  twelvemonth,  Frank
has  exhibited  a  flightiness  of  manner,  just  before  or  about
the  full  of  the  moon ;  and  that  for  two  or  three  days  after  the
full  he  was  sullen.

June  14.  Had  a  fit  yesterday :  his  head  is  much  lighter,
and  he  is  each  day  quieter :  there  was  some  pressure  on  the
top  of  the  head  :  the  blood  rushed  there  since  he  was  cupped :
the  cupping  made  it  do  so  :  this  would  gradually  come  right :
it  did ,  while  in  the  mesmeric  state,  but  went  back  again  when
I  was  gone,  but  with  daily  decreasing  force.

Knows  nothing  about  coming  to  his  senses,  but  thought
lie  would  come  to  them  out  of  a  fit.

June  16.  His  head  nearly  as  light  as  it  used  to  be  when
he  was  well :  the  sides  still  rather  dark,  (these  have  felt  hotter
for  several  days,  but  were  nearly  cool  to-day.)

June  17.  Was  seized  with  a  trembling  in  his  sleep,  which
he  said  would  have  been  a  strong  cataleptic  fit,  if  I  had  not
been  there.  He  was  annoyed  because  he  could  not  get  in  the
money  for  his  poetry  which  he  copies  out  and  sends  his
mother  out  with  to  sell  among  his  friends.  She,  to  quiet
him,  pretended  to  have  got  it,  and  gave  him  the  eightpence
from  her  own  money.  But  the  nice  perceptions  of  a  cataleptic
were  not  to  be  so  deceived :  he  smelt  it  and  threw  it  indig¬
nantly  back  to  her,  saying  angrily  that  it  was  her  own  money
and  did  not  come  from  the  place  she  said.

I  was  sent  for  in  the  evening  to  see  him  as  he  was  so  odd
they  could  do  nothing  with  him  :  I  was  surprized  as  he  was
so  quiet  when  I  left  him.

It  then  occurred  to  me  that  the  moon  might  have  some
influence.  It  was  full  moon  at  nine  in  the  morning.

His  peculiarity  now  was,  that  he  would  get  into  the  privy


by  Mr.  Parsons ,  Royal  Marine  Library ,  Brighton.  359

and  put  his  head  down  the  opening ;  and  he  said  he  felt  cer¬
tain  he  was  to  be  smothered  there :  he  was  very  violent,  and

they  feared  he  would  smother  himself.

As  I  could  not  leave  home,  I  sent  a  line  written  on  a
piece  of  paper,  desiring  him  to  copy  out  his  verses  for  me ;
and,  as  soon  as  the  messenger  left  me,  I  made  an  effort  to
mesmerise  him  till  she  should  get  home  with  it.

I  went  to  him  half  an  hour  later  and  found  that  he  had
dropped  asleep  at  the  time  I  mesmerised  him ;  and,  as  soon
as  he  had  the  paper  I  had  written,  had  become  quiet :  and  he
told  me  that  this  hallucination  ensued  on  it.

He  thought  that  he  was  urgently  desired  by  a  brother
nobleman  (Lord  Emery — myself)  to  write  this  poetry,  and

that  he  must  do  it  to-night.  ,

His  explanation  of  his  previous  state  was,  that  these  were
the  cataleptic  fits,  “  deformed”  by  the  mesmerism :  he  felt
drawn  towards  different  places  instead  of  the  fits  acting  on

him  as  before.  _  .  ,

To  prevent  his  egress  at  the  back  door,  I  make  passes  to

prevent  his  going  over  the  sill  into  the  yard  where  the  privy

Wa  He  says  that  he  has  twice  seen  me  in  his  irrational  state,
and  that,  before  I  came  to  him  to  night,  he  had  seen  me
moving  my  hands  as  I  do  to  mesmerise  him,  but  he  could
not  see  any  thing  besides  myself.  In  truth  when  I  mesmerised
him  from  my  own  house,  I  had  made  use  of  the  passes  to

rivet  my  attention  more  firmly  to  him.

June  17.  His  head  at  the  top  quite  well;  at  the  sides

nearly  well.  He  is  affected  by  the  full  of  the  moon ;  but  that
has  passed  off :  he  will  be  liable  to  this  influence  for  some
time  after  his  cure  :  his  diseased  condition  of  brain  dates  from
last  September,  and  was  then  caused  by  disappointment :  this
was  still  greater  in  the  affair  of  the  examination,  and,  althoug
his  madness  would  have  come  on,  it  would  not  have  come  so

soon  but  for  that.  .  .  x  ,

The  passes  had  prevented  him  from  going  into  the  yard,

till  he  got  over  by  jumping  across  :  but  still  the  influence  was
felt,  for  he  went  to  sleep  directly  he  came  to  the  ground  on
the  other  side  of  the  door.

While  in  the  mesmerism,  a  sort  of  fit  passed  over  him,
which  he  said  was  not  cataleptic  but  epileptic.  He  had  many
epileptic  fits  during  the  six  weeks  before  I  came  to  him  .  11s
bodily  health  is  now  better  than  ever  it  was  before  m  his  llJf-
He  told  me  that  he  saw  in  his  irrational  state,  last  night,
a  little  girl,  Miss  Pepper,  in  George-street  Gardens  in  a  most
deplorable  state,  with  abscesses  about  her  head,  and  that  unless


360  Case  of  Cataleptic  Insanity  treated  Mesmerically ,

they  broke,  she  would  die :  if  a  blister  were  placed  on  the  top
of  her  head,  it  would  draw  away  the  serum,  which  was  press¬
ing  on  her  brain  and  made  her  flighty,  and  the  abscesses
would  burst,  and  she  would  be  cured.

This  was  the  truth  as  to  the  child's  state,  (he  had  known
the  child  when  both  were  well.)  Nothing  was  done;  and  the
child  died  a  day  or  two  afterwards.

Sunday,  June  18.  To-day  he  told  the  name  of  a  stranger
who  was  in  the  room.

June  19.  Found  our  married  couple  again;  on  board  a
ship,  a  large  ship  with  five  masts  :  he  could  not  tell  the  name
of  it,  but  the  name  “  Loudovice”  was  on  one  of  the  sails,
though  he  did  not  think  it  had  anything  to  do  with  the  name
of  the  ship  :  the  lady  and  gentleman  were  in  bed  in  a  sort  of
hammock — he  thought  they  were  coming  from  Germany,  and
the  sailors  were  Germans.

June  20.  He  told  the  name  of  a  gentleman  to-day  who
was  a  stranger  to  him,  to  the  gentleman's  great  wonder :  he
thinks  he  shall  recover  his  senses  next  Monday.

June  23.  Steadily  advancing  to  this  day.  He  says  that
he  had  yesterday  several  times  loss  of  consciousness  and
bodily  strength,  not  exactly  fits  :  he  thinks  these  are  signs  of
reason  returning.  He  still  continues  to  write  poetry,  and
says  that  he  has  another  piece  in  his  head  not  yet  written.
The  sides  of  his  head  rather  hot.

June  24.  The  thunder  in  the  air  has  much  affected  him :
(there  was  a  thunder-storm  yesterday,)  but  he  is  much  better
since  it  has  burst.

In  the  evening  he  went  out  and  had  a  fit  in  the  Old  Steine
and  was  brought  home  in  a  fly,  screaming  because  he  was
interfered  with.

June  25.  Much  better.  The  fit  he  had  yesterday  was  a
good  sign,  it  much  forwarded  his  cure :  it  was  one  he  has
spoken  of, — a  loss  of  strength  and  consciousness  :  he  pre¬
dicted  two  more  fits,  one  at  five,  another  at  six  :  and  he  had
them  as  he  said.

June  26.  Much  better,  but  not  recovered.

June  27.  I  took  a  stranger  with  me:  one  I  had  never
seen  before  to-day.  Frank  told  him  his  name.

June  28.  A  gentleman  and  four  ladies  were  there.  He
told  the  names  of  all  the  ladies,  but  could  not  tell  that  of  the
gentleman :  three  of  the  ladies  are  known  to  him,  the  fourth
was  an  entire  stranger  from  London.

He  looked  at  the  school,  and  saw  that  in  the  house
the  furniture  had  been  moved  and  that  they  were  going  to
paper  the  rooms,  and  the  bed-rooms  had  been  whitewashed.


by  Mr.  Parsons,  Royal  Marine  Library,  Brighton.  361

This  was  quite  true  and  the  rooms  were  never  papered
before.

He  saw  the  gentleman  again  we  have  mentioned  :  he  was
riding  down  a  long  street  on  a  pie-ball  horse.

His  health  improves  :  the  sides  of  the  head  cool,  and  he
has  left  off  writing  'poetry.  This  he  says  is  a  good  sign.

He  predicted  two  fits,  one  at  half-past  two,  another  at
seven ;  they  both  occurred  at  the  times  foretold.

June  29.  As  usual — had  one  convulsive  fit.

June  30.  He  is  to  have  another  to-day.

July  1st.  No  better  to-day,  because  the  fit  of  last  night
which  he  predicted  was  so  violent :  he  says  that  he  wras  partly

rational  at  one  time  yesterday  and  to-day.

July  2.  His  mother  says  he  was  rational  several  times
yesterday,  but  he  says  no.  He  has  now  a  very  strong  fit
every  evening  and  sometimes  two :  he  cannot  see,  that  is,  he
is  not  lucid  :  and  once  yesterday  he  lost  his  vision  after  the
fit  for  a  time.

Monday,  July  3.  He  is  better  and  predicted  two  fits;  one
at  a  quarter-past  four,  another  at  thirteen  minutes  past  seven.
He  describes  the  sides  of  the  head  as  misty,  the  other  parts
clear.

Saturday,  July  8.  Going  on  to  this  day  favourably,  when

he  had  a  strong  fit  in  the  evening.

Monday,  July  10.  Predicts  that  he  shall  recover  his  senses

on  Monday  next.

There  is  a  remarkable  circumstance  connected  with  this
boy’s  lucidity.  He  is  more  clairvoyant  in  the  maniacal  than
in  the  mesmeric  state.  He  saw  (by  seeing  I  always  mean
clairvoyance)  before  he  was  mesmerised  at  all  a  little;  but
not  near  so  well  as  he  has  seen  since  I  mesmerised  him.  He
can  see  the  interior  of  any  person  in  his  mad  state :  and  yes¬
terday  when  a  woman,  a  friend  of  his  mother,  came  in,  he
told  her  that  she  was  not  well,  and  why, — because  she  had  not
digested  what  she  had  eaten,  and  he  named  it.  He  sees  very
decidedly  in  this  state,  whereas  lately  in  his  mesmerism  the
lucidity  has  been  only  the  faintest  outline  or  altogether

absent.

July  11.  I  went  out  in  a  boat  and  remained  some  hours,
and  was  away  from  him  at  the  time  I  usually  visit  him.  I
thought  a  little  anxiously  for  a  minute  about  him  when  I
found  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  be  there ;  and  this  mes¬
merised  him  for  the  time.  #

July  12.  The  head  much  cooler,  but,  on  keeping  my  hand
on  the  sides,  heat  was  soon  felt,  showing  inflammatory  action


362  Case  of  Cataleptic  Insanity  treated  Mesmerically,

to  have  not  yet  ceased.  I  hear  for  the  first  time  to-day  that
he  complains  of  pain  in  his  irrational  state  where  the  heat  is
felt — at  the  sides  of  his  head.

July  13.  He  had  two  more  violent  shaking  fits  than  I  have
yet  seen,  while  in  the  mesmeric  sleep  :  but  they  were  speedily
calmed  and  removed  by  placing  my  hand  on  his  head.

July  14.  Several  still  more  violent  shakings  in  the  sleep,
and  while  his  mother  was  mentioning  something  which  might
be  suspected  as  disagreeable  to  him.

This  I  begin  to  find  is  a  common  circumstance,  and
explains  what  occurred  yesterday  as  I  was  then  listening  to
her.  I  believe  they  are  caused  by  this,  although  he  says  that
he  did  not  hear  what  she  said.  But,  if  I  ask  him  to  try
and  discover,  he  will  incline  himself  and  then  tell  me,  as  if
his  brain  had  unconsciously  recorded  the  impression  and  he
turned  to  the  record  for  it.

July  16.  He  has  lately  taken  no  interest  in  his  writing  or
in  his  flowers,  and  looks  much  better.

Monday,  July  17.  He  predicts  that  he  will  come  to  his
senses  at  12  o’clock  to-night ;  and  has  advised  that  he  be  sent
into  the  country  as  soon  afterwards  as  possible ;  for,  if  he
remains  here,  the  impression  of  the  circumstances  which
caused  his  madness  will  be  as  fresh  as  ever  and  will  bring  it
back  again,  from  want  of  change  of  scene.  It  is  arranged
that  he  shall  be  sent  to  his  aunt  at  Bishopstown  if  she  can
receive  him  :  and  a  letter  was  written  with  that  inquiry.

To-morrow  when  I  see  him  he  will  be  rational,  but  the
attraction  will  continue  strong,  and  nobody  must  touch  him.
He  will  be  asleep  when  I  see  him.

Tuesday,  July  18.  Maria  B - called  on  me  at  nine  in  the

morning  to  tell  me  that  Frank  came  to  his  senses  at  12  last
night,  and  asked  where  he  was.  He  did  not  speak  again  till
seven  o’clock  this  morning,  when  he  remarked  on  the  flowers
and  ornaments  which  profusely  decorated  his  room,  but  would
not  have  them  taken  away.  He  also  said  that  they  might
talk  to  him,  but  not  touch  him,  nor  come  near  to  him.

I  saw  him  at  12.  He  was  asleep,  and  he  has  been  quite
rational  all  day.  I  did  not  mesmerise  him  more  than  by  sit¬
ting  near  him  and  making  a  few  passes  over  the  temples,
which  were  hotter  than  they  should  be.  I  remarked  this  to
him,  and  he  replied,  “  They  are  always  so — but  I  am  quite
free  from  pain  there  now.”

He  says  that  it  will  not  hurt  him  now  if  others  touch  him :
mention  of  the  school  must  be  avoided,  and  he  must  remove
as  soon  as  possible :  his  strength  is  greater  and  his  general


by  Mr.  Parsons ,  Royal  Marine  Library,  Brighton.  363

health  better  than  it  ever  was  in  his  life  before,  but  he  is  not
out  of  danger  of  a  relapse  from  the  same  causes  operating
which  produced  the  disease  in  the  first  instance.

/  thought  it  would  be  better  to  continue  the  mesmerism
for  a  week,  before  he  was  removed,  to  assure  his  recovery.
He  admits  that  it  would  do  him  good,  but  says  that  the
danger  from  his  remaining,  where  he  will  be  subject  to  excite¬
ment,  will  be  greater  than  the  benefit,  now  that  he  is  so  far

cured.

July  19.  Frank  told  me  to-day  that  he  did  not  come  to
his  senses  at  12  but  at  seven  in  the  morning  :  he  thinks  that
he  was  rational,  but  as  he  was  asleep  he  could  not  tell :  if  he
had  awoke  after  12  he  would  probably  have  awoke  rational.
He  recollected  that  it  was  on  Friday  night  that  he  went  to
bed  rational,  and  his  impression  was  that  this  was  the  follow¬
ing  morning  Saturday.  A  bottle  of  lemonade  hau  been
bought  for  him  on  Friday,  which  he  had  not  drunk,  and  he
asked  for  it  on  Tuesday  morning,  saying,  “  I  left  a  bottle  of
lemonade  last  night :  I  should  like  to  have  it  now.  The  last
night  was  the  19th  of  May  :  and  what  appeared  to  him  as
next  morning  was  the  18th  of  July.  The  two  months  were  to
him  as  one  night.

As  I  am  unknown  to  him  in  his  rational  state,  1  asked
him  what  his  feelings  were  towards  me.  He  said  there  was
an  impression  on  his  mind  as  if  he  had  known  me  a  long
time,  without  being  conscious  of  the  nature  of  the  acquaint¬
ance.  A  similar  feeling  was  associated  with  Maria  B—  ,
the  young  woman  who  has  been  so  extremely  kind  to  him  .

she  continually  came  into  his  mind.

July  20.  I  found  him  worse  and  his  head  hotter :  he  wor¬
ries  himself  because  he  has  not  received  a  reply  from  his
aunt.  He  says  that  all  things  about  him  bring  back  the  old
feelings,  and  that  the  longer  he  stays  here  the  worse  his
head  will  become.  I  think  so  too,  and  have  advised  that  Ins
wish  be  complied  with  :  that  he  be  taken  to  Bishopstown  to¬
morrow  and  be  left  there,  if  any  arrangements  to  receive  him

can  be  made.  .  TT*

I  mesmerised  him  till  he  was  quite  cool.  His  mother,

while  talking  to  me  about  removing  him,  incautiously  replied
directly  to  him,  instead  of  through  me,  in  answer  to  some¬
thing  which  Frank  said  to  me;  and  the  effect  was  quite
alarming.  He  was  thrown  into  a  violent  universal  shaking,
which  was  not  calmed  for  a  considerable  time.

I  suspect  now  that  the  cause  of  the  former  similar  attac  vs
was  her  talking  at  him,  and  as  much  to  him  as  to  me .  ioi,  on
those  occasions,  she  was  always  anxious  to  tell  me  oi  some-


364  Case  of  Cataleptic  Insanity  treated  Mesmerically ,

thing  in  regard  to  which  she  wanted  my  aid  to  hinder  him
from  doing  what  annoyed  her,  or  to  induce  him  to  do  what
she  wished  :  and  the  poor  woman  has  been  so  long  tormented
by  his  freaks  that  she  cannot  at  all  times  remember  that  he
is  mad,  and  feels  as  angry  with  him  as  if  he  knew  what  he
was  about :  and,  although  she  will  correct  herself  when
reminded  of  his  condition,  she  requires  to  be  reminded  now
and  then.

July  21.  He  went  into  the  country,  and  was  left  there
with  his  aunt,  very  comfortable  and  happy  and  quite  rational.

September  7th.  I  have  received  several  letters  from  him  to
this  date,  and  have  had  satisfactory  accounts :  but,  being
alarmed  by  the  information  that  he  had  a  very  bad  fit  on
Friday  week,  which  lasted  for  several  hours,  I  determined
yesterday  to  go  and  see  him  myself.

I  did  not  write  to  warn  him  of  my  coming ;  and,  when  I
arrived  at  his  aunt's  house  in  Bishopstown,  she  expressed
great  regret,  as  Frank  had  been  sent  off  by  her  to  Newhaven
only  half  an  hour  before,  and  he  was  told  by  her  to  take  his
time,  saunter  about  when  there  and  amuse  himself,  and  not
be  back  before  12  o'clock,  as  she  feared  it  would  fatigue  him
to  return  too  quickly.  The  distance  from  Bishopstown  to
Newhaven  is  two  miles  and  a  half  by  road,  but  one  mile  less
by  the  hill-path.  It  was  now  half-past  ten.

I  was  curious  to  know  if  the  extreme  attraction  which  he
manifested  was  yet  removed,  (he  having  been  away  from  me
six  weeks,)  as,  if  not,  I  conjectured  he  would  soon  be  drawn
irresistibly  back  without  being  sent  for,  I  therefore  declined
the  offer  of  his  aunt  to  send  a  boy  for  him,  and  walked  over
the  hill  myself.

When  I  had  walked  about  half  way  to  Newhaven,  I
saw,  at  a  distance,  Frank  coming  quickly  back  through  the
meadows,  and,  as  I  drew  nearer  to  him,  something  mechan¬
ical  in  his  manner  of  walking  made  me  suspect  he  was  still
asleep.  But,  to  give  him  a  chance,  I  swerved  away  some
yards  from  his  path  as  we  drew  near  to  each  other,  that  I
might  observe  him  without  embarrassing  him,  and  whether
he  were  awake.  I  wished  also  to  see  if  he  would  betray  any
knowledge  of  me  in  any  way,  as  he  does  not  know  me  in  his
waking  state.  As  we  passed  each  other  he  staggered,  but
went  on,  and  I  saw  that  his  eyes  were  nearly  closed,  as  they
always  were  in  his  somnambulism.  His  pace  instantly  dimin¬
ished  like  that  of  a  person  who  was  before  in  a  great  hurry
to  go  somewhere  and  had  suddenly  remembered  something
left  behind.  I  turned  back  and  followed  him ;  and,  when  I
had  nearly  overtaken  him,  he  staggered  and  edged  away


by  Mr.  Parsons ,  Royal  Marine  Library ,  Brighton.  3G5

backwards  towards  me,  till  he  touched  me  with  his  shoulder,
and  stood  still  as  fast  asleep  as  ever.  He  could  not  answer
any  question  till  I  had  removed  the  rigidity  of  the  organs  of
speech  :  and,  as  I  took  his  arm  and  led  him  home  over  the
hill,  he  told  me  all  about  himself  that  I  wished  to  know.

Q.  Well,  Frank,  how  are  you?

A.  Very  much  better,  Sir,  thank  you.  (Indeed  he  has
grown  so  fat  he  can  scarcely  button  his  coat,  and  he  is  quite
brown  with  health  and  exercise  out  of  doors.)

Q.  What  made  you  in  such  a  hurry  to  come  back  ?  Your
aunt  told  you  not  to  return  till  12  o’clock.

A.  I  could  not  help  it,  Sir  :  I  felt  drawn  home  as  fast  as

I  could  come.

He  then  detailed  as  follows,— When  his  aunt  told  him  to
stay  at  Newhaven  so  long,  he  felt  that  there  was  an  incon¬
sistency  in  this  request  that  he  could  not  reasonably  account
for  and  had  never  before  felt  (I  was  then  very  near  to
Bishopstown)  :  and  as  he  was  walking  over  the  hill  (I  went
round  by  the  road)  at  one  point  he  must  have  lost  his  senses,
and  he  was  nearly  drawn  off  the  road  into  a  ditch,  (this  was
probably  when  the  interval  between  us  was  shortest,  the
time  of  his  perihelion  as  it  may  be  called  :)  he  recovered
himself,  however,  and  went  on  to  Newhaven.  When  there,
he  thinks  his  manner  was  odd :  he  could  scarcely  do  what  he
went  to  do,  a  strong  anxiety  to  return  overpowering  every
other  thought, — a  vague  influence  urging  him  back  to  Bishops-
town  without  any  delay.  He  was  nearly  asleep  (mesmeric)
when  he  left  Newhaven  and  was  quite  so  when  he  met  me  in
the  meadow.

Q.  Does  not  this  extreme  susceptibility  shew  us  that  you

have  not  been  sufficiently  cured  ?

A.  Yes,  Sir,  it  does.  I  must  be  mesmerised  again  when

I  return  home.

Q.  Can  you  see  yourself  inwardly  now  ?

A.  Yes,  Sir.

Q.  How  does  the  head  look  ?

A.  Dark  at  the  top  rather,  not  at  the  sides.

He  has  had  several  fainting  fits  and  cataleptic  fits  since  he
has  been  here,  and  on  Friday  week  was  the  worst :  but  he
had  been  rapidly  gaining  ground  in  every  way,  and  all  these
symptoms  would  gradually  fade  as  his  health  became  moic
established :  he  has  occasionally  a  head-ache :  and  the  walk
with  me  in  this  state  would  do  him  a  great  deal  of  good.

I  mesmerised  his  head  for  a  considerable  time.  He  now
described  the  operation  thus, — “  There  is  a  dark  mist  sur¬
rounding  and  penetrating  the  part  which  is  affected,  and,


366  Case  of  Cataleptic  Insanity  treated  Mesmerically ,

when  you  make  passes  a  white  mist  comes  from  your  hands
that  makes  the  dark  mist  browner  or  of  a  lighter  colour :  when
you  make  tractive  passes  from  the  part,  the  white  mist  seems  to
combat  with  the  dark  mist  and  draw  it  away  from  the  part.”

When  I  left  him  I  feared  that  he  would  follow  me,  and  I
mentioned  my  fears.  “  Will  me  to  sit  still,”  was  his  reply.
I  did  so,  and  he  remained  in  his  chair  while  I  left  the  cot¬
tage,  fast  asleep,  as,  it  seems,  I  am  ever  to  see  him.

Before  I  left  him  I  desired  him  to  write  me  a  letter  con¬
taining  a  narrative  of  his  sensations  on  this  day.  He  said,
“  You  had  better  leave  word  for  me  to  do  it,  Sir,  or  I  shall
not  know  anything  about  it.”  “  No,”  said  I,  “  you  ought
to  be  sufficiently  impressed  in  the  waking  state  to  do  it,
whether  you  are  told  or  not :  I  will  leave  it  so  and  try.”

It  will  explain  the  narrative  to  state  that,  soon  after  I
quitted  the  Newhaven  station  to  walk  to  Bishopstown,  to
which  place  I  had  inquired  my  way,  I  was  overtaken  by  a
gentleman  in  a  cabriolet,  who  invited  me  to  ride,  having
heard  my  inquiry,  as  he  was  going  there  himself.  I  got  in
and  rode  the  rest  of  the  way.

On  the  following  day  I  received  from  Frank  this  letter.

“  Bishopstown,  Sept.  7.

“My  dear  Sir, — Words  cannot  express  the  surprise  and
astonishment  I  felt  when  I  awoke  yesterday.  How  I  came
there  I  could  not  tell  for  several  minutes  :  at  last  I  thought
of  the  strange  incidents  which  occurred  whilst  going  to  New¬
haven.  I  felt  a  strange  reluctance  to  going  there  till  I  came
within  sight  of  Mr.  Farncombe’s  carriage :  I  then  lost  my
consciousness  for  some  time,  and,  when  I  awoke,  was  a  con¬
siderable  distance  from  the  place  where  I  last  remembered.
I  instantly  gave  in  I  had  fainted ;  and  walked  on  to  Mrs.
Liffard's,  and  asked  for  every  thing  very  strangely.

“I  remember  their  asking  me  several  times  about  my
health.  I  would  not  stop,  as  was  my  intention,  but  instantly
walked  on  very  fast.  At  last  I  felt  as  if  losing  my  conscious¬
ness,  and  knew  no  more  till  I  awoke.

“I  then  fancied  you  had  been  here,  and  inquired  and
received  an  answer  in  the  affirmative.  I  felt  verv  curious  till

f

bed-time,  and,  after  committing  myself  to  God,  fell  asleep.

“  When  I  awoke  this  morning  I  felt  that  I  must  write  to
you :  and  I  instantly  set  about  it.

“  With  my  prayers  for  your  health  and  happiness,

“  I  remain,

“  Your  most  obedient  servant,
“Frank  Clifford  Walker.”


by  Mr.  Parsons,  Royal  Marine  Library,  Brighton.  367


With  respect  to  what  I  have  stated,  that  he  does  not  know
me  in  his  waking  state,  there  are  two  testimonies.  #

When  Maria  B - went  to  see  him,  he  was  much  in¬

terested  about  me ;  and,  among  other  questions,  put  this,
Ci  lYhat  sort  of  a  gentleman  is  he  in  appearance,  for  1  have

never  seen  him ?"  ...

The  other  is  a  passage  from  his  third  letter,  written

Aug.  28,  which  was  in  answer  to  one  from  myself  giving
directions  for  his  own  management  and  containing  a  promise
that  I  would  some  day  go  and  see  him.  The  letter  is  very
well  and  sensibly  written,  and  in  reference  to  that  promise  he


“  Best  assured,  dear  Sir,  it  will  be  one  of  the  happiest
moments  of  my  life,  if  the  mesmeric  influence  will  not  be  an
impediment,  to  behold  that  instrument  in  God's  hands  which

has  so  mercifully  restored  me."

In  the  early  days  of  my  treatment  of  him,  he  told  me  in
his  sleep  that  he  had  once  seen  me  :  he  had  been  sent  with
something  by  a  lady  to  my  house,  and  had  only  to  leave  it  in
the  Library.  Of  this  visit  and  of  my  person,  however,  he
does  not  seem  to  retain  any  recollection  when  awake,  a
thing  there  is  no  difficulty  in  believing,  as  I  did  not  exchange

a  word  with  him  on  the  occasion.

He  is  is  now  walking  and  riding  on  a  pony  several  hours
every  day,  and  his  health  daily  improving :  his  countenance
is  ruddy  •  he  is  very  much  stouter,  and  continues  perfectly
rational :  and,  although  I  do  not  myself  think  he  will  perfectly
recover  so  as  to  be  safe  without  continuing  the  mesmeric
treatment  for  another  course,  yet,  when  it  is  remembered  that
I  found  this  boy  in  a  hopeless  condition,  as  admitted  by  his
medical  attendants,  and  that  all  the  skill  and  appliances  of
medicine  had  utterly  failed,  the  result  hitherto  will  be  deemed
satisfactory;  for  the  treatment  has  been  purely  mesmeric,
no  other  aid  (except  once  seven  grains  of  jalap)  was  ever

resorted  to  after  I  took  him  in  hand.

I  have  had  fears  that  my  narrative  would  be  too  long,  but,
in  endeavouring  to  curtail  it,  I  could  not  do  so  without  omit¬
ting  many  curious  phenomena  which  I  hope  will  be  found
interesting  to  the  readers  of  The  Zoist  as  sincere  students  of

nature.

I  have  the  honour  to  be,

Your  obedient  servant,

Sept.  20,  1848.  w-  H-  Parsons.

(To  be  Continued).


***  From  a  misapprehension  the  case  was  headed,  Cm  e


368  Case  of  Cataleptic  Insanity  treated  Mesmerically,


of  Cataleptic  Insanity ,  &c.,  instead  of  A  Case  of  Cataleptic
Insanity  treated  mesmerically,  with  interesting  phenomena. —
Zoist.


NOTE  BY  DR.  ELLIOTSON.

The  case  of  Miss  Emma  Melhuish,  of  Bedford  Street,
Bed  Lion  Street,  recorded  at  great  length  by  me  in  the
Fourth  Number  of  The  Zoist ,  p.  429,  was  very  similar  to
this,  and  deserves  to  be  compared  with  it.  She  had  pa¬
roxysms  of  delirium,  sometimes  furious,  sometimes  mild  and
cheerful,  in  all  which  she  recognized  no  one,  and  had  a
nickname  for  every  body  :  she  had  violent  paroxysms  of  convul¬
sions,  or  of  rigidity,  and  at  other  times  had  extreme  muscular
debility.  By  means  of  mesmerism  that  degree  of  clairvoyance
was  induced  which  amounts  to  the  power  of  foretelling  the
events  and  change  of  the  disease  and  indicating  suitable
measures;  unless  indeed  these  appearances  of  clairvoyance
were  explicable  by  mental  impression  or  imagination  really-
producing  what  was  expected  ;*  and  by  means  of  mesmerism
she  was  always  drawn  out  of  delirium  into  rational  sleep¬
waking.

The  case  of  Miss  Melhuish,  like  so  many  others  in  all  the
volumes  of  The  Zoist,  deserves  the  careful  study  of  every
medical  man  in  the  present  general  state  of  unacquaintance
of  the  medical  profession  with  the  phenomena  not  only  of
mesmerism,  but  of  the  more  exquisite  and  complicated  nervous
diseases,  which  are  only  stared  at  and  forgotten,  and  called
by  the  convenient  and  silly  unmeaning  name  of  hysteria, — so
convenient  a  term  to  cover  ignorance  and  save  the  trouble  of
observation  and  investigation.

Mr.  Parsons’s  remark  in  the  foot-note  at  p.  324  is  sound,
— that  a  speech  of  his  had  no  doubt  been  unconsciously  appre¬
hended  by  the  brain.  It  cannot  be  too  frequently  repeated
that  in  the  deepest  sleep-waking,  amounting  apparently  to
coma,  and  in  many  cases  not  of  sleep-waking  but  of  mere
coma,  impressions  on  the  senses  that  seem  altogether  un¬
heeded  may  be  unconsciously  noticed  by  the  brain  and  at  a
subsequent  period  give  proof  that  they  had  been  perceived
and  treasured  up  in  the  brain. f

Mr.  Parsons’s  experience,  mentioned  at  p.  325,  that  the
effect  of  traction  was  increased  by  repetition,  has  been  my
own  in  all  cases  from  the  very  time  of  the  Okeys,  now  eleven
years  ago.  I  have  always  contended  that  this  bore  no  analogy
to  inanimate,  physical  attraction,  but  was  the  result  of  a

*  See  my  Physiology,  pp.  1168  —  1170,  and  Zoist,  No.  IV.,  p.  440.
f  Zoist ,  No.  XXIII.,  pp.  222  —  224.


by  Mr.  Parsons ,  Royal  Marine  Library,  Brighton.  369

mental  impression  and  a  volition,  though  both  the  impression
and  the  volition  might  be  unconscious,  and  the  latter  irre¬
sistible  also.  The  more  frequently  we  drew  the  limbs,  heads,
or  bodies  of  the  Okeys  by  tractive  passes,  the  more  readily
and  strongly  we  drew  them ;  and  we  sometimes  could  draw
them,  as  Mr.  Parsons  did  his  boy,  when  in  another  room.
I  well  knew  that,  as  the  phenomena  of  the  Okeys  were
genuine,  they  would  occur  at  all  times  and  in  other  countries
when  mesmerism  became  studied  as  a  science  and  practised
as  an  art :  and  so  it  is,  though  the  short-sighted  Wakleys,
Sharpeys,  Conollies,*  Forbeses,  &c.,  &c.,  saw  no  farther  than
half  an  inch  before  them.

The  testimony  of  Mr.  Parsons  at  p.  326  to  mesmeric
effects,  where  will  was  impossible,  confirms  my  own  experience.
Among  the  strange  mistakes  committed  in  some  mesmeric
books  is  the  assertion  that  mesmerism  is  all  the  result  of
will.  All  my  most  experienced  friends,  however  mighty  we
acknowledge  the  power  of  the  will  to  be,  are  satisfied  that
every  effect  may  be  produced  without  willing,  and  frequently
is  not  increased  by  the  utmost  efforts  at  willing  in  addition
to  the  mesmeric  means  of  manipulation,  contact,  fixedness
of  look,  &c.

*  When  I  spoke  some  years  afterwards  to  Dr.  Conolly  of  the  disgraceful
attack  upon  mesmerism  and  myself  in  the  journal  of  which  he  and  Dr.  Forbes
were  the  editors  (see  Zoist,  No.  VII.,  p.  275,  6-7),  he  attempted  a  palliation  by
protesting  that  the  article  was  far  worse  till  he  had  cancelled  certain  passages
in  it  before  its  publication.

Dr.  Conolly,  observing  in  a  newspaper  report  of  a  mesmeric  lecture  at  Bristol
by  Dr.  Storer  that  this  gentleman  had  mentioned  him  as  a  convert  to  mesmerism
as  well  as  Dr.  Forbes,  his  former  partner  in  the  journal,  sent  the  following  ad¬
vertisement  to  the  paper  : —

<c  To  the  Editor  of  the  Bristol  Gazette.

“  Bath  Hotel,  Clifton,  Nov.  30,  1848.

“  Sir, — Happening  to  read  your  paper  of  this  morning’s  date,  I  found  my
name  mentioned,  in  a  report  of  Dr.  Storer’s  Lectures  at  the  Albert  Rooms,
among  the  believers  in  mesmerism.  I  beg  you  to  do  me  the  favour  of  contra¬
dicting  this  assertion,  which  must  have  originated  in  mistake.

“  I  am,  Sir,

“  Your  very  obedient  Servant,

“  J.  Conolly,  M.D.,

“  Physician  to  the  Hanwell  Asylum.”

In  his  reply  Dr.  Storer  very  justly  says,  “  If  Dr.  Conolly  has  not  thought
fit  to  investigate  the  subject  in  the  hope  of  better  understanding  the  nature  and
treatment  of  insanity,  considering  what  has  lately  been  done  in  this  and  other
departments,  it  is  deeply  to  be  regretted  for  the  sake  of  those  under  his  charge.”

I  BOLDLY  TELL  Dr.  CONOLLY  THAT,  WITH  THE  MIGHTY  MASS  OF  FACTS
RECORDED  IN  The  ZoiST  ALONE,  THE  MEDICAL  MAN,  BE  HIS  DEPARTMENT
WHAT  IT  MAY,  WHO  IS  NOT  ACQUAINTED  WITH  MESMERISM,  CONVINCED  OF
ITS  TRUTH,  AND  IN  THE  HABIT  OF  EMPLOYING  IT  IN  HIS  MOST  IMPERFECT
ART,  WILL  SOON  BE  CONSIDERED  EITHER  TO  NEGLECT  A  SOLEMN  DUTY  TO
HIS  PATIENTS,  OR  TO  BE  INCAPABLE  OF  INTELLIGENT,  HONEST,  OR  AT  LEAST
OF  DISPASSIONATE  EXAMINATION  OF  EVIDENCE.

VOL.  VI.


D  D


370  Case  of  Cataleptic  Insanity  treated  Mesmerically ,

The  appearance  to  the  boy’s  inward  vision,  mentioned  at
p.  327,  of  parts  loaded  with  blood  becoming  paler  under
mesmerisation,  is  precisely  what  has  been  visible  to  others
when  mesmerising  and  curing  inflamed  visible  parts  of
patients.

The  declaration  of  the  boy  at  p.  327,  that  attempts  to  wake
him  hurt  his  head,  agrees  with  my  experience  that  patients
should  never  be  awakened  from  their  mesmeric  sleep  unless
they  direct  this,  or  evidently  suffer  from  a  long  sleep,  as  at
p.  330  it  appears  that  he  did.*

The  remarkable  circumstance,  recorded  at  p.  328,  of  the
boy  being  right  and  Mr.  Drummond  wrong,  is  an  instance  of
what  has  frequently  happened.  Colonel  Gurwood,  not  be¬
lieving  in  mesmerism,  tried  the  clairvoyance  of  Alexis  Didier
at  Paris.  Among  the  numerous  perfectly  true  descriptions
given  by  Alexis,  the  youth  detailed  every  particular  of  Colonel
Gurwood’ s  study  in  Lowndes.  Square,  and  said  he  saw  seven
engravings  on  the  wall.  The  Colonel  maintained  that  there
were  only  six  :  but  Alexis  persisted  that  he  saw  seven.  On
the  Colonel’s  return  to  London,  he  found  there  were  seven,
and  that  he  had  forgotten  one  behind  the  door.f  If  this
was  all  cerebral  sympathy  rather  than  clairvoyance,  then
we  have  the  fact  of  cerebral  sympathy  with  ideas  existing
unconsciously  in  the  brain.  For  Colonel  Gurwood  of  course
knew  originally  that  there  were  seven  engravings,  and,  though
he  had  forgotten  one,  a  greater  excitement  of  his  brain  by
stimulants,  fever,  very  great  exertion  of  memory,  or  spon¬
taneously  increased  action  of  his  brain,  at  even  some  distant
period,  would  have  brought  forth  the  dull  and  latent  im¬
pression  of  the  seventh  engraving :  just  as  a  man  has  for¬
gotten  a  language  for  many  years,  and  in  fever,  or  insanity,
or  inflammation  of  his  brain,  remembered  it  again  perfectly,
the  proof  being  clear  that  the  impressions  were  all  along  in
his  brain.

Mr.  Baldoek,  of  Chatham  Dockyard,  who  has  contributed
valuable  cures  to  The  Zoist%  and  been  one  of  the  most  un¬
daunted  and  active  promulgators  of  mesmerism,  mentioned
to  me  that  he  was  in  the  habit  of  mesmerising  a  clairvoyant
man,  and  a  sceptical  gentleman  present  who  had  put  every
thing  in  confusion  in  his  study  before  leaving  home  begged
that  the  man  would  go  clairvoyantly  to  it  and  relate  what  he
noticed.  The  man  mentioned  every  thing,  but  every  thing

*  Zoist,  No.  XVI.,  p.  471-3.

f  The  ample  proofs  of  clairvoyance  afforded  to  Colonel  Gurwood  and  others
by  Alexis  are  well  worth  perusing  in  No.  VIII.,  p.  481 ;  No.  XI.,  p.  389.

+  See  Mr.  Baldock’s  cures  in  No.  IX.,  p.  79  ;  No.  XI.,  p.  337.


by  Mr.  Parsons ,  Royal  Marine  Library,  Brighton.  371

in  its  place.  The  sceptic  chuckled ;  but  wrote  to  Mr.  Baldock,
the  next  day,  that  on  his  return  he  found  his  servant  had
entered  the  room  and  put  every  thing  in  order  as  soon  as  he
had  left  home.

The  determination  expressed  at  p.  332  by  Mr.  Parsons  to
cure  his  patient  and  eschew  all  experiments  made  with  the
view  of  convincing  unbelievers  was  perfectly  right.  If  we
do  sceptics  the  favour  to  spend  an  hour  or  more  in  shewing
them  mesmeric  phenomena, — as  I  stupidly  did  many  years
ago  to  almost  every  one,  taking  it  for  granted  that  all  loved
truth, — the  greater  part  consider  themselves  absolved  from  all
modesty,  consider  themselves  fully  acquainted  with  the  sub¬
ject,  though  quite  ignorant  of  it,  and  therefore  feel  at
liberty  to  state,  not  their  ignorance  and  difficulties,  but  their
own  views  forsooth,  and  to  set  you  right.  When  persons  at¬
tend  a  lecture  on  chemistry  or  mechanics,  they  conceive  the
lecturer  knows  more  of  the  matter  than  they  themselves,
sit  in  modest  silence  till  the  lecture  is  over,  and  then  presume
not  to  argue  or  propound  their  own  superior  views,  but  solicit
explanations  of  what  they  did  not  fully  comprehend.  The
suffering  of  patients  from  the  cruel  and  false  accusations  of
ignorant  sceptics  is  such  that  we  ought  not  to  allow  any
rudeness.  The  tone  of  the  world  has,  however,  undergone  a
great  change.  There  is  a  general  conviction  that  mesmerism
is  true,  and  the  majority  now  behave  like  people  of  good
sense;  only  a  certain  number,  and  those  for  the  most  part
medical  men,  but  of  every  degree,  continuing  blind  to  their
own  ignorance  and  the  possibility  of  their  looking  ridiculous.
Even  Mr.  Wakley,  the  professors  of  the  fallen  and  still-fall¬
ing  Medical  School  of  University  College,  Dr.  Forbes,  and
some  others,  will  not  now  venture  to  conduct  themselves  in
reference  to  demonstrations  of  mesmeric  cases  as  they  did  a
few  years  since.  Very  few  of  this  class  are  now  insensible
to  the  position  of  our  science  and  art.

The  necessity  of  leaving  persons  to  protract  their  sleep-
wTaking,  as  Mr.  Parsons  did,  p.  333,  or  of  sending  them  into  it
again,  and  deepening  it  as  much  as  possible,  if  they  awake
drowsy  and  disposed  to  sleep  more,  or  delirious,  or  strange,
or  cross,  or  in  any  way  uncomfortable,  cannot  be  too  gene¬
rally  known.  I  learnt  this  from  the  cases  of  the  Okeys,  and
have  verified  it  ever  since,  and  found  that  the  experience  of
all  my  friends  coincides  with  mine.

Two  striking  illustrations  of  mesmeric  influence  render¬
ing  the  taste  of  articles  perfectly  different  to  reality,  were
given  by  me  in  No.  III.,  p.  346,  and  No.  XII.,  p.  461.
Thomas  Bussen  munched  with  infinite  relish  wormwood

i)i)2


372  Case  of  Cataleptic  Insanity  treated  Mesmerically,

which  I  gave  him  as  something  very  nice,  although  the  mo¬
ment  I  awoke  him  the  bitterness  of  it  still  in  his  mouth
nearly  caused  him  to  vomit  and  made  him  very  angry.  Miss
Collins,  as  long  as  I  had  my  fingers  over  one  or  both  her
organs  of  Alimentiveness,  munched  aloes  with  equal  relish,
believing  it  to  be  sweet  cake  as  I  told  her  it  was.  I  made  her
relish  water,  nay,  essence  of  wormwood,  as  wine :  and,  con-
trarily,  I  with  ease  made  her  mistake  plain  water  for  essence
of  wormwood  or  for  brandy.  I  produced  the  effects  by  the
force  of  imagination  :  Mr.  Parsons  apparently  by  an  exertion
of  his  mere  will,  p.  336.

The  boy’s  predictions  were  fancied  by  him  to  be  commu¬
nicated  to  him  by  a  book  in  which  they  were  written,  and  to
which  a  ghastly  being  in  black  pointed,  p.  337.

Such  a  statement  is  likely  to  excite  the  ridicule  of  the
ignorant :  but  is  in  perfect  accordance  with  nature.  Certain
excitement  of  various  portions  of  the  brain,  if  not  of  other
divisions  of  the  nervous  system,  gives  the  appearance  of  un¬
existing  or  absent  beings  and  inanimate  objects,  gives  the  im¬
pression  of  unreal  sounds,  tastes,  smells,  and  feelings,  to  use
the  term  feelings  in  the  signification  of  all  sensations  included
in  the  generic  word  touch.  Any  of  these  phenomena  may
occur  singly,  or  in  combination  with  one  or  more  of  the
others,  or  with  different  diseases  of  the  nervous  system.
A  madman  may  believe  their  reality,  as  he  does  the  reality  of
all  his  fancies ;  and  so  may  a  person  not  mad  but  ignorant —
unacquainted  with  their  true  nature,  which  is  diseased  nervous
action.  The  ignorant  suppose  such  appearances  of  beings  to
be  supernatural  beings  or  real  souls  of  terrestrial  men  separated
from  the  body  for  the  moment.  However,  the  appearance  of
their  clothes,  of  books,  and  of  all  the  other  inanimate  objects,
is  not  to  be  so  explained, — not  by  supernatural  clothes,  books,
trees,  &c.,  &c.,  nor  by  separated  souls  of  clothes,  of  books,
trees,  &c. :  and  these  appearances  may  be  produced  by  nar¬
cotic  poisons,  blows  on  the  head,  indigestible  food,  &c.  &c.,  and
be  dispelled  by  emetics,  bleeding,  &c.,  &c.  Clairvoyance  is
sometimes,  but  not  necessarily,  attended  by  this  sort  of  hal¬
lucination — by  an  appearance  or  impression  of  some  unreal
being  or  inanimate  object,  which  seems  to  make  the  commu¬
nication.  In  tli5  highest  form  of  the  sleep-waking  of  the
elder  Okey,  when  she  had  a  degree  of  clairvoyance  and  pre¬
sented  such  an  extatic  appearance  as  no  one  could  assume,
she  fancied  her  communications,  whether  true  clairvoyance  or
illusion  is  not  the  present  question,  were  made  by  a  beautiful
negro.  If  a  question  was  asked  her,  she  was  observed  to
whisper  as  if  to  some  one  with  her — then  to  pause,  as  if  re-


by  Mr.  Parsons,  Royal  Marine  Library,  Brighton.  373

ceiving  an  answer, — and  then  to  answer  the  question.  This
idea  I  traced  to  her  having  seen  a  handsome  young  New
Zealand  Chief,  brought  to  the  hospital  by  Mr.  Gibbon  Wake¬
field  to  witness  her  phenomena.  Her  sister  J ane  at  one  time
fell  into  an  analogous  state  without  any  true  clairvoyance,  and
she  fancied  she  saw  a  gentleman.  Subsequent  reading  in¬
formed  me  that  these  delirious  ideas  were  often  recorded  by
authors  who  have  described  the  cases  of  clairvoyants  that  fell
under  their  own  observation.  At  the  very  time  the  two  Okeys
were  in  University  College  Hospital,  a  young  lady  was  in  an
analogous  condition  at  Neufchatel  under  Dr.  Castell,  and
subsequently  at  Aix  in  Savoy  under  the  care  of  Dr.  Despine,
senior,  who  has  detailed  her  most  interesting  case.*

It  was  not  till  the  following  year  that  I  met  with  the
work,  presented  indeed  to  me  by  Dr.  Despine,  and  found  that
the  impositions  of  the  Okeys,  as  the  deeply  learned  British
medical  journalists,  Mr.  Wakley,  Dr.  Conolly,  Dr.  Eorbes,
Dr.  James  Johnson,  and  professors  and  practitioners  termed
them,  had  been  performing  at  the  same  time,  in  a  little
Swiss  town.  Miss  Estelle  was  but  11  years  old,  five  years
younger  than  Elizabeth  Okey,  and  yet  devised  almost  the
same  set  of  phenomena.  Of  course  Estelle  and  the  Okeys  had
laid  their  heads  together  and  had  daily  correspondence  by
post.  Estelle’s  clairvoyant  communications  were  generally
made  with  the  appearance  of  a  good  angel  whose  name  was
Angeline.  Like  the  Okeys  she  would  address  the  imaginary
being  in  a  whisper,  wait  "for  an  answer,  and,  after  appearing
to  receive  it,  speak  again  and  declare  it.  Metals  and  crystals
had  peculiar  effects  on  her.  She  saw  globules  of  light,  and
blue  and  red  lights :  could  be  sent  to  sleep  by  electricity :  and
had  the  power  of  inducing  her  own  somnambulism.  Socrates
appears  to  have  been  a  clairvoyant,  but  to  have  had  one  tinge
of  insanity  with  it.  He  fancied  that  a  certain  being  attended
him.  This  hallucination  justifies  Mr.  Lelut  in  pronouncing
him  so  far  a  monomaniac. t

As  monomaniacal  delusion  is  only  a  casual  accompaniment
of  clairvoyance,  so  it  sometimes  ceases  to  attend  it.  The
Okeys  lost  it  while  still  exhibiting  as  much  approximation  to
clairvoyance,  if  such  it  should  be  termed,  as  ever.  They
afterwards  were  satisfied  that  it  had  been  an  illusion,  and
explained  it  by  saying  that  a  degree  of  delirium  had  been  at

*  Observations  de  Medecine  Pratique  faites  aux  Bains  d' Aix  en  Savoye.

Anneci.  1838.  .

Du  Demon  de  Socrate,  Sqiecimen  d’une  application  de  la  Science  Psyc/io-

logique  a  celle  de  I’histoire.  Par  F.  Lelut.  Paris,  1836.


374  Case  of  Cataleptic  Insanity  treated  Mesmerically ,

one  time  united  with  one  of  their  mesmeric  conditions.  The
peculiar  modes  of  detection  mentioned  at  pp.  338 — 40,  as
employed  by  Mr.  Parsons’s  youth,  appear  to  me  to  be  the
result  of  an  insane  condition  :  and  his  mode  of  telling  the
time  by  an  imaginary  dial,  p.  338,  to  be  the  result  of  at  least
eccentricity.  I  conceive  that  Prank  had  an  extraordinary
faculty  of  judging  of  time,*  but  went  through  certain  unne¬
cessary  processes,  which,  however,  he  sometimes  made  neces¬
sary,  and  yet  not  always,  for  he  sometimes  judged  accurately
without  them  (p.  355  and  perhaps  353).  Not  comprehending
the  history  of  the  dial,  I  wrote  to  Mr.  Parsons,  and  received
this  answer.

“About  the  dial  I  am  as  much  at  a  loss  as  any  one  can  be  ;  I
have  given  his  answer,  although  I  laughed  at  it  at  the  time.  The
fact  remains,  that  he  did  set  the  clock  astronomically  right  on  several
occasions,  and  I  am  not  aware  of  any  method  by  which  he  could  do
it,  except  by  guessing  or  seeing  Greenwich  time — or  the  chronometer
at  Lawson’s — in  his  clairvoyance  ;  there  would  be  no  difficulty  in
this  latter  :  but  the  boy  chose  to  give  another  way  of  arriving  at  it,
which  is  utterly  puzzling.  In  striving  to  make  the  solution  meet  his
explanation,  I  have  thought  thus  :  the  boy’s  magnetic  state  might
so  polarize  him,  that  he  could  by  his  own  sensations  place  himself
due  south  ;  his  keen  perceptions  might  enable  him  to  see  an  emana¬
tion  from  his  fingers  when  he  (as  he  says)  drew  a  gnomon  over  the
glass  of  water,  (the  boy  was  for  some  months  acting  as  assistant
and  errand  boy  to  an  optician,  and  may  have  there  picked  up  some¬
thing,)  and  the  bright  sunshine  may  have  to  him  cast  a  shade ;  but
this  leaves  the  correction  of  the  equation  of  time  to  his  unconscious
calculation.  Altogether  I  can  make  nothing  of  it  that  satisfies  myself,
and  I  put  the  answer  in  as  he  gave  it ;  it  may  have  a  value  hereafter.”

Some  peculiarities  of  mesmeric  subjects  are  independent
of  the  intellects  and  feelings  :  such  as  the  peculiar  effect  upon
various  patients  from  various  metals  and  other  inanimate
objects.  To  which  class  the  peculiar  effect  of  posture  in  ex¬
citing  this  lad’s  clairvoyance  (p.  345)  belongs,  I  cannot  say.
The  effect  of  taking  the  hands  in  different  ways  in  a  patient
of  mine  who  professed  clairvoyance  will  be  found  in  No.  VIII..
p.  480.

The  circumstance  of  feelings  suggesting  images  is  a  part
of  our  cerebral  constitution,  and  resolvable  into  the  general
fact  of  all  ideas  suggesting  images :  and  is  a  great  distinction
of  the  poet.  The  poet  illustrates  all  his  descriptions  by
imagery  :  in  our  dreams  the  existence  of  different  feelings
suggest  corresponding  images.  If  unhappy,  we  dream  of  dirt
and  difficulties,  insects  and  rats,  &c.,  though  not  of  the  real

*  See  my  case  of  the  extraordinary  activity  of  this  faculty  in  the  mesmeric
state,  No.  IX.,  p.  G5-G.


by  Mr.  Parsons,  Royal  Marine  Library,  Brighton.  375

cause  of  our  misery  :  if  happy,  of  charming  landscapes  and
all  kinds  of  beautiful  objects  and  delights.  If  clairvoyance
takes  place  in  dreaming,  it  may  give  rise  to  imagery ;  and
so  commonly  was  this  known  in  ancient  times  that  professed
interpreters  of  dreams  were  consulted.  When  I  reflect  upon
the  unquestionable  unconscious  working  of  the  brain,  upon
its  unconscious  reception  of  knowledge  from  without  upon
its  unconscious  acting  upon  this  knowledge,  upon  its  uncon¬
scious  and  irresistible  willing,*  I  can  conceive  that  a  clair¬
voyant  may  not  understand  his  clairvoyance :  and  another
sagacious  person,  perhaps  another  clairvoyant,  may  be  re¬
quired  to  interpret  for  him.

Independently  of  clairvoyance,  imaginary  appearances
sometimes  occur  in  sleep-waking  as  in  common  sleep.  Eliza¬
beth  Okey  was  affected  very  uncomfortably  when  she  saw  any
one  she  thought  dying  or  in  danger  of  death.  Such  a  person
so  affected  her  that  an  image  of  death  was  conjured  up  to  her
imagination.  It  was  a  skeleton  partly  enveloped  in  a  sheet,
such  as  we  see  in  some  illustrated  religious  books.  The  nearer
death  seemed  in  her  view,  the  taller  was  the  figure.  In  con¬
versing  with  her  about  it,  as  she  was  terrified  and  I  wished  to
spare  her  distress,  I  refrained  from  calling  it  Death,  but,,  to
make  her  laugh,  nicknamed  it  Jack.  When  the  interesting
psychological  fact  and  the  nickname  became  known,  the  herd
of  ignorant  persons  in  the  school,  and  those  who  wiote  and
conversed  about  her  case,  could  do  no  more  than  laugh  at
her  as  the  prophetess  of  St.  Pancras  and  Jack  as  her  im¬
position.  To  a  philosophic  mind  the  whole  was  a  subject  of
most  interesting  thought.

Of  all  this  she  was  perfectly  ignorant  in  her  waking  state ;
and  regarded  it  as  nonsense  when  it  was  related  to  her.  For
nothing  that  passed  in  her  various  mesmeric  conditions  was

*  Though  I  have  always  contended  that  what  appears  the  attraction  of  parts  is
an  act  of  the  will,  I  confessed  that  if  I  stiffened  Miss  Barber’s  arm  in  her  waking
state,  and  drew  it  by  tractive  passes,  the  movements  of  the  arm  were  excited  uncon¬
sciously,  and  to  her  astonishment,  p.  221.  But  they  do  not  occur,  unless  she  knows
of  my  tractive  passes  :  and  I  had  a  patient.  Miss  Emma  Melhuish,  who  did  anything
that  I  said  she  could,  though  she  did  not  if  I  requested  or  commanded  What¬
ever  movement  I  said  would  occur  of  any  part,  it  did  occur.  I  asked  her  how
all  this  happened ;  and  she  replied,  in  the  gentle  voice  which  had  always  charac¬
terized  her  mesmeric  sleep-waking,  that  “  she  did  not  know,— that  she  heard  what
was  said,  and  that  she  knew  her  arm  went  up,  but  could  not  tell  why,  that  she
did  not  try  to  lift  it  up,— she  could  not  help  it,— and  when  it  was,  up  she  could
not  put  it  down  again;  but,  when  I  said  it  would  go  down,  it  1  .  o.  .,  p.
434.  That  will  was  exerted,  was  proved  by  seeing  being  required  in  Miss  Barber  s
case,  and  hearing  in  Emma’s  case,  though  the  willing  of  both  was  unconscious.
But  the  fact  in  Miss  Melhuish’s  case  was  an  expenmentum  cruets ;  tor,  as  no
tractive  pass  was  made,  there  could  be  no  physical  attraction,— not  mg  compara¬
ble  to  magnetic  attraction.  The  brain  heard  and  willed -and  this  was  all.  See
No.  V.,  p.  70.


376  Case  of  Cataleptic  Insanity  treated  Mesmericalty,

remembered  in  the  natural  state.  Among  the  falsehoods  pro¬
pagated  by  the  ignorant  and  designing  respecting  these  two
interesting  cases  is  that  of  Elizabeth  having  confessed  this
illusion  of  Jack  to  be  an  imposition.  In  truth  she  could  know
nothing  of  it  but  by  hearsay.  In  their  sleep-waking  the
sisters  would  prescribe  repeated  cupping  and  blistering  and
severe  open  blistering  for  themselves,  and  their  advice  was
always  taken  by  me  with  decided  advantage :  but  in  their
natural  state  they  did  more  than  laugh  at  their  own  prescrip¬
tions — they  implored  me  on  their  knees  with  streaming  tears
and  piteous  sobs  that  I  would  not  execute  the  painful  mea¬
sures  ;  just  as  Walker  felt  annoyance,  p.  336.

The  curious  circumstance  of  clairvoyants  communicating  a
knowledge  of  things  as  now  occurring  which  had  occurred  just
before  is  well  established.  What  is  stated  at  p.  357  as  having
happened  on  June  6th  is  similar  to  what  was  noticed  by  Capt.
James  at  Dover  in  one  of  his  clairvoyants.  I  recollect  being  in¬
formed  of  it  by  Capt.  James  at  the  time;  but,  wishing  for  minute
particulars,  I  requested  the  Captain  to  give  me  an  account  in
writing,  and  he  did  so  upon  the  17th  of  the  present  month.

“With  respect  to  the  case  of  clairvoyance  to  which  you  allude,
I  will  endeavour  to  give  you  as  correct  an  account  as  possible  of  what
occurred.

“  About  three  years  since,  a  servant  in  my  employ  exhibited
during  the  mesmeric  sleep  very  extraordinary  clairvoyant  powers.
Some  friends  having  one  day  desired  to  witness  my  experiments,  the
servant  was  mesmerised,  and,  after  giving  various  proofs  of  the  pos¬
session  of  the  faculty  of  clairvoyance,  I  suggested  that  two  of  the
party  should  withdraw  to  another  room,  in  order  to  prove  whether
the  patient  could  describe  what  they  were  doing.

“After  the  lapse  of  a  few  minutes ,  I  desired  the  patient  to  look
into  the  room  in  question  and  to  tell  me  what  she  saw.  After  a
short  pause  she  said,  ‘  I  see  a  gentleman  and  a  lady  in  the  room  ;
the  gentleman  has  got  a  bonnet  on  his  head.’  Another  pause  ;  she
then  exclained,  ‘  Oh !  now  the  gentleman  has  got  upon  the  table
with  a  candle  in  his  hand.’

“  Soon  after  this  my  friends  returned  to  us,  and  I  asked  them
what  they  had  been  doing.  Their  account  agreed  in  every  particular
with  the  patient’s,  except  as  to  the  time.  It  appeared  that  the  gen¬
tleman  had  actually  put  on  a  bonnet  on  first  entering  the  room ,  but
took  it  off  again  immediately ;  and,  after  some  considerable  delay ,
at  length  got  on  the  table  with  a  candle  in  his  hand.  I  perfectly
remember  that,  on  comparing  notes,  we  found  there  must  have  been
a  lapse  of  nearly  five  minutes  from  the  moment  my  friend  removed
the  bonnet  from  his  head  and  the  moment  my  servant  declared  she
saw  it  on  him.”

The  particulars  respecting  the  wedding,  detailed  at  pp.


by  Mr.  Parsons,  Royal  Marine  Library,  Brighton.  3 77

346-7-9,  357-8,  360,  may  have  arisen  partly  from  cerebral
sympathy  with  his  mother,  whose  brain  may  unconsciously
have  had  in  it  many  of  his  ideas  upon  the  subject,  partly
from  true  clairvoyance,  and  partly  from  insanity.

The  intense  attraction  of  the  youth  to  Mr.  Parsons  calls
to  my  mind  the  attraction  of  the  youth,  Mr.  Griffiths,  to  his
mesmeriser  whoever  this  might  be,  recorded  in  the  Fourth
Number  of  The  Zoist,  p.  407.  He  at  one  time  pushed  so
closely  to  Mr.  Parsons,  that  that  gentleman  exclaimed,  “  Why
one  would  think  you  wanted  to  get  inside  of  me.”  Of  Mr.
Symes's  patient  I  remarked,  p.  418,

«  Mr.  S.  went  up  to  him,  and  he  then  followed  Mr.  S.  about  the
room,  and  all  over  the  house,  like  a  child  that  would  not  be  left.
He  was  not  satisfied  with  following  and  being  near  to  Mr.  S.,  but
pushed  against  him  when  standing  still  or  sitting ;  endeavouring,  as
it  were,  to  be  in  the  very  same  'point  of  space,  and,  as  soon  as  he
had  pushed  Mr.  S.  away  from  the  spot  where  that  gentleman  was,
he  still  pushed  against  him  to  occupy  the  fresh  spot.  The  same
thing  once  was  manifested  in  Master  Salmon’s  sleep-waking,  men¬
tioned  above  at  page  324.

“  Whatever  Mr.  Symes  did,  he  did.  Sat  down,  walked,  kneeled,
stood  on  one  leg,  ran  up  or  down  stairs,  put  his  leg  over  the  balusters,
assumed  all  sorts  of  attitudes,  lay  along  a  table,  got  under  the  table,
precisely  as  Mr.  S.  did,  and  as  near  to  Mr.  S.  as  possible.  Then,
as  soon  as  the  desire  to  imitate  was  satisfied,  the  attraction  would
break  forth,  and  he  would  push  against  Mr.  S.  again ;  endeavouring
to  sit  in  the  same  chair  and  push  Mr.  S.  out  of  it,  and,  as  soon  as
he  had  pushed  him  out  of  it,  pushing  on  again.”

In  my  account  of  Master  Salmon's  case,  No.  III.,  p.  324,
I  said,

“  I  have  two  female  patients,  one  of  whom  approaches  as  near
as  possible,  but  never  touches  her  mesmeriser,  and  the  other  puts
her  head  forward,  and,  as  soon  as  it  touches ,  she  withdraws  it  and
stands  fixed.  The  child  (Master  Salmon)  now  attempted  to  drive
against  me,  while  standing,  but  soon  gave  up  and  yielded  to  his  pro¬
pensity  to  imitate  all  I  did.”

Mr.  Parsons  most  justly  remarks  at  p.  352,

“  If  a  young  woman  had  shewn  this  mesmeric  attachment,  it
would  doubtless  have  been  attributed  by  opponents  to  an  impure
motive.  I  have  mesmerised  young  women  who  have  shewn  it  very
strongly,  but  never  so  strongly  as  this  lad  manifested  it,  because  of
the  difference  of  sex,  oddly  as  it  may  read.  The  lad  yielded  at  once
to  the  instinct.  The  young  woman  felt  the  same  impulse,  but  the
innate  modesty  and  reserve,  as  conspicuous  in  this  state  as  in  the
waking  state ,  restrained  her,  for  fear  of  misconstruction.  ‘None
were  ever  so  fond  of  me  as  this  boy,’  I  said,  smiling.  The  boy
now  came  and  put  his  arms  round  me,  as  if  what  I  said  had  influ-


378  Case  of  Cataleptic  Insanity  treated  Mesmerically ,

enced  him  to  shew  his  love.  Yet,  as  I  did  not  speak  to  him,  and
as  he  always  says  he  has  never  heard  a  word  in  such  cases,  when  I
have  questioned  him,  it  may  have  been  unconsciously  apprehended.
This  is  often  the  case  when  talking  is  going  on  around,  and  the  patient
will  manifest  afterwards  that  the  matter  has  been  apprehended,  al¬
though  not  conscious  at  the  time  of  hearing  any  thing.”

I  have  never  once  noticed  the  faintest  sexual  emotion  in
any  of  my  patients,  however  strong  their  attachment  to  me.
It  has  been  Gall’s  pure  faculty  of  attachment  that  was  ex¬
cited.  They  have  manifested  the  same  degree  of  it  whichever
their  sex,  and  the  same  degree  whoever,  or  how  many
strangers  soever,  were  present.  It  has  invariably  been  that
of  a  little  child  to  its  mother ;  of  a  pet  animal  to  its  master.
There  is  however  this  difference,  that  boys,  unconscious  of
impropriety  of  appearance,  have  shewn  no  reserve,  but,  like
Frank  Walker,  sat  close  to  me,  taking  my  hand  in  their’ s,  or
placing  their  heads  on  my  shoulders ;  while  females  have  in¬
variably  abstained  from  any  outward  demonstration  of  friend¬
ship  that  any  but  the  depraved  and  malignant  could  construe
into  an  impropriety.

But,  without  the  ordinary  demonstration  of  the  sentiment
of  friendship,  or  plain  attachment,  there  may  be  a  manifesta¬
tion  of  attraction  to  the  mesmeriser  from  the  strength  of  the
mesmeric  susceptibility  of  the  patient.  The  influence  of  Mr.
Parsons  upon  Frank,  described  at  pp.  364-5,  when  between
Bishopstown  and  Newhaven  the  boy  was  nearly  drawn  off  the
road,  is  parallel  with  the  drawing  which  was  felt  by  Miss
Aglionby  from  even  the  unknown  proximity  of  her  medical
attendant  and  mesmeriser,  Mr.  Nixon.  If  Mr.  Nixon  took
hold  of  the  hand  of  Miss  Aglionby’s  aunt,  Miss  Aglionby  was
“  alternately  repelled  from  and  attracted  to  both,”  p.  240.

With  sorrow  I  saw  in  the  Medical  Gazette  of  Dec.  8,
p.  969,  which  declares  that  none  read  The  Zoist  except  the
impostors  who  publish  their  cases  in  it,*  the  following  state¬
ment  by  Dr.  Mayo  : —

“  "With  respect,  then,  to  mesmeric  therapeutics,  beside  other
questions  which  would  spring  out  of  an  inquiry,  one  question  would
arise  peculiarly  appropriate  to  this  subject — namely,  whether  a  cer¬
tain  measure  of  beneficial  results  being  conceded  to  mesmerism,  the
extent  of  benefit  is  commensurate  with  the  contingent  mischievousness
of  the  means  employed.  In  reference  to  this  point,  I  may  call  the
attention  of  my  readers  to  a  case  published  in  the  last  number  of  the
Zoist.  It  is  that  of  Miss  Aglionby,  communicated  by  herself.  In
that  statement  it  appears  to  me  that  ‘weakness  remaining  after  an
attack  of  fever,’  which  constituted  the  complaint,  is  removed  by  the
substitution  of  a  kind  of  possession ,  which  any  father,  husband,  or

*  Zoist ,  No.  XXII.,  p.  210.


by  Mr.  Parsons,  Royal  Marine  Library,  Brighton.  379

brother,  would  consider  far  more  undesirable  than  the  weakness  re¬
moved  by  it.  Here,  as  in  many  other  points  which  I  could  adduce,
or  which  my  reader’s  imagination  may  suggest,  it  should  be  remem¬
bered  that  the  removal  of  physical  evil  may  be  effected  by  processes
ethically  objectionable.

“Now  the  public  has  a  right  to  demand,  and  to  demand  of  us,
some  answer  to  the  questions,  whether  the  asserted  removal  of  dis¬
orders  on  mesmeric  principles  has  been  truly  effected — whether  the
objections  above  hinted  at  to  their  removal  on  these  principles,  may
be  over-ruled — whether,  in  regard  to  this  latter  point,  a  line  can  be
drawn  between  legitimate  and  illegitimate  use  of  the  expedients  of
the  science.”

By  possession  is  understood  the  residence  of  an  evil  spirit
in  man  or  brute.  Dr.  Mayo  ascribes  a  simple  mesmeric  phe¬
nomenon  to  possession  !  Does  he  know  no  better  ?  And  is  he
so  ignorant  of  mesmerism  as  not  to  know  that  the  phenomena
of  mesmeric  attachment,  when  they  happen  to  occur,  are  per¬
fectly  pure  :*  and  that  the  phenomena  of  mesmeric  attraction
may^exist,  as  they  did  here,  without  even  the  sentiment  of
friendship  and  attachment  ?  His  assertion  that  this  simple
and  innocent  natural  fact,  which  he,  for  reasons  known  to
himself,  styles  possession,  is  what  any  father,  husband,  or
brother  would  consider  far  more  undesirable  than  the  disease
removed  by  mesmerism,  is  worse  than  absurd.  Miss  Aglionby
is  well :  and  the  phenomena  ceased  with  the  mesmerism.  And
if  they  and  the  mesmerism  were  to  be  repeated,  what  then  ?
What  was  there  undesirable  in  them  ?  When  any  one  draws
the  mesmerised  arm  of  a  person  wide  awake,  and  mesmerised
in  no  other  part  than  the  arm,  is  this  possession,  or  a  bit  of
possession  ? — a  bit  of  an  evil  spirit  in  a  bit  of  a  body  ? — and
are  these  experiments  undesirable  things?  Out  upon  such
stuff !— out  upon  it !  When  men  talk  thus  of  virtuous  and
refined  females,  call  them  possessed,  say  that  they  have  sub¬
mitted  to  what  is  undesirable  in  the  eyes  of  fathers,  husbands,
brothers, — the  only  feeling  excited  is  one  of  unutterable  dis-
gust.f  Suppose  that  such  specimens  of  charity,  candour,  de¬
licacy,  and  purity  as  Dr.  Mayo  should  succeed  in  their  views,

*  I  said  in  1845,  Zoist,  No.  IX.,  p.  55,  “Those  who  think  they  have  seen
any  thing  else  must  have  seen  with  the  eyes  of  a  prurient  impure  imagination,
unless,”  &c.  Dr.  Mayo  might  read  the  Rev.  G.  Sandby’s  work  with  profit,— at

pp.  229-31.

f  To  shew  that  I  have  no  personal  feeling  in  this  matter  I  beg  to  quote  the  rest
of  Dr.  Mayo’s  passage.— “  For  great,  indeed,  is  the  curative  effect  held  out  by  these
practitioners,  and  held  out  with  no  slight  degree  of  proof.  The  talents  and  high
scientific  position  of  Dr.  Elliotson  are  well  known.  It  would  be  superfluous,  and,
therefore,  impertinent,  to  say,  that  his  veracity  is  unimpeachable,  but  foi  the
unscrupulousness  with  which  charges  of  insincerity  have  been  brought  against
professors  of  mesmerism.  Now  Dr.  Elliotson  has  recently  published  a  case  ot
cancer,  apparently  absorbed  under  mesmeric  treatment.  Its  cancerous  nature


380


Major  Buckley's  Clairvoyant  Patients.


and  virtuously  make  the  community  afraid  of  a  great  and  holy
blessing,  still  all  females  could  be  mesmerised  by  fathers,  hus¬
bands,  brothers,  or  by  women,  and  males  by  men.  If  there
had  been  the  slightest  ground  for  Dr.  Mayo’s  remarks,  this
should  have  been  his  suggestion.  He  well  knows  that  he
would  not  object  to  have  his  own  daughter  mesmerised.  The
treatment  of  Miss  Martineau  and  of  the  Okeys  by  the  open
foes  of  mesmerism  was  bad  enough,  but  Dr.  Mayo  - - .

I  am  happy  to  hear  from  Mr.  Parsons  in  a  letter  dated
December  18th,

“  The  boy  has  quite  recovered  again,  and  shews  evident  signs  of
more  perfect  convalescence  than  heretofore.  Each  day  now  dimin¬
ishes  his  susceptibility  to  my  influence,  so  that  to-day  he  arose  and
took  my  hand  and  answered  my  question — *  How  are  you?’  before
he  went  to  sleep.  Yesterday  and  the  day  before  he  arose  and  spoke
to  me,  but  could  not  resist  the  contact  with  my  hand,  which  instantly
sent  him  off.  His  fits  are  all  gone,  and  his  appearance  is  more
natural  and  healthy.

“  He  says  (asleep),  that  his  diminished  susceptibility  is  a  sign  of
his  cure,  and  that  he  shall  soon  be  quite  insusceptible  and  cured.”


II.  Major  Buckley’s  Clairvoyant  Patients.  Communicated

by  Dr.  Ashburner.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

Sir, — One  of  the  most  miserable  exhibitions  which  the  pre¬
sent  competing  system  of  society  displays,  in  our  days,  always
excepting  the  dire  condition  of  approximate  starvation  of  mul¬
titudes  of  our  fellow-beings,  is  the  envy,  hatred,  malice,  and
all  uncharitableness  that  characterize  the  conduct  of  the  me¬
dical  profession.  I  have  had  occasion  repeatedly  to  deplore
the  unmanly — the  cowardly  aims  of  the  moral  assassin;  but
offences  against  personal  character  are  of  trivial  consequence
compared  to  cunning  and  deliberate  efforts  to  wound  the
cause  of  scientific  truth  for  the  unholy  purposes  of  a  system
of  self-glorification,  adopted  by  those  who,  pretending  to
respect  high  feeling,  knowingly  and  basely  pander  to  the
brutal  prejudices  of  the  vulgar  herd.  Phrenology,  a  science
promulgated  by  the  illustrious  Gall,  proved  to  be  in  all  its

hacl  been  recognized  by  Mr.  Symes,  Mr.  Samuel  Cooper,  Dr.  Ashburner,  as
well  as  by  Dr.  Elliotson.  But  in  fact  the  cases  of  cure,  less  marvellous  in  kind
than  this,  of  various  diseases  under  mesmeric  agency,  are  too  numerous  to  be  put
aside  without  inquiry.  They  are  numerous  to  an  extent  which  will  induce  the
public  to  accept  the  methodus  medendi  with  all  its  presumable  evils,  unless  we
place  it  before  them  after  investigation  in  a  harmless  form,  if  such  a  form  can  be
devised,  or  convict  the  whole  system  of  vice  or  imposture.”


Communicated  by  Dr.  Ashburner.


381


«

details  absolutely  true  by  the  facts  which  mesmerism  has
developed,  explains  to  us  how  no  man  can  endeavour  to  crush
truth  basely  without  having  a  most  unenviable  head.  It  is  a
proved  fact,  that  every  cunning  physician  who  endeavours  to
give  to  phrenology  or  to  mesmerism  a  malicious  sneer— or  an
inuendo — or  a  whisper,  that  has  been  calculated  to  excite  the
ignorant  prejudices  of  a  patient  or  of  any  other  equally  unin¬
formed  person,  must  have  an  organization  of  the  head  that  is
incompatible  with  the  existence  of  large — or  of  correct  or
of  logical  views;  that  is  quite  incompatible  with  the  indul¬
gence  of  pure  charity;  that  is  quite  incompatible  with  the
exercise  of  philosophical  humility.  A  not  exalted,  but  re¬
treating  forehead— a  large  organ  of  cunning,  with  an  ampli¬
tude  where  the  love  of  gain  resides — a  caution  or  timidity
amounting  to  cowardice — a  large  share  of  Self-esteem,  form
the  characters  of  a  mind  to  which  Bishop  Wilberforce's
remarks  well  apply,  when  he  says  that  <e  on  such  a  mind
there  soon  settles  down  the  thicker  darkness  which  is  bred  by
all  the  storms  of  envy,  captiousness,  jealousy,  and  hatred.”
Mesmerism  teaches,  that  the  fluids  which  emanate  from  such
heads,  when  several  are  at  work  cogitating  together  in  con¬
clave,  produce  on  each  other  forces  of  sympathy,  that— to
use  the  language  of  an  author  ignorant  of  the  depths  of  his
subject,  and  adopting  most  erroneous  views — create  a  ^pos¬
session  which  of  a  necessity  determines  false  conclusions.
Charity  would  lead  us  to  treat  the  aberrations  of  such  minds
with  tenderness  on  the  same  principle  that  we  should  spare
pain  as  much  as  possible  to  idiots ;  but  the  philosophy  of
human  conduct  as  dependant  upon  the  force  of  motives  offered
to  the  mind,  must  teach  us  in  the  cause  of  scientific  truth  to
cut  with  an  unflinching  hand.

I  may  ask  how  much  longer  will  medical  men  go  on  wal¬
lowing  in  their  ignorance  of  phrenology  and  of  mesmerology  ?
Are  they  to  wait  until  Mr.  Faraday  has,  before  the  Koyal
Society,  read  a  few  more  Bakerian  lectures  on  what  he  truly
termed  “ mysterious  subjects?”  Are  physicians  always  to
take  physiological  physics  at  second  hand  ?  Are  they  to  wait
for  the  magnetic  mysteries  of  mind  until  it  shall  please  some
accepted  professor  to  sidle  the  crystalline  facts  of  Eeichenbach
to  the  magnetic  phenomena  of  Galvanrs  electric  battery  ?
Peddlers  in  physiology— peddlers  in  logic— peddlers  in  mental
philosophy— peddlers  in  electricity  and  magnetism,  their  pre¬
sumption  in  any  efforts  at  arbitrating  between  the  professors
of  a  knowledge  their  pride  and  ignorance  incapacitate  them
from  comprehending  and  that  part  of  the  public  which  is
humbly  willing  to  learn ,  is  preposterous.  Mr.  Craig,  from


382


Major  Buckley’s  Clairvoyant  Patients.


Sheffield,  would,  for  threepence  a  head,  undertake  to  give
them  a  kind  of  information  that  should  better  qualify  them
for  abitrators,  and  put  them  in  respect  of  a  true  philosophy
of  mind  more  in  the  way  of  reaching  to  a  level  with  many  of
the  operative  mechanics,  to  whom  they  may  now  look  up
from  a  deep  abyss.

I  am  quite  aware  that  numerous  whisperings  have  gone
forth  against  the  facts  which  Major  Buckley  exhibited  to  me
and  to  others,  some  of  them  have  been  propagated  with  not
very  good  faith  towards  a  most  distinguished  cultivator  of
mesmerism.  But  however  individuals  may  err,  the  truth  must
go  forward.  The  experiments  with  the  nutshells  have  been
so  often  repeated  under  various  circumstances,  that  the  facts
may  defy  the  incredulity — the  sneers — the  whisperings  of  all
the  physicians  in  the  world ;  let  alone  the  poor  creatures  who
would  like  to  lead  the  gobe-mouches  of  London  to  assist  in
their  self-glorification.  Major  Buckley  continues  to  repeat
his  experiments,  and  having  lately  convinced  a  very  intelli¬
gent  medical  practitioner  at  Brighton  of  the  truth  of  clair¬
voyance,  he  has  been  kind  enough  to  send  me  the  statement
I  now  forward  to  you.

I  remain,  Sir,

Your  obedient  servant,

65,  Grosvenor  Street,  John  Ashburner.

Dec.  12,  1848.

“  My  dear  Dr.  Ashburner,

“  On  the  22nd  of  Nov.  I  had  the  pleasure  of  being  intro¬
duced  to  Mr.  Mott,  a  man  of  powerful  intellect — a  zealous
advocate  in  the  cause  of  truth,  a  believer  in  clairvoyance,  and
(like  yourself)  possessing  moral  courage  to  avow  that  belief,
alike  regardless  of  the  opposition  of  the  interested  and  the  ri¬
dicule  of  the  ignorant.  At  my  request  he  purchased  four  motto
nuts  (not  touched  by  me),  which  he  placed  in  muslin  bags — two
in  each — fastening  these  bags  by  inserting  the  staples  of  puzzle
padlocks,  which  were  fixed  by  him,  in  my  absence,  at  letters
known  only  to  himself.  With  the  large  lock,  having  seven  cy¬
linders,  10,460,353,203  combinations  of  letters  may  be  formed.
With  the  small  one,  having  five,  3,200,000.  They  were  delivered
to  me  on  my  calling  for  them  by  Mr.  Mott  himself.  Learn¬
ing  from  my  clairvoyant  friends  that  it  would  be  convenient
to  them  to  see  me  on  the  29th,  I  went  to  town  on  that  morn¬
ing,  returning  the  same  evening.  On  my  assuring  them
that  the  nuts  had  been  placed  in  the  muslin  bags  by  a  gen¬
tleman  who  firmly  believed  in  clairvoyance ,  they  requested  me
to  make  a  few  passes  over  them,  after  which  they  wrote  down


Communicated  by  Dr.  Ashburner.  383

the  words  of  each  motto.  It  appeared  that  when  the  shells
were  opened  the  following  morning  by  Mr.  Mott,  some  trifling
mistakes  had  been  made  in  writing  down  the  mottos.  Both
read  at  the  same  time — both  used  the  same  pen,  consequently
they  could  not  write  down  immediately  what  they  had  read.
They  have  told  me  the  contents  of  many  hundred  shells,  with¬
out  missing  a  single  letter ;  one  clairvoyant,  68  mottos  in
succession,  without  one  mistake.  Up  to  the  29th  November,
the  mottos  contained  in  3,453  shells,  the  words  amounting  to
47,731,  have  been  read  by  thirty-four  clairvoyants.  Many
have  been  read,  untouched  by  me,  while  in  the  hands  of
those  who  purchased  them ;  many,  although  marked  inside
as  well  as  outside  by  yourself  and  others  ;  a  very  large  num¬
ber  with  seals  affixed  to  the  shells  themselves  or  to  the  paper,
muslin  or  gauze  enclosing  them.  Four  clairvoyants  have  now
read  the  mottos  in  eleven  shells  secured  in  bags  by  puzzle
locks.  Sceptics  may  say,  and  truly  say,  with  regard  to  seven
of  these,  that  I  knew  at  what  letters  they  would  open.  Be
it  so;  let  them  judge  of  others  by  themselves;  but  with
respect  to  the  four,  Mr.  Mott,  and  he  alone,  knew  how  to
open  them — he  remained  here,  while  the  mottos  were  read  in
town.  The  last  experiment  proves  beyond  a  doubt  that  I
have  produced  clairvoyance.  Had  I  not  possessed  that  power,
many  would  now  be  on  sick  beds — some  in  their  graves.

“  I  rejoice  to  say  that  since  my  introduction  to  Mr.  Mott,
he  has  not  only  mesmerised  with  success,  but  has  produced
in  each  case  clairvoyance.  He  has  been  engaged  in  the  duties
of  his  profession  half  a  century ;  had  he  been  earlier  aware
that  he  possessed  such  power,  how  greatly  would  he  have
added  to  the  list  of  suffering  fellow-creatures  restored  to
health  by  his  means.  I  send  herewith  his  statement,  together
with  the  muslin  bags,  and  with  best  wishes,

“  Believe  me,

“  Very  sincerely  yours,

“W.  Buckley.”

“Brighton,  November  22nd,  1848.

“  This  morning  Major  Buckley  very  kindly  called  on  me
with  Mr.  Edward  Maitland,  and  after  some  conversation  on
the  subject  of  vital  magnetism,  he  placed  on  the  table  two
puzzle  locks,  (I  had  never  seen  locks  of  this  kind  before,  and
was  some  time  before  I  understood  the  construction  of  them).
Two  muslin  bags  the  Major  also  produced,  and  proposed  that
I  should  get  some  of  the  motto  nuts  and  enclose  them  in  the
bags,  lock  them  securely  myself,  no  one  being  present.  I
placed  two  nuts  in  each  bag  and  securely  tied  and  locked


384  Cases  of  ihe  removal  of  Pain  ivith  Mesmerism ,

them,  keeping  a  copy  of  the  letters  to  which  each  lock  was
put  together,  and  keeping  the  paper  in  my  lancet-case,  no
person  knowing  anything  of  the  paper  but  me.  The  bags
were  sealed  up  in  paper  and  given  to  the  Major.  On  the  30th
of  November  the  bags,  locked  as  I  had  parted  with  them,
were  returned,  and  I  carefully  examined  them.  They  could
not  by  any  possibility  have  been  opened  till  I  opened  them.
This  I  did  by  unlocking  the  puzzle  locks  by  the  letters  before
named.  I  then  took  out  the  nuts, — they  were  cracked, — the
mottos  taken  out, — read  and  found  quite  correct,  except  in
one  paper,  in  French,  the  first  word  in  the  second  line  omit¬
ted.  In  all  other  respects  they  were  read  and  correctly
copied.

(Signed)  “  W.  B.  Mott,  Surgeon,

“  Formerly  Surgeon  of  the  2nd  Battalion
“  47th  Regiment  of  Foot.

“  10,  Devonshire  Place,  Brighton.”


III.  Cases  of  the  removal  of  Pain  ivith  Mesmerism.

By  Mr.  Arthur  Trevelyan.

“  Truth  by  her  native  beauty  is  sure  to  charm  ;  yet  from  her  repugnancy  to
most  men’s  interests,  she  is  seldom  welcome.  Politicians  are  afraid  of  her,
parties  detest  her,  and  all  professions  agree  that  she  is  mad  and  very  dangerous
if  suffered  to  go  about  in  public.” — Jenyns.

It  is  a  duty  owed  by  man  to  man  not  to  hide  anything  which
by  publication  may  have  a  tendency  to  draw  attention  to  a
power  likely  to  assuage  by  its  exercise  the  moral,  mental,
and  physical  miseries  endured  by  suffering  humanity;  and
that  power  is  mesmerism — nature's  best  gift  to  man:  and,
when  we  consider  the  conduct  of  the  majority  of  medical  men
in  opposing  this  great  truth,  I  feel  the  more  anxious  to  give
my  humble  testimony  in  support  of  a  great  natural  truth,
in  justice  to  that  noble  advocate  of  this  great  gift  to  man —
Dr.  John  Elliotson,  M.D.,  who,  lamentable  to  say,  in  the
last  number  of  The  Zoist,  at  p.  317,  states  his  fears — from
symptoms  in  different  organs  of  his  frame — that  his  useful
life  stands  in  jeopardy  every  hour — a  life  rendered  illustrious
by  benevolent  acts  and  rational  deeds.

The  testimony  of  such  a  man  to  the  truth  of  mesmerism,
was  alone  sufficient  to  induce  me  to  become  a  firm  believer  in
that  most  important  of  all  sciences.

We  cannot  blame  our  opponents.  Not  being  free  agents,
they  must  involuntarily  obey  nature’s  laws,  which  laws  have
stamped  their  craniums  deficient  in  the  moral  region.  Thus


by  Mr.  Arthur  Trevelyan.


385


not  having  a  sense  of  justice — a  true  feeling  of  benevolence,
they  are  led  by  their  animal  feelings  to  oppose  a  great  truth,
eagerly  embraced  by  the  honest  and  benevolent,  but  decried
by  the  malevolent,  i.e .  the  moral  idiot,  who  fear,  that,  should
that  science  be  generally  believed,  their  pecuniary  interests
would  be  endangered.

Case  I.  Relief  of  Pains.

E.  M.,  married,  aged  36;  temperament  sanguine  nervous,
nearly  equally  balanced ;  has  had  seven  children,  six  of  whom
are  now  living.  She  has  passed  the  last  six  years  in  very  in¬
different  health,  which  period  intervened  between  the  sixth
and  seventh  child ;  the  former  was  still-born,  and  the  latter
is  the  strongest  child  of  the  whole  set.  Nursing  this  infant
seems  quite  to  have  broken  down  her  previously  weakened
constitution.  The  functions  of  all  the  organs  of  her  body
are  more  or  less  impaired,  and,  for  several  years  past,  a
tender  spot  has  been  felt  in  the  inside  of  the  right  leg,  between
The  lower  part  of  the  calf  and  the  ankle.  Latterly  inflam¬
mation  took  place  in  that  part  of  the  leg,  accompanied  by
acute  pain,  intense  itching,  and  a  tightness  of  the  skin  over
the  part  affected,  the  veins  very  varicose  and  tendons  knotted.
On  the  5th  December,  1847,  a  small  spot  of  the  skin,  less
than  a  quarter  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  broke  over  the  tender
part,  showing  apparently  a  deep-seated  wound,  with  acute
pain  cutting  to  the  bone  :  pus  and  a  watery  discharge  followed
the  opening  of  the  wound.  The  itching  at  the  same  time
disappeared.  On  the  14th  December  I  called  and  found  her
in  a  sad  state  of  suffering :  she  could  not  place  her  foot  to
the  ground  without  experiencing  great  agony,  and  her  nights
were  passed  nearly  sleepless.  The  wound  at  this  date  had
increased  to  two  inches  in  diameter.  I  made  a  few  mesmeric
passes  over  her  head,  and  found  her  very  susceptible.  She
said  she  saw  dimly  coloured  light  proceeding  from  my  finger
ends.  I  did  not  continue  the  passes  at  that  time  on  account
of  her  timidity  on  the  subject,  but  I  left  her  drowsy,  and,  though
she  afterwards  tried  to  shake  off  the  drowsiness,  she  passed
another  sleepy  night.  The  next  day  I  called  again,  and  found
her  suffering  from  all  the  previously-mentioned  symptoms,
besides  a  numbness  of  the  right  thigh  and  a  coldness  of  the
affected  leg.  Just  previously  to  my  calling,  by  the  help  of  the
back  of  the  chairs  she  had  contrived  to  walk  across  the  room,  but
the  agony  was  so  great  that  she  could  not  help  bursting  into
tears.  I  proposed  local  mesmerism,  to  which  she  assented.
The  first  five  passes  caused  a  glow  of  warmth  in  the  leg,  and
in  five  minutes  it  was  of  a  natural  heat :  in  three  minutes  more

YOL.  vi.  E  E


386  Cases  of  the  removal  of  Pain  with  Mesmerism,

the  pain  had  descended  to  the  heel,  thence  passed  to  the  sole
of  the  foot,  in  a  short  time  longer  it  arrived  at  the  toes ,  from
thence  a  feiv  more  passes  dissipated  it  altogether.  At  the
same  time  the  tightness  of  the  skin,  the  knotted  veins  and
tendons  were  relaxed.  I  now  requested  her  to  walk  across
the  room,  which  she  did  with  ease,  and  declared  she  felt  no
difference  between  the  two  legs.  I  continued  the  passes  until
a  numbness  of  the  leg  was  produced  :  but  at  the  same  time
it  remained  of  a  natural  warmth,  had  not  a  cold  numbness
as  before  commencing  the  mesmeric  passes.  In  case  the
pain  recurred,  as  I  expected  it  would  from  over  exertion  in
the  desire  to  fulfil  her  household  duties,  I  requested  her
husband  and  children  to  make  the  mesmeric  passes.  She
stood  the  next  day  at  the  washing-tub,  with  but  little  incon¬
venience  from  her  leg.  On  my  next  visit  I  found  that  after  I
left  her  the  pain  had  returned,  but  was  soon  removed  by
passes  made  by  her  daughter,  who  is  only  thirteen  years  of
age.  She  described  the  passes  made  by  her  child  as  not  so
powerful  as  those  I  made,  but  those  made  by  her  husband
produced  a  cold  current,  which  aggravated  the  pain :  so  I
requested  him  to  desist.  I  have  since  found  that  with  a
magnet  held  in  his  hand  the  current  produced  by  his  passes
is  warm  and  therefore  beneficial.

January  19th.  I  still  continue  to  mesmerise,  but,  finding
her  very  weak  and  suffering  from  pain  in  her  back  and  other
parts,  instead  of  local  passes  I  now  mesmerise  from  the  head
to  the  feet,  and  with  considerable  benefit.

Since  the  first  day  of  applying  mesmerism  she  has  had  no
more  sleepless  nights.

I  occasionally  substituted  the  magnet  for  the  five  fingers,
and  sometimes  think  the  power  is  increased  by  the  employ¬
ment  of  that  instrument.

When  the  magnet  was  held  for  a  short  time  over  the
wound,  the  sensation  occasioned  by  it  was  precisely  similar
to  that  felt  by  the  application  of  nitrate  of  silver,  and  caused
a  drawing  feeling,  and  an  increased  discharge  from  the  sore ;
and  if  held  until  the  pain  ceased,  the  magnetic  effect  was
conveyed  over  the  whole  system,  apparently  equally-  well  as
by  the  passes.

The  burning  pain  caused  by  caustic,  which  at  the  request
of  her  medical  attendant  I  applied  to  the  wound,  is  easily
removed  by  the  passes,  but  it  takes  a  different  route  from  the
natural  pain  of  the  sore ;  the  former  moves  over  the  ankle
and  upper  part  of  the  foot  to  the  toes ;  the  latter  takes  a
longer  line,  by  the  heel  and  the  sole  to  the  toes.

The  numbness  commences  as  soon  as  the  pain  is  removed  :


by  Mr.  Arthur  Trevelyan.


887


beginning  at  the  toes,  it  passes  down  the  foot,  and  up  the
leg  and  thigh,  and  spreads  over  the  whole  body,  provided  the
mesmeric  passes  are  continued  long  enough.  Previously  to
the  numbness  commencing,  she  feels  as  if  there  was  an  accu¬
mulation  of  heat  in  the  part  where  it  begins.  After  the  limb
or  other  part  of  the  body  has  become  numbed,  the  warmth
of  the  passes  are  only  faintly  felt.

The  inflamed  surface  gets  pale,  and  the  wound  at  times
has  appeared  to  heal  over,  under  the  influence  of  the  passing
fingers  or  magnet.

Strong  passes  commencing  at  the  nape  of  the  neck,  over
the  head  and  face,  and  down  the  person,  produce  a  much
greater  heat  on  the  affected  leg,  than  the  short  local  passes.

It  is  important  that  the  passes  be  made  very  slowly,  as
quick  passes  have  scarcely  any  effect — sometimes  a  contrary  to
that  wished  for.

The  mesmeric  effect  is  much  easier  induced  in  a  warm
room  free  from  atmospheric  currents,  than  in  a  cold  room
with  drafts  of  wind.

If  the  operator  with  one  hand  holds  the  hand  of  an  indi¬
vidual,  whilst  making  passes  with  the  other  hand  holding  a
magnet,  there  is  an  increase  of  magnetic  heat,  and  there  is
an  increase,  by  every  additional  individual  to  the  number
holding  each  other’s  hands  :  but,  if  the  patient  is  connected
either  with  the  operator,  or  with  any  of  the  individuals  hold¬
ing  his  hand,  the  effect  ceases :  or,  if  a  metallic  connection
is  made,  the  same  result  follows.

A  magnet  placed  on  the  foot,  pointing  towards  the  instep,
the  foot  resting  on  a  stool,  created  an  increase  of  heat  when
the  passing  magnet  came  near  the  other :  but,  the  moment
the  ends  were  passed,  the  sensation  of  heat  ceased.

A  powerful  effect  was  produced  by  the  operator  making
the  passes  with  a  magnet  in  each  hand,  but  I  am  not  quite
sure  whether  the  hands  alone  are  not  as  powerful.

The  pain  and  the  numbness  from  the  leg  were  conveyed
temporarily  to  her  daughter’s  thighs  and  legs,  by  having  the
affected  limb  in  contact,  resting  on  her  lap,  whilst  she  was
making  the  passes  :  and  this  took  place  a  few  times,  till  the
warning  was  attended  to,  and  she  desisted  from  taking  her
mother’s  leg  into  her  lap.

February  24th.  For  some  time  past,  soon  after  commenc¬
ing  the  passes,  a  drowsiness  comes  on,  but  in  a  short  time
goes  off  again,  and  the  patient  feels  as  if  she  had  awoke  out
of  a  refreshing  slumber.

Rock  crystal  when  first  employed  produced  in  this  patient
cold  currents.


e  e  2


388  Cases  of  the  removal  of  Pain  with  Mesmerism,

Being  indisposed,  I  was  obliged  to  neglect  my  patient  for
several  days.  On  the  2nd  April  I  called  and  found  her  con¬
fined  to  her  bed  with  a  bad  head-ache,  which  was  quickly
removed.  Having  the  rock  crystal  in  my  pocket,  I  thought
I  would  again  give  it  a  trial.  The  passes  made  with  it  this
time  were  quite  warm  and  soothing,  and  again  on  the  29th
the  passes  made  with  it  were  better  than  either  the  magnet
or  fingers  could  produce.

On  her  daughter,  who  was  lately  very  ill  for  some  weeks,
the  crystal  passes  were  always  warm,  and  the  prism  held
before  her  eyes  sent  her  quickly  to  sleep,  though  the  mes¬
meric  sleep  could  be  induced  by  no  other  means.

Silver  tips  put  on  the  middle  finger  of  each  hand,  I  think,
from  what  I  observed,  increased  the  power  of  the  passes.

Sometimes  the  one  method  of  inducing  the  magnetic
effect  seems  the  more  powerful,  sometimes  the  others  above
mentioned ;  probably  the  various  results  are  owing  to  a  dif¬
ference  in  the  patient’s  nervous  system,  which  in  bad  health
is  very  variable.

By  making  local  passes  herself  with  a  small  magnet,  the
pain  in  her  leg  has  been  assuaged ;  also  by  placing  it  beneath
her  heel  when  in  bed,  the  same  effect  has  followed.

My  patient  lately  went  to  the  sea-side,  where  she  remained
for  a  fortnight,  but  did  not  bathe,  as  cold  bathing  disagrees
with  her.  Whilst  there,  she  suffered  much  pain  from  the
sore  in  her  leg,  and  the  change  of  air  did  not  seem  to  benefit
her  at  all.  On  her  return,  she  appeared  healthier  in  her
face,  but  complained  of  not  being  any  stronger.  Probably
however  the  change  to  total  rest  from  very  active  habits  has
been  beneficial,  as  there  was  daily  improvement,  and  the
wound  in  her  leg  was  nearly  healed.  After  her  return  I  only
occasionally  made  the  passes,  using  the  quartz  prism  with  be¬
neficial  effect,  removing  pain,  & c.,  and  causing  a  natural  glow
of  heat  in  her  leg.  I  now  think  her  in  a  fair  way  of
recovery.

The  foregoing  was  written  about  the  end  of  July.  I  after¬
wards  left  home  for  a  month ;  on  my  return  I  found  the
wound  in  her  leg  not  so  well  as  when  I  went  away,  but  her
general  health  continues  better.  During  my  absence  she
called  in  the  aid  of  a  clever  hydropathist  lately  come  into  this
neighbourhood,  who  is  sanguine  as  to  her  recovery  by  means
of  cold  water  and  galvanism,  and  I  rejoice  to  add  that  there
is  both  a  great  improvement  in  her  general  health  and  in  the
state  of  the  sore  on  her  leg.

I  send  this  case  (and  the  following)  to  shew  with  what
facility  pain  can  be  removed — not  having  attended  regularly


by  Mr.  Arthur  Trevelyan.


389


enough  to  be  warranted  in  attributing  the  cure,  if  perfected,
to  mesmerism  alone.

Case  II. — M.  D.,  stone-mason,  who  has  been  long  subject  to

tooth-ache,  was  lately  troubled  with  that  complaint  for  three

consecutive  weeks.  He  dreaded  going  to  rest  as  the  pain

was  always  more  acute  when  warm  in  bed.  I  made  passes

over  the  head  and  down  his  face  with  my  hands  for  ten

minutes ;  the  pain  ceased,  and  a  good  nights  rest  followed

without  any  return  of  the  pain.  The  following  night  the

pain  returned,  but  the  next  night  I  made  some  passes,  and

he  has  not  since  (several  months)  been  troubled  with  that

destroyer  of  comfort.

*

Case  III. — William  Farmer,  domestic  assistant,  set.  21,
has  had  rheumatism  for  seven  years,  not  very  severely,  prin¬
cipally  tormenting  him  at  night  when  getting  warm  in  bed ;
sleep  much  disturbed.  On  the  9th  of  January  last,  I  made
the  passes  with  a  \  lb.  magnet  down  the  affected  thigh  and
leg  previously  to  his  retiring  to  rest ;  in  ten  minutes  the  pain
was  relieved.  I  continued  the  passes  for  half  an  hour  longer,
when  the  thigh,  &c.,  became  numbed.  He  went  to  bed  and
had  an  excellent  night's  sleep,  without  the  usual  pain  coming
on ;  and  now  several  months  have  elapsed  without  his  being
again  troubled  with  rheumatism.  Sleep  easily  induced,  but
not  cataleptic.

Case  IV. — Ann  C. ;  married  ;  the  mother  of  three  chil¬
dren  ;  since  the  8th  of  January  has  had  severe  pain  in  her
teeth,  which  pain  shifts  occasionally  to  the  upper  portion  of
her  cranium,  where  it  was  when  I  called  on  the  12th.  I
made  passes  over  the  head  and  down  the  face  with  the  mag¬
net  ;  in  five  minutes  time  the  pain  was  removed,  and  a  numb¬
ness  of  the  nerves  of  the  head  followed.  Sleep  easily  induced.
Called  four  hours  after  and  no  return  of  the  pain.

Case  V. — Mary  M.,  aged  11,  subject  to  a  bad  tooth-ache ;
removed  in  a  few  minutes  by  the  passes  made  by  her  sister
Jane,  set.  13.  Months  have  now  elapsed  without  any  return.

Case  VI. — Thomas  Wilson,  aged  44,  labourer,  tempera¬
ment  sanguineo-nervous,  suffering  for  several  days  past  from
severe  tooth-ache.  Saw  him  at  work  on  Oct.  20th;  com¬
plained  of  the  intense  pain.  I  said  to  him,  “  Tom,  come
into  Handysides'  kitchen,  and  I  will  remove  your  agony  in  ten
minutes."  He  came  in  and  sat  down,  and  with  my  hands  I


390


Cure  of  Insanity  with  Mesmerism,

made  passes  over  liis  head  and  down  the  face ;  in  ten  minutes
the  pain  was  much  abated,  and  in  five  minutes  more  was
quite  removed,  and  has  not  recurred  up  to  this  date,  Oct.  29th,
1848.  Drowsiness  was  induced.

Case  VII. — James  Boyd,  aged  30,  tailor,  cambo :  tempe¬
rament  lymphatic-fibrous-nervous.  On  the  2nd  inst.,  at
3  30  p.m.,  I  called  at  his  cottage ;  found  him  suffering  from
a  cold  in  the  head,  accompanied  by  acute  head-ache,  and
dimness  of  vision,  to  such  an  extent  that  he  could  not  see  to
follow  his  employment.  Made  passes  over  his  head  and  down
his  face ;  in  eighteen  minutes  nearly  all  the  above  symptoms
were  completely  removed — a  slight  cold  only  remaining :
drowsiness  not  induced.  Next  morning  at  his  work  as  usual,
and  no  recurrence  up  to  this  date,  7th  November,  1848.

Arthur  Trevelyan.

Waliington,  Morpeth.


IV.  Cure  of  Insanity  with  Mesmerism.  By  Mr.  Charles

Timins,  Surgeon.

In  a  work  on  Persia  it  is  related  that  when  the  British  Em¬
bassy  visited  that  country,  an  electrical  machine,  which  they
had  brought  with  them,  excited  great  wonder  and  delight
among  the  natives.  But  a  renowned  doctor  and  lecturer  of
the  college,  envious  of  the  fame  and  popularity  which  it  en¬
joyed,  contended  that  the  effects  produced  were  moral,  not
physical ;  that  it  was  mere  mummery  that  wras  practised ;  and
that  the  state  of  nervous  agitation  excited  produced  an  ideal
shock !  How  similar  the  opposition  to  mesmerism  by  some
of  the  learned  doctors  of  our  colleges  !  But  the  incredulity
and  scorn  which  has  been  manifested  towards  this,  in  common
with  all  remarkable  advances  and  discoveries  that  have  ever
been  made  in  the  “  vast  unexplored  ocean  of  truth,”  is  fast
waning  before  the  aggregation  of  facts  and  experiences  which
every  day  accumulates,  and  we  have  perhaps  no  reason  to  feel
surprised  or  mortified  that  a  similar  reception  is  accorded  to
it  as  attended  the  discovery  which  has  immortalized  the  name
of  Harvey.  Though  I  must  at  the  same  time  express  my  belief
that  the  discovery  of  animal  magnetism  will  be  attended  with
far  more  important  results  than  that  of  the  circulation  of  the
blood ;  affording,  as  I  conceive  it  to  do,  a  clue  to  the  better
understanding  of  both  the  psychological  and  physiological
nature  of  man :  to  say  nothing  of  the  wonderful  power  of
mesmerism  as  a  remedial  agent,  more  especially  in  the  relief


391


by  Mr.  Charles  Timins.

of  those  maladies  which  have  hitherto  chiefly  baffled  the  skill
of  the  physician.  Its  beneficial  influence  in  the  treatment  of
insanity  has  been  experienced  and  attested  by  many,  and  I
trust  ere  long  to  see  it  employed  in  all  our  lunatic  asylums.
In  illustration  of  its  remedial  agency  in  these  disorders,  I
offer  the  following  case,  which  exhibits,  lstly,  The  extreme
facility  and  rapidity  with  which  relief  was  obtained  by  simply
local  mesmerisation  without  inducing  somnolency ;  and  2ndly,
The  correspondence  between  phrenological  development  and
mental  manifestation.

Miss  E.  T.,  age  22,  of  sanguineo-lymphatic  development,
has  suffered  from  spinal  irritation  for  more  than  five  years,
during  which  period  she  has  had  recourse  to  mesmerism  for
relief,  and  has  experienced  great  alleviation  of  her  sufferings,
and  benefit  to  her  general  health  from  its  use.  When  in  the
mesmeric  state  she  manifests  phreno-mesmeric  and  other  phe¬
nomena,  with  exaltation  of  all  the  senses  except  vision.  Her
head  exhibits  very  full  development  of  the  organs  of  the
moral  sentiments,  with  fair  development  of  the  perceptive
and  reflective  faculties.  The  govermental  organs  ( Firmness
and  Self-esteem)  are  small,  their  functional  deficiency  being
perhaps  in  some  respects  compensated  by  the  organ  of  Caution,
which  in  her  is  very  large,  as  are  also  the  organs  of  Love  of
Approbation  and  Adhesiveness,  particularly  the  latter.  Some
months  ago  she  experienced  a  disappointment  of  her  affec¬
tions,  that  proved  a  source  of  great  mental  suffering,  and
seriously  affected  her  health.  Indeed  she  exhibited  all  the
signs  of  a  broken  heart,  and  frequently  in  her  sleep-waking
state  thrilled  all  who  beheld  her  with  the  emotions  which  some
suggestive  incident  would  excite  in  her.  On  the  evening
of  28th  July,  when  present  at  a  large  party  at  a  friend's
house,  the  sight  of  a  gentleman,  who  presented  some  fancied
or  real  resemblance  to  him  who  had  proved  false,  greatly
affected  her,  and  while  speaking  of  the  subject  to  a  female
friend  she  was  seized  with  a  violent  hysterical  paroxysm,
which,  though  for  a  time  subdued,  continued  to  recur ;  and
on  the  subsidence  of  the  paroxysms  she  remained  in  a  state
of  mental  derangement,  which  was  manifested  in  extravagant
expressions  of  regard  and  affection,  and  epithets  of  endearment
towards  all  who  approached  her,  chiefly  female  friends,  several
of  whom  had  been  complete  strangers  to  her  till  this  attack
called  forth  their  sympathizing  kindness  towards  her  ;  and  to
every  one  she  seemed  most  ardently  attached.

On  the  1st  of  August,  four  days  after  her  seizure,  I  ac¬
companied  a  friend  to  visit  her,  and  found  her  in  the  state
above  described,  her  mind  being  incessantly  occupied  by  one


392


Cure  of  Insanity  with  Mesmerism.


feeling — that  of  affection  for  each  and  all  who  came  near  her.
She  complained  of  great  pain  in  the  back  of  her  head,  and
burning  pain  in  her  spine,  describing  the  latter  as  if  a  red-
hot  poker  were  thrust  down  her  spine,  and,  during  the  exa¬
cerbations,  this  spinal  pain  appeared  to  be  of  the  most
agonizing  kind,  her  hands  and  feet  being  at  the  same
time  cold  and  clammy  as  those  of  a  corpse,  evidencing  the
imperfect  distribution  of  the  nervous  energy.  On  my  asking
her  to  point  out  the  situation  of  the  pain  in  her  head,  she
placed  the  ends  of  her  fingers  on  the  organ  of  Adhesiveness
on  the  right  side.  I  then  endeavoured  to  relieve  the  pain  by
making  passes  from  the  part  affected,  but  I  must  confess
without  anticipating  the  striking  result  which  followed  my
manipulations.  These  had  not  been  continued  more  than
five  minutes  when  she  expressed  herself  relieved,  and  said
the  pain  was  going  into  her  neck  and  shoulder,  in  which  di¬
rection  I  was  making  the  passes.  In  five  minutes  more  her
countenance  expressed  surprise  and  bewilderment,  and  sink¬
ing  back  on  the  pillow,  she  exclaimed,  “I  feel  changed .”
Before  fifteen  minutes  had  elapsed  from  commencing  the
passes,  she  sat  up,  her  countenance  and  manner  evidently
changed,  and,  addressing  us  with  reserve ,  in  place  of  the
childish  epithets  of  endearment  she  had  just  before  applied
to  those  around  her,  requested  to  be  informed  where  she  was ,
and  why  so  many  people  were  around  her  bed.  In  fine,  she
manifested  the  most  complete  obliviousness  of  every  thing  that
had  taken  place  during  her  state  of  mental  derangement ;  the
latest  incident  that  maintained  a  place  in  her  memory  being
the  party  she  was  present  at  just  previous  to  her  hysteric
seizure.  It  was  evident  her  mind  had  been  brought  into
another  state  than  that  in  which  we  had  seen  her  only  a
quarter  of  an  hour  before,  for  even  the  incidents  that  had
occurred  only  that  brief  time  previously  had  all  been  erased
from  her  mind.  Some  kind  female  friends,  whose  acquaint¬
ance  she  had  made  during  her  insane  state,  and  towards
whom  she  had  expressed  herself  most  warmly  attached,  she
now  failed  to  recognize ,  and  it  was  evident  they  were  as  entire
strangers  to  her  as  they  had  been  previously  to  her  attack.

Astounded  and  incredulous  as  I  could  not  but  feel  at  such
marvellous  and  unlooked-for  results  following  such  slight  and
apparently  insufficient  causes,  I  was  compelled  on  the  evi¬
dence  of  my  senses  to  believe,  what  I  confess  I  could  scarcely
have  avoided  doubting  on  the  testimony  of  another,  that
by  these  simple  manipulations  the  deranged  condition  of  a
mental  organ  had  been  relieved ,  and  the  mind  restored  to  a
sane  state.  On  detailing  to  her  all  that  had  happened  to  her.


Dr.  Esdaile’s  progress  in  India.


393


she  evinced,  as  may  be  supposed,  much  emotion,  and  at
length  exclaimed,  “Long  have  I  suffered  from  trouble  of
mind,  and  been  compelled  to  wear  an  aching  heart  under  a
smiling  aspect ;  but  now  I  feel  as  if  something  had  been
removed  from  my  mind  that  oppressed  me  :  I  feel  as  if  I  was
a  changed  being,  and  am  now  going  to  be  a  happy  girl.”

To  this  plain  unvarnished  statement  of  facts,  I  will  merely
add  that  she  has  since  continued  perfectly  free  from  mental
derangement ;  and  that  her  general  health  benefitted  so  ra¬
pidly  by  daily  mesmerising  that  she  was  at  the  end  of  a  fort¬
night  able  to  travel  a  very  long  journey  to  visit  her  friends.

Charles  Timins,  E.R.C.S.
1,  Jersey  Place,  Cheltenham,  Sept.  26,  1848.

***  We  beg  Drs.  Conolly  and  Mayo  to  study  this  case. — Zoist.


Y.  Dr.  Esdaile’s  progress  in  India.  By  Dr.  Elliotson.

“  Mr.  Wakley  says  he  is  resolved  that  Mesmerism  shall  no  longer  be  em¬
ployed  in  this  or  any  other  hospital.” — Speech  of  Mr.  Wakley  s  Clerk  to  Dr.
Elliotson  in  the  ward  of  University  College  Hospital,  where  he  was  allowed  as
a  favour  to  see  Elizabeth  Okey ,  November,  1838.

Resolved— “  That  the  Hospital  Committee  be  instructed  to  take  such  steps  as
they  shall  deem  most  advisable,  to  prevent  the  practice  of  Mesmerism  or  Animal
Magnetism  in  future  within  the  hospital.” — Resolution  of  the  Council  of  Uni¬
versity  College,  December  27 ,  1838.

“  No  man  worth  any  thing  is  ever  hunted  to  death.  A  myriad  of  Peels  could
not  hunt  Lord  John  Russel  to  death .”  —Examiner,  June  20,  1846.

In  the  Delhi  Gazette  for  Feb.  20,  1848,  I  read  the  following
passage : —

“  Nobody  yet  knows  what  is  to  be  the  fate  of  the  mesmeric
hospital.  I  have  heard  a  good  story  of  an  interview  between
the  Governor-General  and  Mr.  Halliday,  in  which  the  former
began  by  expressing  his  astonishment  that  the  Bengal  Govern¬
ment  had  committed  itself  to  any  connection  with  a  piece  of
quackery  that  had  long  ago  been  exploded  in  Europe,  but
ended  with  informing  the  Secretary  that  he  was  rather  curious
to  see  a  mesmeric  operation.

“If  the  Governor- General  had  happened  to  fall  into  the
hands  of  the  medical  board  at  the  outset,  it  is  probable  that
the  hospital  would  have  been  knocked  on  the  head  at  once.

In  the  Eastern  Star  for  June  3,  1848,  is  this  article

«  The  Mesmeric  Hospital — A  number  of  gentlemen  favour¬
ably  disposed  towards  the  re-establishment  of  this  institution
met  last  evening  by  invitation  at  the  residence  of  Mr.  James
Hume.  The  attendance  was,  in  all  respects,  very  gratifying,


394


Dr.  Esdaile’s  progress  in  India,


both  Europeans  and  Natives  being  largely  represented.  Rajah
Radakhant  Deb  was  placed  in  the  chair,  and  opened  the  busi¬
ness  of  the  meeting  by  stating  its  object.  Mr.  Hume  then,
in  a  clear  and  perspicuous  speech,  pointed  out  the  benefit
that  would  accrue  not  only  to  practical  medicine  but  to  phy¬
siological  science  if  an  opportunity  were  afforded  for  a  further
study  of  mesmeric  truths  to  one  now  so  practised  in  it  as  Dr.
Esdaile.  He  lightly  sketched  the  progress  of  mesmerism  from
its  beginnings,  when  unhesitating  sceptics  covered  its  doc¬
trines  with  obloquy  and  denied  its  facts,  till  the  present  day
when  many  of  its  furious  antagonists  are  become  its  apostles,
and  others  who  have  not  become  converts  have  at  least  entered
on  the  path  of  unbiassed  inquiry.  Mr.  Hume  next  dwelt  upon
Dr.  Esdaile’s  personal  labours,  and  the  part  played  by  govern¬
ment  in  affording  him  a  fair  opportunity  for  the  establishment
of  his  assertions  respecting  painless  surgery,  which  led  to  the
temporary  hospital  of  last  year.  The  good  effected  by  that
Hospital  had  been  warmly  recognized  by  the  native  community
especially,  and  a  petition  was  preferred  to  government  to  re¬
suscitate  it,  as  well  as  commemorating  Dr.  Esdaile’s  great
services.  Government  had  accordingly  made  Dr.  Esdaile  a
Presidency  surgeon,  and  in  his  minute  on  the  occasion,  the
Governor-General  in  Council  had  written  as  follows, — “  The
Governor-General  in  Council  approves  of  the  mode  suggested
by  the  Government  of  Bengal  to  acknowledge  the  success  of
Dr.  Esdaile’s  experiments  in  the  mesmeric  hospital  by  ap¬
pointing  him  a  Presidency  surgeon,  as  this  will  enable  the
natives  to  avail  themselves  of  a  system  of  cure  which  they
seem  to  appreciate.”  It  was  thus — Mr.  Hume  proceeded — to
the  native  community  especially,  that  Government  had  dele¬
gated  the  opportunity  to  re-establish  the  hospital  and  prove
their  sense  of  Dr.  Esdaile’s  services.  But  there  would  be  no
withholding  on  the  part  of  the  Europeans.  The  hospital
should  be  estabished;  it  could  be  established  whether  the
natives  helped  or  no,  and  it  would  :  but  it  was  most  desirable
on  all  accounts  that  they  should  shew  themselves  active  and
liberal  in  the  enterprize.  No  sum  was  too  small  in  so  good  a
work  :  and  Mr.  Hume  went  on  to  shew  how,  by  the  associative
principle  superintended  by  those  really  sympathising  in  the
prosperity  of  the  institution,  there  was  not  a  house  of  busi¬
ness  but  could  make  itself  responsible  for  a  very  praiseworthy
contribution  towards  the  funds,  yet  pressing  very  lightly  on
the  contributors.

“ Baboo  Ramgopaul  Ghose  then  read  a  series  of  resolutions
describing  the  plan  of  the  new  hospital,  naming  its  committee,
&c.  They  were  unanimously  agreed  to  in  the  gross  without


by  Dr.  Elliot  son.


395


being  formally  proposed  to  the  meeting.  The  spirit  of  those
present  was  so  hearty  that  we  cannot  but  augur  very  favour¬
ably  for  the  success  of  the  scheme.  The  iron  was  struck  while
hot,  and  donations  to  the  amount  of  Rs.  1200  secured,  as
well  as  monthly  subscriptions  of  the  value  of  Rs.  200.  Dr.
Edlin  suggested  that  a  definite  day,  say  the  1st  of  next  month,
be  fixed  for  the  opening  of  the  hospital,  that  people  may  know
exactly  when  patients  will  be  received.  Captain  Engledue
also  proposed  that  the  committee  should  put  itself  in  com¬
munication  with  the  principal  stations  in  the  country,  in  order
to  obtain  pecuniary  assistance  towards  the  support  of  the  in¬
stitution.  It  is  calculated  that  monthly  subscriptions  amount¬
ing  to  Co/s  Rs.  500  are  required  to  meet  the  expenses,  and
we  have  not  the  smallest  hesitation  in  stating  our  belief  that
if  the  gentlemen,  who  so  liberally  came  forward  in  the  room
in  their  own  persons,  exert  themselves  in  the  same  spirit  in
their  private  circles,  that  amount  will  easily  be  secured.  We
have  reason  to  believe  the  site  of  the  hospital  will  be  on  the
old  premises,  which  were  very  favourably  situated.

“  Among  the  parties  present  were  Rajahs  Radakant  Deb,
Kalikrishna,  and  Apurva  Krishna ;  Baboos  Ramgopaul  Chose,
Muddoo  Mohun  Addy,  Comarkally  Kishen  Roy,  Rampersad
Roy,  Radapersad  Roy,  Ramchunder  Mitter,  Nundkishore
Roy,  Modoosooden  Roy  and  T.  H.  Chatterjee;  Syud  Keramut
Allee,  and  Abdool  Sannud;  Messrs.  H.  M.  Elliott,  Evelyn
Cordon,  A.  Grant,  J.  Hume,  Scott  Thomson,  Engledue,
Wagentreiber,  Martin,  Blyth,  Wilby,  Butcher,  Heatly  and
A.  Kemp  ;  Dr.  and  Mr.  Edlin,  Dr.  and  Major  Hough,  Drs.
Webb  and  Fitzpatrick,  and  others  whom  we  cannot  at  this
moment  recollect.  Letters, — among  them  an  eloquent  one
from  Dr.  Duff — were  received  from  several  gentlemen  whose
previous  engagements  necessitated  their  absence.

“We  cannot  but  congratulate  Dr.  Esdaile  on  the  prospects
now  open  to  him,  and  hope  most  sincerely  that  nothing  may
occur  to  disappoint  them.  His  imperturbable  patience,  his
extensive  research,  his  genial  enthusiasm  have  now  a  field
before  them  which  none  can  appreciate  more  than  himself,
and  if  anything  can  add — not  to  his  consciousness  of  pleasure
— but  to  the  pleasure  of  his  friends,  it  is  the  sense  that  he  has
achieved  the  opening  by  his  own  unwearying  labour.  Step  by
step  he  has  conquered  public  opinion,  and  he  is  rewarded  by
finding  his  umquhile  antagonist  transmuted  into  the  irresisti¬
ble  agent.

“  Resolutions.

“  1.  That  it  is  highly  desirable  to  realize  the  expectations  of
Government  in  appointing  Dr.  Esdaile  a  Presidency  Surgeon.


396


Dr.  Esdaile’ s  progress  in  India,


“2.  That  for  this  purpose,  a  notice  be  issued  to  all  the  signers
of  the  Petition  to  Government  for  a  Mesmeric  Hospital,  inviting
them  to  support  by  donations  and  subscriptions  the  formation  of  such
an  Institution.

“3.  That  the  Hospital  shall  be  on  the  same  footing  as  the  late
Government  establishment,  open  to  all  descriptions  of  cases,  medical
as  well  as  surgical,  and  all  classes  of  patients,  European  as  well  as
Natives,  and  that  all  persons,  desirous  of  satisfying  themselves  of
the  nature  and  effects  of  the  treatment,  be  encouraged  to  resort  to
the  Hospital.

“4.  That  if  sufficient  support  be  obtained  from  the  Native  com¬
munity  to  bring  the  Hospital  into  operation,  the  public  in  general
shall  be  invited  to  assist  in  the  execution  of  a  scheme  which  is  of
common  interest  to  all  mankind,  that  the  Government  be  also  re¬
quested  to  afford  assistance  by  furnishing  medicines,  instruments,
furniture,  &c.,  with  a  view  to  the  establishment  of  a  General  Dis¬
pensary  in  connection  with  the  Hospital.

“5.  That  Rajah  Radakant  Deb,  Rajah  Suttuchurn  Gosaul,  Rajah
Kalikishan  Bahadoor,  Rajah  Pertub  Chunder  Sing,  and  Baboo  Ra-
mapersaud  Roy,  H.  M.  Elliot,  Esq.,  the  Rev.  Mr.  Fisher,  Mr.
Hume,  the  Rev.  Mr.  La  Croix,  and  Dr.  Martin  be  requested  to  form
a  Committee  of  co-operation,  and  Baboo  Ramgopal  Ghose  to  be¬
come  Treasurer — the  Treasurer  to  be  a  member  of  the  Committee,
ex  officio.

“6.  That  the  Newspapers  of  Calcutta  be  requested  to  publish  these
resolutions,  and  to  receive  donations  and  subscriptions  for  the  for¬
mation  and  support  of  a  Mesmeric  Hospital  in  Calcutta.

“  Subscriptions  and  donations  will  also  be  received  by  the  mem¬
bers  of  the  committee  and  by  Dr.  Esdaile,  12,  Russell  Street.”

On  the  1st  of  September,  1848,  Dr.  Esdaile  thus  wrote
to  me  : —

o

“  My  dear  Sir, — A  mesmeric  hospital  supported  by  public
subscription  has  been  opened  this  day.  Government  have
given  us  medicines,  instruments,  and  furniture.

“  Yours  sincerely,

“  James  Esdaile.

“  Calcutta,  1st  September.”

On  the  5th  of  September,  Dr.  Esdaile  wrote  to  me
again : —

“  You  will  see  from  the  newspaper  I  send  by  this  mail,
the  proposal  of  a  mesmeric  hospital  by  public  subscription
that  was  made  some  months  ago.  It  was  opened  on  the  1st
September,  and  I  have  just  returned  from  performing  a  suc¬
cessful  mesmeric  operation  to-day.  Nothing  could  more  im¬
pressively  shew  the  effect  produced  upon  the  public  mind  by
my  proceedings,  than  the  realization  of  such  a  scheme  at  this


by  Dr.  Elliot  son.


397


time.  The  most  thriving  merchants  are  ruined,  trade  is  para¬
lyzed,  and  a  great  proportion  of  the  gentlemen  of  the  public
service  in  Calcutta  are  involved  in  the  far-spread  misery  caused
by  the  failure  of  the  Union  Bank.  In  a  word,  the  whole  com¬
munity  is  panic-striken,  and  those  who  have  not  suffered
make  the  losses  of  their  neighbours  a  cloak  for  covetousness.
Nevertheless,  I  have  received  the  necessary  support  for  the
hospital,  and  doubt  not  that  our  means  will  increase  with  our
fame.  My  late  medical  visitors,  unmindful  of  the  hospitable
trouble  I  took  with  them,  fondly  flattered  themselves  that
they  had  asphyxiated  me  and  mesmerism  with  chloroform,
and  are  now  crying  in  amaze,  ‘  What !  Mons.  Tonson  come
again  P  You  have  characterized  the  parties  mentioned  in
your  letter  so  justly,  that  those  best  acquainted  with  them
can  add  nothing  to  the  description.  Cunning,  like  ambition,
is  always  over-leaping  itself,  and  I  never  yet  saw  one  of  your
very  cunning  fellows  who  did  not  get  into  the  dirt  at  last* —
there  let  us  leave  them.  I  sometimes  wish  that  you  had  my
sense  of  the  ludicrous,  and  then  your  justly-excited  contempt
and  indignation  would  And  vent  and  relief  in  an  explosion  of
laughter.  Nothing  is  such  a  sedative  to  irritation  as  a  hearty
suffaw.”

On  the  6th  of  October,  the  Delhi  Gazette  had  this  extract
from  the  Templar  : —

“  The  mesmeric  hospital  is  in  full  operation.  Dr.  Esdaile
having  as  many  patients  as  he  can  manage.  The  other  day
an  old  patient  came  back  to  him  with  a  foul  ulcer  extending
from  knee  to  heel ;  the  fellow  was  sent  to  sleep  and  fell  into  a
cataleptic  state  in  five  minutes,  after  which  the  ulcerated  sur¬
face  was  deliberately  sponged  with  nitric  acid.  He  felt  it  not !
though  the  flesh  had  been  turned  perfectly  white  by  the  cau¬
tery.  Elliotson  has  devoted  a  whole  number  of  The  Zoist
to  a  sarcastic  examination  of  the  opinions  given  by  our  Cal¬
cutta  doctors  upon  the  hospital,  when  under  their  visitation.
It  is  amusing  reading,  but  not  calculated  to  benefit  the  cause.
Mesmerism  is  now  steadily  gaining  ground,  and  for  the  re¬
treating  foe  one  ought  to  build  a  bridge.”

Mesmerists  all  feel  that  the  time  is  come  for  laughing  at
our  opponents  outright  with  our  arms  a-kimbo.  They  are
thoroughly  beaten,  and  ridiculous.  Still  look  at  the  atrocity
of  their  conduct.  Perfectly  indifferent  not  merely  to  the
most  splendid  facts  in  living  nature — (dulness  and  obstinacy
one  can  bear  with) — but  perfectly  indifferent  to  the  sufferings
*  We  beg  Mr.  Wakley  to  read  this.— Zoist.


398


Dr.  Esdaile’s  progress  in  India.


of  their  fellow-creatures  from  incurable  and  even  unrelievable
diseases,  or  from  the  tortures  of  surgical  operations — (inhu¬
manity  one  cannot  bear  with) — they  did  not  remain  neutral
as  becomes  all  men  upon  all  subjects  of  which  they  know
nothing,  but  at  once,  in  perfect  ignorance,  pronounced  mes¬
merism  to  be  a  falsehood  and  a  cheat,  and  scandalized  and
injured  in  every  possible  way  those  humble  enquirers  after
nature^s  truths,  those  lovers  of  the  happiness  of  their  fellow-
creatures,  that  had  been  at  the  trouble  to  investigate  the
subject,  and,  on  finding  it  true,  possessed  the  conscience  and
courage  to  say  so  before  all  men.  For  years  the  facts  were
quietly  presented  to  them  :  and  when  at  length,  those  who
calmly  ventured  to  demonstrate  these  facts  received  nothing
in  return  but  unremitting  injury  and  insult  of  the  grossest
kind,  as  the  medical  journals,  the  quotations  forming  the  head¬
ings  of  so  many  articles  in  The  Zoist,  and  my  pamphlet  on
Operations  without  Pain  in  the  Mesmeric  State ,  have  impe-
rishably  recorded,  it  became  us,  it  was  absolutely  necessary
for  us,  to  castigate  them,  just  as  scribes,  pharisees,  and  hy¬
pocrites  were  denounced,  and  as  the  money-changers  were
scourged  out  of  the  temple.  To  this  severity  only  they  proved
themselves  sensible :  and  to  this,  not  to  the  love  and  perception
of  truth,  can  the  conversion  of  the  worst  of  them  be  as¬
cribed.  I  will  not  assist  in  building  a  bridge  for  them  :  let
them  swim  across  to  us  manfully,  as  they  will  if  they  are
sincere — penitently  confessing  their  transgressions  on  their
arrival  at  our  shore.  Unless  they  come  over  thus,  they  will
be  regarded  not  as  converts  and  allies,  but  as  miserable  de¬
serters  from  the  losing  to  the  victorious  side,  whom  we  care
not  to  have  among  us.

Honour  enough  cannot  be  given  to  Dr.  Esdaile,  who  stood
absolutely  single  in  our  eastern  empire.

An  Oxford  friend  of  mine  has  just  published  the  fol¬
lowing  verses  in  a  collection  of  most  intellectual,  elegant,
and  heart-touching  poems  : —


GENIUS.

Poursuis  ta  sublime  carriere,

Poursuis:  le  mepris  du  vulgaire,

Est  l’apanage  des  grands  coeurs.

Lamartine.

Alone,  alone,  alone,

Yet  not  in  the  grove  or  glen,

But  alone,  alone,  alone,

’Mid  the  crowded  haunts  of  men.


Offering  thoughtful  years
For  a  late,  sepulchral  fame,
While  the  torch  of  life  burns  on
With  a  self-consuming  flame  :


London  College  of  Physicians  and  Mesmerists.


399


Calling  his  fellow-men,

With  the  eager  voice  of  youth,

From  the  gloom  of  error’s  ways
To  the  sunlit  paths  of  truth  ;

Sorrowing  with  the  cares
Of  a  deep,  unwavering  zeal,

For  the  eyes  that  will  not  see,

And  the  hearts  that  cannot  feel :

Oh  !  thus,  on  a  thorny  track,

By  the  fire  of  love  divine
Is  the  child  of  Genius  led

To  his  rest  in  Glory’s  shrine  !

He  hath  hope  in  his  lonely  heart,

And  he  bears  on  his  furrow’d  brow
The  light  of  the  living  truths

Which  the  world  receives  not  now  ;

Toiling  early  and  late,

With  a  slow  and  wasting  toil,

By  the  beams  of  the  rising  sun,

By  the  glare  of  the  midnight  oil ;

Alone,  alone,  alone.

Yet  not  in  the  grove  or  glen,

But  alone,  alone,  alone,

’Mid  the  barren  hearts  of  men.

Poems  by  H.  TV.  Freeland.

The  Albany,  Nov.  1848.


VI.  The  London  College  of  Physicians  and  Mesmerists.  By

Dr.  Elliotson.

When  it  became  my  turn  to  deliver  the  Harveian  Oration,  I
received  the  following  letter  from  the  Registrar  or  Clerk  of
the  College.

“  18,  Bolton  Street,  Piccadilly,
“June  26th,  1845.

“  Dear  Sir, — I  am  desired  by  the  President  of  our  College  to
inform  you  that  it  has  devolved  to  your  turn  to  deliver  the  Harveian
Oration  in  the  ensuing  year ;  and  he  hopes,  and  I  am  sure  the  wish
will  be  generally  and  strongly  felt,  that  you  will  accept  this  ancient
and  honourable  office.

“  It  is  my  duty  to  mention,  (although,  in  your  case,  I  trust  it
is  unnecessary,)  that,  by  a  standing  order  of  the  College,  each
Fellow,  when  thus  informed  by  the  President  that  the  office  of  Har¬
veian  Orator  has  fallen  to  his  turn,  must  signify,  within  a  fortnight,
whether  he  accepts  or  declines  it.  If  he  declines  it,  he  must  pay  a
fine  of  £\0  to  the  College:  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  a  honorarium
of  £  10  for  the  Orator.

“  I  hope  I  shall  soon  have  the  satisfaction  of  reporting  to  the
President  that  you  will  oblige  the  College  by  undertaking  to  deliver
the  Oration  on  the  25th  of  June,  in  1846.

“I  am,  my  dear  Sir,  yours,  very  faithfully,

“Francis  Hawkins.

“  To  Dr.  Elliotson,  F.R.S.,  &c.,  &c.,  & c.”


400  London  College  of  Physicians  and  Mesmerists.

On  preparing  for  my  task,  I  learnt  that  Harvey  had  founded
the  oration  in  these  words.

“  To  maintain  friendship,  there  shall  be  at  every  meeting  once  a
month,  a  small  collation,  as  the  President  may  think  fit,  for  the
entertainment  of  such  as  come  ;  and  once  a  year  a  general  feast  for
all  the  Fellows  ;  and  on  the  day  of  such  feast  shall  be  an  Oration,  in
Latin,  by  some  Member,  to  be  appointed  by  the  President,  two
eldest  Censors,  and  two  eldest  Elects,  so  as  not  to  be  appointed  two
years  together,  in  commemoration  of  the  Benefactors  by  name,  and
what  in  particular  they  have  done  for  the  benefit  of  the  College,  with
an  exhortation  to  others  to  imitate  :  and  an  exhortation  to  the  Members
to  study  and  search  out  the  secrets  of  7iature  by  way  of  experiment ,
and  for  the  honour  of  the  profession  to  continue  mutually  in  love.”

I  accordingly  in  the  first  place  enumerated  the  bene¬
factors  by  name,  setting  forth  all  they  had  done  for  science
and  for  the  College,  and  expressed  my  satisfaction  that  the
liberality  of  all  the  living  fellows  was  such  as  to  render  “  an
exhortation  to  imitate”  superfluous ;  and  in  the  second  place
I  exhorted  “the  members  to  study  and  search  out  the  secrets
of  nature  by  way  of  experiment,  and  for  the  honour  of  the
profession  to  continue  mutually  in  love.”  I  showed  how  all
the  greatest  discoveries  in  medical  science  and  the  greatest
improvements  in  practice  have  been  opposed  by  the  profession
in  the  most  violent  and  unprincipled  manner — the  discovery
and  re-discovery  of  the  lacteal  vessels,  the  discovery  of  the
thoracic  duct,  the  discovery  or  re-discovery  of  the  sexual
system  of  plants,  the  discovery  of  the  circulation,  the  dis¬
covery  of  the  true  physiology  of  the  brain  by  Gall,  the  dis¬
covery  of  the  morbid  sounds  of  the  chest  in  diseases  of  the
lungs  and  heart  and  their  coverings, — the  improvements  of  the
employment  of  antimony,  the  employment  of  Peruvian  bark,
the  employment  of  inoculation  of  small  pox,  the  employment
of  vaccination,  the  employment  of  mild  dressings  to  gun-shot
wounds  instead  of  boiling  oil,  the  employment  of  a  ligature
upon  a  bleeding  vessel  after  amputation  instead  of  burning
pitch  or  red-hot  irons.

“  Never,”  said  I  to  the  College,  “  Never  let  us  forget  these  things  :
never  allow  authority,  conceit,  habit,  or  the  fear  of  ridicule,  to  make
us  indifferent,  much  less  to  make  us  hostile,  to  truth:  and  thus,  being
single-hearted  lovers  of  truth,  and  prizing  it  above  everything  else,  we
shall  all  love  one  another.  Let  us  always  have  before  our  eyes  that
memorable  passage  in  Harvey’s  works: — *  True  philosophers  impelled
by  the  love  of  truth  and  wisdom  never  fancy  themselves  so  wise  and
full  of  sense  as  not  to  yield  to  truth  from  any  source  and  at  all  times  ;
nor  are  they  so  narrow-minded  as  to  believe  any  art  or  science  has  been
handed  down  in  such  a  state  of  perfection  to  us  by  our  predecessors


by  D?\  Elliotson.


40 1


that  nothing  remains  for  future  industry.  Many  contend  that  the
greatest  part  of  what  we  know  is  the  least  part  of  what  we  do  not
know ;  and  philosophers  do  not  permit  themselves  to  be  so  slavishly
led  by  the  assertions  and  precepts  of  any  man  as  not  to  believe  their
own  eyes,  nor  do  they  so  venerate  antiquity  as  to  desert  beloved  truth
in  the  sight  of  the  world  :  but  they  consider  that  instantaneous  ad¬
mission  and  belief  is  no  greater  proof  of  credulity  and  folly  than  not
to  discern  what  is  manifest  to  the  senses,  and  not  to  see  broad  day¬
light,  is  of  stupidity  and  fatuity.  They  think  the  fables  of  the  poets
and  the  wild  opinions  of  the  vulgar  not  less  deviations,  than  the
hesitation  of  sceptics,  from  the  path  of  philosophy.  For  studious,
good,  and  honourable  men,  never  allow  themselves  to  be  so  over¬
whelmed  with  indignation  and  envy  as  not  patiently  to  hear  what  is
advanced  as  truth,  and  not  to  admit  what  is  clearly  proved ;  they
are  not  ashamed  to  change  their  opinions,  when  truth  and  demon¬
stration  make  this  their  duty  ;  nor  do  they  feel  it  disreputable  to
desert  errors  of  even  the  longest  standing  ;  for  they  know  full  well
that  it  is  the  lot  of  human  nature  to  err  and  be  mistaken,  and  that
chance  has  discovered  many  things  which  any  one  may  learn  from
any  other, — an  old  man  from  a  youth,  a  clever  man  from  a  fool.5

"  In  another  part  he  says  : — ‘  Some  are  clamorous  with  ground¬
less  and  fictitious  assertions  on  the  authority  of  their  teachers,  plau¬
sible  suppositions,  or  empty  quibbles  :  and  some  rail  with  a  torrent
of  expressions  which  are  discreditable  to  them,  often  spiteful,  inso¬
lent,  and  abusive,  by  which  they  only  display  their  own  emptiness,
absurdity,  bad  habits,  and  want  of  argument  (which  results  from
sense)  and  show  themselves  mad  with  sophistries  opposed  to  reason.’

‘  How  difficult  it  is  to  teach  those  who  have  no  experience  or  know¬
ledge  derived  from  the  senses,  and  how  unfit  to  learn  true  science
are  the  unprepared  and  inexperienced,  is  shown  in  the  opinions  of
the  blind  concerning  colours  and  of  the  deaf  concerning  sounds.’  ”

Knowing  that  the  physiological  facts  of  mesmerism  and
the  application  of  it  in  disease  are  of  the  very  highest  import¬
ance,  I  proceeded,  from  a  stern  sense  of  duty  and  in  oppo¬
sition  to  my  interest,  to  solicit  the  attention  of  the  College
to  it,  though  without  the  smallest  hope  that  I  should  make
any  impression  at  the  time,  continuing  thus : —

“  Never  was  it  more  necessary  than  at  the  present  moment  to
bear  all  these  things  in  mind.  A  body  of  facts  is  presented  to  us
not  only  wonderful  in  physiology  and  pathology,  but  of  the  very
highest  importance  in  the  prevention  of  suffering  under  the  hands  of
the  surgeon  and  in  the  cure  of  disease.  The  chief  phenomena  are
indisputable  :  authors  of  all  periods  record  them,  and  we  all  ourselves
witness  them,  some  rarely,  some  every  day.  The  point  to  be  deter¬
mined  is,  whether  they  may  be  produced  artificially  and  subjected  to
our  control :  and  it  can  be  determined  by  experience  only.  The  loss
of  common  feeling, — anaesthesia,  is  but  a  form  of  palsy,  and  in  it
wounds  give  no  pain.  If  this  condition  can  be  induced  temporarily
VOL.  VI.  r  F


402  London  College  of  Physicians  arid  Mesmerists ,


by  art,  we  of  necessity  enable  persons  to  undergo  surgical  operations
without  suffering.  Whether  the  artificial  production  of  those  pheno¬
mena,  or  the  performance  of  the  processes  which  so  often  induce
them,  will  mitigate  or  cure  disease,  can  likewise  be  determined  by
experience  only.  It  is  the  imperative,  the  solemn  duty  of  the  pro¬
fession,  anxiously  and  dispassionately  to  determine  these  points  by
experiment,  each  man  for  himself.  I  have  done  so  for  ten  years,
and  fearlessly  declare  that  the  phenomena,  the  prevention  of  pain
under  surgical  operations,  the  production  of  repose  and  comfort  in
disease,  and  the  cure  of  many  diseases,  even  after  the  failure  of  all
ordinary  means,  are  true.  In  the  name,  therefore,  of  the  love  of
truth,  in  the  name  of  the  dignity  of  our  profession,  in  the  name  of
the  good  of  all  mankind,  I  implore  you  carefully  to  investigate  this
important  subject.”

I  found  fault  with  no  body,  but  stated  simply  the  result
of  my  experience  on  a  medical  topic,  and  most  respectfully
invited  the  College  to  an  examination  of  alleged  facts  of  over¬
whelming  interest  and  importance.

Nothing  could  be  better  received.  There  was  such  an
assemblage  as  I  had  never  witnessed  at  an  Harveian  Oration.
I  was  listened  to  with  perfect  silence,  and  two  distinct  rounds
of  loud  applause  were  given  at  the  termination — a  circum¬
stance  altogether  novel ;  for  a  little  fluttering  was  the  utmost
I  had  ever  heard,  and  in  general  the  Oration  is  received  with¬
out  any  mark  of  approbation.*  A  disturbance  had  been
anticipated,  on  account  of  repeated  paragraphs  of  the  most
savage  nature  that  had  appeared  in  the  Lancet ,  having  for
their  object  the  prevention  of  my  Oration. f  The  president,

*  An  utterly  untrue  account  was  published  in  the  Lancet.  See  Zoist ,  No.
XVI.,  p.  599.

f  “  On  the  27th  of  June,  the  commemoration-day  of  the  illustrious  Harvey,
the  Harveian  Oration  is  to  be  delivered  by  Dr.  Elliotson.  So  then,  the  visionary
follower  of  Mesmer,  the  bitter  enemy  of  legitimate  medicine,  the  professional
pariah — he  who  for  years  has  been  performing  such  fantastic  tricks  as  might
well  make  the  angels  weep,  is  to  stand  in  the  place  of  honour,  to  assume  the
orator’s  robe,  &c.  Who  can  have  meditated  and  compassed  this  great  wrong  ?
this  black  infamy  for  the  future  archives  of  the  College  ?  &c.  This  outrage  will
be  enough,  &c.  This  outrage  is  proposed  to  be  perpetuated  in  a  manner  glar¬
ingly  and  peculiarly  offensive.  It  was  not  enough  that  the  mesmerist  should  be
allowed  as  a  matter  of  routine  to  harangue  the  bare  walls,  &c.  Some  of  Her
Majesty’s  ministers  and  of  the  heads  of  the  church  and  of  the  law  have  been
specially  invited  to  witness  this  imperishable  professional  humiliation,  &c.  It
will  constitute  a  vital  blow  to  legitimate  medicine,  &c.  This  unnatural  alliance
between  Mesmer  and  Harvey  will  be  interpreted  into  a  recognition  by  the  College
of  physicians  of  the  quackeries  perpetrated  in  the  name  of  Mesmer,  &c.  The
only  hope  is  that  some  and  a  goodly  number  may  be  found  among  the  Fellows
having  enough  of  courage  and  of  reverence  for  great  names  to  protest  against
these  enormities,  &c.  We  trust  some  of  them  who  have  already  given  their
names  to  the  dinner  will  withdraw,  &c.  Whatever  is  to  be  done,  should  be  done
quickly.  We  can  hardly  believe  that  the  younger  Fellows  particularly,  the  fresh
blood  of  the  College,  will  suffer  this  thing  to  come  to  pass.  Will  they  suffer  the


by  Dr.  Elliotson.


403


Dr.  Paris,  called  upon  me  one  evening,  a  few  days  before  the
delivery,  to  express  a  hope  that,  on  his  account,  I  would  not
hit  my  antagonists  hard,  since  he  had  taken  a  great  respon¬
sibility  upon  himself  in  appointing  me  as  orator  in  the  midst
of  the  extraordinary  efforts  which  had  been  made  by  many
Fellows  to  induce  him  to  pass  me  over.  He  stated  that,  fear¬
ing  a  disturbance  on  account  of  what  had  appeared  in  the
Lancet ,  and  it  being  impossible  to  prevent  any  decently-
dressed  person  from  entering  the  College  on  this  annual
occasion,  he  had  provided  the  attendance  of  some  policemen.
I  replied  that  my  oration  was  completed,  and  what  I  had
written  I  had  written  and  could  not  alter,  but  that  he  would  not
find  any  part  objectionable.  He  had  asked  my  opponents
whether  they  had  anything  to  urge  against  me  on  the  score  of
knowledge  or  conduct :  and  they  had  replied,  Nothing,  only
that  I  advocated  mesmerism  : — an  objection  which  he  regarded
as  invalid,  because  he  considered  that  every  one  had  a  right
to  his  own  opinions.

There  had  not  been  an  Harveian  dinner  for  five  and  twenty
years,  nor  could  a  dinner  be  got  up  by  any  effort  the  following
year  when  Dr.  Southey  gave  the  oration.  The  dinner  was  very
numerously  attended  and  my  health  most  cordially  received  by
the  company,  as  well  as  my  speech  of  thanks.  Every  one  ex¬
pressed  his  satisfaction  at  the  whole  affair.  From  that  time
I  generally  attended  the  various  meetings  of  the  College  for
dispatch  of  business,  but  was  absent  at  the  last  Harveian
Oration.  From  the  short  printed  reports  of  it  I  learnt  that
Dr.  F.  Hawkins  had  aimed  a  blow  at  mesmerism,  though  it
must  have  been  telum  imbelle  sine  ictu.  I  considered  that,  if
he  had  acted  thus,  it  was  not  in  good  taste  after  my  oration,
especially  as  he  knew  nothing  of  the  subject,  and  what  was
not  to  be  expected  from  one  paid  by  Harvey  to  urge  all  the
Fellows  on  that  day  to  continue  in  mutual  love  and  friendship.

arms  of  the  College  to  be  degraded  with  the  absurd  and  often  obscene  pointing
and  passing  of  the  mesmerists  ?  Will  they  suffer  one  who  in  a  trumpery  publi¬
cation  has  been  slandering  the  profession  for  years,  the  hero  of  ribbald  street
ballads  to  represent  them  on  this  august  occasion,”  &c. — Lancet,  June  13,  1846.

The  next  week  Mr.  Wakley  wrote  again  in  the  same  strain,  quoting  passages
of  rebuke  to  the  profession  as  mine,  which  I  had  not  merely  never  written  but
never  read,  and  he  ended  thus  :  “At  the  eleventh  hour,  at  the  last  minute  of  the
eleventh  hour,  something  should  be  done  to  extricate  the  College  from  this  threat¬
ened  degradation.”  So  dreadful  must  have  been  his  rage  that  I  wonder  he  did
not  entreat  the  College  to  go  a  step  further  and  imitate  the  gentleness  of  the
Emperor  of  Russia,  by  a  recent  order  of  which  constitutional  monarch  the  pun¬
ishment  of  a  convicted  incendiary  is  decreed  to  be,  “  Running  the  gauntlet  six
times  before  1,000  soldiers,  and  in  the  event  of  his  surviving  (!)  twenty-one
years’  labour  in  the  Siberian  mines.”

The  Medical  Gazette  (editor,  Dr.  Alfred  Taylor)  worked  at  the  same  object,
June  19,1 846.

F  F  2


404  London  College  of  Physicians  and  Mesmerists.


I  did  not  suppose  he  could  have  said  anything  not  expected
from  a  gentleman  or  even  one  reputable  person  in  reference
to  another.  I  resolved  to  wait  till  the  oration  was  printed
and  I  could  really  know  what  he  had  said.  Then  it  appeared
that  what  he  said  was  this, —

“  Do  not  quacks  hunt  out  the  vices  or  infirmities  of  mankind  to
turn  them  to  profit,  some  selecting  one  and  some  another  for  their
purpose?  Among  quacks,  the  impostors,  called  mesmerists,
are  in  my  opinion  the  especial  favourites  of  those,  both  male  and
female,  in  whom  the  sexual  passions  burn  strongly,  either  in
secret  or  notoriouslv.  Decency  forbids  me  to  be  more  ex-

PLICIT.

“From  these  and  similar  artifices,  the  physician  should  be
carefully  removed  and  guarded  :  and  this  can  hardly  be  accomplished
except  by  a  sound  education,  which  will  teach  him  to  thoroughly
abhor  all  deceit  and  trick.”

I  immediately  wrote  the  following  letter  to  the  President :

“Dr.  Elliotson,  as  a  Fellow  of  the  Royal  College  of  Physicians,
presents  his  compliments  and  begs  to  direct  the  attention  of  the
President  to  the  following  portion  of  the  Harveian  Oration  just  re¬
ceived  by  him  from  Dr.  Francis  Hawkins.

“  *  Quin  etiam  vitia,  sive  infirmitates  hominum,  nonne  aucu-
pantur,  et  qusestui  habent,  alii  aha,  Circumforanei  ?  De  genere
hoc,  prEestigiatores,  quos  vocant,  Mesmerici,  ni  fallor,  iis  praecipue
arrident,  quos,  utriusque  sexus,  Mater  saeva  Cupidinum  aut  caecis
urit  ignibus,  aut  palam  exagitat.  Sed  ex  quibus  hoc  subintelligi
potest,  ea  pudoris  ergo,  sunt  reticenda.  Ab  his,  et  talibus  artificiis,
segregandus  est  Medicus  et  sepiendus  sedulo.  Quod  vix  praestari
potest,  nisi  recta  et  bona  institutione,  ita  informetur,  ut  a  dolis  et
fallaciis  prorsus  abhorreat.’

“  Dr.  Elliotson  is  universally  knowm  to  have  asserted  the  truth  of
the  greater  part  of  the  mesmeric  phenomena  and  of  their  production
by  artificial  means,  as  well  as  the  inestimable  advantage  of  mes¬
merism  in  the  alleviation  and  cure  of  diseases  and  the  prevention  of
pain  in  surgical  operations,  and  to  have  done  this  in  his  Harveian
Oration,  and  continually  to  prescribe,  and  sometimes,  though  always
gratuitously,  to  practise  mesmerism.

“  August  9,  1848.”

I  received  no  answer  for  three  months,  and  then  thought
it  time  to  address  the  following  note  to  the  President : —

“  Dr.  Elliotson  presents  his  compliments  and  takes  the  liberty  of
requesting  to  be  informed  whether  the  President  of  the  Royal  College
of  Physicians  received  a  note  from  him  in  August  last,  pointing  out
some  passages  in  the  last  Harveian  Oration  relating  to  mesmerists,
of  whom  he  is  universally  known  to  be  one.

“Nov.  15.”

I  received  this  reply  : —


Insensibility  to  pain  in  the  mesmeric  Sleep-waking .  405

“  Dover  Street,  Nov.  16,  1848.

“  Dr.  Paris  presents  his  compliments  and  informs  Dr.  Elliotson
that  he  did  receive  from  him,  in  August  last,  a  note  in  which  he
directed  his  attention  to  some  passages  relating  to  mesmerism  in
Dr.  Hawkins’s  Harveian  Oration,  but  as  Dr.  Paris  must  decline
becoming  a  party  to  any  controversy  upon  the  subject,  whatever  opi¬
nion  he  may  entertain  privately,  it  is  his  determination  to  act  with
that  impartiality  which  led  to  Dr.  Elliotson’ s  appointment  to  the
oration.”

To  this  I  wrote  the  following  reply  : —

“  Dr.  Elliotson  presents  his  compliments  to  the  President  of  the
Royal  College  of  Physicians  of  London,  and  begs  to  remark  that  he
did  not  request  the  President’s  attention  to  passages  of  Dr.  Francis
Hawkins’s  Oration  relating  to  mesmerism ,  or  of  a  controversial  cha¬
racter,  for  there  are  none  such  ;  but  to  passages  relating  to  mes¬
merists,  of  whom  he,  a  Fellow  of  the  College,  has  for  ten  years
openly  been  one — passages  stigmatizing  mesmerists  as  quacks  and
impostors  and  the  especial  favourites  of  both  males  and  females  whose
sexual  passions  are  secretly  or  notoriously  violent,  respecting  which
point  Dr.  Hawkins  declared  that  decency  forbad  him  to  say  more.

“  Conduit  Street,  Nov.  17,  1848.”

To  this  I  have  received  no  reply.  The  matter  is  now
for  posterity.

John  Elliotson.

Dec.  30,  1848.


VIL  Case  of  Surgical  Operation  and  the  application  of  caustic
to  an  Inflamed  Eye  without  Pain,  in  mesmeric  sleep-waking.
Together  with  Clairvoyance.  By  Mr.  Tubbs,  Surgeon.
Communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson.

“  Mr.  Monc.kton  Milnes  is  an  incurable  mesmerist.  Between  quackery  and
science  there  can  be  no  friendly  feeling." — Mr.  Wakley,  Lancet ,  Nov.  4th,  1848.

“  Hydropathy  is,  in  fact,  but  one  head  of  the  great  hydra  quackery,— and  is
sprouting  up  at  the  expense  of  its  scotched  sisters,  mesmerism,  phrenology,  and
homoeopathy.  They  are  all  the  offspring  of  the  same  stock— phantasies  of  over¬
wrought  German  abstraction ;  which,  long  after  they  had  ceased  to  trouble  the
parent  mind,  are  imported  at  second  hand  for  the  amusement  of  us  English.

Mr.  Dilke,  editor  of  the  Athenaeum,  May  13th,  1848.

“  I  repeat,  that  to  charge  the  delusions  of  mesmerism  as  the  fruit  of  “  God’s
holy  power,"  is  closely  allied  to  that  terrific  and  unpardonable  sin,— blasphemy
against  the  Holy  Ghost."— Corfe’s  Mesmerism  tried  by  the  Touchstone  of  Truth,

p.  26.

Dear  Sir,— Miss  Stafford,  aged  19  years,  of  a  strumous  dia¬
thesis,  menstruis  suppressis  about  14  months  from  a  sudden
shock  to  the  system  by  her  losing  her  father,  has  been  the
subject  of  neuralgia  in  the  legs,  spine,  and  head,  ending  in
strumous  ophthalmia.  When  I  was  called  in,  I  found  the


406  Insensibility  to  pain  in  the  mesmeric  Sleep-waking ,

sclerotic  coat  affected,  and  two  ulcers  on  the  central  cornea
with  much  adjacent  inflammation.  I  used  every  means  in
my  power.  She  was  cupped  four  times,  had  thirty-six  leeches,
several  blisters,  an  issue  in  the  arm,  the  croton  oil  and  tartar
emetic  ointment,  she  was  salivated,  and  put  on  low  diet.  She
could  not  keep  the  eye-lid  open  without  supporting  it  with
the  fore  finger;  she  could  not  bear  the  light  of  a  candle.
After  three  months'  trial  with  very  little  benefit,  her  aunt
recommended  her  to  go  to  consult  Mr.  Alexander,  in  London.
I  was  agreeable,  but  wished  her  to  give  me  another  week’s
trial.  On  my  next  visit,  which  is  about  five  weeks  ago,  while
my  patient  was  absent,  her  sister  said,  “Do  you  think  you
could  mesmerise  her?"  I  said,  “I  do  not  know."  “If  you
could,  would  it  benefit  her  ?"  My  reply  was,  That  it  might,
and  that  I  felt  assured  it  would  do  her  no  harm.  I  added,
“  I  am  glad  you  proposed  it,  for  the  public  prejudice  is  so
strong  against  the  science  that  I  never  name  it  first."  “  How
are  we  to  manage  it,  as  she  has  a  great  objection  to  mes¬
merism  ?"  It  struck  me  at  the  time  that,  as  the  patient  had
been  nearly  three  months  wearing  a*  green  shade  over  the  eye,
and  its  position  was  dowmwards,  I  would  advise  her  to  throw
off  the  hood,  and  look  upwards  at  objects  with  a  view  of
strengthening  the  eye  and  relieving  the  inflammation  by  un¬
loading  the  vessels  by  gravitation.  This  answered  my  purpose
very  well.  She  said,  “What  am  I  to  look  at?"  Seeing  a
hook  in  the  ceiling,  I  said,  “  Look  at  that  hook  for  twenty
minutes  a  day."  She  stared  at  it,  supporting  the  upper  lid.
Finding  it  made  her  eye  ache,  I  told  her  to  hold  her  two
fingers  over  her  eyes ;  “  Oh,  this  is  worse  than  the  hook."
“Well,  could  you  bear  my  fingers?"  “Yes,  she  thought
she  could."  So  holding  both  her  hands  in  my  left,  and
pointing  my  two  fingers  of  the  other  hand  over  her  eyes,  in
ten  minutes  she  was  entranced ;  her  countenance  changed  to  a
marble  appearance ,  and  hands  became  like  those  of  a  cho¬
lera  patient .  In  fact,  I  found  her  fit  for  any  operation.  Her
sister  and  brother  being  alarmed,  I  had  to  awaken  her.  She
turned  chilly,  and  remained  so  for  some  time.  On  calling
the  next  morning ,  I  was  pleased  to  hear  that  the  long-sup¬
pressed  menstrua  had  returned.

I  sent  in  for  Dr.  Burt,  having  Mr.  Bowie  (who  has  been
over  the  last  few  days  as  medical  inspector  amongst  many
cases  of  Asiatic  cholera,  being  sent  by  the  Board  of  Health)
with  me.  I  proposed  the  division  of  the  whole  vessels  on  the
internal  canthus.  Mr.  Bowie,  (who  knows  you,  and  is  a
perfect  convert  to  the  science,)  with  Dr.  Burt,  concurring
with  me  on  the  propriety  of  such  treatment,  I  soon  threw


407


by  Mr.  Tubbs.

the  lady  into  a  state  of  insensibility.  I  divided  the  mucous
membrane  and  vessels,  laying  bare  the  sclerotic  coat.  The  eye
was  kept  open  by  Mr.  Bowie.  The  lady  slept  about  twenty
minutes,  and  assured  us  she  did  not  feel  the  operation.  This
was  done  on  Friday  noon,  December  7th.  The  next  day,
Mr.  Bowie  assisted  me  again.  We  proposed  touching  the
thickened  membrane  with  a  piece  of  caustic.  "W  ho  should
come  in  but  the  Bev.  Mr.  Wills,  curate  to  the  Bev.  William
Gale,  Towerley ;  Dr.  Burt  was  absent.  I  demesmerised  the
affected  eye,  (having  found  some  difficulty  the  last  time  in
keeping  it  open  from  the  rigid  state  of  the  eye-lid ;)  the  lids
were  easily  separated,  and  the  caustic  applied  well ;  cold  water
was  frequently  dropped  in  the  eye,  to  remove  the  superfluous
caustic  and  prevent  it  from  getting  on  the  cornea.  This  aston¬
ished  the  reverend  gentleman,  who  appeared  to  evince  a  dis¬
position  to  belief  in  mesmerism.  I  recommended  my  patient
to  remain  in  the  sleep-waking  three  or  four  hours,  which  she
did.  We  took  our  departure  to  visit  our  cholera  patients.

Mr.  Bowie  has  sent  me  the  following  note.

“  Upwell  Isle,  December  9tli,  1848.

“  My  dear  Sir, — I  certainly  was  very  much  struck  with  the  result
of  your  mesmerising  Miss  Stafford,  as  it  is  quite  impossible  that  she
could  have  endured  the  acute  pain  which  must  have  been  excited  by
the  application  of  caustic  to  the  eye  without  shrinking,  had  she  not
been  in  a  state  of  insensibility.  I  will  candidly  confess,  although  I
believed  that  sleep  could  be  induced  by  what  is  termed  the  mesmeric
influence,  I  never  was  so  fully  satisfied  before  of  its  phrenological
effects.

“  I  remain,  my  dear  Sir,

“  Yours  faithfully,

“W.  J.  Tubbs,  Esq.”  “Bobert  Bowie.

On  the  18th  instant,  Mrs.  Tubbs  tried  to  produce  the
mesmeric  sleep,  but  was  unable  on  account  of  the  painful
state  of  the  eye  and  a  shooting  pain  in  the  course  of  the
supra-orbitar  foramen.  I  then  took  my  wife's  place,  and
made  passes  over  the  cerebellum,  and  requested  Miss  Stafford
to  look  on  the  ground.  In  a  short  time  the  sleep- waking  was
induced.  Still  her  countenance  indicated  pain.  I  enquired
where  the  pain  was  felt.  She  instantly  pointed  to  the  spot.
I  breathed  on  the  part,  and  she  told  me  the  pain  was  gone.
Finding  her  languid,  I  did  not  operate  on  any  part  of  the
head  except  the  eye.  The  Bev.  Mr.  Evans,  Mrs.  and  Miss
Evans  were  present.  I  requested  them  to  leave,  that  I  might
take  her  out  of  the  sleep.  In  about  half  an  hour  they
returned.  Miss  Stafford  was  quite  unconscious  that  they  had
seen  her.  She  came  out  of  the  sleep-waking  quite  cheerful,


408  Insensibility  to  pain  in  the  mesmeric  Sleep-waking,

and  said  the  pain  was  gone,  took  her  usual  walk,  and  sat
most  part  of  the  afternoon,  assisting  my  wife  to  pick  plums
for  Christmas.  In  the  evening,  I  advised  her  being  sent  into
sleep-waking  by  the  back  of  the  head.  This  was  done.  I  then
touched  Benevolence,  when  she  handed  me  her  pocket  hand¬
kerchief.  I  still  kept  my  finger  on  the  organ,  when  she  took
off  her  brooch  and  gave  me.  I  proposed  that  she  should  do
some  crochet.  She  said  she  would  try.  She  commenced  in
the  usual  way  by  making  a  chain,  120  loops  long,  and  worked
a  few  stitches  of  a  second  row  :  but,  the  needle  not  being  of  a
proper  size  to  please  her,  she  laid  it  down.  She  talked  to  me
upon  different  subjects  while  at  work,  with  her  head  resting
on  a  pillow  and  eyelids  down.  I  sent  for  the  Rev.  Mr.  Wills,
who  came.  We  fixed  two  handkerchiefs  over  her  eyes.  Still
her  work  went  on  quite  as  well  as  if  her  eyes  had  been  open.
I  took  my  seat  at  the  music  and  made  tractive  passes  for  some
time  before  there  was  any  perceptible  movement.  At  last
she  rose  from  her  seat  and  came  in  close  contact  with  me,
I  having  to  put  my  hands  to  keep  her  from  falling  on  me.  I
requested  her  to  play  a  tune.  Being  only  a  beginner  she  was
some  time  before  she  could  make  ont  a  tune,  but  managed  to
play  a  few  notes  of  “  Sich  a  gitting  up  stairs.”  While  she
was  engaged  in  playing,  I  made  passes  from  the  shoulder  to
the  fingers.  I  said,  “  Why  do  you  stop  ?”  “  Because  I

can't  get  this  hand  off  the  keys — it  is  quite  frozen.”  The
Rev.  Mr.  Wills  now  tried  to  take  her  hand  from  the  keys,
but  could  not;  the  arm  being  as  stiff  as  a  piece  of  wood.  I
then  made  transverse  passes,  and  the  fingers  gave  way,  then
the  arm,  and  her  hand  fell  by  her  side.  She  then  returned
to  her  chair  and  was  found  in  as  profound  a  sleep  as  at  first.
Mr.  Wills  then  left.  Miss  Stafford  was  demesmerised,  having
been  asleep  three  hours.  She  this  morning  wrote  a  letter  to
Dr.  Elliotson  in  her  sleep-waking.

“  To  Dr.  Elliotson.

“  Dear  Sir, — I  have  great  pleasure  in  stating  that  my  eye  is
greatly  improving  since  I  have  been  under  mesmeric  treatment.  I
have  undergone  two  operations  since  I  have  been  at  Mr.  Tubbs’s.
Wishing  that  mesmerism  may  be  more  generally  known,  there  would
be  fewer  cases  for  the  medical  professors.  No  wonder  so  many  of
the  medical  men  should  be  so  opposed  to  the  science.

“  Allow  me,  dear  Sir,

“  To  subscribe  myself  yours  respectfully,

“Mary  Ann  Stafford.

“  Up  well,  December  19th,  1848.”

“  Up  well.

“  This  is  to  certify  that  we,  the  undersigned,  witnessed  Miss


by  Mr.  Tubbs.


409


Stafford  writing  the  accompanying  letter  while  in  a  state  of  mesmerism,
and  with  a  scarf  bound  over  her  eyes,  and  we  are  perfectly  satisfied
that  she  had  no  power  of  vision,  and  that  she  acted  completely  under
the  effect  of  mesmerism.

“  Hugh  Gwynne  Evans,  Rector  of  Outwell,  near  Wisbeach.

“  Edward  Wandby,  Upwell.

“  John  Wallis,  Upwell.

“  William  John  Tubbs.

“  December  19th,  1848.”

On  the  20th  Miss  Stafford  became  as  good  a  clairvoyant
as  Alexis.  On  that  evening  she  played  at  cards  blindfolded,
and  never  failed  in  one  single  experiment ;  Dr.  Burt,  Mr.
Mackean,  Mr.  Hugh  Whatly,  Mr.  Ward,  &c.,  were  present.
There  was  a  Mr.  Russell  of  the  National  School,  who  brought
with  him  a  letter  he  had  received  from  a  friend  on  cholera :
it  was  put  into  my  patient's  hands  who  read  it  out  perfectly,
clearly  and  distinctly.  Dr.  Burt  took  out  a  card  from  his
pocket,  and  she  read  every  word  correctly.  She  then  looked
over  an  album  and  made  her  remarks  in  every  page.  I  am
truly  astonished  with  her:  she  can  tell  anything  in  the  sleep.

On  the  23rd,  She  dined  with  me  at  a  friend's,  at  Wisbeach.
After  dinner,  being  thrown  into  the  sleep,  Mr.  Healy,  our
entertainer,  gave  her  the  following  bill;  her  eyes  being
covered  as  usual  with  flannel,  and  a  loose  handkerchief  ovci
all,  with  the  ends  secured  at  the  back  of  her  neck.  “  Thomas
Bird,  Dr.  to  James  Markham,  141bs.  2ozs.  cheese,  at  9d.  per
lb.,  10s.  7d.  which  she  read  in  the  presence  of  four  ladies
and  Mr.  Heald,  silversmith,  of  Wisbeach.  She  also  played  a
game  at  cards.  At  this  time  came  into  the  room,  Mr.  Gar¬
diner,  a  stationer  and  editor  of  the  Wisbeach  newspaper,  and
the  Rev.  J.  King,  Curate  of  Wisbeach.  She  read  the  follow¬
ing  card, — “  A .  W.  Healy,  Wisbeach,  agent  for  the  sale  of
Vergett's  waterproof-cloths  for  cart  and  waggon  covers;"
ending  by  pushing  the  card  away  and  saying  it  did  not  con¬
cern  her.

Cards  were  again  introduced.  She  played  a  short  time.
A  watch  was  shewn  her,  but  she  failed  to  tell  the  time  by  it ;
she  said  she  was  tired.  Mr.  Gardiner  gave  her  his  pocket-
book.  She  correctly  read  the  title  page.

The  loose  handkerchief  was  taken  off  her  face  about  the
time  Mr.  King  and  Mr.  Gardiner  arrived,  for  she  complained
of  being  too  warm  and  faint;  consequently  they  were  not  satis¬
fied,  thinking  it  possible  for  her  to  see.

She  said  she  thought  Rush's  pistols  were  thrown  into  the

pond  on  the  right  side.


210  Insensibility  to  pain  in  the  mesmeric  Sleep-waking,  §c.

One  evening,  in  the  presence  of  Dr.  Burt,  five  other  gen¬
tlemen  and  four  ladies,  a  likeness  of  a  young  lady  was  shown
Miss  Stafford.  She  could  not  see  through  the  case,  but,
when  open,  she  could ;  and  said  the  lady  had  a  book  in  her
hand,  wore  a  cameo  brooch,  blue  ribbon  to  fasten  her  collar,
whose  likeness  it  was,  and  the  manner  in  which  the  hair  was
dressed.  Another  likeness  was  then  placed  in  her  hand ;
when  the  case  was  opened,  she  knew  it  as  being  that  of  a
gentleman  she  had  seen  but  once.  An  extract  of  a  letter
from  John  Bowker,  Esq.,  upon  the  treatment  of  cholera,  was
given  her.  After  reading  a  few  lines,  she  put  it  away,  saying
it  did  not  concern  her.  Then  a  small  box,  in  which  was  a  slip
of  paper  with  four  figures  written  on  it.  This  she  failed  to  see
through  the  lid ;  when  opened,  she  quickly  read  the  figures,
but  read  them  backwards.  Two  cards  were  given  her,  and  she
read  them.  I  played  a  game  of  cards  with  her, — “Draw
the  Well  Dry.”  In  the  midst  of  the  game.  Dr.  Burt  took
my  seat,  to  play  with  her,  when  she  immediately  said,  “I
think  I  shall  not  play  any  more.”  I  resumed  my  seat ;  then
she  was  quite  willing  to  proceed.  She  commenced  writing
a  note,  but  complained  of  fatigue ;  so  we  did  not  press  her
to  go  on.

When  asleep,  she  complains  of  her  eyes  feeling  cold ;
wishes  to  have  several  folds  of  flannel  tightly  tied  round  her
head,  and,  until  her  eyes  become  warm,  she  has  no  clairvoy¬
ance.  On  the  22nd,  her  extra  vision  was  not  so  good,  which
circumstance  we  attribute  to  its  being  about  a  year  since  her
father  died  suddenly.

I  am,  dear  Sir,  yonrs  truly,

Upwell  Isle,  Cambridgeshire,  W.  J.  Tubbs.

December  25th,  1848.

***  As  I  was  not  sure  that  the  eyes  were  bandaged  in  the
instance  of  Miss  Stafford’s  perceiving  the  portraits,  I  en¬
quired  of  Mr.  Tubbs,  and  received  the  following  answer. —
J.  Elliotson.

“  To  Dr.  Elliotson.

“  Sir, — Mr.  Tubbs  has  shewn  me  your  note  of  yesterday’s
date,  and,  as  I  was  present  at  the  meeting  alluded  to  by  you,
he  has  requested  me  to  answer  it.

“  Miss  Stafford  was  unable  to  see  the  likenesses  through
the  cases  in  which  they  were  enclosed ;  but  she  recognized
them  almost  immediately  upon  their  being  opened,  when  her
eyes  were  covered  with  a  piece  of  flannel  and  several  (I  think
four)  pocket  handkerchiefs.


411


Cure  of  diseased  Knee  with  Mesmerism.


“  I  have  no  hesitation  in  stating  it  to  be  my  belief,  that
Miss  Stafford,  when  she  recognized  the  likenesses,  was  unable
to  see  in  the  usual  way,  or  rather,  that  she  was  incapable  ot
exercising  her  organ  of  vision  in  a  natural  way,  upon  the
objects  placed  before  her.

<(  X  may  also  add  my  opinion,  that  neither  Mr.  lubbs,
the  operator,  nor  Miss  Stafford,  the  patient,  has  any  interest
or  desire  to  practise  deception ;  and  that  in  many  instances
of  clairvoyance,  which  I  have  witnessed,  it  would  have  been
impossible  for  them,  or  either  of  them,  to  have  done  so  with
success,  however  strong  their  desire  to  deceive  might  have

been.


“  I  am,  Sir,

“Your  obedient  Servant,


“  Upwell,

“  Dec.  26th,  1848.”


“  It.  A.  Ward.


VIII.  Rapid  Cure  of  Diseased  Knee  with  Mesmerism.  By
Mr.  W.  J.  Tubbs,  Surgeon.  In  a  letter  to  Dr.  Elliotsou.


“  An  old  friend  and  admirer  is  deceived.  The  quack  publication  to  which  he
refers  is  not  extensively  read,  and  we  believe  that  it  is,  for  the  most  part,  in  the
hands  of  fools  and  impostors.  We  have  requested  a  gentleman,  on  whose  judg¬
ment  we  can  rely,  to  examine  the  report  of  the  case  in  question.  Hitherto  we
have  found  that  the  mesmerisers  are  perfectly  unscrupulous.  The  humbug  ap¬
pears  to  be  nearly ,  if  not  quite ,  exploded.”*— Mr.  Wakley,  Lancet,  Nov.  4,

184^I  have  watched  the  proceedings  of  mesmerists  and  phrenologists  for  thirteen
years  ;  and  the  terrific  events  which  have  passed  before  my  eyes  compel  me  to  say,
beware  how  you  plunge  farther  into  this  awful  delusion  of  the  devil  s  chicaneiy  ,
and  that  God  may  mercifully  furnish  you  with  grace  to  recover  yourself  out  of
the  snare  of  the  devil,  before  you  are  taken  captive  by  him  at  his  will,  it  it  be

His  holy  pleasure,  is  the  sincere  prayer  of  ,

3  “  Your  faithful  friend  in  the  Lord,

“  George  Corfe.”
Mesmerism  tried,  &c.,  p.  44.


Harriett  Bell,  aged  19  years,  had  inflammation  of  the  sy¬
novial  membrane  of  the  knee  joint.  Every  treatment  was
adopted.  She  kept  her  bed  four  months.  At  that  time,
being  on  the  sick  pauper  list,  she  was  about  being  sent  to  the
Cambridge  Hospital.  But  stepping  in  one  day,  I  mesmerised
the  knee,  and  it  twitched  and  was  evidently  affected  by  the
passes.  I  entranced  her :  she  could  bear  pinching  and  prick¬
ing  without  evincing  any  appearance  of  feeling,  though  before
her  sufferings  were  very  great.  In  a  fortnight,  she  walkec


*  Mr.  Wakley  means  The  Zoist,  but  dreads  to  mention  its  name,  lest  he
should  contribute  to  make  the  work  more  known.  The  passage  is  an  answei
a  correspondent  who  begged  him  to  look  at  the  case  of  cure  of  cancel  our  las


number. — Zoist.


412  Great  benefit  of  Mesmerism  in  diseased  Heart.


up  to  my  house.  Was  mesmerised  twice  a  week.  Is  well,
and  the  parish  have  put  her  now  to  a  dress-maker  as  an  ap¬
prentice.  She  is  ■perfectly  cured.

W.  J.  Tubbs.

Upwell  Isle,  Cambridge,

Dec.  22nd,  1848.

***  Here  is  a  cure  which  would  cause  the  heart  of  any
one  to  overflow  with  joy  who  does  not  make  it  a  rule  to  stig¬
matize  all  sufferers  cured  with  mesmerism  as  impostors,  or
possessed,  or  unscrupulous  enough  to  submit  to  what  fathers,
brothers,  husbands  must  object  to. — J.  Elliotson.


IX.  Remarkable  benefit  of  Mesmerism  in  Organic  Disease  of
the  Heart ,  Palsy,  Rheumatic  Neuralgia,  and  Acute  Rheu¬
matism.  By  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson,  of  Fairfield  House,
near  York.  With  an  account  of  two  of  the  cases  by
Mr.  Palmer,  Surgeon,  York.

“  It  would  be  far  more  consistent  with  the  sacerdotal  character  of  some  few
clergymen,  who  are  tainted  with  these  delusive  principles,  to  take  heed  to  this
solemn  warning  from  Holy  Writ,  than  for  them  to  practise  mesmerism  in  their
parishes,  and  by  fair  speeches  deceive  the  unwary  who  are  committed  to  their
pastoral  care  ;  and  not  so  unadvisedly  to  take  up  the  pen  in  defence  of  a  system
which,  to  say  the  least  of,  they  can  only  judge  by  the  representations  of  worldly-
minded  persons,  and  not  by  the  sober  opinion  of  the  truly  evangelical  portion  of
the  community. ” — Corfe’s  Mesmerism  tried  hy  the  Touchstone  of  Truth,  p.  34.

I.  Disease  of  the  Heart.

In  No.  XIX.,  p.  289,  I  gave  a  short  account  of  wonderful
benefit  in  a  severe  case  of  diseased  heart.  The  woman  “  had
been  confined  to  her  bed  for  six  weeks,  suffering  great  agony
in  her  head,  shoulders,  and  back ;  constant  f  palpitation  of
the  heart  and  fluttering  in  the  chest a  sense  of  suffocation
so  great  that  she  was  constantly  obliged  to  be  raised;  her
legs  and  body  had  been  much  swollen  for  some  weeks ;  she
had  been  unable  to  use  them.  She  was  instantly  relieved
from  her  pain,  and  half  an  hour  sufficed  to  restore  use  to  her
legs  ;  she  gradually  from  that  day  improved  ;  in  a  month  she
was  able  to  walk  daily  from  her  house  to  mine  and  back  again,
which  is  rather  more  than  a  mile — a  thing  which  she  could
do  with  difficulty  a  year  ago.  She  enjoys  herself,  can  attend
to  her  family,  and  seems  daily  to  gain  strength.  This  case
was  pronounced  by  the  profession  as  incurable  from  the  first ;
but,  as  we  have  already  overcome  so  much  that  was  then  pro¬
nounced  impossible,  I  hope  that  in  a  short  time  I  may  be
able  to  add  that  she  is  quite  returned  to  health.”  Her  name


413


by  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson.

was  Mary  Hatch.  Her  medical  attendant,  Mr.  Palmer,  told
me  he  did  not  expect  her  to  leave  her  bed  aliye.  The  pains
were  instantly  removed,  and  the  dropsical  symptoms  shortly
disappeared.  Even  after  this,  the  medical  men  who  saw  her
thought  it  would  be  impossible  for  her  to  get  about,  or  use
the  slightest  exertion,  as  a  very  little  matter  brought  on  the
palpitation  of  the  heart  and  choking  sensation.  However,  she
has  steadily  though  slowly  progressed,  and  now,  after  rather
more  than  a  year  and  a  half  since  I  first  saw  her,  she  has
been  able  to  work  in  the  hay  and  harvest  field,  which  she  had
been  unable  to  do  for  four  years.  She  is  still  improving,
though  occasionally  subject  to  palpitations.  These  are  speedily
removed  by  mesmerism.

Mr.  Palmer  will  communicate  his  own  account.

II.  Paralysis.

This  was  a  case  I  met  with  in  J anuary  last.  The  patient
is  John  Waterworth,  of  Shetton,  near  York— about  45  years
of  age— his  habits  had  been  rather  intemperate.  For  six
months  he  had  threatenings  and  symptoms  of  paralysis,  and,
about  two  months  or  more  before  I  saw  him,  he  had  had  a
fit  and  remained  for  some  time  insensible.  It  was  then
found  that  there  was  insensibility  of  the  right  leg  and  arm,
his  face  rather  distorted,  a  thickness  of  speech,  &c.  When
I  saw  him  his  symptoms  were  as  follows, — insensibility  of  the
right  leg  and  arm,  and  occasional  loss  of  power  of  moving
them — constantly  recurring  slight  attacks  of  paralysis  of,  or
drawing  down  of  the  muscles  of  the  face,  with  inability  to
move  his  jaws,  and  a  difficulty  of  speech  these  attacks  Aveie
slight  and  of  short  duration,  but  occurred  five  or  six  times  a
day ;  he  was  extremely  nervous,  with  a  slight  tremor  of  the
limbs  and  body ;  depressed,  and  complained  of  head-ache  and
soreness  of  the  mouth  and  throat,  stiffness  of  the  neck,  and
rheumatic  pains  in  the  back ;  his  pulse  weak,  irregular,  and
sometimes  intermittent.  I  do  not  know  what  his  previous
treatment  had  been.  He  was  then  undergoing  a  severe  course
of  mercury,  his  teeth  were  loose,  and  he  was  severely  sali¬
vated.  Indeed,  I  thought  many  of  his  symptoms  might  be
from  the  effects  of  mercury.  He  said  that  he  had  not  found
any  of  his  symptoms  improve,  but  felt  every  day  growing
worse.  Mr.  Hill,  surgeon  of  the  Pauper  Lunatic  Asylum,
York,  was  his  medical  adviser.

His  wife  told  me  that  Mr.  Hill,  three  days  before  I  saw
the  patient,  had  requested  her  not  to  let  him  go  out  of  her
sight,  as  he,  Mr.  Hill,  feared  that  there  was  softening  of
the  brain,  and  her  husband  might  drop  down  dead  at  any


414


Cure  of  Palsy  with  Mesmerism,


moment .  I  mesmerised  him  by  passes  from  the  head  down¬
wards,  resting  my  hands  for  a  minute  or  two  on  his  head  and
shoulders.  I  continued  this  for  an  hour.  At  first  I  observed
an  increase  of  the  nervous  twitchings  and  tremors ;  but  this
soon  subsided,  he  looked  more  lively,  had  no  tremors,  and
said  that  all  pains  in  the  head,  back,  and  limbs  were  gone,
and  he  had  recovered  the  natural  sensation  of  his  limbs.

The  following  day  I  found  him  much  improved,  he  was
more  composed,  had  had  no  return  of  insensibility  or  numb¬
ness  in  the  limbs,  nor  any  paralytic  symptoms ;  but  com¬
plained  of  the  pains  in  his  hip  and  back,  and  the  soreness  of
his  throat  and  mouth.  The  pains  were  again  removed.  I
made  him  gargle  his  mouth  and  throat  with  mesmerised  water,
which  he  said  felt  very  warm  in  his  mouth,  and  made  him
feel  much  more  comfortable.  The  following  day  he  walked
to  my  house,  half  a  mile,  and  continued  to  do  so  until  he
had  quite  recovered,  and  felt  strong  enough  to  go  to  work
again,  which  was  in  the  course  of  three  weeks.  He  had  been
at  work  about  three  weeks  or  a  month,  when,  after  long  ex¬
posure  to  wet  one  day,  he  was  attacked  with  shiverings,  great
pain  across  the  loins,  and  the  following  day  a  swelling  of  the
lower  part  of  the  abdomen.  I  found  him  feverish  and  in
great  pain.  By  mesmerism,  in  an  hour,  he  felt  perfectly  re¬
lieved  ;  he  had  a  little  pain  the  following  day,  but  in  the
course  of  four  or  five  days  the  swelling  had  subsided,  and  he
returned  to  work.  He  has  now  been  at  work  four  months,
and  says  he  never  enjoyed  better  health.

From  the  time  he  commenced  mesmerism  he  took  no
medicine  whatever.  This  patient  never  went  to  sleep  during
the  process  of  mesmerising.  He  said  he  had  a  sensation  as  if
streams  of  warm  air  passed  over  him  as  I  drew  my  hands
over  him,  that  removed  any  pains  he  had  at  the  time,  and
was  most  exhilirating  and  refreshing — that  after  the  process
was  over  he  always  felt  extremely  drowsy,  and  slept  soundly
for  several  hours  immediately  on  returning  home.

Mr.  Palmer  addresses  the  following  letter  to  the  editor  of
The  Zoist  on  these  two  cases, —

“York,  Sept.  19th,  1848.

“  Sir, — Having  noticed  the  beneficial  effects  of  mesmerism
on  two  cases  which  have  lately  come  before  my  notice,  I  would
wish,  if  not  occupying  too  much  space  in  your  valuable
journal,  to  place  them  before  your  readers.  As  they  are  both
cases  of  every-day  observation,  and  attended  with  the  ordi¬
nary  symptoms,  I  will  not  enter  into  any  lengthened  his-


by  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson.  415

tory,  but  merely  give  briefly  the  outlines  of  each,  and  the
termination.

“  The  first  which  I  will  notice  is  one  of  disease  of  the  heart.
The  patient  is  a  middle-aged  woman,  mother  of  several  chil¬
dren,  and  has  been  labouring  under  its  effects  for  some  years.
She  was  when  I  first  saw  her  (about  March,  1847)  suffering
from  the  general  symptoms  of  hypertrophy  of  the  left  ven¬
tricle,  which  had  latterly  very  much  increased,  and  rendered
her  unable  to  make  the  slightest  exertion  without  severe
oppression  and  very  great  difficulty  of  breathing.  She  has
been  several  times  under  medical  treatment  without  any  ma¬
terial  relief,  and  for  the  last  nine  months  has  consulted  no
one.  She  was  treated  in  the  usual  way,  but  still  the  impulse
of  the  breast  and  the  difficulty  of  breathing  remained  without
any  apparent  improvement,  as  did  also  the  anasarca  and  the
other  accompanying  symptoms.  This  condition  continued
for  near  a  month  or  six  weeks,  when  she  was  visited  regu¬
larly  by  Mr.  Thompson,  and  mesmerised  for  several  months,
all  medicines  during  the  time  being  discontinued.  I  saw  her
occasionally,  and  her  health  appears  recovering,  although  very
slowly ;  but  when  I  first  visited  her,  she  was  unable  to  use
the  slightest  exertion,  and  now  she  can  perform  her  usual
household  duties  without  much  inconvenience,  and  describes
herself  to  be  in  better  health  now  than  she  has  been  for  some
years  past.

“The  other  case  is  one  of  paralysis.  The  subject  of  it
being  a  man  about  40  years  of  age,  generally  enjoying  good
health,  had  been  suffering  from  palsy  of  the  left  side  for  nearly
six  months.  He  had  undergone  a  long  course  of  mercury  along
with  counter  irritants,  &c.,  with  apparently  little  benefit,  and
discontinued  their  use  about  six  weeks,  when  he  was  again
placed  under  the  effects  of  mercury  and  severely  salivated,  and
continued  so  for  some  time.  But  still  his  symptoms  were  in  no
way  relieved.  At  this  stage  he  became  the  patient  of  Mr.
Thompson,  and  underwent  the  usual  mesmeric  treatment.  I
had  not  seen  him  for  several  weeks,  when  I  accidentally  met
with  him.  He  had  regained  the  use  of  his  limbs,  and  described
himself  as  quite  cured  of  his  “  sore  mouth”  in  two  or  three
days :  and  the  power  and  sensibility  of  his  leg  and  arm  gra¬
dually  returned  without  any  other  treatment.  It  is  now  nearly
six  months  and  he  has  had  no  relapse.  I  ought  here  to  men¬
tion  also  that,  about  six  weeks  or  two  months  after  he  was
first  mesmerised,  he  became  exposed  to  cold  and  wet,  and  in
a  day  or  two  after  was  affected  with  hydrocele  of  the  left  side,


/


416  Cure  of  Rheumatic  Neuralgia  with  Mesmerism.

that  was  also  relieved  without  any  medicinal  remedies,  and
he  now  shows  not  the  slightest  trace  of  the  affection.

“  These  few  remarks  respecting  the  result  of  the  cases  above
quoted,  although  very  imperfectly  drawn  up,  may  not  prove  un¬
interesting  to  your  numerous  readers.  But  as  Mr.  Thompson
has  supplied  you  with  the  particulars  of  his  treatment  regard¬
ing  them  in  a  former  number,  I  was  induced  to  send  you  this
brief  outline  in  corroboration  of  his  statements.  Apologizing
for  taking  up  so  much  of  your  valuable  space,

“  I  remain,

“Your  obedient  servant,

“  J.  Palmer,  Surgeon,  York.

“  To  the  Editor  of  The  Zoist .”

III.  Two  cases  of  Rheumatic  Neuralgia.

John  Water  worth,  who  had  received  so  much  benefit
from  mesmerism,  asked  me  to  see  his  father,  who  had  been
suffering  for  several  years  from  violent  pains,  which  had  so
increased  lately  that  it  was  with  difficulty  he  could  crawl
about  for  a  few  yards.  The  patient’s  age  was  near  eighty  ;  he
told  me  that  20  years  ago  he  had  a  dislocation  of  the  thigh,
which  was  never  properly  reduced,  and  that  consequently  he
had  been  lame  ever  since ;  but  that  about  six  or  seven  years
ago  he  began  to  have  rheumatic  pains  in  his  loins  and  the  leg
which  was  not  injured ;  that  these  attacks  became  more  fre¬
quent  ;  and  that  when  I  saw  him  the  pain  was  so  severe,  par¬
ticularly  when  he  lay  down,  that  he  generally  passed  his
nights  in  a  chair ;  that  he  was  never  free  from  pain ;  and  that
he  was  now  so  lame  that  he  could  not  get  about  at  all.  I
found  him  extremely  sensitive,  he  went  to  sleep  with  a  few
passes ;  his  head,  arms,  and  legs  were  attracted  by  passes  in
any  direction  ;*  he  was  freed  from  all  pains,  and  has  had  no
return  now  for  many  weeks,  and  walked  up  to  my  house  the
other  day  to  show  himself  to  some  persons  who  were  anxious
to  witness  a  case  of  mesmerism.

The  second  case  was  that  of  a  young  woman,  whose  hip
joint  had  become  distorted  four  or  five  years  ago,  from  a
severe  rheumatic  attack  and  inflammation  in  the  joints.  She
has  since  been  subject  to  repeated  attacks  of  neuralgia  in  her
hip  and  thigh,  for  which  she  could  obtain  no  relief.  Mes¬
merism  immediately  relieved  her  of  all  pain,  and  she  has
since  been  able  to  walk  better,  and  feels  stronger,  than  she
has  ever  done  since  her  illness.


*  The  old  gentleman  was  clearly  possessed  ! — Zoist.


Clairvoyance  of  Alexis  Didier.


41 7


IY.  Rheumatic  Fever.

Mr.  W.  Brow,  Tailor,  Skelton,  about  two  months  ago
was  relieved  of  a  severe  attack  of  rheumatic  fever  by  mes¬
merism.  All  pain  was  immediately  removed,  and  in  four  or
five  days  the  patient  was  well.

Y.  Congestion  of  the  Lungs ,  Sickness,  and  Low  Fever.

A  little  girl,  three  years  of  age,  the  daughter  of  my
steward,  had  an  attack  of  congestion  of  the  lungs.  She  had
been  under  the  medical  treatment  of  Mr.  Palmer  of  York,
and  had  been  ill  for  some  time ;  her  pulse  was  quick  and
feeble,  her  breathing  was  laborious,  and  she  complained  of
pain  in  the  chest ;  the  medicines  prescribed  had  not  relieved
her,  and  the  child  was  fast  losing  its  strength.  By  mes¬
merising  the  chest  for  about  one  hour  and  a  half,  the  breath¬
ing  was  relieved,  and  the  pulse  much  improved,  the  child
sleeping  quietly  during  the  process.  In  two  or  three  days
the  child  had  got  rid  of  these  symptoms.  I  left  home  about
this  time  for  a  fortnight,  and  on  my  return  I  found  the  poor
little  creature  had  relapsed  into  a  sort  of  low  fever,  with  most
distressing  sickness,  which  nothing  seemed  to  alleviate,  every
thing  she  took,  either  of  food  or  medicine,  being  instantly  re¬
jected  from  her  stomach.  Mr.  Allen,  of  York,  had  been
called  in,  and  recommended  her  spine  to  be  rubbed  with
croton  oil.  I  returned  home  just  as  they  were  about  to  apply
it.  I  requested  to  be  allowed  to  try  mesmerism  first ;  and  in
less  than  an  hour  she  was  enabled  to  drink  a  cup  of  milk,
which  was  not  rejected  from  her  stomach ;  she  had  little  or
no  return  of  sickness,  and  recovered  her  strength  and  health
in  an  almost  incredible  manner  in  a  few  days.

H.  S.  Thompson.


X.  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis  Didier.  By  Dr.  Elliotson.

In  the  8th  and  11th  numbers  of  The  Zoist  such  examples  of
the  clairvoyance  of  Alexis  Didier  were  given  as  compelled
me,  with  all  my  prejudices,  to  be  satisfied  of  his  possessing
this  faculty  at  times.

I  received  the  following  account  from  M.  Marcillet. —

“  On  May  17,  1847,  Alexis  and  myself  went  to  the  apart¬
ments  of  Lord  Frederick  Fitzclarence,  at  the  hotel  Brighton,
Rue  Rivoli,  and  the  trials  of  Alexis's  clairvoyance  were  begun
in  the  presence  of  Lord  Normanby,  the  English  ambassador,
who,  like  Lord  Frederick,  had  no  belief  in  mesmerism.

VOL.  vi.  gg


418  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis  Didier,

“  ‘  Can  you  describe  my  country  house  in  England  ?’  said
the  ambassador  to  Alexis,  who  had  been  sent  into  sleep-waking.
After  reflecting  a  few  minutes,  Alexis  replied,  that  it  was  on
a  height.  Then,  having  detailed  its  situation  and  all  the
particulars  of  the  grounds,  he  accurately  described  the  furni¬
ture  of  the  house,  and  finished  by  saying,  that  certain  win¬
dows  looked  out  upon  the  sea.  So  unexpected  a  description
astonished  the  ambassador.

“A  young  and  handsome  lady,  encouraged  by  the  lucidity
of  Alexis,  put  some  questions  to  him.  He  told  her  her  name
and  her  rank ;  { you  are  a  dame  d’honneur  of  Queen  Victoria/
added  he;  and  it  was  true.

“  Lord  Normanby  took  up  one  of  Lord  Frederick's  books,
and,  having  stated  the  number  of  a  page,  Alexis  read  a  sen¬
tence  in  it,  though  the  book  was  not  out  of  Lord  Normanby’s
hands.  This  experiment  was  repeated  several  times  and
always  with  the  same  success.

“  Lord  Frederick  had,  up  to  this  moment,  been  a  mere
spectator  :  but  now  broke  silence,  took  the  hand  of  Alexis,
and,  with  his  characteristic  kindness  of  manner,  asked  the
following  question, —

“  ‘  Can  you  tell  me  how  I  was  employed  the  day  before
yesterday  with  that  gentleman  ?’  pointing  to  one  of  the  com¬
pany.

“  ‘  I  see  you  both/  replied  Alexis,  f  going  to  the  Rue  La-
zare  in  a  carriage  :  there  you  take  the  train  and  travel  to
Versailles;  you  then  get  into  another  carriage,  which  conveys
you  to  St.  Cvr.  You  visit  the  military  school,  and  it  was  the
other  gentleman  who  proposed  this  excursion,  he  having  been
educated  there.’

“  ‘  All  this  is  admirable, .  Alexis/  exclaimed  his  lordship.
‘  Go  on,  Alexis.’

“‘You  return  to  Versailles;  I  see  you  both  enter  a
pastry-cook’s.  Your  companion  eats  three  little  cakes :  you
take  something  else.’

“  Lord  Frederick,  perfectly  astonished,  said,  before  Alexis
had  time  to  think,  ‘  You  are  right ;  I  ate  a  small  piece  of
bread.’

“  ‘  You  next  take  the  train  again  and  return  to  Paris.
However,  let  us  thoroughly  understand  each  other.  You
started  by  the  railroad  on  the  right  bank,  but  you  returned
by  that  on  the  left.’

“  The  latter  circumstance  astonished  his  lordship  so  much,
that  he  not  only  congratulated  us  before  the  whole  party,  but
offered  us  his  high  patronage  on  every  occasion.”


419


by  Dr.  Elliotson.

Soon  after  M.  Marcillet  had  sent  me  word  of  these  won¬
ders,  a  friend  of  mine— Mr.  Bushe,  son  of  the  late  Chief
Justice  of  Ireland,  and  intimate  with  Lord  Frederick,  called
upon  me,  and  offered  to  appty  to  his  lordship  respecting  the
truth.  His  lordship  immediately  desired  his  secretary  to  write
me  word  that  he  was  at  that  moment  too  busy  to  write  to  me
himself,  but  that,  if  I  would  procure  a  detailed  account,  he
would  peruse  it,  and,  if  he  found  it  accurate,  certify  to  its
truth.  I  applied  repeatedly  to  M.  Marcillet,  who  is  the  most
unmethodical  and  dilatory  man  in  the  world,  and  it  was  but
lately  that  I  procured  from  him  the  statement  which  I  have
translated.  I  transmitted  the  original  to  Lord  Frederick  by
means  of  our  common  friend,  and  the  following  was  his  Lord¬
ship's  answer, —

“Portsmouth,  Nov.  15,  1848.

“My  dear  Bushe, — I  have  read  the  statement  you  seut  me  rela¬
tive  to  the  stance  that  was  held  at  my  apartments  when  in  Paris,  in
1847,  in  mesmerism.  It  is  quite  correct  in  every  particular ;  indeed
nothing  could  be  much  more  extraordinary  than  the  whole  thing  was
in  every  respect.

“  I  hope  I  shall  see  Dr.  Elliotson  here,  as  he  is  a  great  friend  of
our  first  physician  here — Dr.  Engledue,  whose  acquaintance  I  have
lately  had  the  good  fortune  to  make.  Come  down,  my  dear  Bushe,
and  see  your  old  friend,

“Fred.  Fitzclarence.

“  I  return  the  letter.”

I  have  had  no  means  of  verifying  the  following  account,
which  was  sent  me  at  the  time  of  the  occurrence.  But  the
substantiation  of  M.  Marcillet's  perfect  accuracy  by  Lord
Frederick,  in  reference  to  the  one,  removes  all  doubt  from
my  mind  respecting  the  other.

“  Alexis  is  more  brilliant  than  ever.  The  saloons  of  the
aristocracy  are  eagerly  opened  to  us.  The  following  facts  of
the  lucidity  of  Alexis  have  done  this.  I  have  a  seance  with
Alexis  at  my  house  every  Saturday  evening,  at  eight  o'clock.
Last  Saturday  week  my  party  was  very  select.  A  lady  pre¬
sented  her  closed  hand  to  Alexis,  and  begged  him  to  tell  her
what  was  in  it.  ‘It  is  hair  in  a  paper.'  ‘True.'  ‘  The  hairs
are  light :  they  belonged  to  a  great  personage  who  is  abroad ;
he  limps  a  little  ;  they  are  the  hairs  of  the  Due  de  Bordeaux.
The  lady,  astonished  at  the  answer,  said  before  the  whole
party  that  she  was  Madame  de  Queney,  first  dame  d  honneun
of  the  Duchesse  de  Berry.

“  Last  Wednesday,  the  24th  instant,  your  ambassador,
Lord  Normanby,  desired  to  see  us  a  second  time,  and  was


420  Books  received ,  Notices  to  Correspondents,  fyc.

again  astonished.  *  In  this  box/  said  he  to  Alexis,  1 1  have
placed  something,  can  you  tell  me  what  it  is  V  ‘  It  is  a  brace¬
let  with  a  portrait;  the  likeness  is  of  Queen  Victoria  !!  V
‘  That  is  astounding :  you  lately  described  my  English  country
house  to  me ;  I  have  another,  can  you  see  it  V  ‘  Perfectly
well.  It  is  not  in  England.  It  is  in  a  warmer  climate.  I
will  stand  at  the  window.  I  see  a  great  city  situated  a  league
off  ;  a  little  river  flows  near  your  garden.  The  city  that  I
see  is  Florence  !  You  have  lived  in  this  city  also,  for  I  see
your  house  also ;  it  is  in  the  Place  opposite  a  large  church.
You  had,  likewise,  a  terrace.  You  had  your  portrait  taken
in  this  city.  *  ‘  Yes/  ‘  This  portrait  is  placed  in  the  saloon

of  your  country  house  V  ‘  This  is  overpowering/  said  the
ambassador.

“  Last  Monday,  we  were  at  the  house  of  the  Comtesse  de
Paris.  A  person  asked  Alexis  what  was  in  a  parcel  tied  with
string  that  he  held  in  his  hand.  ‘  It  is  a  letter  without  sig¬
nature,  and  bears  the  date  of  1809 :  he  who  wrote  it  was  as¬
sassinated  ten  years  afterwards ;  it  is  the  Due  de  Berry/  The
person  who  asked  the  question  was  the  Comte  de  la  Ferronnais.

“  Yours  faithfully,

“Marcillet.

“  May  31,  1847,

“  Paris,  48,  Bue  de  la  Victorie.”


BOOKS  RECEIVED.

The  Journal  of  Psychological  Medicine  and  Mental  Pathology.  Edited  by
Forbes  Winslow,  M.D.  No.  IV.,  Oct.  1,  1848.

Ethnological  Journal,  October,  November,  December.

Popular  Theology  tested  by  Modern  Science,  in  a  series  of  letters  to  a  friend,
by  a  Well-wisher  to  Society.  London  :  John  Chapman,  142,  Strand.  1848.

This  little  book  contains  reflections  calculated  to  make  large  brains  think.
The  “  Well-wisher  to  Society”  has  clearly  expressed  thoughts  which  must  be  pre¬
sented  to  all  those  who  reflect  on  theological  subjects.  Many  of  the  thoughts
bear  the  impress  of  originality,  and  we  would  willingly  extract  a  few  specimens  if
our  pages  were  open  to  the  discussion  of  such  topics.  We  fully  expect  to  hear
that  this  unpretending  volume  has  received  a  large  circulation.


NOTICES  TO  CORRESPONDENTS.

We  regret  being  obliged  to  postpone  to  our  next  number  the  interesting  papers
by  Mr.  Roffe,  Non  Wist,  Mr.  Jaffray,  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson,  Mr.  Barth,  Dr.
Elliotson,  Dr.  Storer,  the  late  Capt.  Bagnold,  accounts  of  several  painless  ex¬
tractions  of  teeth,  and  others — some  of  which  have  been  already  announced.

Non  Wist’s  former  communications  are  all  carefully  preserved,  and  not  yet
jmade  use  of  because  we  have  not  seen  our  way  into  the  subject.


Books  received,  Notices  to  Correspondents,  tyc.  421

Mr.  Pasley  has  written  to  us  in  answer  to  our  remarks  upon  his  pamphlet.
But  we  must  decline  entering  upon  the  argument,  as  it  relates  rather  to  philosophy
in  general,  than  to  our  own  department :  all  we  have  to  observe  in  reply  is,
that,  in  our  notice,  we  did  not  express  either  “  surprise  or  alarm  at  the  philosophy
of  the  sages  of  antiquity  being  disputed,’ ’  neither  did  we  ‘  *  think  that  time  and
consent  make  old  practice  unquestionable  we  said  and  say  nothing  of  the  kind ;
on  the  contrary,  our  motto  always  is,  “This  is  truth,  though  opposed  to  the  phi¬
losophy  of  ages.”  But,  in  the  pursuit  of  that  truth,  we  implied  our  love  of  facts
over  an  indulgence  in  hypothesis;  and  while  we  smiled  at  the  boldness,  not  to
say  rashness  and  positiveness,  with  which  the  author  pronounced  upon  what  he
here  calls  the  “  fall  of  the  sciences,”  and  the  success  of  his  own  theory,  i.e.  the
fall  of  Newton,  and  of  Bacon,  and  of  Priestley,  &c.,  and  the  success  conse¬
quently  of  himself,— we  still  gave  him  a  welcome  into  the  field  of  investigation,
and  admitting  the  ingenuity  of  his  views  and  the  ability  with  which  he  maintained
them,  we  simply  called  for  further  proofs,  and  recommended  more  hesitation  and
self- distrust,  an  advice,  we  regret  to  observe,  which  has  been  received  with  a  sen¬
sitiveness  that  was  scarcely  needful.

London  Medical  Gazette.— The  paragraph  alluded  to  at  p.  403,  is  the  fol¬
lowing: — “  It  is  with  surprise  and  regret  we  learn  that  Dr.  Elliotson  has  been
appointed  to  deliver  the  Harveian  Oration  at  the  Royal  College  of  Physicians
on  the  27th  inst,  Considering  the  notoriety  which  the  orator  elect  has  acquired
as  a  patron  of  mesmerism,  we  should  have  supposed  that  a  more  appropriate
selection  might  have  been  made.  We  cannot  bring  ourselves  to  believe  that  the
majority  of  the  Fellows  concur  in  the  step  which  has  been  taken  by  the  College,
and  we  feel  confident  that  it  will  create  great  dissatisfaction  in  the  profession.”

Mr.  Wakley. — The  publication  of  the  cure  of  the  cancer  seems  to  have  had
as  violent  an  effect  upon  Mr.  Wakley  as  the  delivery  of  Dr.  Elliotson’s  Harveian
Oration.  We  fear  his  frame  will  hardly  stand  many  such  shocks.  He  thus  writes  :

“  An  old  Friend.— The  pretended  cure  of  a  cancer  by  mesmerism,  as  an¬
nounced  in  a  pamphlet,  is  one  of  the  grossest  puffs  we  have  ever  seen.  It  cannot
deceive  any  medical  practitioner  who  is  acquainted  with  his  profession.  It  ap¬
pears  that  the  treatment  commenced  in  1843,  and  the  tumor  did  not  disappear
until  1848.  Hundreds,  and  even  thousands,  of  similar  tumors,  supposed  to  have
been  cancers,  disappear  from  the  breasts  of  females  in  half  those  years,  and  under
every  variety  of  treatment  that  can  be  named.  Under  the  system  of  pressure,
as  practised  by  the  late  Mr.  Young,  tumors  of  double  the  size  were  completely
absorbed  in  less  than  six  months  ;  some  in  two  or  three  months.  Mr.  Young
published  scores  of  such  cases,  and  the  attestations  to  his  accuracy  were  respect¬
able  and  conclusive.  Many  tumors,  apparently  of  a  true  scirrhous  nature,  have
been  promptly  absorbed  under  the  admirable  system  of  pressure  first  adopted  and
recommended  by  Dr.  Neil  Arnott.  In  a  few  weeks  beneficial  effects  have  been
produced,  the  patients  have  been  relieved,  both  from  their  sufferings  and  their
swellings.  It  is  time  that  the  obscenities  of  mesmerism  should  engage  the  atten¬
tion  of  the  heads  of  families,  and  all  persons  who  uphold  the  character  of  English
society  for  its  purity  and  morality.  The  statements  which  are  occasionally  sent
to  us  are  descriptive  of  scenes  which  are  highly  disgusting.  Why  do  not  its


422


Books  received ,  Notices  to  Correspondents ,  fyc.


medical  advocates  transfer  the  practice  to  the  hands  of  females,  since  in  nineteen
cases  out  of  twenty,  the  patient,  alias  the  victim,  alias  the  particeps  criminis,
is  a  female.  This  of  course  would  not  suit  the  object  of  the  benevolent  masculine
mesmeriser.  Whatever  may  become  of  the  delusion  called  mesmerism,  we  are
resolved,  provided  we  are  duly  aided  by  our  professional  brethren,  that  the  ob¬
scenities  of  mesmerism  shall  be  no  longer  practised  with  impunity.” — Lancet,
Nov.  11,  1848.

Why  did  not  this  delightful  man  at  once  say  millions  of  cancers  have  been
cured  :  for  this  was  a  genuine  cancer  ?  His  favourite,  Professor  Samuel  Cooper,
had  no  doubt  of  this  :  nor  has  one  medical  man  who  saw  the  case  or  has  read
the  account.  WThy  is  not  pressure  used  every  day  by  all  surgeons  to  remove
cancers,  and  why  are  any  tumors  cut  away,  as  they  are  daily  in  all  our  hospitals,
if  pressure  succeeds  so  admirably  ?  The  truth  is,  that  pressure  does  not  answer
and  is  not  employed  Let  Mr.  Wakley  give  us  an  acconnt  of  all  the  cases  cured,
and  with  them  all  the  histories  of  mesmeric  obscenities  :  and  we  will  publish  them
forthwith.


All  communications  must  be  addressed  to  the  care  of  Mr.  Bailliere,  219,
Regent  Street,  for  the  Editors  :  and  it  is  earnestly  requested  that  they  be  sent
a  month  before  the  day  of  publication.


END  OF  YOL.  VI.


MESMERIC  INFIRMARY


A  Meeting  held  at  the  Earl  of  Ducie’s,  No.  23,  Belgrave  Square,
July  9th,  1846,  being  convinced  of  the  vast  benefits  derived  from  Mesmerism
in  the  cure  of  Diseases,  even  the  most  intractable,  as  well  as  in  the  prevention  of
pain  in  Surgical  Operations,  and  being  desirous  that  its  benefits  should  be  more
widely  extended  to  the  Poorer  Classes  than  individual  exertion  can  accomplish,

Resolved —

1.  That  with  this  view  a  Mesmeric  Infirmary  shall  be  established  by  voluntary
contribution,  for  the  cure  of  Diseases  and  the  prevention  of  pain  in  Surgical  Operations.

2.  That  this  Infirmary  shall  be  under  the  management  of  a  President,  Vice-
Presidents,  Trustees,  a  Treasurer,  Secretary,  and  Committee.

3.  That  the  RIGHT  HON.  THE  EARL  OF  DUCIE  be  President.


BARON  DE  GOLDSMID,
THE  EARL  OF  CARLISLE,


VICE-PRESIDENTS.

I  R.  MONCKTON  MILNES,  M.P.  I  THE  REV.  G.  SANDBY,  jun.
I  J.  H.  LANGSTON,  M.P.  |


TREASURER.
MR.  BRIGGS.


COMMITTEE.


DR.  ASHBURNER,

DR.  ELLIOTSON,

MR.  CHANDLER,  l

MR.  FLINTOFF,  }  Surgeons.

MR.  CLARK,  J


MR.  J.  HANDS,  )

MR.  D.  HANDS,  'Surgeons.

MR.  F.G.  JOHNSTON,  1
MR.  SYMES,  >

REV.  DR.  DIXON.

MAJOR  BUCKLEY,


CAPTAIN  JOHN  JAMES,
MR.  BLYTH,

MR.  FRADELLE,

MR.  KINGDOM,

MR.  TOPHAM.


DONATIONS  and  SUBSCRIPTIONS.


Adams,  Mr.  Surgeon,  Lyinington  I  1

Adare,  Viscount,  M.P.  F.R.S.  10  0  0..

Adlard,  Mr.  H.,  juu . .

Aglionby,  Miss,  Nunnery,  Cumb.

- 2nd  Subsciiption

Ainslie,  Mr.  G.,  Lewisham .

Akroyd,  Mr.  Edward,  Bankfield,

Halifax . 5  0  0

Anonymous,  Hampshire .  5  0  0

Ashburner,  Dr .  10  0  0

Barton,  Mr.,  Gloster  Cottage,

Boundary -road,  St.John’s  Wood


Dons.  Ann.  Subs.
£  s.  d.  £  s.  d.
0


2

I

I

1

1


2  0
1  0
0  0
0  0
I  0


1  1  0


Bailli&re,  Mr .

Bentinck,  the  Lady  Mary  .

Blyth,  Mr.  1\  P.,  Sion-house,

Lower  Clapton .

Briggs,  Mr.,  Nottingham-place  ..

Briggs,  Mr.  W.,  York .

Brown,  Mr.  Berry,  Hamilton

House,  St.  John’s  Wood .

Browne,  Mr.  J.,  Bridgewater  ...
Browne,  Mr.  W.,  ditto  ..


Dons.  Ann.  Subs.
iC  s.  d.  £  s.  d.

1  1  O

10  0  0

5  5  0
5  5  0

10  0  0
5  0  0

110
1  1  0


[ Turn  over.


DONATIONS  AND  SUBSCRIPTIONS,— continued


Dons.  Ann.  Subs.

.30

s.  d.

£

8.

d.

Brine,  Mr.,  South  Row,  Nw.  Rd.  2

2  0

Brine,  Mrs.,  ditto  2

2  0

Buckley,  Major,  Cheltenham....

5

5  0

• - a  Friend  of. . . .  1

0  0

Bull,  Mr.  J.,  Bridgewater .  1

1  0

Bully,  M.  de,  15,  Harley-street  . .  1

0  0

Butler,  Mr.  Edward .  1

O  0

Buxton,  Dr.,  Brownlow-street  ..  5

0  0

Chambers,  Mr.,  RatclifFe  Highway

0

10

0

Chandler, Mr. Surgeon, Rotherhithe

1

1

0

Clark,  Mr.,  Surgeon,  Kingsland  1

1  0

Clarkson,  Miss  R .  5

0  0

Collier,Miss,  15, High-street,  Cam-

den  Town  .  2

2  0

Collins,  Miss  E.,  Newark .

1

1

0

- 2nd  Subscription

1

1

0

Cook,  Rev.  Joseph,  Purley  Hall. .  5

0  0

Creyke,  Mr. Ralph  Rowcliffe Hall,

Selby .  5

0  0

Croft,  Col.,  Shellington  Hall ....  5

0  0

Davey,  Mr.  W .  1

0  0

Deverel,  Mr.,  Purbrook  Park  ..

2

2

0

Dodsworth,  Sir.  C.,  Bart .  5

0  0

Duberley,  Miss  Ethel  .  0

10  0

Ducie,  Earl  of . 100

0  0

Edwards,  Rev.  John,  Cheltenham

1

1

0

Elliotson,Dr.  F.R.S . 50

0  0

Ellis,  Mr.  J.  A.,  Dresden  .  5

0  0

Enfield,  Mr.,  Nottingham  .

1

1

0

Ewart,  Mr.  M.P.,  Cambridge-sq.  5

0  0

Flintoff,  Mr.  S.,  Surgeon,  73,  Gt.

Titchfield-street .  5

0  0

Forbes,  Sir  Charles,  Bart . 21

0  0

Frances,  Mrs.  9,  Norfolk-crescent,

Hyde  park  .

Frere,  Mr.,  Stamford  Brook,

Chiswick .  10

Friend,  a,  Cheltenham . .

Goldsmid,  Baron  de,  F.R.S . 100  0  0

Gordon,  Mr.  J.  A.,  Naish,  Bristol  50  0  0

Hamilton,  Mr.  Wm.  H.,  10,  St
Andrew’s-place,  Regent’s-park.

Hands,  Mr.  J.,  Surgeon,  Duke-

street,  Grosvenor-square .  5  5  0

Hands,  Mr.  D.,  Surgeon,  Thayer-

street,  Manchester-square .  5

Hayman,  Mr.  S.  Sidmouth .  1

Hennen,  Mrs.,  Denmark  Hill
Hewes,  Mr.  J.  T.,  East  Lodge,

East  Greenwich .

Hoare,  Mr.,  Deptford .

Hodgson,  Captain  Ellis  .

Holland,  Mr.  James,  6,  Laurie-ter.

New-cross  . .

Hussey,  Mr.  Edward,  Scotney

Castle,  Lamberhurst .  5

James,  Captain,  Littlebourn  Rec¬
tory,  Kent  .

James,  Captain  John,  Dover  ....
Jameson,  Mrs.,  Fareham,  Hants
Janson,  Mr.  H.  U.,  Pennsylvania

park,  Exeter  .

Johnston,  Mr.  F.  G.,  Surgeon,

Conduit-street .  5

Kingdom,  Mr.  W.,  Westbourne-

terrace,  Hyde-park . 21

Kiste,  Mr.,  37,  Maddox-street  . .

Lady,  a,  benefitted  by  Mesmerism

under  Mr.  D.  Hands  . 21

Lang,  Mr.  W.,  Glasgow .

Langston,  Mr.,  M  P . 100  0  0

Lloyd,  Mr.,  Rockville,  Roscom¬
mon,  Ireland .

Luxmoore,  Mr.  J.  C.,  Alphington,

Devon  .

Majendie,  Mr.,  F.R.S.,  Heding-

hani  Castle,  Essex .  5

Marshall,  Mr.  James  G.,  Munk
Coniston,  Ambleside .  50  0  0


110


10

0  0

3

3  0

1

0  0

100

0  0

50

0  0

!  5

0  0

5

5  0

5

5  0

1

1  0

1

1  0

1

1

1  0

1

1  0

1

0  0

1

1  0

5

0  0

2

2  0

5

0  0

1

1  0

5

0  0

20

0  0..

5

0  0

5

5  0

21

0  0..

5

5  0

5

0  0

21

o  o

1

1  0

LOO

0  0

5

5  0

5

0  0

5

5  0..

1

1  0

50

0  0

Dons.
£  s.  d

Martineau,  Mr.  R,  Edgbarton  ..
Matthews,  Miss,  Wigton  Hall,

Cumberland .  1  0  (

Miller,  Mr.  W.,  Ramsgate  ......

Moffatt,  Mr.,  M.P .  5  Ot

Molesworth,  the  Dowager  Lady..  5  0  C

Molesworth,  Miss .

Moore,  Mr.  R.  R.,  Temple  ....

Murray,  Mr.  T.  Lamie,  Reform

Club .  50  0  0

Newnham,Mr.  Surgeon, Farnham

Nicholl,  Mrs.,  Hendon  .

Nicholls, Mr.  H.  F.,  Bridgewater
Noyes, Sarah  Ann  (a  servant  cured
by  Mesmerism  after  all  other

means  had  failed) .

Ormerod,  Miss,  Henfleld,  Sussex  1  0  0

- Mr.  E  .  0  10  0

Paine,  Mr.,  Farnham .

Parker,  Mr.  Mercer-st.  Long-acre  1  10

Peach,  Capt.  Daniel,  Blackheath
Pead,  Mr.  R.  G.,  Honey-lane,

Market,  Cheapside,  much  re¬
lieved  by  Mesmerism .

Pettit,  Mr.  16,  Allsop-ter.  New-rd
Robertson,  Rev.  T.,  Blandford-sq.  5  5  0

Ruck,  Mr.  J.,  Clapham .

Sand  by.  Rev.  G.,  jun .  5  0  0

Scarlett,  the  Hon.  Wm .  5  5  0

Selfe,  Mr.  S.,  Bridgewater  ....

Shaw,  Mr.T.  A.,  Lincoln’s-inn-fields

Simpson,  Dr.,  York .  25  0  0

Sims,  Rev.  H.  B.  Great  Parndon

Rectory  .  5  0  0

Sims,  Mr.  C,  Hubbard’s  Hall,  Essex  5  0  0
Skipper,  Mr.  H.,  6,  Hyde-park

Villas  . . .  10  10  0.

Smith,  Mr.  Wm.  G.,  jun. ,2,  Dept¬
ford  Bridge .  1  1  0

Snewing,  Mr.,  Wells-street,  Ox¬
ford-street  .

Spiller,  Mr.  J.,  Bridgewater  ....
Stapleton,  Mr.  W.  P.,  Salcombe

Cottage,  Sidmouth . 10  0  0

Steele,  Mr.  C.  W.,  Surgeon,  Lew¬
isham  .

Stringer,  Mrs.,  Goodhurst .  2  0  0

Sullivan,  Mr.  J .  1  l  o

Swann,  Mr.  E.  G.  Rockville,  Ros¬
common,  Ireland .

Symes,  Mr.,  Surgeon,  Grosvenor-

street .  5  5  0

Symes,  Mrs .

Tanner,  Mrs.,  Surbiton,  Surrey. .  5  5  0.

Taylor,  Mr.  John,  Dockeray  Hall,

Cumberland .  1  0  0

Taylor,  Mr.  Thomas,  12,  Duke-

street,  Borough .

Taylor,  Mr.  . .

Thompson,  Mr.  H.  S.,  Fairfield

House,  near  York  . 21  0  0

- Mrs.,  ditto  ....

Topham,  Mr.  W.,  Temple .  5  0  0

Townshend,  Rev.  C.  Hare . 10  0  0

Trevelyan,  Mr,  A.,  Wallington,

Morpeth  .  5  5  0

Tubbs,  Mr.  F.  S  , Surgeon,  Upwell

Isle,  Cambridgeshire .

Udall,  Mr.,  Temple  .

Underwood,  Mr.  W.,  Vere-street
Underwood,  Mr.  C.,  13,  Holles-st.

Vernon,  Mrs.,  Warwickshire....  100

Wallace,  Miss,  Cheltenham .

Walton  &  Mitchell,  Messrs.,  24,

Wardour-street .  1  lo

Whitfeld,  Mr.,  Surgeon,  Ashford  110
Woods,  Mr.  Wooltou  Grove,  Liverp.  5  0  0
Young,  Mrs.,  Lymington  .  110


Ann.  Subs.
£  s.  d.
110

I..  I  0  0
110

I

..110
1  1  o
1  1  0


1  1  0
110
1  1  0


1  1  0


110
1  1  0


1  1  0
10  10  0

1  1  0


1  1  0
12  0  0


.550


1  1  0
1  1  0

10  0

1  1  0


2  2  0


110

.220


1  1  0
110


2  2  0


2  2  0

2  2  0

1  10

1  1  0

110

..1  10


Subscriptions  will  be  received  by  Members  of  the  Committee ,  Mr,  BaillUre ,  219,  Regent-st.
