THE ZOIST: A Journal of Cerebral Physiology & Mesmerism, and their Applications
to Human Welfare. Vol. V (March 1847 to January 1848).
Edited by John Elliotson. London: Hippolyte Bailliere, 219 Regent Street.
Public domain. Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/s1id13659930).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

THE  ZOIST:

A  JOURNAL


CEREBRAL  PHYSIOLOGY  &  MESMERISM


AND


THEIR  APPLICATIONS  TO  HUMAN  WELFARE.


“  This  is  Truth,  though  opposed  to  the  Philosophy  of  Ages.” — Gall .


YOL.  V.

MARCH,  1847,  to  JANUARY,  1848.


LONDON :

HIPPOLYTE  BAILLIERE,  PUBLISHER,

219,  REGENT  STREET;

PARIS:  J.  B.  BAILLIERE,  RUE  DE  L’ECOLE  DU  MEDECINE ;

LEIPSIZ  :  T.  O.  WEIGEL.


M  DCCC  XLVIII.


LONDON


PRINTED  BY  WALTON  AND  MITCHELL,
24,  Wardour-street,  Oxford-street.


MAG  .4 -3


INDEX.


page

After-pains,  cured . .  154,  389

Antiquity  of  Magnetism  and  Mesmerism  , . . .  273

Ashburner,  Dr.,  on  the  silent  power  of  the  Will  .  260

Asthma,  cure  of . 82

Barth,  Mr.,  his  Cures  of  Pain  .  294

Bickersteth’s,  Rev.  E.,  Explanatory  Letter  .  71

Bird,  Mrs.,  refutation  of  the  calumnies  of  Antimesmerists  respecting  her  201

Bladder,  Irritation  of,  cured  .  289

Blind,  effects  of  Mesmerism  on  a  stone-blind  Gentleman .  1

Blindness,  cured  .  157

Brande,  Professor,  his  singular  tirade .  399

Cerebral  organs  mesmerised  .  138,  141,  300,  307

Chandler,  Mr.,  effects  of  Mesmerism  on  a  stone-blind  Gentleman .  1,  135

■ - on  Insanity  .  142

- Experiments  with  Crystals  . . .  404

- Case  of  Epilepsy  .  407

- Cure  of  Hiccup  . .  .  r .  409

Chest,  benefit  in  affections  of  .  80

Clairvoyance  with  Mesmerism  .  127,  307,  308,  328

- without  Mesmerism .  30,  130,  310,  344,  347

Clark,  Mr.,  case  of  Clairvoyance  and  Double  Consciousness  without  Mes¬
merism  . 30

Collins,  Mr.,  Cure  of  a  Twisted  Neck  .  370

-  Miss,  Cure  of  Tic  Douloureux  .  13

- Cure  of  St.  Vitus’s  Dance  .  375

Community  of  Sensation .  126,  140,  243,  307

Committee,  appointed  by  Madras  Government  to  investigate  Mesmerism. .  197

Consciousness,  Double,  without  Mesmerism  .  30

Cook,  James,  alive  and  hearty .  23

Crystals,  experiments  with  .  404

Davey,  Dr.,  in  Ceylon .  101

Davidson,  Lieut. -Col.,  his  Letter  .  199

Debility,  Nervous,  cured .  156

Deafness,  cured  .  29,  77,  155,  387

Drowning,  effect  of  Mesmerism  after .  157

Dyspepsia  and  Debility,  cured .  288

Ear,  injury  of,  cured  .  387

Elliot,  Dr.,  his  folly . 202


IV


CONTENTS.


page

Elliotson,  Dr.,  on  the  art  of  suddenly  restoring  the  Intellect  and  Moral

Feelings  to  masses  of  men  . .  44

- Cure  of  long  and  severe  Pains .  103

- Review  of  Dr.  Wigan’s  Work  by  .  209

- His  Experiments  on  Community  of  Sensation  .  243

Engledue,  Dr.,  Cure  of  St.  Vitus’s  Dance .  11

Epilepsy,  effects  in  .  407

Esdaile,  Dr.,  Report  of  Government  Committee  upon  his  surgical  ope¬
rations  .  50

- Painless  Operations  . , .  178

- Trials  of  Ether . . .  187

Ether,  contrasted  conduct  of  the  medical  world  in  reference  to  .  48,  377

- Trials  of  . ; .  187

Fossati,  Dr.,  on  the  art  of  making  Madmen .  34

France,  three  more  painless  operations  at  Cherbourg .  197

Gold,  effects  of .  127,  398

Gorman,  F.,  her  Cure  .  328

Gout,  benefit  in .  82

Gregory,  Professor,  on  the  Discovery  of  Physical  Mesmeric  Agents  ....  380

Hands,  Mr.  J.,  Case  of  Cure  and  Phenomena  .  328

Hare,  Lieut.,  his  account  of  Master  Chapman’s  Clairvoyance .  308

Hayman,  Mr.,  rapid  cure  of  Tic  Douloureux .  17G

Head-ache,  Chronic,  cured .  306

Heart,  Chronic  Affection  of,  cured  .  1G1,  289

Hiccup,  cured  .  409

Hockley,  Mr.,  Cure  of  Head-ache  and  Phenomena  .  306

Holland,  Mr.,  Mesmerism  in  a  stone-blind  Gentleman  . . .  1,  135

Hospital,  Mesmeric,  established  by  Government .  G7

Hudson,  Mr.,  Cure  of  Effects  of  Injury  of  the  Spine .  20

Hypochondriasis,  cured  .  234,  300,  3G5

Hysteria,  cured .  156

Johnstone,  Dr.,  Painless  Surgical  Operation .  192

India,  progress  of  Mesmerism  in .  178

Insanity,  benefit  of  Mesmerism  in  .  142

Jacoby,  Dr.,  on  the  Physics  of  the  Nervous  System .  352

Jerrold,  Mr.  Douglas,  his  ludicrous  absurdity .  303

Kiste,  Mr.,  his  Cure  of  Affection  of  the  Heart  . .  . .  161

Knee,  Cure  of  Injury  of  the  .  388

Lewis,  the  Rev.  L.,  on  the  silent  power  of  the  Will .  323

Lloyd,  Mr.,  on  Magnetism  and  Mesmerism  in  Anticjuity .  273

La  Fontaine,  M.,  his  Cure  of  Deafness  .  29

Love  of  the  Past,  organ  of  . . .  382

Loysel,  Dr.,  his  painless  Surgical  Operations .  197

Macgowan,  Dr.,  his  folly .  202

Madness  :  means  of  making  artificially  .  34

Matteucci,  Professor,  his  Experiments  on  the  Nerves  .  363

Mesmerised  Substances,  Sleep  by  .  129


CONTENTS.


Y


page

Nervous  System,  Physics  of  the  .  352

Ophthalmia,  cured  .  154,  290,  301

Operations,  painless .  69,  82,  156,  178,  192,  197,  160,  389

Pains,  severe,  &c.,  cured .  103,  290,  294

Palsy,  cured  .  388

Parker,  Mr.,  on  the  reception  of  Ether  and  Chloroform  .  377

- Surgeon,  his  success  with  Mesmerism .  152,  387

Peach’s,  Captain,  remarkable  Case  .  1,  135

Phlegmasia  Dolens,  prevented  .  387

- much  benefitted .  398

Phrenological  Journal,  Edinburgh,  its  decline  and  fall  .  412

Physical  well-being  necessary  to  Moral  and  Intellectual  Progression  ......  82

Prevision  of  Cure  . . 153

Prideaux,  Mr.,  on  the  organ  of  the  Love  of  the  Past  .  382

Prudence,  Isa.,  the  power  of  the  Will  over .  255

Ranking,  Dr.,  his  ignorance  and  bigotry .  291

Rheumatism,  cured  .  155

Rigidity  of  Neck,  cured .  288

Reynoldson,  Mr.,  on  Sympathetic  Influence  .  325

Sargant,  Mr.,  painless  Tooth  Extraction  . .  ....  160

- Cure  of  Short-sightedness  .  158

Sciatica,  cured  .  388

Seymour,  Dr.,  his  knowledge  of  Mesmerism .  370

Sight,  restored . . .  302,  375

Sightedness,  short,  cured .  158

Smith,  Mr.  G.,  account  of  James  Cook .  23

Snewing,  Mr.,  cured  of  Hypochondriasis  .  234

- Mrs.,  cured  of  Rheumatism  .  247

Spine,  cure  of  effects  of  injury  of . . .  20

St.  Vitus’s  Dance,  cured .  11,  286

Stomach,  Cure  of  pain  of .  167

Storer,  Dr.,  Cure  of  Tic  Douloureux,  &c .  16,  156,  & c.,  300,  388

- painless  Tooth  Extraction .  156

Swedenborg  on  Trance  . 345

- ’s  Clairvoyance  . 347

Symes,  Mr.,  his  Cure  of  Affection  of  the  Stomach,  &c .  167

Sympathetic  Influence  .  325

Tetanus,  probably  prevented .  389

Thompson,  Mr.  H.  S.,  his  Cures  and  Alleviations  .  78,  288

- painless  Operation .  82

- on  the  silent  power  of  the  Will  .  253

Tic  Douloureux,  cured . . .  13,  16,  152,  153,  159,  176,  301,  399

Topham,  Mr.,  Case  of  Epilepsy,  Clairvoyance,  &c .  123

Transferrence  of  disease,  without  Mesmerism .  173

- with  Mesmerism  .  247

Trifling  with  Mesmerism,  improper .  23

Twisted  Neck,  cured .  370


VI


CONTENTS.


page

Twisting  of  Npck,  cured .  303

Voice,  restored  .  302

Wakley,  Mr.,  his  continued  folly .  202,  293

Walker,  Mr.,  his  Cure  of  Deafness .  77

Whitlow,  benefit  in  .  82

Wigan,  Dr.,  review  of  his  work  on  the  Duality  of  the  Mind .  209

Wilberforce,  Rev.  H.,  his  conduct  in  the  Christian  Remembrancer  ......  313


Will,  silent  power  of .  253,  260,  323


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  V.

No.  XVII.

Extraordinary  Effects  of  Mesmerism  on  a  Gentleman  perfectly  blind  for  eleven
years.  By  Mr.  Chandler,  Surgeon,  and  Mr.  Holland.

Cure  of  St.  Vitus’s  Dance.  By  Dr.  Engledue.

Cure  of  Tic  Douloureux.  By  Miss  Collins.

Cures  of  Tic  Douloureux  and  other  Nervous  Affections.  By  Dr.  Storer.

Cure  of  Injury  of  the  Spine  and  Contraction  of  the  Leg.  By  Mr.  H.  Hudson.

Mesmerism  not  to  be  trifled  with,  though  it  kills  nobody;  or,  James  Cook  alive
and  hearty.  By  Mr.  W.  G.  Smith.

Cure  of  Deafness  and  Dumbness  of  above  nine  years  standing.  By  M.  la
Fontaine.

Instances  of  Clairvoyance  and  Double  Consciousness,  independent  of  Mesmerism,
in  a  Father  and  his  grown-up  Children.  By  one  of  the  Parties ;  in  a
Letter  to  Mr.  Clark,  Surgeon,  of  York  Place,  Kingsland  Road.

On  the  Art  of  making  Madmen  at  pleasure.  A  Discourse  delivered  at  the
Ath^nee  Royal,  in  1846,  by  Dr.  Fossati,  President  of  the  Phrenological
Society  of  Paris.

On  the  Art  of  suddenly  restoring  the  Moral  Feelings  and  Intellect  to  Activity  in
large  Masses  of  Mankind.  By  Dr.  Elliotson.

Report  of  the  Committee  appointed  by  Government  to  observe  and  report  upon
Surgical  Operations  by  Dr.  J.  Esdaile,  upon  patients  under  the  influence
of  alleged  mesmeric  agency.  Printed  by  order  of  the  Deputy  Governor
of  Bengal.  Calcutta,  1846.

More  painless  Surgical  Operations  in  India.

Explanatory  Letter  from  the  Rev.  Edward  Bickersteth.

Cure  of  Palsy  of  Thirty  Years’  standing,  Deafness,  Asthma,  &c.  By  the
Rev.  L.  Lewis.

Cure  of  Deafness  of  very  long  standing  in  a  very  old  Man.  By  Mr.  Alex.
Walker,  of  Bainsford.

Great  benefit  of  Mesmerism  in  Affections  of  the  Chest,  Gout,  Strangury,  Asthma,
and  Whitlow.  By  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson.

Physical  Well-being,  a  necessary  preliminary  to  Moral  and  Intellectual  Pro¬
gression.

Dr.  Davey  in  Ceylon.


CONTENTS.


Vll


No.  XVIII.

Cure  of  long-standing  intense  Pains  and  other  Sufferings,  and  extreme  Debility,
with  Mesmerism,  after  the  failure  of  endless  and  distressing  measures.
By  Dr.  Elliotson.

An  instance  of  great  benefit  from  Mesmerism  in  a  case  of  Epilepsy,  with  the
production  of  Clairvoyance  and  other  remarkable  phenomena.  By  Mr.
William  Topham,  Barrister-at-Law.

An  instance  of  Clairvoyance  independent  of  Mesmerism.

Continuation  of  Captain  Peach’s  Case.  By  Messrs.  Holland  and  Chandler.

Important  Mesmeric  Treatment  of  a  Mental  Affection.  By  Mr.  Chandler,
Surgeon,  Rotherhithe.

Cures  of  Neuralgia  of  various  Parts,  After  Pains,  Abscess,  Ophthalmia,  acute
Rheumatism,  Deafness,  and  an  instance  of  Prevision,  being  a  few  Cases
selected  from  Mr.  Parker’s  Mesmeric  Experience  during  the  last  eighteen
months.  By  Mr.  John  B.  Parker,  Surgeon,  Exeter.

Cases  of  painless  Tooth  Extraction,  and  of  Extreme  Debility,  &c.  By  Dr.  Storer,
Park  Street,  Bristol.

Cure  of  Short-sightedness  and  Tic  Douloureux,  and  painless  Extractions  of
Teeth.  By  Mr.  Sargant,  Surgeon,  Reigate,  Surrey.

Cure  of  Affection  of  the  Heart.  By  Mr.  Aldolphe  Kiste.

Case  of  Neuralgia  of  the  Stomach  with  excessive  Debility,  &c.,  & c.  By
Mr.  Symes,  Surgeon,  77,  Grosvenor  Street.

Cure  of  Tic  Douloureux  in  two  sittings.  By  Mr.  Hayman,  Lace  Manufacturer,
Sidmouth.

Dr.  Esdaile’s  First  Monthly  Report  of  the  Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital,  and  his
Experiments  with  Ether  used  with  the  same  view  as  Mesmerism  in  Sur¬
gical  Operations.  Painless  Operation  at  Madras,  by  Dr.  Johnstone,
upon  a  European  lady,  in  the  mesmeric  state.  Appointment  of  a  Mes¬
meric  Committee  at  Madras  by  the  Government.

Three  more  painless  Surgical  Operations  performed  at  Cherbourg  in  France.

Refutation  of  the  Calumnies  promulgated  against  Mrs.  Bird,  whose  case  is
recorded  in  No.  XIV.

No.  XIX.

On  the  joint  operation  of  the  two  halves  of  the  Brain  ;  with  a  notice  of  Dr.
Wigan’s  work,  entitled,  “  The  Duality  of  the  Mind  proved  by  the
structure,  functions,  and  diseases  of  the  Brain,  and  by  the  phenomena  of
mental  derangement,  and  shewn  to  be  essential  to  moral  responsibility,”
1845  ;  and  of  his  pamphlet,  entitled,  “  A  few  more  words  on  the  Duality
of  the  Mind  and  on  some  of  its  corollaries,”  1847.  By  Dr.  Elliotson.

Remarkable  Cure  of  intense  Nervous  Affections  ;  with  the  transference  of  disease
in  two  instances  to  the  mesmerisers  :  decided  cerebral  sympathy  in  the
form  of  community  of  taste,  smell  and  touch.  Sec.,  See.  By  Dr.  Elliotson.

On  the  silent  power  of  the  Will  of  one  Person  over  another.  By  Mr.  H.  S.
Thompson,  Fairfield  House,  near  York.

On  the  silent  influence  of  the  Will.  By  Dr.  Ashburner.

Magnetism  and  Mesmerism  in  Antiquity.  By  Mr.  Lloyd.

Case  of  St.  Vitus’s  Dance  cured  by  Mesmerism  in  less  than  a  Month,  after  Seven
Years  of  suffering,  and  upwards  of  Nine  Months  passed  in  several  Hos¬
pitals.  By  Madame  Marie.


Vlll


CONTENTS.


Removal  of  Rigidity  of  the  Neck,  Debility  and  Dyspepsia,  Disease  of  the  Heart,
Irritation  of  the  Bladder,  and  severe  pains.  By  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson.

A  recent  Specimen  of  Professional  Ignorance  and  Bigotry.

Instance  of  the  great  power  of  Mesmerism  over  Pain.  By  Mr.  G.  H.  Barth.
Cure  of  Hypochondriasis,  Tic  Douloureux,  Inflammation  of  the  Eyes,  Loss  of
Voice  and  Loss  of  Sight.  By  Dr.  Storer,  of  Bristol.

Cure  of  a  singular  Twisting  of  the  Head  in  a  young  man.  By  Dr.  Elliotson.
Cure  of  severe  Head-ache  of  Seven  Years’  standing ;  with  Cerebral  Sympathy,
Mesmeric  Excitement  of  Cerebral  Organs,  and  Clairvoyance.  By  Mr.
Hockley.

Clairvoyance  in  the  case  of  Master  Chapman  recorded  by  Dr.  Storer  in  No.  XVI.
of  The  Zoist :  and  Mesmeric  Phenomena  in  a  young  lady.  By  Lieut.
Hare,  R.N.

Apparent  Clairvoyance  independent  of  Mesmerism,  but  connected  with  Insanity.
The  “  Christian  Remembrancer;”  or  Arrogance  unmasked.


No.  XX.

Facts  illustrating  the  silent  power  of  the  Will.  By  the  Rev.  L.  Lewis.

Instances  of  Sympathetic  Influence.  By  Mr.  Reynoldson.

Mesmeric  Cure  of  a  Case  pronounced  by  different  physicians  to  be  Consumption,
Dropsy,  and  Disease  of  the  Kidneys,  with  numerous  instances  of  Clair¬
voyance  that  appeared  in  it.  By  Mr.  Joseph  Hands,  Surgeon.

Goethe’s  Grandfather’s  Clairvoyance,  independent  of  Mesmerism.  By  Mr.
T.  S.  Prideaux.

Swedenborg  on  Trance.  Communicated  by  Mr.  J.  J.  G.  Wilkinson,  Surgeon,
in  a  letter  to  Dr.  Elliotson.

Swedenborg’s  Clairvoyance  independent  of  Mesmerism.  By  Mr.  Roffe.

On  the  Physics  of  the  Nervous  System.  By  Dr.  Jacoby,  of  Konigsberg.  Trans¬
lated  from  the  German  and  presented  to  The  Zoist  for  publication  by
Mr.  R.  R.  Noel.

Further  particulars  of  My.  Snewing’s  Case.  By  Himself.

Perfect  mesmeric  Cure  of  a  Twisted  Neck.  By  Mr.  Collins.

Mesmeric  Cure  of  St.  Vitus’s  Dance.  By  Miss  Collins.

Letter  on  the  ready  adoption  of  Ether  and  Chloroform  by  the  Medical  Profession,
to  Dr.  Elliotson  from  Mr.  Parker.

On  the  probability  of  the  discovery  of  Physical  Agents  able  to  produce  the
Mesmeric  State.  By  Dr.  Gregory,  Professor  of  Chemistry  in  the  Uni¬
versity  of  Edinburgh.

On  the  Organ  of  the  Love  of  the  Past.  By  Mr.  T.  S.  Prideaux.

Successful  mesmeric  treatment  of  Phlegmasia  Dolens,  Injury  of  the  Ear,  Deaf¬
ness,  Palsy,  Sciatica,  Injury  of  the  Knee,  St.  Vitus’s  Dance,  After
Pains,  threatening  Tetanus,  painless  Surgical  Operation  under  Mes¬
merism,  with  most  instructive  Clairvoyance.  By  Mr.  Parker,  Surgeon.

Mesmeric  Cure  of  Neuralgia  of  one  side  of  the  Neck.

Experiments  with  Crystals :  case  of  Epilepsy,  and  Cure  of  Hiccup  of  twelve
years’  standing  with  Mesmerism.  By  Mr.  Chandler.

The  decline  and  fall  of  the  Edinburgh  Phrenological  Journal.

Review  of  Mr.  Sandby’s  New  Edition.  Part  I.


THE  ZOIST.


No.  XVII.


APRIL ,  1847.


I.  Extraordinary  Effects  of  Mesmerism  on  a  Gentleman,

perfectly  blind  for  eleven  years.  Communicated  by

Dr.  Elliotson.

Dr.  Elliotson  begs  to  forward  the  following  letter  to  The
Zoist  from  Mr.  Chandler  of  Rotherhithe.

Conduit  Street,  March  10th,  1847.

To  Dr.  Elliotson.

My  dear  Sir, — The  following  very  curious  and  interesting
case  wras  introduced  to  my  notice  by  Dr.  Toulmin,  of  Black-
heath,  who,  having  witnessed  some  of  my  mesmeric  cases,
did  not  hesitate  to  admit  that  he  believed  his  own  eyes, —
though  perhaps  he  “  knows  human  kind”  quite  as  well  as
some  others  who  suppose  their  retinge  to  act  as  flattering
mirrors.

Of  course  this  patient  has  been  malingering  for  the  last
14  years,  on  purpose  to  gratify  any  mesmerist  with  whom  he
might  happen  to  come  in  contact.

Capt.  Peach,  get.  55,  has  formerly  commanded  large  East
India  ships,  and,  having  three  times  circumnavigated  the  globe,
has  consequently  been  exposed  to  frequent  alternations  of
climate,  which,  together  with  severe  loses  by  a  very  protracted
Chancery  suit,  have  probably  been  the  cause  of  the  following
severe  and  complicated  diseases  of  his  nervous  system.

He  has  been  completely  am.aurotic  in  both  eyes  for  eleven  years.
This  was  about  three  years  coming  on ;  one  eye  going  first,
and  afterwards  the  other.  For  about  eleven  years  he  has  not
been  able  to  distinguish  the  brightest  light  from  total  darkness,
except  on  one  or  two  occasions  for  a  few  seconds  only,  when,
under  the  influence  of  belladonna,  he  experienced  slight  glim¬
merings  of  light.  He  has  suffered  from  partial  paralysis  of
VOL.  v.  B


2  Extraordinary  effects  of  Mesmerism  on  a  Gentleman ,

the  lower  limbs  for  about  the  same  time.  When  sitting,  he
has  the  power  of  moving  the  legs ;  and,  when  placed  upright,
he  can  balance  himself,  but  cannot  raise  his  foot  from  the
ground.  For  about  six  or  seven  years  he  has  been  constantly
subject  to  the  most  severe  intermittent  darting  pains  (of  a  Tic
character)  in  his  limbs ;  these  pains  have  always  been  capri¬
ciously  erratic,  but  never  attacking  the  trunk  or  head :  he  has
also  had  spasmodic  tension  of  the  muscles  of  the  lower  part  of
the  abdomen  frequently  to  a  most  distressing  degree.  But  the
symptom  which  he  describes  as  causing  him  the  most  intense
suffering,  since  last  June,  has  been  a  gnawing  dull  pain  in
the  lower  part  of  the  spine,  occurring  generally  on  his  awaking
in  the  morning,  of  so  desperate  a  character  as  to  call  for  his
being  immediately  got  up  and  dressed.  The  alteration  of  posi¬
tion  appears  to  afford  him  some  relief.  These  attacks  will
occur  for  several  days  together ;  he  then  may  get  a  few  days
intermission.  They  appear  connected  with  a  very  copious
discharge  of  blood  from  the  bowels,  that  has  existed  for
three  or  four  years,  though  the  attacks  and  discharge  are  now
noticed  to  be  invariably  simultaneous ;  and  the  latter  has  been
observed  to  be  much  more  copious  since  the  lumbar  pains
have  commenced.

These  protracted  and  severe  afflictions  have  at  length  pro¬
duced  a  high  state  of  nervous  irritability ,  destroying  rest  and
appetite  to  such  an  extent  that  he  is  worn  almost  to  a  skeleton.
His  pulse  is  always  100,  and  often  120;  and  he  gets  no  sleep
but  what  is  produced  by  narcotics.

Mr.  Watsford,  of  Greenwich,  who  has  attended  him  for
many  years,  has  frequently  told  him  and  several  members  of
his  family,  that  medicine  could  be  of  no  use  to  him ; — but,
however,  when  the  pains  have  been  exceedingly  urgent,  (giving
occasion  to  screams  which  alarmed  the  neighbourhood),  Mr.
W.  has  been  sent  for,  and  has  always  administered  strong
narcotics,  which,  though  they  lulled  the  pains  for  the  time,
left  him  stupid  for  two  or  three  days.

For  several  years  he  has  been  distressed  by  extreme  flatu¬
lence  after  the  smallest  quantity  of  food ; — indicative  of
greatly  impaired  digestion.

Dr.  Toulmin,  of  Blackheath,  who  has  paid  him  much
disinterested  attention  for  the  last  few  months,  and  has  tried
various  means,  including  belladonna  and  veratria,  & c.,  asked
me  to  see  him  in  August  last,  and  to  say  if  I  thought  mes¬
merism  would  be  likely  to  benefit  him.  After  a  careful  in¬
vestigation  of  the  case,  I  pronounced  it  to  be  apparently  a
very  hopeless  one;  but,  knowing  what  wonders  mesmerism  had
worked  in  many  cases  equally  forlorn,  I  recommended  that


perfectly  Blind  for  eleven  years.


3


it  should  be  tried  if  any  one  could  be  found  in  tlie  neighbour-
hood  who  would  undertake  it.  Accordingly  bis  mother,  an
old  lady  of  more  than  70,  and  the  servant,  an  ignorant  Irish
girl,  commenced  mesmerising  him,  and  produced,  after  a
very  few  trials,  a  most  decidedly  soothing  effect.

Shortly  after,  I  had  an  opportunity  of  introducing  the
case  to  the  notice  of  Mr.  Holland,  of  New  Cross,  who  is  a
most  enthusiastic  nonprofessional  supporter  of  mesmerism,
and  he  immediately  took  it  in  hand;  and,  as  the  wonders  he
has  worked  will  be  best  related  in  his  own  words,  I  beg  to
subjoin  his  reports  of  the  case  to  me,  unabridged.

Laurie  Terrace,  New  Cross.

5th  December,  1846.

Thomas  Chandler,  Esq.

My  dear  Sir,' — Your  own  personal  observations,  and  our
communications  from  time  to  time,  will  have  made  you  aware,
generally,  of  the  favourable  impression  which  mesmerism  has
effected  in  the,  otherwise,  desperate  case  of  your  Blacklieath
patient,  Captain  Daniel  Peach,  so  long  a  martyr  to  a  melan¬
choly  complication  of  ills.

In  compliance  with  your  wish  I  have  now  the  gratification
to  communicate  a  connected  statement  of  my  proceedings  in
this  case  and  their  results.

After  jmu  had  introduced  me  at  the  London  Hospital,  on
the  26th  August  last,  to  Dr.  Toulmin,  as  an  amateur  residing
in  the  “  neighbourhood”  of  the  patient,  to  wit,  something
more  than  a  mile  and  a  half  distant,  I  lost  iio  time  in  waiting
upon  that  gentleman,  at  his  residence  at  Blackheatli,  with
the  object  of  being  made  acquainted  with  full  particulars.
These  were  frankly  communicated,  and  I  placed  myself  at  his
disposal.  Dr.  Toulmin  is  the  Captain’s  neighbour,  both  figu¬
ratively  and  literally,  and  I  need  hardly  add  that  the  appli¬
cation  of  mesmerism,  in  this  case,  has  been  with  his  entire
sanction  and  approval  and,  occasionally,  in  his  presence : — in¬
deed,  he  has  stated  to  me  on  our  leaving  the  patient’s  residence
together  that  the  tranquillizing  effect  which  he  had  just  wit¬
nessed  exceeded  what  he  could  have  produced  by  the  largest
“  safe”  dose  of  opium,  at  the  same  time  adding  that  he  was
not  aware  of  any  ordinary  means  by  which  equal  amelioration
of  the  general  symptoms  could  have  been  effected.

I  commenced  operations  on  the  lltli  of  September  last,
and,  after  six  sittings,  up  to  the  21st,  the  following  is  the
spirit  of  the  remarks  which  I  find  in  my  notes,  as  regards  the
amount  of  mesmeric  influence.  A  tranquil  state  of  abstrac¬
tion  is  induced,  wdtli  more  or  less  of  the  ordinary  consciousness

b  2


4  Extraordinary  effects  of  Mesmerism  on  a  Gentleman,

remaining,  accompanied  by  an  involuntary  closing  of  the  eyes  ;
there  is  also  a  perceptible  dullness  of  sensation  at  the  surface,
(and  most  probably  deeper)  with  a  continually  increasing  in¬
disposition  to  motion  of  any  kind.  Towards  the  end  of  this
series  of  sittings,  the  above  effects  have  attained  a  species  of
intensity  which  promises  the  best  results.

My  mode  of  proceeding  has  been  as  follows. — The  patient
being  seated,  I  have  made  downward  passes,  with  and  also
without  contact,  before  the  face,  trunk,  and  limbs,  occasionally
pointing  at  the  eyes,  or  intently  looking  into  one  or  other  of
them  (it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  he  is  totally  blind).
Much  to  my  surprise  I  found,  at  length,  that  the  look  alone
produced  some  marked  physical  effects ;  these,  the  patient
describes  as  follows : — A  dip  irritation  in  the  upper  part  of
the  eyeball,  as  if  the  upper  lid  were  raised  and  a  hard
pencil  passed  over  the  organ ;  then  a  sensation  of  watering,
as  if  occasioned  by  smoke,  only  relieved  by  a  strong  closing
of  the  lids.  Sometimes  the  patient  has  felt  as  if  a  fine  pencil
of  wind,  proceeding  from  a  point,  impinged  upon  the  centre  of
the  eyeball,  occasioning  a  feeling  of  heat  and  mixing  with
the  other  symptoms,  all  which  continue  to  be  increased  the
longer  the  process  is  persevered  in,  so  much  so  that  he  has
more  than  once  exclaimed,  while  strongly  closing  the  lids,  “  it
is  very  sharp  to  night,”  and  on  several  occasions  he  has
stated  that  the  sensations  amounted  to  positive  “  stinging,”
similar  to  that  produced  by  “  mustard,”  by  “  snuff,”  or  by  an
“ onion.”  Fluid  collects  in  the  corner  of  the  eyes;  or  eye
perhaps,  if  one  only  is  stared  or  pointed  at,

After  being  demesmerised,  the  patient  is  assisted  to  an
erect  position,  in  which  I  make  contact  passes  down  the  spine
and  limbs,  down  the  latter  before  and  behind.

I  have  continued  similar  proceedings  up  to  this  date,  about
three  times  in  each  week,  from  an  hour  to  an  hour  and  a  half
on  each  occasion,  with  only  the  following  slight  variations,
of  having  the  patient  placed  at  full  length  on  a  bed,  instead
of  being  seated  in  a  chair,  and  my  manipulating  the  spine  and
and  limbs  while  he  was  in  the  mesmeric  state, — the  latter
mode  was  suggested  by  Dr.  Elliotson  as  more  likely  to  be
beneficial,  the  former  (the  recumbent  attitude)  had  been  pre¬
preferred  all  along  by  Dr.  Toulmin  and  also  by  the  patient.
I  elected  to  mesmerise  him  sitting,  (to  him  an  uneasy  posi¬
tion,  from  the  weakness  in  the  lumbar  region),  in  order  to
be  able  with  certainty  to  distinguish  the  mesmeric  influence
from  ordinary  sleep,  the  latter  not  being  so  likely  to  super¬
vene  in  an  uneasy  position  :  as  soon  as  rigidity  manifested
itself,  there  was  no  longer  any  necessity  for  this  precaution.


perfectly  Blind  for  eleven  years.


5


The  result  of  continuing  mesmerism  has  been  an  increased
intensity  of  all  the  phenomena — great  insensibility  of  mecha¬
nical  injury  on  the  surface — loss  of  either  ordinary  conscious¬
ness,  or  of  the  recollection  after  the  mesmeric  state  is  over
of  the  occurrences  which  took  place  during  sleep-waking —
inability  to  describe  correctly  in  his  sleep-waking  the  position
in  which  his  limbs  may  have  been  placed,  for  he  is  beauti¬
fully  cataleptic,  and  his  limbs  obey  attraction  as  distinctly  as
the  limbs  of  patients  whose  organs  of  vision  are  perfect  .*

Up  to  the  present  moment  the  good  which  has  been  ac¬
complished  is  as  follows  :

Total  cessation,  since  the  first  week  of  his  being  mes¬
merised,  of  that  excruciating  pain  at  the  bottom  of  the  spine
that  was  wearing  him  to  a  shadow.  His  shuddering  recollec¬
tions  of  this  pain,  which  was  comparatively  recent,  is  more
vivid  than  that  of  any  other  of  his  afflictions  :  his  mode  of  ex¬
pressing  himself,  in  allusion  to  it,  is  "  no  tongue  can  tell  the
agony,”  &c. ;  “  it  struck  my  very  vitals,”  &c.;  "if  I  had  had
the  ability  I  should  have  made  away  with  myself,”  &c.  &c.

The  hemorrhage  from  the  bowels  (the  consequence  of  inter¬
nal  hemorrhoids  in  the  opinion  of  Mr.  Watsford  of  Green¬
wich)  has  been  entirely  suppressed,  not  even  a  tinge  having
manifested  itself  since  the  first  application  of  mesmerism.

The  tension  at  the  lower  part  of  the  abdomen,  as  well  as
the  extreme  flatulence,  have  entirely  disappeared.

The  capriciously  erratic,  and  fierce  darting  pains  (spasms
of  the  "  tic”  character)  whose  attacks  were  almost  incessant
of  late,  and,  more  or  less,  present  for  years  past,  have  been
very  considerably  ameliorated ;  indeed,  out  of  85  days  which
have  elapsed  since  he  was  mesmerised  (from  11th  September
last)  there  have  only  been  13  on  which  these  spasms  have
returned — one  relapse  continued  for  5  consecutive  days,  the
others  were  short,  with  two  intervals  of  14  and  19  days,
respectively,  on  which  there  was  no  return  of  spasm  at  all.
Immediately  previously  to  mesmerism  having  been  resorted  to,
and  during  the  greater  part  of  the  preceding  summer  and
spring,  these  spasms,  together  with  the  gnawing  pain  in  the
lumbar  region,  were  so  frightful,  that  the  patient's  cries  often


*  This  exquisite  fact  I  witnessed  myself  on  the  two  occasions  of  my  being
allowed  the  favour  of  visiting  this  gentleman.  The  whole  affair  was  so  striking
that,  after  my  first  visit  to  Blackheath,  I  requested  permission  to  go  again.  On
the  second  occasion  I  was  anxious  that  the  mesmerism  might  be  begun  when  there
was  no  possibility  of  the  patient  being  aware  of  it.  Accordingly,  while  we  were  all
in  conversation,  Mr.  Holland  began  to  fix  his  eyes  upon  the  patient,  our  conver¬
sation  continuing  eq\ially  as  before.  Presently  the  captain’s  eyelids  twinkled  ;  he
exclaimed,  are  you  not  mesmerising  me  ?  A  drop  of  fluid  appeared  at  the  corner
of  one  eye,  and  he  was  soon  in  sleepwaking. — John  Elliotson.


6  Extraordinary  effects  of  Mesmerism  on  a  Gentleman,

alarmed  the  neighbourhood,  and  attracted  the  notice  of  po¬
licemen  on  duty  near  the  spot.

On  Friday  the  27th  ult.  I  found  him  suffering  from  a
return  of  these  spasms,  and,  as  the  relief  derived  from  mes¬
merism,  on  that  occasion,  epitomised  the  whole  case  in  that
regard,  I  add  a  verbatim  extract  from  one  of  my  notes  of  that
evening,

“  The  potency  of  mesmerism  strongly  evidenced  this  even¬
ing — a  return  of  spasm  yesterday  morning  (inside  of  left
thigh)  very  severe  through  the  day  and  night — less  so  since
this  morning,  but  quite  sufficiently  marked.  I  had  to  attack
him  in  the  midst  of  intermittent  spasm,  and  it  was  full  25
minutes  (instead  of  6  or  8  ordinarily)  before  he  came  under
the  influence — the  paroxysm  still  continued  for  a  quarter  of
an  hour  more,  as  evidenced  by  strong  startings,  but  less  and
less  violent,  which  did  not,  however,  occasion  the  usual  con¬
tortion  of  the  countenance,  and  the  ordinary  exclamation.
Finally,  and  for  the  last  half  hour  up  to  being  demesmerised,
he  had  the  appearance  of  placidity  personified,  without  the
least  motion  of  any  kind.  I  dispersed  the  influence,  as  usual,
by  quiet  transverse  passes  before  the  face — he  awoke  very
gradually,  commencing  with  sundry  very  energetic  gapes,
accompanied  by  various  grimaces  and  contortions  of  the  mus¬
cles  of  the  face,  as  if  each  stood  in  need  of  being  stretched
(altogether  indicative  of  the  refreshing  effect  of  deep  sleep) —
for  some  time  he  replied  incoherently  to  my  questions,  appear¬
ing  to  be  solely  occupied  with  the  process  of  awakening,  and
the  first  indication  (to  night)  of  his  senses  being  collected,  was
his  exclamation,  “  thank  God,  the  pain  is  gone  !”  When  fully
conscious,  his  countenance  and  manner  were  quite  cheerful,
and  he  entered  into  the  spirit  of  some  facetious  remarks  which
ensued.  This  contrast  was  effected  by  mesmerism  in  less  than
two  hours ;  he  admitted  that  he  had  dropped  off  two  or  three
times  (in  fact,  the  influence  was  very  deep  this  evening)  but,
as  usual,  asserted  that  he  was  generally  conscious  of  what
was  passing.  In  this  he  was  wrong,  as  he  was  not  aware  that
I  had  turned  him  on  his  side,  in  order  to  manipulate  the
spine ;  neither  was  he  conscious  that  a  young  lady  had  won  a
pair  of  gloves  of  him,  which  she  did  very  prettily  at  my  in¬
stance.”

The  high  state  of  nervous  irritability  into  which  his  afflic¬
tions  had  plunged  him,  together  with  its  exponent,  viz.,  a
weak  pulse  from  100  to  120,  or  even  140,  have  entirely  sub  ¬
sided;  his  appetite,  with  slight  exceptions,  continues  good;
his  spirits  are  improved,  his  strength  increased,  and  he  usually
rests  well,  the  pulse  ranging  from  72  to  85,  or  very  rarely  90.


perfectly  blind  for  eleven  years.


7


He  has  partially  discontinued  the  use  of  Batley’s  Sedative
Drops,  (wholly  omitted  on  the  nights  of  being  mesmerised,)
and  entirely  that  of  stimulants,  (ale,  wine,  spirits,  &c.)  which
Dr.  Toulmin  had  recommended  with  a  view  to  counteract  the
tendency  to  “  sinking,”  which  his  late  distressing  symptoms
occasioned.

The  partial  paralysis  of  the  lower  extremities  remains
much  the  same,  as  regards  voluntary  motion  (or  rather  the
want  of  it)  in  an  erect  position ;  nevertheless  a  tendency  to
increased  power  is  also  perceptible  here.

In  ordinary  circumstances,  it  would  be  “  hoping  against
hope/’  to  expect  a  restoration  of  vision  in  this  case, — but
under  the  benign  influence  of  the  agent  employed,  what
may  not  be  accomplished  !  Already  it  has  produced,  on  very
many  occasions,  short  intervals  of  “  glimmer,”  so  much  so
that  the  patient  has  been  able  to  distinguish  the  return  of  day,
as  well  as  the  “  diffused  whiteness,”  or  “  glare,”  from  the
fire  or  the  flame  of  the  candle.  He  has  repeatedly  enquired,
“Is  it  not  a  very  bright  day  ?”  “  Is  not  the  fire  very  bright?”
I  presume  that  these  interruptions  of  the  perfect  blindness,
(which  is  ordinarily  so  complete,  that  I  have  repeatedly,  by
means  of  a  lens,  condensed  the  image  of  the  flame  of  the
candle  upon  the  pupil  of  his  eye,  so  as  exactly  to  fill  it,  of
all  which  he  has  remained  totally  unconscious),  indicates
merely  functional  debility  in  the  visual  organs,  without  alter¬
ation  in  their  structure ;  if  so,  let  us  hope  on  and  persevere,
looking  to  our  polar  star,  which,  in  the  teeth  of  adverse  influ¬
ences,  has  for  the  last  ten  or  twelve  years  maintained  its  due
elevation,  and  continued  to  shine  with  undimmed  brightness,
the  centre  of  an  increasing  galaxy  of  similar  intelligences.

If  I  could  spare  the  time  to  mesmerise  this  patient  every
day,  I  have  no  doubt  that  matters  would  move  faster,  and
therefore  more  satisfactorily.  My  avocations  will  not,  how¬
ever,  permit  this;  and  it  is  clear  that  cases  of  this  description
could  only  be  fully  met  by  a  public  establishment,  devoted  to
the  diffusion  of  the  incalculable  benefits  flowing  from  the
beneficent  agent  which  we  employ.

Believe  me,  very  truly  yours,

J.  Holland.

Laurie  Terrace,  New  Cross,

Thomas  Chandler,  Esq.  6th  March,  1847.

My  dear  Sir, — I  have  the  pleasure  to  inform  you  that,
notwithstanding  the  trying  character  of  the  season  from  which
we  are  now  about  to  emerge,  our  patient,  Captain  Peach,
has,  by  the  continued  aid  of  mesmerism,  been  preserved  in  a


8  Extraordinary  effects  of  Mesmerism  on  a  Gentleman,

comparative  state  of  ease,  in  tlie  teeth  of  the  debilitating  ten¬
dency  of  his  exotic  mode  of  existence.

Since  the  27th  November  last,  he  has  had  but  one  severe
relapse  (spasm)  which  commenced  on  the  morning  of  the
12th  January  last,  and  tormented  him  incessantly  through
the  whole  day.  I  visited  him  in  the  evening;  and,  contrary
to  my  expectation,  he  was  fully  mesmerised  in  less  than  one
minute,  advantage  having  been  taken  of  a  temporary  lull.
On  this  occasion  the  attack  was  in  the  upper  part  of  the  large
muscle  on  the  under  side  of  the  left  thigh,  and  was  propor¬
tionally  violent,  returning  almost  directly  after  he  was  mes-  •
merised.  Each  spasm  lasted  from  2  to  4  or  5  seconds,  and
recurred  at  intervals  of  from  20  to  40  seconds  (by  my  watch)
with  occasional  lulls  of  greater  duration.  There  was  the  ordi¬
nary  expression  of  agony,  accompanied  by  a  suppressed  inar¬
ticulate  cry,  but  without  the  least  tendency  to  rouse  the
patient  from  the  mesmeric  state;  indeed  his  countenance
relaxed  into  perfect  placidity  the  instant  the  several  attacks
passed  off.  I  manipulated  incessantly,  and  it  was  only  at
the  end  of  the  first  50  minutes  that  there  was  a  perceptible
diminution  of  the  symptoms ;  but  at  the  expiration  of  20
minutes  more,  he  was  sleeping  like  an  infant,  and  continued
so  for  other  20  minutes,  when  I  left  him,  thinking  that  it
would  be  more  beneficial  to  suffer  the  influence  to  exhaust
itself;  besides  which,  I  dreaded  to  awaken  him  lest  the  attack
should  return  and  the  labour  have  to  be  recommenced.  How¬
ever,  there  has  not  been  any  return,  but  he  was  very  much
shattered  for  two  or  three  days;  still  he  came  round  more
kindly  than  had  been  his  wont  on  former  occasions  before
mesmerism  was  resorted  to.

None  other  of  his  late  complicated  afflictions  have  returned
since  the  date  of  my  former  letter.

I  may  mention  that  the  fixed  look  alone  continues  to  pro¬
duce  a  highly  irritating  effect  on  the  patient's  eyes ;  and,  if
continued  for  10  minutes  or  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  becomes
totally  unbearable;  they  water  copiously,  and  put  on  a  highly
inflamed  appearance;  the  nasal  passages  also  sympathize.
This  treatment  has  been  repeated  perseveringly  with  the
object  of  rousing  the  paralyzed  optic  nerve  to  natural  action,
and  I  am  much  disappointed  at  its  not  yet  having  had  that
result,  more  particularly  as  such  high  susceptibility  to  nature’s
oivn  stimulus  ought,  one  would  think,  to  act  in  that  direction.
The  main  difficulty,  no  doubt,  arises  from  the  affection  having
been  so  long  established,  and  being  so  deeply  seated.  This
view  is  borne  out  by  the  fact  that  the  late  frightful  pain  in
the  lumbar  region,  which  was  of  comparatively  recent  occur¬
rence,  yielded,  almost  instanter,  to  the  mesmeric  influence.


perfectly  Blind  for  eleven  years.


9


Independently  of  the  grave  afflictions  mentioned  in  my
former  letter,  he  has  suffered  for  a  long  time  from  various
comparatively  minor  complaints,  which  have  only  been  men¬
tioned  to  me,  when  attention  has  been  drawn  to  them  in
consequence  of  an  amelioration  having  taken  place.  Among
these  may  be  mentioned  an  insensibility  (of  very  long  stand¬
ing)  in  the  parts  administering  to  micturition,  and  also  a
chronic  “weakness”  in  the  inside  of  the  left  thigh.  The
latter  has  totally  disappeared  for  some  time  past,  and  the
former  has  been  considerably  relieved.

There  is  no  indication  in  the  mesmeric  state  of  any  ex¬
altation  of  the  senses  or  faculties  in  this  patient,  nor  indeed
of  any  other  “  high  phenomena  ;”  but  it  may  be  worth  while
to  state  that,  in  addition  to  the  induced  rigidity  formerly
mentioned,  the  sensation  of  thirst  can  invariably  be  brought
on  by  merely  placing  the  ends  of  my  finger  lightly  under  the
patient's  chin.  This  sensation  is  always  indicated  by  a  sucking
and  swallowing  action,  and  viva  voce  if  the  question  be  asked.
That  this  fact  is  not  the  result  of  “  association”  or  “  mental
suggestion,”  was  fully  demonstrated  by  the  following  occur¬
rence.  On  the  first  occasion  of  my  trying  the  experiment,
Mrs.  Peach's  notice  was  attracted  to  it,  and  a  circumstance
was  thereby  recalled  to  her  mind,  which  to  her  had  no  signi¬
ficance  at  the  time.  Some  time  previously  the  servant  was
mesmerising  her  master  (who  was  seated),  in  the  course  of
which  ordinary  sleep  was  combined  with  the  mesmeric  influ¬
ence,  and  his  “  jaw  dropped.”  Her  mistress  directed  her  to
“put  it  up.”  In  performing  this  evolution,  the  captain  called
out,  “What  is  Jane  doing?”  &c.,  &c.  :  at  the  same  time
complaining  of  thirst ,  and  distinctly  showing  by  the  sucking
and  swallowing  action,  that  the  salivary  glands  were  excited.
Some  surprise  was  felt  at  the  time,  but  the  occurrence  had
been  altogether  dismissed  and  was  only  recalled  from  witness¬
ing  my  experiment.

I  cannot  note  any  decided  alteration  as  regards  the
amaurosis,  or  the  partial  paralysis  of  the  lower  limbs.  Still
the  fitful  “  glimmerings”  continue  to  recur,  and  there  is  a  very
perceptible  increase  of  strength,  though  voluntary  motion  (in
the  erect  position)  is  not  at  command.  However,  his  general
health  is  certainly  improved,  his  spirits  are  better,  and  his
appetite  is  not  to  be  found  fault  with ;  a  bad  night  is  now
the  exception.

He  is  making  the  attempt  to  discontinue  opiates,  and,
hitherto,  has  succeeded  better  than  could  have  been  expected.
His  perseverance  has  been  stimulated  by  having  Miss  Mar-
tineau's  case  read  to  him.  This  experiment  was  commenced  on


10  Extraordinary  effects  of  Mesmerism  on  a  Gentleman.

Saturday,  the  20th  ult.,  since  when  he  has  abstained  altoge¬
ther.  He  has  had  three  or  four  sleepless  nights  in  consequence,
accompanied  by  great  restlessness,  and  craving;  the  effects
of  which  have,  invariably,  been  removed  entirely,  by  the  next
dose  of  “  nature’s  sedative,”  instead  of  “  Batley’s.”

The  patient  has  large  expectations  that  the  “  advance  of
the  sun,”  will  tell  in  his  favour.  Hoping  they  may  be  realized,

I  remain,  my  dear  Sir,  yours  very  truly,

J.  Holland.

What  can  be  more  beautiful  and  conclusive  than  this  case  ?
yet  no  doubt  our  scientific  (?)  profession  will  find  something
to  cavil  at.  I  do  not  complain  of  medical  men  refusing  to
believe  mesmerism  from  mere  report,  it  would,  indeed,  be
unworthy  of  them  to  do  so.  But,  when  they  see  some  of  the
first  men,  not  only  in  our  own  profession  but  also  in  the  church
and  at  the  bar,  openly  and  enthusiastically  advocating  the
cause,  I  think  they  might  at  least  examine  for  themselves.
And  I  do  not  hesitate  to  state  that  he  must  be  a  most  un¬
fortunate  individual  who,  taking  five  persons  indiscriminately
for  the  purpose  of  experiment,  does  not  find  at  least  one  of
them  susceptible  at  the  first  trial.  I  am  quite  sure  the  average
is  much  above  this  in  my  own  practice.  I  may  instance  an
extraordinary  circumstance  which  lately  happened  to  me,  by
which  a  whole  party  became  convinced  of  the  truth  of  mes¬
merism.  In  January  I  went  to  Devizes  to  meet  a  party  of
relations  and  friends  at  dinner.  Mesmerism  was  of  course
talked  of  and  many  a  joke  passed  at  my  expense,  but  you
shall  see  how  I  turned  the  tables.  Having  offered  to  mes¬
merise  any  of  the  party,  (but  without  pledging  myself  to  be
successful)  a  lady  volunteered.  Her  husband  objected;  I,
however,  left  him  with  his  wine  and  joined  the  ladies.  The
offer  was  soon  renewed  and  I  commenced  :  in  ten  minutes  she
became  a  living  statue,  though  for  the  first  five  she  was  talking
and  laughing  incredulously ;  I  then  called  her  husband  and
the  rest  of  the  party  to  see  her,  and  much  enjoyed  their  look
of  amazement  and  fright ;  they  did  not  doubt  her  being  asleep,
and  the  next  question  was,  how  I  was  going  to  awake  her,
for  she  could  not  even  smile  when  her  husband  spoke  to  her,
though  of  a  very  lively  disposition.  After  three  quarters  of
an  hour  I  convinced  them  that  I  could  dissipate  the  effect  as
easily  as  I  had  produced  it,  and  in  a  few  minutes  restored
her  to  her  former  self.  She  described  her  sensations  as  having
been  most  delightful.  She  had  been  perfectly  conscious,
but  could  not  speak  or  move.  She  heard  her  husband  cough,
and  wished  to  speak  to  him,  but  could  not  articulate.


Cure  of  St.  Vitus's  Dance  with  Mesmerism.


11


The  lady  is  not  a  young  hysterical  female ,  but  the  mother
of  a  large  family,  some  of  them  as  tall  as  herself ;  she  is  well
known  to  the  whole  neighbourhood,  and  I  have  no  doubt  the
affair  will  make  a  little  talk  in  the  town.

Cases  of  this  description  make  more  converts  than  public
exhibitions ;  indeed  mesmerism  had  been  much  depreciated
in  the  town  of  Devizes  some  years  before  by  an  itinerant
mesmeriser,  who  could  not  of  course  inspire  that  confidence
in  his  auditors,  without  which  the  most  genuine  phenomena
appear  like  imposition.

In  reference  to  the  ether  mania,  which  is  now  in  course
of  finding  its  proper  level,  it  may  be  remarked  that  mesmer¬
ists  can  have  no  objection  to  its  monopolizing  operative  sur¬
gery.  They  would  only  wish  to  receive  the  same  justice  as
regards  their  results,  at  the  hands  of  the  profession,  that  has
been  so  eagerly  accorded  to  the  new  agent.

I  remain  yours,  very  truly,

Thomas  Chandler.

58,  Paradise  Street,  Rotherhithe,

March  10th,  1847.


II.  Cure  of  St.  Vitus’s  Dance.  By  Dr.  Engledue.

Dr.  Engledue  states  that  he  has  sent  us  “the  following  case
of  cure  of  St.  Vitus’s  dance,  not  because  there  is  anything  un¬
usual  in  the  course  pursued,  but  because  it  is  another  instance
of  the  value  of  mesmerism  after  the  usual  medical  appliances
had  been  tried  in  vain.

John  C - ,  aged  nine  years,  had  been  suffering  for  more

than  a  month  from  St.  Vitus’s  dance.  His  father  consulted
me  in  June,  1846.  He  presented  the  usual  appearances,
which  it  is  unnecessary  to  enumerate.  He  could  neither  walk
nor  feed  himself,  and  was  in  a  truly  miserable  condition.
After  the  administration  of  purgatives,  he  was  placed  under
the  influence  of  iron,  and  this  was  continued  in  gradually
increasing  doses  for  six  weeks,  at  the  expiration  of  which
period  he  was  not  in  the  least  degree  improved,  though  no
doubt  further  perseverance  would  have  cured  him.  However,
I  persuaded  his  father  to  take  the  cure  into  his  own  hands,
to  abandon  medicine  and  to  try  mesmerism,  having  witnessed
its  beneficial  effects  in  other  cases.  He  acceded  to  my  wish
and  made  passes  before  his  son  for  half  an  hour,  night  and
morning.  At  the  end  of  a  fortnight  there  was  a  slight  im¬
provement.  In  three  weeks  this  was  much  more  manifest,


12


Cure  of  Tic  Douloureux  with  Mesmerism ,

and  in  two  months  lie  was  quite  well.  During  the  whole  of
this  period  he  took  no  medicine .  While  the  disease  existed  he
did  not  pass  into  mesmeric  sleep,  but  so  soon  as  this  disap¬
peared,  his  father  was  enabled  to  send  him  into  the  trance
with  the  greatest  ease.  I  believe  this  is  not  unusual.  Sleep
is  not  essential.  Although  in  the  majority  of  cases  it  is  to
be  looked  for,  and  to  be  wished  for,  nevertheless  it  is  not  ne¬
cessary  for  the  cure  of  disease.

Southsea,  Hants.


III.  Cure  of  Tic  Douloureux.  By  Miss  Collins.*

Dr.  Elliotson  begs  to  forward  the  enclosed  to  The  Zoist.
Conduit  Street,  Jan.  1847.

Newark,  Dec.  23,  1846.

Dear  Dr.  Elliotson. — The  accompanying  case  I  take  the
liberty  of  forwarding  to  you,  as  I  feel  persuaded  it  will  afford
you  pleasure  to  know  that  mesmerism  has  again  proved  of  in¬
finite  service  in  a  most  obstinate  complaint,  the  sufferer  from
which  had  tried  all  means  that  the  faculty  advised  for  her  re¬
covery.  But  all  was  found  to  be  alike  unsuccessful,  until  she
had  recourse  to  mesmerism.  About  the  same  time  that  Miss
Wolstenholme  was  afflicted  and  deriving  benefit  from  mesmer¬
ism,  a  young  lady,  a  friend  of  mine,  was  troubled  fearfully
with  the  same  malady  (tic  douloureux),  when  my  mother
undertook  to  apply  the  same  means,  and  which  were  attended
with  equal  success.  She  was  mesmerised  every  day  for  about
a  fortnight,  when  she  was  quite  cured,  and  she  has  had  no
return  of  pain  since.

I  am  happy  to  say  I  am  quite  well ;  and  with  grateful
remembrances  again  apologizing  for  the  intrusion  upon  your
time,

I  am,  dear  Dr.  Elliotson,

Yours  ever  obliged,

John  Elliotson,  Esq.,  M.D.  Eleanor  Collins.

London.

Severe  Case  of  Tic  Douloureux.

On  the  24th  June,  1846,  Mr.  Wolstenholme,  an  officer
of  Excise,  called  upon  my  father  to  borrow  an  electrical  ma-

*  The  cure  of  this  young  lady’s  contracted  foot  by  mesmerism,  and  the  his¬
tory  ot  the  beautiful  phenomena  of  her  mesmeric  state,  will  amply  repay  the
perusal  in  Nos.  xi.  and  xii.


hy  Miss  Collins.


13


chine,  in  order  to  employ  it  for  his  daughter,  who  is  about  24
years  of  age,  and  was  suffering,  and  had  suffered  for  several
years,  with  tic  douloureux.  As  the  instrument  was  not  in
Newark  at  the  time,  my  father  advised  mesmerism  to  be  tried,
and  I  am  happy  to  say  it  was  employed  with  complete  suc¬
cess.  My  father  and  I  went  to  her  house  during  the  after¬
noon,  and  Miss  Wolstenholme  informed  us  that  she  had  been
suffering  from  tic  douloureux  in  both  sides  of  the  face  for
nearly  five  years,  and  to  so  great  a  degree  that  she  dared  not,
during  the  whole  of  last  winter,  venture  into  a  room  where
there  was  a  fire,  but  was  obliged  to  remain  up  stairs  in  a  cold
apartment;  and  her  sufferings  were  so  great,  that  her  life,
she  stated,  wras  perfectly  miserable.  She  had  been  under
medical  treatment  for  two  months,  but  grew  worse  instead  of
better,  though  everything  that  could  be  thought  of  had  been
tried  for  her  relief.  I  saw  her  this  afternoon  for  the  first  time,
in  company  with  my  father,  who  mesmerised  her  by  down¬
ward  passes  for  half  an  hour.  In  fourteen  minutes  she  ap¬
peared  drowsy,  but  did  not  go  to  sleep.  At  the  expiration  of
the  half  hour  the  pain  had  diminished.  My  father  then  locally
mesmerised  her,  which  produced  great  pain  in  her  arms  and
legs,  more  especially  in  the  right  arm,  as  well  as  pain  under
the  left  ear ;  but  all  was  removed  before  we  had  been  there  an
hour,  and  we  left  her  feeling  very  comfortable.

25th.  The  patient  came  to  our  house  this  morning  much
better ;  she  had  had  but  little  pain  in  the  night,  and  very
little  this  morning  early.  The  effects  by  mesmerising  her
were  the  same  as  those  produced  yesterday,  with  the  addition
of  pain  in  the  neck.  The  general  and  local  mesmerisation
lasted  for  three  quarters  of  an  hour,  when  she  said  that  she
felt  better  than  she  had  done  for  months  ;  and  she  returned
home  quite  free  from  pain.  She  called  in  the  evening  to  be
mesmerised,  as  slight  pain  had  come  on  about  five  o’clock.
She  went  away  quite  well.

27th.  Has  had  no  pain  in  the  night,  but  she  had  a  very
little  in  the  morning  early.

28th.  Her  health  and  general  appearance  much  improved,
though  sleep  has  not  yet  been  produced.  Violent  pain  re¬
turned  for  an  hour  at  six  o’clock  in  the  evening,  and  for  ten
minutes  at  half-past  nine.

29th.  My  father  being  obliged  to  leave  home  for  a  few
weeks,  she  became  my  patient,  and  this  morning  I  mesmer¬
ised  her ;  she  would  have  gone  to  sleep  but  for  several  inter¬
ruptions.  She  had  no  pain  at  all  on  the  30th  or  following
day,  and  only  very  little  for  a  short  time  in  the  evening  at
the  usual  hour  (five  o’clock).  Whilst  mesmerising  her  on  the


14  Cure  of  Tic  Douloureux  with  Mesmerism, ,

last-mentioned  day,  she  experienced  the  sensation  of  hot
water  running  down  the  left  side.

July  2nd.  Had  no  pain  since  yesterday,  except  for  a  very
few  minutes  this  morning.  After  mesmerising  her  for  twenty
minutes,  she  fell  into  a  light  and  quiet  sleep,  which  lasted  for
seven  or  eight  minutes,  and  was  exceedingly  sleepy  the  whole
of  the  half  hour.  Extreme  pain  came  on  for  an  hour  in
the  afternoon,  which  she  attributed  to  having  walked  very
quickly.

3rd.  Went  to  sleep  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour  and  slept  six
minutes ;  experienced  great  stiffness,  and  a  prickly  sensation
in  the  left  arm  and  hand.

4th.  She  says  her  pain  daily  diminishes.  I  made  only  a
few  downward  passes  to-day,  but  kept  my  fingers  pointing  at
her  eyes,  which  made  her  drowsy  in  a  very  few  minutes ;  she
slept  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour  much  deeper  than  she  has
hitherto  done.  Excruciating  pain  came  on  in  the  neck  and
head,  which  was  removed  by  breathing  upon,  and  then  blowr-
ing  over,  the  seats  of  the  pain.

5th.  Had  a  deal  of  pain  before  she  went  to  bed ;  did  not
rest  quite  so  well,  and  suffered  very  much  till  I  mesmerised
her.  She  attributed  these  uncomfortable  feelings  to  the
change  of  weather.  I  locally  mesmerised  her  for  an  hour
and  a  half,  when  she  assured  me  she  was  quite  easy  again.

6tli.  She  went  into  the  mesmeric  state  in  a  quarter  of  an
hour,  and  remained  in  it  for  sixteen  minutes.  She  could
recollect  everything  when  she  awoke,  but  said  that  w7hile
asleep  she  could  hear  very  indistinctly,  and  felt  all  over  as
heavy  as  lead,  and  that  sometimes  she  fancied  she  was  falling
into  some  place,  and  at  other  times  that  some  one  wanted
her  and  pulled  her  head  to  the  left — towards  the  place  where
I  was  then  sitting.

7th.  I  mesmerised  her  for  half  an  hour,  when  she  slept
for  twenty-five  minutes.  Went  away  quite  well.

8th.  Had  a  very  good  night,  and  no  pain  since  she  left  me
at  twelve  o^clock  yesterday  morning.  She  wrent  to  sleep  in
ten  minutes,  and  slept  for  twenty  minutes.  In  the  evening,
though  she  had  had  no  pain,  I  mesmerised  her  again;  she
slept  for  thirteen  minutes,  when  something  in  the  street  dis¬
turbed  her ;  but  in  five  minutes  she  again  went  to  sleep,  and
remained  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour.

9th.  Daily  improves,  and  in  ten  minutes  the  sleep  was  in¬
duced,  and  she  remained  in  it  for  twenty  minutes,  and  for
thirty  on  the  following  day.  I  locally  mesmerised  the  face
before  she  went  to  sleep,  and  removed  the  pain  in  two
minutes.


by  Miss  Collins.  15

11th.  Did  not  succeed  in  getting  her  to  sleep,  but  sent
her  home  quite  welL

12th,  13th,  and  14th.  No  pain  except  for  a  very  few
minutes.  Went  to  sleep  in  five  minutes  and  slept  for  half  an
hour.  I  asked  her  several  questions  which  she  answered  in  a
whisper.

15th.  Pain  gradually  diminishing.  In  four  minutes  she
was  in  a  sound  sleep,  which  continued  for  a  quarter  of  an
hour ;  again  in  the  evening  for  twenty  minutes.  She  had  a
severe  pain  in  her  head,  which  was  greatly  relieved  by  local
mesmerism.

16th.  Had  no  pain  since  I  saw  her  yesterday.

17th.  Has  had  pain  in  her  face  since  yesterday  afternoon.
I  took  all  pain  away  before  she  left,  but  it  returned  in  two
hours  afterwards,  and  did  not  leave  her  till  mesmerised  this
morning,  when  she  went  to  sleep  in  five  minutes  and  slept  for
twenty  :  she  went  away  quite  well.

18th.  Much  better  to-day ;  has  had  no  pain  since  I  mes¬
merised  her  last  evening.  I  got  her  to  sleep  in  three  minutes,
and  she  slept  comfortably  for  half  an  hour.  She  fancied,  as
has  been  usual  lately,  that  her  head  was  separated  from  her
body.

20tli.  To-day  my  mother  mesmerised  her  for  me.  She
did  not  go  to  sleep,  but  said  she  felt  as  though  hot  water  was
running  down  her.  The  pain  which  comes  on  but  occasion¬
ally,  now  lasts  but  a  very  few  minutes,  and  then  is  so  slight
as  not  to  be  worth  naming.

21st,  22nd,  23rd.  Three  minutes  is  now  sufficient  to  send
her  to  sleep,  in  which  she  remains  happily  and  soundly  for
about  half  an  hour,  when  it  expends  itself  and  she  awakes
spontaneously.  If  by  any  chance  she  awakes  before  the  usual
time,  two  or  three  passes  will  send  her  off  again.

28th.  Very  well  indeed,  and  came  for  the  last  time.

Dec.  23rd.  I  saw  Miss  Wolstenliolme  to-day,  and  she  in¬
forms  me  that  she  has  had  no  pain  whatever  since  last  June,
and  that  she  is  now  quite  well.

Eleanor  Collins.

Newark,  Dec.  23rd,  1846.

“I  have  carefully  read  over  the  above  statement  of  my
case,  and  declare  that  every  part  of  it  is  strictly  correct.

“  Mary  Ann  Wolstenholme.”


16  Tic  Douloureux  and  other  Nervous  Affections

IV.  Cases  of  Tic  Douloureux  and  other  Nervous  Affections,
cured  with  Mesmerism.  By  Dr.  Storer.

27,  Brock  Street,  Bath.

December,  1st,  1846.

Case  I. — A  gentleman,  residing  at  Lansdown  Place,
called  in  February  last  to  consult  me  about  his  wife,  who  had
been  suffering  for  a  long  time  from  acute  pains  and  restless¬
ness  ;  she  had  had  no  sleep  for  the  last  two  or  three  weeks,
notwithstanding  opiates  had  been  prescribed  by  her  medical
attendants.  He  wished  to  know  if  mesmerism  would  be  of
any  use ;  I  told  him  I  thought  it  would,  and  made  an  ap¬
pointment  to  see  her  at  six  o'clock  in  the  evening.

I  found  the  patient  in  bed,  in  great  pain ;  she  told  me
candidly,  that  she  only  consented  to  see  me  to  oblige  her
husband ;  she  had  no  belief  in  mesmerism,  and  therefore  did
not  expect  any  benefit.

I  proposed  a  trial,  to  which,  she  consented,  and  though
interrupted  two  or  three  times  by  her  own  remarks,  I  was
enabled  to  induce  sleep  in  less  than  twenty  minutes, — by
half-past  six.  She  remained  in  this  state  until  nine  o'clock,
when  she  awoke,  asked  the  time,  appeared  surprized,  turned
her  head,  and  again  fell  asleep,  and  continued  in  this  state
until  the  next  morning,  six  o'clock.  She  told  her  husband
how  refreshed  she  felt,  and  how  much  better  she  really  was.

This  report  I  received  when  I  called  the  next  day.

The  patient's  appearance  also  corroborated  this  statement
as  regards  her  looks.  I  then  proposed  a  second  trial,  she  said
it  was  perfectly  useless,  then,  as  she  felt  so  much  better  and
refreshed,  that  she  was  certain  mesmerism  could  not  produce
any  further  effect.  She  wished  the  operation  postponed ;  I
urged  the  present  time,  as  it  would  more  decidedly  test  its
power.  She  incredulously  consented,  and  told  me,  whilst  trying
her,  I  was  only  wasting  my  time ;  but  opposed  to  all  this,  in
less  than  twenty  minutes,  she  was  again  asleep, — about  half¬
past  ten  o'clock.  A  conversation  was  held  in  the  room  that
did  not  disturb  her,  and  I  left  directions  for  her  to  be  allowed
to  sleep  on.  This  she  did  until  past  two  o'clock, — when  being
told  the  time,  she  made  an  effort  to  rouse  herself, — and  having
friends  present  succeeded.  She  awoke  quite  free  from  pains,
dressed  in  the  afternoon,  and  again  passed  another  comfort¬
able  night.  I  wished  to  continue  my  attendance  during  the
week,  but  a  summons  to  the  country  prevented  that ;  though
I  was  glad  to  be  informed  some  time  afterwards,  that  the
pains  and  sleeplessness  were  both  removed,  and  her  general
health  improved.


cured  with  Mesmerism ,  by  Dr.  Store?'.


17


Case  II.— A  lady,  residing  at  Camden  Place,  Bath,  sent
for  me  in  July  last  to  see  her.  I  was  informed  that  she  had
been  suffering  from  violent  pains  about  her  head  and  face  for
the  last  few  weeks ;  she  had  been  attended  by  two  medical
gentlemen  who  considered  the  case  to  be  tic  douloureux,  and
prescribed  various  remedies,  but  without  any  good  effects.  A
friend  of  her’s  who  had  been  greatly  benefitted  by  mesmerism,
advised  a  trial ;  the  lady  consented,  but  told  me  she  expected
no  benefit,  having  no  belief  in  its  powers.

I  saw  her  on  Sunday  about  two  o’clock  for  the  first  time,
and  found  her  suffering  from  acute  pain,  particularly  on  the
right  side  of  the  face  and  temple.  After  a  short  time  I  pro¬
posed  a  trial  of  mesmerism,  and  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour  pro¬
duced  sleep,  with  apparent  freedom  from  pain.  She  remained
in  this  state  for  half  an  hour,  when  I  demesmerised  her.  She
said  she  was  now  certainly  free  from  pain,  but  she  could  not
believe  that  to  be  the  effect  of  mesmerism,  inasmuch  as  she
had  not  been  to  sleep ;  she  however  requested  me  to  see  her
again  soon,  as  about  six  o’clock  the  pains  were  always  more
violent.  I  returned  about  that  time;  she  had  been  better
since  I  left,  but  was  evidently  fearing  the  threatened  attack,
which  was  however  much  slighter  than  usual.  I  mesmerised
her  in  less  than  ten  minutes.  There  were,  as  before,  two
friends  of  her’s  present,  who,  knowing  her  expressed  denial  of
the  first  sleep,  now  requested  me  to  adopt  some  plan  to
satisfy  her  own  mind  when  awake.

I  moved  the  arms  backwards  and  forwards  several  times,
and  placed  one  hand  for  five  minutes  over  her  face.  After
the  half  hour  I  again  awoke  her,  as  her  friends  did  not  like
my  leaving  her  in  the  mesmeric  state,  which  I  wished.

When  demesmerised  she  was  quite  free  from  pain ;  but
again  doubted  having  been  affected  until  satisfied  by  her  own
friends  of  what  had  occurred.  Monday  morning,  I  was  in¬
formed  that  the  patient  had  passed  a  quiet  evening,  had
refreshing  sleep,  and  only  a  slight  return  of  pain  this  morning
when  she  left  her  bed -room.  All  her  doubts  had  vanished,
and  she  had  been  anxiously  looking  for  me.  I  again  mes¬
merised  her  about  ten  o’clock  and  left  her  to  awake  spon¬
taneously,  which  she  did  about  one  o’clock,  and  remained
perfectly  comfortable  during  the  day.  I  saw  her  again  in  the
evening,  and  left  her  asleep.  On  Tuesday  I  was  told  she  had
passed  an  excellent  night,  and  had  no  return  of  the  pain  in  the
morning.  I  mesmerised  her  about  three  o’clock,  and  though
the  sleep  did  not  last  very  long,  she  continued  free  from  pain,
and  passed  a  good  night.  I  continued  my  visits  during  the
week.  She  had  no  return  of  the  pains,  says  she  feels  her

VOL.  v.  c


18  Tic  Douloureux  and  other  Nervous  Ajfeciions

health  generally  improved,  and  intends  next  week  going  on
a  visit  to  some  friends.  I  heard  from  this  lady  two  months
afterwards,  and  she  says  that  she  has  had  no  return  what¬
ever  of  her  pains,  and  that  if  they  should  again  annoy  her,
she  will  lose  no  time  in  having  applied  the  only  remedy  she
has  yet  found  successsful.

Case  III. — Most  violent  Case  of  Tic  Douloureux  greatly

relieved .

Mrs.  West,  setat.  50,  residing  at  St.  James's  Parade,  was
sent  to  me  in  January  last  by  a  medical  gentleman  residing
here,  with  an  opinion  from  him  to  the  following  effect : — that  it
was  one  of  the  worst  cases  he  had  ever  seen  and  that  he  had
exhausted  all  his  means  without  doing  any  good.  The  poor
woman  states,  that  she  has  suffered  severely  for  the  last  three
or  four  years,  that  sometimes  the  pain  is  so  severe  as  to  cause
her  to  bite  her  lips,  that  she  has  frequently  been  without
sleep  for  two  or  three  weeks  together,  her  eyes  are  constantly
suffused  with  tears,  and  her  mouth  drawn  aside  by  the  pain.
She  has  had  several  teeth  removed  with  the  hope  of  relief,
but  all  to  no  avail.  She  has  been  under  several  medical  men,
and  her  case  has  excited  much  commiseration.

I  willingly  consented  to  try  mesmerism,  and  though  it  was
commenced  during  the  coldest  part  of  last  winter,  after  a  fort¬
night's  mesmerising  there  was  evidently  induced  a  remission
of  the  more  severe  symptoms ;  for  instance,  the  pain  lessened,
she  slept  better,  she  was  much  more  placid  during  the  mes¬
meric  sleep  though  frequently  awoke  by  spasm,  and  her  eyes
less  watery.  I  steadily  persevered  for  about  six  weeks,  and  had
the  extreme  satisfaction  of  seeing  a  marked  change  for  the
better.  From  fear  of  being  troublesome,  she  unfortunately
omitted  to  attend,  and  in  three  weeks  time  she  became  worse ;
I  then  resumed  mesmerism,  and  in  a  few  days  brought  her
round  to  her  previous  improved  state.

I  continued  mesmerising  for  another  month,  making  fully
three  months,  when  she  was  so  much  improved,  that  some
who  met  her  did  not  know  her  for  the  same  person.  She
now  slept  well,  ate  well,  and  was  altogether  a  different  person.
In  the  summer  she  went  away  for  two  months,  and  impru¬
dently  sitting  on  the  grass  after  rain,  caught  severe  rheuma¬
tism,  but  her  tic  did  not  affect  her.  When  she  returned  to
Bath,  finding  her  still  suffering  from  rheumatism,  she  was
again  mesmerised,  and  in  three  weeks  greatly  relieved.  The
tic  has  scarcely  returned.  Should  it  do  so,  I  have  no  doubt
but  that  mesmerism  will  soon  relieve  it.  She  is  now  verv


cured  with  Mesmerism,  by  Dr.  Storer.


19


susceptible  of  mesmerism,  and  when  I  am  busy  Mrs.  Storer
finds  no  difficulty  in  affecting  her.

In  such  a  very  extreme  case,  with  a  disposition  to  rheu¬
matism,  I  can  hardly  hope  for  an  entire  cessation ;  but  the
good  already  effected  has  gone  far  beyond  anything  yet  ac¬
complished  by  medicine.

The  gratitude  of  the  poor  woman  is  extreme,  and,  what
is  equally  satisfactory,  the  good  effects  of  mesmerism  have
in  this  case  been  acknowledged  by  three  different  medical
men.

Case  IY. — Case  of  great  Nervous  Debility  affecting  the  Head.

Mrs.  H.  a  respectable  married  woman  consulted  me  some
time  since  in  reference  to  her  general  health ;  she  complained
of  great  general  debility,  which  she  described  as  making  her
feel  quite  exhausted,  with  a  constant  liead-ache,  rendering
her  unequal  to  her  duties  at  home.

As  she  had  taken  a  good  deal  of  medicine  and  without
any  benefit,  her  husband  recommended  her  to  try  mesmerism.
I  found  her  very  susceptible  to  its  influence,  and  after  a  few
times  mesmerising,  her  head-aches  ceased  and  her  general
health  became  much  improved.  She  is  very  liable  to  cold
which  generally  affects  the  side,  and  has  usually  been  treated
by  depletion;  but  her  husband,  perceiving  the  good  effects
of  mesmerism  in  the  first  instance,  when  her  next  attack  be¬
gan,  in  July  last,  sent  for  me.  I  found  her  with  pains  all  over
her,  particularly  in  the  side,  and  viewed  the  case  as  pleuritis
with  rheumatism.  Knowing  her  susceptibility,  I  at  once
mesmerised  her  and  left  her  asleep;  she  continued  in  this
state  for  nearly  three  hours,  and  when  she  awoke,  expressed
herself  much  freer  from  pain.  I  saw  her  in  the  evening,  and
put  her  again  to  sleep.

Her  husband  informed  me  the  next  day,  that  she  had
slept  nearly  all  night,  and  that  in  the  morning  she  was  much
more  free  from  pain,  and  the  side  also  was  considerably  better  :
I  found  her  up  in  an  easy  chair  and  again  mesmerised  her.
She  remained  in  this  position  for  two  hours,  and,  when  she
awoke,  expressed  herself  to  be  nearly  w^ell.  I  attended  her
for  two  days  more,  making  only  four  during  the  illness.  She
is  now  quite  well,  and  looking  altogether  improved.  Her  hus¬
band  and  herself  assure  me  that  her  last  attack  was  precisely
similar  to  her  former  ones,  and  that  she  has  generally  been
confined  from  two  to  three  weeks,  and  always  remained  ex¬
tremely  weak  for  a  considerable  time,  until  the  present  oc¬
casion.

c  2


20


Cure  of  injury  of  the  Spine,  fyc.,

This  individual  has  been  mesmerised  now  by  me  a  great
many  times.  Her  case  presents,  in  a  very  marked  degree,
almost  all  the  mesmeric  states,  and  on  each  occasion,  after
mesmerism,  she  expresses  herself  better.  I  sometimes  avail
myself  of  her  offer,  when  I  wish  to  give  a  private  demonstra¬
tion  on  this  subject,  her  object  being,  as  she  says,  to  extend
the  knowledge  of  so  valuable  a  remedy.

P.S.  Note  to  my  Epileptic  Cases  in  No.  xvi.

The  number  of  these  and  similar  cases,  occurring  amongst
the  poor  in  every  city,  is  very  great,  and  yet  even  a  trial
of  the  most  simple  and  the  safest  remedy,  mesmerism,  is  still
withheld  from  our  public  hospitals.

It  was  only  a  short  time  since,  that  a  gentleman  here
recommended  a  poor  epileptic  youth  to  one  of  the  hospitals,
and,  having  seen  the  good  effects  of  mesmerism  in  several  cases,
ventured  to  suggest  it  to  the  medical  officers.  The  written
answer  was,  and  that  from  one  of  the  leading  (!)  men,  “  That
none  of  the  medical  men  of  the  Bath  United  Hospital  un¬
derstood  the  science  (so  called)  of  mesmerism.”  Another
was  asked  some  time  since,  why,  in  surgical  cases,  he  did
not  give  the  poor,  at  least,  the  benefit  of  a  trial ;  his  reply
was,  because  he  thought  there  was  nothing  in  it.

This  same  individuals  attention  was  again  more  recently
directed  to  the  subject  in  consequence  of  the  many  painless
surgical  operations  which  had  been  actually  performed.  He
then  said,  he  should  be  afraid  of  trying  it,  lest  apoplexy
should  ensue.  What !  Apoplexy  be  induced  by  nothing.
Certainly,  between  the  two  opinions,  there  is  only  one  step
from  the  ridiculous  to  the  sublime.

In  justice,  however,  to  two  or  three  of  the  medical  gen¬
tlemen  connected  with  the  hospital,  I  beg  to  say  that  all  are
not  unbelievers,  and  that  it  is  only  the  existence  of  certain
prejudices  or  obstructions  that  prevents  them  giving  it  a  fair
trial.

J.  S.


V.  Cure  of  Injury  of  the  Spine  and  Contraction  of  the  Leg.

By  Mr.  H.  Hudson.

Liverpool,  30th  Dec.,  1846.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

Dear  Sir, — I  perceive  in  your  publication  several  accounts

of  cures  effected  bv  means  of  mesmerism,  and  think  it  will

•/  *


by  Mr.  H.  Hudson.


21


yet  be  made  a  great  blessing  to  the  community  if  properly
applied.  I  cured  a  young  woman  in  this  town  by  means  of
it,  whom  I  providentially  met  as  I  was  looking  for  a  place
of  worship.  Perceiving  she  was  quite  lame  and  apparently
in  much  pain,  I  proposed  to  mesmerise  her.  But  not  under¬
standing  what  that  meant,  she  did  not  know  what  to  say,  yet
felt  inclined  to  submit  to  anything  calculated  to  do  her  good,
but  at  the  same  time  she  said  she  had  no  money  to  pay  me.
I  told  her  if  I  could  cure  her  she  would  have  nothing  to  pay.
Upon  enquiry  she  informed  me  that  about  seven  months
since  she  had  fallen  while  cleaning  the  outside  of  a  window,
and  had  injured  her  spine,  the  doctors  called  it  a  bruise  of
the  spine ;  that  she  had  been  in  York  Infirmary  five  months,
when  she  came  to  the  one  here,  where  she  underwent  several
operations  without  receiving  any  benefit.  She  also  said  that
she  had  had  upwards  of  200  leeches  on  her  back,  and  had
consulted  about  a  dozen  different  doctors,  but  they  could
none  of  them  do  her  any  good.

During  that  time  her  left  leg  became  contracted  at  the
knee,  so  that  she  had  to  walk  on  her  toes,  and  with  great
pain  in  her  back.  Her  parents  being  very  poor,  she  was
almost  reduced  to  the  necessity  of  going  to  the  poorhouse,
having  spent  all  her  money  besides  pledging  her  clothes  for
support.  Her  mother  was  present  during  our  interview.  I
desired  the  young  woman  to  sit  down,  and  was  enabled  to
put  her  into  the  trance  in  about  four  minutes ;  her  mother
thought  she  had  fainted,  but  telling  her  she  was  asleep,  I
tried  to  make  her  sing  by  singing  myself,  when  she  immedi¬
ately  joined  me.  Having  desired  her  mother  to  assist  me,  I
took  hold  of  her  leg  and  brought  it  quite  straight,  without
causing  her  the  least  pain.  On  trying  if  she  could  walk  by
exciting  the  organ  of  Self-Esteem  she  did  so  quite  well,
which  alarming  her  mother,  she  ran  out  and  left  the  girl  with
me.  In  a  few  minutes  her  sister  and  another  person  came
in,  apparently  much  excited  and  alarmed,  and  I  awoke  her.
It  took  me  about  four  minutes,  as  she  was  in  a  very  deep
sleep.  On  asking  her  to  walk  across  the  floor,  she  got  up
and  immediately  said,  “  What  have  you  been  doing  to  my
leg  ?  it  is  now  straight,”  and  then  walked  about  very  well ;
but  I  perceived  her  heel  was  not  properly  on  the  ground.
Having  asked  her  if  her  back  was  still  painful,  she  said  the
pain  was  quite  gone,  but  it  felt  sore.  I  put  her  to  sleep  again
that  evening  and  the  day  following ;  but  the  next  day  being
the  Sabbath,  I  left  her  till  Monday,  when  I  brought  her  leg
into  a  rigid  state,  which  stretched  the  sinew  at  the  back  of
the  heel.  On  waking  her  she  said,  “  Thank  God,  I  have  got


22


Cure  of  injury  of  the  Spine,  fyc.


my  heel  to  the  ground  again  ”  I  put  her  to  sleep  several
times.  On  the  Wednesday  following,  she  stood  all  day  at
the  wash-tub,  and  was  perfectly  cured.  This  was  about  four
months  since.  I  procured  her  a  situation  with  a  friend  of
mine,  (Mr.  R.  N.,  at  Wallington,  near  Newcastle-upon-Tyne),
where  she  has  been  ever  since,  without  any  return  of  her  old
complaint,  and  gives  perfect  satisfaction  to  her  master  and
mistress.  Her  name  is  Elizabeth  Harley,  and  she  lived  in  Ed¬
mund  Street  with  her  mother.  She  lived  last  when  at  service
(where  she  left  on  account  of  her  lameness)  at  Mr.  Gar-
thorpe’s  House  of  Correction,  City  of  York.

This  case  has  already  been  inserted  in  the  Liverpool  Mer¬
cury,  and  copied  into  several  other  papers  from  that.  I  have
mesmerised  several  persons,  and  have  always  found  it  to  do
good  when  it  takes  proper  effect.  I  will  not  trouble  you  fur¬
ther,  but  hoping  this  will  meet  with  your  approval,  I  have
the  honour  to  remain.

Your  humble  Servant,

H.  Hudson,

Cor.  Sec.  of  the  Liverpool  Seamen’s  Friend  Society.


P.S.  We  have  made  careful  enquiries  respecting  the
above -related  particulars,  and  have  ascertained  that  she
lived  with  Mr.  Garthorpe ;  was  injured  in  her  back,  and
dismissed  from  both  infirmary  and  hospital;  that  she  was
at  Leeds  for  some  time,  and  sent  to  the  House  of  Correction
at  York,  with  a  good  character,  and  taken  into  Mr.  Gar-
thorpe^s  service,  remaining  in  some  time,  and  proving  herself
a  most  excellent  servant.  On  leaving  it,  she  was  at  York
entrapped  and  engaged  by  a  woman  who  kept  an  impro¬
per  house,  but  no  sooner  discovered  this  than  she  deter¬
mined  to  make  her  escape ;  the  woman  refusing  to  let  her  go
and  keeping  her  in  the  house  by  force.  The  poor  girl  watched
her  opportunity,  dressed  herself  in  the  best  clothes  she  could
lay  her  hand  upon,  got  out  through  a  window  and  made  the
best  of  her  way  to  Liverpool,  to  which  she  was  traced  by  a
police  officer  and  taken  back  to  York,  and  tried  by  the  Re¬
corder,  Mr.  Elsly,  who  was  about  to  pass  sentence  of  trans¬
portation  for  seven  years  upon  her,  when,  in  her  defence,  she
detailed  the  whole  story ;  and  persons  being  present  who  could
confirm  it,  her  sentence  was  commuted  to  confinement  for  a
short  period  in  the  House  of  Correction.  She  was  taken  by
Mr.  Garthorpe  again  into  his  service,  but  not  liking  her  con¬
finement  she  attempted  to  escape,  fell  from  a  ladder  and
injured  her  spine.  She  then  gradually  became  unable  to


23


Mesmerism  not  to  be  trifled  with.

work,  entered  the  York  Infirmary,  and  after  remaining  there
unrelieved  for  a  length  of  time,  and  finally  pronounced
incurable  there  and  at  the  hospital,  she  went  to  some  friend
at  Liverpool.  All  this  information  was  given  by  Mr.  Gar-
thorpe  himself,  who  declares  she  was  a  most  excellent  servant,
and  that  he  is  ready  to  give  her  a  character  to  that  effect. —
Zoist.


VI.  Mesmerism  not  to  be  trifled  with,  though  it  kills  nobody ;

or,  James  Cook  alive  and  hearty.  By  Mr.  W.  G.  Smith.

Communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson.

Du.  Elliotson  forwards  to  The  Zoist  an  authentic  account
which  he  has  received  of  a  lad  unexpectedly  sent  to  sleep
with  mesmerism  two  or  three  years  ago,  at  Deptford,  and
whom  the  Times  and  other  papers  represented  as  incapable
of  being  awakened;  so  that  thousands  now  believe  he  never
woke,  and  positively  died,  and  many  thousands  fear  mes¬
merism,  lest  the  party  mesmerised  should  never  wake  again,
whereas  every  person  who  goes  into  the  sleep  wakes  sooner  or
later  spontaneously.

Conduit  Street,  March  10.

2,  Deptford  Bridge,
February,  1847.

My  dear  Sir,

In  an  interview  I  had  some  time  since  with  Mr.  Chandler,
of  Rotherhithe,  he  gave  me  to  understand  that  various  un¬
pleasant  and  ill-founded  reports  were  in  circulation,  tending-
very  much  to  retard  the  progress  of  mesmerism,  and  produce
a  feeling  of  terror  of  it  in  those  who  would  otherwise  avail
themselves  of  that  great  therapeutic  agent.  These  reports  are,
“  that  the  lad,  James  Cook,  mesmerised  by  me,  is  now  dead,
and  had  died  in  consequence  of  his  being  mesmerised.”  I
beg  most  positively  to  deny  this  statement,  and  thus  publicly
to  declare  that  he  is  alive  and  well,  has  grown  up  a  fine
young  man,  and  was  never  in  better  health  than  at  the  pre¬
sent  time.

It  is  true  that  his  sleep  was  of  a  prolonged  character,  and
so  excited  public  attention  that  the  police  deemed  it  necessary
to  investigate  the  case.  I  was  therefore  visited  at  2  a.  m.  by
a  special  commission  of  that  enlightened  body  (grave  fellows,
by  the  way,  to  report  on  a  case  of  mesmerism),  consisting  of
an  inspector  sergeant  and  private  of  the  force,  who,  like
Dogberry  of  old,  showed  their  profound  wisdom  in  their  mode


24


Mesmerism  not  to  be  trifled  with,


of  examination,  by  summing  up  the  evidence  and  promising
all  parties  a  lodging  in  the  station-house.  Not  being  tho¬
roughly  satisfied  whether  they  were  acting  right  or  wrong,  a
messenger  was  despatched  for  the  police  surgeon.  Myself
and  Mr.  Taylor,  awaiting  his  return,  sat  in  suspense,  the
sable  pall  of  night  being  for  a  time  illumined  with  the  pre¬
sence  of  these  worthy  functionaries.  (“We  felt  inclined  to
suspect  their  places  and  in  good  faith  to  write  them  down — ”)
We  reasoned  for  a  time  upon  the  imprudence  of  such  a  step,
but  they  “ knew  the  law ”  (they  were  good  and  true  subjects).
The  worthy  iEsculapius  came.  He  very  blandly  and  candidly
assured  us  he  was  quite  ignorant  of  the  ills  or  benefits  of  mes¬
merism.  After  feeling  the  pulse,  gravely  shaking  his  head,
&c.,  &c.,  he  said  he  should  advise  the  inspector  to  leave  the
case  in  our  hands,  for  should  anything  serious  happen  we
could  easily  be  found.  We  were  pleased  enough  to  hear  that
decision,  for  the  inspector’s  impressions  a  few  minutes  pre¬
vious  led  us  to  expect  something  worse ;  and  well  for  all  per¬
sons  it  happened  so,  as  the  consequences  of  a  separation  from
the  patient  at  such  a  time  would  no  doubt  have  been  attended
with  serious  results  :  and  I  take  this  opportunity  of  publicly
thanking  Mr.  Downing,  the  police  surgeon  of  Greenwich,
for  his  favourable  decision,  and  saving  me  from  the  ordeal  of
an  examination  before  a  magistrate.

It  may  be  well  here  to  narrate  some  few  particulars  in
reference  to  this  case,  trusting  it  may  serve  as  a  warning  to
those  who  would  tamper*  with  this  agency,  especially  the
timid  and  inexperienced,  who  have  no  idea  of  the  many  in¬
conveniences  in  which  the  young  experimentalist  is  placed,
when  he  loses  that  great  essential  to  a  mesmerist — confidence,
or  of  the  care  invariably  requisite  to  prevent  another  person
from  coming  in  contact  with  his  patient.

Having  attended  an  experimental  lecture  in  Greenwich,
by  a  Mr.  Taylor,  and  witnessed  a  young  lady  (the  daughter
of  a  much  esteemed  minister),  mesmerised,  after  being  cas¬
ually  selected  from  the  audience,  at  the  first  sitting,  in  ten
minutes,  and  some  of  the  higher  order  of  phenomena  pro¬
duced  in  her,  I  naturally  experienced  a  desire  to  know  some¬
thing  more.  During  the  subsequent  week  I  read  one  or
two  cases,  and  I  asked  myself,  why,  if  those  effects  were
real,  I  should  not  produce  them  as  well  as  other  persons  ?  my
curiosity  awrakened,  impulse  pointed  to  me  a  patient.  I  then
called  James  Cook,  a  lad  in  my  father’s  employment,  asked
him  to  stand  before  me  quite  still  and  look  me  in  the  face.


*  Medical  men  are  the  most  fit  to  practice  it  IF  they  would.


by  Mr.  W.  G.  Smith,  of  Deptford.


He  complied  with  my  request;  I  placed  him  with  his  back
against  an  iron  steam  pipe,  which  was  affixed  to  some  brick¬
work  ;  I  passed  my  hands  in  the  way  I  had  seen  Mr.  Taylor,
and  after  making  the  down  ward  passes  for  two  or  three  minutes,
his  eyes  closed,  his  breathing  became  accelerated,  he  lost  all
consciousness,  and  would  have  fallen  had  I  not  caught  him
in  my  arms.

This  very  much  alarmed  me,  and  I  called  to  a  young  man,
(one  of  my  father’s  workmen)  to  hold  the  lad  wdiile  I  procured
a  seat.  No  sooner  had  the  man  touched  him,  than  he  went
into  a  state  of  complete  frenzy :  he  rose,  threw  his  arms  in  all
directions,  strided  along  the  workshop,  and  in  a  few  minutes
became  quite  furious  and  dangerous  to  approach;  he  opened
his  eyes  and  stared  wildly,  uttering  incoherent  sentences  and
fancied  he  was  pursued  by  some  demon,  saying,  “  That  he
had  run  him  through  with  his  sword  and  had  him  under  the
drawbridge  by  the  castle,”*  and  at  length  he  sank  on  the
ground  exhausted.

At  this  I  became  terrified.  My  feelings  it  would  be  vain
to  attempt  to  describe.  So  completely  was  I  overpowered
that  I  allowed  the  boy  to  do  as  he  pleased  for  some  time  with¬
out  making  any  effort  to  restrain  him,  having  so  completely
lost  my  power  over  him.

It  occurred  to  me  that  a  second  lecture  on  mesmerism
was  to  be  given  that  evening  in  Greenwich,  by  Mr.  Taylor,
and  to  him  I  despatched  the  young  man  who  had  innocently
done  the  mischief,  desiring  him,  under  no  pretenee  whatever,  to
return  without  Mr.  Taylor.  The  interval  was  to  me  dreadful.
Imagine,  Sir,  yourself  alone  with  a  maniac,  and  you  have
a  description  of  my  position  for  nearly  two  hours.  At  some
times  during  this  interval  he  would  narrate  with  remarkable
accuracy  any  event  that  had  taken  place  in  his  life,  or  passages
of  tales  he  had  read  ;  he  was  performing  mental  journies  with
the  rapidity  of  thought,  accurately  describing  places  as  if  he
were  present  that  he  had  never  before  seen.

Mr.  Taylor,  upon  hearing  the  facts  of  the  case,  with  a
generosity  and  kindness  I  can  never  forget,  resolved  to  attend
immediately.  He  only  stayed  to  explain  to  an  audience  of
150  persons  his  reasons  for  absenting  himself  so  abruptly.
They,  naturally  thinking  he  was  playing  them  a  hoax,  ques¬
tioned  him,  and  were  clamorous  till  they  heard  the  name.
As  soon  as  my  name  was  mentioned,  a  great  part  of  the
audience  who  knew  me  accompanied  Mr.  Taylor  and  beset
the  house.  I  allowed  them  to  enter,  and  numbers  who  an

*  He  was  rather  fond  of  reading  tales  of  chivalry  which  would  account  for
his  using  such  language.


26


Mesmerism  not  to  be  trifled  with,


hour  before  were  sceptics,  departed  convinced.  They  com¬
municated  to  their  friends  what  they  had  seen,  who  doubting
everything  unless  it  was  corroborated  by  the  evidence  of  their
own  senses,  begged  as  a  favour  to  be  admitted  also.  Thus
on  the  first  evening  (though  my  inclination  was  to  keep  the
affair  secret),  a  chain  of  circumstances  over  which  I  had  no
control  caused  the  reports  to  circulate,  which  produced  an
excitement  and  interest  in  the  public  mind  almost  unparal¬
leled  by  any  other  case.

When  Mr.  Taylor  arrived,  the  boy  was  on  a  mental  journey
to  the  Temperance  Hall,  looking  for  Mr.  Taylor,  and  watch¬
ing  the  young  man’s  actions,  and  accurately  described  the
place  and  persons  there.  I  will  affirm  previous  to  that  time
he  had  neither  seen  the  place  nor  the  lecturer.  The  numerous
persons  continually  pouring  into  the  workshop,  he  did  not
notice.  Having  mentally  travelled  home,  he  cast  his  eyes
about  the  workshop  and  pointing  to  Mr.  Taylor  from  among
a  group  of  persons,  said,  “That  is  the  gentleman  Walton
(the  young  man  who  had  handled  Cook)  was  talking  to  at
the  Hall.”  It  was  impossible  he  could  have  heard  who  was
Mr.  Taylor,  for  among  all  the  persons  who  were  continually
arriving,  there  was  not  a  word  spoken,  except  by  myself  and
the  boy.  We  adopted  many  means  of  awakening  him,  but
in  vain  :  on  our  questioning  the  boy  on  his  own  condition,
he  said,  “  If  I  do  not  wake  in  20  minutes ,  you  must  take  me
to  bed,  and,  if  I  am  not  awake  in  the  morning,  you  must
send  for  this  gentleman  ”  Precisely  on  the  expiration  of  20
minutes,  he  seized  my  hand  and  dragged  me  away  as  quickly
as  he  could  through  a  dark  room,  avoiding  any  obstacle  in
the  way,  and  threw  himself  on  the  bed.  Some  of  the  most
striking  of  his  clairvoyant  powers  showed  themselves  during
the  night :  and  several  severe  and  satisfactory  tests  were  ap¬
plied,  convincing  to  all  who  applied  them.

After  a  long,  long,  and  wearying  night  the  morning  came
at  last ;  but  with  it  no  hope,  no  improvement :  his  eyes  re¬
mained  hermetically  sealed  :  he  rose,  washed  himself,  and
ate  his  breakfast,  and  could  observe  the  most  minute  object
with  as  great  accuracy  as  if  he  was  in  his  normal  condition.
The  whole  of  Friday  passed  in  unsuccessful  attempts  to  restore
him.  Towards  the  latter  part  of  the  day  he  opened  his  eyes  :
but  to  me  his  aspect  was  more  distressing  than  before :  his
looks  excited  pity  in  all  who  saw  him.  The  great  excitement
caused  in  the  town  induced  hundreds  of  persons  to  visit  him,
by  which,  from  a  desire  on  my  part  that  all  by  seeing  him
should  be  convinced,  I  was  little  aware  I  was  retarding  his
recovery.


by  Mr.  W.  G.  Smithy  of  Deptford.


27


Nothing  particular  occurred  that  day  :  but  at  night  I  was
honoured  with  a  visit  from  the  police,  as  I  previously  nar¬
rated.  When  morning  arrived  the  lad  was  conscious  of  all
that  had  taken  place,  and  added  that  had  they  taken  us  away
he  would  have  followed  wherever  I  went :  for  separation  from
me  would  have  injured  him.

Throughout  the  whole  of  Saturday  numerous  persons
visited  the  case,  including  several  medical  men,  also  a  Mr.  D.
Hope,  now  keeping  a  small  chemist  and  druggist’s  shop  on
Deptford  Bridge,  but  then  a  medical  student  on  board  the
Dreadnought  Hospital  Ship,  all  of  whom  declared  the  boy  to
be  in  a  very  extraordinary  state.  In  their  experience  they
had  never  seen  such  a  case  before.  Mr.  Hope  also  to  test
whether  the  boy  was  insensible  to  pain,  slyly  ran  a  needle
into  his  foot,  and  declared  before  a  company  of  respectable
inhabitants  in  a  neighbouring  tavern  he  was  in  the  habit  of
visiting,  that  there  was  not  the  slightest  manifestation  of
pain,  and  from  his  conversation  led  every  one  to  believe  in
the  reality  of  the  mesmeric  trance.  This  Mr.  Hope  was  not
only  exceedingly  interested  in  the  lad,  but  did  all  he  could  to
persuade  him  to  take  a  powder  he  had  prepared,  as  there
had  been  no  natural  relief  from  Thursday  morning  till  Sunday
morning.  But  the  boy  resolutely  persisted  that  “  medicine
would  do  him  no  good.”  How  true  must  have  been  the
boy’s  prevision,  as  was  subsequently  shewn  by  the  written
communication  you  so  kindly  forwarded  to  me,  and  which  in
my  then  critical  situation,  although  I  had  a  firm  belief  in  the
boy’s  ultimate  recovery,  burst  through  the  dark  clouds  of
despondency,  diffused  a  bright  ray  of  hope,  and  cheered  me
in  the  severest  moments  of  trial  through  which  I  had  after¬
wards  to  struggle.  At  this  crisis  your  kind  advice  raised  my
drooping  spirits,  imparted  fresh  vigour  to  my  exertions,  and
nerved  me  to  the  task  I  had  before  me.

Several  persons  determined  should  any  thing  serious  have
occurred  to  have  raised  a  subscription  to  prosecute  me.
Mr.  Hope  afterwards  wrote  an  untrue  and  impudent  letter  in
The  Times,  and  refused  to  repeat  his  charges  of  deception
before  a  meeting  of  medical  gentlemen  that  was  convened.
The  chairman  of  that  meeting,  Mr.  Atkins,  surgeon,  affirm¬
ing  “  that  there  ivas  neither  delusion  nor  collusion  in  the  case.”

On  Saturday  afternoon  my  situation  and  that  of  my
patient  became  to  myself  and  all  concerned  very  alarming.
About  this  time,  sir,  my  mother  called  on  you,  when  you,  in
the  most  gentlemanly  and  liberal  manner  gave  your  valuable
advice,  which  led  to  the  boy’s  restoration,  by  our  complying
with  your  injunctions,  much  earlier  than  could  otherwise  have


28


Mesmerism  not  to  be  trifled  with.


been  done.  You  will  recollect,  sir,  you  requested  no  one
should  touch  the  patient  but  the  mesmeriser;  that  he  should
also  have  whatever  he  desired,  provided  it  appeared  not
decidedly  improper  :  but  to  give  him  no  medicine  unless  he
prescribed  it  himself,  as  he  would  be  his  own  physician.
These  injunctions  were  strictly  adhered  to,  and  after  the
crisis,  which  appeared  about  10.  30  p.m.,  a  gradual  improve¬
ment  took  place,  and  on  Sunday,  6  p.m.,  (as  the  boy  had
predicted,)  he  returned  to  his  normal  condition,  though  he
laboured  under  extreme  nervous  debility  for  two  or  three  days
afterwards,  and  it  required  great  care  to  subdue  any  returning
paroxysm.

During  the  trance  he  could  relate  with  astonishing  accu¬
racy  all  the  minutiae  of  the  coming  pains  and  paroxysms,
the  date  to  the  very  minute,  and  the  nature  of  the  pain  and
the  means  to  remove  it ;  water  was  his  sovereign  remedy,
external  and  internal,  with  mesmerism,  to  his  ultimate  re¬
covery.  All  his  statements  were  verified  to  the  letter  in  the
presence  repeatedly  of  a  numerous  circle  of  friends,  who
stood  by  me  during  my  trials,  and  prevented  that  depression
of  spirits  which  might  possibly  have  occurred  had  I  been
thoroughly  deserted.  Some  of  those  gentlemen  had  the
pleasure  of  meeting  you  at  one  of  your  mesmeric  demonstra¬
tions  some  short  time  afterwards,  who  could  testify  to  the
genuineness  of  the  statements  I  now  advance,  and  whose
names,  a  delicacy  on  their  parts  prevents  me  from  pub¬
lishing.

But  to  return  to  Mr.  D.  Hope,  for  I  cannot  allow  such
conduct  to  pass  unnoticed,  reflecting  as  it  does  on  the  cha¬
racters  of  all  persons  concerned.  Mr.  D.  Hope’s  letter  was
inserted  in  The  Times,  and  all  his  assertions  stereotyped  in
every  brain  as  facts.  But  how  was  it  they  were  never  contra¬
dicted  ?  They  were  replied  to  and  flatly  denied  by  me  in  an
answer  I  wrote.  Not  only  the  editor  of  that  public  journal
but  the  editor  of  The  Examiner  treated  my  communications
in  the  most  contemptuous  manner — never  noticed  them ;  they
published  untruth,  and  denied  me  an  opportunity  of  replying.
So  much  for  the  liberty  of  the  press.

Thus  I  have  furnished  you  with  a  brief  statement  of  facts
that  occurred  in  connexion  with  this  extraordinary  case ;  as  I
have  given  them  from  memory  I  have  omitted  a  considerable
portion ;  for  from  the  excited  state  of  my  feelings  at  the  time
and  want  of  rest,  not  having  slept  throughout  the  Thursday,
Friday,  and  Saturday,  a  period  of  88  hours,  I  was  unable  to
take  notes.  The  lad  required  my  undivided  attention,  nor


Cure  of  Deafness  and  Dumbness  by  Mesmerism.  29

could  I  attempt  to  use  a  pen  in  his  presence,  for  his  curiosity
to  know  what  I  wrote  was  intense,  and  if  unsatisfied  would
have  produced  immediate  paroxysms,  and  yet  I  dared  not
read  anything  about  his  own  case  to  him.  Some  accounts
reached  the  newspapers  greatly  exaggerating  the  leading
features  of  the  case  :  many  were  correct,  but  no  authentic
statement  has  before  been  published.

I  do  trust  this  letter  will  remove  the  impression  from  the
minds  of  all  who  have  hitherto  been  misled  as  to  the  effects
produced  on  the  “  boy  Cook  of  Deptford,”  and  make  it  gene¬
rally  known  that  mesmerism,  instead  of  injuring  him,  has,
when  subsequently  properly  applied,  contributed  very  largely
to  restore  to  health  a  previously  weak  and  ailing  constitution.*
I  have  mesmerised  him  a  great  deal  since  in  accordance  with
his  own  wish,  as  he  continually  was  saying  during  his  trance
that  he  must  be  mesmerised  a  great  deal  before  he  “  got
quite  well.”

Thanking  you  sincerely  for  the  interest  you  have  taken  in
this  case,  and  the  courteous  and  kind  manner  in  which  you
have  always  received  me  and  imparted  so  cheerfully  any  in¬
formation  I  have  required,

I  remain,  my  dear  Sir,  with  respect  and  gratitude,

Yours  very  sincerely,

To  Dr.  Elliotson.  Wm.  G.  Smith.


VII.  Cure  of  Deafness  and  Dumbness  of  above  nine  years
standing.  By  M.  La  Fontaine.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

Sir, — Having  received  from  my  friend.  Dr.  Bunnett,  the
accompanying  letter  by  M.  La  Fontaine,  and  believing  that
the  facts  therein  stated  are  of  great  importance,  I  forward
it  to  you  in  the  hope  that  it  may  be  inserted  in  the  next
number  of  your  journal.

I  am,  Sir,  your  obedient  servant,

13,  North  Audley  Street,  John  Ashburner.

6th  Nov.,  1846.

Bagneres  de  Bigorre,
Aug.  30,  1846.

Sir, — Your  letter  of  July  19,  arrived  but  yesterday ;  I
lose  no  time  in  complying  with  your  request.

Miss  Georgiana  Burton,  11  years  old,  became  deaf  and


*  He  is  a  surviving  twin — the  last  child,  and  has  a  sister  subject  to  fits.  The
father  and  mother  and  nearly  all  the  family  are  of  highly  nervous  temperaments.


30


Clairvoyance  and  Double  Consciousness.


dumb  at  nine  months,  after  convulsions.  She  had  also  a
paralysis  of  the  face,  which  was  so  drawn  that  the  left  corner
of  her  mouth  almost  touched  her  eye.  She  heard  only  when
her  left  ear  was  shouted  into,  and  then  could  not  distinguish
sounds.

Drs.  Donellan  and  Mesnier  proposed  an  operation  in  the
throat ;  but  did  not  promise  success.

On  the  29th  of  January,  1843,  her  family  brought  her
to  me.  Having  ascertained  that  her  case  was  what  I  have
mentioned,  I  determined  to  mesmerise  her  without  sending
her  to  sleep.

In  an  hour  there  was  some  effect  on  her  sensibility,  and
afterwards  she  heard  and  endeavoured  to  repeat  all  the  vocal
sounds.

I  continued  to  mesmerise  her  every  other  day  for  three
months.  At  the  end  of  this  period,  her  deafness  was  com¬
pletely  removed ;  as  were  also  the  palsy  and  contraction  of  her
features ;  and  by  the  1st  of  May  she  was  really  a  pretty  child.

During  the  three  months  of  treatment,  her  sisters  taught
her  to  read,  write  and  reckon,  and  to  speak.  But  for  an
individual  to  learn  to  speak  who  has  been  deaf  and  dumb,
and  who  has  been  made  to  understand  in  any  way,  requires
much  time  and  patience.  A  child  is  a  year  old  before  it  is
taught  to  say  papa,  &c.

The  last  time  I  saw  her  was  in  June,  1844.  Her  hearing
continued  :  she  did  not  yet  speak  well.  Her  face  was  natural,
except  when  she  smiled,  and  then  a  little  contraction  appeared.

I  trust,  sir,  that  this  account  will  be  satisfactory  to  you.
If  you  desire  further  information  I  shall  be  in  Paris  about
the  19th  of  September,  and  at  your  service.

I  have  the  honour  to  remain,  &c.,

Ch.  La  Fontaine.

64,  Rue  Neuve  des  Mathurins,  Paris.


VIII.  Instances  of  Clairvoyance  and  Double  Consciousness
independent  of  Mesmerism,  in  a  Father  and  his  grown-up
Children.  By  one  of  the  Parties;  in  a  Letter  to  Mr.  Clark,
Surgeon,  of  York  Place,  Kingsland  Road.

July  11th,  1846.

Sir, — The  present  very  interesting  number  of  The  Zoist *
you  have  so  kindly  lent  me  for  perusal  has  brought  to  my  re¬
collection  cases  of  double  consciousness  in  my  own  family.*

*  This  (the  14th)  number  contained  some  wonderful  instances  of  double
consciousness  without  mesmerism. — Zoist.


Clairvoyance  and  Double  Consciousness.


31


In  the  years  1841-2  my  dear  respected  father  was  fre¬
quently  attacked  with  mental  derangement,  originating  greatly
I  believe  from  the  knowledge  of  the  unfortunate  circumstances
in  which  I,  his  beloved  daughter,  was  placed,  owing  to  the
sudden  death  of  my  husband.

The  various  scenes  of  mental  delusion  I  was  called  to
witness  are  not  uncommon  to  gentlemen  of  your  profession.
I  therefore  pass  them  over  simply  to  relate  his  strange  know¬
ledge  of  events.

When  he  was  first  attacked,  I  went  to  see  him,  but  it
was  only  at  times  that  he  recognized  me.

My  attention  was  first  excited  by  the  following  incident.
So  soon  as  the  meat  for  dinner  was  brought  from  the  butch¬
er’s,  of  which  he  could  have  no  possible  knowledge,  being
confined  to  his  bed  and  out  of  the  reach  of  either  seeing  or
hearing,  he  exclaimed,  (pointing  to  the  floor  underneath  which
was  the  room  it  was  in),  “  What  a  nice  rump-steak,  I  will
have  some.”  Struck  with  his  manner  and  also  knowing  that
it  was  not  our  intended  dinner,  I  replied,  “No  father,  there
is  no  rump-steak ;  we  are  going  to  have  mutton  chops  he
went  into  a  great  passion,  declared  that  there  was  rump  steak,
that  he  could  see  it,  and  described  the  dish.  I  went  down
stairs,  and  to  my  utter  astonishment  beheld  it  as  he  related.

In  the  morning,  without  making  known  my  intention,  I
took  a  basket  and  went  into  the  garden  to  cut  some  cabbages
and  gather  strawberries.  The  garden  being  at  the  side  of
the  house,  where  there  was  no  window  to  look  into  it,  it  was
impossible  for  him  to  see  me  by  ordinary  vision.  However,
he  turned  to  my  sister,  saying,  “  That  basket  into  which
Betsey  is  putting  the  cabbages  and  strawberries  had  better  be
moved  out  of  the  sun  or  the  fruit  will  be  spoiled ;  tell  her
she  is  not  gathering  strawberries  from  the  best  bed  ;  she  had
better  go  to  the  other.  When  I  was  told  of  it,  I  was  com¬
pletely  puzzled.  During  the  time  of  my  visit,  wherever  I
went,  whatever  I  did  or  thought  of,  was  open  to  his  view.
My  sister  afterwards  informed  me  that  his  medical  attendant
lent  her  some  books  for  her  perusal ;  one  morning  my  father
said  to  her,  “  The  Doctor  sends  his  respects  and  will  be  obliged
for  the  books/’  Supposing  some  message  had  been  sent,  my
sister  replied,  “Very  well.”  In  the  course  of  a  short  time
after,  the  Doctor’s  boy  arrived  with  his  master’s  respects  and
request  for  the  books.  On  enquiry  she  found  no  previous
message  had  been  sent,  nor  enquiry  made  for  them.  We
have  both  come  to  the  conclusion  that  he  must  mentally  have
travelled  to  the  doctor’s  and  heard  the  message  :  I  should
think  the  distance  three  quarters  of  a  mile.


32


Clairvoyance  and  Double  Consciousness,


Another  time  lie  said  to  my  sister,  “  There  is  a  handsome
young  man  and  an  old  woman  coming  by  the  coach  this  after¬
noon  to  see  me.”  Sure  enough  to  her  surprise,  when  the  coach
arrived,  it  brought  my  brother  and  a  nurse  for  my  father.  No
one  had  any  knowledge  of  my  brother’s  coming  or  of  his  bring¬
ing  a  nurse  with  him.  The  distance  from  whence  they  came
was  eleven  miles.  I  wish  to  call  your  attention  to  the  circum¬
stance,  that  here  he  did  not  recognize  the  parties  though  both
well  known  to  him  ;  calling  my  brother  a  young  man  and  the
nurse  an  old  woman,  instead  of  mentioning  their  names.

When  in  his  senses  he  knew  nothing  of  what  had  trans¬
pired,  and  had  no  recollection  of  my  coming  to  see  him.  He
wasted  away  to  a  skeleton  and  died,  midsummer,  1842,  in
the  64th  year  of  his  age.  He  never,  until  the  time  stated,  had
any  mental  derangement,  though  he  certainly  was  for  years
very  nervous.  At  that  time  I  knew  nothing  of  phrenology,
so  cannot  give  his  development.  I  know  he  was  a  talented
and  very  active  man,  a  kind  and  affectionate  father.

My  second  case  is  that  of  my  eldest  sister,  though  in  pri¬
ority  of  time  before  my  father’s,  yet  not  so  interesting.  She
was  in  a  bad  state  of  health  some  years,  I  suppose  what  might
be  called  nervous.  The  circumstance  I  am  about  to  relate
occurred  during  a  severe  illness  in  which  mental  derangement
took  place.  At  one  time  she  would  take  no  food,  at  another
eat  most  voraciously.  One  day  we  had  ribs  of  beef  for  dinner.
How  it  came  to  her  knowledge  I  could  never  ascertain,  but
so  it  did,  and  she  insisted  to  have  some  for  her  dinner.  I
gave  her  some,  she  wanted  more.  Fearing  to  make  her
worse,  I  would  not  give  it  her :  she  declared  she  would  have
it,  but  soon  after  went  to  sleep.  I  went  quietly  down  stairs,
took  the  meat  out  of  the  kitchen,  carried  it  down  through
the  beer  cellar  into  the  wine  cellar,  covered  it  over  with  a
tub,  put  a  weight  on  it,  went  up  and  found  her  just  as  I  left
her.  During  the  night  through  fatigue  I  fell  asleep,  and  was
awakened  by  her  calling  to  me.  What  was  my  astonishment
when  I  beheld  her  sitting  in  bed  with  a  slice  of  this  beef  cut
the  whole  length  of  the  ribs,  devouring  it  like  a  savage.  I
asked  her  how  she  obtained  it,  and  she  positively  declared  that
she  fetched  it  herself  while  I  slept ;  that  while  lying  in  bed
she  saw  me  go  down,  take  the  meat,  and  she  described  every
particular.  I  believe  she  never  left  her  bed  when  I  hid  it ;
and  had  she,  there  were  three  doors  which  I  closed  after  me,
and  I  must  have  seen  her.  When  she  recovered  she  knew
nothing  about  it,  but  on  a  relapse  told  me  all  the  circum¬
stances  again,  laughing  heartily  at  the  trick  she  had  played  me.

In  1833  she  died  of  the  cholera.


independent  of  Mesmerism.


33


My  next  circumstance  is  different,  not  occurring  under
derangement;  but  accurately  remembered  to  this  day.

My  youngest  sister,  when  seriously  ill  a  few  years  back,
saw  distinctly  the  saucepan  on  the  fire,  and  the  watch,  and
she  told  the  time  by  it.  She  was  terrified  at  herself,  and
mentions  it  now  with  a  sort  of  terror.

I  leave  these  cases  for  your  consideration,  wishing  I  had
known  formerly  as  much  of  mesmerism  as  I  now  do.  I  most
certainly  should  have  made  use  of  its  great  benefits.  I  should
more  minutely  have  watched  these  singular  phenomena.
There  was  much  more,  but  I  cannot  connectedly  remember  it.

To  your  professional  friends  you  can  make  what  use  you
please  of  this  paper ;  I  am  willing  to  come  forward  before
them  at  any  time,  but  my  situation  prevents  me  having  my
name  made  public.  I  do  not  possess  the  firmness  of  an
Elliotson,  or  I  might  not  care  about  publicity  :  my  three
children  hold  me  back ;  the  day  may  come  when  it  may  not
affect  them,  and  then  I  should  like  nothing  better  than  to
declare  publicly  what  mesmerism  has  done  for  me.  I  was
thinking  this  morning  what  an  infinite  source  of  trouble  I
have  been  to  you  three  years  next  week  since  you  first  mes¬
merised  me.  A  waggon-load  of  vagaries  you  have  driven  out
of  my  head,  perhaps  saved  me  from  a  miserable  end.  I
think  I  was  following  in  my  father’s  steps.  My  extreme  ex¬
citability  was  awful :  now  I  have  none  of  it :  I  am  calm
and  take  untoward  circumstances  quietly.  But  had  I  fallen
into  some  mesmerists’  hands,  they  would  have  been  sick  of
me  ere  this.  You  have  persevered,  and  I  have  gained  the
benefit.  And  what  have  you  for  it  ?  just  what  your  master
gets,  (Dr.  Elliotson,  I  mean,)  that  is,  nothing ;  and  I  have
nothing  to  give  you  but  my  gratitude.  Accept  this  then  as
all  I  have  to  offer.

I  remain,  Sir,

Yours  respectfully,

»]/  \1/  vlr

**J>  ^  rj>


Mr.  Clark  informs  us  that  the  writer  of  ‘this  account  has
experienced  the  very  same  affections,  but  in  a  less  intense
degree.  Her  name  is  attached  to  the  account,  but  we  of
course  omitted  it.

Mr.  Clark  was  a  student  of  University  College,  and  has
for  ten  years  fearlessly  admitted  the  truth  of  mesmerism,
practised  it  and  advocated  it,  and  would  at  this  moment  fear¬
lessly  cure  by  its  means,  were  he  allowed,  some  remarkable
VOL.  v.  D


34  On  the  Art  of  making  Madmen  at  pleasure,

cases  in  Shoreditch  Workhouse,  of  which  he  is  surgeon.  But
he  is  forbidden  by  the  philosophical  authorities,  and  nothing
is  done  for  the  poor  sufferers.  We  fear  the  Poor  Law  Com¬
missioners  are  not  without  fault  in  this. — Zoist.


IX.  On  the  Art  of  making  Madmen  at  pleasure.  A  Discourse

delivered  at  the  Athenee  Royal,  in  1846,  by  Dr.  Fossati,

President  of  the  Phrenological  Society  of  Paris.

The  study  of  the  phenomena  of  the  human  mind,  in  all
the  different  phases  of  life,  and  under  the  innumerable  in¬
fluences  which  act  upon  it,  is  full  of  charms  and  instruction,
and  is  inexhaustible.  The  most  profound  observers  and
thinkers  of  all  ages  have  made  it  the  object  of  their  thoughts
and  bequeathed  their  results  in  their  philosophy,  their  morals,
their  legislation,  and  their  religion.  Yet,  since,  notwith¬
standing  all  their  praiseworthy  efforts,  they  were  not  directed
by  the  light  of  natural  science,  they  have  left  us  in  the  chaos
of  principles,  proverbs,  and  maxims,  for  the  most  part  in
opposition  to  each  other  and  of  no  utility  in  the  business  of
life.

The  pretensions  of  some  philosophers  of  the  present  day
to  select  from  all  this  what  is  good  and  reject  what  is  bad,  are
absurd  and  ill  founded ;  for  colours  cannot  be  chosen  in  dark¬
ness,  nor  can  true  gold  be  separated  from  the  false  without
the  aid  of  physical  and  chemical  science :  without  the  light
of  natural  and  physical  science,  sound  philosophy  cannot  be
constructed.  Natural  science  is  the  light,  the  touchstone,  of
the  philosopher,  who  will  find  it  in  cerebral  physiology  only,
— in  the  study  of  the  nervous  system  and  brain  examined  in
their  nature  and  under  the  influence  of  the  different  causes
which  call  them  into  action.

While  pursuing  this  course,  and  devoting  myself  to  in¬
vestigations  into  the  different  forms  of  insanity  and  their
causes,  I  was  struck,  nay,  almost  overwhelmed,  in  discovering
that  a  very  large  number  of  men,  my  brothers,  my  fellow-
creatures,  wrere  plunged  during  their  whole  lives  in  a  kind  of
artificial  insanity ,  by  which  their  reason  and  judgment  were
for  ever  perverted ;  and  I  found,  that  in  all  ancient  times,  as
at  present,  the  remedies  of  this  were  forbidden.

The  truth  which  I  have  the  honour  to  submit  to  your  ex¬
amination,  viz.,  that  madmen  can  be  made  and  are  made,  at
pleasure,  is  not  a  pleasantry,  as  you  might  almost  believe ;  but
is,  on  the  contrary,  a  reality,  as  positive  as  it  is  distressing  and
frightful.  To-day,  and  especially  on  such  an  occasion  as  the  pre-


by  Dr.  Fossati.


35


sent,  I  can  merely  sketch  out  this  subject,  however  fruitful
it  is  in  practical  applications,  and  however  instructive  to  those
who  have  preserved  the  possibility  of  rectifying  their  opinions
and  of  becoming  convinced  that  what  I  declare  to  them  is  a
truth.  There  is  no  time  for  a  more  ample  development,  and
yet  nothing  deserves  the  attention,  the  study,  and  generous
efforts  of  good  men  so  much  as  the  knowledge  of  this  truth.
If  my  convictions  were  to  become  general,  the  makers  of
madmen  at  pleasure  would  soon  disappear  from  the  earth,  to
the  great  blessing  of  mankind ;  and  to  this  result  probably  is
tending  the  progress  which  is  now  making  in  all  positive
science.  Listen  to  me,  therefore,  kindly  for  a  few  moments.

Do  not  imagine  that  I  am  about  to  speak  of  the  artificial
madness  induced  by  various  narcotic  or  spirituous  substances,
which,  when  taken  into  our  stomach  or  otherwise  conveyed
to  our  organs,  produce  derangement  in  our  brain.  I  will
limit  myself  to  mentioning  the  chief  of  them.  When  these
substances  are  administered  accidentally  and  at  intervals,  they
occasion  temporary  delirium  or  heaviness  and  stupor;  but
never  true  madness.  All  are  acquainted  with  the  delirium  of
drunkenness  :  with  the  temporary  exaltation  of  certain  facul¬
ties  by  opium,  stramonium,  hyoscyamus,  and  some  varieties
of  mushroom  and  other  analogous  substances.  Hachisch,
which  is  used  by  various  eastern  nations  to  stimulate  and  in¬
toxicate  themselves  and  produce  a  temporary  insanity,  is  the
extract  of  a  species  of  hemp.  M.  Yiray  has  proved  that  this
drug  was  known  to  the  ancients,  and  that  the  Nepenthes  of
Homer, — the  draught  which  Helen  gave  to  Telemachus  in
the  palace  of  Menelaus,  in  order  to  destroy  the  memory  of
his  sorrows,  was  hachisch.  The  intoxication  by  this  substance,
Michaud  says,  is  characterized  by  a  kind  of  ecstacy,  similar
to  what  is  experienced  by  the  orientals  from  opium.  In
Malabar,  the  beautiful  and  adorned  virgins  who  repair  to  the
temple  to  appease  the  God  of  plenty,  and  begin  to  dance  and
jump,  sending  forth  cries  all  the  time,  to  exhaust  themselves,
to  contort  their  limbs  and  eyes,  to  foam  and  do  horrible  things,
were  under  the  influence  of  a  species  of  electuary,  into  the
composition  of  which  enters  the  Indian  hemp  (Cannabis
Indica),  administered  to  them  by  the  Brahmins  to  deceive
the  people.  De  Kempfer,  who  saw  and  relates  many  of  these
facts,  participated  in  them  with  his  friends,  from  having  taken
a  ball  of  Bengal  electuary  at  a  feast.  They  had  scarcely
swallowed  it,  before  they  began  to  laugh,  to  embrace  each
other,  and,  mounting  their  horses,  they  fancied  they  were
flying  in  the  air  upon  the  wings  of  Pegasus,  and  that  they
were  surrounded  with  rainbows.  Dr.  Moreau,  in  a  work

d  2


36


On  the  Art  of  making  Madmen  at  pleasure,


recently  published,  has  also  made  us  acquainted  with  the  pro¬
perties  of  hachisch,  which  consist  in  causing  the  highest
gaiety,  mad  laughter,  and  a  total  derangement  of  all  the
faculties.  He  tried  it  upon  himself,  and  observed  the  pro¬
gress  of  all  the  psychological  phenomena  of  insanity.

I  might  likewise  describe  to  you  the  fatal  results  of  the
internal  use  of  cantharides,  that  almost  always  leads  to  mad¬
ness,  fatuity,  and  death.  I  have  witnessed  facts  of  this  nature
in  my  own  practice.

Thus  all  spirituous  or  narcotic  substances  given  in  certain
doses,  and  at  intervals,  occasion  certain  forms  of  cerebral
exaltation  or  a  mental  derangement,  which  ceases  as  soon  as
the  action  of  the  substance  on  the  organization  ceases.  If
this  action  is  too  violent,  too  prolonged,  or  too  frequently
repeated,  the  individual  falls  into  a  state  of  muscular  and
intellectual  exhaustion,  and  at  length  into  fatuity  and  stu¬
pidity.  The  Orientals,  and  in  particular  the  Chinese,  while
refusing  to  be  poisoned  by  the  English,  have  become  ac¬
quainted  with  the  dangerous  effects  of  opium  and  hachisch,
just  as  we  of  the  A¥est  have  become  acquainted  with  the  inju¬
rious  effects  of  the  abuse  of  spirituous  liquors.

Enough  upon  the  temporary  delirium,  and  madness  pro¬
duced  by  medicinal  substances.  I  could  say  much  more ;  but
this  is  not  the  object  of  my  discourse.  There  is  another  direct
way  to  the  brain,  and  of  this  I  now  purpose  to  speak.

Cerebral  physiologists  maintain  that  the  moral  and  intel¬
lectual  man,  such  as  we  see  him  during  the  whole  of  his  exist¬
ence,  is  invariably  the  result  of  a  twofold  source  of  causes  or
determining  circumstances.  First :  his  organization,  such
as  is  possessed  by  every  individual,  more  or  less  good,  more  or
less  perfect,  and  generally  very  different  in  different  persons.

Secondly :  all  the  ideas  and  notions  acquired  by  the
external  senses,  all  the  impressions  and  all  the  sensations,  all
the  knowledge  which  is  furnished  by  our  instructors,  by  every
one  with  whom  we  associate,  or  with  whom  we  are  in  contact
in  life,  from  the  day  of  our  birth  to  the  day  of  our  death.

If  this  is  the  twofold  source  of  our  moral  and  intellectual
existence,  (and  it  is  unquestionable),  you  will  perceive  how
much  liberty  of  action  remains  for  the  poor  human  being
from  the  moment  of  his  birth.  He  cannot  choose  his  sensa¬
tions,  nor  give  himself  ideas  and  notions  different  from  those
which  have  been  given  to  him  by  the  persons  and  objects
around  him.  This  is  the  reason  the  people  speak  Chinese  in
China ;  French  in  France ;  are  Mussulmans  in  Turkey  ;
Christian  in  Spain;  Brahminists  or  Budhists  in  India ;  and
Jewrs  every  where.  This  is  the  reason  that  mankind  is  igno-


by  Dr.  Fossati.


37


rant  in  Africa  and  Asia,  and  somewhat  informed  in  Europe.
This  is,  finally,  the  reason  why  men  are  wood-cutters  or
forgers  of  metal  on  mountains  and  in  forests,  and  hair¬
dressers,  cabinet-makers,  or  painters  at  Paris.

Nature  in  vain  produces  fine  and  vigorous  organizations,
fitted  to  display  talents  and  capacities  of  the  highest  order,  if
the  human  being  from  the  earliest  infancy  is  in  the  hands  of
persons  who  prevent  just  and  sound  ideas  from  reaching  his
intellect,*  if,  on  the  contrary,  all  sorts  of  false  absurdity,  ex¬
travagant  ideas,  are  insinuated  into  him,  this  poor  creature
who  does  not  yet  possess  reasoning  power,  who,  with  his
innate  craving  for  knowledge  takes  in  with  perfect  confidence
all  the  instruction  which  is  given  to  him,  will  become  pre¬
cisely  such  a  moral  and  intellectual  being  as  you  will  have
fashioned  him,  and  nothing  else.

Eirst,  consider  what  a  human  being  becomes  in  the  ab¬
sence  of  all  communication  with  the  external  world ;  in  the
privation  of  all  impressions  upon  his  perceptive  faculties;  in  the
negation  of  all  kind  of  instruction.  You  have  a  more  or  less
complete  idiot,  accordingly  as  he  receives  fewr  or  more  impres¬
sions  in  his  form  of  existence.  This  frightful  crime  has  been
committed,  and  I  can  prove  to  you  that  idiots  have  been
made  artificially  at  pleasure.  Permit  me  to  adduce  two  ex¬
amples  only  taken  from  modern  times;  it  is  well  for  you  to
be  acquainted  with  them.

The  first  is  the  child  called  the  Nuremburg  child,  brought
up  in  a  dungeon  from  his  earliest  infancy ;  set  at  liberty  when
16  years  of  age,  and  abandoned  in  the  streets  of  Nuremburg,
he  excited  the  attention  of  the  magistrates,  who  ordered  him
to  be  educated  at  the  expense  of  the  city.  In  May,  1825,
this  young  man  was  observed  at  one  of  the  gates  of  the  town,
standing  motionless.  He  was  silent,  but  weeping ;  in  his
hand  was  a  letter  addressed  to  an  officer  of  the  garrison  of
the  city.  This  announced  that  from  4  to  16  years  of  age,  he
had  been  confined  in  a  cell,  where  he  had  been  baptized  (the
good  and  true  Christians  !)  and  was  named  Caspar  Hauser.
On  being  questioned,  he  proved  dumb,  and  wept :  the  word
which  he  most  frequently  pronounced  was  haara,  in  order  to
express  his  desire  to  return  to  his  cell.  He  was  below  the
middle  stature,  of  a  mild  and  open  countenance,  his  eyes
were  weak,  but  his  look  had  an  agreeable  expression.  His
cell  was  dark,  about  six  feet  long,  and  four  broad,  and  he
had  been  supplied  with  bread,  a  pitcher  of  water,  and  straw
for  a  bed  :  his  feet  had  been  always  bare,  and  his  only  covering
a  shirt.  In  his  imprisonment  he  had  suffered  more  from
thirst  than  from  hunger  :  he  had  no  notion  of  time,  and


38  On  the  Art  of  making  Madmen  at  pleasure,

9

therefore  could  not  tell  how  long  he  had  been  in  captivity.  He
knew  no  language,  for  the  man  who  had  charge  of  him  never
spoke  more  than  a  few  words  to  him,  the  meaning  of  which
he  knew  but  imperfectly.  When  he  joined  the  world,  all  his
sensations  were  at  first  very  acute ;  light,  motion,  noise,  the
variety  of  objects  gave  him  indescribable  annoyance.  Music
gave  him  the  first  agreeable  sensation.  He  afterwards  became
able  to  notice  a  beginning  of  order  in  the  impressions  made
upon  him.

The  other  example  is  more  recent,  and  occurred  at  Paris.
In  1838  the  newspapers  announced  that  a  young  man,  named
Willand,  had  always  been  kept  in  solitude  by  his  father,  up
to  the  age  of  twenty.  The  phrenological  society  of  Paris
appointed  a  committee  to  examine  him  and  draw  up  a  report.
The  committee  met  at  the  Hospital  St.  Antoine,  where  the
young  man  had  been  placed,  and  I  drew  up  the  report.  He
presented  much  analogy  with  Hauser ;  but,  his  separation
from  society  having  been  less  rigorous,  his  idiotism  was  less
perfect ;  and  the  knowledge  which  he  had  acquired,  though
scanty,  enabled  him  to  answer  our  questions  tolerably.  He
spoke  French  pretty  well,  but  was  ignorant  of  almost  every
thing  :  he  was  ignorant  of  the  meaning  of  amusing  onesself
and  growing  sick  of  anything,  had  some  confused  notion  of
God,  king,  and  law,  and  had  some  idea  of  design,  though
not  more  than  a  child  four  years  old.  His  father  frequently
spoke  to  him  and  read  him  the  newspapers ;  and  his  mother
spoke  to  him  occasionally  through  the  door  of  his  cell :  con¬
sequently  his  faculties  had  been  cultivated  to  a  certain
degree.

Willand  was  short,  of  a  lymphatic  temperament,  weak,
unable  to  walk,  pale  and  thin ;  but  had  an  agreeable  physiog¬
nomy.  His  voice  had  no  pitch  :  he  could  not  bear  the  light.
His  forehead  was  very  good,  and  the  rest  of  his  head  well
developed.  Our  craniological  observations  agreed  with  his
psychological  manifestations;  and  we  found  in  him  the  rudi¬
ments  of  the  more  or  less  energetic  faculties  which  his  organ¬
ization  indicated,  but  which  had  remained  inactive  through
his  forced  isolation  for  so  many  years.

Now,  let  the  adversaries  of  cerebral  physiology  affect  as
much  as  they  please  not  to  perceive  the  fact,  which  we  pro¬
claim  ;  let  them  repeat  to  satiety  that  as  soon  as  a  man  has
the  basis  of  crime — to  use  their  miserable  language — we
must  of  necessity  commit  crime;  we  shall  always  answer
them  with  facts  in  our  hands,  that  it  is  not  enough  to  have  a
determinate  cerebral  organization,  for  the  intellectual  and
moral  phenomena  to  be  produced  which  depend  upon  it,  but


by  Dr.  Fossati.


39


that  every  organ  must  be  excited,  exercised  and  cultivated,
for  it  to  manifest  its  peculiar  faculty  more  or  less  energeti¬
cally.

If  the  art  of  making  idiots  at  pleasure  exists,  the  art  of
making  madmen  intentionally  also  exists.  I  must  explain
and  make  myself  well  understood  upon  this  point.

Madness  is  a  derangement  of  the  functions  of  the  brain.
This  derangement  is  usually  of  long  duration  and  without
fever.  The  ideas  and  sensations  are  either  generally  or  par¬
tially  at  variance  with  the  laws  of  the  functions  of  a  regu¬
lar  organization,  and  with  the  real  condition  of  external
objects.  In  madness,  the  organs  of  voluntary  motion  and
those  of  nutrition  are  usually  not  affected,  and  consequently
madmen  walk  and  use  all  their  limbs,  eat  and  digest,  like  the
rest  of  the  world.

Now  it  is  evident  that  whenever  we  cause  erroneous  ideas
to  enter  into  the  intellect  of  persons,  or  give  false  sen¬
sations,  impressions,  or  notions,  which  are  not  in  accordance
with  the  real  state  of  things,  we  have  the  power  of  making
madmen  of  them.  If  afterwards  we  employ  all  kinds  of
means,  even  the  most  violent,  to  prevent  the  intellect  from
becoming  enlightened  by  the  true  knowledge  of  facts ;  if  we
exert  ourselves  to  prevent  the  judgment  from  ever  establish¬
ing  itself  upon  anything  but  hypotheses  and  imaginary  fan¬
cies,  we  shall  prevent  the  reason  of  these  unfortunate  persons
from  ever  being  established.

To  effect  this,  it  is  necessary  only  for  a  certain  number  of
people  to  obtain  possession  of  one  or  more  of  the  young  chil¬
dren  of  a  country,  before  their  reason  and  judgment  are
formed,  and  to  introduce  or  inoculate  into  their  feeble  intel¬
lects  false  and  absurd  ideas  of  the  phenonena  which  surround
them  :  to  make  them  believe,  for  example,  that  there  exist
an  infinite  number  of  invisible  personages  who  are  the  cause
of  every  thing  which  strikes  them ;  to  give  these  beings  ex¬
traordinary  powers,  and  caprices,  and  monstrous  passions ;
then  to  say  that  they  are  charged  by  these  beings  to  execute
their  wishes  in  this  world;  to  avenge  them,  serve  them,  satisfy
them  in  every  thing.  You  will  then  see  that  those  people  will
have  created  an  immense  power  over  these  their  unfortunate
fellow  creatures,  deranged  fellow  creatures,  whom  they  have
thus  fashioned,  and  may  even  lead  them  on  through  all  degrees
of  fanaticism  to  assassination,  arson,  destruction,  and  martyr¬
dom,  that  is  to  say,  to  suicide.  Such  monomaniacs,  for  they
are  mad  in  one  order  only  of  ideas,  retain  almost  all  their
mental  faculties,  no  less  than  the  power  of  motion  and  the
nutritive  functions,  with  the  exception  of  those  only  in


40  On  the  Art  of  making  Madmen  at  pleasure,

which  they  are  deranged.  We,  therefore,  see  the  difficulty  of
recognizing  this  kind  of  insanity  ;  especially,  if  the  majority
have  been  taught  the  same  things.  The  banker,  mentioned
by  Gall,  as  believing  that  his  head  was  made  of  glass,  carried
on  his  affairs  very  well,  kept  his  accounts  and  conducted  his
correspondence  correctly,  and  his  insanity  betrayed  itself  only
when  the  nature  of  his  head  was  spoken  of.  It  is  the  same
with  artificial  madmen :  you  do  not  perceive  they  are  such
unless  you  strike  the  diseased  mental  chord  and  are  not  mad
like  themselves.  But  it  may  be  said;  it  is  a  gratuitous
assumption  to  suppose  that  any  persons  can  have  the  horrible
design  and  a  regular  system  of  so  training  human  beings  that
reason  and  judgment  can  no  longer  shine  upon  them :  it
would  be  the  most  atrocious  of  crimes,  to  deprive  a  man  of
reason  and  intelligence  which  are  bestowed  upon  him  in  order
to  place  him  above  all  other  animals :  it  would  be  a  crime
against  God  and  man :  it  is  impossible.

Is  it  impossible?

Now  do  I  feel  the  shortness  of  the  time  allowed  me  to  lay
open  to  you  the  horrible  plots  of  the  numerous  associations
which  have  no  other  object  than  this,  and  to  display  the
hideous  picture  of  horrors  perpetrated  upon  artificial  madmen.
I  should  like  to  inform  you  of  the  schemes  of  all  the  makers
of  madmen  of  all  times  and  in  all  countries,  and  unfortunately
of  the  present  day  likewise.  Let  us  take  a  few  instances
only,  and  these  from  distant  lands ;  from  the  east, — Turkey,
India,  and  China, — countries  of  which  I  am  more  at  liberty
to  speak.  Consider  all  the  wars  and  massacres  committed  by
the  believers  in  all  false  religions ;  consider  whether  there  is
not  delirium  and  furious  madness  in  the  conduct  of  these
unfortunate  wretches.  I  will  borrow  from  the  elegant  pen  of
a  great  philosopher  of  the  last  century  the  description  of  the
preparation  for  a  religious  war.

“A  general  warlike  movement  (says  Volney*)  took  place
in  the  two  Tartar  and  Mussulman  empires.  On  every  side
armed  men  were  assembled;  provisions,  munitions,  and  all
the  murderous  apparatus  of  war  were  displayed ;  and  in  both
nations,  the  temples,  beset  by  an  immense  multitude,  pre¬
sented  a  scene  which  fixed  my  attention.  On  one  hand,  the
Mussulmans  assembled  before  their  mosques,  were  washing
their  hands  and  feet,  paring  their  nails,  and  combing  their
beards;  then  spreading  carpets  upon  the  ground,  and  turn¬
ing  towards  the  south,  their  arms  sometimes  extended,  some¬
times  folded,  they  made  genuflexions  and  prostrations ;  and,

in  remembrance  of  the  reverses  which  thev  had  suffered  in

*

*  Les  Ruines,  p.  60.


by  Dr.  Fossati.


41


the  last  war,  exclaimed,  *  Merciful  God!  compassionate
God  !  has  thou  abandoned  thy  faithful  people  ?  Thou  who
promised  to  thy  Prophet  the  dominion  over  nations  and  sig¬
nalized  their  religion  by  so  many  triumphs,  why  dost  thou
deliver  thy  true  believers  into  the  hands  of  infidelity  V  and
the  Imans  and  Santous  said  to  the  people,  ‘  It  is  the  punish¬
ment  of  your  iniquities ;  you  eat  pork,  you  drink  wine,  you
touch  unclean  things  :  God  has  punished  you.  Repent,  purify
yourselves,  rehearse  your  creed,  fast  from  morning  to  night,
give  the  tenth  of  your  property  to  the  mosques,  go  to  Mecca,
and  God  will  give  you  the  victory/  Then  the  people  taking
heart,  uttered  loud  cries ;  ‘  There  is  but  one  God/  they
shouted  furiously,  f  and  Mahomet  is  his  prophet ;  cursed  be
ever  one  who  believes  it  not.  God  of  Mercy,  grant  to  us
to  exterminate  these  Christians :  it  is  for  thy  glory  that  we
fight,  and  our  death  is  martyrdom  for  thy  name/  Then  of¬
fering  up  victims,  they  prepared  for  battle.

“  On  the  other  hand,  the  Russians  on  their  knees  ex¬
claimed,  ‘  Let  us  return  thanks  to  God  and  celebrate  his  power :
he  has  strengthened  our  arms  to  humble  our  enemies.  Mer¬
ciful  God,  hear  our  prayers ;  to  please  thee,  we  will  pass
three  days  without  tasting  meat  or  eggs.  Grant  to  us  to  ex¬
terminate  these  impious  Mahometans,  and  overthrow  their  em¬
pire  :  we  will  give  thee  the  tenth  of  the  spoil,  and  build  you
more  temples/  And  the  priests  filled  the  churches  with  clouds
of  incense  and  said  to  the  people,  (We  are  praying  for  you,
and  God  accepts  our  incense  and  blesses  your  arms.  Continue
to  fast  and  to  fight :  confess  to  us  your  secret  faults ;  give  your
property  to  the  church ;  we  will  absolve  you  from  your  sins,
and  you  shall  die  in  a  state  of  grace/  And  they  sprinkled
water  upon  the  people,  and  distributed  little  bones  of  dead
persons  to  make  amulets  and  talismen:  and  the  people  breathed
nothing  but  war  and  battle .”

There  is  no  necessity  for  me  to  quote  the  terrible  executions
of  the  Christian  missionaries  by  the  Chinese.  They  are  well
known.  I  need  not  remind  you  of  the  many  millions  of  their
fellow-creatures  exterminated  by  Christians  in  America,  Africa
and  Asia,  in  short  every  where.

A  soon  as  a  man  fancies  he  will  serve  God  by  massacreing
other  men,  he  is  ready  for  every  atrocity.  Have  we  not  wit¬
nessed  men  in  their  furious  delirium  entering  by  night  into
the  houses  of  those  who  held  opinions  and  creeds  different
from  their  own,  and,  without  having  received  the  least  injury,
or  provocation,  or  reason  of  complaint,  nay,  even  without
knowing  them,  murdering  them  in  their  beds  or  wherever


42


On  the  Art  of  making  Madmen  at  pleasure }


else  they  were  found.  You  are  aware  that  I  allude  to  the
massacre  of  St.  Bartholomew.

Again,  when  people  are  made  to  believe  that  God  takes
pleasure  in  the  sufferings,  privations,  and  torments,  which
we  inflict  upon  our  bodies,  the  unfortunate  wretches  whose
reason  has  been  thus  alienated  are  led  from  fasting  and  fla¬
gellations  to  suicide,  that  is,  to  the  sacrifice  of  life  amidst
dreadful  torments.

The  Indians,  believing  that  human  sacrifices  are  agreeable
to  their  gods,  refuse  to  give  evidence  for  the  purposes  of
justice  in  questions  of  this  nature.  In  different  parts  of  Hin-
dostan  the  efforts  of  the  resident  English  have  not  succeeded
in  putting  an  end  to  human  sacrifices.  The  Indian  news¬
papers  of  last  year  report  that  the  Rajah  of  Mogador  having
died  on  the  day  of  a  solemn  festival,  his  corpse  was  carried
to  Marlesch,  near  Serampore,  and  burnt  during  the  night :
and  his  widow,  sixteen  years  old,  could  not  be  prevented  from
perishing  upon  the  same  pile,  firmly  believing  that  the  sacri¬
fice  would  be  agreeable  to  her  gods  and  serviceable  in  the  next
world.*  If  this  was  not  a  genuine  monomaniacal  suicide,  I
know  no  other  more  real.  But  here,  I  beg  you  carefully  to
observe,  it  is  artificial ;  for  if  others  had  not  persuaded  this
poor  creature  that  it  would  be  very  useful  to  her  to  be  burnt
alive,  she  certainly  would  not  have  acted  thus.  They  made
her  mad,  they  deranged  her  reason,  and  she  acted  accordingly.

And  when  formerly,  in  our  western  countries,  at  the
bloody  ceremony,  called  auto  da  fe ,  the  execution  of  the
poor  wretches  convicted  of  heresy  took  place,  and  they  al¬
lowed  themselves,  placed  upon  a  pile  in  a  public  place,  to  be
burnt  alive,  rather  than  give  satisfaction  to  other  madmen
who  had  got  possession  of  their  persons,  do  you  not  perceive,
in  all  these  acts,  ferocious,  incorrigible  madmen,  rendered  so
artificially?  We  shudder  at  thinking  of  the  madness  of  the
spectators  and  executioners,  of  the  kings  and  high  officers
coolly  attending  and  even  amusing  themselves  with  such  sacri¬
fices.  The  miserable  objects,  in  their  frightful  delirium,  be¬
lieved  that  it  was  a  work  very  pleasant  to  God.  To  so  enor¬
mous  a  degree  of  madness  can  men  be  artificially  brought !
Acknowledge  with  me,  at  least  for  the  credit  of  our  nature,
that  all  these  were  in  a  true  state  of  artificial  insanity.

I  could  recite  other  instances  without  end,  but  I  am  con¬
tented  to  have  proved  to  you,  that  man  can  make  and  does

*  Within  the  last  few  weeks  was  a  statement  in  the  Patriot  newspaper,  that
nearly  100  human  beings  were  sacrificed  at  Calabar  on  the  occasion  of  the  funeral
of  a  son  of  the  late  king. — Zoist.


by  Dr.  Fossati.


43


make  madmen  at  pleasure.  I  will  add  that  I  think  no  human
being  can  escape  this  frightful  condition,  if  he  is  placed  early
and  entirely  in  the  hands  of  those  who  are  skilful  in  the  art.

If  any  one  satisfied  of  the  justice  of  my  observations
should  enquire  the  way  to  escape  this  insanity,  since  we  are  not
able  in  our  early  childhood  to  give  ourselves  sound  and  positive
notions  of  the  truth  of  things,  and  may  not  be  able  to  avoid
those  who  make  it  their  business  to  derange  the  natural  order
of  our  ideas  and  destroy  our  reason,  I  must  own  that  the
undertaking  is  difficult ;  for,  in  the  East,  those  whose  office
it  is  to  prepare  entire  generations  of  artificial  madmen  are
associated  with  power  and  make  common  cause  with  it  in
turning  the  unfortunate  wretches  to  profit.  There  they  pre¬
vent  every  new  and  good  idea  from  extending  and  propagating ;
they  threaten  and  punish  those  who  are  enlightened  and
desirous  of  communicating  their  light  to  others ;  there,  they
bestow  the  greatest  praise  upon  ignorance,  and  regard  as  per¬
verse  those  who  wish  to  reason  upon  every  thing,  and  especi¬
ally  upon  matters  which  concern  them.

In  the  West,  matters  stand  differently.  There  are  coun¬
tries  in  which  reason  can  shew  itself :  but  the  difficulties  to
be  overcome  are  still  very  great.  There  are  rooted  prejudices,
powerful  conflicting  interests,  and  great  ignorance  of  positive
truths  in  all  classes  of  society.  Those  who  sometimes  seem  well
informed,  are  often  truly  ignorant,  or  are  impenetrable  madmen.

The  only  mode  of  escaping  artificial  insanity  is  to  devote
ourselves  to  the  study  of  natural  knowledge;  to  admit  nothing
into  our  intellect  that  is  not  the  result  of  strict  observation  :
to  believe  nothing  on  authority  when  our  own  intellect  can
judge  for  itself  and  suffice  for  itself.  If  such  is  the  tendency,
Gentlemen,  of  the  study  of  cerebral  physiology,  this  science
is  destined  to  enlighten  our  fellow-men,  to  procure  for  them
an  increased  amount  of  happiness  by  delivering  them  from  the
prejudices  which  surround  them ;  it  furnishes  for  all  a  pure
morality,  which  flows  logically  from  the  natural  and  consti¬
tuent  laws  of  our  intellect  and  moral  feelings.  Let  the
Orientals  reject  cerebral  physiology  as  opposed  to  the  interests
of  those  who  lead  the  flock ;  we  comprehend  this  and  regard
it  as  natural  on  their  part :  but  in  the  West,  where  we  witness
the  stratagems  and  fierceness  of  our  adversaries,  we  are  obliged
to  fancy  that  either  they  have  the  same  interests  as  the  Orientals
to  defend,  or  that  they  themselves  are  in  a  state  of  incurable
artificial  insanity.

***  This  powerful  and  remarkable  discourse,  which  deserves
to  be  read  and  pondered  upon  night  and  day  by  every  human


44  On  the  Art  of  suddenly  restoring  the  Moral  Feelings

being,  whatever  his  age,  his  acquirements,  or  his  situation  in
life,  and  to  be  applied  carefully  to  himself,  was  delivered  at
the  great  annual  public  meeting,  at  which  visitors  of  both
sexes  are  happily  admitted,  and  was  received,  we  understand,
with  absolute  enthusiasm.  Let  those  who  are  blind  despisers
of  mesmerism  examine  their  own  condition  dispassionately
after  its  perusal. — Zoist.


X.  On  the  Art  of  suddenly  restoring  the  Moral  Feelings  and

Intellect  to  Activity  in  large  Masses  of  Mankind.  By  Dr.

Elliotson.

Every  wellwisher  of  his  species  witnesses  with  indescriba¬
ble  delight  the  mighty  change  which  has  all  at  once  come
over  the  medical  profession.

1.  Up  to  nearly  the  end  of  last  year,  its  members  could  not
by  entreaty  or  argument  be  induced  to  adopt  a  measure  for
preventing  the  pain  of  surgical  operations,  or  even  to  listen
with  common  patience  for  a  single  moment  to  any  person
who  proposed  or  advocated  one  :  and  some  went  farther  than
mere  indifference  to  human  agony,  and  boisterously  contended
(in  spite  of  common  sense  and  the  remarkable  verse  of  the
2nd  chapter  of  Genesis),*  that  agony  in  operations  was  an  ex¬
cellent  thing.  God  was  not  thanked  by  the  profession  for
having  vouchsafed  an  escape  from  pain  in  surgical  operations ;
nor  were  prayers  offered  to  him  to  grant  a  mode  of  escaping  it.

2.  Up  to  nearly  the  end  of  last  year,  the  possibility  of
preventing  surgical  agony  was  scouted  by  the  medical  pro¬
fession;  and  the  testimony  of  happy  patients  who  by  art
had  undergone  an  operation  without  any  suffering  was  scouted
too,  as  an  impudent  attempt  at  imposture,  and  those  who
listened  to  their  testimony  were  treated  as  impostors  or  cre¬
dulous  blockheads.  Some  of  those  patients  were  supposed
to  be  so  constituted  by  nature  that  nothing  could  give  them
pain,  though,  except  when  they  were  in  the  mesmeric  sleep,
their  agony  was  extreme ;  and  the  rest  were  declared  to  have
only  exerted  a  strong  resolution  and  disguised  their  suffering,
though  many  were  fainthearted  and  unable  to  disguise  their
suffering  when  not  in  the  mesmeric  sleep,  and  all  in  the  mes¬
meric  sleep  during  the  operation  shewed  no  sign  of  resolution,
neither  grasped  anything,  clenched  their  hands,  closed  their
mouths,  bit  their  lips,  nor  held  their  breath,  neither  talked,
laughed,  nor  sang,- — made  no  muscular  effort  or  any  other


*  See  Zoist,  No.  xiii.„  p.  4.


and  Intellect  to  activity,  by  I)r.  Elliotson.  45

kind  of  effort  to  prevent  themselves  from  attending  to  their
pain,  nor  displayed  the  physiognomy  of  determination,  but  lay
placidly  sleeping  and  breathing,  perfectly  relaxed  and  motion¬
less  from  head  to  foot.  Nay,  their  perfect  relaxation  and  mo¬
tionlessness  were  urged  as  a  positive  proof  of  their  deception  ;
for  it  was  alleged  that  on  whichever  half  of  the  body  an  ope¬
ration  was  performed,  the  corresponding  part  on  the  other
side  would  have  moved  during  the  incisions,  ligatures,  and
avulsions,  if  the  patient  had  really  felt  nothing  !  Some  pa¬
tients,  as  the  lady  whose  breast  was  removed  by  M.  Cloquet,
and  the  man  whose  leg  was  amputated  in  Nottinghamshire,
were  unblushingly  reported  to  have  owned  themselves  impos¬
tors;  nay  the  latter  was  reputed  to  have  never  existed.*

3.  Up  to  nearly  the  end  of  last  year,  the  medical  profession
persisted  in  displaying  ignorance,  not  only  of  the  difference
between  resolution  and  insensibility,  but  of  the  common
phenomena  of  sleep-waking — a  state  which  continually  occurs
as  a  disease  no  less  than  as  the  product  of  an  artificial  process
called  mesmeric.  The  fact  of  a  person  hearing  who  could
not  feel  pain,  of  seeing  and  of  observing  the  steps  of  an
operation  and  not  feeling  pain,  of  being  asleep  in  one  faculty
or  external  sense  and  awake  in  another,  was  too  ridiculous  to
be  talked  of  for  an  instant.

4.  Up  to  nearly  the  end  of  last  year,  no  variety  or
amount  of  testimony  was  regarded  by  the  medical  profession.
Painless  operations  had  been  performed  in  America,  the  West
Indies,  the  East  Indies,  France,  Ireland,  and  Great  Britain,
aye,  in  England,  abundantly ;  and  in  all  amounted  to  nearly
two  hundred.  They  had  been  performed  on  young  and  old,
and  varied  from  the  extraction  of  teeth  to  amputation  of  the
limbs  and  the  removal  of  tumors  equal  to  the  greater  part  of
and  even  exceeding  a  hundred  weight,  and  every  operation
had  terminated  successfully. f  Of  course  these  operations
were  performed  by  medical  men ;  but,  with  two  or  three  ex¬
ceptions,  these  gentlemen  were  at  the  time  little  known,
though  able,  and  highly  respectable,  and  not  metropolitan
hospital  surgeons  and  teachers,  nor  even  pure  surgeons :  to
pure  surgeons  such  matters  were  a  stumbling-block  and  foolish¬
ness  and  even  an  offence.  Teachers  and  practitioners  in  hospi¬
tals  never  alluded  to  these  any  more  than  to  the  other  of  the
all-important  facts  of  mesmerism  before  their  pupils,  except  in

*  See  my  Pamphlet,  p.  81,  82,  83,  and  Zoist,  No.  ii,  p.  210.  A  Nottingham¬
shire  Surgeon  of  high  reputation  declares  to  this  hour  that  the  case  was  a  fudge,
got  up  to  please  Lady  Mai*y  Bentinck  !  but  then  he  adds  that  he  would  not  have
believed  the  facts  had  he  seen  them  !

f  See  my  paper  in  the  16th  No.  of  The  Zoist,  art.  ix.


46  On  the  Art  of  suddenly  restoring  the  Moral  Feelings


contempt  and  ridicule  :  no  surgical  books  condescended  to  no¬
tice  them  ;  the  medical  journals,  however  great  their  rivalry
and  mutual  hatred,  all  agreed  in  preserving  a  dead  silence  in
regard  to  The  Zoist,  though  its  contents  are  infinitely  more
important  than  those  of  the  medical  journals  during  the  same
period  in  a  physiological  and  curative  point  of  view,  and  will
be  referred  to  as  records  of  authority  and  high  import  in  the
next  half  of  the  present  century.  In  vain  The  Zoist  pre¬
sented  its  facts,  proved  them,  and  urged  their  deep  importance
to  the  man  of  science  and  the  philanthropist.  Assumed  con¬
tempt,  and  positive  hatred  and  injury,  were  the  reward  of
all  the  disinterested  labourers  in  this  holy  cause.

1.  But,  as  the  last  year  was  closing,

— Quod  optanti  Divom  promittere  nemo
Auderet,  volvenda  dies  en  adtulit  ultro.

The  whole  body  of  surgeons,  public  and  private,  great
and  little,  lithotomist  and  dentist,  metropolitan  and  provin¬
cial,  suddenly  felt  it  a  solemn  matter  of  conscience  to  prevent
the  agony  of  their  operations,  and  all  operators  now  glory  in
this  benevolent  anxiety,  saying  it  has  become  a  pleasure  to
operate  as  this  can  be  done  without  torture,  and  they  collect
noblemen,  clergy,*  and  barristers  around  their  hospital  tables
to  witness  the  most  frightful  exploits  of  surgery  without  a
pang  to  the  patient. f  The  possibility  and  duty  of  this  are
laudably  urged  upon  the  pupils ;  and  all  medical  journals
laudably  exert  themselves  to  the  utmost  in  the  dissemination
of  the  facts  and  the  inculcation  of  the  duty.  The  profession
rushes  in  crowds  to  every  hospital  where  a  painless  operation
is  about  to  be  performed :  and  rushes  from  the  most  distant
parts.  Dr.  Copland  and  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie  are  set  perfectly
at  nought :  the  latter  in  the  very  building  where  in  October
last  he  laughed  to  scorn  the  idea  of  people  expressing  much
pain  from  surgical  operations,  the  idea  of  people  not  suffering
pain  although  they  seem  to  suffer  none,  and  the  idea  of  an
hospital  to  prevent  the  pain  of  surgical  operations. J  Yes,

*  The  reverend  Mr.  Scobell,  who  last  spring  exerted  himself  to  the  utmost  to
prevent  the  patients  of  the  Middlesex  Hospital  from  having  the  agony  of  opera¬
tions  prevented  ( Zoist ,  No.  xiv.,  p.  227),  was  this  spring  seen  at  St.  George’s
Hospital  witnessing  the  various  painless  operations  !

f  When  these  classes  requested  permission  of  me  to  crowd  into  the  operating
theatre  of  University  College  Hospital  to  witness,  not  bloody  shows,  but  phy¬
siological  and  psychological  phenomena  of  deep  interest  to  every  reflecting  man,
this  was  thought  absolutely  outrageous  and  improper  by  the  persons  who  were
my  colleagues  and  by  the  council  of  University  College,  who  refused  me  an  un¬
occupied  theatre  in  the  College  for  this  purpose.

X  See  Zoist,  No.  xvi.,  p.  596.  See  also  my  Pamphlet,  p.  36,  &c.,  &c.


and  Intellect  to  activity,  by  Dr.  Elliotson.


47


in  his  own  hospital,  where  so  lately  he  made  so  remarkable
a  figure  in  attempting  so  strange  a  purpose  in  so  strange  a
way;  and  is  set  at  nought  by  those  who,  as  in  all  other  things,
so  in  contempt  and  vilification  of  mesmerism,  had  always
humbly  obeyed  him.  For  this  every  good  man  will  respect
the  surgeons  of  St.  George’s  Hospital :  and  will  now  respect  Sir
Benjamin  Brodie,  for  he  himself  has  just  been  there,  though  it
is  said  after  much  entreaty,  (but  this  part  must  be  forgiven,)
to  witness  painless  surgical  operations  !  Nay,  some  have  had
more  than  their  benevolence  excited;  the  effect  on  Mr.Wakley
has  been  a  deep  religious  feeling.  He  cannot  be  happy  unless
thanksgivings  are  publicly  offered  up  to  Almighty  God  for
putting  it  in  these  latter  days  in  the  power  of  man  to  operate
without  pain  upon  his  fellow-creatures.  This  combination  of
benevolence  and  piety  will  make  Mr.  Wakley  universally  be¬
loved  and  respected ;  and  no  doubt  is  the  forerunner  of  cha¬
rity  that  never  faileth,  of  gentleness,  of  peace,  and  universal
goodwill  in  all  his  actions  and  in  every  page  that  he  will
henceforth  pen.  The  Lancet  must  in  future  beam  with  hea-
venly-mindedness.

2.  As  the  last  year  was  closing,  the  medical  profession
suddenly  admitted  as  reasonable  men  the  possibility  of  pre¬
venting  pain  in  surgical  operations  :  and  suddenly  admitted
as  reasonable  men  that  the  absence  of  pain  is  capable  of  clear
proof  by  the  absence  of  signs  of  pain,  no  longer  ascribing
this  to  resolution ;  and  suddenly  believed  implicitly,  as  good
men  thinking  no  evil,  every  poor  patient  who  declared  that
he  felt  no  pain.  No  patient  was  from  this  moment  doubted  :
it  was  presumed  beforehand  that  every  one,  though  never  seen
before,  would  be  honest.  It  was  too  ridiculous  to  think  he
could  either  sham  or  tell  an  untruth.  Nay,  if  the  patient
screamed  ever  so  much  and  declared  he  felt  no  pain,  he  was
believed :  if  he  winced,  or  made  any  movement,  great  or
small,  few  or  many,  these  movements  were  all  called  auto¬
matic,  reflex,  or  excito-motory,  and  declared  to  be  no  proofs
of  pain.  Nor  were  they,  necessarily,  any  more  than  screams
or  groans.  These  movements  might  be  automatic,  or,  as
Prochaska  called  them,  reflex;  such  as  are  seen  in  frogs
when  their  limbs  are  pinched  after  their  heads  have  been  cut
off.  If  these  motions  do  not  occur,  the  person  very  pro¬
perly  is  not  thought  an  impostor;  as  the  poor  man  in  Not¬
tinghamshire  was  pronounced  because  he  was  universally  mo¬
tionless  while  his  leg  was  cut  off.  If  they  do  occur,  it  is
not  thought  a  proof  of  imposition  when  they  do  not  occur  in
the  opposite  limb ;  an  occurrence  which  was  declared  in  the
Medical  and  Chirurgical  Society  to  be  an  unfailing  test, — the


48  On  the  Art  of  suddenly  restoring  the  Moral  Feelings

very  phenomenon  crucis.  In  the  amputation  of  legs  and  arms
no  attention  is  paid  to  the  opposite  member  :  the  fancy  is
wisely  not  thought  of.  Then  cries  are  ascribed  to  simple  fear
or  to  frightful  dreams.  But  the  moaning  of  the  poor  Not¬
tinghamshire  peasant  after  his  leg  was  off,  though  clearly  owing
to  a  dream,  was  ascribed  to  pain,  nothing,  during  the  ampu¬
tation,  that  could  be  construed  into  an  expression  of  pain,
having  taken  place.  To  suppose  the  patients  insensible  of
pain  was  at  that  time  treated  as  too  ridiculous  an  idea.

3.  As  the  last  year  was  closing,  the  profession  not  only
suddenly  became  acquainted  with  the  difference  between
resolution  and  insensibility,  but  with  the  phenomena  of  the
sleep-waking  state.  Patients,  it  was  now  admitted,  might
not  only  suddenly  groan  and  shrink  and  yet  not  feel,  but
they  might  hear  and  not  feel,  they  might  converse  and
not  feel,  they  might  talk  as  in  a  dream  and  not  feel,  they
might  see  and  not  feel.  If  at  the  time  they  proved  that
they  knew  all  that  was  going  on,  and  they  said  they  heard
and  yet  felt  nothing,  this  excited  no  surprise,  and  no  doubt
was  excited,  as  had  been  the  case  with  the  members  of  the
Medical  Society  because  the  poor  Nottinghamshire  man  hon¬
estly  said  he  recollected  hearing  once  a  kind  of  crunching,
thereby  puzzling  the  assembly  and  working  his  own  con¬
demnation  and  that  of  his  mesmeriser  and  surgeon.

4.  As  the  last  year  was  closing,  a  brief  account  from  Ame¬
rica  of  a  new  mode  of  preventing  pain  in  operations  was  at
once,  and  properly,  believed,  fully  relied  upon,  and  thought
worthy  of  immediate  and  general  verification, — a  generous
compliment  to  our  own  countrymen  who  had  laboured  so
perseveringly  and  set  forth  their  own  happy  results  for  above
three  years  !  In  vain  the  first  medical  journal  that  gave
the  account — the  Medical  Gazette ,  stated  at  the  same  time
that  it  was  said  to  have  produced  apoplexy  in  one  patient
and  killed  another,  and  denominated  the  process, — poisoning.

- Sublatus  ad  .ethera  clamor.

Every  one  was  wild  to  distinguish  himself  in  benefiting  his
fellow  creatures  by  the  new  means,  and  become

- Super  ^ethera  notus  :

suddenly  coinciding  with  the  hint  given  in  The  Zoist,  for
October,  1845,  p.  311,  by  my  learned  and  excellent  friend,
the  author  of  An  Essay  on  the  Xanthian  Marbles ,  Mr.  W.
Watkins  Lloyd,  who,  after  alluding  to  the  mesmeric  phe¬
nomena  of  Delphi  and  the  influence  of  gases,  said — “  These
instances  suggest  the  question,  whether  experiments  may


On  the  Art  of  suddenly  restoring  the  Moral  Feelings,  fyc.  49

not  be  advantageously  directed  to  test  the  efficacy  of  the  gases
in  inducing  mesmerism,  coma,  or  somnambulism,  or  influ¬
encing  it  when  induced.”  Dr.  Collyer,  another  mesmerist,
in  a  pamphlet  published  simultaneously  in  Boston,  New  York,
and  Philadelphia,  in  1843,  and  quoted  by  me  the  same  year
in  7  he  Zoist,  No.  iii.,  p.  236,  referring  also  to  the  Delphic
oracle  and  the  vapours  from  the  earth  at  the  spot,  mentions
that  trance,  somnambulism,  &c.,  may  be  induced  by  various
causes,  and  among  the  rest  by  “  the  inhaling  of  narcotic  and
stimulating  vapours.”*

We  mesmerists  have  now  witnessed  a  complete  vic¬
tory  OVER  ONE  OF  THE  MOST  REMARKABLE  PREJUDICES
WHICH  EVER  SIGNALIZED  THE  MEDICAL  PROFESSION.  If  it  is

proved  that  the  inhalation  of  sulphuric  ether  produces  the
insensibility  to  pain  and  the  other  phenomena  which  are
alleged  with  one  voice  by  medical  men,  it  is  proved  that
mesmerism  does  the  same, — that  mesmerism  is  true.  For
the  proofs  of  insensibility  and  the  other  realities  common  to
the  mesmeric  and  the  ether  state  are  the  same.  The  various
high  phenomena  and  the  curative  advantages  of  mesmerism
must  now  be  investigated  by  the  medical  profession,  as  all
the  ground-work  is  conceded  in  the  case  of  ether.

Be  it  remembered  that  mesmerism  is  perfectly  innocent,
never  killed  anybody ;  and  never  produced  inconvenience
except  from  ignorance  and  mismanagement !  That,  though
not  universally  of  easy  application,  it,  when  it  takes,  secures
quiet  nights  after  an  operation,  may  be  repeated  when¬
ever  the  wound  is  dressed  or  the  least  pain  is  felt,  accelerates
the  cure,  improves  the  health,  and  renders  many  operations
unnecessary.

Having  recorded  a  wonderful  instance  of  the  sudden  re¬
storation  of  the  moral  feelings  and  intellect  to  activity,  on  a
certain  individual  subject,  in  a  large  mass  of  mankind,  I  shall
postpone  to  the  next  number  the  consideration  of  the  art  of
effecting  this  :  and  shall  be  happy  to  receive  in  the  mean
time  the  suggestions  of  all  thinking  men  who  make  human
nature  their  study,  and  especially  shall  I  feel  obliged  for  a

*  Psychography,  or  the  Embodiment  of  Thought ,  &c.,  p.  26.  In  the  Jersey
Times  for  January  last.  Dr.  Collyer  states  that  in  1842  he  made  trials  of  the  in¬
halation  of  stimulating  and  narcotic  vapours  combined,  in  above  twenty  persons-,
with  entire  success,  the  unconsciousness  lasting  from  half  an  hour  to  two  hours  ;
that  these  experiments  were  the  topic  of  conversation  from  one  end  of  the  United
States  to  the  other ;  and  that  above  a  thousand  copies  of  his  pamphlet  were  sold.

VOL.  V.  E


50


Report  of  the  Calcutta  Committee


conscientious  and  searching  account  of  the  personal  experi¬
ences  of  those  of  my  professional  brethren  who  have  just  gone
through  this  wonderful  change.  The  phenomena  of  their  own
consciousness  observed  conscientiously  and  detailed  conscien¬
tiously  will  be  invaluable  to  the  science  of  human  nature  and
the  art  of  improving  the  character  of  mankind.

(To  be  concluded  in  the  next  number.)


XI.  Report  of  the  Committee  appointed  by  Government  to
observe  and  report  upon  Surgical  Operations  by  Dr.  J.
Esdaile ,  upon  patients  under  the  influence  of  alleged  mes¬
meric  agency.  Printed  by  order  of  the  Deputy  Governor
of  Bengal.  Calcutta,  1846.

“  It  (the  Hue  Chantereine)  was  scarcely  built,  when  the  two  heroes  of  modem  quackery,
Cagliostro  and  Mesmer,  did  it  the  honour  of  making  it  the  scenes  of  their  oracles,  the
•precursors  of  performers  on  a  large  scale.” — Edinburgh  Review,  p.  98.

We  have  received  the  Report  of  the  Calcutta  Committee
mentioned  in  our  last  number  (xvi.,  Jan.  1847),  pp.  563,  4,  6,
to  which  we  beg  our  readers  to  refer.

The  history  of  this  Report  is,  that,  in  January  last,  Dr.
Esdaile  reported  75  mesmeric  operations  to  the  Medical
Board,  and  offered  to  give  this  every  facility  for  personal
observation.  The  receipt  of  his  letter  was  not  even  acknow¬
ledged.  He  waited  till  he  had  accumulated  102  cases,  and
then  reported  the  fact  direct  to  the  Government,  offering  to
satisfy  any  number  of  persons,  in  whom  they  had  confidence,
of  the  correctness  of  his  statements.*  Upon  this  the  Deputy
Governor  ordered  a  Mesmeric  Committee  to  be  formed  to
observe  and  report  upon  surgical  operations  to  be  performed  by
Dr.  Esdaile  in  their  presence,  and  three  members  of  the  Com¬
mittee  were  chosen  for  their  well-known  hostility  to  the  sub¬
ject,  on  the  principle  that  one  sinner’s  conversion  is  more
convincing  than  the  salvation  of  a  thousand  saints.

The  members  were,

J.  Atkinson,  Esq.,  Inspector  General  of  Hospitals,

Chairman  of  the  Committee.

E.  M.  Gordon,  Esq.

J.  Jackson,  Esq.,  Surgeon,  Native  Hospital.

D.  Stewart,  Esq.,  M.D.,  Presidency  Surgeon.

W.  B.  O’Shaughnessy,  Esq.,  M.D.,  Secretary  of

James  Hume,  Esq.  the  Committee.

A.  Rogers,  Esq.

*  In  the  report  of  the  11th  sitting,  the  Committee  say,  “  Dr.  Esdaile


on  Dr.  Esdaile' s  Mesmeric  Operations.


51


The  Report  is  dated  Oct.  9,  1846.  We  shall  extract  por¬
tions  of  it,  and  make  occasional  comments.

“  Dr.  Esdaile  stipulated  for  the  exclusive  medical  charge  of
whatever  hospital  wards  might  be  devoted  to  the  proposed  experi¬
ments — for  his  having  his  own  subordinate  hospital  establishment,
those  employed  as  mesmerisers  in  Hooghly- — and  for  a  daily  sitting
of  the  Committee.  He  further  repeated  his  intention  of  restricting
his  experiments  rigidly  to  native  patients  of  the  class  usually  received
in  Jail  and  Charity  Hospitals,  and  he  declined  to  perform  mesmeric
manipulations  himself,  on  the  ground  of  this  being  needless  and
detrimental  to  his  health.”

Dr.  Esdaile' s  object  being  merely  to  repeat  in  Calcutta,
if  possible,  what  he  had  done  at  Hooghly,  it  was  necessary
that  he  should  be  placed  in  like  circumstances,  as  far  as  attain¬
able,  and  the  inmates  of  the  Government  Jail  and  Charity
Hospitals  had  been  almost  exclusively  his  patients  hitherto.

“The  Committee  have  accordingly  assembled  on  14  successive
days,  and  have  had  under  their  observation  10  surgical  cases  taken
by  Dr.  Esdaile  from  the  general  wards  of  the  Native  Hospital,  all
needing  operations  of  more  or  less  severity.”

They  were  given  to  him  by  Dr.  Jackson,  and  were  all  the
cases  requiring  operations  in  his  hospital ;  4  were  received
during  the  sittings  of  the  Committee.

“  The  patients  treated  were  all  native  males,  from  18  to  40  years
old,  Hindoos  and  Mahomedans,  in  all  conditions  of  general  health
from  extreme  emaciation  to  ordinary  strength.  Their  diseases  are
specified  in  the  annexed  roll.


“  List  of  Patients  subjected  to  Dr.  Esdaile' s  Mesmeric  Experiments.


No.

Name.

Age.

Admitted.

Disease.

Duration.

1

Cheedam .

40

7th  Sept. . .

Double  Hydrocele  . .

Several  months

2

Bissonath .

20

7th  Sept. . .

Tumor  of  Scrotum  . .

Ditto

3

Nilmoney  ....

45

7th  Sept. . .

Tumor  of  Scrotum  . .

Ditto

4

Neelchul .

35

7th  Sept. .  .

Phimosis .

Ditto

5

Deeloo .

40

7th  Sept. . .

Double  Hydrocele  . .

3  years

6

Jahiroodeen  . .

33

7th  Sept. . .

Hypertrophy  of  Colis.

2  years

7

Dohmun .

40

10th  Sept. . .

Hyper,  of  Scrotum. .

Several  months

8

Ramchund ....

18

1 3tli  Sept. . .

Hyper,  of  Scrotum..

2  years

9

Hyder  Khan  . .

30

1 6th  Sept. . .

Mortification  of  Leg. .

15  days

10

Murali  Doss  . .

30

14th  Sept. . .

Hyper,  of  Scrotum  . .

6  years

“W.  B.  O’Shaughnessy,  Secretary.


handed  in  an  authentic  copy  of  his  first  letter  addressed  to  Government  regarding
his  mesmeric  operations  in  Hooghly.  (Letter  read  and  recorded  as  he  desired.)’'
Why  is  this  not  printed  ?  It  was  the  foundation  of  the  whole  affair,  and  the
origin  of  the  Committee.  From  all  that  here  appears,  the  reader  might  suppose
that  Dr.  Esdaile  had  been  dragged  before  the  Committee,  instead  of  his  having
dragged  them  before  him  by  this  letter  to  Government.

E  2


52


Report  of  the  Calcutta  Committee


“The  mesmerisers  employed  by  Dr.  Esdaile  were  young  men,
Hindoos  and  Mahomedans,  from  14  to  30  years  of  age,  most  of
them  compounders  and  dressers  from  the  Hooghly  Hospital.

“  To  each  patient  a  separate  mesmeriser  was  assigned.  The
room  in  which  they  operated  was  darkened,  but  from  time  to  time
the  Committee  were  enabled  to  witness,  through  small  apertures
made  in  the  door  panels,  the  manner  in  which  the  processes  were
carried  on.  The  patient  lay  on  his  back,  the  body  naked  from  the
waist  upwards,  and  the  thighs  and  legs  bare;  the  mesmeriser  seated
behind  him  at  the  head  of  the  bed,  leaning  over  him,  the  faces  of
both  nearly  in  contact,  the  right  hand  being  generally  placed  on  the
pit  of  the  stomach,  and  passes  made  with  one  or  both  hands  along
the  face,  chiefly  over  the  eyes.  The  mesmeriser  breathed  frequently
and  gently  over  the  patient’s  lips,  eyes  and  nostrils.  Profound
silence  was  observed.  These  processes  were  continued  for  about  two
hours  each  day  in  ten  cases,  for  eight  hours  in  one  case  in  one  day,
and  for  six  hours  in  another  case,  without  interruption.  Three  cases
of  the  ten,  Bisoyiath,  Deeloo,  and  Nichul,  were  dismissed  without
satisfactory  effect  ;  Bisonath  suffering  from  slight  cough  which
Dr.  Esdaile  considered  to  render  the  mesmeric  manipulation  ineffec¬
tual;  Deeloo  on  the  5th  day  for  having  taken  spirits,  and  Nichul
having  resisted  the  mesmeric  processes  during  eleven  days  without
conclusive  result.”

Bisonath  laboured  under  chronic  bronchitis,  which  com¬
pelled  him  to  clear  his  windpipe  every  ten  or  fifteen  minutes ;
lie  was  therefore  physically  incapacitated  from  sleeping  long
under  any  influence.  This  the  Committee  seemed  to  re¬
cognize,  and  the  account  of  the  impediment  is  too  slight.
It  appears  further  on  that  this  man  was  finally  operated  upon
when  sound  asleep  from  90  drops  of  laudanum ;  yet  when  the
incision  was  made,  he  shouted,  struggled  violently  for  some
minutes,  talked  loud,  and  his  pulse  rose  to  120.

“  In  seven  cases,  in  a  period  varying  from  one  to  seven  sittings,
deep  sleep  followed  the  performance  of  the  processes  above  described.

“This  sleep  in  its  most  perfect  state  differed  from  ordinary  na¬
tural  sleep,  as  follows.

“  The  individual  could  not  be  aroused  by  loud  noises ;  the  pupils
were  insensible  to  light ;  and  great,  and  in  some  cases  apparently
perfect,  insensibility  to  pain  was  witnessed  on  burning,  pinching,
and  cutting  the  skin  and  other  sensitive  organs.

“This  sleep  in  its  general  character  differed  from  that  which
would  be  produced  by  narcotic  drugs,  in  the  quickness  with  which,
in  eight  cases  out  of  ten,  the  patient  was  awoke,  after  certain  trans¬
verse  passes  and  fanning  by  the  mesmeriser,  and  blowing  upon  the
face  and  on  the  eyes;  in  the  natural  condition  of  the  pupils  of  the
eyes  and  the  conjunctiva  in  all  the  cases  after  awaking;  in  the  ab¬
sence  of  stertorous  breathing  and  of  subsequent  delirium  or  halluci¬
nation,  and  of  many  other  symptoms  familiar  to  medical  observers.


53


on  Dr.  Esdaile’s  Mesmeric  Operations.

and  which  are  produced  by  alcoholic  liquors,  opium,  hemp,  and
other  narcotic  drugs.  It  is  right,  however,  to  add  that  in  two  cases
the  patients  shewed  much  confusion  and  disinclination  to  answer,
and  complained  of  giddiness  for  some  time  after  being  suddenly
aroused.”

The  Committee,  being  ignorant  of  mesmerism,  were  not
aware  that  this  effect  is  common  when  the  patient  is  suddenly
awakened  ;  and  sagaciously  suspected  bang  had  been  taken  !

“  In  seven  cases  surgical  operations  were  performed  in  the  state
of  sleep  above  described.

“  In  the  case  of  Nilmony  Dntt,  there  was  not  the  slightest  indi¬
cation  of  the  operation  having  been  felt  by  the  patient.  It  consisted
in  the  removal  of  a  tumor.  It  lasted  four  minutes.  The  patient’s
hands  or  legs  were  not  held.  He  did  not  move,  or  groan,  or  his
countenance  change.  And  when  awoke  after  the  operation,  he  de¬
clared  he  had  no  recollection  of  what  had  occurred.

“  In  another  case,  Ryder  Khan ,  an  emaciated  man,  suffering
from  mortification  of  the  leg,  amputation  of  the  thigh  was  per¬
formed,  and  no  sign  of  its  causing  pain  was  evinced.

“  In  a  third  case,  Murali  Doss,  (the  operation  he  underwent
being  very  severe,)  he  moved  his  body  and  arms,  breathing  in  gasps
but  his  countenance  underwent  little  change  and  the  features  ex¬
pressed  no  suffering,  and  on  awaking  he  declared  he  knew  of  nothing
having  been  done  to  him  during  his  sleep.

“A  case  of  tapping  one  side  of  a  double  hydrocele  is  passed
over  as  insignificant  and  inconclusive,  for  although  apparently  pain¬
less,  the  operation  was  repeated  on  the  other  side,  while  the  patient
was  awake,  with  the  same  result.  The  operation  too  is  one  daily
borne  without  material  suffering,  by  numerous  patients  in  all  our
hospitals.”*

“  In  the  three  other  cases  observed  by  the  Committee  during  the
performance  of  operations  in  the  state  of  sleep  above  described,
various  phenomena  were  witnessed,  which  require  to  be  specially
pointed  out.  While  the  patients  did  not  open  their  eyes,  or  utter
articulate  sounds,  or  require  to  be  held,  there  were  vague  and  con¬
vulsive  movements  of  the  upper  limbs,  writhing  of  the  body,  dis¬
tortion  of  the  features,  giving  the  face  a  hideous  expression  of
suppressed  agony,  the  respiration  became  heaving,  with  deep  sighs.
There  were  in  short  all  the  signs  of  intense  pain,  which  a  dumb
person  undergoing  operation  might  be  expected  to  exhibit,  except
resistance  to  the  operator.”

In  no  instance  did  any  patient  require  to  be  held,  or
appear  to  know  the  source  of  his  annoyance ;  and  when  the
spectators  wished  to  restrain  their  hands.  Dr.  Esdaile  said  it

*  The  case  was  most  significant.  After  the  operation,  the  man,  being
awakened  and  told  all  was  ready,  rose,  took  off  his  cloth,  and  in  astonishment
exclaimed,  <c  God  knew  how  it  was  done,  he  knew  nothing  of  it.”  (p.  9.)


^ '


54


Report  of  the  Calcutta  Committee


was  unnecessary,  While  dissecting  the  scrotum  off  Ram-
chund’s  testes,  his  limbs,  which  were  widely  separated,  re¬
mained  perfectly  rigid,  and  were  never  in  the  smallest  degree
approximated,  nor  did  he  ever  approach  the  injured  part  with
his  hands.  The  movements  described  were  as  objectless  as
the  fluttering  of  a  fowl  after  its  head  has  been  cut  off.

“  But  in  all  these  cases,  without  exception,  after  the  operation
was  completed,  the  patients  expressed  no  knowledge  or  recollection
of  what  had  occurred,  denied  having  dreamed,  and  complained  of
no  pain  till  their  attention  was  directed  to  the  place  where  the
operation  was  performed.

“  It  therefore  becomes  a  question  whether  the  writhings  and
distorted  features,  in  the  three  cases  above  described,  are  to  be
regarded  as  proof  that  the  operations  occasioned,  at  the  time,  the
actual  agony  of  which  such  symptoms  are  the  usual  evidence,  or
whether  they  w7ere  mere  ‘instinctive  movements,’  as  Dr.  Esdaile
represents  them.  But  our  province  is  only  to  record  facts,  and  not
to  enter  upon  that  of  the  physiologist  or  the  metaphysician.

“  The  general  result  arrived  at  then,  on  the  question  of  pain
during  the  mesmeric  surgical  operations  we  witnessed,  amounts  to
this,  that  in  three  cases  there  is  no  proof  whatever  that  any  pain
was  suffered,  and  that  in  the  three  other  cases  the  manifestations  of
pain  during  the  operation  are  opposed  by  the  positive  statement  of
the  patients  that  no  pain  was  experienced.

“The  following  table  shews  the  curious  fact  that  in  the  three
cases  in  which  there  was  no  evidence  of  pain  the  pulse  rose  remark¬
ably  during  the  operation.  But  in  the  cases  in  which  there  were
the  symptoms  of  pain  described  above,  the  pulse  continued  exactly
the  same  before  and  during  the  operations.


STATE  OF  PULSE.


Patient.

Disease.

Before.

During.

Immediately

after.

Operation.

Nilmony  . .

Tumor .

84

124

Natural  .

Apparently  painless

Ditto .

Dressing  changed  on  12th  Sep.

80

108

Natural  .

Apparently  painless

Domun ....

Tumor .

72

72

Natural  .

Doubtful.

Jahirudin  . .

Excision  of  thickened  prepuce

60

60

Natural  .

Doubtful.

Ramchund  .

Tumor .

68

68

Natural  .

Doubtful.

Hyder  Khan

Amputation  of  thigh .

108

112

100  ..  ..

Apparently  painless

Murali  Doss

Tumor . .

68

108

72  ..  ..

Apparently  painless

“The  Committee  having  been  satisfied,  by  the  cases  above  cited,
that  by  the  mesmeric  method  sleep  could  be  so  deepened  in  some
instances,  as  to  permit  of  the  performance  of  severe  surgical  opera¬
tions  without  pain,  according  to  the  declarations  of  the  patients ,
considered  that  their  next  duty  ‘  in  testing  the  efficiency  of  Dr.
Esdaile’ s  mesmeric  processes’  was  to  ascertain  the  ratio  of  suscepti¬
bility  to  the  influence  in  a  large  body  of  cases.”

Why  is,  “  and  the  evidence  of  our  own  senses,”  not  added
and  added  in  italics  ?  The  Committee  had  both.


on  Dr.  Esdaile’ s  Mesmeric  Operations.


55


“Dr.  Esdaile  was  accordingly  invited  to  take  100  individuals  at
random  from  Dr.  Jackson’s  wards,  subject  them  to  mesmeric  mani¬
pulation  before  the  Committee,  and  shew  what  number  of  the  100
could  be  brought  into  the  condition  of  insensibility  to  pain.  This
experiment  Dr.  Esdaile  declined  to  undertake.”

Dr.  Esdaile  no  doubt  looked  upon  this  as  a  trap  to
smother  his  positive  successes  in  hoped-for  failures.

“With  respect  to  the  amount  of  bleeding  during  operations
performed  in  the  mesmeric  sleep,  and  which  Dr.  Esdaile  considered
as  being  very  much  less  than  in  ordinary  operations,  three  of  the
four  medical  members  of  the  Committee  have  expressed  their  opi¬
nion  that  there  is  no  material  difference  observable.”


This  is  contrary  to  experience.


“  Neither  do  the  medical  members  consider  that  the  after  treat¬
ment  of  the  individuals  operated  on,  was  in  any  degree  ameliorated ,
or  the  cure  accelerated ,  by  the  operation  having  been  performed  in
the  mesmeric  sleep.”


The  Committee  had  no  means  of  knoiving  this  even  if
true.  By  their  journal  it  will  be  seen  that  their  opportunities
of  observing  6  cases,  which  required  a  month  or  six  weeks
for  their  cure,  were,


8  days  in  1


6

5

4

2

0


))


))


33


33


33


1

1

1

1

1


The  last  case  was  the  removal  of  a  scrotal  tumor  16  lbs.
in  weight,  which  left  a  wound  38  inches  in  circumference,
and  the  Committee  never  saw  the  man  again  !


“To  the  capability  of  removing  or  the  renewal  of  dressings
during  the  mesmeric  sleep,  without  disturbing  the  patient,  Dr.
Esdaile  attached  much  importance,  as,  by  avoiding  pain,  he  con¬
sidered  the  cure  to  be  accelerated.  The  Committee  witnessed  the
painless  removal  or  application  of  dressings  from  extensive  wounds
during  the  mesmeric  condition  in  four  cases,  but  the  gentleness  and
care  with  which  the  process  was  performed  left  it  doubtful  whether
the  patients  would  have  made  any  complaint  had  mesmerism  not
been  resorted  to.”


Why  was  this  left  in  doubt  ?  The  Committee  had  daily
opportunities  of  observing  the  conduct  of  the  men  when
dressed  without  the  aid  of  mesmerism,  and  in  Dr.  Esdaile’s
absence.  Is  not  this  wilful  ignorance  ?

“  But  in  one  case,  Ramchund,  an  examination  of  the  wound,  of
a  peculiarly  painful  nature,  was  required,  involving  two  separate


56


Report  of  the  Calcutta  Committee

incisions;  just  as  the  first  was  completed  (it  lasted  about  a  quarter
of  a  minute,  and  caused  writhing  of  the  body  and  distortion  of  the
face)  he  awoke,  and  on  proceeding  to  the  second  step,  he  shouted
aloud  in  pain  and  terror,  and  struggled  so  violently  that  the  operator
could  not  proceed.

“The  uncertainty  of  the  time  required  in  producing  the  intense
condition  of  the  mesmeric  sleep,  in  the  majority  of  the  cases  now
under  notice,  appeared  very  unfavourable  to  the  general  introduction
of  mesmeric  manipulations  in  the  practice  of  surgery,  especially  in
hospitals.  But  Dr.  Esdaile  states  positively  that  by  frequently  chang¬
ing  the  mesmerisers,  and  performing  the  manipulations  without  in¬
terruption,  the  same  result  may  possibly  be  produced  within  one
day,  which  would,  in  the  manner  pursued  before  the  Committee,
have  been  necessarily  extended  over  several  days.  In  the  cases  of
Ryder  Khan  and  Murali  Doss,  several  mesmerisers  were  successively
employed,  and  the  result  seemed  to  the  Committee  corroborative  of
Dr.  Esdaile’s  statement.”

All  the  Committee  knew  about  mesmerism  was  what
Dr.  Esdaile  had  shewn  them  during  fourteen  days ;  and  what
did  they  see  ?  that  he  operated  on  seven  out  of  ten  men  given
to  him,  without  one  of  them  knowing  anything  about  it ;  and
these  were  all  the  cases  requiring  operation  in  the  largest
hospital  in  Calcutta  during  a  fortnight  !  Quem  Deus  vult
perdere,  §c. !

“  The  Committee  further  apprehend  that  a  serious  practical  ob¬
stacle  to  the  universally  useful  application  of  mesmeric  processes
exists  in  the  resistance  to  the  sleep,  which,  Dr.  Esdaile  acknowledges,
is  given  by  cough,  by  pain,  by  mental  excitement,  by  fever,  and
by  the  sinking  state  of  the  vital  system  induced  by  protracted  and
dangerous  disease.”

One  would  suppose  they  were  sitting  in  judgment  on  the
philosopher's  stone.

“  The  case  of  Bisonath  is  referred  to  on  this  point,  who  was
dismissed  from  treatment  by  Dr.  Esdaile’s  desire  on  the  5th  day,  in
consequence  of  his  having  a  slight  habitual  cough,  which  Dr.  E.
considered  to  interfere  with  his  mesmeric  treatment,  and  to  disturb
that  of  the  other  cases  in  the  same  room.

“  There  are  further  and  serious  considerations  involved  in  this
subject,  to  which  the  Committee  deem  it  their  duty  briefly  to  advert.
Admitting  the  existence  of  a  natural  power  of  producing  the  mes¬
meric  sleep,  there  are  strong  grounds,  even  in  the  facts  before  the
Committee,  for  supposing  that  persons  thus  treated  are  rendered
subsequently  more  and  more  susceptible  to  its  influence;  their  nerv¬
ous  systems  are,  it  appears,  brought  into  a  morbidly  impressible
condition.  The  professional  members  of  the  Committee  regard  this
point  as  one  deserving  of  attentive  notice.  If  this  increase  of  sen¬
sibility  and  susceptibility  exposes  the  patients  to  numerous  nervous


on  Dr.  Esdaile’s  Mesmeric  Operations.  57

maladies,  too  much  caution  cannot  be  observed  in  extending  the
practice  to  the  ordinary  and  often  trivial  exigencies  of  surgical
diseases.  It  is,  however,  only  by  prolonged  experiments  skilfully
practised  and  faithfully  recorded,  that  conclusive  evidence  can  be
gathered  ou  this  most  important  question.”

They  saw  nothing  but  the  beneficial  effects,  and  had  no
business  to  speculate  upon  the  subject.  They  were  a  Com¬
mittee  of  observation.  Their  speculations  are  ludicrous.

“  The  Committee  deem  it  necessary  to  represent  most  respect¬
fully  to  the  Government  that,  impressed  with  a  strong  conviction  of
the  importance  of  observing  with  the  strictest  possible  scrutiny
every  case  or  experiment  brought  before  them,  they  have  found  it
requisite  to  meet  daily  for  fourteen  successive  days  from  7\  to
10a.m.,  during  the  observation  of  ten  cases  of  which  three  wrere
inconclusive.  The  Committee  respectfully  submit  that  the  respon¬
sible  public  duties  on  which  most  of  the  members  are  employed,
must  suffer  serious  interruption  were  the  enquiry  to  be  followed  up
under  their  observation  and  ivitk  equal  strictness,  to  the  requisite
extent  for  the  decision  of  the  doubful  points  they  have  indicated.
At  the  same  time  the  Committee  feel  that  the  subject  is  one  demand¬
ing  the  most  accurate  and  authenticated  observation  of  every  experi¬
ment  which  is  brought  forward.  The  Committee  also  solicit  the
instructions  of  Government  wdiether,  should  further  enquiry  be
resolved  on,  it  is  to  be  limited  strictly  to  such  experiments  as
Dr.  Esdaile  wishes  to  perform,  or  whether  the  Government  wish  the
Committee  to  extend  the  investigation  as  they  think  desirable.

“In  conclusion,  the  Committee  are  unanimously  of  opinion  that
great  credit  is  due  to  Dr.  Esdaile  for  the  zeal,  ability,  and  boldness
with  which  he  has  taken  up  and  pursued  this  enquiry.  Ilis  sphere,
however,  has  been  hitherto  limited,  but  the  Committee  hope  that
his  further  investigations  may  be  extended  to  medical  as  well  as  sur¬
gical  cases,  to  European  as  well  as  native  patients,  and  to  the  eluci¬
dation  of  the  several  questions  which  have  been  adverted  to  in  the
course  of  this  report.”

One  of  the  non-medical  members  of  the  Committee  saw
so  much  that  he  disapproved  of  in  this  report,  saw  that  some
of  the  opinions  of  the  medical  members  were  so  silly  and  un¬
supported,  that  he  drew  up  one  for  himself.  This  must  be
allowed  great  weight,  because,  as  editor  of  a  newspaper,  he
had  rained  all  kinds  of  abuse  on  Dr.  Esdaile  and  mesmerism
(knowing  nothing  about  either,  as  usual)  from  the  beginning;
but  he  is  a  manly  independent  person.

It  is  well  known  that  the  other  lay  members  agreed  with
him,  and  only  signed  the  whole  for  the  sake  of  peace.

“Minute  by  Mr.  Hume.

“  I  have  signed  the  Report,  because  I  agree  with  all  its  facts  :
but  the  paragraphs  27,  &c.,  (of  p.  56),  I  objected  to  when  they  were


58


Report  of  the  Calcutta  Committee


under  discussion,  and,  as  on  further  consideration  my  opinion  re¬
mains  the  same,  I  desire  to  express  it.  I  think  the  paragraphs  in
question  calculated  to  create  an  unfavourable  impression  of  mesmer¬
ism  as  a  surgical  and  medical  agent,  neither  warranted  by  what  we
have  seen,  nor  by  the  reasoning  applied  to  what  we  have  not  seen.

“  I  desire,  in  the  first  place,  to  make  an  observation  on  paragraph
22  (1st  of  p.  55).  The  proposition  therein  alluded  to  I  was  not  aware
of  until  after  Dr.  Esdaile’ s  reply  had  been  received.  I  should  not
have  supported  it,  considering  the  position  in  which  Dr.  Esdaile  was
placed  by  the  Committee.  He  had  distinctly  declined  to  do  more —
before  anything  was  done — than  attempt  to  substantiate  the  fact
of  painless  operations  by  virtue  of  mesmerism,  and  the  question  of
ratio  of  susceptibility,  however  important  in  itself,  was  beside  that
question.  I  think  it  right  to  say  thus  much,  because  the  Report
does  not  state  whether  the  Committee  considered  the  reasons  assigned
by  Dr.  Esdaile  for  declining  the  experiment  sufficient ;  I  think  they
were.

“  Para.  27  (1st  of  p.  56).  I  dissent  from  the  opinion  expressed  at
the  commencement  of  this  paragraph.  I  do  not  think  the  uncertainty
of  the  time  required  for  producing  the  intense  condition  of  the  mes¬
meric  sleep  *  very  unfavourable  to  the  general  introduction  of  mes¬
meric  manipulation  in  the  practice  of  surgery,  especially  in  hospitals.’
I  think  if  a  severe  operation  can  be  performed  without  pain,  it  is  a
very  secondary  consideration  whether  the  patient  has  to  be  mesmer¬
ised  one  hour  or  twenty-four  hours.  So  far  from  the  objection  being
specially  applicable  to  hospitals,  it  seems  to  me  that  it  is  much  less
so|than  to  operations  out  of  hospitals,  for  where  there  is  a  large  esta¬
blishment  there  may  be  mesmerisers  without  inconvenience,  and  the
cost  I  throw  out  of  the  question.  If  the  introduction  of  mesmerism
into  our  hospitals  necessarily  involved  the  abolition  of  some  existing
system,  it  might  be  at  present  a  questionable  change  ;  but  why  it
should  not  be  introduced  if  it  be  once  proved  that  painless  operations
can  be  performed  by  its  means,  I  am  at  a  loss  to  imagine.

“  I  did  not  consider  the  Committee  was  called  on  to  report  on
the  question  of  introducing  mesmerism  into  hospitals,  but  as  an  opi¬
nion  is  given  unfavourable  to  its  introduction,  as  at  present  informed
I  must  record  my  dissent.

“Para.  28.  I  object  to  this  paragraph,  because  the  Committee
was  not  called  on  to  report  on  the  f  universally  useful  application  of
mesmeric  processes  because  I  have  never  understood  that  mesmer¬
ism  was  asserted  by  Dr.  Esdaile,  or  by  any  body  else,  to  be  uni¬
versally  applicable  or  infallible  ;  and  because  it  appears  to  me,  after
other  portions  of  the  Report,  to  be  setting  a  possible  failure  under
some  circumstances  against  positive  success  under  other  circum¬
stances, — as  though  a  person  were  to  descant  on  the  invaluable  pro¬
perties  of  quinine,  and  then  complain  that  it  could  not  be  turned
to  account  while  a  patient  was  in  a  high  state  of  delirium  and  fever.

“Para.  29.  The  case  of  Bissonauth,  referred  to  in  this  para¬
graph,  is  a  weak  one  ;  in  fact  it  proves  nothing.  At  the  end  of  five
days  he  was  dismissed  from  treatment  because  he  had  not  been


on  Dr.  Esdaile’s  Mesmeric  Operations.


59


mesmerised  and  had  a  cough :  but  another  patient  was  dismissed
after  eleven  days  because  he  had  not  been  mesmerised, — and  he  had
no  cough.  The  Report  speaks  (para.  28)  of  what  Dr.  Esdaile  *  ac¬
knowledges’  about  the  causes  which  do,  or  may,  give  resistance  to
the  mesmeric  sleep,  and  those  specified  might  appear  to  have  natu¬
rally  that  effect;  but  we  have  seen  so  much  that  is  tmnatural, — such
as  a  man  bearing  a  red-hot  cinder  on  his  breast  without  flinching,
and  this  simply  because  a  boy  had  breathed  on  his  face  and  made
some  ‘  passes,’  that  I,  for  one,  am  not  prepared  to  say  that  mes¬
merism  cannot  quiet  a  cough,  soothe  mental  excitement,  allay  fever,
and  defeat  the  hostility  of  pain.  Resistance  to  the  mesmeric  sleep
is  one  thing,  the  power  to  defeat  it  another:  to  assert  that  because
there  is  resistance  there  is  ‘  a  serious  practical  obstacle  to  the  uni¬
versally  useful  application  of  mesmerism’  is  not  logically  correct;
but  if  it  were,  what  is  there  under  heaven  of  which  we  can  declare
the  ‘  universally  useful  application’  to  assuage  the  ills  that  flesh  is
heir  to, — except  patience.

“  Para.  30.  This  paragraph  expresses  the  opinion  of  the  me¬
dical  members  of  the  Committee  on  a  point  of  much  interest;  cer¬
tainly  on  one  calculated  to  create  distrust,  if  not  alarm,  of  mesmerism.
Being  however  a  portion  of  the  Report  which  the  non-medical  mem¬
bers  are  to  sign,  I  may  be  permitted  to  say  a  few  words  upon  it.

“It  is  said  there  are  strong  grounds  for  believing  that  parties
who  have  been  once  mesmerised  ‘  are  rendered  subsequently  more
and  more  susceptible  to  its  influence,  their  nervous  systems  are,  it
appears,  brought  into  a  morbidly  impressible  condition.  If  this
increase  of  sensibility  and  susceptibility  exposes  the  patients  to
numerous  nervous  maladies,  too  much  caution  cannot  be  observed  in
extending  the  practice  to  the  ordinary  and  often  trivial  exigencies  of
surgical  operations.’  All  that  the  Committee  has  had  an  oppor¬
tunity  of  observing  is,  that  patients  become  gradually  more  suscep¬
tible  of  the  mesmeric  influence :  we  may  take  it  however  that  the
results  of  constant  and  prolonged  practice  on  a  mesmeric  patient
would  be  seriously  prejudicial,  but  why  suppose  the  abuse  instead  of
the  use  of  this  agent !  I  am  not  aware  that  any  one  would  see
occasion  for  extending  the  mesmeric  process  beyond  the  accomplish¬
ment  of  the  operation  and  subsequent  treatment  of  the  patient,  and
there  is  no  evidence,  that  I  am  aware  of,  to  show  that  in  the  ordi¬
nary  period  required  for  these  purposes  the  nervous  system  is  likely
to  be  prejudicially  affected.

“  The  paragraph  alludes  to  surgical  cases  :  it  may  be  most  im¬
portant  as  regards  the  application  of  mesmerism  to  purely  medical
cases.

“James  Hume.”

We  can  fancy  the  wry  faces  of  the  doctors:  “they  eat  their
leek,  and  eke  they  swear.”  But  their  wry  faces  can  only
convince  the  spectators  that  the  compelling  power  must  have
been  irresistible  which  forced  them  to  make  so  distasteful  a
meal.


60


Report  of  the  Calcutta  Committee


The  following  is  the  Government's  acknowledgment  of  the
Report  of  the  Committee.

“  To  J.  Atkinson,  Esq.,  Chairman;  and  W.  B.  O’Shaughnessy,
Esq.,  Secretary  of  the  Committee  appointed  to  observe  and
report  on  Dr.  Esdaile’s  Mesmeric  Experiments.

“  Government  of  Bengal,  “Gentlemen, — I  am  directed  to  acknowledge

vember,  1846.  the  receipt  ot  your  letter  dated  the  9th  ultimo,

forwarding  the  Committee’s  Report,  with  Minutes  of  their  proceed¬
ings  and  various  documents  referred  to,  the  whole  of  which  have
been  perused  by  the  Hon’ble  the  Deputy  Governor  of  Bengal  with
much  interest  and  attention.

“  2.  It  appears  from  this  Report  that  ten  persons  requiring  sur¬
gical  treatment  were  subjected  to  the  supposed  mesmeric  process ;
that  of  these,  three  were  dismissed  without  effect,  and  the  other
seven  patients,  after  various  intervals,  were  thrown  into  a  deep  sleep,
which  however,  according  to  the  Committee,  differed  from  natural
sleep  in  as  much  as  ‘  the  individual  could  not  be  aroused  by  loud
noises  ;  the  pupils  of  the  eyes  were  insensible  to  light ;  and  great,
and  in  some  cases  apparently  perfect  insensibility  to  pain  was  wit¬
nessed  on  burning,  pinching,  and  cutting  the  skin  and  other  sen¬
sitive  organs.’  On  the  other  hand  this  sleep  differed  from  that  pro¬
duced  by  narcotic  drugs  ‘  in  the  quickness  with  which  in  eight  cases
out  of  ten  the  patient  was  awoke,  after  certain  transverse  passes,
and  fanning  by  the  mesmeriser,  and  blowing  upon  the  face  and  eyes;
in  the  natural  condition  of  the  pupils  of  the  eyes  and  the  conjunctiva
in  all  the  cases  after  awaking  ;  in  the  absence  of  stertorous  breathing,
and  of  subsequent  delirium,  or  hallucination,  and  of  many  other
symptoms  familiar  to  medical  observers,  and  which  are  produced  by
alcoholic  liquors,  opium,  hemp,  and  other  narcotic  drugs.’

“  In  the  seven  cases  in  which  deep  sleep  was  produced,  opera¬
tions  were  performed  during  this  sleep ;  and  the  result  is  stated  to  be
that  three  operations  and  one  dressing  were,  to  all  appearance,  per¬
fectly  painless;  and  in  the  other  three  there  were  ‘all  the  signs  of
intense  pain  which  a  dumb  person  might  be  expected  to  exhibit,
except  resistance  to  the  operator.’  ‘  But,’  the  Committee  add,  ‘  in
all  these  cases,  without  exception,  after  the  operation  was  com¬
pleted,  the  patients  expressed  no  knowledge  or  recollection  of  what
had  occurred,  denied  having  dreamed,  and  complained  of  no  pain,
till  their  attention  was  directed  to  the  place  where  the  operation  had
been  performed.’  It  appears  from  the  following  table  given  by  the
Committee,  that  the  state  of  the  pulse  in  these  cases  was  not  what
might  have  been  expected  ;  being  raised  greatly  in  the  apparently
painless  operations,  and  remaining  unaffected  in  those  which  were
accompanied  by  symptoms  of  pain.

“  ‘  The  general  result  arrived  at,  then,’  say  the  Committee,  ‘  on
the  question  of  pain  during  the  mesmeric  surgical  operations  we  wit¬
nessed,  amounts  to  this,  that  in  three  cases  there  is  no  proof  what¬
ever  that  any  pain  was  suffered,  and  that  in  three  other  cases  the


on  Dr.  Esdaile’s  Mesmeric  Operations.


61


manifestations  of  pain  daring  the  operation  are  opposed  by  the  posi¬
tive  statement  of  the  patient  that  no  pain  was  experienced.’


STATE  OF  PULSE.


Patient.

Disease.

Before.

During.

Immediately

after.

Operation.

Nilmoney  . .

Tumor .

84

124

Natural  .

Apparently  painless

Ditto .

Dressing  changed  on  12th  Sep.

80

108

Natural  .

Apparently  painless

Domun ....

Tumor .

72

72

Natural  .

Doubtful.

Jahirudin  . .

Excision  of  thickened  prepuce

60

60

Natural  .

Doubtful.

Ramchund  .

Tumor .

68

68

Natural  .

Doubtful.

Hyder  Khan

Amputation  of  thigh .

108

112

100  ..  ..

Apparently  painless

Murali  Doss

Tumor .

68

108

72  ..  ..

Apparently  painless

“  The  Committee  conclude  their  Report  by  adverting  to  the  ne¬
cessity  for  an  extensive  as  well  as  accurate  observation  of  the  pheno¬
mena  attending  mesmeric  agency,  of  the  existence  of  which  they
seem  to  entertain  little  doubt.  They  attribute  great  credit  to  Dr.
Esdaile  for  the  ‘  zeal,  ability,  and  boldness  with  which  he  has  taken
up,  and  pursued  this  enquiry;’  but  they  remark  that  his  sphere  has
hitherto  been  limited,  and  they  f  hope  that  his  further  investigations
may  be  extended  to  medical,  as  well  as  surgical,  to  European,  as
well  as  native  patients  ;  and  to  the  elucidation  of  the  several  ques¬
tions  which  have  been  adverted  to  in  the  course  of  this  Report.’

“  3.  The  Deputy  Governor  concurs  entirely  with  the  Committee
in  thinking  that  though  the  investigations  upon  which  their  Report
is  founded  have  been  upon  a  scale  too  confined  to  warrant  any  defi¬
nite  conclusion  as  to  the  existence  and  applicability  of  mesmeric
agency  to  surgical  cases,  yet  the  results  hitherto  observed  are  of
sufficient  importance  to  warrant  a  further  prosecution  of  the  enquiry.
At  the  same  time,  His  Honor  is  fully  aware  of  the  value  of  the
time  of  the  members  of  the  Committee,  and  that,  as  they  have
themselves  observed,  the  responsible  public  duties  on  which  most  of
the  members  are  employed,  must  suffer  serious  interruption,  were
the  enquiry  to  be  followed  up  under  their  observation,  and  with  equal
strictness ,  and  to  the  requisite  extent  for  the  decision  of  the  doubtful
points  they  have  indicated.

“4.  Under  these  circumstances,  the  Deputy  Governor  is  unwill¬
ing  to  tax  unnecessarily  the  time  and  convenience  of  the  gentlemen
forming  the  Committee;  and  in  releasing  them  from  the  necessity  of
further  attendance,  I  am  instructed  to  convey  the  acknowledgments
of  the  Government,  and  to  express  the  satisfaction  of  the  Hon’ble
the  President  in  Council  as  well  as  of  the  Deputy  Governor  of
Bengal  with  the  manner  in  which  the  Committee  have  performed
their  part  in  these  important  proceedings.

“  5.  The  Committee’s  Report  has  been  ordered  to  be  published,
and  the  Deputy  Governor  entirely  concurs  with  the  remark  of  the
President  in  Council,  that  it  is  sufficient  for  the  present  that  it
should  be  allowed  to  work  its  own  way  towards  producing  conviction
among  the  profession  and  the  public  ;  and  that,  at  this  stage,
any  more  direct  encouragement  on  the  part  of  Government  to  the


62


Report  of  the  Calcutta  Committee


general  introduction  of  the  mesmeric  practice  would  be  premature.
But  so  far  has  the  possibility  of  rendering  the  most  serious  surgical
operations  painless  to  the  subject  of  them,  been,  in  His  Honor’s
opinion,  established  by  the  late  experiments  performed  under  the  eye
of  a  Committee  appointed  for  the  purpose,  as  to  render  it  incumbent
on  the  Government  to  afford  to  the  meritorious  and  zealous  officer  by
whom  the  subject  was  first  brought  to  its  notice  such  assistance  as  may
facilitate  his  investigations,  and  enable  him  to  prosecute  his  interesting
experiments  under  the  most  favourable  and  promising  circumstances.

“  6.  With  this  view  His  Honor  has  determined,  with  the  sanc¬
tion  of  the  Supreme  Government,  to  place  Dr.  Esdaile  for  one  year
in  charge  of  a  small  experimental  hospital  in  some  favourable  situa¬
tion  in  Calcutta,  in  order  that  he  may,  as  recommended  by  the  Com¬
mittee,  extend  his  investigations  to  the  applicability  of  this  alleged
agency  to  all  descriptions  of  cases,  medical  as  well  as  surgical,  and
all  classes  of  patients,  European  as  well  as  native.  Dr.  Esdaile  will
be  directed  to  encourage  the  resort  to  his  hospital  of  all  respectable
persons  desirous  of  satisfying  themselves  of  the  nature  and  the  effect
of  his  experiments,  especially  medical  and  scientific  individuals  in  or
out  of  the  Service  ;  and  His  Honor  will  nominate  from  among  the
medical  officers  of  the  Presidency,  ‘  Visitors,’  whose  duty  it  will  be
to  visit  the  hospital  from  time  to  time,  inspect  Dr.  Esdaile’ s  proceed¬
ings,  without  exercising  any  interference,  and  occasionally,  or  when
called  on,  report  upon  them,  through  the  Medical  Board,  for  the
information  of  Government.  On  these  reports  will  mainly  depend
what  further  steps  the  Government  may  deem  it  expedient  to  take  in
the  matter.

“  I  have  the  honour  to  be.  Gentlemen,

“  Your  most  obedient  Servant,

“  (Signed)  Fred.  Jas.  Halliday,

4 4 Secretary  to  the  Govt,  of  Bengal”

The  account  of  the  wonderful  painless  mesmeric  operation
of  the  removal  of  a  tumor  weighing  112  lbs.  is  printed  by
Government,  though  it  was  performed  after  the  Committee
had  adjourned — a  high  compliment  on  the  part  of  Govern¬
ment  to  Dr.  Esdaile.  Our  account  of  it  in  our  last  number,
p.  563,  &c.,  was  carried  down  to  only  the  second  day  after  the
operation.  But  we  here  find  it  continued  to  the  ninth,  when
the  man  was  doing  well  and  had  every  prospect  of  a  good  re¬
covery.

It  is  clear  that  but  for  the  good  sense  and  firmness  of
gentlemen  not  of  the  medical  profession,  the  Report  would
have  been  more  wretched,  more  unfair,  more  the  result  of
miserable  feeling  than  it  is,  and  that  no  mesmeric  hospital
would  have  been  established.  The  Government  Secretary
deserves  high  praise  and  thanks.  He  witnessed  the  facts  and
judged  for  himself,  like  an  honest,  intelligent,  and  wise  man.


on  Dr.  Esdaile’s  Mesmeric  Operations.


63


The  editors  of  the  Indian  newspapers  saw  the  matter  in
its  true  light  and  did  themselves  honour.  The  following  are
passages  in  some  of  them  :

“  We  have  received  the  report  of  the  Mesmeric  Committee,
which  we  intend  to  publish  to-morrow,  together  with  the
minute  of  one  of  its  members,  Mr.  Hume.  The  report  itself
reminds  us  of  a  coat  made  by  a  fashionable  tailor,  but  patched
by  botchers  with  cloth  of  a  different  quality  and  colour.  Its
very  title  is  an  impertinence.  It  states  itself  to  be  a  report
of  surgical  operations  upon  patients,  under  Alleged  Mesmeric
Agency.  These  three  words  being  printed  in  far  more  con¬
spicuous  types  than  any  others  in  the  title.  What  would  the
Chairman  think  of  a  criticism  of  certain  drawings,  alleged  to
be  from  the  pencil  of  Dr.  Atkinson  or  the  Secretary,  of  a
review  of  a  Manual  of  Chemistry,  alleged  to  be  by  Dr.  W.
B.  O’Shaughnessy.  The  term  might  have  been  very  properly
though  not  very  courteously  used  before  the  investigation,
but  after  signing  the  report  in  which  the  fact  of  mesmeric
agency  is  admitted,  the  term  alleged  is  wholly  out  of  place.
To  save  the  trouble  of  reverting  to  the  report  to-morrow,  we
shall  make  a  few  observations  on  it  at  present.  In  paragraph
5th,  the  committee  say,  that  they  have  had  under  their  ob¬
servation  ten  surgical  cases,  f  taken  by  Dr.  Esdaile  from  the
general  wards  of  the  native  hospital/  This  expression  would
induce  the  reader  to  believe  that  Dr.  Esdaile  had  selected
these  cases  as  being  peculiarly  favourable  to  his  mode  of  treat¬
ment  ;  but  it  is  not  stated,  as  it  ought  to  have  been,  that  these
cases  were  received  from  Dr.  Jackson,  and  were  all  the  cases
in  the  hospital  requiring  operation.  In  the  ninth  paragraph,
the  committee  say,  that  ‘  The  room  in  which  they  [the  mes-
merisers]  operated  was  darkened,  but  from  time  to  time  the
committee  were  enabled  to  witness*  the  manner  in  which  the
processes  were  carried  on.  They  have  omitted  to  state  that
they  could  look  whenever  they  pleased.  In  the  same  para¬
graph  they  state  that  one  patient,  Bisonath,  suffered  from
slight  cough,  which  ‘Dr.  Esdaile  considered  to  render  the
mesmeric  manipulation  ineffectual/  It  should  have  been
added  that  this  patient  laboured  under  Chronic  Bronchitis,
which  compelled  him  to  clear  his  wind  pipe  every  10  or  15
minutes  and  that  therefore  uninterrupted  sleep  could  not  be
expected.

“In  the  12th  paragraph,  the  committee  admit  that  ‘This
sleep  in  its  general  character  differed  from  that  which  would
be  produced  by  narcotic  drugs/  and  mention  ‘  the  absence  of
such  symptoms  as  are  produced  by  alcoholic  liquors,  opium,
hemp  and  other  narcotic  drugs/  But  they  qualify  this  by


64


Report  of  the  Calcutta  Committee


saying. — ‘ It  is  right  however  to  add,  that  in  two  cases  the
patients  showed  much  confusion  and  disinclination  to  answer,
and  complained  of  giddiness  after  being  suddenly  aroused/
They  do  not  add  that  they  had  been  warned  of  this,  nor  do
they  seem  to  be  aware  that  it  is  a  common  and  well  known
effect  of  mesmeric  agency.

“In  the  17th  paragraph,  they  say  of  one  patient,  who  was
tapped  for  a  double  hydrocele,  that  his  case  “  is  insignificant
and  inconclusive,”  because,  though  the  operation,  under  mes¬
meric  influence,  performed  on  one  side  was  “  apparently  pain¬
less,”  it  was  repeated  on  the  other,  when  the  patient  was
awake,  with  the  same  result.  We  are  informed  that  the  patient
had  no  pain  whatever  till  tapped  the  second  time,  when  awake,
when  he  felt  the  usual  pain  in  the  loins.

“  In  the  21st  paragraph,  the  committee  state.  ‘  The  gene¬
ral  result  arrived  at  then,  on  the  question  of  pain  during
the  mesmeric  surgical  operations  we  witnessed,  amounts  to
this,  that  in  three  cases  there  is  no  proof  whatever  that  any
pain  was  suffered,  and  that  in  the  other  three  cases  the  mani¬
festations  of  pain  during  the  operation  are  opposed  by  the  posi¬
tive  statement  of  the  patient  that  no  pain  was  experienced /
To  this  it  might  have  been  added  in  fairness  to  the  operator,
that  in  no  instance  did  any  patient  require  to  be  held  or  ap¬
pear  to  know  the  source  of  his  annoyance.

“  In  the  25th  paragraph,  the  Committee  mention  that  they
witnessed  ‘the  painless  removal  of  dressing  from  extensive
wounds  during  the  mesmeric  state,  but  the  gentleness  and
care  with  which  the  process  was  performed  left  it  doubtful
whether  the  patients  would  have  made  any  complaint  had
mesmerism  not  been  resorted  to/

“  The  Committee  would  have  done  well  to  have  witnessed,
by  way  of  removing  their  doubt,  the  same  process  in  the
natural  state.

“  In  the  22nd  paragraph,  they  mention  having  invited  Dr.
Esdaile  to  take  100  cases  at  random  from  Dr.  Jackson’s  wards,
and  they  state  that  he  declined  this  experiment,  but  do  not
give  his  reason  in  their  report, — that  it  was  because  he  has
made  a  rule  of  never  mesmerising  those  who  did  not  need  it.
The  Committee  were  requested  by  him  to  mention  his  original
report  to  government  of  102  operations  performed  without
one  death.  This,  however  they  have  thought  proper  to  omit,
though  the  proportion  of  deaths  in  similar  operations  under
ordinary  surgery,  is  a  most  important  consideration.

“The  Committee  having  thus  declined  to  do  what  they
were  requested,  proceed  to  do  what  they  were  not  asked,  by
reporting  in  paragraph  28,  against  the  universally  useful


on  Dr.  Esdaile’s  Mesmeric  Operations.


65


applicability  of  mesmerism,  because  certain  enumerated  dis¬
eases  resist  it.

“They  also  object,  paragraph  30,  that  there  are  strong
grounds  for  supposing  that  persons  mesmerically  treated  ac¬
quire  an  increase  of  susceptibility  and  sensibility,  which  ‘  ex¬
poses  the  patients  to  numerous  nervous  diseases’  Why  do
they  not  propose  to  banish  opium  and  prussic  acid,  and  a
hundred  other  poisons  from  the  pharmacopoeia  ?  Is  there  any
powerful  agent  which  may  not  be  misused  ?

“The  Committee  having  thus  performed  their  duty  to
mesmerism,  we  hope  they  will  admit  that  we  have  performed
ours  to  them.  There  is  one  member,  however,  who  having
signed  a  separate  minute,  deserves  a  special  notice,  and  we
give  it  with  the  greater  pleasure,  because  we  think  his  dif¬
ference  with  his  colleagues  highly  creditable  to  him.  This
gentleman  is  Mr.  Hume.  Our  readers  know  that  while  he
was  editor  of  the  Star,  he  lost  no  opportunity  of  ridiculing
mesmerism  and  its  promoters.  He  might,  therefore,  have
been  expected  according  to  the  usual  pride  of  human  nature,
to  have  been  ashamed  to  avow  his  previous  errors,  and  to  have
obstinately  adhered  to  first  convictions.  On  the  contrary,  it
will  be  found  that  he  has  candidly  yielded  to  evidence,  and
though,  like  St.  Thomas,  he  was  uot  satisfied  till  he  had  put
his  hands  into  the  wounds,  he  has  yielded  to  sufficient  testi¬
mony  with  far  more  candour  than  his  colleagues.  We  abstain
from  extracts,  because  we  intend  to  publish  the  whole  minute
to-morrow,  but  we  beg  particularly  to  refer  our  readers  to  it,
because  the  testimony  of  a  witness  who  has  previously  been
a  determined  opponent  is  particularly  valuable.  We  had
nearly  omitted  one  point  which  requires  notice.  The  com¬
mittee  say,  paragraph  23,  that  three  out  of  four  of  the  medi¬
cal  members  think  that  there  is  no  difference  in  the  loss  of
blood  by  patients  operated  on  mesmerically,  and  those  in  the
ordinary  manner.  But  Hr.  Stewart,  in  opposition  to  them,
positively  asserts  that  in  the  common  operation  for  the  re¬
moval  of  large  tumours,  ‘the  bleeding  constituted  the  chief,
nay  the  only  difficulty /  but  in  the  mesmerised  cases,  though
the  first  discharge  was  large,  ‘  the  flow  immediately  stopped/
and  he  adds,  that  in  one  case  not  a  single  artery  required  to
be  tied  for  at  least  10  or  12  minutes  along  the  whole  surface
of  a  wound  measuring  ‘38  inches  in  circumference/

“  Surely  the  reporters  ought  to  have  noticed  this  fact,  and
not  merely  stated  a  difference  of  opinion  with  their  colleague.

“  The  Deputy  Governor  entertains  a  different  opinion  of
the  imPortance  of  the  enquiry  from  that  held  by  a  majority
of  tbe  committee,  for  he  desires  the  Bengal  Secretary  to


66


Report  of  the  Calcutta  Committee

inform  them  that  f  So  far  has  the  possibility  of  rendering
the  most  serious  surgical  operations  painless  to  the  subject  of
them,  been  in  His  Honor’s  opinion  established  by  the  late
experiments  performed  under  the  eye  of  a  committee  appointed
for  the  purpose,  as  to  render  it  incumbent  upon  the  Govern¬
ment  to  afford  to  the  meritorious  and  zealous  officer  by  whom
the  subject  was  first  brought  to  its  notice,  such  assistance  as
may  facilitate  his  investigations,  and  enable  him  to  prosecute
his  interesting  experiments  under  the  most  favourable  and
promising  circumstances/  ” — Englishman ,  Nov.  10.

“  When  some  time  since  we  published  a  long  series  of  ex¬
tracts  from  Dr.  Esdaile’s  work  on  mesmerism,  we  understood
that  the  Government  at  Bengal  had  given  orders  for  an  offi¬
cial  inquiry  into  the  efficacy  of  the  mesmeric  influence  in
the  case  of  surgical  operations :  the  impression  on  our  minds
being  at  the  time,  that  the  investigation  would  be  of  suffi¬
cient  duration  and  extent  to  satisfy  the  mind  of  every  rational
man  upon  the  subject,  who  should  think  proper  to  inquire
into  it.

“  In  this  last  particular  we  have  been  disappointed.  The
investigation,  it  appears,  was  limited  in  duration  to  the  pe¬
riod  of  fourteen  days  only,  whilst  the  persons  to  be  experi¬
mented  upon  were  restricted  to  the  very  inconsiderable  num¬
ber  of  ten.

“  The  result,  however,  has  been  all  that  the  advocates  of
mesmerism  can  desire.  For,  of  the  ten  persons  forming  the
subjects  of  investigation,  three  only  could  not  be  mesmerised
at  all ;  whilst  of  the  remaining  seven — all  of  whom  were  sub¬
jected  to  surgical  operations  of  considerable  severity — three,
who,  from  “  distortion  of  feature,”  appeared  to  suffer,  neither
required  to  be  held,  nor  offered  any  resistance  whatever  to
the  operator,  and  on  awaking  declared  themselves  to  be  wholly
unconscious  of  what  had  been  done  to  them.  A  fourth  case
was  deemed  “inconclusive,”  in  consequence  of  the  same
person  having,  in  another  instance,  borne  a  similar  operation
without  showing  any  sign  of  pain ;  whilst  in  the  remaining
three  not  a  symptom  of  feeling  was  displayed,  the  insensi¬
bility  to  suffering  being  apparently  most  perfect.

“  It  is  remarkable  enough  to  find  in  the  face  of  facts  like
these,  that  the  medical  portion  of  the  Committee  of  Investi¬
gation  was  still  disposed  to  throw  cold  water  upon  mesmerism,
as  an  agent  in  the  surgical  hospital.  But  as  their  own  re¬
port  of  the  facts  submitted  to  them  was  found  to  be  in  direct
opposition  to  their  expressed  “opinion,”  as  to  the  importance
of  this  new  surgical  agent,  the  Government  of  Calcutta  has


on  Dr.  Esdaile’s  Mesmeric  Operations.


67


very  wisely,  as  we  think,  given  much  more  weight  to  the
facts ,  upon  which  the  Committee  were  instructed  to  report,
than  to  their  mere  opinions,  which  appear  to  have  been  rather
impertinently  thrust  into  the  report  in  the  face  of  the  in¬
structions.

“And  accordingly  the  Government  has  now  determined  on
giving  Dr.  Esdaile  a  much  wider  theatre  for  the  demonstra¬
tion  of  his  experiments,  namely,  a  small  hospital  for  that
express  purpose;  and  a  much  more  competent  set  of  judges
than  two  or  three  prejudiced  men — namely,  the  public,  who,
under  proper  regulations,  are  to  be  admitted  to  the  Mesmeric
Hospital  under  the  charge  of  Dr.  Esdaile.

“In  concluding  his  observations  upon  the  subject,  the
editor  of  the  Bengal  Hurkaru  says  : —

‘  These  results  are  considered  by  the  public  as  ‘  completely  estab¬
lishing  the  pretensions  of  Dr.  Esdaile,  and  as  proving  the  efficacy
of  the  mesmeric  agency.  The  Report  of  the  Committee,  however,
which  is  considered  as  that  of  the  medical  members  who  formed  the
majority,  is  generally  considered  to  display  much  of  jealousy  and
prejudice  against  the  new  power.  It  has  been  much  criticised  by  the
local  press,  which  is  unanimous  in  its  condemnation.  The  Com¬
mittee,  however,  though  evidently  bearing  no  good  will  to  the  science,
has  been  constrained  by  the  facts  elicited  to  recommend  further  in¬
vestigation,  and  the  Government  has,  as  already  mentioned,  deter¬
mined  to  place  Dr.  Esdaile  in  charge  of  a  small  hospital,  to  which
the  public  is  to  be  admitted  to  witness  his  operations.’  ” — The  Ladies’
Own  Journal.

“We  are  glad  to  observe  that  Dr.  Esdaile  satisfied  the
Government  Committee,  and  that  he  is  immediately  to  be  put
at  the  head  of  a  Mesmeric  Hospital.  What  will  the  English
persecutors  of  Dr.  Elliotson  say  to  this  act  of  the  Govern¬
ment  of  India  ?  It  is  of  little  consequence  what  such  persons
now  may  say  or  think.  Truth  has  prevailed  in  spite  of  them.”
— Ceylon  Observer,  Nov.  19,  1846.

“  The  new  hospital  will  be  advantageous,  for  mesmerism  as
a  remedial  agent  is  applicable  to  a  vast  variety  of  cases,  which
do  not  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  surgeon,  and  though  the
effects  on  these  are  less  striking  than  in  such  terrible  opera¬
tions  as  those  which  we  have  had  to  record,  yet  they  are  not
less  important;  and  considering  the  great  advantages  pos¬
sessed  by  a  public  institution,  we  can  scarcely  doubt  that  the
foundation  of  the  intended  hospital  will  prove  an  era  in  the
medical  annals  of  India.” — Englishman.

“  The  Hurkaru  gives  the  following  summary  of  the  opinions
of  the  Calcutta  press.

f  2


68


Report  of  the  Calcutta  Committee,  fyc.

‘That  the  conclusions  of  the  Report,  as  distinguished
from  the  record  of  facts,  have  been  dissented  from  by  the
whole  local  press  our  contemporary  will  hardly  deny.  Our
own  verdict  wre  need  not  repeat/  The  Englishman  looked
on  the  Report  ‘  as  a  coat  made  by  a  fashionable  tailor,  but
patched  by  botchers/  and  he  straightway  pulled  it  to  pieces.
The  Calcutta  Star  concurred  with  Mr.  Hume  in  his  objections
to  certain  paragraphs  which  were  ‘  calculated  to  create  an
unfavorable  impression  of  mesmerism  as  a  surgical  and  me¬
dical  agent,  neither  warranted  by  what  was  seen,  nor  by  the
reasoning  applied  to  what  was  not  seen/  and  it  subsequently
admitted — we  quote  the  words  for  the  last  time — that  “  a
certain  degree  of  jealousy  is  no  doubt  to  be  detected  in  the
Report  /  and  that  this  had  led  to  ‘  weak  and  illogical  con¬
clusions/  The  Eastern  Star ,  though  as  our  contemporary
says,  repudiating  the  attempts  made  to  identify  the  motives
of  the  majority  with  that  of  professional  jealousy  and  bias
of  educational  routine,  expressed  its  ‘  concurrence  with  the
general  public  opinion  against  the  impropriety  of  certain
paragraphs  appearing  as  a  portion  of  the  Committee’s  Re¬
port/ — and  then  followed  the  steps  of  its  daily  brother  in
controverting  the  conclusions  embodied  in  those  paragraphs.
And  lastly,  the  Friend  of  India  speaks  of  ‘  the  evident  reluc¬
tance  which  the  members  of  the  Committee,  with  one  excep¬
tion,  have  manifested  in  admitting  the  facts  established  by
these  experiments/  If,  then,  the  press  has  not  been  ‘  unan¬
imous  in  condemnation  of  the  Report/  it  certainly  has  been
most  wonderfully  unanimous  in  its  disapprobation  of  that  part
of  it  which,  as  Mr.  Hume  well  expresses  it,  was  ‘calculated
to  create  an  unfavourable  impression  of  mesmerism  as  a  sur¬
gical  and  medical  agent,  neither  warranted  by  what  we  (the
Committee)  have  seen ,  nor  by  the  reasoning  applied  to  what
we  have  not  seen /  ” — Delhi  Gazette ,  Dec.  24ith,  1846.


In  a  letter  to  the  editor  of  the  Star,  December  20,  Dr.
Esdaile,  after  giving  an  account  of  the  institution  of  the
mesmeric  hospital,  and  the  directions  given  to  him,  ending
in  these  words, —

“  His  Honor  expects  too,  that  you  will  encourage  the  resort  to
your  hospital  of  all  respectable  persons  desirous  of  satisfying  them¬
selves  of  the  nature  and  the  effect  of  your  experiments,  especially
medical  and  scientific  individuals  in  or  out  of  the  service/’ —

subjoins  the  following  remarks  :

“  The  last  paragraph  only  recommends  a  continuance  of  the


More  painless  Surgical  Operations  in  India.


69


course  I  have  pursued  from  the  beginning,  that  of  making  all  who
took  any  interest  in  the  subject,  welcome  to  witness  the  daily  rou¬
tine  of  my  hospital  practice,  and  I  shall,  of  course,  be  happy  to
continue  it.

“  I  beg  leave  to  take  this  occasion  to  indicate  to  the  public  the
cases  which,  in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge,  are  considered
the  most  likely  to  be  benefitted  by  mesmeric  treatment.

“1st.  All  persons  requiring  serious  surgical  operations  will,  if
possible,  be  reduced  to  a  state  of  insensibility  before  being  operated
upon,  but  this  usually  requires  a  considerable  time,  varying  with
each  person’s  constitution.  A  very  great  majority  of  the  natives
who  require  surgical  aid,  may  have  the  advantage  of  painless  opera¬
tions — during  the  last  eighteen  months,  I  have  operated  on  120
persons  without  one  of  them  knowing  anything  about  it.

“  2nd.  The  action  of  mesmerism  is  also  beneficial  in  many  me¬
dical  diseases ;  it  has  been  found  very  effectual  in  nervous  pains —
debility  of  the  nervous  system — palsy  from  functional  derangement
of  the  nerves — rheumatism — muscular  contraction  of  the  limbs.
But  people  are  too  apt  to  imagine,  because  mesmerism  has  done
so  much  that  could  not  be  done  before,  that  it  can  do  anything,
and  in  consequence,  I  am  daily  expected  to  perform  all  kinds
of  impossibilities.  Like  every  other  natural  power,  it  has  its  appro¬
priate  and  limited  sphere  of  usefulness,  but  this  has  still  to  be  de¬
termined  by  experiment  to  a  great  extent.

“  I  hope  that  the  editors  of  the  native  newspapers  will  be  good
enough  to  explain  the  nature  of  the  new  Institution  to  their  country¬
men,  who  are  principally  interested  in  it.

“  I  am,  your  obedient  servant,

“  J.  Esdaile.

“Calcutta,  19th  Nov.,  1846.

“  P.S.  If  any  one  supposes  that  this  is  only  a  Government
Charity  Hospital,  I  beg  leave  to  correct  this  wrong  impression  at
the  outset.

“The  Deputy -Governor  wishes  all  classes  of  the  community  to
benefit  by  this  institution;  and  rooms  will  be  set  apart  for  rich  per¬
sons  to  be  mesmerised  in.  I  should  neither  have  the  means  nor  the
time  to  conduct  their  cases  at  home,  but  they  can  resort  to  the  hos¬
pital  daily  to  be  mesmerised,  and  when  prepared,  they  may  be  ope¬
rated  on  in  their  own  houses,  if  they  prefer  it. — J.  E.” — Delhi  Ga¬
zette,  Dec.  24  th,  1846.


XII.  More  painless  Surgical  Operations  in  India.

The  Bombay  Bi-monthly  Times  gives  the  following  report  of
Dr.  Esdaile’s  surgical  operations  for  the  month  of  January.

“  Dr.  Esdaile’s  mesmeric  report  for  the  month  of  January
has  been  published.  It  is  a  highly  interesting  document,
and  fully  proves  the  inestimable  value  of  mesmerism  as  an
aid  in  the  performance  of  surgical  operations.  The  scirrhous


70


More  painless  Surgical  Operations  in  India.

breast  of  a  woman,  aged  50  years,  weighing  seven  pounds,
has  been  removed,  and  the  patient  cured.  A  tumor  of  the
scrotum,  of  thirty  years*  growth,  weighing  forty  pounds,
has  been  cut  off  and  the  patient  cured.  Another  of  thirty
pounds,  a  third  of  one  hundred  pounds,  and  a  fourth  of
small  size,  have  all  been  excised  with  perfect  success — the
whole  of  the  operations  being  performed  during  the  mesmeric
trance,  without  in  most  of  the  cases  the  slightest  knowledge
on  the  part  of  the  patients  of  what  had  been  done  to  them
till  awakened  by  the  operator !  Dr.  Esdaile  concludes  his
report  as  follows : — ‘  From  the  foregoing  facts  I  consider
myself  entitled  to  say  that  it  has  been  demonstrated  that
patients  in  the  mesmeric  trance  may  be  insensible  to  the
loudest  noises ;  painful  pricking  and  pinching;  the  cutting
of  inflamed  parts ;  the  application  of  nitric  acid  to  raw  sur¬
faces  ;  the  racking  of  the  electro-magnetic  machine ;  and  the
most  painful  surgical  operation,  and  yet  be  aroused  into  full
consciousness  by  the  exposure  of  their  bodies,  for  a  few  mi¬
nutes  to  the  cold  air.  All  the  persons  admitted  last  month
for  operations  have  been  disposed  of  except  one/  We  are
sorry  we  have  not  room  for  the  report  entire.  Dr.  Esdaile
deserves  to  be  ranked  amongst  the  greatest  benefactors  of
the  human  race/*

It  gives  also,  from  the  Crescent,  an  account  of  a  painless
operation  by  another  gentleman,  and  at  Madras.

“  ‘  We  understand  that  a  successful  case  of  mesmerism
occurred  in  this  place,  on  Saturday  last,  in  which  the  patient
was  relieved  of  a  large  tumour,  situated  on  the  upper  part  of
the  back,  by  the  skilful  operation  of  the  mesmerist,  Dr.
Johnstone.  The  entire  operation  occupied  about  a  quarter
of  an  hour ;  during  the  whole  of  which  period  the  patient
remained  in  a  state  of  perfect  insensibility.  We  believe  Dr.
Johnstone  was  assisted  by  Superintending  Surgeon  D.  S.
Young,  and  Assistant  Surgeon  George  Smith,  M.D. :  and  that
there  were  present  besides  the  lady*s  husband,  the  dressers
and  the  nurse.  Professor  Key  was  to  have  witnessed  it,
but  was  prevented,  much  to  his  disappointment.  The  tumor
weighed  upwards  of  three  pounds  after  extraction/  **


We  must  here  repeat  the  words  of  the  editor  of  the  Bom¬
bay  Bi-Monthly  Times :  “  Dr.  Esdaile  deserves  to  be  ranked
amongst  the  greatest  benefactors  of  the  human  race.”


(  71  )

XIII.  Explanatory  Letter  from  the  Rev.  Edward  Bickersteth.

Watton  Rectory,  Ware,
February  1,  1847.

Sir, — A  friend  having  pointed  out  to  me  the  remarks  in
The  Zoist  on  a  passage  in  my  Signs  of  the  Times,  I  frankly
admit  that  an  expression  which  I  used  in  that  passage  was
unguarded  and  improper.  The  words  “  supernatural  and
therefore  diabolical,”  conveyed  an  idea  far  from  my  mind ;
but  I  think  that  the  general  tenor  of  the  paragraph,  which
you  fairly  gave  at  the  head  of  the  article,  would  shew  that  I
was  only  alluding  to  those  peculiar  powers  claimed  by  the
mesmerist,  which  discovered,  in  a  supernatural  way,  things
that  no  human  sagacity  could  discern,  without  any  apparent
advantage.  But  I  frankly  acknowledge,  that  I  have  seen  in
Mr.  Pyne’s  work  on  Vital  Magnetism  and  elsewhere  enough
to  make  me  think  that,  though  mesmerism  may  be  fearfully
abused  as  I  have  noticed,  it  may  yet  be  one  of  those  powers
which  God  gives  for  the  benefit  of  the  human  race.  The
powers  of  the  steam  engine  may  illustrate  this ;  infidels  have
ventured  to  say  that  its  miracles  are  superior  to  those  of  our
blessed  Saviour;  and  yet  we  must  not  on  that  account  deny
that  it  is  an  immense  blessing  from  our  God.  True  religion
is  very  far  from  being  unfriendly  to  the  legitimate  pursuit  of
knowledge :  I  can  heartily,  therefore,  wish  success  to  all
legitimate  efforts  for  attaining  fresh  discoveries  in  medicine  or
science  in  the  spirit  of  the  following  prayer  of  Lord  Bacon,
“  To  God  the  Father,  God  the  Word,  and  God  the  Spirit,
we  pour  forth  the  most  humble  and  hearty  supplications,  that
He,  remembering  the  calamities  of  mankind  and  the  pilgri¬
mage  of  this  our  life,  in  which  we  wear  out  our  days  few  and
evil,  would  please  to  open  to  us  new  refreshments  out  of  the
fountains  of  his  goodness  for  the  alleviation  of  our  miseries.
This  also  we  humbly  and  earnestly  beg,  that  human  things
may  not  prejudice  such  as  are  divine ;  neither  that  from  the
unlocking  of  the  gates  of  sense  and  the  kindling  of  a  greater
natural  light,  any  thing  of  incredulity  or  intellectual  night
may  arise  in  our  minds  towards  the  divine  mysteries.  But
rather  that  our  mind  being  thoroughly  purged  and  cleansed
from  fancy  and  vanities,  and  yet  subject  and  perfectly  given
up  to  the  divine  oracles,  there  may  be  given  up  to  faith,  the
things  that  are  faith.  Amen.”

Allow  me  to  add  a  caution  against  lightly  treating  the
temptations  of  Satan.  It  is  perfectly  plain  that  the  Holy
Scriptures  have  revealed  to  us  a  mighty,  malignant,  subtle,
adversary,  the  devil,  the  leader  of  evil  spirits,  permitted  to


72  Letter  from  the  Rev.  Edward  Bicker steth.

tempt  us,  and  ever  vigilant  and  active  to  seduce  and  destroy
our  souls.  It  is  needful  to  our  eternal  welfare  not  to  be  ig¬
norant  of  bis  devices,  who  can  transform  himself  into  an
angel  of  light,  and  it  is  needful  to  resist  him,  that  he  may
flee  from  us.

You  are  at  full  liberty  to  insert  this.

I  am,  yours  faithfully,

Edward  Bickersteth.

To  the  Editor  of  The  Zoist.


We  have  unfeigned  pleasure  in  publishing  this  letter,
which  refers  to  the  third  article  in  No.  xvi.  of  The  Zoist,  and
in  thus  proving  to  the  world  that  Mr.  Bickersteth  is  a  candid
man.

He  will,  we  are  certain,  not  feel  offended  at  our  seizing
this  occasion  for  pointing  out  to  the  world  how  wrong  it  is  to
use  expressions  carelessly — without  fully  weighing  their  mean¬
ing  and  applying  them  according  to  their  meaning,  and  to
give  opinions  on  matters  which  we  have  not  fully  investigated.
To  use  expressions  loosely  so  that  they  may  possibly  lead  to
erroneous  impressions,  is  bad:  but  to  give  opinions  on  matters
on  which  we  have  not  bestowed  due  study  is  absolutely  a
great  sin,  though  one  committed  hourly  by  men  in  general
in  the  pride  and  self-satisfaction  of  their  hearts.  Few  would
venture  to  deliver  any  opinion  at  all  upon  a  hundreth  part
of  the  subjects  on  which  they  do  not  hesitate  to  assert
eagerly,  if  they  were  reflecting  and  conscientious.

We  must  remark  to  Mr.  Bickersteth  that  mesmerism  has
no  “  miracles ”  does  nothing  “  in  a  supernatural  way  ”  that  all
its  effects  are  natural  phenomena,  and  by  natural  means.  It
competes  not  with  miracles  any  more  than  a  man  ascending
according  to  the  laws  of  nature  in  a  balloon  by  means  of  an
inflammable  gas  lighter  than  atmospheric  air  competes  with
the  account  of  Elijahs  miraculous  ascent  to  the  skies  in
“  a  chariot  and  horses  of  fire.”

We  regret  that  Mr.  Bickersteth  has  spoken  of  the  devil
in  his  letter ;  because  The  Zoist  is  devoted  to  natural  science,
and  has  always  made  it  a  point  to  abstain  from  supernatural
matters,  which  are  as  unfit  for  it  as  for  a  treatise  on  chemistry
or  astronomy  or  for  the  philosophical  transactions  to  which
The  Zoist  is  analogous,  but  treating  of  two  sciences  which  the
Boyal  Society  at  present  rejects  though  adopted  and  studied
by  many  of  its  members ;  or  for  any  other  scientific  work
written  for  Jews  as  well  as  Christians,  for  Mohammedans  and
Hindus  as  well  as  Jews,  and  for  Atheists  and  Pantheists


Cure  of  Palsy  of  Thirty  Years’  standing.


73


as  well  as  Mohammedans  and  Hindus,  and  should  be  reserved
for  theological  works, — works  professedly  upon  matters  su¬
pernatural,  matters  always  to  be  carefully  distinguished  from
natural  science  and  art. — Zoist.


XIV.  Cure  of  Palsy  of  Thirty  Years’  standing ,  Deafness ,
Asthma,  fyc.  By  the  Bev.  L.  Lewis.

To  Richard  Beamish,  Esq.

Dear  Sir, — If  you  think  the  following  case  deserving  of
public  notice,  you  are  welcome  to  send  it  to  the  Editor  of
The  Zoist,  for  its  insertion,  if  he  pleases,  in  that  periodical.

Yours  truly,

L.  Lewis.

Gateacre,  March,  1847.

On  the  6th  of  July  last,  I  was  requested  by  Miss  M.
Brownhill,  of  Hale  Wood,  near  Liverpool,  to  try  the  effects
of  mesmerism  upon  her,  as  she  was  suffering  great  pain  day
and  night  I  learnt  from  her  that,  at  the  age  of  between  two
and  three  years,  her  left  leg  became  paralysed  and  continued
quite  powerless  during  7  months.  In  that  time  various  re¬
medies  were  applied  by  the  late  Dr.  Brandreth  and  Mr.  Park
of  Liverpool,  and  a  degree  of  strength  was  restored,  but  the
paralysed  leg  continued  weaker  and  smaller  than  the  other,
and  always  cold  up  to  the  time  of  its  being  operated  upon  by
mesmerism,  a  period  of  more  than  thirty  years  !  In  con¬
junction  with  this,”  added  Miss  B.,  “  my  health  was  always
delicate,  manifested  by  pain  in  the  left  side,  cough,  asthma
and  frequently  violent  pain  in  the  head.”  Besides  this,  it
may  be  stated  that  frequently  in  the  course  of  her  life,  she
underwent  many  painful  operations,  such  as  bleeding,  blister¬
ing,  issues,  fyc.,  fyc.,  but  was  never  long  relieved  from  suffering.
When  I  first  visited  her,  one  of  her  ears  was  quite  deaf.

The  first  time  I  mesmerised  her  was  only  for  a  quarter  of
an  hour,  and  she  did  not  go  into  the  sleep.  During  the  first
fortnight,  I  mesmerised  her  nearly  daily  for  half  an  hour
each  time,  but  she  did  not  appear  much  better,  though  her
natural  sleep  at  night  which  had  been  sadly  broken  by
her  sufferings  began  to  return.  In  the  third  week,  a  con¬
siderable  discharge  of  offensive  matter  from  the  deaf  ear  oc¬
curred,  which  greatly  relieved  her  head  and  breathing,  and
the  paralyzed  leg  which  had  been  icy  cold,  began  to  feel  a
little  warm.  In  the  fourth  week,  I  directed  some  passes  over
this  leg,  and  in  a  few  days  it  was  so  improved  as  to  become


74


Cure  of  Palsy  of  Thirty  Years’  standing ,

nearly  of  the  same  temperature  as  the  other.  One  day  after
mesmerism  the  leg  swelled  very  considerably,  but  the  swelling
subsided  by  the  following  day.  Miss  B.  had  been  advised
to  clothe  herself  in  flannels,  and  she  continued  to  do  so
till  some  time  after  I  commenced  to  mesmerise  her.  I  then
persuaded  her  to  leave  them  off  and  also  the  fur  that  she
always  wore  on  her  chest.  She  dreaded  the  change ;  but,
after  a  few  days'  trial,  she  felt  much  more  comfortable
without  them.

Aug.  3rd.  About  a  month  from  the  commencement  of  the
treatment,  her  general  health  was  much  improved  without
having  had  recourse  to  medicine  of  any  kind ,  though  previously
to  her  mesmerism  she  never  spent  a  week  or  scarcely  a  day
without  taking  physic.

4th.  After  an  hour's  mesmerising  to-day,  Miss  B.  became
very  drowsy,  and  became  unconscious  for  the  first  time.  Her
hearing  is  better  and  there  is  discharge  from  both  her  ears.

6th.  She  complained  of  some  pain  in  the  head  and  chest,
the  weather  having  become  suddenly  very  hot,  but  after  a
few  passes  she  was  relieved.  I  breathed  into  her  ear  through
a  tube,  which  produced  very  uneasy  sensations ;  and  similar
effects  were  produced  when  I  touched  the  spine  with  one  fin¬
ger  and  the  chest  with  another.  For  a  few  days  some  engage¬
ments  prevented  me  from  seeing  Miss  B.,  and  on  the  10th
I  found  her  rather  worse  than  usual  from  pain  in  the  head
and  chest.  I  mesmerised  her  as  before,  directing  the  magnetic
influence  into  the  ears  particularly,  and  diffusing  it  as  well
over  the  head  and  down  the  spine.  There  had  been  no  dis¬
charge  from  the  ears  for  a  few  days.

11th.  Found  Miss  B.  in  better  spirits  and  much  more  free
from  pain.  The  ear  had  again  begun  to  discharge  copiously
a  fluid  of  a  whitish  colour.  The  leg  not  so  warm.

12th.  Mesmerised  her  along  the  spine  and  sides,  which
affected  her  most  powerfully.  I  also  made  the  usual  passes
over  the  chest  and  leg,  and  left  her  much  refreshed.

14th.  Found  that  the  leg  mesmerised  yesterday  had  re¬
sumed  its  former  warmth,  her  cough  was  better  and  her  hear¬
ing  improved.  This  day  I  tried  the  effect  of  drawing  a  knife
over  her  hand  instead  of  a  crystal.  In  drawing  it  from  the
wrist  downwards  to  the  top  of  the  fingers,  she  felt  a  cold  air ;
and  on  the  contrary  way,  warm  air  and  the  mesmeric  influence
up  to  her  shoulder.

15th.  Mesmerised  Miss  B.  to-day.  No  discharge  from
the  ear.  The  knee-pan  of  the  paralyzed  leg,  that  had
hitherto  been  quite  loose,  was  reported  by  her  sister  to  be
getting  firm  like  the  other.  Miss  B.  had  been  in  the  habit


by  the  Rev.  L.  Lewis.


75


for  years  of  placing  her  weak  leg  in  her  arm  on  her  lap  when¬
ever  she  chose ;  the  knee-pan,  not  being  fixed,  appeared  to
sink  in  on  those  occasions  between  the  joints.  Her  sleep  not
so  well,  but  her  asthma  better.  Up  to  the

22nd.  I  mesmerised  her  as  usual  without  any  apparent
change.  Breathing  warm  breath  on  the  top  of  the  head
thrilled  her  whole  frame.  Sleep  not  good.  Some  headache,
but  her  hearing  is  now  quite  restored.

25th.  Miss  B.  went  into  the  mesmeric  sleep  for  the  first
time.  She  had  a  curious  sensation  in  her  leg  after  last  mes¬
merism,  but  it  ceased  before  bed  time  and  she  slept  well.  Her
sense  of  smell  which  had  been  lost  for  a  long  time  is  now
restored.  Bowels  are  regular,  though  before  mesmerism  even
medicine  affected  them  but  little.  I  mesmerised  her  with  vari¬
ous  effects  to  the  end  of  the  month.  The  discharge  from
the  ear  still  continuing.

Sept.  2nd.  Mesmerised  her  and  she  slept  for  half  an  hour;
still  the  ear  discharges  a  thin  fluid.  Leg  much  stronger,  the
foot  instead  of  turning  out  is  now  straight  like  the  other.

8th.  Miss  B.  is  much  improved  in  health.  She  can  stand
upon  the  weak  leg.  The  ear  not  so  painful  though  a  great
discharge.  Nights  good.

15th.  Discharge  from  the  ear  stopt,  and  Miss  B.  had  an
attack  of  asthma  at  night  for  three  hours.  When  the  ear
discharged  again,  the  breathing  was  relieved.  Left  off  mes¬
merising  her  till

21st.  When  I  found  her  worse  and  the  asthma  had  re¬
turned.  Did  not  go  into  the  sleep  to  day.  The  discharge
partially  ceased.  The  knee-pan  looser  again.

24th.  Mesmerised  again.  The  discharge  of  the  ear  in¬
creased  and  the  asthma  gone.  Sleep  good.

26th.  Miss  B.  went  into  the  deep  mesmeric  sleep  and
became  rigid  in  her  limbs  for  the  first  time.  Discharge  from
the  ear  not  so  copious.  Leg  stronger;  the  knee-pan  not
quite  fixed.

30th.  Mesmerised  her.  Great  discharge  from  the  ear.
-A  touch  of  the  cholera  in  the  morning,  but  felt  no  return  of
it  after  mesmerism.

Oct.  3rd.  Mesmerised  her.  Much  discharge  from  the
ear  and  a  slight  swelling  in  it  from  a  cold.  Cap  of  the  knee
j firm  again.  Much  pricking  pain  in  the  leg  occasionally.

8th.  Mesmerised  Miss  B.  She  is  much  stronger.  Walked
about  4  miles  to-day.  Great  discharge  from  the  ear  with  a
little  blood.

10th.  Sent  her  into  the  mesmeric  sleep  in  five  minutes.
Discharge  from  the  ear  diminished.  Health  better.


76


Cure  of  Palsy  of  Thirty  Years)  standing.


16th.  The  right  ear,  which  had  been  deaf,  now  quite  well,
and  the  discharge  stopped,  and  the  left  ear  begins  to  discharge
much  like  the  other.  Discharge  from  one  of  the  toes  of  the
weak  foot.  A  boil  rising  on  the  left  shoulder  and  great  sore¬
ness  on  the  left  region  of  the  head.

23rd.  Mesmerised  her  again.  Owing  to  a  large  gathering
behind  the  ears  Miss  B.  did  not  sleep  well.  Great  discharge
from  both  ears.  Leg  growing  in  size,  tendons  appearing  in
their  proper  places.  She  is  now  unable  to  place  the  weak
leg  on  her  lap,  the  patella  being  quite  fixed.

Nov.  3rd.  Mesmerised  Miss  B.  Some  discharge  still  from
the  ear.  The  great  toe  which  had  been  loose  for  years  she
can  now  raise  at  will,  the  cord  over  being  so  much  strength¬
ened.

7th.  Continues  better,  though  she  has  three  boils  on  the
face  that  give  her  no  pain  after  mesmerism.

12th.  The  boils  heal  without  pain.  Went  into  the  deep
mesmeric  sleep.  Ear  does  not  discharge.  Made  the  weak
leg  rigid  by  passes  over  the  knee  and  under  the  sole  of  the
foot.  She  felt  a  cramp  in  that  leg  for  the  first  time  the  pre¬
ceding  night.

17th.  She  went  into  the  sleep  in  five  minutes.  Advised  her
to  poultice  the  boil  and  thus  cured  it  without  pain.  I  touched
the  organ  of  tune  and  willed  the  tune  called  the  “  Sicilian
Mariner,”  when  she  said  she  heard  the  most  delightful  music
but  at  a  great  distance.  On  my  eating  some  sugar  she  said
the  taste  was  acid ;  she  does  not  like  sugar,  and  it  turns  acid
in  her  stomach.

20th.  Mesmerised  her  in  three  minutes,  and  every  part  of
her  frame  became  free  from  pain.  The  boils  are  all  healed
after  a  great  discharge.  Left  her  in  good  spirits.

23rd.  Bendered  her  very  comfortable  by  sending  her  to
sleep.  The  lame  foot  which  was  a  little  longer  than  the  other,
is  contracting  and  getting  thicker  in  the  instep.  Awoke  her
with  the  will  alone,  but  she  did  not  feel  comfortable.

Dec.  3rd.  Sent  her  into  the  sleep  for  an  hour.  Removed
all  pain  from  the  head  and  chest,  side  and  hip.  The  leg  much
larger  and  stronger,  and  she  can  now  lift  her  foot  to  the  scraper
without  any  difficulty,  instead  of  raising  it  for  that  purpose,
as  she  used  always  to  do,  with  both  her  hands.

30th.  The  dense  fog  affected  Miss  B.  in  a  slight  degree,
but  by  mesmerism  the  difficulty  of  breathing  was  effectually
removed.  The  asthma  is  nearly  subdued.

Jan.  13th,  1847.  A  few  days  since  I  mesmerised  Miss  B.
and  her  sister ;  the  latter  for  a  fit  of  influenza  accompanied
with  a  bad  cough.  The  sister  was  relieved  by  the  operation,


77


Cure  of  Deafness  of  very  long  standing.

but  Miss  B.  was  affected  with  an  influenza  and  had  a  bad
cough  and  appeared  to  have  taken  it  from  her  sister,  as  I  had
mesmerised  them  together  and  at  the  same  time.  For  two
nights  she  never  slept  at  all  but  continued  in  a  state  of  high
excitement,  describing  herself  at  night  as  if  the  bed  was
floating  under  her.  She  could  not  endure  the  sight  of  her
friends.  Before  the  third  night,  the  delusion  vanished  in  an
instant,  and  she  felt  as  if  a  heavy  weight  fell  from  her  head,
and  was  immediately  quite  well.

In  February  I  had  not  many  opportunities  for  mesmerising
her,  though  towards  the  middle  of  the  month  I  mesmerised
her  three  days  successively  for  a  swelling  in  the  face,  brought
on  I  believe  by  my  having  omitted  mesmerising  her  so  long.
The  swelling  was  soon  reduced,  the  violent  headache  accom¬
panying  it  subsided,  and  she  feels  much  strengthened.

March.  I  consider  that  Miss  B\s  health  is  now  re-estab¬
lished  without  having  had  recourse  to  wine  or  any  other
stimulants  whatever,  without  her  having  tasted  any  physic
in  any  form,  without  bleeding,  or  leeching,  blisters  or  issues.
The  w?eak  leg  and  foot  which  had  been  in  a  cold  and  withered
state  for  30  years,  are  now  as  warm  as  any  other  part  of  the
frame,  much  larger  in  size,  and  strong  enough  to  bear  her
whole  weight  without  any  pain.  The  patella  is  firmly  fixed
and  never  turns  round  as  it  used  to  do,  when,  the  leg  giving
way,  she  instantly  fell  to  the  ground.  Her  countenance  has
resumed  a  healthy  colour.  She  can  walk  many  miles.  Has
no  trace  of  the  asthma  left.  Can  bear  foggy  weather  without
inconvenience.  Has  good  spirits  and  seems  to  enjoy  existence.

L.  Lewis.

Gateacre,  near  Liverpool.

March  11th,  1847.


XV.  Cure  of  Deafness  of  very  long  standing  in  a  very  old  Man.

By  Mr.  Alex.  Walker,  of  Bainsford.

“to  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  FALKIRK  HERALD.

“  Sir, — The  following  account  of  the  successful  application
of  local  mesmerism  may,  perhaps,  be  interesting  to  your
readers : —

“  James  Roberts,  residing  in  Stenhousemuir,  having  heard
that  I  had  operated  (privately)  upon  some  individuals  for
partial  deafness,  and  that  it  had  proved  effectual  in  restoring
their  hearing,  called  upon  me,  in  November  last,  and  stated
that  his  father,  residing  in  Linlithgow,  had  been  afflicted


78  Great  benefit  of  Mesmerism  in  Affections  of  the  Chest,

with  deafness  for  forty-five  years,  and  that,  for  a  year  back,
his  hearing  had  entirely  failed  him, — and  he  begged  me  to
try  the  effect  of  mesmeric  treatment  in  this  seemingly  hope¬
less  case.  I  informed  him  in  what  instances  I  had  been  suc¬
cessful,  and  recommended  him  to  make  a  trial,  by  operating
himself,  in  the  way  which  I  explained  to  him.  How  far  he
has  succeeded  the  following  testimonials  will  shew.  I  have
given  names  and  residences,  so  that  it  only  remains  with  the
public  to  enquire.

“Bainsford,  1st  Aug.  1846.  “  Alex.  Walker.

“  Stenhousemuir,  29th  June,  1846.

'  Sir, — From  the  instructions  you  gave  me  how  to  operate
on  my  father  with  local  mesmerism,  for  deafness,  I  am  happy
to  say  that  the  result  has  been  that  his  hearing  has  been  re¬
stored.

f  I  must  say  that  I  felt  very  exhausted  after  operating,
which  was  twice  every  day  for  upwards  of  eight  days.

‘  I  am  yours,  &c.

'  Mr.  Alex.  Walker,  Bainsford/  'James  Roberts.

'  Linlithgow,  29th  June,  1846.

'  Sir, — I  cheerfully  comply  with  your  request  in  giving
a  certificate  of  my  hearing  being  restored  by  local  mesmerism.

'  When  my  son  told  me  of  the  means  he  meant  to  employ,
I  was  very  sceptical  of  any  good  result,  as  I  was  then  in  my
71st  year;  but,  notwithstanding,  I  resolved  to  make  a  trial,
and  went  to  Stenhousemuir  for  that  purpose.  He  commenced
operating  on  me  two  hours  in  the  morning  and  two  hours  at
night,  or  thereby,  for  I  think  eleven  days,  at  the  expiry  of
which  time  my  hearing  came  back,  so  that  I  can  now  enjoy
that  social  intercourse  with  mankind  from  which  I  have  been
so  long  debarred  by  my  affliction.

'  Yours,  with  gratitude,

'  George  Roberts.

'Mr.  Alex.  Walker,  Bainsford/  ”


XVI.  Great  benefit  of  Mesmerism  in  Affections  of  the  Chest,
Gout,  Strangury,  Asthma,  and  Whitlow .  By  Mr.  H.  S.
Thompson.

Dr.  Elliotson  begs  to  forward  this  letter  to  The  Zoist.

Fairfield,  York,  March  20th,  1847.
My  dear  Elliotson, — I  should  like  very  much  to  have  your
opinion  of  this  ether  discovery.  I  have  no  doubt  that  you,
and  many  others  interested  in  mesmerism,  have  been  watch-


Gout,  Strangury,  Asthma,  and  Whitlow .


79


ing  with  intense  interest  the  result  of  the  ether  experiments ;
and  I  feel  confident  that  neither  you  nor  any  other  persons,
who  have  practised  mesmerism  from  benevolent  and  disin¬
terested  motives  alone,  will  admit  that  there  can  be  anything
like  rivalry  between  the  two  discoveries ;  but,  on  the  con¬
trary,  will  be  most  anxious  to  hail  this  new  mode  of  applying
ether  as  one  of  the  greatest  boons  to  mankind,  and  as  a  most
valuable  auxiliary  to  mesmerism,  in  the  event  of  its  effects
proving  as  beneficial  as  could  be  hoped  for  from  the  certainty
of  its  operation.  In  its  more  general  success  in  producing
coma  and  insensibility  to  pain,  its  superiority  over  mesmer¬
ism  seems  to  be  proved,  but  there  also  its  superiority  appears
unfortunately  to  end ;  for  as  far  as  I  have  been  able  to  ascer¬
tain,  it  seems  that  the  average  fatality  attendant  upon  severe
operations  has  been  by  no  means  diminished  by  the  application
of  ether,  and  that  in  some  instances  its  exhibition  has  been
attended  by  fatal  results.  On  the  contrary,  operations  per¬
formed  on  patients  under  the  influence  of  mesmerism  have
rarely,  if  ever,  been  fatal ;  and  I  think  we  can  challenge  the
world  to  point  out  a  single  case  where  death  has  been  the
effect  of  mesmerism.

So  far  then  we  are  forced  to  conclude,  that,  whilst  the
ether  is  more  certain  in  its  action  than  mesmerism,  it  is  at
the  same  time  attended  by  risk  in  its  application,  and  alto¬
gether  unattended  by  those  sanative  and  curative  effects  that
are  so  peculiar  to  the  latter.  But  perhaps  this  is  an  early
day  to  decide  upon  the  respective  merits  of  the  two  disco¬
veries,  and  probably  there  may  be  improvements  in  the  pre¬
parations  of  the  ethers,  and  in  the  modes  of  application,  that
may  somewhat  do  away  with  the  objections  I  have  stated.

The  reception  of  the  ether  discovery  by  the  faculty  has
been  curious,  entertaining,  and  instructive.  The  anti-mes-
meric  professionals  have  gulped  down  this  ether  remedy  with
such  avidity,  that  the  effects  of  it  have  been  very  apparent
in  themselves ;  and,  intoxicated  with  the  draught  they  have
taken,  seem  in  the  highest  degree  elated  with  the  idea
that  this  new  discovery  will  entirely  supersede  that  of  mes¬
merism.  But  in  the  haste  with  which  they  have  imbibed
this  ether,  the  bane  of  mesmerism,  the  insensibility  pro¬
duced  has  been  so  complete,  that  they  have  swallowed  all
unconsciously  every  objection  they  have  hitherto  urged  against
the  truth  of,  and  the  benefit  to  be  derived  from,  mesmerism.
I  trust  when  they  awaken  from  the  stupor  that  their  inebri¬
ation  has  caused,  they  will  be  led  to  examine  more  dispas¬
sionately  the  merits  of  not  only  these  discoveries,  which  I
believe  may  be  so  beneficial  to  our  species,  but  will  calmly


80  Great  benefit  of  Mesmerism  in  Affections  of  the  Chest,

investigate  every  other  discovery  that  is  submitted  to  them
and  has  for  its  object  the  alleviation  of  pain  and  human
misery.

I  send  you  a  few  cases  which  have  been  benefited  by  mes¬
merism.  I  have  not  lately  met  with  anything  very  striking,
or  perhaps  worthy  of  particular  notice,  but  what  I  send  is
sufficiently  so  to  stamp  and  confirm  my  belief  in  the  utility
of  mesmerism  in  a  great  variety  of  diseases,  if  not  the  bene¬
ficial  application  of  it  in  all.

It  has  been  often  urged  against  mesmerism,  that,  as  the
cures  are  the  effect  of  the  imagination,  they  are  less  real
than  apparent,  and  that  therefore  they  are  not  permanent.
For  that  reason  I  always  think  it  advisable  to  mention  where
experience  has  proved  the  reverse  of  this ;  and  I  can  with
pleasure  state,  that,  in  those  tedious  and  long-standing  cases
of  neuralgia  that  were  described  in  former  numbers  of  The
Zoist,  the  cures  continue  permanent,  though  mesmerism  has
been  discontinued  in  some  of  them  for  more  than  a  year  and  a
half;  and  I  must  add,  that,  as  far  as  my  observation  goes,  the
cures  of  different  diseases  by  mesmerism  have  been  at  least
as  permanent  as  those  by  any  medical  means,  and  in  some
cases  the  very  constitution  of  the  patients  has  appeared  to
have  changed,  and  those  who  were  naturally  delicate  and
weakly,  have  become  robust  and  strong.  Mesmerism,  like
all  other  remedies,  in  some  cases  can  but  alleviate  or  miti¬
gate  suffering,  and  cannot  cure  disease ;  but  how  often  does
it  succeed  in  doing  the  former,  when  all  other  means  have
failed !


CASES.

I  have  had  a  good  many  slight  and  recent  cases  which  have
been  almost  immediately  relieved  by  mesmerism,  but  I  pass
over  them,  and  will  mention  a  few  of  a  severer  character.

Affections  of  the  Chest. — The  efficacy  of  mesmerism  in  re¬
lieving  and  removing  affections  of  the  chest  I  have  sometimes
found  very  extraordinary.  I  met  with  three  cases  of  this  de¬
scription  within  the  last  year.  In  two  of  these  the  symptoms
were  very  similar,  being  fixed  pains  in  the  chest  and  left  side,
difficulty  of  breathing,  a  short  cough,  attended  in  one  case
by  spitting  of  blood.  These  symptoms  were  removed  by  mes¬
merising  the  back  and  chest  from  an  hour  to  an  hour  and
a  half  a  day.  Great  relief  was  experienced  the  first  sitting,
and  the  patients  were  perfectly  well  after  the  fourth  day.

The  third  case  was  not  quite  similar,  but  was  cured  still
more  expeditiously.  This  was  the  case  of  a  lady,  upwards  of
45  years  of  age,  who  had  had  a  very  severe  attack  of  influenza


Gouty  Strangury,  and  Whitlow.


81


in  the  spring  of  last  year ;  it  had  left  her  in  a  very  debilitated
state,  and  with  constant  pain  in  her  right  side,  chest,  and
between  the  shoulders.  It  was  one  day  in  the  latter  end  of
October  that  I  saw  her,  when  she  felt  rather  worse  than
usual.  I  had  not  made  passes  over  the  chest  and  back  for
more  than  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  when  she  said  that  all  pain
was  gone,  and  that  she  felt  in  an  extraordinary  manner  re¬
freshed  and  revived.  I  continued  the  passes  for  about  an
hour.  From  that  day,  she  has  told  me,  there  was  never  any
recurrence  of  the  pain,  nor  of  the  same  degree  of  languor
and  debility  from  which  she  had  so  long  suffered,  and  she
quickly  recovered  her  usual  strength.

Gout. — In  gout,  I  should  imagine,  mesmerism  would  some¬
times  be  found  very  useful,  from  its  effects  upon  the  only  two
persons  I  have  had  an  opportunity  of  trying  it  upon.  The  first
was  a  gentleman  suffering  in  both  feet,  and  scarcely  able  to
walk  about :  by  mesmerising  the  feet  and  legs  for  half  an
hour,  I  removed  all  pain,  and  enabled  him  to  walk  about
easily.  I  had  not  an  opportunity  in  this  case  of  continuing
the  treatment  long  enough  to  effect  a  cure ;  it  was  one  of
long  standing  and  severe;  but  the  effects  were  always  the
same  the  few  times  I  tried  mesmerism  upon  him,  viz.,  remov¬
ing  the  pain,  enabling  the  patient  to  walk  easily,  and  render¬
ing  him  comfortable  for  some  hours  afterwards.

The  other  case  was  that  of  a  lady,  who  had  been  attacked
about  three  weeks  before  I  saw  her  with  severe  inflammation
in  one  foot,  and  the  disease  appeared  to  be  on  the  increase,
and  her  general  health  suffering.  The  pain  was  removed  in
a  similar  manner  as  in  the  former  case,  and  the  lady  enabled
to  walk  an  hour  after  I  commenced  mesmerising,  though  she
could  not  put  her  foot  to  the  ground  previously.  This  patient
I  continued  mesmerising  every  other  day.  The  case  was
steadily  progressive,  and  at  the  end  of  three  weeks  she  was
quite  well.  The  lady  told  me,  the  last  time  I  saw  her,  that
she  had  no  return  whatever  of  any  pain ;  all  inflammation
was  gone ;  and  that  she  had  been  walking  about  a  great  deal,
and  felt  better  and  stronger  than  she  did  before  the  attack.

Strangury. — In  a  case  of  strangury,  mesmerism  was  of  great
and  immediate  service.  In  the  early  part  of  November  last
year,  a  gentleman,  upwards  of  seventy  years  of  age,  had  been
suffering  from  severe  obstruction,  and  for  four  days  had  been
able  to  pass  nothing  but  a  few  drops  at  a  time  of  a  bloody  se¬
cretion,  and  that  with  the  greatest  agony.  I  mesmerised  him
for  about  three  quarters  of  an  hour,  by  making  passes  over
the  abdomen ;  he  was  completely  relieved  of  all  spasm  and
obstruction,  and  has  not  had  a  return  of  the  complaint  since.

VOL.  v.  o


82  Physical  Well-being,  a  necessary  preliminary  to

I  mesmerised  him  for  half  an  hour  a  day  for  a  few  days  after¬
wards,  as  a  precautionary  measure.

Asthma. —  In  the  first  week  of  January  last,  I  was  called
in  to  see  a  friend  who  was  suffering  from  a  severe  attack  of
asthma,  brought  on  by  cold.  He  says  that  he  never  suffered
so  much  from  a  sense  of  suffocation  before,  and  certainly  I
never  witnessed  so  distressing  a  case.  By  making  passes  over
the  back  and  chest,  in  less  than  ten  minutes  the  severity  of
the  spasm  was  very  sensibly  lessened,  and  within  three  quarters
of  an  hour  the  attack  was  over.  He  had  no  return,  and  he
gradually  and  steadily  improved  in  health,  though  I  had  not
an  opportunity  of  mesmerising  him  more  than  three  times.

Whitlow. — In  January  last,  a  female  servant  in  my  family
had  a  very  bad  whitlow ;  the  back  of  the  hand  was  much  in¬
flamed,  and  she  said  she  felt  great  pain  up  her  arm  to  the
shoulder.  It  had  caused  her  two  or  three  sleepless  nights,
and  I  was  requested  to  see  it.  I  made  passes  down  the  arm,
and  over  the  finger ;  in  ten  minutes  all  pain  was  gone,  and
she  could  bear  it  to  be  touched  without  feeling  any  pain.
Seeing  that  she  was  inclined  to  fall  into  the  mesmeric  sleep,
I  made  a  few  passes  over  her  head ;  she  was  soon  in  a  state
of  insensibility.  Having  some  friends  who  were  sceptical
staying  in  my  house,  I  sent  for  them.  The  girl  was  asleep
and  smiling ;  I  opened  the  whitlow,  expressed  all  the  matter,
and  bound  her  finger  up.  The  smile  on  her  countenance
never  changed.  When  she  awoke,  she  was  quite  unconscious
of  the  operation  ;  she  assured  me  that  she  never  felt  another
throb  or  ache  in  the  arm  or  finger,  and  felt  nothing  but  a
little  soreness  from  the  wound,  which  was  healed  in  a  week.
She  lost  the  nail.

Yours  sincerely,

H.  S.  Thompson.


XVII.  Physical  Well-being,  a  necessary  preliminary  to  Moral

and  Intellectual  Progression.

“  Let  your  aim  be  to  make  this  country  the  model-school  for  the  world.
Purify  your  institutions  and  your  laws,  and  proclaim  to  the  tyrant  and  the  despot
by  the  peaceful  grandeur  of  your  examples,  that  the  only  use  you,  as  legislators
and  governors,  make  of  your  power,  is  to  increase  the  happiness  and  freedom
of  your  people.  Let  all  nations  as  they  move  on  in  the  great  struggle  of  human
improvement,  quote  England  as  an  authority  for  the  course  they  should  pursue,
as  the  pattern  to  which  they  should  conform,  as  typical  of  the  enjoyments  they
would  wish  to  realize.’ ’

Two  years  have  elapsed  since  we  wrote  the  above  sentence,
and  great  and  important  have  been  the  changes  in  our  laws


Moral  and  Intellectual  Progression.


83


bearing  upon  the  physical  well-being  of  the  people.  The
corn  laws  have  been  repealed,  and  Lord  John  Russell  in  the
House  of  Commons  but  a  few  months  since  stated  that  we
were  not  to  discuss  such  questions  on  any  narrow  and  impo¬
litic  consideration  of  the  course  pursued  by  other  nations,
but  that  we  were  to  support  what  was  right  and  just,  and  to
trust  to  the  example  and  to  the  moral  power  such  a  line  of
conduct  would  give  us  for  the  purpose  of  converting  and  win¬
ning  over  neighbouring  countries  to  a  just  and  liberal  policy.
We  hail  this  as  an  effort  in  the  right  direction.  This  is  open¬
ing  up  a  new  path,  and  if  it  is  followed  boldly  and  resolutely,
it  will  truly  make  England  the  model-school  for  the  world.
We  shall  not  enter  into  details  on  this  matter,  because  such
would  give  to  this  article  more  of  a  political  character  than
we  desire,  but  we  shall  simply  remark  that  the  recent  victory
gained  by  the  common  sense  of  the  many  over  the  prejudices
and  selfishness  of  the  few,  must  be  recognized  as  the  first
real  effort  to  improve  the  physical  well-being  of  rapidly  in¬
creasing  millions.  We  have  legislated  for  the  purpose  of
increasing  the  quantity  and  improving  the  quality  of  the  food
of  the  people,  and  this  is  the  grand  fundamental  requisite  on
which  to  build  moral  and  intellectual  attainments.

If  we  did  not  wish  to  enter  on  this  question  merely  as
physiologists  and  philanthropists,  we  could  indulge  in  the
speculations  of  the  politician  and  discuss  the  interesting  pro¬
blems  of  the  political  economist, — we  could  picture  to  our¬
selves  the  agricultural  labourer  raised  from  the  condition  of
serfdom  to  comparative  independence,  and  the  manufacturing
operative  engaged  in  his  necessary  routine  of  labour,  un¬
checked  by  those  fearful  periods  of  rest,  the  sure  harbingers
of  destitution  and  crime, — we  could  prove  that  the  legislative
change,  which  will  bring  the  great  necessary  of  life  in  proper
quantity  to  every  man’s  home,  will  bring  as  a  necessary  conse¬
quence,  most  of  those  other  physical  comforts  which  we  have
been  in  the  habit  of  considering  as  essential  items  for  a  civi¬
lized  people,  but  of  which  a  large  portion  of  our  population
are  lamentably  destitute, — we  could,  as  it  were,  measure  the
strides  of  advancing  civilization,  and  show  how  far  the  people
of  distant  climes  may  be  assisted  or  retarded  in  their  progress
by  the  just  and  liberal  tendency  of  our  own  legislative  enact¬
ments,  and  then  by  a  glance  into  the  future,  at  our  own
presumed  condition,  we  think  we  could  hazard  a  calculation
of  the  increase  of  virtue  and  happiness  amongst  our  own
people,  and  show  that  moral  power,  that  reason,  persuasion,
and  kindness  are  the  monarchs  to  govern  men  and  to  rule
the  world.

o  2


84  Physical  Well-being ,  a  necessary  preliminary  to

The  recent  effort  made  by  this  country — we  allude  to  the
progress  of  free  trade  legislation — is  a  subject  for  sincere  con¬
gratulation.  It  is  one  of  the  tests  of  our  advancing  civiliza¬
tion,  but  there  are  many  important  points  requiring  our
attention  before  we  can  legitimately  rejoice  in  the  designation
of  a  civilized  people.  The  being  whose  powers  are  unde¬
veloped  is  an  imperfect  being,  and  when  the  great  bulk  of
the  population  of  a  country  is  in  this  lamentable  condition,
that  country  cannot  be  said  to  be  civilized.  If  we  wish  to
know  the  stage  of  civilization  reached  by  a  people,  let  us
ascertain  whether  they  are  obeying  the  laws  governing  their
organism,  whether  they  have  acquired  the  important  know¬
ledge  of  the  connexion  between  them  and  their  own  happi¬
ness.  Civilization  is  not  to  be  measured  merely  by  the
amount  of  luxury,  by  the  increased  accumulation  of  comforts,
or  by  the  numerous  victories  achieved  by  science,  annihilating
time  and  space,  and  really,  in  fact,  rendering  the  whole  race
members  of  one  community.  No.  The  great  test  of  civili¬
zation  is  the  progress  made  by  a  people  in  those  refinements
of  social  intercourse  which  result  from  moral  and  intellectual
improvement — the  extent  of  the  inculcation  of  those  laws
and  those  principles  which  tend  to  elevate  the  many  and  not
the  few,  which  have  for  their  object  and  embrace  in  their
fullest  scope  every  circumstance  calculated  to  impart  the
greatest  amount  of  happiness  and  freedom.  Yes,  “the  great¬
est  happiness  of  the  greatest  number,”  seems  to  be  the  motto
which  reason  and  benevolence  would  prompt  us  to  place  over
the  portico  of  the  house  of  the  people, — it  seems  to  be  a  prac¬
tical  commentary  on  the  great  moral  axiom,  “  Do  unto  others
as  ye  would  they  should  do  unto  you.”  How  lamentably
deficient  we  have  been  as  a  people  in  rendering  obedience
to  this  law,  is  abundantly  seen  by  recalling  the  numerous
schemes  at  present  under  discussion,  all  tending  more  or  less
towards  the  alleviation  of  the  miseries  of  a  neglected  popula¬
tion.  But  we  have  scarcely  yet  done  more  than  enter  upon
the  right  path ;  there  is  much  to  be  accomplished,  and
whether  we  move  swiftly  or  slowly,  in  a  course  characterized
by  justice,  or  the  reverse,  will  mainly  depend  on  the  intelli¬
gence  and  integrity  of  our  rulers.  It  is  our  duty  to  show
how  far  our  science  will  promote  the  rational  and  benevolent
movements  of  the  age.

We  can  now  as  physiologists  come  to  some  conclusion
regarding  man’s  capabilities  and  his  wants ;  not,  be  it  re¬
membered,  altogether  from  what  has  been  done ;  not  from
a  survey  of  the  remnants  of  antiquity,  whether  they  be  the
idle  efforts  of  successive  generations  to  raise  a  pyramid,  or


Moral  and  Intellectual  Progression.


85


the  chronicled  thoughts  of  the  intellectual  giants  of  their
day,  but,  thanks  to  the  labours  of  the  illustrious  Gall,  by  a
knowledge  of  humanity,  by  knowing  the  peculiar  powers
inherent  in  man,  as  well  as  the  laws  governing  his  formation
and  the  exercise  of  his  faculties.  We  have  an  unerring
guage  which  enables  us  to  measure  the  capacity  for  thought,
whether  we  survey  an  individual  or  a  race.  We  have  the
power  of  analyzing  the  cerebral  organism  of  the  beings  we
are  daily  brought  in  contact  with,  and  of  predicating  their
capacity  for  the  fulfilment  of  their  various  duties.  We  can
indicate  to  the  legislator,  the  moralist,  and  the  philanthropist
the  course  they  should  pursue ;  for,  since  we  possess  a  phi¬
losophy  which  demonstrates,  so  to  speak,  the  component
parts  of  humanity,  we  necessarily  arrive  at  a  conclusion  re¬
garding  the  rights  of  humanity,  the  laws  by  which  men
should  be  governed,  and  the  efforts  which  should  be  made  to
elevate  their  condition.  But  how  numerous,  how  endless  the
applications  of  our  science  !  There  is  not  a  subject  apper¬
taining  to  man,  either  with  reference  to  his  present  state  or
future  progress,  or  as  regards  his  formation,  his  education,
or  his  government,  which  is  not  dignified  and  enriched  by
the  illustration  it  affords,  by  the  clear  and  philosophical  views
it  enables  us  to  take  of  difficult  and  intricate  questions.  It
builds  a  foundation  on  which  we  must  erect  the  machinery
which  is  to  propel  onward  and  onward  our  race ;  it  affords
the  means  by  which  we  are  to  remove  all  the  impediments  to
our  advance;  it  insists  on  the  adoption  of  principles  and  laws
applicable  to  all  nations  and  all  climes,  and  will  accomplish
for  sentiment  and  feeling  what  the  physical  sciences  promise
to  effect  with  regard  to  space — the  consolidation  of  mankind
into  one  universal  brotherhood.  It  advocates  freedom,  and
abhors  tyranny ;  it  recognizes  the  free  and  unrestrained  ma¬
nifestation  of  thought ;  it  matures  all  views,  and  patronizes
all  schemes  calculated  to  increase  mam’s  happiness,  and  would
banish  at  once  and  for  ever  the  remnants  of  barbarism,  the
relics  of  a  debasing  animalism.

Physical  well-being,  a  necessary  preliminary  to  moral  and
intellectual  progression.

It  seems  to  us  who  have  been  in  the  habit  of  reflecting  on
the  condition  of  the  labouring  classes  of  this  country,  that  it
is  scarcely  necessary  to  insist  on  the  truth  of  the  statement
that  their  moral  and  intellectual  advancement  must  bear  a
strict  relationship  to  their  physical  condition.  If  we  did  not
know  the  great  amount  of  ignorance  which  prevails  on  this
subject, — if  we  did  not  witness  in  every  town  the  fearful
accumulation  of  evils,  all  tending  to  produce  a  serious  demo-


86  Physical  Well-being,  a  necessary  preliminary  to

ralizing  influence  on  the  inhabitants,  and  the  slow  progress
which  has  been  hitherto  made  towards  the  alleviation  of  these
evils, — if  we  did  not  hear  the  occasional  enunciation  of  pre¬
judices,  the  offspring  of  ignorance  and  selfishness,  and  there¬
fore  capable  of  retarding  progress,  we  should  scarcely  con¬
sider  it  necessary,  we  repeat,  to  insist  on  the  reception  of  a
truth,  which  to  us  is  so  self-evident,  that  physical  destitution
has  much  to  do  with  the  prevalence  of  misery,  recklessness,
and  crime.

From  statistical  returns  it  appears  that  a  seventh  part  of
our  population,  now  upwards  of  28,000,000  is  in  a  state  of
destitution  and  supported  by  legal  relief.  It  also  appears,
that  while  the  population  from  the  year  1805  to  the  year
1842  has  increased  about  70  per  cent.,  serious  crime  has  in¬
creased  700  per  cent.  Crime  therefore  has  augmented

TEN  TIMES  AS  FAST  AS  THE  NUMBER  OF  THE  PEOPLE  !

Mr.  Alison  states  that  in  London,  one  tenth  of  the  whole
population  are  paupers,  and  20,000  persons  rise  every  morn¬
ing  without  knowing  where  they  are  to  sleep  at  night ;  at
Glasgow,  nearly  30,000  persons  are  every  Saturday  night  in
a  state  of  brutal  intoxication,  and  every  twelfth  house  is  de¬
voted  to  the  sale  of  spirits  ;*  and  in  Dublin,  60,000  persons
in  one  year  passed  through  the  fever  hospital.  The  number
of  individuals  charged  with  serious  offences  is  in  England
five  times  greater  than  it  was  thirty  years  ago ;  in  Ireland
six  times  ;  but  in  Scotland  twenty-seven  times.  The  cost  of
punishing  and  repressing  crime  is  calculated  at  above  a  mil¬
lion  and  a  half  sterling  in  England  and  Wales.  The  annual
cost  of  vicious  characters,  of  both  sexes,  throughout  the
country,  is  estimated  at  ten  millions;  the  cost  of  4,700  vicious
characters  in  Liverpool  alone  was  reckoned  at  J6700,000  per
annum.

Can  any  individual  read  these  statements  and  not  feel
convinced  that  there  is  a  cause  at  work  which  men  in  general
have  hitherto  overlooked  ?  Can  any  individual  look  into  this
“  Slough  of  Despond”  and  not  become  impressed  with  the
desire  to  do  all  that  in  him  lies  for  the  purpose  of  alleviating
such  a  mass  of  misery,  destitution,  and  crime  ?  Every  seventh
individual  in  the  United  Kingdom  a  pauper !  At  the  present
moment  our  population  is  increasing  at  the  rate  of  one  thou¬
sand  per  day  over  and  above  the  deaths,  and  serious  crime
during  the  last  forty  years  has  increased  ten  times  as  fast  as
the  population  !  What  are  the  limits  to  this  fearful  progress?


*  In  London,  the  proportion  of  public  houses  to  other  houses  is  as  one  to
fifty-six. — Alison.


Moral  and  Intellectual  Progression.  87

If  we  are  to  continue  in  this  state,  if  population  and  crime
are  to  hold  always  the  same  relationship,  it  requires  no  great
amount  of  foresight  to  perceive  that  the  character  of  our
people  will  soon  be  altogether  altered,  and  that  our  boasted
advancement  will  prove  to  be  a  delusion.  “  If,”  says  Mr.
Porter,  “  while  wealth  has  been  accumulated  and  luxuries
have  been  multiplied,  vice  has  been  thereby  engendered,  and
misery  increased — the  advantages  of  our  progress  may  well
be  questioned.”  Of  what  advantage  is  it  that  we  increase
in  numbers  if  we  progress  ten  times  as  fast  in  crime  ?  Our
increase  under  such  circumstances  is  a  curse,  if  it  but  pro¬
claim  a  deeper  moral  degradation.  But  there  are  limits  to
such  progress,  and  it  is  in  our  power  to  define  them.  Educa¬
tion,  preceded  by  the  diffusion  of  the  necessaries  and  comforts
of  life ,  will  restore  moral  health  to  our  people.  And  here  is
the  proof.  “  The  early  settlers  of  the  province  of  Nova
Scotia  were  so  fully  impressed  with  the  necessity  of  impart¬
ing  instruction  to  the  people,  that  ample  provision  was  made
for  them,  and  has  been  continued  by  their  descendants  to
the  present  day,  for  the  support  of  schools,  so  that  not  a
child  is  brought  up  in  the  province  without  receiving  a  con¬
siderable  amount  of  instruction  combined  with  moral  train¬
ing.  When  Mr.  Young,  a  barrister  and  member  of  the  pro¬
vincial  parliament,  was  asked  regarding  the  state  of  crime
within  the  province,  he  gave  this  striking  answer.  f  Crime  !
we  have  no  crime/  He  said,  1 1  do  not  mean  that  people
never  quarrel  in  Nova  Scotia;  brawls  do  sometimes  occur,
although  not  very  frequently ;  but  as  to  crime,  understanding
by  the  term  offences  for  which  men  are  brought  to  the  bar
of  justice  in  England,  I  repeat  that  it  does  not  exist/  The
cause  of  this  truly  enviable  state  of  society  was  made  appa¬
rent  when  he  described  the  means  employed  for  imparting
universal  education,  and  added,  as  a  consequence  of  the
high  degree  of  intelligence  thereby  developed,  that  every
person  could  find  employment,  and  could  support  himself  and
his  family  upon  the  fruits  of  his  industry.  The  return  made
to  the  Colonial  Office  in  London  in  1841  confirms  these  state¬
ments,  for  we  find  it  stated  ‘  There  is  at  least  one  gaol  in
each  county,  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  superior  court,
superintended  by  the  high  sheriff  or  his  gaoler,  but  there  are
not  any  officers  of  prisons  appointed /  ”*

The  population  of  Nova  Scotia,  in  1838,  amounted  to
178,237, — we  number  28,000,000,  but  the  same  measures
which  have  produced  such  beneficial  results  in  one  of  our


*  Porter's  Progress  of  the  Nation,  Vol.  Ill,,  p.  261.


88  Physical  Well-being ,  a  necessary  preliminary  to

colonial  possessions,  would  go  far  towards  remedying  the
miseries  which  afflict  our  own  land.  The  great  difference  in
the  numbers  to  which  the  educational  means  are  to  be  applied,
affords  no  argument  for  not  adopting  them ;  on  the  contrary,
the  rapid  multiplication  of  our  numbers  should  excite  us  to
exertion,  and  point  out  to  us  that  the  only  prudent  and  safe
course  is  to  hasten  the  adoption  of  a  national  system  of
education.  We  cannot  prevent  the  accumulation  of  the
people;*  but  we  can  prevent  and  remove  the  demoralizing
influences  which  lower  them  in  the  scale  of  being,  for  it  is
manifest  that  there  is  something  fundamentally  wrong  in  the
system  of  legislation,  when  we  permit  crime,  which  can  be
altogether  prevented,  to  increase  in  a  greater  ratio  than  num¬
bers.  Is  there  not  something  to  be  improved  in  the  social
arrangements  of  a  people,  when  their  natural  increase  is
dreaded  by  their  rulers,  and  called  te  redundancy  ” — when
this  increase,  the  most  essential  element  of  their  greatness,
is  considered  an  evil  to  be  deplored,  and  if  possible  prevented  ?
If  our  rulers  understood  man;s  nature,  and  legislated  in
accordance  with  the  principles  deduced  therefrom,  they  would
perceive  that  the  true  wealth  and  power  of  a  nation  consists
in  the  numbers  of  its  people,  and  it  is  only  when  our  legis¬
lation  and  our  social  arrangements  are  in  accordance  with
these  natural  laws,  that  this  increase,  instead  of  being  a  source
of  dread  and  despair,  will  be  considered  a  proof  of  advanc¬
ing  civilization  and  a  sure  sign  of  our  increasing  national
prosperity.

There  is  not  the  slightest  fear  of  our  being  unable  to
produce  the  sustenance  required  for  any  increase  of  population.
We  hear  it  frequently  asserted,  even  now,  that  population
tends  to  increase  faster  than  the  means  of  subsistence,  and
the  Malthusians  have  been  arguing  upon  this  fallacious  doc¬
trine  for  years ;  but  there  is  no  danger  of  our  ever  being  in
this  unfortunate  predicament,  if  we  take  care  that  the  land
receives  back  again  that  which  has  been  removed  from  it  in
the  shape  of  food.f  For  as  Dr.  Guy  has  said,  “A  very

*  The  progress  of  our  population  has  gone  forward  with  a  continually  accele¬
rated  speed.

Between  1801  and  1811  the  increase  was  1,492,255.

„  1811  and  1821  „  2,108,028.

„  1821  and  1831  „  2,189,970.

,,  1831  and  1841  „  2,278,381.

f  This  is  not  a  mere  assertion  without  proof,  but  an  assertion  which  will
bear  the  most  rigid  investigation.  Here  is  one  instance  :  —

“  The  recent  urine  of  one  cow  is  valued  in  Flanders,  where  liquid  manures
are  highly  esteemed,  at  40s.  a  year.  It  contains  on  an  average,  as  we  have  seen,
900  lbs.  of  solid  matter,  and  this,  estimated  at  the  price  of  guano  only,  is  worth


Moral  and  Intellectual  Progression.


89


slight  alteration  of  the  favourite  dogma,  population  tends  to
increase  faster  than  food,  will  convert  a  dangerous  fallacy  into
an  important  and  useful  truth.  If,  instead  of  asserting  that
population  tends  to  increase  faster  than  food,  we  say,  popu¬
lation  tends  to  increase  faster  than  human  skill  and  economy
applied  to  the  cultivation  of  the  soil,  we  substitute  a  motive
to  exertion  for  one  of  the  most  depressing  and  paralyzing
theories  which  the  wit  of  man  ever  yet  devised.”*  We  shall
not  here  enter  upon  any  lengthened  statements  regarding  the
amount  of  food  which  the  land  of  the  United  Kingdom  is
capable  of  producing.  The  powers  of  man  over  the  soil  do
not  diminish  as  agriculture  improves  and  society  advances ;  on
the  contrary,  they  are  greatly  increased.  There  seems  good
reason  therefore  for  believing  that  if  only  the  present  im¬
provements  in  agriculture  were  universally  adopted,  and  the
reclaimable  waste  lands  cultivated,  every  acre  of  arable  land
might  be  made  to  produce  three  quarters  of  wheat,  which  is
less  than  the  average  of  many  of  our  counties ;  and  it  would
then  follow  that  from  120,000,000  to  180,000,000  of  human
beings  might  be  maintained  with  ease  and  comfort  from  the
territory  of  the  United  Kingdom  alone. f

Is  there  not  then  something  humiliating  in  the  reflection,
that  in  a  world  groaning  under  the  riches  of  nature,  there
should  exist  a  country  which  possesses  the  largest  number  of
the  elements  of  happiness, — a  country  which  is  capable  of
making  the  greatest  exertions  by  means  of  its  scientific  and

at  present  £4  sterling.  Multiply  this  by  eight  millions,  the  number  of  cattle
said  to  exist  in  the  United  Kingdom,  and  we  have  thirty-two  millions  of  pounds
sterling,  as  the  value  of  the  urine,  supposing  it  to  be  worth  no  more  than  foreign
guano.  It  is  impossible  to  estimate  how  much  of  this  runs  to  waste,  but  one-
tenth  of  it  will  amount  to  nearly  as  much  as  the  whole  income  tax  recently  laid
upon  the  country.” — Johnstone’s  Agricultural  Chemistry.

“  Taking  a  general  view  of  the  subject,  we  may  assume  a  clear  revenue  from
the  sewer  water  of  all  towns  of  £\  for  each  inhabitant,  either  in  a  direct  money
return,  or  partly  to  the  inhabitants  in  a  reduced  price  from  the  increased  abun¬
dance  of  produce.” — J.  Smith ,  Esq.,  Report  of  Health  of  Towns  Commission.

“  The  value  of  town  manure  may  be  estimated  by  the  fact,  that  a  portion  of
the  drainage  of  Edinburgh  spread  upon  certain  level  lands  towards  the  sea,  has
increased  the  value  of  these  lands  by  more  than  ^5, 000  a  year ;  and  that  if  the
whole  drainage  of  London  could  be  so  used,  at  a  sufficient  distance  from  the
town,  the  value  would  exceed  ^500,000  a  year.” — Dr.  Arnott’s  Report  on  the
Fevers  of  Edinburgh  and  Glasgow.

It  is  more  than  probable,  therefore,  that  the  refuse  of  towns,  which  is  now
allowed  not  only  to  run  to  waste,  but  too  frequently  to  poison  the  inhabitants,
would  far  exceed ,  after  the  cost  of  its  application  to  the  land  has  been  defrayed,
the  value  of  all  the  corn  and  manure  which  we  import.  The  very  means,  there¬
fore,  which  we  ought  to  adopt  for  the  purpose  of  increasing  the  means  of  subsist¬
ence,  would  tend  materially  to  increase  the  health  and  physical  well-being
of  all  town  populations.

*  Lecture  on  the  Health  of  Towns.

f  Alison  on  Population,  vol.  i.,  page  48.


90  Physical  Well-being ,  a  necessary  preliminary  to

mechanical  appliances  for  the  accumulation  of  wealth  and  the
diffusion  of  the  necessaries  of  life,  but  whose  inhabitants  in
many  instances,  especially  in  Ireland,  continue  in  the  most
wretched  condition ;  so  wretched,  that  travellers  tell  us  no¬
where,  not  even  amongst  the  peasants  of  oppressed  and
crushed  Poland,  or  amidst  the  wandering  tribes  of  the  wilds
of  Tartary,  have  they  seen  people  so  badly  nourished  and
provided  for :  and  the  chairman  of  the  Health  of  Towns*
Association  (Lord  Normanby)  contrasts  even  this  wretched¬
ness  with  worse  specimens  from  Liverpool,  the  second  metro¬
polis  of  the  kingdom,  for,  after  stating  that  he  had  visited
hundreds  of  negro  huts  in  the  West  Indies  and  many  Irish
cabins,  he  declared,  “  he  would  rather  pass  his  life  in  any  one
of  the  first  or  in  most  of  the  last,  than  he  would  inhabit  one
of  those  dens  or  cellars  too  often  used  as  dwellings  by  the
industrious  poor  of  this  country — those  upon  whom  the  pros¬
perity  and  quietness  of  this  country  so  greatly  depended/*  Mr.
Chadwick  has  affirmed  that,  in  the  cellars  of  Liverpool,  Man¬
chester  and  Leeds,  he  had  beheld  amongst  the  operatives  more
scenes  of  vice,  misery  and  degradation  than  those  which,  when
detailed  by  Howard,  had  caused  the  sympathy  of  the  world.*
Mr.  Freeth,  of  London,  states,  “The  great  majority  of  respect¬
able  persons  appear  to  me  to  be  in  profound  darkness  as  to
the  masses  of  misery,  filth  and  wretchedness,  which  are,  in
many  cases,  only  separated  from  their  own  comfortable  houses
by  a  nine-inch  wall;  behind  some  of  the  first  streets  in
London  scenes  may  be  found  at  which  humanity  shudders.**
With  such  evidence  before  us,  need  we  ask  what  are  the
causes  at  work  to  produce  the  low  physical  condition  of  our
people  ?  Need  we  look  about  for  the  hot-beds  of  crime,  or
for  the  fountains  from  which  those  impure  streams  which  flow
through  the  length  and  breadth  of  our  land  emanate  ?  Para¬
doxical  as  it  must  appear  to  those  who  have  not  looked  into
the  subject,  the  depots  of  wealth  and  luxury  are  the  great


*  In  Liverpool,  according  to  Dr.  Playfair,  there  are  the  vast  number  of
7,892  cellars,  with  a  computed  population  of  39,460  inhabitants  ;  whilst  in  Man¬
chester  there  are  4,443,  with  18,217  inhabitants.

Dr.  Duncan  also  states  that  in  Liverpool  there  is  a  district  containing  12,000
inhabitants  on  a  svu-face  of  105,000  square  yards,  being  a  ratio  of  460,000  in¬
habitants  to  the  square  mile.  Mr.  Farr  had  previously  selected,  as  an  instance
of  the  greatest  density  attained  in  the  heart  of  English  cities,  a  small  portion  of
London,  where  the  inhabitants  were  in  the  proportion  of  243,000  to  the  square
mile.

<f  It  is  impossible,”  says  the  Rev.  T.  Milner,  “  to  bring  a  people  thus  situ¬
ated  into  a  good  physical  or  moral  condition  ;  and  it  excites  painful  thoughts  to
reflect  upon  the  splendid  liberalities  of  the  town  in  question  for  foreign  objects,
the  welfare  of  Bushmen  and  Caffres,  with  home -dwellers  abandoned  to  a  position
in  comparison  with  which  that  of  Wombwell’s  lions  and  bears  is  enviable.”


Moral  and  Intellectual  Progression.


91


centres  of  misery  and  crime,  and  the  capitals  of  the  empire
which  dictates  laws  to  half  the  world,  contain  within  their
walls  beings  almost  as  degraded  as  the  uncivilized  tribes  of
our  colonial  dependencies.  It  is  high  time,  then,  that  men
awake  to  a  sense  of  their  danger.  It  is  high  time  that  the
rich  bestir  themselves  and  use  their  exertions  to  sweep  away
the  accumulating  materials  of  social  discord,  and  to  remove
from  the  land  which  they  occupy  the  deep  stain  of  infamy
which  attaches  to  it.  It  is  time  that  the  selfish  feelings  which
have  been  so  long  predominant  should  give  way  to  the  dic¬
tates  of  benevolence  and  justice,  and  that  all  thinkers  who
can  bring  aught  to  the  general  stock  of  progressive  ideas,
should  cast  them  before  the  world,  and  thus  add  their  mite
towards  aiding  the  efforts  of  oppressed  humanity.  Selfish¬
ness  has  gained  its  numerous  victories,  such  as  they  have
been ;  it  has  had  its  days  of  rejoicing,  such  as  they  were ;
it  has  for  ages  crushed  with  a  giants  strength  the  many  and
exalted  the  few,  and  refused  to  listen  to  the  oft-repeated  ap¬
peals  of  the  distressed  and  oppressed.  The  festering  sores,
the  natural  result  of  such  treatment,  are  now  afflicting  our
population ;  and  the  descendants  of  those  who  have  been  the
cause  of  all  this,  have  been  told  that  the  crimes  and  miseries
we  have  referred  to,  “  are  but  the  representatives  of  the  mis¬
chief — spawned  by  the  filth  and  corruption  of  the  times.”*
But  the  day  of  retribution  is  at  hand.  We  are  sure  that  the
day  has  dawned  which  is  to  give  the  death-blow  to  that
power,  which,  with  raised  front  and  brazen  brow,  has  so  often
attempted  to  defend  the  right  of  the  strong  to  oppress  the
weak.  The  banner  of  justice  has  been  unfurled,  and  men
have  been  taught,  and  are  beginning  to  feel,  that  “  property

HAS  ITS  DUTIES  AS  WELL  AS  ITS  RIGHTS.”  We  hope  to  See

this  truth  universally  recognized  and  adopted  as  a  national
maxim ;  for,  when  all  classes  fully  appreciate  it,  there  will  be
some  hope  of  advancement,  some  prospect  of  our  beholding
the  realization  of  those  aspirations  which  all  good  men  have
so  ardently  desired,  but  so  few  have  considered  it  probable
we  should  attain.

Men  of  wealth !  ye  who  by  money-power  have  been  en¬
abled  to  elevate  yourselves  above  your  brethren,  reflect  that
ye  hold  your  property  for  other  purposes  than  mere  personal
aggrandizement.  Reason,  benevolence,  and  justice  tell  ye
that  it  is  held  in  trust,  that  ye  possess  power  not  for  the
purpose  of  elevating  yourselves  above  your  neighbours — not
to  increase  the  strength  of  the  barriers  which  separate  class


*  Lord  Ashley’s  Speech  in  the  House  of  Commons.


92  Physical  Well-being,  a  necessary  preliminary  to

from  class,  but  to  endeavour  to  remove  these  remnants  of  a
selfish  policy,  and  thus  to  bring  your  neighbours  nearer  your¬
selves, — not,  as  heretofore,  to  carry  out  a  system  of  class-
legislation,  but  to  assist  the  development,  instead  of  retarding
the  growth  of  that  natural  longing  for  elevation  inherent  in
all, — not,  as  ye  are  engaged  at  present,  in  dealing  forth  with
the  cold  hand  of  charity  your  surplus  wealth  to  prevent  abso¬
lute  starvation,  but  by  placing  the  necessaries  and  comforts
of  life  within  the  reach  of  all  by  the  removal  of  restrictions,
and  by  striving  to  make  the  poor  the  improvers  of  their  own
condition  by  promoting  their  intelligence  and  freedom.  Help
the  poor  to  help  themselves.  Teach  them  their  duty  by  your
own  example,  and  shew  them  that  the  only  true,  rational,  and
benevolent  way  of  assisting  them,  is  to  make  them  agents  in
bettering  their  own  condition.  Listen  not  to  the  selfish,
coward  cry  of  those  who  would  refuse  their  aid  from  fear  of
the  result,  because  by  the  adoption  of  such  a  course  of  policy
all  that  is  good  must  be  attained.  Dread  not  the  elevation  of
the  people,  rather  reflect  on  the  consequences  of  a  prolonged
degradation  and  debasement.  Remember  it  is  no  rhetorical
flourish — no  ad  captandum  statement  of  Mr.  Chadwicks,
that  he  had  seen  more  vice,  misery,  and  degradation  in  one
town,  than  the  labours  of  a  life  had  enabled  a  Howard  to
accumulate  and  thereby  arouse  the  sympathy  of  the  world.

But  let  us  look  a  little  deeper — let  us  enquire  into  the
minute  anatomy  of  the  disease  which  is  so  sorely  afflicting
our  country.  Since  we  cannot  all  visit  the  localities  where
these  horrors  abound,  let  us  familiarize  ourselves  with  the
statements  of  those  philanthropists  who  have  done  so,  and
who  tell  us  that  the  districts  of  “  dens  and  wigwams”  contain
“a  fearful  multitude  of  untutored  savages;”  that  “the  moral
condition  of  the  people  is  unhealthy  and  even  perilous ;”  nay
more,  that  “  moral  feeling  and  sentiments  do  not  exist  among
them.”  “  The  condition  of  the  lower  classes  is  daily  becom¬
ing  worse  and  worse  in  regard  to  education,  and  it  is  telling
every  day  upon  the  moral  and  economic  condition  of  the  adult
population .”  “  Their  horrid  words,  their  ferocious  gestures,

their  hideous  laughter,  their  brutal,  bloated,  mindless  faces,
appal  and  amaze  the  stranger.”*  This  is  the  language  of
civilized  men,  describing  their  impressions  on  visiting  the
leprous  spots  on  the  fair  surface  of  our  country,  and  if  we
require  any  other  stimulus  to  arouse  us  to  exertion,  not  only

*  Vide  Report  of  Factory  Commissioners.  Lord  Ashley’s  Speeches  in  the
House  of  Commons.  Children’s  Employment  Commission.  Report  on  Health
of  Towns’  Population,  and  the  several  pamphlets  published  by  the  Health  of
Towns’  Association.


Moral  and  Intellectual  Progression.


93


to  enquire  into,  but  to  remove  and  sweep  away  for  ever  the
sources  of  such  pollution ;  if  the  progress  of  crime  already
alluded  to  be  not  sufficient, — let  us  imagine  the  effect  on  our
own  children,  supposing  they  were  compelled  to  reside  amidst
such  scenes, — let  us  reflect  on  the  slow  but  steady  deteriorat¬
ing  influence  which  must  be  exerted  on  character, — the  gra¬
dual  sapping  and  overthrowing  of  virtuous  resolves  and  lofty
and  generous  aspirations, — the  daily  familiarity  with  all  that
degrades  and  brutalizes  humanity,  and  then  say  how  long  a
space  of  their  childhood  would  pass  away,  ere  we  should  have
to  rank  them  amidst  “the  fearful  multitudes  of  untutored
savages.”  And  then  let  us  consider  how  different  might  have
been  the  result !  If  we  had  placed  them  far  away  from  the
haunts  of  misery,  destitution,  and  crime, — if  we  had  made
them  attend  to  habits  of  personal  and  home  cleanliness, — if
we  had  enforced  the  observance  of  domestic  decency, — if  we
had  increased  the  number  of  social  comforts,  and  removed
all  the  preventible  sources  of  disease, — if  we  had  located  them
from  their  infancy  under  the  most  favourable  physical  cir¬
cumstances,  and  then  by  all  the  educational  means  in  our
power,  we  had  inculcated  habits  of  virtue,  and  trained  the
various  faculties,  each  in  its  proper  sphere,  why  then,  we
should  not  only  have  performed  a  duty,  but  we  should  have
fulfilled  all  the  requirements  essential  to  the  production  of  a
rational  and  virtuous  being.  But  what  are  the  signs  of  a
rational  and  virtuous  being  ?  What  is  the  chief  end  of  man;s
being  ?  “  When  I  see,”  says  the  eloquent  Mr.  W.  J.  Fox,

“  the  senses  so  alive  as  to  thrill  at  every  sight  of  beauty  and
sound  of  harmony,  so  quick  that  nothing  escapes  them,  so
active  that  they  range  around,  and  bring  home  like  bees  to
their  hive,  all  the  treasures  and  diversities  which  nature  and
art  without  us  can  provide, — when  I  see  the  memory  piling
up  the  records  of  past  ages,  of  the  discoveries  of  science,  in
its  ample  storehouse,  classifying  and  arranging  them  there,
so  that  everything  is  ready  for  use,  and  can  be  properly
applied  at  the  moment  it  is  wanted, — when  I  perceive  thought
and  reason  operating  like  a  skilful  architect,  laying  deep  the
foundations,  and  piling  high  and  firm  the  structure  of  intel¬
lectual  character, — when  I  witness  affection  flowing  out  richly
and  freely,  having  returned  back  again  into  its  own  bosom
the  good  it  bestows  upon  others, — when  I  see  the  active
powers  and  principles  working  good  alike  for  the  individual
and  the  community,  and  man  growing  himself  rich  in
thoughts  and  recollections  of  the  past  and  hopes  of  the  future,
just  in  proportion  as  he  is  ministering  those  same  thoughts
and  hopes  to  his  countrymen  or  fellow-creatures, — when  I


94  Physical  Well-being ,  a  necessary  preliminary  to

note  progress  made  from  year  to  year ;  the  mind  able  to  take
a  loftier  flight ;  the  thought  exhibiting  grandeur,  variety,
and  richness ;  affection  flowing  more  clearly,  free,  and  strong,
and  the  sum  of  usefulness  augmenting  on  all  sides ; — why
then  I  think  I  see  something  of  a  fulfilment  of  the  end  for
which  man  was  created ;  I  behold  objects  worthy  of  his
powers  and  mental  operations, — and  trace  their  reasonable
adaptation  to  the  end  which  is  to  be  accomplished  by  them —
something  upon  which  one  can  rest,  towards  which  every  in¬
dividual  should  aspire, — in  that  aspiration  realizing  the  good
which  the  lightened  burden  of  class-legislation,  or  the  inter¬
ference  of  opinion  to  mitigate  the  pains  of  humanity,  may
give  him  an  opportunity  of  doing ;  but  for  whom  the  oppor¬
tunity  is  worthless  unless  there  be  also  the  disposition.”

Since  then  man  is  a  progressive  being,  and  since  our
object  is  to  improve  and  elevate  him  as  high  as  his  nature
will  permit  us,  and  thus  to  endeavour  to  realize  all  that  the
above  eloquent  writer  has  portrayed,  it  follows  that  our  rulers
should  do  all  that  in  them  lies  for  the  purpose  of  improving
educational  means,  and  removing  the  causes  of  vice.  And
we  think  from  what  we  have  already  advanced,  it  must  begin
to  appear  pretty  evident,  that  our  position — the  necessity
which  exists  for  attending  to  the  physical  well-being  of  a
people,  before  we  can  expect  to  make  much  progress  in  their
moral  and  intellectual  advancement,  is  not  only  correct,  but
of  paramount  and  fundamental  importance.  This  being  so
far  conceded,  we  have  to  keep  constantly  before  us  the  as¬
tounding  fact,  that  there  are  between  3  and  400,000  added
every  year  to  the  general  aggregate  of  the  dwellers  on  our
soil.  How  important  then  the  enquiry,  for  the  purpose  of
ascertaining  the  state  of  those  already  in  existence,  in  order
that  we  may  make  some  provision  for  the  rapid  increase, —
that  we  may  remove  obstructions,  and  add  to  the  machinery
by  which  our  object  is  to  be  promoted.  The  great  mass  of
these  beings  annually  produced  are  destined  to  be  workers —
wealth-producers ;  and  unfortunately  legislators  have  always
hitherto  considered  them  in  this  light  only ;  they  have  looked
upon  them  as  the  means  by  which  immense  wealth  may  be
produced,  and  disregarded  the  all-important  concomitant,
the  amount  of  happiness.  There  are  two  important  ques¬
tions  involved  in  this  discussion,  very  different,  and  yet  mu¬
tually  bearing  upon  each  other ;  they  are,  How  do  our  people
live  ?  Where  do  our  people  live  ?

In  regard  to  the  first,  Mr.  Austen,  the  assistant  Poor
Law  Commissioner,  says, —

“  In  Wiltshire  the  food  of  the  labourer  and  his  family  is  wheaten


Moral  and  Int olle dual  Progression.


95


bread,  potatoes,  a  small  quantity  of  beer,  but  only  as  a  luxury,  and
a  little  butter  and  tea.  To  this  may  sometimes  be  added  (but  it  is
difficult  to  say  how  often  or  in  what  quantities),  cheese,  bacon,  and,
in  the  neighbourhood  of  Caine,  a  portion  of  the  entrails  of  a  pig, —
a  considerable  trade  being  carried  on  at  Caine  in  curing  bacon.  I
am  inclined  to  think  that  the  use  of  bacon  and  those  parts  of  the
pig  only  occurs  where  the  earnings  of  the  family  are  not  limited  to
those  of  the  husband ;  or,  if  his  wages  form  their  sole  means  of
support,  then  it  depends  upon  the  number  of  his  family.  In  more
than  one  cottage,  where  the  mother  went  out  to  work,  or  two  of  the
boys  were  earning  perhaps  3s.  or  3s.  6d.  a-week  between  them,  I
saw  a  side  of  bacon  hanging  against  the  wall;  but  nothing  of  the
kind  was  visible  when  the  only  earnings  were  those  of  the  husband ,  or
the  family  was  numerous  and  young.”  “i\.t  Stourpain,  a  village
near  Blandford,  I  measured  a  bed-room  in  a  cottage  consisting  of
two  rooms,  the  bed-room  upstairs,  and  a  room  on  the  ground-floor  in
which  the  family  lived  during  the  day.  The  room  was  ten  feet
square,  with  one  small  window  fifteen  inches  square.  There  were
eleven  in  family ,  and  the  aggregate  earnings  in  money  were  16s.  6d.
weekly.  They  all  slept  in  the  same  room,  in  three  beds.  There  was
no  curtain  or  any  kind  of  separation  between  the  beds.  This,  I  was
told,  was  not  an  extraordinary  case;  but  that,  more  or  less,  every
bed-room  in  the  village  was  crowded  with  inmates  of  both  sexes,  of
various  ages  ;  and  that  such  a  state  of  things  was  caused  by  the
want  of  cottages/’*

Where  do  our  people  live  ?  Here  is  an  example  from  the
vicinity  of  royal  palaces  and  ducal  residences,  not  far  from
the  house  in  which  the  wealthy  have  been  meeting  for  cen¬
turies  for  the  avowed  purpose  of  legislating  for  the  people, f

*  Mr.  Sadler  stated,  in  a  speech  in  the  House  of  Commons,  that  in  1690
there  were  47,537  houses  in  the  county  of  Suffolk,  but  only  42,773  in  1821,  the
population  having  been  almost  doubled  in  the  interval !  The  Rev.  E.  Dawson,
vicar  of  Alford,  gives  a  history  of  fifteen  parishes  in  his  own  neighbourhood,  in
which,  between  1780  and  1830,  there  were  175  cottages  demolished,  and  only  12
new  ones  built !

+  Even  now,  when  a  terrible  calamity  has  befallen  us,  and  we  have  at  least
a  fifth  part  of  our  population  in  a  state  of  starvation,  what  are  our  legislators
doing  ?  At  their  command,  at  the  present  moment,  whilst  we  are  writing,  thou¬
sands  and  tens  of  thousands  of  the  wealthy  are  mumbling  forth,  with  a  kind  of
lip-service,  prayers,  and  calling  upon  their  God  to  avert  the  misery  which  is
existing ;  misery,  which  many  men  foresaw,  nay,  which  one  man,  Cobbett,
absolutely  foretold.  What  hypocrisy  is  this  !  If  those  who,  by  their  neglect,
have  brought  about  this  state  of  things,  think  it  right  to  deprive  themselves  of  a
day’s  provisions,  and  thus  by  an  outward  sign  proclaim  to  the  famishing  millions
that  they  are  about  to  pursue  a  wiser  and  juster  policy,  why  we  have  nothing  to
say  to  it,  albeit,  we  should  much  prefer  that  their  moral  resolves  should  be  pre¬
sented  to  us  clothed  in  the  language  of  a  vigorous  intellect,  for  in  truth  we  have
no  faith  in  any  system  of  gastromancy.  By  a  vicious  system  of  legislation,  the
people  have  been  permitted  to  increase  and  multiply  surrounded  by  physical  evils,
and  supported  by  a  species  of  food  which  ranks  very  low  in  the  scale  of  nutri¬
ment  ;  the  natural  result  ensues,  and  then,  instead  of  seeking  for  and  removing
the  causes  of  the  evil,  they  publish  a  form  of  worship,  and  command  the  people


96  Physical  Well-being,  a  necessary  preliminary  to


but  who  till  a  very  recent  period  have  been  almost  entirely
occupied  in  advancing  their  own  selfish  interests,  leaving  the
masses,  the  producers  of  the  wealth  they  have  been  purloin¬
ing,  to  increase  in  numbers — ranking  them  as  mere  hewers
of  wood  and  drawers  of  water ;  their  social  position  uncared
for,  their  moral  and  intellectual  advancement  disregarded,
till,  as  we  have  read,  their  very  form,  almost  the  only  sem¬
blance  of  humanity  they  possess,  has  undergone  most  serious
deterioration, — “  they  are  decayed  in  their  bodies  ;  the  whole
race  is  rapidly  decreasing  in  size.”

“  There  is  a  district  situated  near  the  very  centre  of  the  metro¬
polis,  on  the  north  side  of  Holborn  Bridge,  and  to  the  west  of
St.  John  Street,  which  might  be  not  unaptly  compared  to  Bunyan’s
Slough  of  Despond,  for  here  is  collected  a  large  portion  of  the
natural  and  social  pollutions  that  flow  from  the  surrounding  neigh¬
bourhoods  ;  and  to  those  at  all  acquainted  with  the  topography  of
London,  the  names  of  Field  Lane,  Saffron  Hill,  Cow  Cross,  and
Sharp’s  Alley,  present  no  other  ideas  than  those  of  much  wretched¬
ness  and  more  vice.  This  populous  mass  of  streets,  courts,  alleys,
and  yards,  probably  contains  not  fewer  than  60,000  or  80,000  in¬
habitants.  Generally  speaking,  the  people  seem  to  have  no  higher
and  no  other  ideas  than  those  connected  with  their  servile  occupa¬
tions,  and  the  appetites  and  passions  of  their  animal  nature.  With
the  exception  of  a  more  or  less  imperfect  acquaintance  with  the  art
of  reading  possessed  by  some,  it  may  be  said  that  the  march  of
intellect  has  never  found  its  way  down  their  narrow  lanes,  and  that
the  stream  of  knowledge  has  passed  by  them  without  leaving  a  drop
amongst  their  congregated  habitations.  Shut  up  within  a  labyrinth
of  brick  no  interruption  occurs  to  relieve  the  miserable  monotony  of
their  existence,  except  what  arises  from  the  brutal  excitement  of  a
drunken  brawl,  or  the  frequent  visits  of  the  police  in  search  of
offenders  against  the  laws  of  the  realm.”

Dr.  Gilly  observes  of  the  confined  huts  of  the  Northum¬
brian  hinds : —

“  How  they  lie  down  to  rest,  how  they  sleep,  how  they  can
preserve  common  decency,  how  unutterable  horrors  are  avoided,  is
beyond  all  conception.  The  case  is  aggravated  when  there  is  a
young  woman  to  be  lodged  in  this  confined  space,  who  is  not  a
member  of  the  family,  but  is  hired  to  do  the  field-work,  for  which
every  hind  is  bound  to  provide  a  female.  It  shocks  every  feeling  of
propriety  to  think  that  a  room,  and  within  such  a  space  as  I  have
been  describing,  civilized  beings  should  be  herding  together,  without
a  decent  separation  of  age  or  sex.”

to  pray  that  the  natural  course  of  events  may  be  altered  ;  that,  in  truth,  the  soil
which  has  not  been  tilled  may  produce  its  fruits.  “  May  not  that  be  defined  as
superstition ,  which  trusts  to  any  other  influence  to  effect  a  desired  object  than
the  natural  cause  appointed  to  produce  it  ?”  We  say  that  the  command  to  ob¬
serve  this  fast  is  rank  superstition,  and  we  have  that  faith  in  progress ,  that  we
think  we  may  hazard  the  opinion, —tee  shall  never  have  another  fast.


97


Moral  and  Intellectual  Progression.

The  Rev.  S.  G.  Osborne,  the  rector  of  Bryanstone,  in
Dorsetshire,  states,—

“  Whatever  attempts  at  decency  may  be  made, — and  I  have  seen
many  most  ingenious  and  praiseworthy  attempts, — still  there  is  the
fact  of  the  old  and  young,  of  both  sexes,  married  and  unmarried,
all  herded  together  in  one  and  the  same  sleeping  apartment.  Within
this  last  year,  I  saw,  in  a  room  about  thirteen  feet  square,  three
beds  ;  on  the  first  lay  the  mother,  a  widow  dying  of  consumption ;
on  the  second,  two  unmarried  daughters,  one  eighteen  years  of  age,
the  other  twelve ;  on  the  third,  a  young  married  couple,  whom  I
myself  had  married  two  days  before.”

Mr.  Toynbee,  one  of  the  surgeons  of  the  St.  George’s
and  St.  James’s  Dispensary,  states, —

“  In  the  class  of  patients  to  our  dispensary,  nearly  all  the  fami¬
lies  have  but  a  single  room  each,  and  a  very  great  number  have  only
one  bed  to  each  family.  The  state  of  things  in  respect  to  morals  as
well  as  health,  I  sometimes  find  to  be  terrible.  I  am  now  attending
one  family,  where  the  father  about  50,  the  mother  about  the  same
age,  a  grown-up  son  about  20,  in  a  consumption,  and  a  daughter
about  17,  who  has  a  scrofulous  affection  of  the  jaw  and  throat,  for
which  I  am  attending  her,  and  a  child,  all  sleep  in  the  same  hedi  in
a  room  where  the  father  and  three  or  four  other  men  work  during
the  day  as  tailors,  and  they  frequently  work  there  late  at  night  with
candles.”

Mr.  Spooner,  of  Blandford,  says,—

“  Two  years  ago  typhus  fever  occurred  in  a  neighbouring  parish
which  I  attend ;  there  was  one  cottage  which  consisted  of  one  room
on  the  ground  floor  and  two  small  bed-rooms  up  stairs.  In  this  cot¬
tage  lived  an  old  man,  with  his  wife,  his  two  daughters,  middle-
aged  women,  and  his  son  and  wife,  with  three  children, — in  all  ten
individuals.  The  whole  family  had  the  fever,  some  of  them  very
severely.  The  son’s  wife  with  two  of  her  children  were  on  a  bed  in
an  outhouse;  in  the  outhouse  was  a  well,  and  a  large  tub  containing
pig’s  victuals,  and  was  the  general  receptacle  for  everything.  The
floor  was  earthen,  with  no  ceiling  but  the  thatch  of  the  roof.”

Mr.  Baker,  in  his  report  on  the  condition  of  the  popula¬
tion,  gives  the  following  description  of  the  houses  of  many
of  the  working  classes  : —

“  Broken  panes  in  every  window  frame  and  filth  and  vermin  in
every  nook.  With  the  walls  unwhitewashed  for  years,  black  with
the  smoke  of  foul  chimneys,  without  water,  with  corded  bed-stocks
for  beds,  and  sacking  for  bed-clothing,  with  floors  unwashed  from
year  to  year,  without  out-offices;  streets  elevated  a  foot,  sometimes
two,  above  the  level  of  the  causeway,  by  the  accumulation  of  years,
and  stagnant  puddles  here  and  there,  with  their  fetid  exhalations,
causeways  broken  and  dangerous,  ash-places  choked  up  with  filth,
VOL.  v.  H


98  Physical  Well-being,  a  necessary  'preliminary  to

and  excrementitious  deposits  on  all  sides,  as  a  consequence,  un¬
drained,  unpaved,  unventilated,  uncared  for  by  any  authority,  but
the  landlord,  who  weekly  collects  his  miserable  rent  from  his  miser¬
able  tenants.’ 5

What  education  can  avail  under  such  circumstances  as
these?  Mr.  Chadwick  was  informed  by  a  gentleman  in  the
manufacturing  districts, —

“That  in  every  case  of  personal  and  moral  improvement  the
successful  step  was  made  by  the  removal  of  the  party  from  the  ill-
conditioned  neighbourhood  in  which  he  had  been  brought  up.”
“  If  a  young  workman  married  and  took  up  his  abode  in  the  old
neighbourhood,  the  condition  of  the  wife  was  soon  brought  down  to
the  common  level,  and  the  marriage  became  a  source  of  wretched¬
ness.”

So  wretched  and  degraded  is  some  portion  of  our  popula¬
tion  that  Mr.  Walker,  the  stipendiary  magistrate  of  the
Thames  Police  Office,  made  the  following  statement : —

“  I  have  often  said  that  if  empty  casks  were  placed  along  the
streets  of  Whitechapel,  in  a  few  days  each  of  them  would  have  a
tenant,  and  these  tenants  would  keep  up  their  kind  and  prey  upon
the  rest  of  the  community.  I  am  sure  that  if  such  facilities  were
offered,  there  is  no  conceivable  degradation  to  which  portions  of  the
species  might  not  be  reduced.  Allow  these  tub-men  no  education
and  you  would  have  so  many  savages  living  in  the  midst  of  civiliza¬
tion.  Wherever  there  are  empty  houses  which  are  not  secured,  they
are  soon  tenanted  by  wretched  objects.  Parish  officers  and  others
come  to  me  to  aid  them  in  clearing  such  places.  I  tell  the  police
and  the  parish  that  there  is  no  use  in  their  watching  these  places,
that  they  must  board  them  up  if  they  would  get  rid  of  the  occupants.
If  they  will  give  the  accommodation  they  will  get  the  occupants.
If  you  will  have  marshes  and  stagnant  waters  you  will  then  have
suitable  animals,  and  the  only  way  of  getting  rid  of  them  is  by
draining  the  marshes.”

Without  going  too  much  into  detail,  we  have  now  from
official  documents  answered  the  two  queries, — How  and
where  our  people  live  ?  Whether  we  walk  through  the  by¬
ways  of  our  towns,  the  districts  of  “  dens  and  wigwams,”  as
they  have  been  called — survey  the  villages  in  our  agricultural
districts,  or  look  into  the  lonely  cottage  of  the  peasant,  the
same  fearful  truth  meets  us,  and  we  become  convinced  that
the  monster  evil,  the  cause  which  retards  social  improvement,
is  the  low  physical  condition  of  our  population.  Virtue  and
happiness  can  never  be  found  ivhere  physical  misery  abounds.
Can  we  wonder  when  beings  are  surrounded  by  all  that  ren¬
ders  life  miserable,  if  they  become  reckless,  improvident,  dis-


Moral  and  Intellectual  Progression.


99


solute,  and  criminal?  Can  we  wonder  at  the  drunken  brawl*
which  is  always  to  be  heard  where  physical  misery  is  seen  ?
Amidst  the  filth  and  wretchedness  of  a  crowded  court,  the
condition  of  the  inhabitants  is  always  undergoing  a  process
of  deterioration ;  the  impure  air  which  they  breathe,  and  the
absence  of  sufficient  light  and  water,  renders  them  predisposed
to  disease,  induces  a  recklessness  of  character  and  an  indiffer¬
ence  to  the  common  decencies  of  life,  which  are  the  sure  precur¬
sors  of  a  career  of  dissipation  and  debauchery.  Horrible  as  are
the  accounts  we  have  given,  we  could  have  selected  worse,  we
could  have  described  scenes  which  occur  daily  in  most  of  our
large  towns,  that  are  not  to  be  surpassed  amongst  the  most
debased  communities  of  savage  life.  Aye,  and  amongst  agri¬
cultural  labourers  too, — “  the  bold  peasantry  their  country’s
pride/’  who  are  so  frequently  compared  with  the  manufactur¬
ing  artizan,  and  whose  life  is  said  to  be  so  much  more  happy
and  contented  by  those  who  never  take  a  peep  into  their  mud-
walled  cottages,  or  reflect  on  the  small  amount  of  comfort
which  can  be  purchased  by  the  pitiful  earnings  of  a  week’s
labour,  we  could  present  actual  pictures,  at  the  bare  recital
of  which  the  least  sensitive  amongst  us  would  recoil  with
horror.  Hear  it,  lords  of  the  soil !  Within  a  few  yards  of
your  mansions,  where  ye  enjoy  the  comforts  of  civilized  life,
and  indulge  in  the  luxuries  peculiar  to  a  pampered  appetite,
your  cottagers  live,  surrounded,  too  frequently,  by  all  the
causes  calculated  to  debase  and  brutalize  humanity.  Yes,  the
wigwams  of  Wiltshire  and  Dorset  can  compete  for  the  display
of  misery  with  the  cellars  of  Liverpool  and  Manchester ;  and
the  people  who  till  the  soil  and  produce  the  necessaries  of  life,
are  reduced  to  a  far  lower  state  than  many  of  the  operatives
who  wait  upon  the  steam-engine,  and  in  numerous  instances
administer  only  to  our  luxuries.

We  must,  however,  bring  our  remarks  to  a  close,  and
defer  to  another  opportunity  the  consideration  of  other  facts
bearing  upon  this  important  subject.  There  are  several  fea¬
tures  which  we  have  not  displayed — several  considerations
which  we  have  not  yet  touched  upon.  We  have  not  yet
enumerated  the  diseases  which  are  the  sure  visitants  of  the
abodes  of  the  wretched,  or  given  the  least  idea  of  the  fearful
mortality  amongst  the  labouring  population.  The  diseases
which  attack  the  inmates  of  the  peasant’s  cottage  are  seriously
destructive  of  life,  but  the  mortality  is  very  much  greater
amongst  the  working  classes  in  our  large  towns.  If  we  com-

*  The  outlay  in  drunkenness  and  in  the  use  of  spirituous  liquors  injurious  to
health  (after  every  allowance  for  reasonable  conviviality),  is  above  fifteen  millions
per  annum,  throughout  the  United  Kingdom.


100  Physical  Well-being,  a  necessary  preliminary,  fyc.

pare  one  million  of  the  inhabitants  of  large  towns  with  the
same  number  of  the  inhabitants  of  rural  districts,  the  inha¬
bitants  of  towns  lose  nearly  8,000  more  every  year  than  the
inhabitants  of  the  country.  The  mean  duration  of  life  in
Surrey  is  45  years;  it  is  37  for  London;  and  only  26  for
Liverpool.  The  inhabitants  of  the  metropolis,  therefore,  tak¬
ing  one  with  another,  when  compared  with  those  of  Surrey,
lose  8  years  of  their  lives,  and  the  inhabitants  of  Liverpool
19  years  of  their  lives !  This  mortality  increases  with  the
over-crowding  of  the  inhabitants,  and  attains  its  highest
point  in  the  most  densely  peopled  districts.  Here  is  an  ex¬
ample  of  this  fact.  “  Thus,”  says  Dr.  Guy,  “  to  take  a  single
metropolitan  parish,  that  of  St.  Giles*  and  St.  George*s,
Bloomsbury, — while  the  gentry  who  inhabit  the  open  squares
and  broad  streets,  live  on  an  average  forty  years,  the  working
classes,  who  inhabit  narrow  lanes,  blind  courts,  and  dark
cellars,  live  only  seventeen  years ;  that  is  to  say,  they  lose,
one  with  another,  just  twenty-three  years  of  their  lives.  In
Shoreditch  the  loss  amounts  to  twenty-eight  years  !”

In  Manchester  and  Liverpool,  half  the  population  born
are  cut  off  under  the  age  of  five  years ;  and  seventy-six  out  of
every  one  hundred  die  before  the  age  of  nine  months  !

In  Preston,  in  the  well-conditioned  streets,  the  mortality
among  children  under  one  year  old  is  15  in  the  100;  in
moderately -conditioned  streets,  38  in  the  100;  and  in  the
worst-conditioned  streets,  44  in  the  100,  being,  as  nearly  as
possible,  three  times  the  mortality  of  well-conditioned  streets.

The  overcrowding  of  our  population,  conjoined  with  the
defective  cleansing  and  sewerage  of  our  towns,  are  the  chief
causes  of  this  mortality.  These  are  the  preventible  causes  of
disease, — causes  which  in  Lancashire  alone  produce  398,000
cases  of  preventible  sickness  yearly,  and  14,000  premature
deaths,  of  which  11,000  are  of  adults  engaged  in  productive
labour  !  “  The  annual  slaughter  in  England  and  Wales  from

preventible  causes  of  typhus  fever  alone ,  which  attacks  persons
in  the  vigour  of  life,  is  double  the  amount  of  what  was  suffered
by  the  allied  armies  in  the  battle  of  Waterloo

Such  then  is  the  progress  of  disease  and  death  amongst
our  neglected  population.  But  what,  let  us  ask,  is  the  state
of  those  who  struggle  through  all  the  dangers  of  infancy,  and
escape  that  death  which  is  making  such  havoc  amongst  their
neighbours?  Consider  their  weak  and  deteriorated  bodies,
with  all  their  functions  improperly  performed,  and  of  course
their  brains  losing  power  amidst  the  general  wreck.  Consider
them  living  to  the  age  of  30  and  40,  and  becoming  the  pa¬
rents  of  children,  not  only  inheriting  all  their  diseases,  but


Dr.  Davey  in  Ceylon,  Books  received,  fyc.  101

doomed  to  live,  and  die  in  their  turn,  surrounded  by  all  the
causes  calculated  to  still  further  depress  their  physical  en¬
ergies.  Sir  A.  Carlisle  stated  that,  where  the  father  and
mother  were  both  town  bred,  the  family  ended  with  the  third
generation.  But  we  shall  most  probably  return  to  the  dis¬
cussion  of  this  physiological  portion  of  the  question  in  the
next  number.

L.  E.  G.  E.


Dr.  Davey  in  Ceylon.

If  we  had  room  we  should  wish  to  refer,  in  a  more  becoming
manner,  to  the  exertions  of  our  intelligent  friend.  Dr.  Davey,  at
Ceylon,  who  is  endeavouring  to  enlighten  the  inhabitants  of  that
island  on  two  most  important  subjects — cerebral  physiology  and  mes¬
merism.  We  have  received  several  newspapers  containing  articles
relating  to  these  subjects.  One  gave  a  very  lengthened  account  of  a
paper  read  by  Dr.  Davey  to  the  Royal  Society,  “  On  the  cerebral
development  of  the  Ceylonese.’’  It  contained  many  important  ob¬
servations  ;  but  it  appears  that  the  colonial  society  is  in  a  similar
predicament  to  our  own,  the  metropolitan,  and  is  afflicted  with  the
presence  of  a  supervisor  of  the  same  calibre  as  Dr.  Roget.  This
paper  not  only  met  with  considerable  opposition,  but  was  refused
insertion  in  the  transactions  of  the  society,  because  its  character  was
phrenological !  Dr.  Davey  will  perceive  a  statement  in  our  last  number,
that  the  same  illiberal  course  was  pursued  at  the  last  meeting  of  the
British  Association.  We  trust  he  will  not  relax  in  his  efforts.  There
is  a  wide  field  open  to  him,  and  although  his  observations  do  not
find  a  ready  insertion  amongst  the  philosophical  papers  in  the  trans¬
actions  of  the  society,  the  opposing  party  cannot  prevent  the  accu¬
mulation  of  facts,  nor  the  ultimate  application  of  the  physiological
truths  deduced  from  them.  We  shall  have  another  opportunity  for
referring  to  this  subject.


BOOKS  RECEIVED.

Mesmer  and  Swedenborg :  or,  the  relation  of  the  Developments  of  Mesmerism
to  the  Doctrines  and  Disclosures  of  Swedenborg.  By  George  Bush.  New  York.
1847.

Phrenological  Journal.  Edinburgh.  January,  1847.

Humanitas.  The  writer  of  the  rhymes  inserted  in  the  Lancet  to  ridicule  the
Mesmeric  Infirmary  is  Dr.  Badely,  of  Chelmsford,  a  Fellow  of  the  College  of
Physicians  and  a  Graduate  of  the  University  of  Cambridge  !  Thus  Mr.  Wakley,
like  Mr.  Moses,  has  a  poet !  !


THE  ZOIST.

No.  XVIII.


JULY ,  1847.


I.  Cure  of  long-standing  intense  Pains  and  other  Sufferings,
and  extreme  Debility,  with  Mesmerism,  after  the  failure
of  endless  and  distressing  measures.  By  Dr.  Elliotson.

Towards  the  end  of  October,  1845,  I  received  a  visit  from
Mr.  Morgan,  of  Bedford  Row,  the  gentleman  who  some  years
before  had  so  humanely  and  rationally  yielded  to  the  request
of  a  poor  woman  in  Three  Cups  Yard,  behind  Bedford  Row,
that  he  would  apply  to  me  for  mesmerism  to  her  child,  who
was  afflicted  with  insanity,  fatuity,  dumbness,  and  prostra¬
tion,  and  upon  whom  he  had  exhausted  all  his  remedies  in
vain,  and  the  wonderful  mesmeric  cure  of  whom  is  recorded
in  the  fourth  volume  of  The  Zoist*  Mr.  Morgan’s  present
object  was  similar.  But  the  rank  of  the  patient  for  whom  he
now  requested  my  assistance  was  very  different.  She  was  a
young  lady  residing  in  Eaton  Square,  and  her  father  and
brother  were  in  Parliament.  Some  of  the  most  fashionable
physicians  had  been  called  in.  A  royal  physician  in  ordi¬
nary,  and  two  other  royal  physicians,  had  exhausted  all  their
means  upon  her  as  fruitlessly  as  Mr.  Morgan  had  exhausted
his  upon  the  poor  child  in  Three  Cups  Yard.  I  accordingly
met  him  at  her  father’s  house,  and  found  the  young  lady
very  pale,  sickly,  and  emaciated,  so  feeble  as  not  to  be  able
to  sit  upright,  and  suffering  agonies  in  many  parts  of  her
system.

After  hearing  the  history  of  the  disease,  I  examined  her
carefully,  and  finding  no  sign  of  structural  disease,  though
some  perfectly  unfounded  fears  had  been  entertained  respect¬
ing  one  of  her  lungs,  I  declared  that  no  reason  appeared  why
she  should  not  get  well,  and  that  mesmerism  would  probably


VOL.  v.


*  p.  467.


I


104  Cure  of  intense  Pains  and  other  sufferings,

cure  her.  According  to  my  custom,  I  refrained  from  being
so  presumptuous  as  to  declare  that  it  would  be  sure  to  cure
her.  Mesmerists  should  always  remember  that  in  a  host  of
cases  there  may  be  something  inappreciable  by  our  means  of
investigation  that  will  baffle  all  our  power,  and  that  the  most
promising  cases  may  eventually  foil  us.  Medical  men,  on  the
other  hand,  who  despise  mesmerism,  should  remember,  when
mesmerists  are  so  foiled,  that  they  themselves  with  their  legi¬
timate  (that  is  the  orthodox  word)  medicine  are  foiled  every  day,
and  every  hour  of  the  day  if  they  have  an  extensive  practice,
perhaps  after  prescribing  the  most  painful  measures,  and  that
this  sad  imperfection  of  medicine  and  surgery  it  is  that
makes  patients  fly  to  mesmerism  and  other  abominations.
For  sick  people  are  circumstanced  still  like  the  woman  in  the
gospel  nearly  2000  years  ago,  who  “  had  suffered  many  things
of  many  physicians,  and  had  spent  all  that  she  had,  and  was
nothing  bettered,  but  rather  worse.”

It  was  therefore  arranged  that  the  young  lady  should  be
mesmerised,  and  Mr.  Morgan  goodnaturedly  and  liberally
offered  to  operate  if  I  would  shew  him  the  way,  He,  how¬
ever,  lived  at  a  great  distance  and  fancied  he  produced  no
effect ;  and  the  maid  tried  and  she  was  thought  to  produce
no  more.  Seeing  that  the  thing  would  not  be  done  at  all
unless  I  did  it,  I  offered  to  take  the  case  in  hand  myself,
though  I  very  rarely  do  unless  there  is  likely  to  be  something
peculiarly  interesting  in  the  phenomena.  I  premised  that  I
never  had  mesmerised  professionally,  and  never  would,  how¬
ever  high  in  rank  a  patient  might  be,  and  that  if  I  took  the
case  in  hand  I  must  act  entirely  as  a  friend.  I  really  pitied
the  poor  sufferer,  and  had  soon  discovered  that  she  had  every
lady-like  feeling  and  habit,  and  was  not  only  unaffected,  but
courageous  and  sincere,  straightforward  and  noble-minded.

The  following  is  the  account  which  she  at  once  cheerfully
consented  to  draw  up  for  me  of  her  case.

“  Five  years  ago,  I  caught  a  severe  cold,  and  had  a  cough
which  lasted  for  more  than  three  months  and  pulled  me  down
so  much  that  I  could  hardly  make  any  exertion  without  feeling
so  exhausted,  depressed  and  ill,  that  at  night  I  was  forced  to
throw  myself  on  the  bed  and  lie  down  for  some  time  before
I  could  be  undressed.  After  trying  a  great  many  remedies
without  the  least  benefit,  I  was  obliged  to  take  to  my  bed
and  have  a  blister  on  my  chest ;  and  was  relieved  for  a  time ;
but  my  nerves  became  so  dreadfully  disturbed  that  I  was  hys¬
terical,  and  the  least  noise  affected  me  painfully.  About  this
time  I  heard  of  the  sudden  death  of  a  great  friend  in  India


with  Mesmerism ,  by  Dr.  Elliotson.  105

and  received  a  shock  greater  than  any  one  knew,  and  the
recollection  of  her  haunted  me  day  and  night.  I  was  con¬
tinually  fainting  and  had  violent  hysterical  paroxysms.  My
medical  attendants, — a  neighbouring  practitioner  and  a  phy¬
sician,  thought  that  “  rousing ”  would  do  me  good,  and  or¬
dered  me  to  be  “  well  talked  to”  although  I  was  taking  stimu¬
lants  which  seemed  to  excite  me  more  than  was  proper.  The
“  rousing ”  seemed  only  to  make  me  much  worse,  so  great  was
my  excitement.  After  a  long  time  I  appeared  to  rally  and
was  ordered  to  go  out  if  I  could.  But  I  was  quite  unequal
to  it,  not  having  left  my  room  for  some  time,  and  the  merely
going  down  stairs  amongst  my  family  was  the  cause  of  a
relapse  so  severe  that  I  kept  my  bed  for  many  weeks.  Dread¬
ful  head-aches  came  on  with  violent  bleedings  at  the  nose.
Leeches  were  continually  applied  behind  my  ears,  and  on  the
temples.  The  relief  from  them  was  very  great.  Blisters,
too,  were  applied  to  the  nape  of  my  neck ;  but,  though  they
relieved  my  head,  the  agony  from  their  irritation  was  so  great
that  I  could  scarcely  endure  them.  A  large  extent  of  surface
over  my  spine  was  raw  and  discharged  exceedingly  for  some
time.  Violent  hysterical  attacks  were  induced,  which  some¬
times  lasted  three  hours.  Bor  them  I  was  literally  drenched,
sometimes  for  three  hours  together,  with  cold  water,  thrown
at  me  to  “  rouse ”  me.  I  used  to  sink  down  thoroughly  ex¬
hausted  by  all  I  went  through.  I  had  no  rest  at  night,  and
my  maid  was  constantly  getting  up  to  try  to  quiet  my  excited
state,  and  would  remain  with  me  for  two  hours  at  a  time,
although  really  not  knowing  what  to  do  for  me,  or  how  to
pacify  my  truly  wretched  condition.  Every  thing  was  tried.  I
was  drenched  with  medicine  of  all  sorts;  but  none  did  any  good.
Tonics  brought  on  such  an  inward  fever  that  I  was  forced
to  leave  them  off ;  my  lips  became  parched  and  peeled  through
the  fever,  which  for  three  weeks  was  so  intense  that  I  lived
on  nothing  but  water  ice.  This  state  continued  for  more  than
six  months,  sometimes  a  little  better  and  then  again  worse.
Mv  head-aches  were  at  times  so  bad  that  I  could  bear  no

V

noise  :  any  one  walking  across  my  room  almost  drove  me
wild,  and  really  at  times  I  knew  not  what  I  did,  and  the
subsequent  depression  was  so  extreme  that  for  days  I  have
felt  unable  to  speak.  I  got  quite  disgusted  with  the  medical
men  who  saw  me,  and  I  determined  to  give  up  all  medicine  for
a  time  and  trust  to  nature.  This  I  did  for  many  weeks,
though  obliged  to  have  leeches  continually,  so  violent  were
my  head-aches,  which  nothing  relieved  but  losing  blood.  Not
getting  on  any  better,  I  was  again  induced  to  see  a  physician,
and  did  see  another,  who  gave  me  some  quieting  medicine,

i  2


10G  Cure  of  intense  Pains  and  other  sufferings ,

which,  however,  proved  of  little  use.  The  bleedings  at  my
nose  were  constant,  and  the  more  I  lost  by  leeching  the  better
I  felt ;  but  I  was  always  “  roused soon  afterwards  by  being
“well  talked  to,,}  and  the  excitement  which  this  produced  was
quite  dreadful,  so  that  I  have  rolled  about  my  bed  like  a  wild
person.

“  My  illness  at  times  seemed  to  change ;  the  cough  again
troubling  me,  together  with  great  weakness,  and  my  head-aches
not  being  so  violent.  I  was  under  all  sorts  of  medicine,  at
times  better,  and  then  worse.  Violent  head-aches  came  on,
if  I  walked  across  my  room  ;  and  at  last  I  was  carried  from
the  bed  to  the  sofa,  and  even  this  would  bring  on  faintings
and  hysterical  attacks,  which  would  exhaust  me  for  a  long
while.  I  continued  the  leeches  for  a  year ,  almost  every  other
day,  and  they  still  gave  me  relief,  always  making  me  lighter
and  easier.  They,  however,  were  the  only  remedy  which  did
me  good ;  but  as  this  plan,  of  course,  could  not  go  on  for
ever,  I  now  took  advice  of  a  third  physician,  and  he  forbad
all  leeching  unless  nothing  else  would  answer;  ordered  me
mustard  baths  up  to  the  knees,  and  gave  me  steel  in  an
effervescing  state.  For  a  time  I  rallied,  but  only  for  a  time,
and  I  again  began  to  go  back ;  my  head  getting  worse,  and
my  nose  sometimes  bursting  out  bleeding  in  the  night,  so
that  I  was  quite  alarmed,  though  the  relief  was  great  to  my
heavy  head.  The  tonic  medicine  I  was  taking  I  was  obliged
to  discontinue  as  fever  came  on  again,  with  sickness  and
retching,  and  at  one  time  continued  for  a  very  long  period.
I  was  ordered  salines,  which  I  took  for  some  time  with  great
benefit.  I  determined  again  to  do  without  a  doctor,  so  heartily
tired  was  I  of  all  the  remedies  that  had  been  tried.  My  suf¬
ferings  were  so  terrible,  that  I  have  lain  many  a  day  without
noticing  any  one,  the  tears  rolling  down  my  cheeks  from
agony ;  yet  I  got  somewhat  better  again,  and  tried  a  shower
bath,  which  proved  of  service,  and  I  was  enabled  by  degrees
to  get  about  my  room,  and  then  down  stairs,  and  to  take  a
drive ;  but  yet  could  not  bear  much,  and  noise  still  distressed
me  greatly.  Yet  on  the  whole,  I  was  decidedly  better,  and,
as  the  autumn  was  coming,  I  was  ordered  to  try  change  of
air,  and  went  to  Bath  to  stay  with  some  friends,  and  drank
the  waters.  But  after  a  little  while,  they  seemed  to  disagree
with  me,  as  I  felt  continually  sick  after  them  and  feverish,  and
had  a  noise  in  my  head  and  ears.  By  the  advice  of  a  doctor
there,  I  gave  them  up.  He  ordered  me  to  be  careful  not  to
over  exert  myself,  and  prescribed  salines.  I  unfortunately
caught  cold,  and  was  again  troubled  with  cough,  which  re¬
duced  me  sadly,  and  I  got  into  such  a  weak  state,  that  I


ivilh  Mesmerism,  by  Dr.  Elliotson.


10  7


felt  illness  was  again  creeping  over  me ;  and  so  bad  did  I
become,  that  I  took  to  my  bed,  and  never  stirred  from  it  for
a  month,  except  to  have  my  bed  made,  and  some  days  not
even  that,  and  my  wretched  head  became  most  troublesome.
Leeches  were  again  applied  continually,  always  with  a  great
relief ;  but  I  became  so  ill,  that  it  was  an  exertion  to  turn  in
my  bed,  and  my  spine  began  to  cause  me  such  pain  that,
when  I  attempted  to  walk  from  my  bed  to  the  sofa,  I  was  in
misery,  and  at  last  could  not,  but  used  to  slide  across  the
bed  to  it.  Unfortunately,  the  house  could  not  be  kept  as
quiet  as  I  wished,  and,  and  after  much  suffering,  I  was
moved  up  to  London.  The  journey  was  the  cause  of  great
misery  to  me ;  I  for  a  week  after  never  moved  from  my  bed.
The  room  was  kept  dark,  as  light  brought  on  severe  head¬
ache  ;  if  I  were  the  least  roused,  the  excitement  was  dreadful.
Some  days  have  passed  when  I  have  not  even  turned  in  my
bed,  and  I  felt  so  m,  as  if  I  really  were  dying  gradually.
Ice  was  applied  to  my  head,  which  had  been  shaved,  and
cold  lotions  also,  with  relief  for  a  time ;  but  still  my  sufferings
I  think  increased,  and  nothing  but  the  greatest  quiet,  and
leeches  almost  every  day,  give  me  any  relief  at  last.  Often
have  I  clenched  my  hands,  and  beaten  myself  about  for  hours,
wild  with  pain,  and  then  such  sobbing  fits  would  attack  me,
that  the  bed  has  shaken  under  me.

My  exhaustion  after  these  attacks  was  of  course  great.
Still  my  room  was  obliged  to  be  darkened  all  day,  so  painful
was  light  to  me ;  and  if  any  one  ever  whispered  in  my  room,
it  drove  me  wild ;  I  never  spoke  or  took  the  least  notice,  and
felt  gradually  sinking ;  a  kind  of  exhausted  sleep  came  upon
me,  which  lasted  for  some  time  ;  but  I  was  generally  disturbed
out  of  it  by  some  noise,  and  the  frightful  state  of  excitement
I  was  then  thrown  into,  must  have  been  sad  to  witness.  To
raise  myself  in  bed  was  impossible,  or  even  to  put  my  foot
to  the  ground,  as  my  spine  gave  me  pain  up  to  the  head  by
the  attempt.  I  was  again  obliged  to  see  a  physician,  making
the  fourth,  and  he  ordered  me  to  be  kept  quiet,  but  not  too
quiet,  as  I  should  otherwise  never  be  able  to  bear  noise ;  not
to  have  leeches  every  day,  but  now  and  then ;  he  gave  me
some  German  waters,  and  afterwards  iron,  but  I  could  not
continue  this  for  head-ache;  and  he  ordered  water  to  be
thrown  over  my  head  continually  in  large  quantities,  and
this  relieved  me.  Again  I  got  better,  was  able  to  be  outside
the  bed  for  a  little  while,  then  to  be  set  upon  the  sofa,  and
by  degrees  to  sit  up  much  longer.  Yet  I  made  no  further
progress,  excitement  coming  on  violently  if  I  was  talked
to  for  long.  As  my  cough  again  troubled  me,  my  physician


108


Cure  of  intense  Pains  and  other  sufferings,


thought  there  was  some  internal  change  going  on,  and  ex¬
amined  my  chest.  He  said  the  right  side,  or  rather  lung,  was
sore  and  delicate,  and  that  I  must  be  careful,  and,  as  soon
as  I  could,  be  moved  away  for  change  of  air ;  and  he  recom¬
mended  Norwood.  So  I  went  there  and  remained  two  months,
my  cough  continuing,  and  incessant,  and  I  expectorated  much ;
nothing  quieted  the  cough,  and  it  wore  me  down  greatly,  as
well  as  distressing  my  head.  As  the  winter  was  approaching,

I  returned  home,  not  worse,  but  yet  not  better.  I  was  often
obliged  to  keep  in  bed,  my  spine  causing  me  great  suffer¬
ing,  particularly  from  the  coughing,  which  distressed  my  head
as  well.  My  physician  ordered  me  an  opium  plaister  down  the
spine  to  soothe  me,  but  I  could  not  bear  it ;  the  irritation
it  occasioned  was  so  bad  that  I  was  obliged  to  have  it  torn
off  as  quickly  as  possible,  and  my  cough  and  head-ache  still
went  on  for  more  than  fourteen  months,  and  I  expectorated
a  great  deal.  My  physician  said  it  was  useless  his  coming,
as  he  could  do  nothing  for  me,  and  directed  us  to  send  for
him  if  I  got  worse.  Thus  I  remained  for  a  long  time,  some
days  better,  some  days  worse.  The  whole  spring  and  summer
passed  away,  and  I  was  unable  to  move,  except  from  the  bed
to  the  sofa,  and  even  that  was  a  trouble  to  me.  I  sighed  for
the  fresh  air,  and  felt  it  would  do  me  good  if  I  could  breathe
it,  but  I  was  unable,  as  every  exertion  brought  on  great  pain
to  my  spine  and  head.  The  winter  was  advancing,  and  I  was
still  so  ill  I  again  saw  the  physician  who  had  last  attended
me ;  he  advised  me  by  all  means  to  be  moved,  in  as  easy  a
manner  as  I  could,  to  some  quiet  house  about  the  Regents
Park,  as  the  noise  of  our  own  house  was  too  much  for  me.
In  fact,  I  could  no  longer  bear  it,  my  nerves  were  in  such  a
sensitive  state.  My  nights  were  dreadful;  often  my  maid  was
up  with  me  half  the  night,  to  soothe  my  wretched  state,  and
the  following  day  I  was  so  ill,  I  could  bear  no  one  coming
near  me.  In  February  I  was  moved  to  St.  John's  Wood,
where  I  remained  nine  months.  The  quiet  was  most  grateful
to  me,  though  at  first  I  was  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  leeches
almost  every  day,  and  was  getting  so  bad  that  I  really  thought
my  mind  must  go.  For  hours  together  I  was  like  a  wild
person,  particularly  if  disturbed  after  the  leeches ;  my  head
got  so  weak  that  I  could  not  bear  any  noise.  I  felt  that  the  re¬
lief  from  the  leeches  was  still  very  great,  yet  they  seemed  to
be  gradually  injuring  me.  I  saw  my  physician  again,  who
said  I  must  not  have  them,  though  he  knew  not  what  to  do
for  me :  he  thought  I  could  rouse  and  exert  myself  more.
But  I  had  not  the  power :  I  really  could  not.  I  asked  him  if
he  thought  a  seton  would  benefit  me ;  he  said  perhaps  it  might.


with  Mesmerism,  by  Dr.  Elliot  son.


109


but  he  could  not  say,  and  advised  me,  if  I  wished  it,  to  try  it.
To  have  the  prospect  of  any  relief  was  so  delightful,  that  I  de¬
termined  to  try  the  seton,  and  by  his  orders,  had  one  put  in
the  nape  of  my  neck.  This  was  kept  open  a  year,  and  for  a
longer  time  than  anything  else  did  me  much  good ;  my
head-aches  were  wonderfully  relieved,  and  by  degrees  I  left
my  bed,  and  was  able  to  move  about  my  room,  and  at  last
to  get  down  stairs,  a  thing  I  had  not  done  for  many
months,  and  as  the  summer  advanced,  I  got  out  into  the
garden,  but  could  not  walk ;  and  driving  was  still  painful  to
my  spine  and  head.  Yet  I  was  better,  for  I  was  able  to  see
people  at  times,  but  was  still  obliged  to  be  quiet,  as  excite¬
ment  and  great  exhaustion  were  generally  the  result,  if  I
was  long  talked  to.  I  was  wretchedly  thin,  and  my  cough
was  again  becoming  troublesome  and  weary  to  me.  As  the
winter  was  approaching,  my  own  medical  man  (who  had  at¬
tended  all  our  family  for  years)  induced  me  to  try  a  winter
at  Hastings,  for  I  felt  the  cold  so  much ;  and  in  October  I
was  moved  there  in  a  bed  carriage,  by  railroad.  After  having
been  there  some  time,  I  began  to  feel  better,  and  when  it
was  warm,  I  went  out  for  half  an  hour  in  the  Bath  chair.
But  the  exertion  was  very  great,  and  I  could  not  walk  at  alh
I,  however,  remained  away  from  home  for  six  months,  and
was  much  better  till  within  two  months  of  my  leaving,  when
I  began  to  feel  ill  again,  but  my  complaint  seemed  now  to
have  assumed  a  different  form.  My  head-aches  were  very
bad,  though  my  seton  discharged  very  well.  A  sense  of  heavy
weight  oppressed  me  after  eating,  and  a  kind  of  torpid  state
came  over  me,  so  that  I  felt  I  could  not  move ;  and  although  I
craved  for  food  I  have  been  obliged  to  abstain,  so  wretched
was  the  state  which  eating  caused  me.  I  used  to  feel  in  a
kind  of  dreamy  existence  directly  after  eating,  with  a  wish
to  sleep,  but  if  I  did  it  was  most  disagreeable.  My  head
felt  heavy,  and  I  was  quite  unable  to  move  for  a  long  time,
and  had  a  great  deal  of  fever,  and  was  obliged  to  remain  in
my  bed,  for  I  could  not  move  about  the  room  without  violent
pains  in  my  back ;  the  seton  did  not  discharge  as  it  used,  and
it  gave  me  great  pain.  I  sent  up  to  my  physician  in  town
to  know  what  to  do ;  he  said  I  ought  by  all  means  to  return
to  town,  as  I  would  not  have  advice  at  Hastings ;  and  as  soon
as  I  was  able,  I  did,  in  a  bed  carriage.  The  next  day  my  doctor
saw  me,  he  thought  me  extremely  ill ;  I  was  miserably  thin ;
he  said  my  seton  had  literally  worn  itself  out,  and  that  it
must  be  closed  up,  as  it  was  only  injuring  me :  it  had  been
kept  open  a  year.  He  gave  me  some  medicine,  as  I  was  in
such  a  feverish  state,  and  had  a  continual  gnawing  pain  under


110


Cure  of  intense  Pains  and  other  sufferings ,

my  right  shoulder;  for  the  latter  he  dry-eupped  me.  He  tried
many  things,  and  though  I  got  better  for  a  little  while  under
these  remedies,  yet  it  was  only  for  a  little  while  I  was  better.
Taking  little  in  the  way  of  food,  I  was  greatly  reduced;
I  could  take  nothing  but  light  puddings,  and  sometimes
not  them,  for  I  was  more  troubled  by  sickness  after  eating,
and  pain  at  the  pit  of  my  stomach ;  I  was  obliged  to  go  many
hours  without  food,  although  I  longed  for  it,  as  I  could  not
often  keep  in  my  stomach  what  I  took,  and  I  felt  so  much
easier  and  lighter  when  I  took  nothing.  But  of  course  this
would  not  continue.  I  tried  various  remedies  as  my  stomach
was  so  irritable,  and  I  was  obliged  to  take  powerful  aperients.
I  continued  in  a  most  wretched  state,  never  leaving  my
bed  room  throughout  the  beautiful  spring  and  part  of  the
summer  months ;  I  was  only  able  to  lie  on  my  sofa,  and  sighed
for  fresh  air,  I  felt  so  weak  and  sinking.  Nothing  however
seemed  to  do  me  any  good,  and  I  was  heartily  sick  of  all  the
doctors ;  I  gave  up  all  remedies  and  resolved  to  trust  to  na¬
ture  again,  and,  as  I  at  times  felt  easier,  I  resolved  to  try  if
a  drive  for  a  little  while  would  benefit  me.  The  air  felt
indeed  truly  delightful,  but  my  head  suffered  much  from
the  motion  of  the  carriage,  and  I  therefore  went  out  but
twice  or  thrice,  and  began  to  get  so  ill  that  I  knew  not  what
to  do.  My  limbs  became  affected  with  violent  darting  and
gnawing  pains ;  I  was  in  my  bed  for  days,  had  no  rest  at
night,  and  was  completely  worn  out.

“  Often  has  the  pain  caused  me  to  sob  for  many  an  hour,
and  I  tried  morphine  to  give  me  sleep ;  but  it  was  of  no  avail.
I  got  so  bad  and  irritable  I  could  not  bear  myself,  and  felt  as
if  I  must  gradually  die,  at  times,  from  my  dreadful  pains  and
excitable  state.  I  therefore  determined  to  see  our  own  family
medical  attendant,  who  had  always  been  most  kind  to  me,
though,  from  living  at  a  distance,  he  had  not  attended  me
throughout  the  illness.  He  advised  me  to  see  some  other
physician  :  and  about  this  time  I  was  urged  much  to  think  of
mesmerism,  which  I  laughed  at  and  ridiculed ;  and  I  said,
‘  I  would  not  hear  of  it,  as  it  was  all  nonsense :  after  four
years  of  such  illness,  and  after  everything  had  been  tried,  to
think  of  mesmerism  doing  good  was  absurd ;  and  I  did  not
like  it  or  believe  in  it/  I  however  heard  all  that  was  said,
and  a  book  was  sent  me  with  the  case  of  a  lady  who  had  been
ill  for  fifteen  years,  and  had  tried  everything,  and  was  told
she  must  die,  when  she  heard  of  mesmerism  and  tried  it,  and
was  cured.  Yet,  though  all  this  surprised  me  very  much,  I
would  not  listen  to  being  mesmerised.  I  asked  the  opinion
of  our  family  medical  attendant,  and  he  said  it  was  a  thing


with  Mesmerism ,  by  Dr.  Elliotson.  Ill

that  must  be  left  entirely  to  my  own  decision ;  lie  had  seen  a
remarkable  case  of  a  child,  who  had  been  cured  by  it ;  and,
though  he  did  not  himself  understand  it,  he  would,  whenever
I  wished,  call  on  Dr.  Elliotson,  and  ask  him  to  see  me.  After
thinking  over  it  a  long  time,  I  determined  to  see  Dr.  Elliot¬
son,  and  ask  whether  he  thought  it  might  in  some  degree
alleviate  my  sufferings,  although  I  had  no  faith  in  it,  and  felt
nothing  now  would  do  good.  My  doctor  called  on  Dr.  El¬
liotson,  and  told  him  of  my  case,  and  how  I  had  suffered
and  was  still  suffering;  also  that  one  physician  had  said
my  right  lung  was  diseased.  Dr.  Elliotson  said  he  must
see  me  first  to  judge  for  himself;  he  had  known  mesmerism
work  wonders  where  everything  had  failed,  and  as  I  so  much
wanted  to  be  soothed  and  to  obtain  rest,  he  did  not  see  why
it  should  not  be  tried.  Dr.  Elliotson  came,  and  after  examin¬
ing  my  chest  very  carefully  with  the  stethoscope,  told  me
-  there  was  no  disease  anywhere  about  the  lungs ;  that  my
cough  was  entirely  from  nervous  irritation  of  the  air  pas¬
sages;  and,  after  some  farther  examination,  he  began  to
mesmerise  me.  I  shall  never  forget  the  effect  it  had  on  me
the  first  day,  it  was  so  dreadful ;  I  was  all  the  time  in  a
wretched  state  of  weakness,  and  could  not  sit  up  on  the  sofa
without  being  bent  double.  As  he  made  the  passes,  I  became
most  restless  and  started  up  from  the  sofa,  so  that  my  own
doctor,  Dr.  Elliotson,  and  my  maid,  were  obliged  to  hold  me
to  keep  me  quiet.  This  continued  for  some  time,  and  at  last,
after  great  patience  on  Dr.  Elliotson's  part,  he  got  me  quiet,
and  I  burst  into  a  violent  fit  of  sobbing  and  was  relieved.
Dr.  Elliotson  remained  with  me  nearly  two  hours,  and  was
most  kind.  After  trying  to  cheer  me  up,  he  left  me,  and
desired  I  might  be  kept  very  quiet,  saying  he  would  see  me
the  next  day.

“  My  state  after  he  left  me  was  most  dreadful.  I  was
again  seized  with  most  violent  hysterics,  jumped  up  off  the
sofa,  and  became  quite  unmanageable.  My  maid  was  forced
to  hold  me  to  keep  me  quiet ;  and  after  an  attack  of  two
hours,  I  sunk  down  perfectly  exhausted,  and  went  to  bed.
But  no  sleep  came  upon  me ;  and  the  next  day,  though  I  was
up,  I  felt  so  strange  and  ill,  that  I  wished  I  had  never  tried
mesmerism,  it  so  completely  seemed  to  have  routed  (I  may
say)  and  disturbed  my  whole  system.  However,  Dr.  Elliotson
persevered  every  day  for  nine  months,  half  an  hour  at  a  time.
His  great  kindness,  patience  and  perseverance  I  shall  never
forget.  He  was  always  the  same,  and  unlike  all  my  other  medi¬
cal  men,  who  had  seemed  to  imagine  I  might  get  well  if  I
tried  ;  just  as  if  I  would  not  if  I  could,  and  I  have  often  cried


112  Cure  of  intense  Pains  and  other  sufferings,

for  hours  to  be  what  I  once  was.  And  really  I  used  to  wonder
how  he  could  go  on  from  day  to  day,  for  there  were  no  visible
effect  for  more  than  three  months.  Certainly  after  the  first
two  or  three  days  I  began  to  be  much  quieter  while  he  was
mesmerising  me,  and  at  last  I  lay  quite  quiet,  and  felt  no
wish  to  move,  and  the  cough  left  me.  He  encouraged  me,
by  telling  me  it  might  be  many  days,  perhaps  many  weeks,
before  sleep  came  on,  but  he  thought  that  when  it  did,  my
relief  would  be  great.  I  still  had  no  faith  in  mesmerism,
and  often,  after  he  has  left  me,  have  I  thought  to  myself
what  nonsense  it  was  going  on  with  it,  and  have  longed  to  ask
him  to  give  me  up.  But  my  maid  persuaded  me  to  persevere,
as  she  thought,  though  it  was  very  slight,  she  could  see  an
improvement  working  in  me,  and  that  I  was  calmer,  and  not
so  irritable,  as  when  Hr.  Elliotson  first  saw  me.

“  I  was  taking  violent  aperient  medicine  every  night,  as  I
was  obliged.  He  told  me  I  must  begin  to  leave  it  off  by
degrees,  it  was  injuring  me  greatly,  and  that  mesmerism
would  not  take  effect  as  long  as  I  did.  So  by  degrees  I  left
it  off,  and  at  the  end  of  two  months  I  began  to  take  only  a
dessert  spoonful  of  castor  oil,  and  that  only  once  in  five  days ;
and  at  last  a  teaspoonful  was  sufficient,  and  that  once  in  ten
days.  I  now,  at  the  end  of  three  months,  began  to  feel  a
change ;  something  different  seemed  really  now  to  be  taking
place.  I  could  sit  up  better  on  my  sofa,  and  my  appearance
got  better,  not  so  ghastly  and  worn  ;  and  though  the  improve¬
ment  was  slight,  still  I  felt  something  which  I  had  never
before  experienced,  and  Hr.  Elliotson  himself  began  to  think
I  was  really  mending.  Every  day  I  became  quieter ;  my  head
was  better,  and  my  limbs  also.  He  ordered  my  maid  to  mes¬
merise  my  limbs  at  night,  to  ease  the  pains ;  and  I  obtained
relief.  My  rest  at  night  improved ;  nightmare,  that  I  used
to  be  horribly  subject  to,  entirely  left  me ;  and  I  felt  I  was
getting  on.

“  When  Hr.  Elliotson  first  attended  me,  I  was  continually
in  bed ;  but  gradually  I  was  able  to  leave  it  oftener  and  longer:
every  day  for  a  week  or  fortnight  together,  and  so  on,  until
I  seldom  kept  it  for  a  whole  day.  Of  course  at  times  I  was
not  so  well;  but  when  I  think  of  the  improvement  that  took
place,  I  am  thunderstruck.  My  depression  was  not  nearly
so  great,  and  I  could  sit  in  an  easy  chair  for  some  time,  and
felt  lighter.  Formerly  I  would  be  for  hours  totally  unable  to
speak,  and  so  depressed  that  the  tears  used  to  roll  down  my
cheeks  from  the  state  of  exhaustion  and  suffering  that  was
upon  me ;  and  no  one  knows  how  utterly  wretched  I  have
been.  All  this  had  left  me ;  and  when  mesmerism  had  been


with  Mesmerism ,  by  Dr.  Elliotson.


113


tried  for  four  or  five  months,  I  began  to  feel  a  different  crea¬
ture.  The  spring  too  was  fast  approaching,  and  Dr.  Elliotson
allowed  me  to  go  out  for  a  drive  for  half  an  hour.  Though  I
was  carried  up  and  down  stairs,  the  exertion  was  very  great
to  me,  but  I  persevered  by  his  directions,  only  being  allowed
to  go  out  at  first  once  a  week,  then  twice,  and  so  on  to  every
day.  The  air  indeed  was  delicious,  though  my  exhaustion
was  very  great ;  but  nevertheless  I  bore  it  wonderfully  well,
and  by  degrees  walked  down  stairs — a  thing  I  had  not  done
for  many  months  before  he  first  saw  me ;  and  after  a  time  I
walked  up  slowly  as  well  as  down,  and  next  was  able  to  drive
to  Kensington  Gardens  in  the  morning,  and  walk  for  ten
minutes,  and  gradually  up  to  half  an  hour.

“  Mesmerism  now  began  to  take  great  effect,  and  I  began
to  believe  in  it  most  truly.  A  sensation  of  torpidity  came
over  me,  so  that  I  felt  I  could  not  move  off  the  sofa,  even  if
any  one  had  attempted  to  kick  the  door  down  in  order  to  get
into  my  room  (as  my  maid  always  locked  the  door  after  Dr.
Elliotson  left,  that  no  one  might  disturb  me).  I  used  some¬
times  to  remain  in  this  stupified  state  for  two  hours,  feeling
more  like  a  person,  I  should  think,  who  was  dead  drunk ;
when  the  effects  went  off,  I  used  to  get  off  the  sofa,  and  I
shall  never  forget  my  face  on  looking  at  it ;  I  was  so  altered,
just  like  a  tipsy  person.  But  by  remaining  quiet  for  some
time,  all  this  went  off,  and  in  the  after  part  of  the  day  I  felt
as  if  I  were  quite  well — so  well  and  exhilarated  I  could  do
anything,  and  often  have  done  too  much  for  my  strength.
Indeed,  my  sister  happening  one  evening  to  see  me  from  a
window  pacing  up  and  down  my  room,  could  not  believe  it
was  I,  and  looked  twice  to  convince  herself ;  so  surprised  was
she  after  seeing  me  lie  like  a  dead  person  caring  for  nought
so  long,  that  she  could  not  comprehend  it.  No  one  indeed
can  tell  what  a  truly  happy  and  blessed  relief  was  now  upon
me.  I  never  felt  such  an  exhilarated  feeling  as  from  the
effects  of  mesmerism.  I  lost  all  nervous  excitement ;  my
whole  appearance  was  improved ;  I  could  read  now  a  little
and  see  more  people  without  suffering,  and  began  to  feel  as
if  I  were  getting  like  my  own  self.  Sleep  came  gradually
upon  me,  so  that  often  after  Dr.  Elliotson  had  left  me  I  have
slept  unknowingly  for  more  than  half  an  hour,  and  the  re¬
freshment  afterwards  was  like  I  know  not  what,  and  did  me
more  good  than  two  hours*  common  sleep.  I  used  to  wake
up  wondering  what  had  happened  and  where  I  was,  and  was
not  aware  my  maid  had  left  the  room ;  and  yet  formerly,  not
even  a  person  slightly  whispering  or  working  with  a  needle
could  be  allowed  in  my  room,  so  great  was  my  agony  from


114


Cure  of  intense  Pains  and  other  sufferings,


the  noise.  In  fact  mesmerism  was  working  wonders,  and  I
was  obliged  to  ask  Dr.  Elliotson  to  diminish  the  time,  which
he  did  to  twenty  minutes,  as  the  effect  was  so  very  great  that
I  could  not  recover  for  hours  from  the  stupified  state.  He
gradually  decreased  it  to  fifteen  minutes,  and  then  to  ten.
Even  this  now  was  becoming  too  overpowering,  and  he  tried
five  minutes,  which  was  enough ;  till  at  last  three  minutes
did ;  and  as  he  was  going  to  Switzerland  in  September,  he
advised  me  to  leave  it  off,  and  not  to  be  mesmerised  unless  I
felt  ill.  He  had  shewn  my  maid  how  to  do  it,  and  therefore
I  could  always  be  mesmerised  if  necessary.  I  began  now  to
get  about  like  any  other  being.  I  never  took  during  the
whole  nine  months  any  medicine  beyond  aperients,  and  those
less  and  less;  I  took  but  little  nourishment,  and  only  cold
water  and  light  puddings,  and  often  not  them ;  so  that  really
I  may  say  mesmerism  was  my  only  remedy.

“  I  can  never  cease  to  look  back  with  feelings  of  gratitude
to  Dr.  Elliotson  for  his  great  thought,  kindness  and  patience  ;
and  what  I  feel  at  my  wonderful  recovery  it  is  impossible  to
express ;  indeed  I  sometimes  fancy  I  am  dreaming  now,  so
strange  is  it  to  be  well  and  about.  I  thought  if  mesmerism
could  even  quiet  my  wretched  state  it  would  be  a  blessing,
but  certainly  never  expected  to  be  as  well  as  ever,  and  more
active  than  ever  I  was ;  and  when  I  reflect  that  everything
had  been  tried,  and  think  over  all  I  have  gone  through,  and
the  heartless  speeches  that  were  made  concerning  my  getting
well  if  I  chose  to  exert  myself,  whereas  I  was  never  one  to
give  way,  and  was  always  most  active,  I  am  so  astonished
that  I  cannot  at  all  comprehend  it.  I  am  now  quite  well,
able  to  take  very  long  walks,  and  still  drink  nothing  but
water,  and  take  not  as  much  nourishment  as  many  take  who
do  not  walk  as  I  do ;  and  when  many  people  who  had  not  seen
me  for  four  years  meet  me,  they  start  back  and  tell  me  it
must  be  a  resurrection,  and  that  I  am  a  living  wonder.  Yet,
notwithstanding  all  this,  I  fear  many  will  not  believe  mes¬
merism  has  cured  me,  or  that  there  is  anything  in  it.  I  only
wish  they  could  feel  the  effects  I  have  felt  from  it,  when  gra¬
dually  it  worked  upon  my  system,  at  first  so  uncomfortably,
and  then  so  soothingly.  I  cannot  bear  to  hear  any  one  for  a
moment  laugh  at  it,  for  to  it  alone,  I  must  maintain,  do  I
owe  my  recovery.  As  I  said,  Dr.  Elliotson’s  great  attention
and  kindness  will  ever  be  remembered  by  me  with  feelings  of
the  greatest  gratitude ;  and  much  do  I  regret  I  did  not  try
mesmerism  long  before,  for  I  would  all  along  have  given
worlds  to  have  recovered,  so  unlike  my  former  self  was  I
when  in  this  wretched  state  of  suffering.”


115


with  Mesmerism ,  by  Dr.  Elliotson.

The  painful  excitement  which  the  patient  in  the  preceding
account  describes  as  the  result  of  my  first  mesmerising  her
was  possibly  only  an  hysterical  emotion  at  the  novelty  of  the
measure  and  of  myself,  who  had  never  seen  her  before.  I
have  known  occurrences  of  this  kind  in  other  instances  of  the
first  mesmerisation.  I  recollect  that  when  Dr.  Roots  and
myself  allowed  Mr.  Chenevix,  in  1828,  to  make  trials  of  mes¬
merism  on  some  of  our  patients  in  St.  Thomas's  Hospital,
a  female,  under  the  care  of  Dr.  Roots  for  violent  hysterical
fits,  had  a  sharp  one  almost  as  soon  as  the  manipulations
were  begun  the  first  and  only  time,  Dr.  Roots  not  allow¬
ing  her  or  others  to  be  mesmerised  again,  and  pronouncing
mesmerism  to  be  injurious,  and  since  then,  I  understand,
not  entertaining  a  more  favourable  opinion  of  it.  An
epileptic  young  man  from  Welchpool  had  a  violent  epilep¬
tic  fit  when  I  first  saw  him  and  mesmerised  him :  but  he
was  mesmerised  regularly  from  that  day  and  never  had  ano¬
ther, — becoming  perfectly  cured,  and  his  case,  with  all  its  in-
interesting  mesmeric  phenomena,  is  detailed  in  the  first  volume
of  The  Zoist.  Various  catchings,  pains,  and  other  annoyances,
even  fits,  when  the  patient  is  subject  to  them,  may  occur  from
mesmerism  at  first,  and  recur  at  every  mesmerisation  for  some
time ;  but  I  have  always  found  these  inconveniences  gradually
and  completely  disappear  if  mesmerism  was  persevered  with.*
Still  I  cannot  assert  that  these  are  not  results  of  mesmeric
influence  independent  of  emotion.

For  mesmerism  is  a  much  more  remarkable  power  than
many  suppose.  The  mesmerism  of  one  person  will  affect  a
certain  individual  differently  from  the  mesmerism  of  another  :
and  this  even  in  regard  to  local  effects, — when  employed  but
locally ;  and  where  imagination  cannot  be  conceived  to  have
any  influence.  A  variety  of  persons  will,  for  instance,  induce
a  variety  of  sensations  in  a  mesmerised  knee  or  arm.  Some
are  much  more  affected  by  one  mesmeriser  than  by  another.
Some  derive  no  benefit  from  one  mesmeriser,  and  great  bene¬
fit  from  another.  Also  changes  occur.  I  have  a  patient
whom  I  send  to  sleep  with  one  pass,  or  indeed  by  merely
holding  my  hand  for  a  second  before  her  face,  and  whom  I
benefit  exceedingly.  But  such  is  her  susceptibility,  that  if
another,  not  to  say  makes  a  pass  before  her,  but  stands  or
sits  near  her  in  her  mesmeric  state,  unless  that  person  is
already  in  the  mesmeric  state,  she  is  rendered  very  ill  and
exhausted.  The  same  occurs  in  her  natural  state  if  any  one
but  myself  for  a  moment  attempts  to  mesmerise  her.  For¬
merly  a  single  pass  from  myself,  even  when  she  was  in  her

*  Zoist ,  Yol.  II.,  p.  199.


116  Cure  of  intense  Pains  and  other  sufferings,

natural  state,  made  her  very  ill.  I  had  long  attended  her,
and  long  did  not  propose  mesmerism  to  her.  But  the  attempt
by  myself  or  a  young  lady  who  knew  her  well  made  her  ill
for  many  days :  whereas  her  sister,  who  was  not  like  us  in
good  health,  sent  her  to  sleep  for  many  hours  twice  a  day
with  the  greatest  benefit.  At  length  her  sister  did  her  no
good ;  and  my  mesmerism  was,  and  now  is,  not  only  borne,
but  productive  of  the  very  highest  benefit.  A  mesmeriser
therefore  need  not  feel  hurt  because  his  mesmerism  disagrees
with  a  particular  individual.  The  very  person  who  agrees  with
his  patient  may  disagree  with  another.  It  is  wrong  to  urge
perseverance  with  himself  when  he  does  not  suit  a  patient.
By  making  the  attempt  but  slightly,  however,  and  by  behav¬
ing  in  the  very  kindest  manner,  his  mesmerism  may  at  last
be  borne :  and  it  may  be  unobjectionable  to  make  the  attempt
slightly  at  distant  intervals.  It  is  probable,  nay  almost  cer¬
tain,  that  imagination,  without  the  patient  being  at  all  aware
of  it,  may  contribute  to  the  degree  and  character  of  the
effects  of  different  mesmerisers  in  some  cases.*

The  ultimate  augmentation  of  the  power  of  mesmerism,
even  to  inconvenience,  that  occurred  in  the  present  case,  I
have  noticed  in  others.  It  was  remarkable  in  the  young
gentleman  from  Welchpool,  permanently  cured  of  epilepsy.
Daily  mesmerism  at  length  produced  head-ache,  inability  to
collect  his  thoughts,  flushing  and  heat  of  his  face ;  and  it
was  performed  but  every  other  day  for  a  week ;  then  every
fourth  day ;  then  but  once  a  wreek ;  and  then  omitted  for
good.f  Mary  Ann,  spoken  of  in  so  many  Zoists,%  has  been
mesmerised  daily  for  epilepsy  above  four  years.  The  more
she  was  mesmerised  the  better  she  was.  Finding  her  im¬
prove  very  little,  I  not  only  allowed  her  to  sleep  three  or  four
hours  every  morning  at  my  house,  one  pass  being  sufficient
for  this,  but  her  father  always  sent  her  into  mesmeric  sleep
as  soon  as  she  was  in  bed,  and  this  sleep  was  allowed  to  ex¬
pend  itself,  as  it  always  did  in  three  or  four  hours,  running
into  ordinary  sleep,  the  proof  of  which  was  her  always  re¬
membering  in  the  mesmeric  state  the  next  day  all  her
thoughts  and  everything  else  which  had  occurred  during  the
first  three  or  four  hours  of  her  sleep  the  previous  night,  and
no  more.  This  additional  mesmerisation  for  some  time  did
her  good;  and  if  I  deepened  her  coma  by  laying  my  hand
upon  her  forehead,  this  did  her  good.  But  at  length  the
additional  quantity  and  the  additional  degree  did  her  harm :
rendered  her  faint  and  feeble  for  perhaps  hours.  If,  in  her

*  Zoist ,  Vol.  II.,  p.  49,  52.  f  Zoist,  Vol.  I.,  p.  426.

+  Vol.  II.,  pp.  216,  247,  388.  Vol.  III.,  pp.  322,  374,  454.  Vol.  IV.  p.  53.


with  Mesmerism i,  by  Dr.  Elliotson .


117


mesmeric  state,  sire  mesmerises  any  one,  or  touches  for  a
minute  any  one  in  the  mesmeric  state,  so  powerful  is  the
effect,  that  she  always  has  dropped  senseless  and  exhausted.
But  now,  if  even  another  is  mesmerised  by  passes  in  the
same  room  where  she  is  in  the  mesmeric  state,  she  drops
senseless  and  exhausted,  and  her  limbs  can  no  longer  be
stiffened.  There  is  not  a  spark  of  affectation  or  fancy  in  her.
The  effects  I  know  to  be  genuinely  mesmeric.  I  now  no
longer  attribute  to  fancy  the  restlessness  and  faintness  which
I  have  seen  some  persons  exhibit  when  in  a  room  where
others  were  being  mesmerised.  In  Mary  Ann  I  now  refrain
from  producing  deep  mesmeric  coma,  and  from  having  her
mesmerised  more  than  once  a  day  :  and  she  is  decidedly  im¬
proving.  The  ultimate  power  of  mesmerism  in  the  young
lady  whose  case  forms  the  subject  of  this  paper,  and  its  gra¬
dually  increasing  production  of  unpleasant  effects,  are  very
remarkable.  Could  I  have  induced  absolute  coma,  possibly
she  would  have  experienced  none  of  that  miserable  confused
state.  But  she  never  went  to  sleep  while  I  was  with  her;  and
I  could  not  deepen  her  heaviness,  for  she  was  made  uncom¬
fortable  by  longer  continuance  of  the  downward  passes  before
her  face  by  which  I  always  mesmerised  her,  or  by  placing  the
points  of  my  fingers  upon  her  closed  eyes  or  my  hands
upon  her  forehead :  and  neither  metals,  nor  a  very  large
magnet,  nor  crystals,  exerted  any  power  over  her.  All  this
holds  good  with  medicines.  Some  persons  are  little  or  not
at  all  affected  by  a  particular  drug  :  some  are  exquisitely
susceptible  of  its  effects  :  some  are  affected  agreeably,  others
disagreeably :  and  in  some  a  complete  change  will  occur.
Persons  insusceptible,  or  almost  insusceptible,  of  the  effects
of  a  medicine,  may  become  very  susceptible  of  them  :  and
those  with  whom  a  particular  medicine  always  did  good,  or
at  least  agreed,  may  ultimately  find  it  not  merely  useless
but  positively  injurious  :  and  there  is  no  more  evidence  of
imagination  in  the  case  of  mesmerism  than  of  these  medi¬
cines.  Attention  to  these  points,  and  the  adjustment  of  the
force,  is  no  less  indispensable  in  mesmerism  than  in  the  exhi¬
bition  of  medicines.  The  minutest  amount  of  mesmerism
may  be  requisite  in  a  case  which  once  required  all  the  mesmer¬
ism  that  could  be  bestowed.

Imagination  cannot  be  alleged  as  the  cause  of  the  cure.
The  patient  had  strong  sense  and  strong  resolution,  and  a
thorough  contempt  for  affectation,  fancies,  whims,  and  the
desire  of  sympathy  and  notice.  It  was  long  before  she  could
be  induced  to  try  mesmerism ;  and,  long  after  she  began  to
try  it,  she  continued  to  regard  it  as  nonsense.  She  had  no


118  Cure  of  intense  Pains  and  other  sufferings,

opinion  of  it  till,  to  her  surprise,  she  found  herself  im¬
proving.  Exactly  in  the  same  way,  Rosina,  whose  charming
case  is  recorded  in  the  second  volume  of  The  Zoist,  submitted
to  be  mesmerised  solely  to  please  her  father,  and  regarded  it
as  nonsense  till  she  actually  found  her  fits  were  less  frequent
and  her  illness  less  after  each  fit.*  Yet  I  have  no  doubt  that
imagination  has  great  influence  over  mesmeric  patients.  I
feel  certain  that  there  is  first  the  genuine  mesmeric  influence
transmitted  from  one  person  to  another,  often  unconsciously
in  regard  to  one  or  both  parties,  and  even  transmissible  by
the  intervention  of  inanimate  substances,  and  it  is  perhaps
a  modification  of  galvanism,  magnetism,  and  other  powers
of  inanimate  matter,  which  may  be  fundamentally  one  and
fundamentally  the  same  as  that  which  produces  vital  pheno¬
mena  and  the  mental  phenomena  of  the  brain  or  other  mental
organs,  if  others  there  be.  But  I  am  as  certain  that,  secondly ,
imagination,  suggestion,  emotion,  or  whatever  name  we  choose
to  employ,  has  a  frequent  share  in  producing  the  phenomena;
and  that,  thirdly ,  the  mere  will  of  another  person  very  often
is  able  to  produce  them,  though  I  have  never  been  able  to
make  it  even  probable  in  any  trials  I  have  made  that  my
will  has  had  any  share  in  producing  the  phenomena  which  I
have  effected  by  mesmeric  means.  A  very  remarkable  ex¬
ample  of  the  true  mesmeric  influence  was  that  of  Mr.  Henry
S.  Thompson  and  a  lady,  who,  being  both  determined  scep¬
tics,  resolved  to  play  a  trick  upon  a  party.  It  was  arranged
that  he  should  make  passes  and  she  go  to  sleep  and  exhibit
phenomena ;  when  to  his  utter  astonishment  his  passes  proved
effective,  and  the  lady  fell  into  a  true  mesmeric  coma.f

The  present  case  affords  an  additional  proof  that  the  com¬
mon  idea  of  sleep  or  some  other  sensible  effect  being  requisite

*  “She  had  continued  to  come  to  me  in  obedience  to  her  father,  but,  as  she
has  since  told  me,  still  regarded  the  affair  as  a  piece  of  folly ,  not  believing  that
I  ever  sent  her  to  sleep ,  and  determined  not  to  sleep.  She  found,  however,  that
her  fits  were  much  less  frequent,  and  that  she  suffered  much  less  after  they  were
over,  and  this  made  her  begin  to  think  there  was  something  in  it :  and  no  wonder,
for  she  had,  independently  of  the  mesmeric  process  and  state,  but  three  in
eighteen  days,  each  milder  than  the  preceding,  and  the  last  without  a  struggle.
The  ignorant  argument  of  mesmeric  effects  being  all  the  result  of  imagination  was
absolutely  ridiculous  in  her  case.  She  both  despised  mesmerism,  and  defied  it :
and  her  intelligence  and  resolution  are  of  no  ordinary  amount.  But  she  could
resist  no  longer,  and  is  now  as  disgusted  with  those  who  talk  their  childish  non¬
sense  against  the  reality  and  utility  of  mesmerism,  as  she  was  originally  with
those  who  believed  its  truth.  Even  a  little  sister  who  used  to  run  out  of  the
room  when  her  fit  began,  remarked  the  improvement  in  the  violence  and  number
of  her  fits,  and  said  in  a  week,  ‘  Mother,  what  a  good  thing  it  is  you  took  Rosina
to  that  new  doctor.’  The  excitement  of  an  attack  by  the  mesmeric  process  gra¬
dually  declined.” — Vol.  II.,  p.  199.

f  See  Zoist ,  Vol.  I.,  p.  72,  165,  334.  Vol.  II.,  p.  197.


with  Mesmerism ,  by  Dr.  Elliotson.


119


to  benefit  from  mesmerism  is  unfounded.  No  sleep  nor
any  sensible  effect  resulted  while  yet  the  cure  began  and
proceeded.*

It  exhibits  also  the  necessity  for  steady  and  long  persever¬
ance  in  the  absence  of  all  prospect  of  improvement.  For
three  months  I  was  not  able  to  discern  any  improvement  nor
any  effect.  I  confess  I  began  to  feel  a  little  despair.  But  I
knew  how  slow  are  many  of  nature^s  results ;  I  knew  no
reason  why  I  should  not  succeed  ;  and  I  went  calmly  on  as  I
have  done  in  supporting  mesmerism  against  the  efforts  of
nearly  all  the  profession.  I  have  seen  some  mesmerisers  give
up  a  case  in  a  few  months,  or  weeks ;  or  even  not  persevere
if  there  was  no  sensible  effect  of  some  kind  the  first  or  second
time  of  mesmerising.  Patients  and  their  friends  may  be  excused
such  conduct  on  the  score  of  ignorance  :  but  those  who  take
upon  themselves  to  practise  mesmerism  should  know  better.

This  case  proves  the  error  of  a  common  fancy  that  mes¬
merism  is  the  effect  of  a  strong  person  upon  a  weaker :  and
that  the  weak  are  the  most  susceptible.  I  have  often  at  once
powerfully  affected  persons  of  fair  strength  and  health  :  and
very  often  have  persevered  a  very  considerable  time  day  after
day  without  causing  any  effect  with  persons  of  extreme
debility,  debility  being  usually  attended  with  irritability  which
probably  resisted  the  influence.-}-  While  this  lady  was  very
weak,  I  was  not  aware  of  any  effect;  and,  as  she  regained  her
strength,  the  power  of  mesmerism  became  more  and  more
manifest,  and  at  length  became  painfully  great.  So  in  ordi¬
nary  medicine,  during  a  severe  disease  doses  are  borne  and
required  which  disagree  as  the  disease  declines,  and  cannot
be  borne  at  all  when  it  ceases.  In  very  low  fever  and  in
violent  pains,  a  quantity  of  wine  is  taken  without  inconveni¬
ence  and  with  benefit  that  excites  injuriously  as  the  health
returns,  and  we  have  gradually  to  lessen  the  amount.

If  this  case  affords  important  mesmeric  instruction,  it
furnishes  a  grave  lesson  to  those  medical  men  who  scoff  at
mesmerism.  Here  was  a  fellow-creature  of  the  gentle  sex
suffering  by  no  fault  of  her  own  the  severest  torments.
Several  of  the  most  popular  practitioners  in  the  highest  cir¬
cles  were  called  in  :  and  no  doubt  did  their  best.  But  to
what  did  their  efforts  amount  ?  After  large  expense,  and  the
actual  exasperation  of  all  the  sufferings  by  many  of  their
measures,  she  was  in  the  end  just  as  bad  as  ever;  and  I  feel
convinced  that,  had  nothing  been  done,  she  would  not  have
been  worse  in  the  long  run,  and  in  many  respects  would  have

*  Zoist,  Vol.  I.,  p.  182;  Vol.  III.,  p.  206.

+  Zoist,  Yol.  I.,  p.  180;  Vol.  IV.,  p.  470.

VOL.  V.


K


120  Cure  of  intense  Pains  and  other  sufferings,

been  much  better.  They  practised  no  better  than  the  hum¬
blest  general  practitioner  of  the  village  or  the  obscure  street :
no  better  than  any  practitioner  who  lived  a  thousand  years
ago.  But  if  they  did  no  better,  they  did  no  worse  than
others  would  have  done.  They  practised  according  to  the
present  imperfect  state  of  medical  science.  Yet  I  must  differ
from  them  in  many  of  their  measures.  I  regret  the  injunc¬
tion  to  excite  her  and  distract  her  with  noise  and  other
harsh  measures,  while  her  nerves  were  all  agonizingly  sen¬
sitive.  This  practice  was  the  same  as  ordering  a  man  with
an  inflamed  eye  to  be  exposed  to  the  sun  with  his  eyelids  held
open,  or  as  pouring  brandy  into  an  inflamed  stomach.  The
excessive  leeching,  the  blistering,  and  strong  physic,  were  all
measures  which  I  would  not  have  employed.  Neither  should
I  for  a  moment  have  hinted  to  her  or  any  one  so  unjust  an
opinion  as  that  she  could  prevent  her  sufferings  and  would
get  well  when  she  thought  proper.  Such  views  appear  to  me
erroneous  in  these  diseases  of  the  nervous  system.  The  ex¬
quisite  sensitiveness  of  various  nerves,  and  the  mental  agony
in  these  cases,  is  just  as  real  as  the  pain  of  pleurisy.  The
various  morbid  sensations  of  different  nerves  in  these  cases,  as
well  as  occasional  strange  inclinations  and  thoughts  which  we
witness,  are  all  real.  The  inferences  of  danger  which  patients
in  nervous  diseases  draw  from  their  sufferings  are  unfounded:
but  their  sufferings  are  as  real  as  they  represent.  They  may
not  be  sensitive  to  noise  and  other  things  at  one  moment,  and
be  very  sensitive  at  another,  perhaps  the  next,  moment;  but  it
is  just  the  same  with  the  states  of  the  nerves  that  cause  the
shootings  of  tic  douloureux  or  convulsions.  A  patient  may
be  free  from  these  one  moment  and  agonized  or  distorted  the
next.  Nervous  patients  are  too  often  very  cruelly  treated.
When  not  very  bad  they  may  help  themselves  by  exertion ;
just  as  a  madman  near  sanity  may  by  some  argument  ad¬
dressed  to  him  shake  off  his  diseased  idea :  but  they  can  no
more  by  effort  cure  themselves  of  their  agonies  while  in  full
force  than  the  inmates  of  Bedlam  can  be  cured  by  reasoning.*
Some  medical  men  behave  unworthily  to  their  patients
when  no  better ;  stoutly  declaring  that  they  are  better,  and
attempting  to  bully  them  into  a  confession  that  they  are  bet¬
ter,  while  the  poor  creatures  feel  and  know  they  are  no  better :
and  I  have  witnessed  this  both  when  the  object  was  to  con¬
tinue  attendance  upon  a  private  patient,  and  in  hospital  prac¬
tice  from  unwillingness  to  admit  the  imperfection  of  their

*  My  readers  will  remember  the  absurdities  of  Mrs.  Chick,  who  considered  that
poor  Mrs.  Dombey  had  only  to  “  make  an  effort and  actually  perished  for  want
of  having  made  “  an  effort .”


with  Mesmerism,  by  Dr.  Elliotson.


121


art, — and  even  when  the  patients  had  no  nervous  affection
and  were  steadily  approaching  the  grave.

What  is  the  grave  lesson  to  medical  men  in  the  innumerable
cases  which  they  know  by  woful  experience  they  cannot  cure,
or  in  which,  though  they  have  hoped  to  effect  a  cure,  they  are
baffled?

I  have  always  urged  upon  the  mesmeric  world  and  upon
patients  that  mesmerism  should  be  regarded  as  a  holy  thing
— a  thing  involving  the  most  solemn  responsibilities  of  striving
with  all  simplicity  and  earnestness  of  purpose  to  benefit  our
fellow-creatures,  and  of  regarding  ourselves  as  placed  in  a
sacred  relation,  demanding  perfect  integrity  and  perfect
purity  of  feeling.  The  person  who  holds  not  these  convic¬
tions,  and  acts  not  entirely  upon  them,  is  unfit  to  mesmerise,
and  should  be  detested  and  openly  discountenanced  by  us
all :  equally  with  the  medical  person  who  forgets  his  solemn
responsibilities  in  the  confidential  intercourse  which  his  pro¬
fession  allows  him.  But  I  must  urge  upon  the  medical  world
and  all  those  who  may  have  influence  over  the  treatment  of
invalids,  that  they  likewise  have  a  solemn  responsibility  in
regard  to  mesmerism.  Here  is  a  simple  and  innocent  method,
alleged  by  very  numerous  persons  of  respectability  to  have
effected  very  numerous  cures  of  diseases  which  had  proved
too  stubborn  for  all  the  established  methods  of  medicine  and
surgery  in  the  hands  of  the  most  eminent  as  well  as  of
merely  popular  practitioners,  and  to  have  procured  alleviation
and  comfort  in  incurable  cases  when  the  established  methods
had  done  not  even  this.  Such  endless  cases  are  fully  detailed
with  every  personal  reference  which  can  be  desired.  No  facts
in  medical  records  are  more  satisfactorily  presented.  The  false¬
hoods  of  those  who  have  previously  attended  the  patients  in
vain,  the  shocking  slanders  of  these  men  and  others  leagued
with  them,  are  too  gross  to  deceive:  and  the  previous  notoriety
of  the  cases,  and  the  living  testimony  of  the  patients  with  the
full-blown  proofs  of  cure  in  their  countenances  and  persons,
render  impotent  every  attempt  to  set  aside  the  facts.  Nearly
all  medical  men  profess  to  be  Christians  :  many  vent  religious
sentiments  in  season  and  out  of  season,  in  their  lectures  and
their  publications,  are  seen  regularly  at  church,  place  re¬
ligious  books  about  the  rooms  into  which  their  patients
are  shewn,  and  unsparingly  pronounce  those  of  their  profes¬
sion,  whom  from  merely  some  bad  feeling  they  dislike,  to  be
irreligious,  infidels,  even  atheists,*  or  something  else,  the  re-

*  Not  only  were  the  terms  infidel  and  atheist  bestowed  upon  Newton  and
Locke,  hut  Christ  himself  is  in  the  list  of  Atheists  published  in  the  Dictionnaire
des  Atlit es.

K  2


122  Cure  of  intense  Pains  and  other  sufferings ,  fyc.

proacli  of  which  they  know  is  calculated  to  do  injury  to  the
best  man  in  the  present  ignorant  and  immoral  state  of  society.
And  yet  these  virtuous  men  forget  that  religion  is  a  farce,  if
it  values  people  for  their  mere  opinions  upon  mysterious,
supernatural,  incomprehensible  matters,  such  opinions  not
being  the  result  of  proof,  usually  springing  from  the  feelings
and  external  influences,  and  requiring  infinitely  more  know¬
ledge  and  hard  thought  than  fall  to  the  lot  of  one  person  in
ten  thousand ;  if  it  does  not  penetrate  the  whole  frame,  influ¬
ence  our  very  smallest  actions,  and  engender  perfect  goodwill
and  commiseration  for  those  whom  we  think  in  error  and  that
modesty  which  renders  us  aware  of  our  scanty  amount  of
knowledge  and  our  disposition  to  proud  injustice ;  and  if  it
does  not  render  us  anxious  to  learn  all  that  can  be  taught
us  which  is  calculated  to  enable  us  to  be  more  useful  to  our
fellow-creatures.  I  am  compelled,  therefore,  to  regard  those
professing  medical  Christians  who,  while  gravely  praying  and
singing  in  the  sight  of  men  at  church,  refuse  to  examine  into
the  facts  of  mesmerism,  refuse  to  go  and  witness  them  and
experiment  for  themselves,  and  insanely  declare  they  would
not  believe  the  facts  if  they  witnessed  them,  to  be  such  as
Christ  were  he  on  earth  again  would  inveigh  against  with  all
severity  as  he  did  against  the  hypocrites  of  old ;  and  to  be
most  immoral  and  unrighteous,  indulging  bad  passions  while
calling  themselves  miserable  sinners  and  bestowing  all  sorts
of  fine  expressions  upon  the  object  of  their  worship  and
pretending  reverence  for  his  precepts  of  humility,  justice  and
mercy.

Had  the  medical  attendants  of  this  young  lady  made
themselves  acquainted  with  mesmerism,  and  not  through
unfortunate  prejudice  remained  behind  this  knowledge  of  the
day,  they  would  have  recommended  mesmerism  in  her  case,
and  spared  her  years  of  suffering  from  both  the  disease  and
the  means  employed.

By  mentioning  the  name  of  one  medical  man,  her  resi¬
dence,  and  a  circumstance  or  two  of  her  family,  I  have  put
it  in  the  power  of  all  her  friends  to  recognize  the  case  and
given  all  the  proofs  of  authenticity  which  the  world  can  de¬
sire.  But  though  I  have  not  given  her  full  name,  she  nobly
gave  me  permission  to  print  it :  and  I  cannot  refrain,  though
without  permission,  to  terminate  this  account  with  the  note
which  accompanied  the  history,  and  which  displays  the  truth¬
fulness,  kindness,  modesty  and  courageous  independence,
that,  when  combined,  render  the  female  character  so  beautiful.

“  Dear  Dr.  Elliotson, — I  have  sent  you  my  case,  which  I


An  instance  of  great  benefit  in  Epilepsy.


123


trust  you  will  be  able  to  make  out :  and  let  me  know  if  it  is  as
*  *

you  wish.  I  think  I  have  done  it  as  clearly  as  I  can,  and
all  of  it  is  as  true  as  it  can  be ;  indeed  I  have  not  said  half
what  my  sufferings  were,  but  I  do  think  I  have  said  enough.
If  my  name  would  be  of  any  advantage  to  you,  pray  by  all
means  put  it  in,  as  I  feel  I  cannot  be  sufficiently  grateful  to
you  for  all  your  kindness,  &c.,  and  I  think  such  a  recovery  as
mine  deserves  being  made  public,  though  of  course  I  do  not
wish  to  make  myself  conspicuous.

“  Yours  sincerely,

“  Eaton  Square,  “  E - B - — .

“  June  1st,  1847.”


II.  An  instance  of  great  benefit  from  Mesmerism  in  a  case  of
Epilepsy ,  with  the  production  of  Clairvoyance  and  other
remarkable  phenomena.  By  Mr.  William  Topham,  Bar-
rister-at-Law.  Communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson.

Temple,  May  31st,  1847.
My  Dear  Elliotson, — As  you  have  sometimes  expressed  an
interest  in  a  case  of  mesmerism,  which  engaged  my  attention
a  few  years  ago ;  will  you  allow  me  to  place  at  your  disposal
a  detailed  statement  of  the  facts  of  that  case  ?  My  reason  for
not  doing  so  at  the  time  when  the  circumstances  occurred  was
that  I  did  not  then  deem  it  to  be  sufficiently  important  for
publication;  because  the  unavoidable  discontinuance  of  the
mesmerism  had  left  the  cure  incomplete.  Yet,  upon  lately
referring  to  my  notes,  taken  at  the  time,  I  have  been  led  to
think  that  the  case — incomplete  though  it  be  as  a  perfect  cure
— contains  so  much  real  matter  of  interest  to  those  whom  no
personal  motives  deter  from  seeking  and  acknowledging  the
great  truths  of  nature,  that  its  circulation,  through  your
means,  may  not  be  wholly  unacceptable.

I  cannot  resist  this  opportunity  of  congratulating  you ,
upon  the  steady  progress  which  mesmerism,  with  all  its  ines¬
timable  blessings,  is,  “  now,”  constantly  making.

Believe  me  always,  very  sincerely  yours,

W.  Topham.

Dr.  Elliotson.

On  the  4th  of  March,  1839,  Thomas  Horner,  then  in  the
14th  year  of  his  age,  the  son  of  a  poor  husbandman,  at
Middleton,  in  Yorkshire,  was  seized  with  a  violent  fit  of
epilepsy.  A  second  fit  occurred,  after  the  lapse  of  a  month  :
at  the  expiration  of  the  same  period  of  time,  he  had  again  a


124  An  instance  of  great  benefit  in  Epilepsy,

fit;  and  thus,  for  some  months,  he  was  seized  with  fits  at  like
intervals.  Their  frequency  then  increased,  a  fortnight  only
intervening  between  each  attack ;  gradually,  his  fits  became
still  more  frequent ;  and  at  the  time  when  he  attracted  my
attention,  the  1st  of  August,  1843,  they  were  taking  place  as
often  as  three  times  a  week,  and  had  also  assumed  a  more
violent  appearance.

The  duration  of  each  fit,  from  the  first,  was  two  hours ;
during  the  greater  portion  of  this  time,  he  had  been  under
medical  treatment ;  but  without  any,  even  temporary  relief :
he  had  been  bled  from  the  arm  nine  times  within  the  pre¬
ceding  three  years.  Each  bleeding,  he  said,  produced  a  feel¬
ing  of  greater  weakness ;  and,  occasionally,  the  recurrence  of
a  fit  within  a  day  or  two.

From  the  time  of  his  first  attack,  in  1839,  and  during  the
entire  period  of  four  years  and  a  half,  he  had  been  in  the
following  state,  viz.,  great  and  incessant  pain  over  both  tem¬
ples  ;  after  each  fit,  severe  pain  in  his  right  side ;  that  side
sometimes  becoming  swollen,  and  then  the  pain  extending
down  the  thigh  and  leg,  rendering  them  stiff  and  immovable ;
his  eyes  always  dull  and  filmy,  so  that  he  could  see  no  object
with  any  distinctness ;  his  sleep  invariably  checked  and
broken  by  the  pains  in  his  head,  which  seldom  allowed  him
more  than  half  an  hour’s  repose,  when  he  became  roused,
and  obliged  to  walk  about,  in  order  to  prevent,  what  other¬
wise  always  occurred,  the  additional  pain  in  his  right  side
and  leg.  He  only  (though  invariably)  suffered  from  this
pain  in  his  right  side  after  each  fit,  or  if  he  lay  still  when  the
pains  in  his  head  roused  him  from  sleep.

On  hearing  of  his  great  sufferings,  and  of  the  entire
failure  of  the  medical  treatment  which  he  had  been  subjected
to,  I  resolved  to  try  the  effect  of  mesmerism.  He  was  a
simple  illiterate  fellow,  who  could  neither  read  nor  write ;  he
had  never  heard  of  the  subject  of  mesmerism  in  his  life ;  and
sat  down  without  even  a  guess  at  what  I  was  about  to  attempt.
I  succeeded  in  producing  the  mesmeric  sleep  in  ten  minutes.
After  sleeping  half  an  hour,  he  became  aroused  by  my  speak¬
ing  to  him.  When  just  awakened  he  felt  a  slight  degree  of
the  pain  in  his  right  leg,  which  always  followed  the  fit ;  but
it  ceased  immediately  after  a  few  passes  over  the  leg.  Upon
recovering  from  his  very  evident  surprize  on  his  first  experi¬
ence  of  mesmerism,  he  uttered  an  exclamation  of  delight,  to
find  that  his  sight,  which,  throughout  the  four  years  and  a  half
preceding  had  been  clouded  and  indistinct,  so  as  almost  to
amount  to  blindness,  had  become  perfectly  clear ;  and  that,
as  he  said,  everything  seemed  bright  around  him.  That  night


with  Clairvoyance,  fyc.


125


he  enjoyed  eight  hours  of  uninterrupted  sleep  ;  the  pains  in  his
head  ceased ;  and  he  came  to  me  the  next  morning  in  high
spirits,  the  visible  change  in  his  countenance  exciting  the  re¬
marks  of  those  who  had  been  in  the  habit  of  noticing  his  usual
dull,  haggard  look.

The  mesmerism  was  daily  repeated,  and  he  as  regularly
improved  in  general  health  and  appearance.  He  continued
free  from  the  least  pain  of  any  description,  slept  soundly  every
night ;  and  although  these  violent  fits  had  been  taking  place
three  times  a  week  up  to  the  day  when  he  was  first  mesmer¬
ized,  yet,  from  that  day,  he  had  no  return  of  a  fit ;  nor,  with
one  exception,  when  the  sensation  passed  away  in  a  few  mi¬
nutes,  the  least  indication  of  the  approach  of  a  fit  for  upwards
of  two  months.

On  the  7th  of  October,  at  8  o’clock  in  the  evening,  he
had  a  fit,  which  continued  for  an  hour ;  but  the  pain  which
accompanied  it  was  of  a  totally  different  description  from  that
which  prevailed  in  all  the  previous  attacks.  On  this  occasion
he  felt  severe  pain  in  the  epigastrium,  and  then  became  insen¬
sible.  On  recovering  his  consciousness,  he  still  felt  the  pain
in  the  same  place,  and  nowhere  else.  His  head  remained
entirely  free  from  pain  ;  nor  did  he  feel  the  least  uneasiness
there.  The  pain  in  the  epigastrium  soon  left  him,  and  he
enjoyed  his  usual  sound  sleep  at  night.

He  had  no  further  return  of  a  fit  until  the  21st  of  October;
when,  induced  by  his  increased  strength  to  engage  himself  in
some  laborious  occupation  throughout  the  whole  day,  and
after  resting  many  hours,  he  had  again  a  fit.  Yet  he  experi¬
enced  no  subsequent  pain,  and  continued  free  from  any  indi¬
cation  of  another  fit  for  some  weeks;  although  the  mesmerism
was  unavoidably  discontinued  after  the  27th  of  October.

Horner  remained  in  an  improved  state  of  health;  gra¬
dually  becoming  stouter  and  stronger,  and  with  no  recurrence
of  the  pains.  He  was  however  still  subject  to  the  recurrence
of  a  fit,  once  in  the  course  of  a  month  or  five  weeks.  In  the
beginning  of  the  following  April,  he  caught  a  severe  cold,
and  within  twenty-four  hours,  died  from  the  internal  inflam¬
mation.

As  Horner’s  state,  when  he  was  under  the  influence  of
mesmerism,  exhibited  some  peculiar  facts  and  very  curious
phenomena,  I  feel  that  a  detailed  account  of  these  will  prove
as  full  of  interest  as  the  statement  of  those  results  which  were
merely  curative.

At  the  fourth  time  of  mesmerising  he  passed  into  a  state
of  somnambulism,  and  then,  ignorant  as  he  had  previously
been  of  the  very  existence  of  mesmerism  itself,  he  confidently


126  An  instance  of  great  benefit  in  Epilepsy,

told  me  that  I  should  deepen  his  sleep,  and  so  increase  its
benefit,  by  touching  his  eyeballs  for  a  short  time,  a  sugges¬
tion  which  proved  to  be  quite  true.

He  would  sleep  any  length  of  time,  unless  I  aroused  him.

When  mesmerised,  the  left  side,  throughout  his  body,
was  totally  devoid  of  sensation ;  but  the  right  side,  from
head  to  foot,  was  extremely  sensitive.  He  could  not  bear  to
be  touched,  even  by  his  mesmeriser,  on  the  right  side  of  his
body;  it  gave  him  great  pain.  But  if  I  touched  the  left
cheek  at  the  same  time  that  I  touched  the  right,  the  left  hand
simultaneously  with  the  right,  and  so  on,  throughout  the
entire  of  each  side,  he  felt  nothing  whatever, — not  even  the
severest  pinching.  By  making  passes  over  the  right  leg  it
became  stiffened  and  rigidly  fixed ;  but  I  could  never  thus
affect  the  left  leg  in  the  least  degree.  It  will  be  remembered
that  the  right  side  of  his  body  was  always  affected,  became
painful,  sometimes  swollen,  after  his  fits.

If  I  held  his  hands  for  the  space  of  ten  or  twelve  minutes
after  he  was  mesmerised,  he  could  not  bear  me  to  leave  him,
saying  that  it  made  him  cold  and  uncomfortable  when  I
did  so.

In  his  mesmeric  state  he  would  sit  at  table  and  eat  and
drink  very  enjoyably,  and  apparently  with  increased  powers
of  digestion;  for  soon  after  his  restoration  to  his  natural
state,  he  would  partake  of  his  dinner  or  supper  with  as  good
an  appetite  as  if  he  had  not  been  (of  which  he  was  ignorant)
freely  indulging  it  half  an  hour  before.

The  touch  of  any  piece  of  metal  gave  him  pain  on  both
sides  of  his  body.

On  touching  his  right  eye-ball  with  the  utmost  gentleness
with  the  tip  of  my  finger,  he  felt  a  smart  pricking  pain,  and
saw,  at  each  touch,  a  flash  of  light ;  indeed  he  persisted  in
declaring  each  time  that  I  held  a  candle  close  to  his  eye.  His
left  eyeball  was  insensible  to  any  touch.

There  was  perfect  community  of  sensation  and  taste
between  him  and  his  mesmeriser,  but  only  on  his  right  side.
For  instance,  whilst  his  hands  were  held  in  mine,  if  a  third
person  pinched  my  arm  (no  matter  which),  he  felt  pain  in  his
right  arm,  and  complained  that  he  was  pricked  there.  How¬
ever  noiselessly  and  secretly  any  substance  was  placed  in  my
mouth,  he  instantly  moved  his  lips,  as  in  the  act  of  tasting,
saying  that  he  did  taste  something,  naming  the  substance
(and  he  was  very  rarely  wrong)  that  was  in  my  mouth,  and
evincing  his  pleasure  or  displeasure,  as  the  thing  was  sweet,
bitter,  or  sour.  But  he  always  said  that  the  taste  was  only
on  the  right  side  of  his  mouth.  So  if  I  drank  a  glass  of


with  Clairvoyance,  tyc.


1 27


water  whilst  holding  his  hands,  he  always  fancied  that  the
water  was  being  poured  down  his  own  throat,  and  sometimes
asked  me  to  give  him  no  more  as  it  was  too  cold.  I  ought  to
add  here,  that  all  our  experiments  were  conducted  with  the
severest  caution,  and  that  he  was  frequently  thickly  blind¬
folded  for  the  satisfaction  of  many  persons  who  witnessed
them.

He  has  been  occasionally  thrown  into  the  mesmeric  sleep
by  his  holding  a  mesmerised  sovereign  in  his  hand  for  three
or  four  minutes.  I  tested  the  truth  of  this  circumstance  in
the  following  manner,  which  was  frequently  repeated.  Some
third  person  made  a  very  minute  and  private  mark  upon  a
sovereign  taken  from  his  own  purse.  He  then  emptied  the
contents  of  his  purse  (often  ten  or  twelve  sovereigns)  into  a
hat,  giving  me  the  one  which  he  had  privately  marked.  After
mesmerising  it,  I  threw  it  into  the  hat,  and  they  were  all
shaken  together.  Then  Horner  at  my  desire  proceeded  to
take  out  each  sovereign  singly.  Upon  taking  up  perhaps  the
fourth  or  the  seventh,  as  the  case  might  be,  he  started,  and
said  that  it  pricked  his  fingers.  This  sovereign  was  then
examined,  and  proved,  in  every  instance,  to  be  the  one  which
had  been  previously  marked  and  mesmerised.

The  immediate  effect  of  a  mesmerised  sovereign  placed  in
his  hand  was  extreme  rigidity  of  the  hand  and  arm,  and  a
sensation  of  great  numbness  up  to  the  shoulder;  he  then
gradually  lost  all  consciousness  and  fell  into  the  mesmeric
sleep,  which,  as  in  every  instance,  became  very  deep  if  he
were  not  spoken  to.  A  glass  of  mesmerised  water  would  also
produce  the  mesmeric  sleep  in  the  course  of  three  or  four
minutes,  whilst  he  was  under  the  idea  that  he  had  been  only
drinking  an  ordinary  glass  of  water.*

I  have  likewise  thrown  him  into  the  mesmeric  sleep  whilst
he  was  in  active  conversation  with  two  or  three  strangers ;
I  being  a  short  distance  behind  him,  and  he  himself  not  cog¬
nizant  of  my  attempt.

After  five  or  six  weeks’  mesmerism  he  began  spontaneous¬
ly  to  exhibit  instances  of  clairvoyance.  The  first  occasion  was
on  the  11th  of  September.  It  was  in  the  dusk  of  the  even¬
ing  ;  so  that  the  room  where  he  was  mesmerised  was  nearly
dark.  My  previous  mode  of  mesmerising  him  had  been  by
pointing  at  his  eyes,  but  on  this  occasion  I  began  by  making
passes  over  the  top  of  his  head,  and  continued  them  after  he

*  These  effects  of  mesmerised  gold  and  water  were  exactly  those  which  I  wit¬
nessed  a  thousand  times  in  the  Okeys,  who  are  quite  well  and  in  respectable
circumstances,  though  some  persons  to  this  hour  cruelly  declare  they  are  de¬
ranged,  and  others  stigmatize  them  as  impostors. — J.  Elliotson.


128  An  instance  of  great  benefit  in  Epilepsy,

was  in  the  sleep.  In  the  course  of  five  or  six  minutes  after
the  sleep  was  induced,  he  suddenly  exclaimed  that  he  could
see  into  the  room  above  us  (the  drawing-room).  I  said,
“  Your  eyes  are  closed  ;  how  can  you  see  ?"  And  he  replied,
“  I  don't  see  with  my  eyes  !  I  see  from  the  top  of  my  head ;
all  the  top  of  my  head  seems  open  !"  He  then  accurately
described  the  position  of  different  articles  in  the  room  above
us,  which  I  myself  had  never  noticed  before,  and  he  having
only  entered  the  room  once  in  his  life,  when  he  came  for  a
couple  of  minutes  to  speak  to  me,  a  month  previously.  He
also  named  two  persons,  out  of  a  large  party  in  the  house,  as
being  in  the  room ;  told  me  accurately  where  each  was  sitting,
and  how  occupied.  I  inquired  of  him  if  he  saw  any  light,
knowing  that  it  was  earlier  than  the  usual  time  of  the  lights
being  taken  up  to  that  room ;  he  answered,  that  there  was
only  a  very  small  candle  on  the  table,  near  the  person  (naming
him)  who  was  reading.  I  found  everything  as  Horner  had
described ;  a  small  taper  having  been  used  as  a  temporary
light.

He  exhibited  many  other  instances  of  clairvoyance  upon
different  occasions,  of  which  I  will  give  one  or  two  more.

I  have  put  on  a  shooting-jacket,  in  which  were  eight  or
ten  pockets ;  I  have  put  various  articles  into  each  pocket,  of
a  description  very  unlikely  to  be  mixed  together ;  and  then,
with  all  the  pockets  closed  and  the  jacket  buttoned  up  to  my
throat,  I  would  proceed  to  the  dark  room  where  Horner  was,
and,  standing  a  couple  of  yards  before  him,  he  would  tell  me
truly  the  several  articles  in  the  several  pockets,  describing
the  situation  of  each  pocket,  and  naming  each  article  within
it.  Occasionally  a  short  time  after  he  had  rightly  named
some  one  article  as  being  in  a  certain  pocket,  I  have  secretly
removed  it  to  another ;  but  he  constantly  perceived  the  change
and  described  it,  although  my  hand  was  always  closed  over
the  thing  which  I  was  removing,  and  the  persons  who  were
standing  nearer  to  me  than  Horner  sat  could  detect  nothing
that  I  did.

I  once  requested  a  friend,  out  of  Horner's  hearing,  to  go
up-stairs  into  the  room  above  us,  and  hold  up  the  window-
curtain,  at  a  time  when  Horner  was  describing  to  me  what  a
large  party  there  were  doing,  and,  apparently,  much  amused
at  their  proceedings.  Suddenly  he  exclaimed,  “  Why  there's
Mr.  De  Gex  just  come  into  the  room!"  I  said,  “Watch
him,  and  tell  me  what  he  does."  He  then  exclaimed,  “  Oh,
what  a  curious  thing  for  him  to  do ;  he  is  standing  with  his
hand  hold  of  your  father's  shoulder !  Yes,  there  he  stands,
still !  What  a  curious  thing !  Now,  he  has  left  him,  and


with  Clairvoyance,  fyc.


129


is  going  out  of  tlie  room  again  !”  In  a  few  moments  Mr.
De  Gex  re-entered  the  room  where  we  were,  when  I  repeated
Horner’s  statement.  He  said  that  it  was  perfectly  true,  and
that  he  had  changed  the  manner  of  testing  Horner’s  clairvoy¬
ance  in  order  to  satisfy  himself.*

Horner  could  rarely  exert  the  power  of  clairvoyance  longer
than  ten  or  twenty  minutes,  when  he  complained  of  great
pain  in  his  head ;  indeed,  after  the  second  time,  he  felt  severe
pain  in  his  head  for  three  days,  so  that  I  desisted  during  a
week  from  mesmerising  him  by  passes  over  the  top  of  his
head ;  for  he  never  became  clairvoyant  except  when  the  sleep
was  produced  by  that  mode.

Such  were  the  effects  of  mesmerism  in  this  case.  Imme¬
diate  and  permanent  relief  from  incessant  pains  of  four  and
a  half  years’  duration,  rapid  improvement  in  health,  and
almost  an  entire  cessation  from  frequent  and  violent  epileptic
fits :  profoundly  interesting  also  in  the  varied  phenomena
which  were  constantly  arising  during  its  daily  progress.

P.S.  A  few  weeks  after  the  regular  mesmerism  had  been
given  up,  and  whilst  I  was  in  London,  I  proved  Horner’s  sus¬
ceptibility  to  my  mesmeric  power  in  the  following  manner :  I
mesmerised  a  kid-glove,  and  sent  it  through  the  post-office
to  one  of  the  members  of  my  father’s  family,  desiring  that
Horner  should  put  the  glove  on  his  hand.  He  was  accordingly
sent  for  in  the  evening  of  the  day  on  which  the  glove  was
received  (the  day  after  it  was  mesmerised) ;  and  put  the  glove
on,  as  desired.

At  first,  he  said  that  he  felt  a  sort  of  warmth  passing  up
his  arm ;  and  then,  in  the  course  of  three  or  four  minutes,
he  dropped  asleep.  Soon  afterwards,  the  arm  of  the  gloved
hand  became  rigid,  and  he  called  out  loudly  that  he  felt
extreme  pain  throughout  the  whole  arm,  asking  those  who
were  present  to  take  the  glove  off  immediately.

The  glove  was  removed  with  some  difficulty,  for  his  hand
had  become  much  swollen ;  he  then  remained  in  a  state  of  calm
sleep  for  upwards  of  an  hour,  when  he  awoke  spontaneously.
The  hand  which  had  been  covered  with  the  mesmerised  glove,
continued  to  be  painful  and  much  swollen  for  some  hours.

To  avoid  a  recurrence  of  the  pain  in  Horner’s  arm  and
hand,  on  receiving  my  second  mesmerised  glove,  it  was,  at
my  request,  placed  upon  his  head ;  when  he  passed  into  the
mesmeric  sleep  in  a  few  minutes,  without  any  pain  or  any
uncomfortable  sensation.

*  Mr.  De  Gex  also  is  a  barrister,  and  is  a  fellow  of  Jesus  College,  Cambridge.
— J.  Elliotson.


130  Instance  of  Clairvoyance  independent  of  Mesmerism ,

I  frequently  repeated  this  mode  of  mesmerising  him.
Sometimes  I  sent  a  glove  which  had  not  been  mesmerised —
taking  care  not  to  acquaint  any  one  with  the  fact ;  and,  to
shew  how  little  Hornets  imagination  had  to  do  with  the
success  of  the  experiment — in  every  instance  when  the  glove
was  not  mesmerised/— his  mind  being  fully  impressed  with
the  belief  that  it  was^ it  produced  no  effect.  Otherwise,  it
invariably  caused  the  mesmeric  sleep.


III.  An  Instance  of  Clairvoyance  independent  of  Mesmerism.

Communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson.

From  my  early  demonstrations  of  mesmerism  in  University
College  Hospital  to  the  present  time,  I  have  never  ceased  to
remind  the  world  that  nothing  is  produced  in  the  mesmeric
state  that  does  not  occur  spontaneously  and  independently  of
it.  I  have  been  favoured  with  the  following  account  from  a
friend.

J.  Elliotson.

The  anecdotes  relative  to  the  extraordinary  prophetic
power  possessed  by  a  Brahmin  of  Bombay  are  extracted  from
the  “  Oriental  Memoirs ”  of  James  Forbes,  Esq.,  of  whom  a
slight  account  is  prefixed ;  as  a  relation  so  extraordinary  re¬
quires  every  proof  that  the  relater  is  a  person  on  whose
veracity  we  may  rely.

The  prospective  power  of  the  Brahmin,  is  a  remarkable
contrast  to  the  retrospective  displayed  by  Zschokke.

H.  S.

James  Forbes,  Esq.,  author  of  “  Oriental  Memoirs,  ”
Member  of  the  Royal  and  Antiquarian  Societies,  and  of  the
Arcadian  at  Rome,  lineally  descended  from  the  Earls  of  Gra-
nard,  was  born  in  London  in  May,  1749.  He  was  educated
at  Hadley  by  the  Rev.  David  Garron.  Before  the  age  of
sixteen  he  obtained  an  appointment  to  Bombay.  After  having
filled  several  important  situations  in  different  parts  of  India,
with  equal  talent,  honour,  and  integrity,  he  returned  to  Eng¬
land  in  1784.  In  1787  he  married  the  daughter  of  J.  Gayland,
Esq.,  by  whom  he  had  one  daughter,  married  to  the  Count
de  Montalembert,  peer  of  France.  He  was  a  man  of  ardent
piety,  unbounded  charity,  and  universal  philanthropy,  and
considerable  literary  attainments.  His  drawings  of  the
natural  productions  of  the  countries  he  visited,  together  with


*  communicated  by  Dr,  Elliotson.


131


the  manuscripts,  fill  a  hundred  and  fifty  folio  volumes.  He
died  in  1819,  aged  70.

Extract  from  Forbes9 s  “  Oriental  Memoirs  .''

*  *  *  *  “  These  persons  (soothsayers)  abound  in  all

parts  of  India ;  but  there  are  among  the  Brahmins  a  small
number,  who  seem  to  differ  from  all  the  descriptions  of  people
before  mentioned ;  they  appear  also  perfectly  distinct  from
the  fortune-telling  Brahmins  and  pretended  astrologers,  who,
like  the  gypsy  tribe  in  Europe,  are  well  known  in  India.
Those  I  now  speak  of  seem  to  be  gifted  with  a  talent  possessed
only  by  a  very  few  of  the  quiet,  retired,  literary  Brahmins.
To  one  of  these  I  shall  now  confine  myself;  he  was  a  man
well  known  to  many  of  my  contemporaries  in  India,  and  I
have  occasionally  met  with  him  at  Bombay,  Surat,  and  Cam-
bay,  where  I  believe  he  chiefly  resided.

“  I  shall  relate  three  anecdotes  in  confirmation  of  the  pene¬
trating  spirit,  preternatural  gift,  or  whatever  term  may  be
allowed  for  the  talent  which  this  man  possessed.  I  know  that
the  predictions  were  made  long  before  the  events  happened,
and  were  literally  accomplished.

“On  my  arrival  in  Bombay  in  1766,  Mr.  Crommelin,  the
governor  of  that  settlement,  was  under  orders  to  relinquish
his  situation  at  the  beginning  of  the  following  year,  and  then
return  to  England.  Mr.  Spencer,  the  second  in  Council,
was  appointed  his  successor  in  the  Bombay  government,
instead  of  Mr.  Hodges,  chief  of  Surat,  who  considered  it  as
his  right.  Mr.  Hodges  had  become  acquainted  with  this
Brahmin  during  his  minority  in  the  Company's  service.

“  This  extraordinary  character  was  then  a  young  man,  little
known  to  the  English,  but  of  great  celebrity  among  the  Hin¬
doos  and  every  other  description  of  natives  in  the  western
part  of  the  peninsula.  The  Brahmin  expressed  an  affectionate
regard  towards  him,  and,  as  far  as  the  distinction  of  religion
and  caste  allowed,  the  friendship  became  mutual  and  disin¬
terested.  The  Brahmin  was  always  justly  considered  as  a
very  moral  and  pious  character ;  and  Mr.  Hodges  was  equally
well  disposed ;  his  Hindoo  friend  encouraged  him  to  proceed
in  that  virtuous  path  which  would  lead  him  to  wealth  and
honour  in  this  world,  and  finally  conduct  him  to  eternal  hap¬
piness.  To  enforce  these  precepts,  he  assured  him  he  would
gradually  rise  from  the  station  he  then  held  at  Cambay  to
other  residences  and  inferior  chiefships  in  the  Company's  ser¬
vice  ;  that  he  would  then  succeed  to  the  higher  appointment
of  chief  at  Tellicherry  and  Surat,  and  would  close  his  Indian


132  Instance  of  Clairvoyance  independent  of  Mesmerism,

career  by  being  Governor  of  Bombay.  Mr.  Hodges,  not
being  enjoined  secrecy,  spoke  of  these  Brahminical  predictions
among  his  associates  and  friends,  from  their  very  first  com¬
munication,  and  their  author  was  generally  called  Mr.  Hodges's
Brahmin.  These  predictions  for  some  years  made  but  little
impression  on  his  mind.  Afterwards  as  he  successively  as¬
cended  the  gradations  in  the  Company's  service,  he  placed
more  confidence  in  his  Brahmin,  especially  when  he  approached
near  the  pinnacle  of  ambition,  and  found  himself  chief  of
Surat,  the  next  situation  in  wealth  and  honour  to  the  govern¬
ment  of  Bombay.

“  When,  therefore,  Mr.  Spencer  was  appointed  governor
of  that  settlement,  and  Mr.  Hodges  dismissed  from  the  chief-
ship  of  Surat  and  suspended  the  service,  he  sent  for  his  Brah¬
min,  who  was  then  at  Pulparra,  a  sacred  village  on  the  banks
of  the  Tappee  of  which  I  have  already  spoken,  on  a  religious
visit.  Mr.  Hodges  received  him  at  the  chief's  garden-house,
where  he  was  sitting  in  the  front  veranda.  He  immediately
communicated  to  him  the  events  which  had  lately  taken  place
to  the  disappointment  of  all  his  hopes  and  future  expectations ;
and  slightly  reproached  him  for  a  pretended  prescience  and
for  having  deceived  him  with  false  promises.  The  Brahmin,
with  an  unaltered  countenance,  as  is  usual  with  his  tribe  on
all  such  occasions,  coolly  replied,  ‘  You  see  this  veranda,  and
the  apartment  to  which  it  leads ;  Mr.  Spencer  has  reached
the  portico,  but  he  will  not  enter  the  palace ;  he  has  set  his
foot  upon  the  threshold,  but  he  shall  not  enter  into  the  house.
Notwithstanding  all  appearances  to  the  contrary,  you  will
attain  the  honors  I  foretold  and  fill  the  high  station  to  which
he  has  been  appointed.  A  dark  cloud  is  before  him.'

“  This  singular  prophecy  was  publicly  known  at  Surat  and
Bombay ;  and  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  the  Brahmin  was  the
subject  of  discussion  in  every  company,  when  an  express  ar¬
rived  overland  from  England  to  annul  Mr.  Spencer's  appoint¬
ment,  and  to  invest  Mr.  Hodges  with  the  government  of
Bombay.  All  which  accordingly  took  place.  Mr.  Spencer
embarked  for  England  in  the  same  ship  in  which  I  arrived
in  India  in  December;  and  Mr.  Crommelin  sailed  in  January,
leaving  Mr.  Hodges  in  complete  possession  of  the  government.
It  is  almost  needless  to  remark  the  ascendancy  of  this  Brah¬
min  over  the  mind  of  Mr.  Hodges  during  the  remainder  of
his  life ;  nor  is  it  to  be  wondered  at,  that  the  new  governor
undertook  no  important  step  without  consulting  his  Brahmin."

The  second  anecdote  relates  to  the  same  Brahmin,  and
was  as  well  known  to  the  inhabitants  of  Bombay  as  the  former.
Mr.  Forbes  had  been  on  terms  of  the  closest  friendship  with


communicated  by  Dr.  Ellioison.


133


the  parties  to  whom  it  relates,  from  the  first  day  of  his  landing
in  India.  After  stating  some  circumstances  connected  with
his  voyage  and  the  friend  to  whom  he  was  then  introduced
and  with  whom  he  remained  for  forty  years  on  the  terms  of
of  the  closest  intimacy,  he  says  : —

“  The  lady  sitting  at  the  head  of  my  friends  table  when  I
made  my  bashful  entry,  was  a  widow  at  the  time  he  married
her.  Her  first  husband  died  when  she  was  very  young,
leaving  two  children,  a  son  and  a  daughter.  The  latter
remained  with  her  mother,  the  former  was  sent  to  England
for  education,  and  at  the  age  of  sixteen  embarked  for  Bombay,
with  the  appointment  of  a  writer,  some  years  prior  to  my
arrival  there.  The  ships  of  that  season  all  reached  the  island
in  safety,  except  the  one  in  which  this  young  gentleman
sailed,  which  at  length  was  deemed  a  missing  vessel,  and  her
safety  despaired  of.  A  mother  could  not  so  easily  give  up
hope :  her  usual  evening  walk  was  on  a  sandy  beach,  forming
a  bay  on  the  western  side  of  the  island,  in  full  view  of  the
ocean.  Maternal  solicitude  frequently  cast  a  longing  eye
to  that  quarter  where  the  ships  from  Europe  generally  ap¬
peared.  The  shore  of  that  bay  was  also  the  place  where  most
of  the  Hindoos  erected  the  funeral  pile  and  burnt  their  dead.
This  ceremony  is  attended  by  Brahmins,  and  Mr.  Hodges's
Brahmin,  then  at  Bombay,  was  occasionally  among  them.
Observing  the  mother's  anxiety,  he  asked  her  the  cause ;  the
lady  being  a  native  of  India,  and  well  knowing  his  character,
inquired  in  his  own  language  why  a  man  so  extraordinarily
gifted,  should  be  ignorant  of  the  cause  of  her  tender  solici¬
tude.  The  Brahmin  was  affected,  and  said,  “  I  do  know  the
reason  of  your  sorrow ;  your  son  lives  :  the  ship  will  soon
arrive  in  safety,  but  you  will  never  more  behold  him."  She
immediately  mentioned  this  conversation  to  her  friends.  A
signal  was  made  not  long  after  for  a  ship  from  Europe  :  on
the  pilot  reaching  her,  his  private  signal  indicated  the  missing
ship  :  boats  were  sent  off  to  bring  the  passengers  on  shore.
The  expected  son  was  not  forgotten;  his  mother's  friends
went  on  board,  and  were  informed  that  he  had  remained  at
the  Brazils,  where  the  ship  having  been  long  detained  for
repair,  the  Jesuits  converted  this  promising  youth  to  the
Church  of  Rome.  Instead,  therefore,  of  conducting  him  to
his  expecting  parent,  they  only  delivered  her  letters,  replete
with  affectionate  expostulations  and  entreaties  that  she  would
follow  his  example,  and  enter  the  true  church.  A  mother's
disappointment  is  easier  to  conceive  than  describe.  Her  son
continued  at  Rio  de  Janeiro,  and  occasionally  wrote  to  her,
until  the  suppression  of  the  Jesuits  in  the  pontificate  of  Cle-


134  Instance  of  Clairvoyance  independent  of  Mesmerism.

raent  the  14th,  on  which  occasion,  with  many  other  members
of  that  society,  he  was  sent  from  South  America  to  the  prisons
of  Portugal,  and  no  more  heard  of.

“  The  unfortunate  mother  came  to  England  some  years
afterwards  with  her  husband  and  only  daughter,  who  was
married,  and  died  soon  after  her  arrival.  This  was  a  stroke
her  fond  mother  was  little  able  to  sustain ;  a  bereavement
which  seemed  to  admit  of  no  consolation.  The  downy  wings
of  time,  the  balmy  comforts  of  religion,  aided  by  every  effort
of  an  affectionate  husband,  were  of  no  avail  in  extricating
her  from  a  state  of  apathy  and  despair.

“  Not  long  after  this  event,  an  intimate  friend  of  the  family
having  remitted  a  considerable  sum  of  money  from  India  by
bills  on  Portugal,  went  to  Lisbon  to  recover  them.  Walking
near  a  prison  in  that  city,  he  was  supplicated  for  charity  by
a  voice  from  a  subterraneous  grate,  and  being  addressed  in
English  made  it  the  more  impressive.  Not  content  with
affording  transient  relief,  he  entered  into  conversation  with
the  prisoner,  and  found  he  was  the  long-lost  son  of  his  dis¬
consolate  mother.  The  intelligence  was  immediately  conveyed
to  England,  and  tenderly  communicated  to  his  sorrowing
parent,  with  the  addition  that  her  husband  had  already  re¬
mitted  money  to  Lisbon,  and  exerted  such  means  for  his
deliverance  that  there  could  be  no  doubt  of  his  speedy  restor¬
ation  to  her  maternal  arms.  This  news  shed  a  momentary
gleam  of  joy  on  her  countenance,  but  it  was  soon  succeeded
by  renewed  pangs  of  sorrow,  and  a  continued  exclamation  of
‘  The  Brahmin  !  the  Brahmin  P

“  The  friend  at  Lisbon,  when  all  was  happily  accomplished,
lost  no  time  in  informing  her  son  that  his  mother  lived,  was
married  to  a  gentleman  of  fortune  and  respectability,  who
was  waiting  to  welcome  him  to  their  parental  roof ;  and  their
interest  and  liberality  had  procured  his  liberty,  which  he  was
the  happy  instrument  of  effecting,  and  was  then  come  to
conduct  him  from  a  scene  of  misery  to  life,  and  light,  and
joy !  Although  the  communication  was  made  in  the  most
considerate  manner,  he  scarcely  believed  the  reality  of  his
emancipation  from  those  dreary  walls,  where  he  had  for  years
been  excluded  from  the  light  of  the  sun  and  fresh  air :  for
‘hope  deferred  maketh  the  heart  sick.’  The  sudden  transi¬
tion  from  hopeless  despair  in  the  dungeon’s  gloom,  to  the
sight  of  the  sun,  the  fanning  of  the  breeze,  and  the  sympathy
of  friendships,  were  too  much  for  his  emaciated  frame;  he
faintly  uttered  the  effusions  of  a  grateful  heart,  and  expired  !

“  Thus  was  the  Brahmin's  prediction  to  his  mother,  uttered
full  thirty  years  before,  completely  fulfilled  !


Extraordinary  effects  of  Mesmerism  on  a  Gentleman.  135

“  The  last  anecdote  I  shall  relate  respecting  this  man  is
very  short.  Some  months  previous  to  my  first  leaving  India,
a  gentleman  and  his  wife  arrived  from  England  at  Bombay.
He,  having  been  appointed  to  a  lucrative  situation  at  Surat,
proceeded  thither  at  an  early  opportunity,  leaving  his  wife  in
a  friend’s  family  until  he  should  have  procured  a  house,  and
made  suitable  provision  for  her  reception  at  Surat.  They
were  both  young,  and  had  an  only  child.  In  a  few  weeks
she  followed  him  to  Surat.  The  evening  before  she  embarked,
sitting  in  a  mixed  company  of  gentlemen  and  ladies,  antici¬
pating  her  approaching  happiness,  the  same  Brahmin  came
into  the  verandah,  with  the  gentleman  of  the  house,  who  was
high  in  station  at  Bombay.  He  introduced  him  to  the  com¬
pany,  and  in  a  sort  of  jest  asked  him  to  tell  the  destiny  of
the  happy  fair  one  lately  arrived  from  Europe.  To  the  sur¬
prize  of  the  whole  company,  and  particularly  so  to  the  object
of  the  inquiry,  he  gave  her  a  penetrating  and  compassionate
look ;  and  after  a  pause,  said  to  the  gentleman  in  the  Hindoo
language,  ‘  Her  cup  of  felicity  is  full,  but  evanescent !  A
bitter  potion  awaits  her,  for  which  she  must  prepare  !’  Her
husband  had  written  that  he  should  come  in  a  barge  to  Surat
bar,  to  accompany  her  on  shore.  He  did  not  appear,  but  a
friend  of  mine  went  on  board  to  announce  to  her  his  danger¬
ous  illness :  he  was  then  in  the  last  paroxysm  of  a  fever,  and
expired  in  her  arms  !  I  came  home  a  passenger  in  the  same
ship  with  the  widow,  and  another  lady  who  endeavoured  to
alleviate  her  sorrow  by  every  tender  assiduity.  The  name  of
a  Brahmin  was  never  mentioned  at  table,  nor  anything  relat¬
ing  to  Hindoo  astrology.  The  anniversary  of  her  husband’s
death  happened  during  the  voyage,  and  was  indeed  a  day
of  woe.”


IY.  Continuation  of  Capt.  Peach’s  Case ,  by  Messrs.  Chandler
and  Holland.  Communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson.

To  Dr.  Elliotson.

My  dear  Sir, — I  beg  to  forward  you  a  continuation  of
Mr.  Holland’s  report  of  Captain  Peach’s  truly  wonderful
case  :  you  can  bear  witness  to  some  of  the  phenomena  your¬
self.  I  have  again  visited  him  since  the  day  you  accompanied
me,  and  amongst  other  things  saw  the  young  lady  alluded  to
in  the  report  come  into  the  room  entirely  without  the  cogni¬
zance  of  the  patient,  and  from  the  other  side  of  the  room
produce  a  very  marked  effect  in  spite  of  Mr.  Holland,  Mr.
Symes  (who  visited  him  with  me)  and  myself  continually
VOL.  v.  l


136  Extraordinary  effects  of  Mesmerism  on  a  Gentleman ,

engaging  him  in  conversation.  This  occurred  after  Mr.
Holland  had  awakened  him  from  a  half  hour's  mesmeric  nap,
and  so  great  was  the  effect  that  he  requested  Mr.  H.  to  awake
him  a  little  more.  We  begged  him  not  to  distress  himself,  but
to  sleep  again  if  he  felt  inclined,  which  he  was  very  soon
obliged  to  do.

This  case  has  made  many  converts  and  confirmed  many
who  were  wavering.  No  one  can  possibly  see  and  doubt,  un¬
less  they  choose  to  question  the  blindness  of  the  patient,  and
the  next  step  must  be  to  question  their  own  existence.

Yours  sincerely,

Thomas  Chandler.

Thomas  Chandler,  Esq.

“  Laurie  Terrace,  New  Cross,
“  June  3rd,  1847.

“  My  dear  Sir, — Since  my  letter,  of  the  6th  of  March  last,
there  has  not  been  any  relaxation  of  the  attempt  to  benefit
Captain  Peach  by  the  continued  application  of  mesmerism :
and,  although  further  results,  up  to  this  time,  have  been
chiefly  of  a  negative  character,  still  they  are  not  less  im¬
portant  on  that  account  (at  least  to  him,)  as  the  almost  com¬
plete  absence  of  his  former  intense  sufferings  is  a  consolatory
set  off  against  our  want  of  decided  success  in  restoring  vision
or  relieving  the  partial  paralysis  of  the  lower  limbs,  more  par¬
ticularly  as  the  improvement  in  his  general  health  is,  at  once,
perceptible.

“  That  so  much  could  have  been  accomplished,  in  this  par¬
ticular  case,  is  wonderful,  when  it  is  recollected  that  his  afflic¬
tions  were  so  deeply  rooted,  and  that  the  late  ungenial  season
confined  him  for  so  many  months  in  the  heated  air  of  the
same  room ;  added  to  which,  his  mother’s  acute  sufferings
(from  a  cutaneous  disease  in  the  right  leg)  have  been  almost
continuous  for  a  long  time,  occasionally,  by  night,  as  well  as
day,  rendering  her  delirious,  and  have  so  lacerated  his  feel¬
ings,  as  to  have  a  direct  tendency  to  counteract  the  good
effects  which  he  has,  notwithstanding,  experienced ;  often  has
he,  himself,  most  appositely,  referred  to  these  distresses  as
constituting  (  a  refinement  of  affliction.’

“  But  slight  (if  any)  improvement  can  be  noted  as  regards
the  paralysis  of  the  lower  limbs,  independent  of  the  absence
of  the  terrific  darting  pains  before  alluded  to  ;  many  tantaliz¬
ing  fluctuations  continue  to  occur,  indicating  that  the  depriva¬
tion  of  sight  is  not  the  result  of  organic  change.  In  reference
to  this  part  of  the  case  I  find  the  following  among  my  notes.

“  The  patient  is  often  able  to  distinguish  daylight,  parti¬
cularly  when  he  first  wakes  in  the  morning;  also  artificial


perfectly  Blind  for  eleven  years.


13  7


light ;  he  describes  the  appearance  to  be  a  circle  of  luminous
whiteness,  the  periphery  of  which,  on  one  occasion,  he  indi¬
cated  by  using  his  outstretched  arm  as  a  radius;  he  feels  sure
that  this  appearance  always  proceeds  from  a  real  luminous
object,  as  he  recollects  that  a  similar  hazy  luminosity  consti¬
tuted  one  stage  in  the  progress  towards  blindness,  many  years
since ;  further,  he  has  often  remarked,  that,  shortly  after  the
commencement  of  the  mesmeric  treatment,  this  perception  of
light  commenced  in  the  right  eye,  afterwards  in  the  left,  and,
lately,  in  both ;  the  very  order  in  which  vision  had  ultimately
departed.  On  the  23rd  of  April,  I  employed  the  fixed  look,
as  usual,  when  he,  suddenly  thrust  out  his  arm  (the  hand
almost  touching  my  face,  but  rather  off,  on  my  right  side)
exclaiming,  f  what's  that?'  alluding,  as  it  afterwards  appeared,
to  a  patch  of  white  light,  about  the  size  of  his  hand.  In  this
case,  it  should  seem,  that  the  physical  effect,  produced  by
the  fixed  look,  acted  as  a  blow  in  occasioning  a  sensation  of
light.  No  longer  ago  than  Friday  the  28th  ulto.,  he  informed
me  that  he  had  seen,  a  day  or  two  previous,  the  rim  of  his  hat,
while  out  on  the  heath,  in  his  wheeled  chair.  All  these  appear¬
ances  are,  however,  very  inconstant,  perfect  darkness  being
the  most  prominent  features  in  the  series.  He  did  not,  how¬
ever,  experience  anything  analagous  before  mesmerism  was
resorted  to,  except  when  under  the  influence  of  the  treatment
adopted  by  Dr.  Toulmin  last  year,  and  then  flashes  of  light
were  mixed  up  with  other  effects.  Altogether  those  alterna¬
tions  are  very  perplexing,  and  can  only  be  met  by  perseverance.

“  Apart  from  therapeutic  results,  I  may  mention  that,
since  my  last  communication,  some  additional  mere  ‘  pheno-
mena;  have  supervened,  interesting  in  themselves,  and  under
circumstances  rather  peculiar,  as  will  be  seen  in  the  sequel.

“  The  gentry  in  the  neighbourhood  are  strongly  under
the  influence  of  the  example  of  the  good  Samaritan,  and  both
Captain  Peach  and  his  mother  have  long  experienced  the
soothing  effect  of  the  kind  attentions  and  good  offices  of  many
friends  whose  sympathy  has  been  strongly  excited  by  this

afflicted  pair.  One  of  these,  Miss - ,  had  up  to  the

middle  of  last  April  been  a  very  frequent  visitant,  and  be¬
guiled  many  a  tedious  hour  of  the  Captain's  monotonous
existence  by  reading,  or  otherwise  making  her  various  ac¬
quired  accomplishments  available.  On  one  occasion,  about  the
time  alluded  to,  she  found  Captain  Peach  suffering  from  an
accession  of  spasm.  Having  several  times  witnessed  the  relief
which  I  had  been  able  to  afford  him  under  similar  circum¬
stances,  she  felt  impelled  to  attempt  to  effect  the  same  benefit,
in  which,  as  I  was  afterwards  informed  by  Mrs.  Peach,  she

l  2


138  Extraordinary  effects  of  Mesmerism,  on  a  Gentleman,

perfectly  succeeded.  It  was  a  subject  of  remark  that  the  in¬
fluence  exerted  by  this  young  lady  was  identical  with  mine,
(in  quality,  but  more  energetic)  which  I  did  not  fail  to  note,
as  such  had  not  been  the  case,  on  more  than  one  previous
occasion,  with  other  parties  who  had  been  willing  to  operate
in  my  absence,  with  a  view  to  the  increased  benefit  which  a
more  frequent  repetition  of  the  process  than  I  could  admin¬
ister  was  supposed  likely  to  produce.

“  In  order  that  the  subject  may  be  more  intelligible,  I  will
briefly  state  the  Captain’s  own  account  of  his  sensations  while
under  the  mesmeric  influence,  given  by  the  aid  of  that  pecu¬
liar  kind  of  consciousness  which  he  then  possesses.  In  reply
to  my  enquiries,  he  has  often  described  the  effect  to  be  ‘  an
intense  and  delightful  tranquillity/  without  any  cognizance  of
body ,  joined  to  the  most  perfect  indisposition  to  motion  of  any
kind,  or  even  speech.  Sometimes  he  has  characterized  his
sensations,  by  saying  “  I  feel  as  nobody,  but  very  happy.

“I  had  long  wished  for  an  assistant  in  the  good  work,  and

found  no  difficulty  in  inducing  Miss - to  follow  up  her

first  attempt,  as  often  as  convenient  to  her,  on  the  days  of
my  non-attendance.  Her  influence  up  to  the  present  time  has
become  so  decided  that  she  has  frequently  mesmerised  the
patient  from  the  opposite  side  of  the  room,  he  not  being  even
conscious  of  her  presence.  This  you  have  witnessed  on  two
occasions ;  in  the  first  instance  you  were  accompanied  by  Dr.
Elliotson,  and,  in  the  second  by  Mr.  Symes,  of  Grosvenor-
street.  The  latter  instance  was  most  marked,  from  the  cir¬
cumstance  of  several  other  parties  being  present,  and  the
Captain’s  politeness  prompting  him  to  resist  to  the  utmost
the  influence  which  was  stealing  over  him.  You,  doubtless,
noted  the  suspicious  manner  in  which  he  suddenly  advanced
his  hands  in  different  directions,  having  on  a  former  occa¬
sion  detected  the  young  lady’s  presence  under  similar  circum¬
stances  by  that  manoeuvre.  On  another  occasion,  he  was

taking  a  glass  of  wine,  not  being  aware  that  Miss - was

influencing  him,  when  he  attributed  the  growing  confusion  of
his  ideas  to  the  wine.

“  I  now  come  to  the  additional  phenomena  before  alluded
to.  These  have  only  manifested  themselves  subsequent  (and
I  believe,  consequent)  to  my  influence  having  been  re¬
inforced  as  above  stated.

“  On  the  23rd  of  April  last,  the  patient  having  been  fully
mesmerised  for  the  preceding  half  hour,  I  attempted  (as  I
had  often  done  before)  to  excite  various  portions  of  the  brain,
more  as  a  matter  of  habit,  than  with  any  decided  expectation
of  success.  All  at  once  his  countenance  brightened  up,  and


perfectly  Blind  for  eleven  years.


139


he  made  a  chuckling  laugh.  I  was  excessively  surprized,  and
endeavoured  to  draw  from  him  what  was  passing  in  his  mind.
His  only  reply  was,  ‘  I  have  had  such  a  happiness,  but  it  is
gone/  As  he  shewed  a  tendency  to  awake,  I  made  a  few
passes,  and  renewed  my  attempt,  with  the  object  of  bringing
back  the  (  happiness/  But  a  very  opposite  result  took  place,
indeed,  no  response  at  all  came  for  some  time ;  and  I  had
relapsed  into  my  previous  desultory  proceeding,  when  again,
and  in  a  moment,  the  countenance  saddened;  and  the  patient
gave  way  to  a  loud  and  violent  paroxysm  of  grief,  accompanied
by  sobs  and  a  copious  flow  of  tears,  but  still  unable  to  assign
a  cause  for  the  feeling  of  ‘  melancholy  and  wretchedness/
which  came  over  him.  This  paroxysm  lasted  for  a  minute  or
so,  and  was  ultimately  dispersed  by  transverse  passes  and  by
breathing  over  the  portions  of  the  brain  which  I  had  mani¬
pulated.  I  do  not  recall  the  particular  organs,  as  my  pro¬
ceedings  were  altogether  of  so  desultory  a  character  that  no
clue  would  be  afforded  to  those  which  were  connected  with
these  manifestations.  As  before,  he  seemed  about  to  awake,
but  was  again  checked  by  passes.  When  demesmerised,  he
felt  at  a  loss  as  to  what  had  been  done  to  him  to  occasion  so
great  a  feeling  of  happiness,  and  its  sudden  change,  in  an
instant,  to  that  of  wretchedness,  without,  however,  making
any  allusion  to  phrenology,  or  seeming  to  be  aware  of  any  of
my  proceedings.  He  has  studiously  been  kept  in  ignorance,
in  order  that  further  experiments  should  be  clear  of  all  men¬
tal  association.  During  the  paroxysm  his  mother,  whose  atten¬
tion  had  been  attracted  to  my  proceedings,  became  greatly
alarmed ;  she  has  since  stated  that  if  it  had  continued  much
longer,  she  must  have  cried  too.

“  It  is  worthy  of  remark  that  this  fit  of  crying  came  on
at  the  time  my  mind  was  intently  occupied  with  an  opposite
manifestation.  What,  then,  becomes  of  the  objection  so  often
urged,  that  the  so-called  phrenological  phenomena,  under  the
influence  of  mesmerism,  are  merely  the  result  of  unconscious
mental  suggestions  on  the  part  of  the  operator.  In  this
instance  sadness  was  totally  out  of  my  thoughts.

“  Up  to  the  present  time,  I  have  frequently,  and  with  more
method,  renewed  these  experiments,  which  have  resulted,  as
follows.

“  ‘  Gaiety*  being  excited  in  each  hemisphere,  a  beautiful
smile  ensues,  accompanied  by  a  chuckling  laugh  of  a  more  or
less  decided  character.

“  *  Colour*  being  similarly  treated,  the  eyelids  begin  slowly
to  vibrate,  and  then,  gradually  to  open  wide,  maintaining  a


140  Extraordinary  effects  of  Mesmerism  on  a  Gentleman,

fixed  and  meaningless  stare,  while  the  excitement  is  con¬
tinued,  but  closing  immediately  upon  its  removal ;  if  asked
what  he  sees,  he  replies  ‘  black.3

“  ‘  Ideality  being  stimulated  in  the  ordinary  manner,  the
right  fore-arm  begins  slowly  to  elevate  itself  (to  an  angle  of
about  30°)  with  a  succession  of  slight  convulsive  motions ;
when  fully  raised,  it  remains  so  after  the  excitement  is
removed,  and  is  found  to  be  rigid.

“  The  above  are  the  only  phrenological  manifestations
which  I  have  been  able  to  obtain  up  to  this  date.

“  There  is  yet  a  f  phenomenon 3  of  a  different  kind  to  be
mentioned.  You  will  recollect  that  on  the  occasion  of  Dr.
Elliotson’s  last  visit  (on  the  16th  ulto.)  he  suggested  that
‘  community  of  taste 3  should  be  tried.  It  was  so,  and  suc¬
ceeded  admirably.  I  have  since  repeated  the  experiment  with
equal  success,  particularly  on  the  evening  of  the  25th  ulto.
in  the  presence  of  Dr.  Toulmin,  whose  gravity  was  not  proof
against  the  results.  I  introduced  a  succession  of  articles  into
my  mouth  (at  the  same  time  holding  the  patient’s  hand,)  the
climax  being  a  most  villanous  compound.  The  consequent
sucking,  biting,  swallowing  actions,  accompanied  by  well
marked  wry  faces  on  the  part  of  the  Captain,  were  most
amusing ;  camomile,  rhubarb,  and  ginger,  seemed  to  be  the
most  annoying,  and  liquorice  the  most  grateful ;  in  no  case,
could  he  describe  what  he  was  tasting,  notwithstanding  such
strong  indications  of  cognizance.

“  In  my  former  letters,  I  omitted  to  describe  the  principal
tests  applied  to  ascertain  the  degree  of  insensibility  to  mecha¬
nical  injury;  they  are  as  follows.  Besides  pinching,  pricking,
&c.,  he  bears,  without  the  slightest  motion  or  change  of
countenance,  the  introduction  of  a  bit  of  string  up  the  nos¬
trils  (almost  to  the  level  of  the  eyes),  although  it  be  agitated
so  as,  ordinarily,  to  produce  the  greatest  effect.  The  tip  of
his  nose  may  also  be  pushed  aside  by  the  point  of  a  fine
needle,  producing  a  flow  of  blood,  but  no  appearance  of  sen¬
sation  ;  the  same  when  applied  internally  to  the  most  sensitive
part  of  the  division  between  the  nostrils.  He  does  not  readily
answer,  when  addressed  by  any  other  than  his  mesmeriser;  nor
does  he  appear  to  be  disturbed  by  loud  noises,  such  as  striking
the  shovel  sharply  with  the  poker  close  to  his  ear,  bawling
with  equal  proximity,  &c.,  &c.

“  On  one  occasion,  I  made  his  arm  rigid  without  disturbing
his  ordinary  consciousness  by  previous  general  mesmerisation.
He  being  blind  and  using  no  effort  to  support  his  arm  in  a
horizontal  position,  the  effect  was  the  same  to  him  as  if  his


perfectly  Blind  for  eleven  years .


141


arm  had  been  resting  on  his  lap ;  indeed  such  would  have
been  his  idea,  if  he  had  not  been  cognizant  of  the  commence¬
ment  of  the  experiment.

“  On  one  occasion  lately  I  left  him  to  awake  spontane¬
ously  ;  he  did  so,  but  quite  rigid  all  over.  J ane,  the  servant,
had  some  difficulty  in  relaxing  him.

“  You  will  recollect  that  Dr.  Elliofson  pointed  out  various
modes  of  deepening  the  influence ;  more  particularly  by  the
operator  applying  the  tip  of  his  nose  to  that  of  the  patient :
you  will  also  recollect  that  this  was  verified  instanter  upon
our  patient.  I  repeated  the  experiment  on  my  next  visit,
and,  independent  of  the  legitimate  result,  was  surprized  to
perceive  that  he  appeared  to  be  impatient  under  the  process,
and  shewed  a  disposition  to  shake  off  some  effect ,  without
however  seeming  to  have  the  power.  When  awake,  he  com¬
plained  of  having  been  annoyed  by  a  great  weight  on  his  nose,
and  wondered  what  could  have  been  done  to  him  to  occasion  it.
In  reference  to  this  subject,  he  also  used  the  following  very
strong  expression, — that  it  seemed  as  if  “  his  nose  had  been
driven  into  his  head.”  This  sensation  has  not  presented  itself
since,  although  the  experiment  has  been  repeated  several
times.

“  I  am  happy  to  add  that  the  Captain's  anxiety  on  his
mother's  account  is  now  greatly  relieved,  as,  for  some  days
past,  she  has  derived  great  benefit  from  Dr.  Toulman's  treat¬
ment.  He  goes  out  for  a  couple  of  hours  almost  every  day,
and  feels  the  good  effect  of  the  change ;  the  only  drawback
arises  out  of  his  great  susceptibility  to  slight  colds.

“  I  am,  my  dear  Sir,

“  Yours  very  truly,

“  J.  Holland.”

P.S.  June  the  6th.  I  went  with  Dr.  Elliotson,  and  his
friends,  Lord  Adare,  Mr.  Henry  S.  Thompson,  of  Fairfield
House,  and  Mr.  Crompton,  of  Sion  Hill,  Yorkshire,  to  see
Captain  Peach ;  unfortunately  Mr.  Holland  was  not  there ;  I
was  therefore  obliged  to  mesmerise  him,  having  never  done  so
before.  I  succeeded  however  very  satisfactorily,  indeed  quite
as  well  as  though  Mr.  H.  had  been  there.  I  first  looked  at
his  eyes,  and  the  usual  effect  was  produced,  viz.,  smarting
and  watering.  I  then  in  a  few  minutes  got  him  into  his
usual  deep  mesmeric  sleep,  in  which  state  he  does  not  admit
that  he  is  asleep.  After  catalepsing  his  arms,  I  produced  the
three  phrenological  phenomena  he  usually  shews.  On  touch¬
ing  Colour  he  opened  his  eyes,  and  when  asked  what  he  saw,
said  “  Black.”  Ideality  produced  the  effect  of  raising  his


142  Important  Mesmeric  treatment  of  a  Mental  Affection,

right  hand  ;  and  Gaiety  made  him  more  than  smile,  and  say
he  felt  very  happy  and  pleasant.  I  then  tried  community  of
taste ;  first  I  put  Spanish  liquorice  into  my  mouth — he  said
it  was  pleasant — rather  sweet :  gentian  root — he  said  it  was
bitter :  cardamom  seeds — he  said  it  was  hot :  sugar  was  sweet  :
vinegar  was  acid  :  cinnamon  did  not  appear  to  affect  him,
but  I  afterwards  put  some  salt  into  my  mouth,  and  he  said  it
was  aromatic  :  water  he  described  simply  as  wet ;  he  would
not  admit  that  it  was  grog.  I  forgot  to  pass  a  bit  of  string
up  his  nose,  which  he  bears  without  moving  a  muscle.  I
then  awoke  him,  and  he  shewed  as  usual  (with  him)  all  the
signs  of  a  man  just  awake  from  a  very  sound  sleep,  but  would
not  admit  that  he  had  been  asleep.

The  young  lady  came  in  whilst  he  was  asleep,  and  I
wished  her  to  mesmerise  him  after  he  was  awake  without  his
knowing  of  her  presence,  as  I  saw  her  do  beautifully  on  two
occasions  from  the  further  side  of  the  room ;  but  she  was  too
nervous.

T.  Chandler.


Y.  Important  Mesmeric  treatment  of  a  Mental  Affection.

By  Mr.  Chandler,  Surgeon,  Botherhithe.

The  following  case  is  of  equal  practical  importance  with  that
of  Captain  Peach,  and  shows  that  there  is  as  much  science  in
administering  mesmerism  as  there  is  in  giving  calomel  or  any
other  medicine.  I  make  this  remark,  because  some  profes¬
sional  men  who  have  been  convinced  of  the  truths  of  mes¬
merism,  have  again  discarded  it  from  their  list  of  therapeutics,
as  being  unscientific,  inexplicable,  and  uncertain  in  its  opera¬
tion  and  effects.  Will  these  learned  philosophers  explain
(except  upon  theory)  how  their  dose  of  calomel,  opium,
hydrocyanic  acid,  or  other  strong  medicine,  acts  upon  the
system  ?  Will  they  inform  us  what  is  the  difference  between
a  positive  and  negative  current  of  electricity,  and  why  a
magnet  lifts  a  piece  of  iron?  We  are  obliged  to  be  contented
with  the  theory  of  all  these  facts,  and  many  thousands  more ;
why  do  we  not  then  take  mesmerism  on  the  same  terms,  and
turn  it  to  as  good  an  account  as  possible  in  relieving  human
sufferings.

Miss  M.  D.,  set.  17,  has  always  enjoyed  excellent  health,
and  is  of  a  particularly  cheerful  disposition.  About  four  or
five  months  ago  she  had  a  slight  fit  of  hysteria,  so  slight  that
it  was  not  taken  any  notice  of;  but  on  its  being  repeated,
about  once  in  a  month  or  five  weeks,  the  nature  of  the  disease


by  Mr.  Chandler.


143


became  evident,  and  since  Christmas,  the  attacks  have  gra¬
dually  become  more  frequent  and  severe,  first  occurring  once
in  a  fortnight,  then  once  a  week,  and  at  last  every  second
day,  and  usually  in  the  evening.

On  the  evening  of  the  29th  of  January,  1847,  I  first  saw
her  in  a  very  severe  attack,  requiring  considerable  force  to
restrain  her ;  there  was  no  hesitation  in  pronouncing  it  the
same  disease  two  of  her  brothers  had  suffered  from,  when
about  the  same  age,  both  of  whom  were  cured  by  mesmerism ;
indeed  one  of  them  was  my  first  case.*  Mesmerirm  was  of
course  suggested  by  the  family,  it  having  been  found  so  effi¬
cient  on  former  occasions,  and  I  commenced  accordingly  on
the  31st  of  January,  taking  care  to  mesmerise  before  the  time
of  the  attack.  The  effect  was  truly  magical ;  she  was  asleep  in
less  than  two  minutes,  her  head  dropping  on  her  chest :  the
attack  came  on  in  five  minutes,  again  shewing  the  similitude
between  this  and  the  brothers*  cases,  for  their  attacks  were
always  brought  on  at  will  by  mesmerism.  Instead  of  requiring
three  people  to  hold  her,  as  it  did  on  the  29th,  I  kept  her  in  her
chair  by  placing  a  finger  against  her  shoulder.  The  attack
lasted  nearly  an  hour,  but  she  awoke  quite  comfortable,  and
ate  a  good  supper  afterwards,  instead  of  being  exhausted,  as
she  had  been  after  her  former  attacks.  The  fit  was  modified
just  in  the  same  manner  as  in  the  young  men*s  cases ;  yet  it
cannot  be  said  that  she  imitated,  for  she  never  saw  either  of  her
brothers,  nor  did  the  second  one  ever  see  the  first,  in  the  disease;
yet  the  similitude  between  the  three  cases  was  most  striking.

February  1st.  I  thought,  as  the  attack  had  appeared  to
have  put  on  a  tirtian  character,  that  we  should  go  over  the
day  without  one.  In  this  I  was  deceived,  for  in  the  evening
there  was  every  appearance  of  an  attack  approaching.  I
therefore  mesmerised  her,  and  it  quickly  came  on,  which,  I
believe,  from  experience  with  her  brothers,  it  would  not  have
done  had  there  not  been  a  fit  near  coming.

I  mesmerised  her  every  day  to  the  12th,  (varying  the
hour,)  when,  as  there  appeared  to  be  no  fit  during  the  sleep,
I  determined  to  omit  it  on  the  13th;  but  early  in  the  evening
of  that  day,  an  attack  came  on,  evidently  a  relapse  of  her
disease,  and  with  increased  violence.  On  my  arrival,  I  found
her  furious,  biting  at  those  around  her,  laughing,  crying,
screaming,  and  struggling  in  a  most  horrible  manner;  in
fact,  just  as  violent  as  either  of  her  brothers  had  at  any  time
been,  and  almost  as  strong.

Finding  passes  out  of  the  question,  on  account  of  her
*  See  Zoist,  Vol.  I.,  p.  162  ;  and  Vol.  II.,  p.  374.


144  Important  Mesmeric  treatment  of  a  Mental  Affection,

great  violence,  I  immediately  placed  my  fingers  on  her  eyes,
and  in  five  seconds  she  became  perfectly  quiet,  so  as  not  to
require  any  further  restraint,  though  before  I  arrived  it  was
as  much  as  three  of  her  brothers  could  do  to  keep  her  on  the
bed.  The  influence  I  exerted  over  her  was  not  a  matter  of
accident,  for  the  same  thing  happened  several  times  afterwards,
and  was  invariably  attended  by  the  same  results ;  a  brother
could  command  her  for  a  short  time,  but  his  influence  ap¬
peared  to  cease ;  but  the  moment  I  put  my  fingers  on  her
eyes,  without  speaking,  she  would  become  quiet.  I  have
frequently  been  a  considerable  time  in  the  room  exerting  an
influence  over  her  without  her  knowing  it,  and  when  at  length
I  have  spoken  to  her,  she  has  always  expressed  the  greatest
surprize  at  my  presence.

The  attacks  continued  with  great  violence  and  frequency
(sometimes  three  or  four  times  in  the  day),  until  the  23rd,
when  finding  we  were  not  gaining  ground,  I  determined  to
try  a  new  method,  namely,  keeping  her  permanently  under
the  influence  of  mesmerism  for  some  hours.  I  therefore  mes¬
merised  her  at  4  o'clock,  and  left  her  till  the  following  morn¬
ing  at  11,  when  I  found  that  she  had  passed  a  comfortable
night,  without  any  appearance  of  a  fit.  I  awoke  her  for
about  half  an  hour,  and  then  sent  her  off  again  until  the
evening,  when  I  again  gave  her  half  an  hour’s  holiday.  On
sending  her  to  sleep  after  this,  (which  is  now  done  by  a
single  pass,  or  a  nod,  or  even  a  wink,)  she  had  a  slight  fit  of
laughing ;  showing  evidently  that  the  disease  was  only  waiting
its  opportunity,  and  was  not  yet  removed.

The  following  day  (Thursday)  was  passed  in  the  same
manner,  and  on  Friday  morning,  the  26th,  I  thought  it  time
to  try  how  she  would  behave,  if  allowed  to  remain  unmes¬
merised  for  a  few  hours.  I  accordingly  awoke  her  at  11
o’clock,  and  promised  to  return  and  remesmerise  her  at  4 ;
unfortunately  at  three  she  had  a  slight  attack,  but  having
been  so  long  under  the  influence,  one  of  her  brothers,  who
happened  to  be  present,  immediately  mesmerised  her  without
difficulty,  and  the  fit  only  lasted  ten  minutes,  and  was  not
violent.

The  phenomena,  during  the  time  she  remains  asleep,  are
most  curious.  She  does  not  remain  permanently  in  the  deep
coma  as  many  do,  but  continues  to  awake  at  intervals  of  one
or  two  minutes,  into  a  sort  of  semicoma;  being  perfectly
sensible  of  the  state  she  is  in,  and  holding  a  broken  conver¬
sation  with  those  in  the  room  in  a  most  collected  manner ;
falling  asleep  with  a  word  half  uttered,  and  resuming  her
sentence,  where  she  left  off,  on  awaking  the  next  time,  or


by  Mr.  Chandler.


145


sometimes,  when  she  has  only  uttered  a  word  or  two,  beginning
the  sentence  again,  and  speaking  very  rapidly,  knowing  she
has  but  little  time.  She  takes  her  meals  in  the  same  broken
way,  often  falling  asleep  with  a  piece  in  her  mouth,  and
frequently  taking  a  sip  of  drink,  and  falling  asleep  before
swallowing  it.  She  takes  several  naps  whilst  cleaning  her
teeth,  and  the  same  whilst  washing  her  face,  often  remaining
in  a  most  ludicrous  position.  It  is  also  curious  that  she  has
each  night  taken  her  natural  rest,  apparently  independent  of  the
mesmerism,  but  resuming  precisely  the  same  state  on  awaking
in  the  morning.  During  the  short  intervals  of  profound  sleep
she  is  insensible  to  pain  over  the  whole  body,  and  I  can,
when  she  is  in  the  semicoma,  or  even  when  the  influence  of
mesmerism  is  taken  off,  mesmerise  any  particular  part,  and
it  becomes  very  nearly  insensible.  I  turned  this  to  account
in  extracting  a  large  molar  tooth  for  her;  she  objected  to
have  it  done  whilst  asleep,  but  permitted  me  to  mesmerise
the  part,  when  she  was  not  under  the  influence.  It  succeeded
admirably ;  she  declared  she  should  not  have  known  it  was
being  drawn  if  she  had  not  been  waiting  for  the  crunch.
One  of  her  brothers  would  not  believe  that  she  was  insensible
to  pain,  but  said  if  I  would  allow  him  to  tickle  her  foot  and
she  remained  motionless,  he  should  be  convinced,  as  he  knew
she  could  not  possibly  bear  it.  I  instantly  permitted  it,  and
she  did  not  move  a  muscle,  but  whilst  he  was  tickling  her  a
second  time,  I  made  transverse  passes  and  awoke  her,  when
she  instantly  jumped  up,  and  rushed  after  her  brother  in  a
state  of  the  greatest  excitement,  which  took  me  some  minutes
to  subdue.

27th.  As  she  had  an  attack  yesterday  (though  a  slight
one,)  during  the  time  she  was  awake,  I  wished  to  keep  her
asleep  to-day ;  but  at  her  earnest  solicitation,  I  agreed  to
give  her  two  hours,  and  accordingly  awoke  her  from  11
till  1,  without  any  unpleasant  result.  I  gave  her  another
short  holiday  in  the  evening,  and  a  delightful  time  it  appears
to  her,  for,  being  so  thoroughly  conscious  of  the  state  she  is
in,  and  not  being  able  to  amuse  herself,  though  naturally  of
a  very  lively  and  active  disposition,  the  time  passes  heavily ;
she  is,  nevertheless,  quite  sensible  of  the  benefit  she  is  de¬
riving  from  the  plan,  and  has  the  good  sense  to  submit  with¬
out  murmuring.

28th.  Awoke  her  at  1,  and  left  her,  promising  to  call
and  put  her  to  sleep  at  half-past  3 ;  but  being  engaged  with
a  labour,  it  was  a  quarter  past  4  before  I  arrived.  I  found
her  quite  well,  but  being  desirous  of  commanding  her  in  case
of  my  unavoidable  absence  at  any  future  time,  I  mesmerised


146  Important  Mesmeric  treatment  af  a  Mental  Affection,

a  glass  of  water  and  gave  it  her  to  drink.  She  fell  asleep,
though  not  quite  so  quickly  as  by  the  passes ;  but  the  sleep
was,  if  anything,  more  profound  than  usual.  She  has  not
had  even  a  threatening  of  a  fit.

March  1st.  Wishing  to  try  still  further  the  effect  of  mes¬
merised  water,  I  awoke  her  at  half-past  12,  and  left  a  glass  mes¬
merised,  which  I  desired  her  to  drink  at  4.  As  she  had  pain
arising  from  gastric  irritation  (evidently  quite  independent  of
her  fits),  which  made  her  irritable  and  uneasy,  the  water  was
given  her  at  twenty  minutes  before  4,  and  in  three  minutes
she  was  in  her  usual  mesmeric  sleep.  I  called  at  half-past  4,
and  found  her  as  much  influenced  as  though  I  had  mesmerised
her.  As  she  was  suffering  from  deranged  liver  and  stomach,
I  gave  her  two  grains  of  calomel  this  evening.

2nd.  This  morning  I  found  her  complaining  of  severe
pain  in  the  bowels  with  great  tenderness ;  she  had  vomited  a
considerable  quantity  of  bile,  but  the  calomel  had  not  acted.
The  pain  was  so  severe  that  it  had  in  a  great  degree  dissipated
the  mesmeric  coma.  Thinking  this  pain  (as  it  came  in  pa¬
roxysms)  might  be  connected  with  the  hysterical  disease,
though  evidently  not  depending  entirely  upon  it,  I  applied
local  mesmerism  by  pressing  with  the  points  of  my  fingers  on
the  bowels.  At  first  she  could  scarce  bear  me  to  touch  her,
but  by  degrees  the  tenderness  subsided,  and  then  the  pain
left,  so  that  in  less  than  ten  minutes  she  was  perfectly  easy,
and  declared  that  she  felt  quite  well,  and  was  able  to  get  up,
though  only  a  quarter  of  an  hour  before  she  said  she  thought
she  should  be  obliged  to  remain  in  bed  all  day ;  she  was  so
comfortable  with  regard  to  her  hysteria  that  I  left  her  awake
for  the  remainder  of  the  day,  leaving  a  glass  of  water  mes¬
merised  in  case  of  accident.  The  calomel  acted  freely,  and
she  was  quite  well  till  the  evening,  when  I  thought  it  advisa¬
ble  to  send  her  to  sleep  for  the  night.

3rd.  Found  her  suffering  from  slight  globus  hystericus,
which  a  little  local  mesmerism  soon  relieved ;  left  her  awake
and  called  in  the  evening  at  seven,  mesmerised  a  glass  of
water  to  be  taken  at  ten ;  she  has  not  had  the  slightest  hint
of  a  fit.  She  sleeps  immediately  on  swallowing  one  mouthful
of  the  water  quite  as  quickly  as  by  a  pass.  One  of  the  family
awakes  her  in  the  morning.  Last  night  shortly  after  taking
the  water  she  complained  of  tooth-ache,  but  on  rubbing  it
with  a  little  of  the  water  it  immediately  left.  This  occurred
on  several  occasions,  and  the  following  will  illustrate  still
more  the  wonderful  effect  of  local  mesmerism  upon  her.  One
morning  she  was  suffering  from  a  boil  on  her  knee,  which
was  so  painful  that  she  could  not  bend  the  joint.  I  com-


by  Mr.  Chandler.


147


menced  mesmerising  the  part,  which  at  first  was  so  tender
that  I  could  scarce  be  permitted  to  touch  it,  but  after  a  few
passes  all  the  pain  and  tenderness  left,  and  she  could  bend  it
as  well  as  the  other.  This  could  not  be  fancy,  for  I  distinctly
felt  the  thickening  which  is  usual  around  boils.

5th,  6th,  and  7th.  She  remains  quite  well.  I  leave  her
the  water  and  let  her  remain  mesmerised  all  night  as  a
precaution.

8th.  This  evening  she  had  a  short  but  rather  severe  fit,
brought  on  by  fright ;  one  of  the  family  succeeded  in  par¬
tially  mesmerising  her,  and  then  a  few  drops  of  the  water
were  poured  in  her  mouth,  and  she  was  immediately  quieted.

10th.  There  has  been  for  the  last  two  days  rather  a  hur¬
ried  manner,  I  have  therefore  thought  it  better  to  mesmerise
her  for  a  few  minutes  at  my  visit  in  the  morning ;  she  goes
off  with  one  pass  or  a  nod,  and  the  benefit  is  very  apparent
by  her  altered  look  when  she  awakes.

16th.  She  remains  free  from  her  regular  attacks,  but  is
liable  to  a  slight  fit  from  any  excitement.

18th.  The  attacks  rather  on  the  increase  these  last  two
days.  Finding  that  when  she  is  becoming  ill  she  will  not
drink  the  mesmerised  water,  I  have  adopted  the  plan  of  mes¬
merising  a  piece  of  steel,  which  is  put  into  her  hand  on  the
least  appearance  of  an  attack.  It  has  succeeded  to  a  certain
degree ;  when  she  is  well  it  takes  effect  instantly,  but  if  the
fit  has  commenced  she  will  not  permit  the  steel  to  be  put
near  her,  and  when  forced  upon  her  the  effect  is  not  by  any
means  so  great.

19th.  As  the  disease  does  not  so  readily  give  way  to  mes¬
merism  as  in  her  brothers*  cases,  the  family  have  become
uneasy  and  wish  to  try  medicine  and  further  advice.  I  ac¬
cordingly  met  Dr.  F.  Ramsbotham  to-day,  and  by  bringing
him  suddenly  to  her  without  previous  notice  he  had  an  oppor¬
tunity  of  seeing  her  during  an  attack.  He  confirmed  my
opinion  that  the  case  was  pure  hysteria  without  the  slightest
organic  disease — that  she  would  ultimately  recover  perfectly,
and  that  medicine  would  not  be  likely  to  benefit  her.  He
ordered  her,  however,  some  alterative  pills  at  night,  and
ferri  sulph.  with  pil.  galban.  co.  twice  a  day.  He  moreover
recommended  (having  witnessed  the  quieting  effect  of  mes¬
merism  upon  her)  that  it  should  be  continued  when  necessary,
observing  that  anything  which  had  the  effect  of  breaking  the
chain  of  the  attack  would  be  likely  to  be  beneficial.

20th.  I  extracted  the  tooth  before  alluded  to  (a  large
molar  in  the  lower  jaw)  ;  the  excitement  did  not  produce  an
attack.  I  before  stated,  that  though  she  was  awake  all  she


148  Important  Mesmeric  treatment  of  a  Mental  Affection,

felt  was  the  great  pulling ;  she  did  not  feel  the  lancing  of  the
gum,  nor  any  pain  afterwards  :  local  mesmerism  only  was
used.

24th.  She  is  having  her  fits  more  frequently  and  suddenly,
sometimes  starting  from  the  room  and  keeping  the  family  in
a  constant  state  of  alarm.  She  can  always  be  instantly  con¬
trolled  by  mesmerism  by  any  of  the  family,  but  after  a  short
time  they  lose  their  power  over  her,  and  she  becomes  more
or  less  unmanageable ;  when  I  go  in,  however,  let  her  be
ever  so  violent,  I  can  immediately  quiet  her  by  placing  my
fingers  on  her  eyes,  and  without  letting  her  know  I  am
present.  I  have  had  several  opportunities  of  proving  this ;
her  brother  having  been  touching  her  eyes  in  the  same
manner  before  my  arrival,  the  moment  I  speak,  (taking  care
it  shall  be  when  she  is  in  the  semicoma,)  she  expresses  the
most  natural  surprise  at  my  presence.  Though  she  may  have
several  slight  attacks  during  the  day,  in  the  evening  comes
the  regular  one,  and  there  is  always  the  same  routine  to  go
through.  About  eight  o’clock  she  begins  to  get  poorly,  we
then  get  her  up  stairs  and  give  her  a  light  supper ;  she  then
has  a  fit  of  talking,  and  after  some  difficuly  she  is  got  into
bed ;  then  comes  a  freak,  and  till  this  is  permitted  she  will
not  go  to  sleep  for  the  night :  at  present  she  must  have  a
jump,  after  which  she  turns  on  her  right  side,  goes  into  the
deep  coma,  and  remains  perfectly  quiet  till  the  morning.
This  turning  on  the  right  side  has  been  a  sure  sign  in  her
brothers’  cases  as  well  as  in  her’s  that  the  fit  was  over.

April  5th.  Though  she  has  had  two  or  three  fits  every
day  since  last  report,  and  her  evening  one  last  night  lasted
three  hours  and  was  very  violent  and  troublesome,  yet  to-day
she  remains  quite  well  and  goes  to  bed  even  without  the
slightest  appearance  of  a  fit ;  it  appears  as  though  the  disease
having  reached  its  climax  stops  suddenly.

I  should  have  mentioned  that  Dr.  Ramsbotham  saw  her
again  some  days  ago,  and  ordered  her  decoct,  aloes  with  mist,
ferri  co.  and  velerian,  but  without  any  apparent  effect ;  yet
as  the  disease  left  her  after  taking  it  about  two  days,  I  thought
it  as  well  to  give  it  to  her  again  when  she  had  a  relapse,  but
it  totally  failed.  She  remained  quite  well  till  the  15th,  the
evening  of  which  day  she  was  by  her  particular  desire  to
spend  with  her  brother  and  sister  at  my  house.  During  the
day,  however,  there  were  such  evident  signs  of  a  return  of
the  disease  that  she  could  not  have  been  permitted  to  have
gone  to  any  other  friend’s  house.  In  the  course  of  the
evening  she  was  several  times  so  flighty  that  I  thought  it
advisable  to  give  her  a  short  mesmeric  nap ;  in  spite  of  all.


by  Mr.  Chandler.


149


however,  just  before  supper- time  her  regular  attack  com¬
menced,  precisely  in  the  same  manner  as  it  left  eleven  days
before ;  it  lasted  above  two  hours,  and  caused  great  trouble
in  getting  her  home,  as  she  would  not  go  into  a  cab,  so  that
her  brother  and  myself  had  to  carry  her  part  of  the  way.
On  arriving  at  home  the  fright  and  excitement  caused  an
hysterical  fit  in  several  members  of  the  family,  amongst
others  the  brother  who  was  last  mesmerised  for  the  same
disease  some  three  years  ago  had  an  attack  so  like  his  former
ones  that  I  had  great  fear  they  would  be  repeated.  I  imme¬
diately  commenced  mesmerising  him,  and  curious  to  relate,
although  he  had  not  been  mesmerised  since  that  time,  he
came  at  once  under  the  influence,  and  was  very  soon  relieved.
After  the  attack  was  removed  he  complained  of  very  violent
pain  in  the  back,  which  was  immediately  relieved  by  local
tactile  passes — another  proof  of  his  being  under  mesmeric
influence.  He  had  no  further  attack.

16th.  Miss  D.  had  her  attack  in  the  evening  as  usual,  but
she  has  chosen  a  new  freak,  she  must  lift  somebody  or  some¬
thing  before  she  settles  to  sleep.  I  insisted  that  she  should
only  lift  the  pillow,  telling  her  she  should  fall  asleep  the
instant  she  attempted  to  lift  anything  else,  were  it  only  a  pin.
Out  of  mere  opposition  she  attempted  to  lift  her  sister  and
then  the  bolster,  but  became  fixed  the  moment  she  had
clasped  them  in  her  arms ;  she  then  felt  she  was  conquered,
tossed  the  pillow  up  two  or  three  times,  and  went  off  to  sleep
for  the  night.  It  appears  that  the  fit  must  have  some  vent
to  exhaust  its  exuberant  strength  upon  before  she  can  settle
for  the  night,  for  she  says,  “  I  must  do  something  before  I
go  to  sleep and  when  she  is  well  she  tells  us  she  is  quite
conscious  at  the  time  how  very  ridiculous  she  is,  but  cannot
possibly  restrain  herself.

17th.  As  she  still  continues  to  start  from  the  room,  taking
an  opportunity  yesterday  of  running  across  the  field  to  the
great  alarm  of  all  the  family,  I  determined  to  put  a  stop  to
it.  Accordingly  I  passed  my  hand  over  all  the  doors  and
windows  on  the  ground  floor,  telling  her  she  would  fall  asleep
the  moment  she  tried  to  pass  them.  This  succeeded  so  beau¬
tifully,  that  when  she  was  going  out  quietly  for  a  walk  with
her  brother,  she  fell  asleep  the  moment  her  first  foot  touched
the  door-sill,  the  second  foot  being  left  on  the  mat.  She  was
then  lifted  over  and  awoke.  The  same  thing  happened  on
her  return  to  the  house.

This  is  no  doubt  partly  the  effect  of  imagination,  but  it  is
not  entirely  so ;  for  on  several  occasions  she  has  been  going
out  or  coming  in  totally  forgetting  the  circumstance,  yet  the


150  Important  Mesmeric  treatment  of  a  Mental  Affection,

moment  she  touched  the  door  the  effect  answered  as  usual,
and  she  fell  asleep,  rousing  as  usual  after  a  short  time  into
the  semicoma,  and  asking  to  be  awoke,  saying  she  forgot.
It  appears  that  so  deep  an  impression  is  made  upon  the  nerv¬
ous  system — perhaps  the  sympathetic — that  it  is  impossible
for  the  patient  to  break  through  it.  It  may  be  as  well  to
mention  here  that  this  effect  remained  for  some  time  after
she  was  well;  the  family  wishing  it  not  to  be  removed  until
she  was  quite  safe.  When  she  had  been  well  some  eight  or
ten  days,  I  met  her  in  the  garden,  and  finding  that  she  still
had  a  nap  in  coming  through  the  door,  I  waved  my  hand  to¬
wards  the  house,  and  told  her  she  could  walk  in  and  out  for
the  present  without  going  to  sleep.  I  need  scarcely  add  that
the  spell  was  broken.

18th,  19th.  Much  the  same.  The  lifting  propensity  still
continues  ;  she  wishes  to  lift  every  body  who  comes  into  the
house,  and  sometimes  she  takes  up  a  chair  or  a  stool,  and
usually  falls  with  it  in  her  hand.  To  obviate  this,  I  have
ordered  that  she  shall  not  lift  any  body  or  anything;  the
moment  she  takes  hold  of  them  with  the  idea  of  forcibly
lifting  them  she  is  to  fall  asleep.  So  perfectly  did  this  suc¬
ceed,  that  when  she  had  been  well  for  nearly  a  fortnight,  she
inadvertently  lifted  her  sister’s  baby  to  the  window  in  a  play¬
ful  manner  to  shew  some  one  who  was  outside,  and  instantly
became  fixed,  though  she  had  till  that  moment  forgotten  the
circumstance.

20th.  There  is  less  disposition  to  run  and  lift,  finding
perhaps  that  she  cannot  accomplish  either.  A  very  disagree¬
able  feature  occurred  during  the  fit  this  evening — a  violent
screaming.  I  stopped  it  by  touching  her  throat  with  the
points  of  my  fingers  each  time  it  occurred,  but  could  not  en¬
tirely  prevent  it  as  she  was  too  much  excited  to  be  talked  to.
The  following  morning  I  told  her,  the  moment  she  attempted
to  scream  she  should  fall  asleep.  In  the  evening,  during  her
attack,  she  attempted  it,  but  of  course  failed.  Though  she
is  very  angry  at  finding  herself  thwarted  in  everything,  yet
when  she  is  well  she  is  quite  convinced  of  the  propriety  of  it,
and  even  begged  me  to  stop  the  screaming,  as  it  distressed
her  very  much  and  made  her  chest  sore.

22nd.  As  she  was  very  heavy  and  dull  this  morning,  and
complaining  of  great  lassitude  and  weight  over  the  eyes,  I
mesmerised  her  and  awoke  her  several  times  for  a  few  minutes,
which  completely  relieved  her.  I  have  noticed  in  a  former
communication  that  I  often  find  this  plan  very  beneficial.
She  is  now  having  five  minutes’  sleep  every  hour.  There  was
a  very  slight  fit  in  the  evening.


by  Mr.  Chandler.


151


23rd,  24th,  25th.  No  attack  on  either  day.  The  short
naps  have  been  continued,  but  she  is  getting  tired  of  them,
and  begins  to  shew  rather  too  much  quickness  in  her  manner.

26th.  Very  flighty  all  the  day :  in  the  evening  the  attack
returned  in  full  force.  The  mesmerism  completely  subdues
all  the  violence,  but  it  does  not  stop  the  talking  during  the
intervals  of  semicoma.  The  freak  this  evening  was,  that  she
must  slap  the  panelling  of  the  room  with  her  hand  before
going  to  sleep.  I  compromised  by  permitting  her  to  throw
one  shoe  at  it,  telling  her  to  fall  asleep  the  moment  she  at¬
tempted  even  to  throw  the  second :  she  threw  one,  and  pick¬
ing  it  up  tried  again,  but  fell  asleep  with  the  shoe  raised  to
her  shoulder  in  the  act  of  throwing.  So  complete  is  the
power  over  her  imagination,  that  I  believe  I  could  even  pre¬
vent  her  speaking  if  it  were  necessary.  Yet  I  cannot  en¬
tirely  prevent  the  attack,  as  I  invariably  could  in  the  young
men's  cases :  the  case  has  been  throughout  more  troublesome
and  complicated.

27th  and  28th.  A  troublesome  and  prolonged  attack  each
night ;  continues  to  throw  her  shoe,  and,  although  I  was  not
present,  she  could  not  throw  the  second  one.

29th.  The  disease  appears  to  have  been  coming  to  a  climax
these  last  three  days,  and,  as  on  a  former  occasion,  left  her
suddenly :  she  had  no  attack  this  evening,  but  a  very  slight
one  in  the  afternoon  from  excitement.  She  talked  last  even¬
ing  so  much  about  going  mad,  that  her  friends  were  alarmed,
and,  without  consulting  me,  sent  for  an  obscure  surgeon  at
the  West  End,  who  promulgated  some  very  crooked  crotchets.
He  hung  his  cap  on  the  colon,  and  took  up  his  brooms  (aloe-
tics  and  castor  oil)  to  sweep  it  out.  He  allowed  himself  six
weeks  to  accomplish  this  Augean  task.  I  watched  the  effect
for  three  weeks,  and  it  certainly  appeared  to  me  that  three  or
even  thirty  more  would  make  no  alteration  in  the  matter  dis¬
charged  from  the  bowels,  namely,  copious,  healthy,  feculent
motions;  just  the  same  as  would  be  produced  from  any
healthy  person  by  the  same  medicines.  He  pretended  to  say
that  an  oedematous  state  of  the  forehead,  shewing  pitting  on
pressure,  was  a  certain  sign  of  a  loaded  colon,  and  of  course
made  this  wonderful  phenomenon  appear  on  the  patient.  This
was  too  much  for  my  gravity,  I  could  not  help  laughing;
and,  on  comparing  the  foreheads  of  several  other  members  of
the  family,  I  clearly  shewed  that  they  were  all  alike.  If  any
of  the  readers  of  The  Zoist  have  ever  observed  anything  of
the  kind,  I  should  feel  particularly  obliged  by  a  communica¬
tion  on  the  subject.  I  have  asked  above  a  dozen  medical
men  of  high  standing  in  the  profession,  and  not  one  has  ever
VOL.  v.  M


152  Cases  selected  from  Mr.  Parker’s  Mesmeric  Experience ,

even  heard  of  this  extraordinary  symptom,  or  of  the  obscure
individual  who  promulgated  it.  For  the  present,  therefore,  I
have  no  hesitation  in  writing  it  down  rubbish.  There  is  an
old  saying,  that  “  it  is  better  to  be  born  lucky  than  rich
this  person  appears  at  any  rate  in  this  instance  to  have  been
the  former,  for  being  called  in  just  as  the  disease  was  ceasing,
he  makes  a  pretence  of  doing  a  great  deal  and  gets  the  credit
of  curing  it.

To  the  present  date  (June  5th)  Miss  D.  remains  well.  I
have  given  the  case  thus  in  detail,  for  two  reasons ;  first,  that
the  readers  of  The  Zoist  may  form  their  own  opinions  as  to
the  amount  of  credit  due  to  mesmerism  in  curing  it :  and
secondly,  because  it  certainly  contains  many  points  of  prac¬
tical  importance  in  using  the  remedy,  whether  it  is  allowed
to  have  had  any  effect  in  ultimately  curing  the  disease  or
not.

I  have  one  or  two  other  cases  worthy  of  notice,  but  my
present  communication  has  reached  such  a  length  that  I  think
I  had  better  reserve  them  for  the  next  number.  In  conclusion
I  will  just  observe,  that  I  have  for  a  long  time  placed  mes¬
merism  on  my  remedial  list,  and  always  recommend  it  when
I  consider  it  will  be  beneficial  to  my  patient ;  indeed  I  should
consider  myself  equally  culpable  in  omitting  to  recommend
mesmerism  in  a  case  of  hysteria,  tic  douloureux,  or  other
nervous  disease,  as  in  neglecting  to  give  quinine  in  ague  or
opium  in  delirium  tremens  :  and  I  have  very  little  doubt  that
the  day  will  come  when  the  propriety  of  so  doing  will  be
universally  recognized.


VI.  Cures  of  Neuralgia  of  various  parts,  After  Pains,  Abscess,
Ophthalmia,  acute  Rheumatism,  Deafness,  and  an  instance
of  Prevision,  being  a  few  Cases  selected  from  Mr.  Parker’s
Mesmeric  Experience  during  the  last  eighteen  months.  By
Mr.  John  B.  Parker,  Surgeon,  Exeter.

I.  Neuralgia  of  the  Face.

Miss  - - had  suffered  from  tic  douloureux  for  six

years,  during  which  time  she  had  tried  all  the  well-known
remedies  without  any  marked  benefit ;  besides  having  many
of  her  teeth  extracted.  On  my  first  visit  I  found  her  in
the  greatest  agony ;  the  act  of  speaking  aggravated  her  suf¬
ferings  so  much,  that  she  could  with  very  great  difficulty
articulate  two  words  in  succession,  and  this  occasioned  great


by  Mr.  John  B.  Parker.


153


distortion  of  countenance.  Six  days  mesmeric  treatment  quite
relieved  her  from  pain.  During  the  past  14  months  she  has
experienced  two  slight  returns  of  the  pain:  on  each  occasion
the  complaint  was  removed  by  one  mesmeric  sitting.  She  is
now  quite  well.

II.  Neuralgia.

Mr.  Davidge,  Milk  street,  Exeter,  had  suffered  very  se¬
verely  from  tic  douloureux  for  several  years.  The  various
remedies  recommended  for  such  cases  having  entirely  failed,
mesmerism  succeeded  in  relieving  him  the  first  application ,  and
in  five  days  he  was  able  to  attend  to  his  business  as  usual.

III.  Neuralgia  of  the  Hip.

Miss - having  for  five  months  suffered  much  pain

about  the  hip,  so  that  she  could  with  difficulty  and  in  much
pain  walk  across  the  room,  consulted  her  ordinary  medical
attendant  who  pronounced  it  a  hip  complaint.  The  parents
having  heard  of  many  of  my  mesmeric  cures,  sent  for  me ;
when  I  recommended  the  mother  to  mesmerise  the  daughter.
In  five  days  she  was  quite  well  and  able  to  walk  three  miles,
and  she  has  remained  well  to  this,  now  12  months  since.

IV.  Abscess  of  the  Lachrymal  Sac.

The  sister  of  this  young  lady  had  been  suffering  from  an
abscess  in  the  lachrymal  sac  for  18  months,  accompanied  with
very  distressing  pains  over  the  orbit  and  cheek.  She  had
consulted  several  eminent  surgeons  in  London  who  had  ad¬
vised  a  pin  to  be  worn  in  the  lachrymal  duct.  Leeches  had
been  previously  applied,  and  suppuration  of  the  leech  bites
had  invariably  followed.  Mesmeric  treatment  was  had  re¬
course  to,  and  in  three  weeks  all  the  distressing  symptoms  sub¬
sided.

V.  Prevision  of  Cure.

A  lady  had  a  large  tumour  of  the  left  ovary  of  nine  years
duration  which  has  been  completely  removed  by  the  application
of  leeches  to  the  os  uteri.  This  treatment  had  been  had
recourse  to  by  myself  with  very  decided  benefit  before  she  had
ever  been  mesmerised ;  but  in  her  mesmeric  sleep-waking  her
introvision  was  so  correct  as  to  tell  me  how  many  applications
of  leeches  would  be  necessary  to  remove  the  whole  of  the

m  2


154  Cases  selected  from  Mr.  Parker’s  Mesmeric  Experience,

tumour ;  and  her  prevision  lias  been  most  truly  verified.  The
tumour  of  the  side  was  so  large  as  to  cause  the  trunk  to  be
swerved  on  one  side  to  such  an  extent  as  to  produce  a  very
visible  distortion  of  the  spine.

YI.  Removal  of  After  Pains.

April  13,  1847,  Mrs.  C.  was  delivered  of  her  fifth  child,
after  a  natural  and  short  labour,  at  eight  in  the  morning.
The  after  pains  were  very  violent  and  I  ordered  her  several
doses  of  morphine  and  mesmerism.  The  morphine  was  taken
during  the  day  and  through  the  night.  On  my  visit  in  the
morning,  I  found  her  in  great  distress, — the  pains  constant
and  very  violent.  The  mesmerism  had  been  omitted.  She
was  then  mesmerised  in  my  presence,  and  in  twenty  minutes
the  pains  ceased.  I  requested  the  operation  to  be  repeated  if
the  pains  returned.  On  my  visit  the  following  morning  I
found  my  patient  quite  delighted  with  the  wonderful  effects
of  mesmerism ;  there  had  been  no  necessity  to  repeat  the
operation.


VII.  Neuralgia  of  the  Heart.

Mrs. - ,  aet.  42,  subject  to  violent  palpitation  of  the

heart  with  considerable  pain  of  the  organ,  occasionally  at¬
tended  with  faintness  and  much  pain  on  the  inside  of  the  left
arm,  much  aggravated  by  going  up  stairs.  The  pain  was
quite  subdued  by  the  first  application  of  mesmerism,  and  in
three  days  she  was  able  to  resume  the  active  duties  of  life.

VIII.  Ophthalmia.

My  own  little  boy,  set.  6,  had  a  very  severe  attack  of  ca¬
tarrhal  ophthalmia,  for  which  I  ordered  leeches,  blisters,
aperients,  soothing  and  astringent  applications,  without  the
least  relief.  In  fact  the  pain  was  becoming  more  and  more
severe.  He  was  then  mesmerised  twice  daily,  and  from  the
first  trial,  the  pain  was  much  subdued,  and  in  the  course  of  a
few  days  all  the  symptoms  were  removed  and  the  eyes  resumed
their  natural  lustre.  Under  ordinary  circumstances  this  would
have  become  strumous  ophthalmia, — the  most  troublesome
complaint  at  all  our  ophthalmic  institutions.  From  what  I
have  witnessed  in  this  case,  I  am  quite  satisfied  that  mes¬
merism  is  the  true  remedy  for  all  scrofulous  affections,  as  it
is  certainly  a  transfusion  of  the  nervous  energy :  and  as
diseases  may  be  transferred  from  one  individual  to  another


by  Mr.  John  B.  Parker.


155


without  an  act  of  the  will,  there  is  much  more  reason  to  believe
that  health  may  be  transferred  with  the  additional  assistance
of  the  will,  as  is  exhibited  in  my  daily  experience.*

IX.  Deafness.

Ann - set.  23,  had  been  very  deaf  for  three  years,

I  could  scarcely  make  her  understand  a  single  word.  She
was  mesmerised  daily  for  a  month,  when  her  hearing  was
quite  restored  and  she  now  hears  conversation  in  the  lowest  tone.

X.  Acute  Rheumatism.

Mr.  C.  for  three  succeeding  years  has  had  a  severe  attack
of  rheumatic  fever  :  each  attack  commencing  with  more  vio¬
lence  than  its  predecessor.  April  16,  1847,  he  sent  for  me.
He  was  then  suffering  very  acute  pains  in  the  whole  system.
I  had  bled  him  during  the  former  attacks  as  well  as  in  this.
In  the  preceding  attack  his  wife  had  some  prejudice  against
mesmerism,  and  consequently  he  had  very  little  benefit  from
it.  But  on  this  occasion  his  wife  mesmerised  him  when  he
had  any  acute  pain,  and  immediate  relief  has  invariably  fol¬
lowed  every  mesmeric  operation.  In  the  former  attacks  he  had
been  unable  to  move  till  a  month  or  five  weeks ;  in  this  attack
he  was  convalescent  at  the  end  of  a  fortnight.  The  result
of  this  case  is  the  perfect  confidence  of  the  whole  family  in
the  remedial  agency  of  mesmerism. t

Not  a  day  passes  without  my  being  consulted  for  pains  in
the  face,  ear-ache,  or  rheumatic  pains;  and  in  the  great  ma¬
jority  of  these  cases,  a  single  mesmeric  operation  is  quite
sufficient  to  remove  all  the  pain.  Such  a  multitude  of  these
cases  has  now  passed  under  my  own  observation,  that  mes¬
merism  is  resorted  to  in  Exeter  by  the  industrious  classes  as
a  most  extraordinary  remedial  agent.


*  See  cures  of  ophthalmia  and  of  scrofula  in  Vol.  II.,  p.  239 ;  Vol.  III.,
pp.  519,  24,  326;  Vol.  IV.,  pp.  458-9,  461-3.— Zoist.

t  See  similar  cases  in  Vol,  II.,  pp.  86,  257,  384;  Vol.  III.,  p.  326. — Zoist.


(  156  )


VII.  Cases  of  painless  Tooth  Extraction ,  and  of  extreme

Debility,  fyc.  By  Dr.  Storer,  Park  Street,  Bristol.

I.  Case  of  Hysteria  and  Spasm  with  Tooth  Extraction

without  Pain .

A  young  woman,  living  as  servant  with  a  respectable  family
in  this  city,  was  mesmerised  for  a  severe  hysterical  affection
with  spasms  at  the  pit  of  her  stomach.  She  was  also  suf¬
fering  from  violent  tooth-ache,  proceeding  from  a  decayed
tooth.  Three  sittings  relieved  the  hysteria ;  and,  finding
the  pain  in  the  face  still  continue,  I  advised  her  to  have
her  tooth  extracted  in  the  mesmeric  state.  She  consented,
and  attended  the  following  day  at  my  rooms,  where  I  was
about  to  give  a  private  demonstration  to  a  large  and  respect¬
able  party.

After  I  had  shewn  various  phenomena  on  different  cases,
hereafter  referred  to,  the  young  woman  was  introduced.  I
mesmerised  her  deeply  in  less  than  five  minutes.  The  dentist
was  Mr.  Williams  of  Park  Street,  up  to  this  period  a  stranger
to  me,  and,  though  only  suddenly  called  upon  to  attend,  he
very  kindly  consented.  After  having  opened  the  mouth  and
made  the  jaw  rigid,  I  placed  Mr.  Williams  en  rapport.  He
proceeded  to  freely  lance  the  gum,  and  then  skilfully  extracted
an  upper  molar  tooth,  which  required  great  force.  The
patient  was  then  made  to  rinse  her  mouth  with  water,  as  the
gum  bled  freely ;  and  afterwards  the  dentist  closed  the  gum
by  firm  pressure.  Perceiving  no  indications  of  pain  through¬
out,  and  in  reply  to  an  inquiry,  he  addressed  himself  to  those
present,  by  saying  that  closing  the  gums  was  frequently  a
painful  part  of  the  operation,  and,  though  he  had  applied
ether  with  success  in  several  cases,  yet  he  had  not  met  with
oue,  which  to  his  mind  had  been  so  entirely  satisfactory,  as
regards  insensibility  to  pain.  The  young  woman  was  then
demesmerised,  and  appeared  quite  incredulous  of  the  fact  of
the  extraction,  until  she  felt  the  cavity  and  was  shewn  her
tooth.  A  faint  moan  had  been  heard,  but  she  denied  all
knowledge  of  pain  or  the  operation.

II.  Nervous  Disease  with  great  Debility.

On  the  same  occasion,  I  introduced  two  cases  which  had
both  been  cured  by  mesmerism.  The  first  was  that  of  a
youth,  named  James  Waring,  about  14  years  of  age,  living
in  Thomas  Street,  in  this  city.  He  had  suffered  some  time
since  from  a  severe  nervous  affection,  considered  as  epilepsy
by  his  friends,  which  produced  wasting,  with  great  debility.


Cases  of  painless  Tooth  Extraction,  fyc.


15  7


Mesmerism  was  recommended,  and  in  about  six  weeks  he
was  convalescent.  His  strength  is  fully  restored,  he  is  now
a  stout  youth,  and  quite  well.  I  occasionally  mesmerise  him,
as  his  friends  allow  him  to  come  forward.  He  is  a  good  sub¬
ject,  shewing  various  mesmeric  phenomena.  He  is  phreno-
mesmeric,  and  in  his  waking  state,  rigidity  and  traction,  to
some  extent,  may  both  be  induced.

III.  Cure  of  Blindness  from  Lightning,  by  Mesmerism.

The  following  is  a  most  interesting  case.  The  little  girl
is  Jane  Chard,  aged  11  years,  residing  at  Church  Lane,  in
this  city.

Some  months  since  she  was  struck  by  lightning,  during
a  thunder  storm,  and  deprived  of  sight.  Her  father  is  a  poor
but  very  intelligent  man.  On  discovering  the  fact,  he  was
about  taking  his  child  to  the  hospital,  when  a  thought  oc¬
curred  to  him,  that,  as  the  accident  was  occasioned  by  electri¬
city,  magnetism  or  mesmerism,  being  similar,  would  afford
the  greatest  or  only  chance  of  success.

Mesmerism  was  applied  in  this  case,  and  though  the
little  girl  was  entirely  blind  for  three  days,  after  that  time
the  sight  began  gradually  to  return,  and  by  the  end  of  a
fortnight  she  was  quite  well.

I  mesmerise  her  occasionally :  she  proves  an  excellent
patient  for  all  the  higher  phenomena ;  she  is  so  susceptible
that  she  can  be  operated  upon  by  will.  She  is  naturally  a
very  delicate  child,  but  always  feels  better  after  being  mes¬
merised.

IV.  Mesmerism  in  cases  of  Drowning — Man  a  Galvanic

Apparatus.

The  weather  now  inviting  many  bathers,  the  following
case  may  prove  of  interest;  and  perhaps  of  great  importance
in  accidents  on  the  water.

Last  summer,  a  poor  woman  threw  herself  into  the  Avon,
near  to  the  ferry,  at  Tiverton,  adjoining  Bath.

I  was  accidentally  passing  at  the  time,  and,  hailing  the
ferry-boat,  proceeded  with  three  others  to  the  spot.  We  got
the  poor  woman  out  of  the  water  in  about  five  minutes  from
the  immersion,  and  had  her  conveyed  to  a  public  house  some
little  distance  off.  I  directed  her  clothes  to  be  removed,  and
that  she  should  be  placed  between  warm  blankets,  and  well
rubbed.  She  was  quite  insensible,  and  deadly  cold.  I  forced
small  quantities  of  warm  brandy  and  water  into  the  mouth,
but  it  was  not  swallowed  for  some  time.  The  usual  mode  of


158  Cure  of  Shortsightedness  and  Tic  Douloureux ,

friction  by  the  hand  or  flannel  up  and  down  was  first  resorted
to;  and,  though  it  was  well  applied  in  this  case  by  two
women,  by  one  on  the  back  and  by  the  other  to  the  lower
extremities,  no  reaction  appeared  to  set  in.

After  satisfying  myself  that  a  portion  of  the  brandy  and
water  had  been  swallowed,  and  directing  my  pointed  fingers
with  contact  to  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  the  seat  of  a  nervous
plexus,  I  succeeded  in  getting  a  faint  murmur  from  her,  with
chattering  teeth  ;  “  Cold,  cold,”  was  the  expression.

I  now  took  the  place  of  one  of  the  women,  and  began  by
making  longitudinal  passes  with  contact  down  the  spine.
After  a  short  time,  I  again  asked  the  poor  woman  how  she
felt.  She  faintly  replied  by  saying  she  felt  a  glow  in  the
back.  I  now  directed  the  women  to  take  my  place,  and
continue  the  friction  as  they  saw  me  do  it.  They  did  not
seem  to  comprehend  me,  or  perhaps  thought  the  old-fashioned
mode  best.  I  now  operated  on  the  lower  extremities  by
passes  with  contact,  and  presently  the  poor  woman  said  un¬
asked,  that  the  glow  had  left  the  back,  and  she  felt  it  in  her
legs.

This  hint  sufficed  to  make  me  direct  my  energies  over  the
whole  body,  particularly  over  the  course  of  the  spine ;  and  I
very  soon  afterwards  had  the  extreme  satisfaction  of  hearing
the  poor  woman  say,  and  before  those  present,  that  the  glow
seemed  to  follow  the  direction  of  my  hands.  Reaction  set  in,
the  poor  woman  recovered,  and  the  following  evening  was
conveyed  home  to  her  friends.  Two  reporters  called  on  me
for  the  particulars,  and,  though  I  especially  drew  their  atten¬
tion  to  the  more  interesting  facts,  except  the  accident  no
notice  was  taken  of  the  treatment.  I  merely  now  give  the
facts  as  they  occurred,  and  I  cannot  but  think,  that  where  an
electrical  or  galvanic  apparatus  is  not  at  hand,  the  above
simple  process  is  well  worthy  of  further  attention  :  of  course
I  mean  with  all  the  usual  auxiliaries.


VIII.  Cure  of  Shortsightedness  and  Tic  Douloureux ,  and  painless
Extractions  of  Teeth.  By  Mr.  Sargant,  Surgeon,  Reigate,
Surrey.  Communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson.

Last  year,  Mr.  Sargant,  a  medical  gentleman  at  Reigate  in
Surrey,  called  upon  me  to  enquire  whether  I  thought  mes¬
merism  would  be  of  use  in  a  very  extraordinary  case  of  some
standing  in  which  he  had  lately  been  consulted.  I  replied  in  the
affirmative,  and  shewed  him  a  case  or  two  and  the  method  of
making  the  passes,  since  he  knew  nothing  of  the  subject  and


by  Mr.  Sargant.


159


had  viewed  it  as  Mr.  Wakley  represented  it  in  the  Lancet,
till  of  late  when  the  constant  abundant  accession  of  indisput¬
able  facts  compelled  him  to  believe  that  he  had  been  deceived.
In  five  minutes  he  was  put  into  the  way  of  mesmerising  and
demesmerising.  He  returned  home,  began  mesmerising  his
patient,  produced  wonderful  benefit  and  striking  phenomena,
and  the  extraordinary  case  will  in  due  time,  I  trust,  be  placed
among  the  cures  recorded  in  The  Zoist.  Like  an  honest  and
courageous  man,  he  resolved  that  his  patients  in  general
should  benefit  by  mesmerism  whenever  it  was  possible,  and
openly  both  avows  his  convictions  and  practises  the  art.  The
following  are  a  few  of  his  cases  illustrative  of  the  benefit  of
mesmerism.

To  me  Mr.  Sargant's  conduct  is  peculiarly  gratifying,
from  the  course  taken  by  an  old  practitioner  in  his  neighbour¬
hood,  who  ought  not  to  have  acted  as  he  has  done  in  refer¬
ence  to  the  great  subject  of  mesmerism.

John  Elliotson.

“  Reigate,  June  4th,  1847.

“  My  dear  Sir, — I  herewith  send  you  a  few  cases,  which,
should  you  think  them  sufficiently  calculated  to  further  illus¬
trate  that  great  boon — mesmerism — to  suffering  humanity,
and  to  open  the  eyes  of  those  who  are  so  blind  that  the  sun
in  its  meridian  is  darkness  to  them,  I  shall  with  yourself  and
others  feel  repaid  if  we  can  only  f  convert  one  sinner  from
the  error  of  his  way/

“  Believe  me,  my  dear  Sir,  with  every  feeling  of  gratitude
for  your  kindness,

“  Ever  yours  faithfully,

“  Dr.  Elliotson.  “Joseph  Sargant.”


I.  Shortsightedness.

Rebecca  S.,  set.  25,  a  servant  for  some  years  in  a  respect¬
able  family,  was  compelled  to  leave  her  situation  from  short¬
ness  of  sight,  in  August,  1846,  the  time  I  was  attending  the
family ;  and  I  advised  mesmerism,  to  which  she  very  gladly
consented,  though  at  the  same  time  I  was  doubtful  whether
any  benefit  would  be  derived.  But  to  my  great  astonishment,
after  mesmerising  her  eight  times,  her  vision  has  returned  as
strong  as  it  was  when  a  child ;  and  she  has  now  been  in
service  for  the  last  three  months.

II.  Tic  Douloureux.

Sarah  B.,  set.  22,  had  suffered  from  tic  douloureux  for  six
months,  and  had  tried  all  the  usual  remedies  without  any


160  Cure  of  Tic  Douloureux  and  painless  Teeth  Extractions.

benefit.  In  August,  1846,  she  came  to  my  house,  a  perfect
stranger,  to  witness  mesmerism,  and  likewise  to  consult  me
as  to  my  opinion  of  its  effects  upon  her  case.  My  answer
was,  that  we  had  cases  on  record  which  had  been,  if  not
cured,  very  greatly  relieved.  After  witnessing  some  pheno¬
mena,  she  sat  down,  and  in  three  minutes  was  sound  asleep.
I  then  locally  mesmerised  the  side  of  the  face,  and  allowed
her  to  remain  for  half  an  hour,  and  then  awoke  her.  She
left  my  house  and  walked  home,  went  to  bed,  and  slept  from
ten  o’clock  until  eight  the  next  morning,  without  the  slight¬
est  knowledge  of  pain,  which  she  had  not  done  for  the  last
six  months.  Being  delighted,  she  dressed,  and,  not  giving
herself  time  for  breakfast,  ran  up  to  my  house  to  be  mesmer¬
ised,  fearing  I  might  have  left  home.  I  again  mesmerised
her  for  an  hour  as  before,  and  in  the  course  of  the  day  she
had  a  few  twinges,  but  slight  compared  to  her  former  attacks.
I  continued  to  mesmerise  her  for  a  fortnight,  when  she  was
obliged  to  leave  the  neighbourhood,  and  said  should  she  feel
the  slightest  return  she  wrould  come  down  to  me.  I  have
heard  from  her  since,  and  she  continues  quite  free.  These
cases  occurred  on  the  17th  August,  1846.

Painless  Extractions  of  Teeth.

I.  August  27th.  Miss  B.,  set.  16,  at  a  ladies’  seminary,
was  suffering  with  severe  tooth-ache.  I  mesmerised  her  and
extracted  one  of  the  molares  in  a  very  decayed  state,  without
her  having  the  slightest  knowledge  of  the  operation ;  evincing
not  the  minutest  feeling  of  pain,  not  so  much  as  the  distor¬
tion  or  movement  of  a  single  muscle.

II.  Sept.  19th.  At  the  same  place  I  extracted  a  decayed
molar  tooth  from  Miss  C.,  set.  11,  in  the  mesmeric  state,
without  the  child  being  at  all  conscious,  she  having  a  great
dread  of  the  operation.  I  had  promised,  if  she  would  allow
me  to  mesmerise  her  then,  I  would  instantly  awake  her,  when
she  should  have  her  tea,  and  then  be  mesmerised  and  the
tooth  be  extracted.  But  finding,  on  first  mesmerising  her,
she  was  so  soundly  asleep,  I  embraced  the  first  opportunity
and  extracted  the  tooth.  On  awaking  her  to  enable  her  to
cleanse  the  mouth,  she  said,  “  Oh  dear,  why  you  have  taken
out  my  tooth,  and  I  never  felt  you.”

III.  S.  P.,  set.  19,  came  to  my  house  to  have  her  tooth

extracted,  and  said,  “  You  send  people  to  sleep  before  you
take  their  teeth  out ;  don’t  you,  Sir  ?”  “  Yes,”  I  replied,

“  and  I  will  send  you  to  sleep  if  you  like.”  She  sat  down,


Cure  of  Affection  of  the  Heart.


161


and  in  six  minutes  she  was  sound  asleep.  I  then  desired  her
to  open  her  mouth,  which  she  did ;  lanced  the  gum  and  ex¬
tracted  the  tooth  without  her  moving  a  muscle,  and  awoke
her  to  cleanse  the  mouth.  She  was  quite  surprised.  Her
mother  was  in  the  room,  and  asked  her,  “  Did  not  you  feel
.Mr.  Sargant  pull  your  tooth  out?”  She  replied,  “No,
mother,  I  never  felt  it  at  all.”


IX.  Cure  of  Affection  of  the  Heart  by  Mr.  Adolphe  Kiste.

Communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson.

I  have  received  the  following  letters  and  documents  from
Mr.  Majendie.

“  Hedingham  Castle,  June  7th,  1847.

“  Dear  Sir, — I  send  you  the  case  of  Eliza  Barrett,  in  which
the  benefit  derived  from  mesmerism  seems  to  me  proved  by
most  direct  evidence.  It  is  most  improbable  that  the  able
physicians  and  surgeons  of  three  London  hospitals,  should
have  been  mistaken  in  supposing  disease  of  the  heart  to  exist,
if  it  were  not  so ;  and  that  Mr.  Hands,  who  examined  Eliza
Barrett  before  mesmerism  was  applied,*  should  also  have  been
in  error.  It  is  most  improbable  that  you,  with  all  your
experience  in  the  use  of  the  stethoscope,  should,  on  exami¬
nation  after  mesmeric  treatment,  have  failed  to  detect  disease
of  the  heart,  if  it  still  remained.

“  The  so-called  reasoning  of  post  hoc  non  propter  hoc ,  is
hardly  admissible,  as  it  is  most  improbable,  that  when,  after
failure  of  all  other  medical  appliances,  mesmerism  was  em¬
ployed  and  benefit  ensued,  the  cure  should  be  a  mere  matter
of  chance.  If  the  whole  is  to  be  resolved  into  the  effect  of
imagination,  the  sooner  doses  of  imagination  are  prescribed
according  to  an  orthodox  formula,  the  better  for  suffering
humanity.

“  Very  sincerely  yours,

“  Dr.  Elliotson.”  “  Ashhurst  Majendie.

“  In  the  beginning  of  February,  Mr.  Adolphe  Kiste  ex¬
pressed  to  me  the  wish  to  meet  with  some  sick  person  whom
he  might  endeavour  to  benefit  by  mesmerism.  I  mentioned
this  to  Mr.  Decimus  Hands,  and  met  at  his  house  Eliza

*  Before  any  non-medical  mesmerist  takes  a  case  in  hand,  he  should  have  it
examined  by  a  medical  man,  and  the  opinion  pronounced  upon  it  should  be
written  down.  Lamentable  experience  makes  this  necessary.  When  a  fee  cannot
be  given,  no  medical  man  who  is  a  mesmerist  will  refuse  this  good  office. —
Zoist.


162


Cure  of  Affection  of  the  Heart,


Barrett,  a  girl  of  twenty- two,  who  had  just  left  St.  George’s
Hospital,  suffering  from  disease  of  the  heart,  considered
incurable.

“  I  took  her  to  the  studio  of  Mr.  Kiste,  in  Great  Marlbo¬
rough  Street,  who  speedily  put  her  into  the  mesmeric  state,
and  sleep-waking  soon  declared  itself.

“  She  slept  that  day  about  five  hours,  and  continued  to  do
so  daily  for  three  weeks.  Mr.  Kiste  then  desired  she  should
pass  twenty-four  hours  in  mesmeric  sleep.  I  accompanied
.  him  to  the  sister’s  house  one  morning,  when  he  put  her  to
sleep;  and  he  went  again  the  next  day  at  the  same  hour,
when  he  awakened  her.

“  The  benefit  which  was  apparent  from  the  first  day  of  trial,
was,  from  the  time  of  the  long  sleep,  more  decided.  Dr.
Elliotson  kindly  offered  to  examine  the  state  of  the  heart.

“  Eliza  Barrett  walked  in  the  mesmeric  state  from  Marl¬
borough  Street  up  Blenheim  Steps,  got  into  a  cab,  and  pro¬
ceeded  to  Conduit  Street,  where  she  remained  an  hour.  Dr.
Elliotson  examined  her  minutely,  and  found  no  trace  of  dis¬
ease  of  the  heart.  She  was  taken  back  without  being  awa¬
kened.  She  had  been  in  a  most  deplorable  state,  unable  to
maintain  herself  by  needle-work,  unequal  to  service  from
the  pain  in  the  side  brought  on  by  exertion,  and  without
resource.

“  After  about  six  weeks,  she  appeared  to  be  in  good  health,
and  was  endeavouring  to  get  a  place  as  housemaid.  But  an
attachment,  which  had  been  broken  off,  as  I  believe,  on  ac¬
count  of  the  desperate  state  of  her  health,  was  renewed.*
She  married  in  the  month  of  May,  and  Mr.  Kiste  finds  on
enquiry  that  she  is  perfectly  well.

“  Ashhurst  Majendie.”


“  To  Adolphe  Kiste,  Esq.,

“37,  Maddox  Street.  “June  26th,  1847.

“  Kind  Sir, — I  return  you  my  sincere  thanks  for  the
cure  which,  under  God,  I  have  received  at  your  hands  by
mesmerism.  I  can  truly  say,  that  for  more  than  one  and
twenty  years  of  my  life  I  never  knew  what  it  was  to  enjoy
health,  and  when  the  physicians  at  three  hospitals,  and  St.
James’s  Dispensary,  and  many  other  medical  gentlemen  had,
after  using  all  the  means  and  medicines  they  prescribed,
failed  to  do  anything  more  than  relieve  the  pain  for  a  time,  I

*  The  patient  at  Bideford,  cured  by  Mr.  Davey,  after  being  dumb  seven
years,  was,  before  her  illness,  engaged  to  a  young  man  ;  but  the  marriage  was
broken  off.  Her  cure  removed  all  difficulty  ;  the  advances  were  renewed,  and
through  mesmerism  she  became  a  happy  wife. — See  Zoist,  Vol.  IV.,  p.  451.


by  Mr.  Adolphe  Kiste.


163


came  to  you  in  February,  1847,  in  a  very  weak  state,  utterly
incapable  of  earning  my  own  living,  then  labouring  under
disease  of  the  heart,  and  pains  in  the  limbs.  The  first  time
I  was  mesmerised  I  received  benefit  from  it.  When  I  had
been  mesmerised  six  or  seven  times,  five  hours  a  day,  I  could
lie  down  on  my  left  or  right  side,  not  having  been  able  to  lie
upon  either  for  some  time  previous,  without  considerable
pain.  The  violent  beating  of  the  heart,  and  shortness  of
breath  then  left  me ;  I  had,  I  believe,  been  mesmerised  two
and  twenty  times,  when  I  was  quite  cured.  You  mesmerised
me  five  times  after  that,  which  made  the  cure  more  perma¬
nent.  I  have  now  enjoyed  perfect  health  for  above  three
months,  being  well  six  weeks  previous  to  my  getting  married,
which  was  on  the  9th  of  May.  I  have  had  much  mental
anxiety  and  exertion  of  body,  without  the  least  return  of  pain
or  palpitation.  After  suffering  so  much  for  so  many  years,  I
am  well  able  to  appreciate  the  cure  which  I  have  received
through  mesmerism.  With  many  thanks  for  your  kindness
towards  me,  believe  me  to  remain,

“  Your  very  humble  Servant,

“Eliza  Harris.

“No.  4,  Duke  Street,  Bloomsbury.”

“  To  Adolphe  Kiste,  Esq.

“  Sir, — From  the  age  of  one  year  to  fifteen  years  I  was  af¬
flicted  with  fits,  abscesses  and  tumours.  It  was  at  this  age  I
first  suffered  with  palpitation  of  the  heart  and  rheumatism  in
my  limbs,  which  caused  them  to  swell  at  times  very  much.  In
February,  1845,  being  then  20  years  of  age,  I  became  so
bad,  and  having  no  home,  I  went  to  Middlesex  Hospital  to
try  to  get  in,  but  could  not.  I  then  went  to  St.  Pancras
Infirmary.  It  was  here  I  had  the  rheumatic  fever  and  began
spitting  of  blood.  When  I  had  been  here  seven  weeks,  suffer¬
ing  so  much  from  the  heart,  and  a  complaint  in  the  throat
which  they  gave  me  a  gargle  for,  and  getting  no  better,  I
asked  Mr.  Cooper  to  give  me  an  order  to  go  out,  which  he
did.  I  then  went  on  the  following  day  to  St.  Thomas’s  Hos¬
pital.  Dr.  Barker  ordered  sixteen  leeches  over  my  heart  the
day  I  went  in,  and  salivated  me.  I  was  there  six  weeks,  when
Dr.  Barker  told  me  he  could  do  no  more  for  me.  I  had  no
prospect  before  me  but  to  go  into  the  workhouse  when  I  left
there,  being  incapable  of  earning  my  living  :  I  asked  Dr.
Barker  to  be  so  kind  as  to  give  me  a  note,  stating  that  I  had
been  under  his  care  and  what  was  the  matter  with  me.  This
was  on  Saturday,  the  3rd  May,  1845.  On  the  following  Mon¬
day  he  sent  me  one  from  his  house  by  the  post  to  the  hospital,


164


Cure  of  Affection  of  the  Heart,


stating  that  I  had  a  disease  of  the  heart  and  what  kind  of  a  one.
I  then  came  out  of  St.  Thomas’s  Hospital,  and  I  obtained  a
letter  for  Middlesex  Hospital,  of  Mr.  Bell,  chemist,  Oxford
Street.  Tuesday  being  Dr.  Crawford’s  taking-in  day,  I  went
there  and  was  taken  in,  had  a  warm  bath  and  was  put  to  bed.
The  first  medicine  I  had  there  stopped  the  spitting  of  blood,
and  when  I  had  been  there  a  week  Dr.  Crawford  ordered  me
to  have  cold  shower-baths  of  a  morning,  every  other  day  at
first,  and  then  every  day.  I  had  blisters  applied  to  my  side
and  to  the  back  of  my  neck.  I  had  turpentine  fomentations
applied  to  the  stomach  and  side,  and  the  medicine  I  was  tak¬
ing  brought  me  out  in  boils  all  over  me.  They  healed  up
again ;  I  got  so  well  that  I  was  enabled  to  come  out  of  the
hospital,  and  having  no  clothes  scarcely,  and  my  father  being
ill  in  the  infirmary,  I  had  no  one  to  assist  me,  so  I  took  the
letter  which  Dr.  Barker  gave  me  with  me  to  the  workhouse.
This  was  in  June,  1845,  on  a  Thursday;  on  Friday  I  was
called  to  the  board-room  of  the  workhouse,  Mr.  Cooper  was
there,  and  Mr.  Lee  the  master  of  the  workhouse ;  I  gave
them  Dr.  Barker’s  letter,  and  told  them  what  I  had  come
there  for,  and  that  a  friend  had  got  me  a  situation ;  and  they
gave  me  some  clothes,  and  I  came  out  and  went  to  place.  I
kept  pretty  well  for  two  months,  and  then  I  had  the  attend¬
ance  of  Mr.  Parts,  of  Camden  Town.  It  was  from  this  time
I  began  taking  calomel  for  to  ease  the  pain,  and  I  have  taken
it  all  along  till  I  got  so  bad  in  November  last.  Before  I  left
my  place,  a  lady  my  mistress  was  acquainted  with  gave  me  a
letter  for  the  St.  George’s  and  St.  James’s  Dispensary.  I
went  there,  and  saw  Dr.  Dew.  He  ordered  me  to  be  cupped
on  the  left  shoulder  and  a  blister  over  the  heart ;  he  gave  me
some  medicine  and  ordered  me  rest.  It  was  not  convenient
for  me  to  lay  up  at  my  situation,  and  he  said  he  could  not
get  me  well  without  I  did,  and  that  I  had  better  go  into  the
hospital  where  I  could  have  rest.  I  obtained  a  letter  for
Middlesex  Hospital,  and  went  there  and  saw  Dr.  Crawford
again,  Dec.  4,  1846.  But  he  told  me  he  could  not  possibly
take  me  in  till  the  next  week,  but  he  put  me  under  Dr.
Latham’s  care.  I  saw  him  that  day,  and  he  gave  me  some  me¬
dicine  ;  and  on  coming  home  with  it  I  lost  my  senses,  and  fell
down  in  Cavendish  Square.  When  I  came  to,  a  young  woman
kindly  offered  to  lead  me  as  far  as  Mr.  Sommerfield’s,  in  Mary-
lebone  Lane,  who  sent  his  servant  home  with  me.  I  was  to  go
to  the  hospital  on  the  following  Friday,  and  as  I  got  much  worse
my  mother  was  obliged  to  lead  me  there.  While  I  was  wait¬
ing  to  see  Dr.  Latham  I  was  very  bad,  and  Mr.  Corf  came
and  spoke  to  me,  and  asked  me  if  I  should  like  to  stay  then


by  Mr.  Adolphe  Kiste.


165


and  go  to  bed.  I  said  I  should  like  to  stay,  so  he  ordered
one  of  the  nurses  to  take  me  up  into  Queen's  Ward.  At  night
I  had  a  warm  bath,  and  I  had  a  blister  put  on  my  forehead ;
and  when  I  had  been  there  a  week,  Dr.  Crawford  ordered  me
shower-baths  again.  I  had  been  here  rather  better  than  a
fortnight,  when  Dr.  Crawford  said  he  should  not  keep  me  there
any  longer,  as  he  thought  I  should  be  better  out  and  have  the
air.  I  was  no  better  when  I  left,  for  I  no  sooner  got  down  stairs
and  went  in  the  board-room  to  return  thanks,  than  I  became
very  ill  again.  Dr.  Crawford,  when  he  discharged  me,  the
Tuesday  before  Christmas,  made  me  out-patient  under  Dr.
Latham's  care.  I  was  seized  with  a  trembling  fit  whilst  wait¬
ing  to  see  him.  When  I  reached  home  I  had  a  worse  attack,
and  I  was  a  week  getting  worse,  when  I  went  on  the  follow¬
ing  Tuesday  down  to  St.  George's  Hospital  to  see  if  I  could
get  a  letter  for  to  go  in.  I  was  unsuccessful,  and  I  was
forced  to  give  a  little  girl  something  to  lead  me  from  Hyde
Park  corner  to  Bond  Street.  She  then  left  me,  and  when  I
ha,d  got  half-way  up  Bond  Street  I  fell  down  in  a  fit.  When
1  came  to,  a  young  man  kindly  offered  from  amidst  the  crowd
that  was  round  me  to  see  me  home,  which  he  did.  On  the
next  day  I  went  again  to  St.  George's  Hospital.  I  obtained
a  letter  at  No.  7,  Belgrave  Square,  and  I  went  and  saw  Dr.
Jones,  who  immediately  made  me  an  in-patient.  I  had  two
of  these  trembling  attacks,  and  I  was  taken  upstairs  to
Holland's  Ward  and  put  to  bed.  Dr.  Jones,  when  he  saw
me  again,  sounded  me  a  good  deal,  and  I  think  he  then
called  my  complaint  an  affection  of  the  heart  and  chest.
Afterwards  I  was  sounded  by  several  other  gentlemen  and
Mr.  Fuller.  They  changed  my  medicine  a  good  many  times
and  fomented  the  stomach.  Dr.  Jones  ordered  me  vapour-
baths  for  the  pains  in  the  limbs,  and  would  not  suffer  me  to
get  up  at  all.  Mr.  Fuller  sounded  me  again  for  about  three
quarters  of  an  hour.  This  was  when  he  found  out  what  the
complaint  was.  Afterwards  Dr.  Jones  sounded  me  again ;  it
was  then  he  said  Mr.  Fuller  was  right  in  saying  it  was  a
chronic  disease  of  the  heart.  The  doctors  all  complained  of  a
confused  murmur  or  grating  sound  in  the  heart,  which  they
heard  when  they  sounded  me.  I  used  to  feel  sometimes  as
though  the  heart  would  beat  out  of  the  side,  and  then  all  at
once  it  would  stop  and  seem  to  take  my  breath  with  it.  To
lay  upon  my  left  or  right  side  I  could  not,  and  if  I  laid  upon
my  back  the  palpitation  was  so  great  that  it  shook  me  in  my
bed.  I  remained  in  St.  George's  Hospital  four  weeks;  when
Mr.  Hamilton,  the  house-surgeon,  discharged  me.  When
Dr.  Jones  heard  of  it,  he  said  he  was  very  glad  of  it,  as  he


166


Cure  of  Affection  of  the  Heart.


was  afraid  that  he  should  have  me  get  worse  again  if  I  stopped
there,  but  he  would  make  me  an  out-patient  if  I  liked.  But
I  told  him  it  was  no  use  of  his  doing  that,  as  I  could  not
walk  so  far.  It  was  previous  to  this  that  he  said  he  could  not
take  out  my  heart  and  put  me  in  a  new  one.  They  gave  me
steel  medicine  to  take,  and  the  last  medicine  I  took  from
there  was  ether  and  hartshorn.  Dr.  Jones  ordered  a  bella¬
donna  plaster  over  the  heart  and  a  strengthening  plaster
round  the  loins.  I  sent  for  my  sister  to  fetch  me  home.
When  I  had  been  home  three  days,  I  saw  Mr.  Hands  in  the
prayer-meeting,  along  with  Mr.  Miller.  On  the  following
Friday,  Mr.  Hands  sent  to  my  sister’s  for  me  to  come  down
to  his  house.  I  went  there,  and  he  then  spoke  to  me  about
mesmerism,  and  said  he  thought  he  knew  of  a  gentleman
that  would  undertake  to  cure  me  if  I  would  make  up  my
mind  to  be  done,  and  mother  would  give  her  consent  to  my
being  mesmerised,  which  she  did  on  the  Saturday  previous  to
my  coming  to  you  on  the  Monday.  I  bless  God  that  ever  I
was  mesmerised,  for  I  have  been  only  one  and  twenty  times
in  that  state,  and  am  now  quite  cured  :  for  which  I  return
you  my  sincere  thanks.

“  I  remain,  Sir,  your  very  humble  servant,

“  March  28th.  “  Eliza  Barrett.”

There  can  be  no  question  that  the  view  taken  of  the
disease  by  the  various  physicians  was  correct ;  and  their  treat¬
ment  of  it  sound  and  excellent.  It  was  evidentlv  a  case  of

«/

acute  rheumatic  periconditis,  or  inflammation  of  the  heart’s
covering,  that  became  chronic,  and  probably  induced  after
a  time  a  degree  of  hypertrophy  or  overgrowth  of  the  heart ;
and  there  was  the  addition  of  hysteria.  She  was  treated  by
all  with  the  greatest  kindness  as  well  as  skill.  But  in  the
end  her  disease  proved  to  have  been  ameliorated  only  for  a
time.  Ordinary  medical  means  could  have  effected  no  more
in  any  hands ;  and  these  circumstances  render  the  value
of  mesmerism  the  more  striking.*

I  have  seen  her  this  week,  and  she  is  perfectly  free  from
all  disease  of  the  heart  and  from  hysteria,  though  the  troubles
and  bodily  exertion  she  has  gone  through  lately  have  been
great.  She  tells  me  that  mesmerism  appears  to  have  changed
her  constitution  altogether,  for,  from  having  all  her  life  been
ill  in  some  way  or  other,  she  is  now  perfectly  hearty.

June  28th.  John  Elliotson.

*  The  utility  of  mesmerism  in  affections  of  the  heart  is  exhibited  in  Vol.  I.,
p.  4G5.


(  167  )


X.  Case  of  Neuralgia  of  the  Stomach  with  excessive  Debility,
§c.,  fyc.  By  Mr.  Symes,  Surgeon,  77,  Grosvenor  Street.

Miss - ,  having  been  in  rather  delicate  health  for  a  twelve-

month  previously,  was  suddenly  seized  on  the  28th  of  January,
1843,  with  violent  cramp-like  pains  of  the  stomach  (gastro-
dynia),  accompanied  by  distressing  vomiting,  faintness,  great
flatulent  distension  of  the  abdomen  with  borborygmus,  &c.,
coldness  of  the  surface  and  particularly  of  the  lower  extremi¬
ties,  extreme  pallor  of  the  countenance,  &c.  Hot  brandy
and  water  was  administered,  and  hot  fomentations  applied  to
the  stomach,  but  it  was  above  an  hour  before  she  experienced
any  relief,  she  remained  very  weak  and  languid  for  some  days
and  then  had  a  recurrence  of  the  pains,  &c.,  more  severe
even  than  at  first ;  after  which  the  attacks  returned  more  and
more  frequently  and  with  increased  intensity,  lasting  three  or
four  or  even  five  hours  at  a  time,  and  producing  sometimes  ab¬
solute  fainting  from  excessive  pain  and  exhaustion.  She  could
not  take  the  smallest  particle  of  solid  food,  not  a  single  crumb
of  sopped  bread,  without  inducing  one  of  these  distressing  pa¬
roxysms,  which  would  likewise  come  on  from  any  little  mental
agitation,  and  frequently,  too,  without  any  apparent  cause.
Her  menstruation  had  always  been  regular  and  with  scarcely
any  pain,  but  now  her  periods  were  attended  with  intense  pain
of  the  loins  and  anterior  region  of  the  uterus ;  and  this
again  would  invariably  bring  on  a  recurrence  of  the  stomach
affection.  After  attending  to  the  alvine  secretions,  I  ordered
hydrocyanic  acid  three  times  a  day,  beginning  with  a  small
dose  and  gradually  increasing  it  to  as  large  a  dose  as  my  pa¬
tient  could  bear,  combining  it  in  turn  with  lime  water,  ses-
quicarbonate  of  soda,  and  with  stramonium,  and  afterwards
also  with  creosote  and  trisnitrate  of  bismuth,  &c.  Full  doses
of  cajeput  oil  were  administered  during  the  paroxysms,  &c.,
&c.,  but  with  only  temporary  relief.  In  short  I  tried  every
medicine  I  could  think  of  as  applicable  to  the  case,  and  at
length  nothing  seemed  to  give  the  slightest  alleviation  of  pain
except  strong  stimulants  combined  with  large  and  repeated
doses  of  opium  (muriate  of  morphine  was  the  form  employed)
but  this  was  followed  by  such  distressing  head-ache,  sickness,
and  thirst,  that  nothing  short  of  the  intense  agony  she  suffered
would  have  justified  its  exhibition.

Nine  weeks  had  now  elapsed  since  the  commencement  of
these  attacks.  I  have  said  that  my  patient  was  unable  to
take  a  particle  of  solid  food,  she  obtained  scarcely  any  sleep
at  night,  and  became  weaker  and  weaker,  until  one  day
VOL.  v.  N


168


Neuralgia  of  the  Stomach,  fyc.,


she  nearly  fainted  in  trying  to  walk  between  two  assistants
from  her  bed  to  a  sofa  in  the  same  room ;  and,  at  length,  she
could  scarcely  bear  to  be  lifted  from  one  to  the  other  to  have
her  bed  made  without  faintness  or  pain.  I  saw  with  alarm
that  no  permanent  benefit  was  derived  from  any  of  the
powerful  remedies  I  had  prescribed,  and  I  felt  that  my  patient
must  shortly  die  unless  some  better  means  could  be  devised.
I  had  long  felt  desirous  of  attempting  mesmerism  in  this  case,
but  knowing  that  the  lady’s  friends  were  strongly  prejudiced
against  it,  I  had  not  suggested  its  adoption,  especially  as  at
that  time  I  had  never  seen  a  similar  case  so  treated  ;  but,  in
despair  of  affording  relief  by  any  other  means,  I  now  ven¬
tured  to  propose  it  to  the  mother  as  a  last  resource ;  her  reply
was,  “Well,  Mr.  Symes,  you  know  our  confidence  in  you,
and  whatever  you  say  is  necessary  shall  be  done.”  I  had  on
that  occasion  only  a  very  few  minutes  to  spare,  but,  determined
to  lose  no  time,  I  at  once  commenced  mesmerising  my  patient
and  was  pleased  at  seeing  an  evident  effect  produced  at  the
end  of  ten  minutes,  although  she  did  not  go  into  the  mes¬
meric  sleep :  this  was  on  the  5th  of  April.  On  making  my
visit  on  the  following  day,  I  was  highly  gratified  at  learning
that  she  had  passed  a  better  night  than  for  two  months
previously.

6th.  Mesmerised  her  25  minutes ;  she  became  drowsy  and
could  with  difficulty  keep  her  eyes  open  but  did  not  sleep,  yet
she  felt  so  much  better  afterwards  that  1  determined  upon  dis¬
continuing  all  medicine .  She  passed,  in  her  own  words,  “  a
most  excellent  night  .”

7th.  Mesmerised  twenty-five  minutes.  The  eyes  closed
spontaneously,  but  without  loss  of  consciousness ;  she  felt,
however,  so  much  better  and  stronger  afterwards  that  she
rose  from  the  sofa  of  her  own  accord  and  walked  across  the
room  without  assistance.  I  now  gave  her  the  yelk  of  an  egg,
raw,  which  she  bolted  and  retained  on  her  stomach  without
any  ill  effect ;  slept  well  all  night.

8th.  The  eyes  closed  in  spite  of  herself  a  few  minutes
after  I  commenced  the  passes,  and  she  was  unable  to  open
them  until  I  ceased ;  still  she  did  not  lose  consciousness,  but
was  enabled  to  take  her  yelk  of  egg  and  walk  about  the  room
for  ten  minutes  afterwards.  She  passed  another  good  night,
and  the  next  morning  attempted  to  walk  about  the  room
before  being  mesmerised,  but  was  soon  obliged  to  sit  down
from  faintness.  After  being  mesmerised  half  an  hour,  with
no  other  effect  than  on  the  previous  day,  she  could  walk  about
with  impunity  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour.

10th.  My  patient  had  had  no  recurrence  of  her  attacks


by  Mr.  Symes.


169


since  the  first  day  she  teas  mesmerised ;  but  this  being  her
monthly  period,  I  had  looked  forward  to  it  with  anxiety.
She  complained  of  lassitude  and  severe  pain  in  the  back,  but
had  entirely  lost  this  pain  after  half  an  hour's  mesmerising ;
ate  two  yelks  of  eggs,  and  walked  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour
without  fatigue.

11th.  The  eyes  closed  as  usual,  and  she  experienced  the
usual  benefit.

12th.  Was  discomposed  by  letters  of  a  distressing  kind,
and  felt  ill  in  consequence.  Mesmerised  half  an  hour,
but  with  little  effect,  being  much  disturbed  during  the  time ;
the  eyes  did  not  close,  she  was  unable  to  walk  afterwards,
and  passed  a  restless  night.

13th.  After  half  an  hour's  mesmerism  I  ventured  to
allow  her  a  little  chicken ,  which  caused  no  inconvenience ;
she  slept  naturally  for  an  hour  afterwards  and  awoke  re¬
freshed.

14th.  The  eyes  closed  as  usual;  she  made  a  hearty  meal,
and  felt  so  well  that  I  gave  her  permission  to  take  an  egg  for
her  breakfast  the  next  morning.

15th.  A  violent  attack  of  pain,  vomiting,  &c.,  &c.,  was
brought  on  by  eating  the  egg  before  being  mesmerised ,  and
left  the  usual  faintness  and  prostration  of  strength;  but
after  being  mesmerised  three  quarters  of  an  hour,  felt  so
much  better  that  she  walked  about  and  ate  a  hearty  dinner
without  inconvenience.

16th  and  17th.  Felt  as  usual  weak  and  listless  in  the
mornings,  but  strong  and  well  after  the  mesmerism.

18th.  Went  into  the  mesmeric  sleep  for  the  first  time  to¬
day,  after  which  she  made  a  hearty  dinner,  and  read  aloud
great  part  of  the  evening  without  fatigue :  a  fortnight  before
she  could  not  even  endure  a  little  conversation.

Still  mesmerised  half  an  hour  daily,  the  eyes  always
closing  in  spite  of  any  efforts  to  keep  them  open,  but  without
her  losing  consciousness  ;  felt  so  well  on  the  20th  that  she
was  induced  to  dine  before  being  mesmerised ;  about  twenty
minutes  after  it,  however,  the  old  symptoms  of  pain,  vomit¬
ing,  flatulence,  &c.,  returned,  but  ceased  entirely  after  the
mesmerism,  and  she  was  able  to  read  aloud  and  walk  about
all  the  evening, — formerly  after  such  an  attack  she  was  always
obliged  to  go  to  bed.

Went  on  well  till  the  29th,  when  some  cause  of  excite¬
ment  occurred  in  the  evening,  which  kept  her  awake  great
part  of  the  night ;  and  a  renewal  of  the  annoyance  on  the
following  morning  induced  a  painful  attack,  which  was  re¬
lieved  as  usual  bu  mesmerism.

n  2


170


Neuralgia  of  the  Stomach ,  fyc.,


May  6th.  Monthly  period.  Had  considerable  pain  in  the
back,  &c.,  which  was  entirely  removed  by  mesmerism,  and
the  sleep  was  induced  for  twenty-seven  minutes.

Had  an  attack  on  the  13th  from  the  sudden  communica¬
tion  of  a  family  affliction;  and  on  the  18th  the  same  symp¬
toms  were  just  commencing  when  I  paid  my  daily  visit.
Mesmerised  her  three  quarters  of  an  hour,  prevented  the
attack  from  coming  on,  and  left  her  quite  comfortable.  With
these  exceptions  she  went  on  favourably,  the  eyes  always
closing  during  mesmerism,  but  the  sleep  only  coming  on
occasionally  till  the  23rd,  when  she  went  out  for  a  drive  for
the  first  time  since  the  commencement  of  her  illness ;  it  was
a  cold  easterly  wind,  and  an  hour  after  her  return  she  was
seized  with  head-ache,  sore  throat,  cough,  and  loss  of  voice.
After  half  an  hour’s  mesmerising  the  head-ache  was  entirely
relieved  and  the  throat  better ;  the  voice  did  not  return  for
several  hours,  and  the  cough  continued  troublesome  for  a
day  or  two.

The  mesmerism  was  continued  till  the  27th,  on  which  day
it  was  omitted ;  she  passed  a  restless  night  in  consequence,
and  awoke  next  morning  with  one  of  her  attacks,  which  con¬
tinued  till  she  was  mesmerised ;  she  had  also  a  little  pain  on
the  31st,  from  not  being  mesmerised  until  several  hours  after
her  dinner.

June  4th.  The  periodic  pain  in  her  back,  fyc.,  removed  by
mesmerism.  Continued  for  the  next  nine  days  always  feeling
weak  and  low  of  a  morning,  but  strong  and  in  good  spirits
after  the  mesmerism,  which  was  omitted  on  the  13th,  and  at
bed-time  she  began  to  feel  unwell.  Took  some  beef  tea,  but
rejected  it  almost  immediately,  and  was  restless  and  uneasy
all  night.  A  rather  severe  attack  came  on  after  her  breakfast
the  next  morning,  leaving  her  weak  and  ill  till  the  afternoon,
when  the  mesmerism  restored  her,  and  she  enjoyed  a  hearty
meal.  *

30th.  Went  out  to  spend  the  day,  and  probably  from  over
fatigue  had  a  slight  attack  in  the  evening,  which  was  soon
subdued  by  mesmerism.  This  was  continued  daily  until  the
9th  of  June,  when  she  was  persuaded  to  go  for  change  of  air
to  stay  at  the  country-house  of  a  friend,  and  not  having  been
mesmerised  had  an  attack  in  the  evening,  which  lasted  two
hours.

10th.  Lay  down  to  sleep  for  an  hour  in  the  middle  of  the
day,  and  was  most  careful  of  her  diet,  in  the  hope  of  avoid¬
ing  an  attack;  but  it  again  came  on  in  the  evening  even  more
severely  than  on  the  previous  day.

11th.  Weak  and  ill,  lay  on  the  sofa  great  part  of  the  day,


by  Mr.  Symes.


171


and  went  to  bed  very  early,  but  a  most  severe  attack  ensued.
Her  friends  there,  who  had  hitherto  laughed  at  mesmerism,
now  confessed  that  she,  at  least,  could  not  do  without  it,  and
agreed  to  drive  her  up  to  town  to  see  me  on  the  following
morning.

12th.  She  arrived  at  mv  house  with  her  mother,  so  weak
that  she  could  with  difficulty  step  out  of  the  carriage  into  my
dining  room.  I  immediately  mesmerised  her  for  an  hour ,
after  which  she  expressed  herself  as  feeling  quite  well ;  had  a
ravenous  appetite ,  returned  to  the  country  and  ate  everything
before  her.  The  young  lady  of  the  house,  who  had  often
seen  her  friend  mesmerised  by  me,  and  acknowledged  the
invariable  improvement  in  her  appearance  after  it,  yet  re¬
tained  an  unaccountable  antipathy  against  the  remedy,  and
could  never  be  persuaded  that  an  hour’s  natural  sleep  in  the
course  of  the  day  would  not  have  an  equally  beneficial  effect ;
but  seeing  that  no  precautions  would  keep  away  the  attack,
save  “  the  one  thing  needful,”  her  natural  goodness  of  heart
and  sympathy  for  her  friend’s  sufferings  overcame  her  pre¬
judices  at  this  time,  and  she  consented  herself  to  apply  the
remedy.  Accordingly  from  the  13th  to  the  20th  this  lady
mesmerised  ray  patient  for  half  an  hour  daily,  and  there  was
no  return  of  the  pain  till  the  21st,  when  a  slight  attack  was
induced  by  a  fright,  which  the  lady  soon  relieved  by  the
usual  means ;  yet

u - true  ’tis  strange,

And  passing  strange  ’tis  true,”

her  antipathy  against  this,  to  her  friend,  invaluable  blessing,
is  at  this  day  greater  than  ever  ;  nay,  I  am  told  that  she  has
so  far  imbibed  the  prejudices  of  a  religious  friend  as  to  ascribe
the  mesmeric  influence  to  satanic  agency.  Other  friends  of
my  patient  do  not  scruple  to  declare  this  same  conviction :
one  lady  in  particular,  a  near  family  connexion,  who  has
likewise  witnessed  the  remarkable  sanative  effects  of  mes¬
merism  in  this  case,  and  the  failure  of  all  other  means,  for
she  was  staying  in  the  house  at  the  time,  is  most  bitter  against
it  and  all  who  practise  it ;  yet  she  too,  under  the  influence  of
her  better  feelings,  has  more  than  once,  on  witnessing  Miss

- ’s  agonizing  pain,  offered  to  mesmerise  her.  Others  again

rudely  laugh  at  her  for  adopting  such  absurdity.  Miss -

herself  knew  nothing  about  the  science  until  applied  to  her
own  case,  and  her  mother  had  a  feeling  against  it ;  but  both
have,  from  the  commencement,  been  deeply  sensible  of,  and
grateful  for,  the  benefit  conferred,  and  can  afford  to  laugh
at  the  folly  of  those  who  have  tried  to  set  them  against  it.


172


Neuralgia  of  the  Stomach,  fyc.,


22nd.  My  patient  returned  to  town,  and  I  recommenced
mesmerising  her  daily  till  the  5th  of  August,  when  she  went
into  the  country,  feeling  quite  well,  and  continued  so  until
the  13th,  on  which  day  she  awoke  with  great  pain  in  her
back  from  the  usual  periodical  cause.  A  severe  attack  came
on  after  her  breakfast  and  lasted  two  hours.  She  could  not
move  off  the  sofa  all  day,  and  took  nothing  but  a  little
chicken  broth,  yet  another  paroxysm  came  on  in  the  evening,
leaving  her  very  weak  and  ill  for  days  after;  but  she  had  not
another  attack  till  the  31st,  when  the  carriage  was  nearly
upset,  and  she  had  to  alight  and  walk  a  considerable  dis¬
tance  :  this  induced  a  slight  paroxysm,  and  on  the  5th  of  the
following  September  an  alarm  of  fire  produced  another,  when
the  young  lady  who  had  formerly  mesmerised  her  being  for¬
tunately  present,  kindly  exerted  her  satanic  (?)  influence,  sent
her  to  sleep  in  spite  of  the  pain  within  five  minutes,  and  in
twenty  minutes  she  awoke  feeling  quite  well.  One  must
presume  therefore  that  Satan  is  tired  of  walking  up  and  down
like  a  roaring  lion  seeking  whom  he  may  devour,  and  prefers
assuming  the  form  of  a  ministering  angel  assuaging  the  ills
of  mortality.  Probably  these  ladies  are  not  aware  that  the
same  absurd  outcry  has  been  raised  against  every  new  remedy,
— vaccination,  bark,  &c.,  &c.,  but  how  they  can  reconcile  it  to
their  consciences,  under  any  circumstances,  to  employ  such
a  remedy,  if  they  really  do  in  their  hearts  ascribe  it  to  such
a  source,  I  must  leave  it  to  themselves  to  explain ;  “  I  only
know  that  ”  I  “  would  not  have  done  so.”

Most  of  the  dates  in  the  foregoing  narrative  are  taken
from  a  journal  kept  by  my  patient  for  a  sister  who  is  abroad,
but  from  some  cause  not  sent  to  her,  and  put  into  my  hands

to  “  make  what  use  I  pleased  of.”  Miss - escaped  any

attack  for  some  months  after  this,  and  in  her  letter  to  her
sister,  dated  April,  1844,  says  she  is  quite  well.  She  was
indeed  restored  to  comparative  health,  and  I  am  as  fully  con¬
vinced  as  she  is  herself  that  her  life  was  in  imminent  danger
when  I  commenced  the  process,  and  has  been  saved  by  it.
The  tendency,  however,  to  a  recurrence  of  the  attacks  has
continued ;  and  although  sometimes  she  has  been  free  from
them  for  many  months  together,  at  others  she  has  had  them
severely,  requiring  to  be  mesmerised  very  frequently  after¬
wards  ;  thus  in  November  and  again  in  December,  1844,  and
several  following  months,  she  had  some  severe  attacks.

It  is  worthy  of  note  that  Miss - *s  mother,  an  elderly

gentlewoman,  had  been  subject  to  attacks  of  gastrodynia  for

three  or  four  years  previously  to  Miss - illness,  during  the

whole  of  which  time  they  had  slept  together,  and  as  I  after-


by  Mr.  Symes.


173


wards  learnt  they  had  been  in  the  habit  of  sleeping  with
a  hand  locked  in  each  other’s  hand ;  and  during  the  whole  of
her  daughter’s  illness,  up  to  this  time,  Mrs.  R.  had  not  suffered
a  single  attack.  I  did  not  for  a  long  time  connect  these  cir¬
cumstances  with  Miss - ’s  illness  farther  than  as  giving  the

hereditary  predisposition,  and  when  I  did  so,  I  had  some  dif¬
ficulty  in  inducing  the  ladies  to  occupy  separate  sleeping
rooms,  but  I  did  at  length  insist  upon  it,  and  since  then

Mrs. - has  had  occasional  returns  of  gastrodynia,  although

not  so  severe  or  so  frequent  as  formerly.  I  have  now  little
doubt  that  the  younger  lady’s  illness  was  originally  induced
by  sleeping  in  this  way  with  her  mother,  and  that  the  ob¬
stinate  predisposition  to  a  recurrence  of  the  attacks,  and  the
debility  and  lassitude  so  constantly  experienced  of  a  morning,
are  ascribable  to  the  same  cause.  In  truth,  the  beneficial
action  of  my  half  hour’s  active  mesmerism  in  the  day  was
constantly  being  counteracted  by  the  injurious  tendency  of
the  mother’s  eight  or  ten  hours’  passive  mesmerism,  so  to
speak,  at  night.

After  a  time,  Miss - went  habitually  into  the  sleep¬

waking  state  when  mesmerised,  and  although  on  this  occa¬
sion  I  have  dwelt  principally  upon  the  curative  powers  of
the  agency,  different  highly  interesting  phenomena  have  been
induced.  I  had  often  great  difficulty  in  awaking  her,  some¬
times  for  hours  together ;  her  eyes,  too,  would  remain  closed
for  some  time  after  coming  out  of  the  mesmeric  state,  in  spite
of  her  own  and  my  efforts  to  open  them.  On  one  occa¬
sion,  I  tried  in  vain  to  get  her  eyes  to  open  for  above  an
hour  after  the  waking,  but  not  being  able  to  accomplish  it,  I
was  obliged  to  leave  her,  telling  her  that  without  doubt  they
would  presently  open ;  but  if  not,  that  she  might  be  pretty
sure  they  would  open  when  she  awoke  in  the  morning  after  a
night’s  rest.  To  my  surprise,  however,  I  found  them  still
closed  on  paying  my  visit  the  next  day,  though  they  opened
readily  after  I  had  again  mesmerised  her.  But  at  length  she
was  enabled,  in  the  sleep-waking  state,  to  instruct  me  how  to
avoid  this  difficulty  in  future.  She  would  also  tell  me  how  long
it  was  necessary  for  her  to  sleep,  and  if  I  awakened  her  before
the  time,  she  would  be  sure  to  have  an  attack.  If  I  could
make  her  promise  to  awake  spontaneously  at  the  end  of
a  given  time,  as  in  twenty-three,  or  twenty-five,  or  thirty
minutes  for  example,  she  would  do  so  precisely  at  that  time.
Then  she  acquired  the  power  of  foreseeing  to  an  hour  in
how  many  days  or  weeks  the  next  attack  would  ensue  if  not
mesmerised;  and  if  I  delayed  ever  so  little  after  the  time
specified,  I  was  sure  to  find  her  ill.  But  as  I  have  always


174


Neuralgia  of  the  Stomach ,  fyc.,


taken  care  to  mesmerise  her  if  possible  before  an  expected  at¬
tack,  she  has  rarely  had  auy,  and  when  they  have  come  on,  I
could  always  clearly  trace  them  to  some  imprudence  on  her  part,
or  to  mental  agitation,  or  other  exciting  cause ;  and  they  are
always  readily  subdued  by  mesmerism.  At  one  time,  how¬
ever,  when  she  required  to  be  mesmerised  daily,  as  was  always
the  case  after  an  attack,  I  was  undergoing  excessive  fatigue
and  anxiety,  and  I  found  myself  hardly  able  to  affect  her ;
so  my  friend.  Dr.  Elliotson,  kindly  undertook  to  mesmerise
her  for  me  for  a  week  or  two.  He  could  produce  the  effect
without  difficulty,  and  when  I  recommenced,  under  more
favourable  circumstances,  I  was  equally  successful.

In  November,  1845,  too,  she  unfortunately  had  an  at¬
tack  when  I  was  out  of  town,  and  not  liking  to  trouble
Dr.  Elliotson,  she  sent  for  a  neighbouring  practitioner,  who
dosed  her  with  powerful  medicines  for  some  twenty  hours,
without  the  slightest  relief;  and  when  I  arrived,  I  found  her
completely  exhausted  with  pain  and  fatigue.  Although  I
could  usually  induce  the  sleep  in  a  few  passes, — I  have  effected
it  by  merely  gazing  at  her  for  a  second  or  two,  at  the  distance
of  her  drawing  room, — it  was  now  above  an  hour  before  I
could  succeed,  and  in  her  sleep  she  told  me  it  would  be  neces¬
sary  for  her  to  be  mesmerised  daily  for  two  months,  unless
she  could  be  kept  in  the  mesmeric  state  six  or  eight  hours  a
day  for  a  fortnight :  but  as  she  would  neither  allow  any  one,
except  the  mesmeriser,  and  those  who  had  mesmerised  her,
to  approach  her,  nor  suffer  her  mesmeriser  to  leave  her  in
the  mesmeric  state  for  more  than  a  few  minutes  at  a  time,
I  could  effect  this  only  by  begging  her  to  come  on  a  visit  to
my  house  for  a  fortnight,  during  which  time  I  regularly  mes¬
merised  her  night  and  morning  for  an  hour  or  two,  and  my
wife  for  some  hours  in  the  middle  of  the  day ;  and  thus  we
got  over  the  effects  of  this  violent  and  protracted  attack.

I  can  excite  in  her  some  six  or  eight  of  the  phrenological
organs,  as  well  as  the  phenomena  of  traction,  and  alternate
rigidity  and  relaxation  of  the  limbs,  &c. ;  and  by  making
her  promise,  during  the  sleep-waking,  to  do  anything  in  her
natural  state,  she  will  certainly  do  it,  although  having  no
recollection  of  anything  that  has  occurred  in  the  mesmeric
state.

I  must  not  omit  to  mention,  that  my  patient  is  now  hap¬
pily  married,  and  that  I  saw  her  a  few  days  since  in  excellent
health  and  spirits.

The  case  is  highly  interesting  and  instructive  in  many
points  of  view.  It  has  served  thoroughly  to  convince  me  of
what  I  had  before  but  a  vague  notion  of,  viz.,  the  great


by  Mr.  Symes.


175


impropriety  of  allowing  young  persons  to  sleep  with  the  aged,
especially  when  the  latter  are  afflicted  with  any  disease,  even
though  not  of  a  kind  usually  considered  contagious.  Had  I
immediately  on  the  commencement  of  the  malady  insisted  upon
my  patient  sleeping  alone,  and  could  I  have  devoted  several
hours  a  day  to  mesmerising  her,  or  had  she  been  blest  with
friends  ready  to  do  so,  and  thus  to  co-operate  with  me  in  my
anxious  and  strenuous  efforts  to  effect  a  cure,  instead  of  thwart¬
ing  me  and  annoying  her,  by  decrying  and  persuading  her  to
discontinue  the  only  remedy  she  found  of  use,  I  feel  assured
her  recovery  would  have  been  as  rapid  as  it  was  protracted.
It  shows,  too,  how  long  it  is  sometimes  necessary  to  persevere
with  this  remedy,  just  as  with  any  other  therapeutic  agent,
in  order  to  effect  one’s  object ;  and  it  may  serve  as  a  lesson
to  all  of  us  never  to  presume  to  give  an  opinion  upon  subjects
we  are  unacquainted  with.

This  lady  ha3  herself  effected  several  striking  cures  by
means  of  mesmerism.  For  example  :  on  visiting  the  cottage
of  a  poor  woman  in  the  country,  she  one  day  saw  a  child
which  had  been  suffering  for  weeks  from  ophthalmia.  She
succeeded  in  mesmerising  the  child  On  the  following  day
the  eye  was  much  better ;  she  repeated  the  operation,  and  in
two  days  all  traces  of  the  inflammation  had  disappeared.

On  calling  at  a  friend’s  house  in  town,  she  found  the
infant  screaming  in  the  nurse’s  arms,  and  was  told  that  no¬
thing  would  pacify  it ;  it  lyid  been  crying  all  night,  and  the
mother,  quite  worn  out,  had  just  gone  to  lie  down.  Without
saying  anything,  she  took  the  child  in  her  lap,  mesmerised
it  for  twenty  minutes,  and  restored  it  asleep  to  the  nurse.
The  mother  had  no  idea  how  the  change  had  been  effected,
but  wrote  to  her  the  next  day,  to  say  how  much  better  the
child  had  been  ever  since  her  visit ;  it  had  slept  so  much,
and  had  scarcely  disturbed  her  all  the  night  afterwards.

Only  a  few  weeks  ago,  spending  the  evening  at  my  house,
I  saw  her  remove  tooth-ache  in  a  few  minutes,  from  a  gen¬
tleman  who  had  just  before  been  pacing  the  room  in  agony
with  it.

Before  concluding  I  may  perhaps  be  permitted  to  men¬
tion,  although  it  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  above  case,
how  highly  I  was  gratified  a  few  days  since  at  witnessing,  by
the  kindness  of  Mr.  Chandler,  the  extremely  interesting  phe¬
nomena  induced  in  his  blind  patient,  Captain  Peach.  The  gen¬
tleman  who  usually  mesmerises  Captain  P.  readily  sent  him
into  the  sleep-waking  state  by  a  few  passes,  and  then  exhi-
bited  the  phenomena  of  traction,  community  of  taste,  &c.
While  the  Captain  was  still  asleep,  a  lady,  who  is  also  in  the


176


Cure  of  Tic  Douloureux,


habit  of  mesmerising  him,  entered  the  room ;  she  is  said  to
have  greater  mesmeric  power  over  the  Captain  than  any  one
else,  and  it  was  agreed  that  after  he  was  awakened  she  should
send  him  to  sleep  again  without  his  knowing  she  was  present.
She  did  speak  however  after  he  was  awakened,  but  we  went
on  talking  to  the  Captain,  and  at  a  given  signal  she,  sitting
at  a  distance  of  at  least  six  feet,  commenced  making  passes
and  pointing  towards  him.  His  eyes  presently  began  to
quiver  and  fill  with  tears,  as  they  always  do  when  mesmerised,
and  his  head  dropped  several  times  upon  his  chest,  he  each
time  rousing  himself  with  a  start,  moving  uneasily  about  upon
his  seat,  and  apologizing  to  us  for  “  not  being  able  to  keep
awake.”  The  lady  at  length  advanced  towards  him,  and  in  a
few  moments  sent  him  quite  off,  and  then  readily  produced
the  different  phenomena  before  alluded  to.  It  is  indeed  a
most  satisfactory  case,  and,  the  usual  effects  occurring  as
they  do  in  a  gentleman  who  has  been  blind  so  many  years
and  when  he  could  not  know  what  was  being  done,  it  shews
that  at  least  these  phenomena  may  be  induced  quite  inde¬
pendently  of  “  the  imagination.”


XI.  Cure  of  Tic  Douloureux  in  two  sittings.  By  Mr.  Hayman,
Lace  Manufacturer,  Sidmouth.*

About  the  middle  of  April,  1845,  Ann  Llewellyn  came  on
business  to  my  shop,  and  having  heard  I  mesmerised  ex¬
pressed  a  wish  to  be  present  at  one  of  the  sittings,  though
much  prejudiced  against  it  from  believing  it  to  be  satanic.  I
consented,  and  took  her  into  the  parlour  where  there  was  a
youth  in  the  mesmeric  sleep.  I  began  by  exciting  the  phreno¬
logical  organs,  and  having  touched  Veneration  and  Language,
he  slowly  rose  from  his  chair,  clasped  his  hands,  fell  upon  his
knees,  and  poured  forth  a  most  beautiful  and  affecting  prayer ;
upon  which  Anne  declared  herself  satisfied,  as  the  devil  would
never  teach  a  man  to  pray.  She  then  determined  to  come  to
me  the  next  day  and  try  what  could  be  done  for  her.  She  was
then  about  30  years  of  age  and  had  been  suffering  from  tic
douloureux  ever  since  a  severe  cold  in  1840.  It  was  accom¬
panied  by  tightness,  weakness,  and  oppression  of  the  chest,
and  frequent  spasms.  The  nose  was  much  affected,  the  tip
scarlet,  burning  hot,  in  acute  pain.  She  had  consulted
several  of  the  medical  profession  in  Exeter  and  Exmouth,

*  A  subscriber  to  the  Mesmeric  Infirmary  and  acquainted  with  Mr.  D.  Hands.
— Zoist.


by  Mr.  Hay  man.


177


who  coincided  in  declaring  her  to  be  in  a  highly  nervous
state  and  that  medicine  could  not  avail,  though  nature  might.

Anne  came  according  to  her  promise,  and  her  sister  and
brother  in  law  came  with  her.  I  proposed  to  commence  by
mesmerising  the  man,  and  therefore  began  by  making  the
passes  over  him  at  the  same  time  that  I  forcibly  willed  that
she  should  feel  the  effect  instead  of  him.  After  some  minutes,
I  turned  to  her  and  said,  I  feared  I  could  not  give  her  much
time,  but  found  she  was  already  partially  collapsed.  I  took
her  thumbs  and  in  about  four  minutes  she  fell  back  quite  un¬
conscious,  but  seemed  to  labour  under  great  oppression  and
difficulty  of  breathing  ;  a  few  downward  passes  quickly  relieved
her.  As  I  made  them  down  the  limbs  and  off  from  the  feet,
her  countenance  brightened,  testifying  the  comfort  and  plea¬
sure  she  felt.  I  then  spoke  to  her  and  so  did  her  sister  and
brother,  but  she  did  not  answer.  I  then  excited  language
and  called  her  by  name,  “  Anne.”  “  Yes.”  “  Are  you  com¬
fortable?”  “Yes;  but  in  great  pain.”  “In  what  part?”
She  placed  her  hands  on  her  chest  without  speaking.  “  Do
you  think  I  can  do  you  good  ?”  “  Yes,  I  know  you  can.”

“  Tell  me  then  what  I  am  to  do,  how  to  proceed.”  She  put
both  hands  on  her  forehead,  drew  them  gently  down,  press¬
ing  on  the  chest  with  her  thumbs ;  then  down  to  the  hips,
pressing  there ;  continuing  to  the  feet :  then,  throwing  off
the  influence,  she  repeated  this  process,  and  I  closely  observed
her  directions.  As  my  finger  accidentally  touched  the  tip  of
her  nose,  her  features  sparkled  with  pleasure.  I  again  excited
Language,  and  the  remainder  of  the  sitting  was  filled  up  by
proving  my  power  over  her.  I  made  her  sing,  and  excited
Terror  and  Ideality,  when  I  was  obliged  to  quiet  her :  I  then
demesmerised  her.  She  walked  twelve  miles  the  following
day,  and  two  months  afterwards  called  on  me  to  shew  me  how
well  she  was.  I  then  tried  to  mesmerise  her  by  pointing,  and
she  exclaimed  I  was  throwing  fire  at  her,  and  then  at  the
beautiful  colours.  She  saw  each  of  my  fingers  as  I  pointed
forming  a  different  colour,  with  sparks  of  fire ;  she  then  said
she  saw  the  interior  of  her  mesmeriser,  and  described  the
different  arteries,  the  circulation  of  the  blood,  the  appearance
of  the  brain,  &c.,  &c.,  calling  the  lungs  the  lights.  One  of
my  hands  felt  cold,  the  other  hot.  All  of  a  sudden  she  became
very  sad,  and  cried  and  sobbed  out,  “  Oh  my  husband,  my
husband.”  On  being  questioned,  she  said  she  saw  him,  that
he  had  been  bled  in  consequence  of  an  accident,  being  crushed
between  a  waggon  and  a  wall;  that  the  hurt  was  in  the  shoulder,
and  he  had  been  in  bed  four  days  and  was  wishing  for  her,
but  did  not  like  to  send  for  her ;  he  had  no  bones  broken.


178


Great  Progress  of


I  cautioned  the  sister  not  to  say  anything  of  this  to  her
when  awake,  but  to  go  home  as  soon  as  they  could.  On  their
arrival  the  whole  account  was  found  perfectly  correct.

I  have  seen  her  repeatedly  since,  and  she  remains  in  good
health  and  has  not  had  any  return  of  her  complaint  since
April,  1845.

June,  1847.


XII.  Dr.  Esdaile’s  First  Monthly  Report  of  the  Calcutta  Mes¬
meric  Hospital ,  and  his  Experiments  with  Ether  used
with  the  same  view  as  Mesmerism  in  Surgical  Operations.
Painless  Operation  at  Madras,  by  Dr.  Johnstone ,  upon  a
European  lady,  in  the  mesmeric  state.  Appointment  of  a
Mesmeric  Committee  at  Madras  by  the  Government.  Com¬
municated  by  Dr.  Elliotson.

The  following  is  the  printed  report  which  I  have  received : —

“  The  Government  having  been  pleased  to  sanction  the
publication  of  monthly  reports  from  my  hospital,  as  the  best
means  of  diffusing  correct  knowledge  among  the  people  on
a  subject  of  practical  importance  to  them,  I  shall  in  future
furnish  a  monthly  summary  of  the  cases  treated  in  the  hos¬
pital,  that  the  public  may  know  what  is  doing,  and  that  my
statements  may  be  corroborated  or  contradicted  on  the  spot,
while  the  facts  are  fresh  in  the  memory  of  those  who  wit¬
nessed  them.  It  is  impossible  for  me  to  give  the  names  of
the  persons  who  witnessed  what  I  relate,  very  few  of  them
being  known  to  me,  but  I  hope  that  they  will  freely,  and
without  scruple,  correct  any  statement  of  mine  that  does
not  in  all  essentials  correspond  with  their  own  observations.

“  I  regret  that  there  is  no  novelty  in  the  nature  of  the
cases  treated  last  month,  and  for  this  reason :  in  consequence
of  the  success  I  have  met  with,  in  removing  the  tumors  so
common  in  this  country,  while  the  patients  were  in  the  mes¬
meric  trance,  persons  afflicted  with  this  disease  resort  to  me
from  great  distances,  and  a  notion  has  gone  abroad  among
the  people,  that  my  ‘  charm 9  is  only  applicable  to  such  cases  :
add  to  this,  that  the  natives  are  totally  ignorant  of  the  effi¬
cacy  of  mesmerism  in  medical  diseases,  and  it  will  explain
the  sameness  of  my  proceedings  since  coming  to  Calcutta.
The  field  will  gradually  open,  however,  and  in  proportion  as
the  public  become  familiar  with  the  subject,  and  its  extensive
application  to  medical  as  well  as  the  generality  of  surgical
diseases,  I  shall  be  able  to  communicate  more  varied  and  in¬
teresting  matter.


Mesmerism  in  India.


179


“  In  recording  last  month’s  proceedings,  I  shall  put  the
reader  in  possession  of  the  facts,  and  then  make  some  com¬
ments  on  them.

“  November  9th.  Doahmony,  a  peasant  woman,  aged  50,
has  come  from  Benares  to  get  an  immense  scirrhous  tumor
of  the  right  breast  removed.  It  commenced  two  years  ago,
and  is  moveable,  hard,  and  elastic ;  there  is  no  enlargement
of  the  axillary  glands,  and  she  does  not  look  in  very  bad
health.

“  On  the  7th  day  of  mesmerising,  she  was  entranced,
her  arms  were  partially  cataleptic,  and  she  was  insensible  to
pricking.  Next  day,  she  was  again  put  to  sleep,  and  two-
thirds  of  the  tumor  removed  without  her  moving  or  appearing
to  feel  it.  She  then  awoke  up,  and  appeared  to  recover  her
senses  before  the  operation  was  finished.  No  manual  restraint
was  used  during  the  excision  of  the  mass,  but  she  became
very  violent  immediately  after,  and  required  to  be  forcibly
held  down  while  the  arteries  were  being  tied.

“  The  breast  weighed  7  pounds.

“  December  29th.  Discharged  at  her  own  request,  her
friends  having  come  for  her  from  Benares.  The  sore  is  nearly
healed.

“  Ramlochun  Doss,  a  weaver,  residing  at  Serampore,  aged
60.  He  has  got  one  of  the  usual  tumors  of  30  years’  growth.
Having  been  entranced  for  five  days  previously,  he  was  ope¬
rated  on  the  1st  December.

“  I  intended  to  save  all  the  parts,  if  found  to  be  worth
keeping,  but  the  organ  on  the  left  side  was  diseased,  and  was
therefore  sacrificed ;  the  other  being  healthy,  was  kept.

“  There  was  not  the  slightest  shrinking  from  the  knife,  or
the  smallest  movement  in  the  trunk  and  lower  extremities.
An  indistinct  moaning  was  heard  when  the  cord  was  cut
across,  but  the  man  lay  perfectly  passive  and  motionless  dur¬
ing  and  after  the  tying  of  the  arteries.  His  pulse  being
nearly  insensible  from  the  great  loss  of  blood,  I  thought  it
expedient  to  awake  him  to  administer  a  cordial.

“  He  was  with  considerable  difficulty  aroused,  and  was
very  unwilling  to  be  disturbed,  but  at  last  opened  his  eyes,
and  instantly  asked,  f  Why  so  many  people  were  standing
around  him  ?’

“  He  said  that  he  felt  very  well  in  every  respect ;  that
there  was  a  slight  heat  in  the  seat  of  his  complaint ;  this
caused  him  to  carry  his  hand  to  the  part,  and  he  then  became
aware  that  the  tumor  was  gone.


180


Great  Progress  of


“  It  weiglied  40  lbs.

“December  31st.  He  lias  had  no  difficulty  in  recovering,
and  the  wound  is  nearly  healed.

“  December  6th.  Katick  Doss,  a  washerman :  has  been
afflicted  with  a  tumor  for  16  years.  He  was  entranced  on
the  fifth  day  of  mesmerising,  and  was  operated  on  two  days
after.  Having  injured  my  hand,  I  was  unable  to  operate,
and  Mr.  R.  CTShaughnessy  obligingly  took  my  place.  The
dissection  was  tedious  and  severe,  but  he  lay  motionless,  till
about  the  middle  of  the  operation ;  he  then  began  to  awake,
and  was  completely  aroused  before  it  was  over.  He  com¬
plained  for  a  good  while  after,  that  he  could  not  see — this  fact
will  be  met  with  again  soon.  The  organs  were  all  saved.
Weight  of  tumor,  30  lbs.

“  December  31st.  This  man  has  been  in  a  very  dangerous
state,  sloughing,  diarrhoea,  and  fever  having  ensued,  but  I
think  that  he  is  now  likely  to  recover.

“  I  hope  that  the  reader  will  give  the  following  strange
eventful  history  his  best  attention,  as  in  it  nature  herself  will
be  seen  partially  raising  the  veil,  and  admitting  us  to  a  glimpse
of  the  mysteries  of  the  inner  life  of  man.

“November  21st.  Sheik  Manick,  a  husbandman,  has  come
from  Burwan  to  have  an  enormous  tumor  removed.  He  is
subject  to  fever  twice  a  month,  but  his  constitution  appears
to  be  wonderfully  little  impaired.  We  succeeded  in  entranc¬
ing  him  on  the  third  day,  and  for  four  days  after,  but  fever,
followed  by  diarrhoea  then  attacked  him,  and  the  process  was
discontinued.  On  the  4th  December,  he  was  again  mes¬
merised,  but  it  wras  found  that  we  had  to  commence  de  novo,
his  system  having  thrown  off  the  mesmeric  influence  in  the
interval.  I  determined  on  account  of  the  periodic  derange¬
ments  of  his  system,  to  operate  on  the  first  occasion  that
offered.

“  December  12th.  His  arms,  which  were  crossed  upon  his
breast,  were  rigidly  fixed  in  that  attitude,  and  could  not  be
extended;  pricking  him  all  over  did  not  disturb  him.  I  there¬
fore  proceeded  to  operate.

“  I  ought  to  have  noted,  that  after  testing  him,  I  awoke
him  daily,  to  ascertain  if  he  had  been  conscious  of  any  annoy¬
ance  in  his  sleep.

“  The  tumor  was  so  immense,  that  no  attempt  could  be
made  to  save  the  deep-seated  organs ;  I  therefore  performed
the  operation  in  the  manner  described  by  Dr.  Stewart,  in  a
similar  case  on  which  I  operated  in  the  Native  hospital.


Great  Progress  of


181


“  About  the  middle  of  the  operation,  he  cried  out,  and
showed  other  signs  of  suffering;  but  his  exclamations  were
unintelligible,  or  had  no  reference  to  his  present  position.  Soon
after  all  was  over,  he  vomited  a  full  meal,  and  his  pulse
became  imperceptible.  He  answered  questions  in  a  wild
distracted  manner,  and  all  we  could  make  out  was,  that  he
could  not  see,  although  his  eyes  were  wide  open.  When  I
tried  to  give  him  a  cordial,  his  teeth  were  found  to  be  firmly
clenched,  and  considerable  rigidity  still  remained  in  the  arms.
He  continued  to  complain  in  a  distracted  unintelligible  man¬
ner  for  an  hour,  that  I  remained  with  him.

“The  tumor  weighed  100  lbs.

“  He  was  operated  on  at  12  o’clock  p.m.,  and  I  returned
to  see  him  at  4  o’clock.  He  was  sleeping  soundly,  and  I
awoke  him ;  he  said  that  he  was  in  full  possession  of  all  his
senses,  that  he  saw  very  well,  and  he  spoke  loudly  and  ear¬
nestly  as  usual.  He  had  slept  soundly  since  10  o’clock  (his
mesmerising  time),  he  said,  and  was  awoke  this  moment  by
me.  I  asked  him  when  he  last  saw  me  ?  and  he  replied,
“  yesterday  when  you  awoke  me  as  usual.”  He  had  no  recol¬
lection  of  having  been  disturbed,  and  said  that  he  certainly
had  not  vomited  to-day.  Being  farther  pressed  to  remember
if  nothing  had  annoyed  him  when  asleep,  he  said,  f  Ah !
Yes,  now  I  recollect  being  awoke  for  a  moment  by  the  ants
biting  me,  but  went  to  sleep  again  till  you  awoke  me  this
moment.’

“  He  now  missed  the  weight  of  his  burden,  and  sat  up  to
look  for  it ;  on  seeing  the  altered  state  of  things,  he  expressed
the  greatest  surprize,  and  said,  f  Why  did  you  not  tell  me
you  were  going  to  do  it  to-day  ?’

“  I  desired  him  to  go  over  the  events  of  the  day  up  to  the
present  moment,  and  he  did  this  with  the  greatest  minute¬
ness  till  10  o’clock,  his  mesmerising  time,  but  after  that  he
only  recollected  being  annoyed  by  the  ants  for  a  moment,
and  slept  well  till  awoke  by  me  just  now.  He  repeated,  that
he  had  not  seen  me  since  yesterday.  I  found  him  entranced
when  I  came  to  the  hospital  to-day,  and  therefore  was  not
among  his  waking  recollections — his  existence  from  10  till  4
o’clock  was  a  complete  blank.  He  seems  to  me  to  have  awoke
up  from  the  most  intense  degree  of  the  mesmeric  trance  into
somnambulism,  (of  which  the  patient  has  no  recollection  in
his  waking  state)  in  which  there  was  a  disturbance  of  the
instinctive  powers  of  life  caused  by  the  sudden  and  profuse
loss  of  blood,  but  the  life  of  volition  continued  torpid  and
enchained  till  the  moment  that  I  awoke  him.

“December  13th.  The  wound  was  stitched  to-day,  and


182


Great  Progress  of


there  was  no  want  of  meaning  in  his  exclamations  :  they
were  most  emphatic  and  appropriate,  and  he  abused  every¬
body  in  the  most  expressive  Bengalee  terms.

“  December  28th.  He  has  had  no  difficulty  in  recovering,
and  has  been  walking  about  for  several  days.

“December  4th.  Sheik  Nemoo,  a  Khitmutgar;  aged  30:
he  has  got  a  small  tumor.  He  was  entranced  on  the  8th
day,  and  the  operation  was  performed  two  days  after.

“  The  operation  was  very  difficult  and  severe,  from  the
almost  cartilaginous  hardness  of  the  skin,  and  its  adhering
closely  to  the  subjacent  organs.

“  Towards  the  end  of  the  operation,  he  exhibited  the
usual  signs  of  pain,  and  asked  for  water  and  a  punkah,  but
on  coming  thoroughly  to  his  senses,  in  about  ten  minutes
after,  he  asked  when  and  by  whom  it  was  done  ?  The  organs
all  saved.

“  December  31st.  Is  doing  well.

“From  the  foregoing,  it  will  be  seen  that  two,  if  not
three,  patients  awoke  into  consciousness  before  the  end  of
the  operation.  The  extraordinary  case  of  Sheik  Manick  I
consider  to  have  been  as  satisfactory  as  if  he  had  acted  the
part  of  a  corpse  throughout.  For  when  the  convulsive  move¬
ments  often  seen  leave  no  memory  of  them  in  the  brain,  and
no  trace  of  suffering  in  any  part  of  the  system  is  visible  when
the  person  comes  to  his  senses,  such  cases  are  surely  for  all
practical  purposes  painless  operations.  If  a  man  has  had  no
apprehension  of  an  operation,  and  knows  not  that  it  has
been  performed  when  he  awakes,  what  is  this  to  be  called  if
not  a  painless  operation  ?

“  As  a  practical  man,  I  am  quite  satisfied  if  my  patients
assure  me  that  they  felt  no  pain,  especially  when  every  look,
word,  and  action  correspond  with  their  statements.  To  the
careful  observer,  those  vague  convulsive  movements  are  as
specific  and  characteristic  of  an  extraordinary  state  of  the
system,  as  a  corpse-like  endurance  of  the  most  cruel  torture.
When  the  trance  is  only  disturbed,  but  not  broken,  the
motions  often  seen  are  as  objectless  as  those  of  a  galvanized
corpse,  or  the  fluttering  of  the  fowl  after  its  head  has  been
cut  off :  the  spinal  nerves  seem  only  to  be  irritate.d,  without
involving  the  brain,  or  voluntary  part  of  the  nervous  system,
and  as  long  as  there  is  no  volition ,  there  is  no  sensation,  as
will  be  shortly  seen.  There  is  no  attempt  to  withdraw  the
part  from  under  the  knife,  the  patients  never  try  to  remove


Mesmerism  in  India.


183


it  with  their  hands,  and  it  is  quite  evident  that  they  have  no
idea  of  the  source  of  their  discomfort.  If  the  will  had
prompted  the  movements,  some  memory  of  them  would  re¬
main,  but  there  is  usually  none.  I  think  it  very  probable  that
this  muscular  irritability  might  be  generally  extinguished
altogether  by  prolonged  treatment,  but  it  is  not  worth  the
trouble,  for  the  sj^stem  suffers  as  little  as  when  there  is  not  a
quiver  of  the  flesh.  This  I  have  been  long  aware  of,  and
acted  up  to,  but  I  now  come  to  an  equally  practical  fact,  in
working  out  which  I  have  usefully  spent  a  considerable  part
of  last  month.

“  It  is  no  small  triumph  of  science,  and  no  trifling  boon
to  humanity,  to  render  men  insensible  even  to  half  the  hor¬
rors  of  terrible  operations,  but  having  been  long  accustomed
to  save  my  patients  all  knowledge  of  the  injuries  inflicted
upon  them*  I  was  dissatisfied  with  the  half-successes  that
occurred  last  month,  and  suspected  that  there  was  some  dis¬
turbing  influence  at  work  which  had  been  overlooked,  or  that
I  was  ignorant  of,  as  many  imperfect  operations  happened  in
one  month  as  in  the  last  year  and  a  half,  and  I  resolved  not
to  move  a  foot  farther  till  the  disturbing  cause  was  detected.

“  In  the  hot  weather,  the  patients  are  all  but  naked,  and
in  this  state  are  entranced,  and  operated  on.  But  last  month,
they  were  mesmerised  under  two  blankets  and  a  sheet,  with
their  faces  only  exposed.  Having  been  tested  in  the  mes¬
merising  room,  they  were  carried  on  their  beds  into  the
operating  room,  through  which  a  current  of  the  cold  north
wind  blew,  and  that  every  movement  of  the  body  might  be
seen,  they  were  exposed  stark  naked  to  the  spectators.  I
remarked  on  several  occasions,  that  a  deep  inspiration,  and
other  involuntary  movements  immediately  followed  this  ex¬
posure  of  the  body  to  the  cold  air,  although  the  persons  had
a  moment  before  been  quite  indifferent  to  the  loudest  noises,
pricking  and  pinching.  The  demesmerising  influence  of  cold,
when  artificially  applied,  was  familiar  to  me,  as  will  be  seen
in  my  Mesmerism  in  India,  and  it  will  appear  surprizing  that
I  should  not  have  been  more  on  my  guard  against  it  as  a
natural  agent .  I  can  only  plead  in  extenuation,  the  stupify-
ing  influence  of  a  successful  routine ;  but  failures,  when  im¬
proved,  are  often  more  instructive  than  complete  success.

“  I  suspected  that  cold  was  the  secret  enemy  at  work,  and
lost  no  time  in  determining  the  point  by  actual  experiments.
Two  men  being  in  preparation  for  operation  were  subjected
to  the  following  course  of  experiment.

“  Mothoor,  a  bearer  from  Cuttack,  has  got  one  of  the
usual  tumors.  He  was  sent  to  me  by  his  brother,  Bogobun
VOL.  v.  o


184


Great  Progress  of


Doss,  from  whom  I  removed  a  50-pound  tumor  in  the  trance,
a  year  ago,  at  Hooghly  :  he  also  sent  Morali  Doss,  on  whom
I  operated  in  the  Native  Hospital,  in  presence  of  the  mes¬
meric  committee.

“Dec.  27th.  Mothoor  being  entranced  to-day,  was  sub¬
jected  to  the  action  of  the  electro-magnetic  machine  with  the
central  magnet  in  it,  his  hands  and  body  trembled  in  syn¬
chrony  with  the  shocks,  but  his  countenance  remained  per¬
fectly  placid ;  in  about  ten  minutes,  his  head  turned  convul¬
sively  to  one  side,  but  his  features  were  not  disturbed,  and
he  slept  on.

“  When  handling  his  arms,  I  saw  a  boil  on  one  of  them,
and  made  a  crucial  incision  into  it,  without  his  shrinking  in
the  least.  He  was  then  carried  under  the  blankets,  and  his
bed  placed  in  the  north  door  of  the  hospital ;  the  blankets
and  sheet  were  suddenly  pulled  off,  and  he  was  exposed  naked
to  the  cold  air ;  in  about  two  minutes  he  shivered  all  over,
his  breathing  became  disturbed,  and  he  clutched  right  and
left  for  the  bed-clothes,  but  still  sleeping ;  they  were  supplied
to  him,  and  he  huddled  himself  up  under  them  with  the
greatest  satisfaction,  still  sleeping  however.  The  bed  was
then  carried  back  to  the  mesmerising  room,  and  he  was  arti¬
ficially  awoke.  He  had  slept  profoundly  without  a  dream,
he  said,  and  awoke  this  moment  from  feeling  cold.  When
shewn  the  wound  in  his  arm,  he  was  greatly  surprized,  and
shewed  the  usual  signs  of  pain,  saying,  that  he  had  struck
the  boil  against  something  in  his  sleep,  he  supposed,  and  it
had  burst.

“  Dec.  28th.  The  magnetic  machine  awoke  him  to-day  on
the  second  application.

“  Dec.  29th.  He  was  more  deeply  affected  to-day,  and  lay
unmoved  for  several  minutes  in  the  open  air ;  he  then  shud¬
dered  all  over,  his  breathing  became  irregular,  and  he  imme¬
diately  awoke  into  the  full  possession  of  his  senses :  the  cold
had  awoke  him,  he  said.

“  Dec.  30th.  I  covered  the  wound  in  his  arm  with  nitric
acid  to-day ;  the  flesh  became  instantly  white,  but  he  did
not  shrink  in  the  least :  a  pin  was  also  thrust  through  the
flesh  between  his  fingers,  and  left  there,  of  course  without
his  minding  it.  He  was  then  exposed  in  the  northern  door¬
way,  and  awoke  in  less  than  a  minute  after  being  exposed  to
the  air.  The  cold  awoke  him,  he  said.

“  The  pin  sticking  between  his  fingers  greatly  perplexed
him,  and  he  drew  it  out,  expressing  as  much  pain  as  most
people  would  do  on  having  it  stuck  into  them.  The  whitened
sore  on  his  arm  was  now  shewn  to  him,  and  he  immediately


Mesmerism  in  India.


185


exhibited  signs  of  the  greatest  pain,  as  people  always  do  when
any  raw  surface  comes  in  contact  with  the  mineral  acids  :  the
pain  was  so  severe  that  I  ordered  his  arm  to  be  fomented  with
warm  water.

“A  stove  vvas  ordered  for  the  operation  room.

“  Dec.  31st.  The  room  being  agreeably  heated  to-day,  I
proceeded  to  operate  on  him  in  the  presence  of  numerous
spectators,  exposing  only  the  diseased  surface.  The  opera¬
tion  was  very  severe  and  tedious  from  the  hardness  of  the
diseased  mass  and  its  adhering  closely  to  the  delicate  organs
below,  which  were  all  saved.  No  sound  escaped  the  man,
there  was  not  the  slightest  shrinking  under  the  knife,  and
the  only  movements  observed,  I  was  told,  were  some  slight
contractions  of  the  toes  and  forehead.

“  He  awoke  in  about  ten  minutes  after  all  the  arteries  were
tied,  as  if  from  a  natural  sleep,  stretched  himself  well,  com¬
plained  that  he  felt  his  thighs  and  arms  stiff,  and  seeing  his
bhai,  Bogobun  Doss,  he  asked  him  to  shampoo  them  for  him.
He  had  slept  very  well,  he  said,  nothing  had  disturbed  him,
and  he  felt  no  pain  in  the  part.  The  wound  was  at  last  shewn
to  him,  and  he  expressed  the  greatest  horror  and  alarm,  ex¬
claiming  that  it  pained  him  excessively.  After  a  while,  I  asked
him  if  Bogobun  Doss  had  told  him  the  truth.  ‘  Oh  !  yes/
he  answered,  i  it  was  done  exactly  as  he  described/

“  Dr.  Dickens  from  Cuttack,  visited  the  hospital  a  few
days  after,  and  was  recognized  by  Mothoor.

“  After  telling  him  all  about  it,  he  confidentially  asked,
c  But  how  did  the  Dr.  Saheb  do  it  V

“  Chand  Khan,  aged  35,  has  got  the  same  complaint.
We  commenced  mesmerising  him  on  the  8th  December,  and
on  the  25th  he  was  insensible  to  pricking,  &c.

“December  27th.  He  was  carried  on  his  bed,  under  the
blankets,  to  the  north  door.  I  called  upon  him  loudly  by
name,  and  plucked  a  pinch  of  hair  out  of  his  moustache  with¬
out  disturbing  him.  I  then  drew  off  the  bed-clothes;  in  less
than  a  minute  he  shivered,  sighed  deeply,  like  a  person  after
a  shower  bath,  and  eagerly  sought  for  the  bedding,  straining
his  eyelids  to  open  them,  but  in  vain.  He  soon  after  awoke
from  the  cold,  he  said.

“December  28th.  Again  exposed  to  the  cold  air,  after
inflicting  different  tests  of  sensibility.  After  shivering,  and
seeking  for  covering,  as  yesterday,  but  finding  none,  he
rolled  himself  up  like  a  hedge-hog,  and  tried  to  make  the
most  of  it,  but  soon  awoke,  and  from  the  cold,  he  said.

“  December  30th.  Acted  precisely  the  same  as  yesterday.

o  2


186


Great  Progress  of


“  December  31st.  I  stuck  a  pin  into  his  nose,  and  left  it
there  a  moment,  before  drawing  off  the  bedding.  He  awoke
exactly  as  he  had  done  on  former  days,  and  from  the  same
cause,  cold.

“  When  getting  up  he  rubbed  his  nose  against  the  bed,
and  the  pin  fell  out  to  his  great  surprize.

“  After  he  got  up,  I  gently  pricked  his  nose  with  the  pin
which  he  resented  as  much  as  any  one  in  the  company  would
have  done.

“  Next  day,  he  was  operated  on  without  knowing  anything
about  it,  and  although  the  operation  was  not  the  formidable
one  expected,  it  was  very  curious,  and  will  be  related  next
month.

“  From  the  foregoing  facts,  I  consider  myself  entitled  to
say,  that  it  has  been  demonstrated,  that  patients  in  the  mes¬
meric  trance  may  be  insensible  to,

“  The  loudest  noises.

“  Painful  pricking  and  pinching.

“  The  cutting  of  inflamed  parts.

“  The  application  of  nitric  acid  to  raw  surfaces.

“The  racking  of  the  electro-magnetic  machine.

“  The  most  painful  surgical  operation,  and  yet  be  aroused
into  full  consciousness  by  the  exposure  of  their  naked  bodies,
for  a  few  minutes,  to  the  cold  air.*

“  All  the  persons  admitted  last  month  for  operation  have
been  disposed  of,  except  one.

“James  Esdaile,  M.D.

“  Calcutta,  1st  January,  1847.”

In  the  Delhi  Gazette  Overland  Summary ,  for  March  22,
are  the  following  paragraphs  : —

“  His  Highness  the  Nawab  Nazeem  of  Moorshedabad,
accompanied  by  Mr.  Torrens,  Mr.  Cooper,  and  the  native
gentlemen  in  his  suite,  visited  the  Mesmeric  Hospital  on  the
10th.  Dr.  Esdaile  offered  to  operate  on  a  patient  who  had
been  brought  to  the  proper  state,  and  the  Nawab  declined
to  be  present,  but  munificently  presented  the  doctor  with
500  reals,  to  be  applied  to  the  purposes  of  the  hospital.

“  The  Englishman  of  Eeb.  23,  is  glad  to  hear  that  steps
have  been  taken  by  several  of  his  wealthy  fellow-townsmen
to  give  greater  publicity  to  Dr.  Esdaile's  proceedings  and
successful  cures  among  their  countrymen  than  it  would  seem
they  have  hitherto  attained.”

*  “  This  will  be  provided  against  in  the  London  Mesmeric  Hospital,  no  doubt.
— J.  E.”


Mesmerism  in  India.


187


The  following  paragraph  will  amuse  those  who  have
watched  the  conduct  of  the  adversaries  of  mesmerism  in
Europe.

“  The  Hurkaru  states  that  Government,  on  the  repre¬
sentation  of  the  medical  visitors  to  the  Mesmeric  Hospital,
has  withdrawn  the  permission  which  it  had  previously  given
for  the  publication  of  the  reports  of  this  institution.  The
public  will  remember  that  Dr.  Esdaile  has  from  the  very  first
been  anxious  that  the  utmost  publicity  should  be  given  to  the
whole  of  his  proceedings,  and  he  has  always  courted  the  free
expression  of  opinion  regarding  the  nature  of  his  operations,
confident  that  the  result  of  discussion  would  be  the  triumph
of  the  cause  he  has  espoused.  One  monthly  report  as  our
readers  know  was  published,  and  it  is  impossible  not  to  see
the  advantages  which  arose  from  its  publication.  Dr.  Esdaile
challenged  any  proof  of  the  inaccuracy  of  his  statements,
and  this  challenge  brought  forth  two  antagonists  in  the
columns  of  a  contemporary.  One  of  these  writers  boldly
asserted  that  Dr.  Esdaile  had  given  an  incorrect  account  of
the  month’s  proceedings ;  that  he  had  spoken  of  operations
as  painless,  which  were  in  reality  not  so.  Dr.  Esdaile  came
forward,  and  vindicated  himself  most  satisfactorily  from  this
charge,  and  in  the  end  Medicus  retired  in  discomfiture ”

It  delights  me  to  inform  the  European  public  that  Dr.
Esdaile  has  shewn  no  unworthy  feeling  respecting  the  inhala¬
tion  of  sulphuric  ether,  but  has  had  recourse  to  it  and  begun
most  dispassionately  to  investigate  its  properties.  Without  any
communication  with  the  mesmerists  of  Great  Britain,  he  has
displayed  the  same  pleasure  at  the  discovery  of  its  powers,
and  not  for  an  instant  thought  of  attempting  to  depreciate
them.  The  conduct  of  the  mesmeric  world  in  this  particular
has,  I  fear,  disappointed  their  adversaries.  Truth  and  uni¬
versal  benefit  were  the  sole  objects  of  us  here  and  in  India.
Dr.  Esdaile  printed  the  following  letter  in  the  Englishman  of
March  3rd.

“  THE  INSENSIBILITY  PROCURED  BY  MEANS  OF  ETHER.

“  To  the  Editor  of  the  Englishman.

“  Sir, — The  moment  that  the  rumours  of  the  possibility
of  procuring  insensibility  to  pain  by  the  inhalation  of  the
vapour  of  ether  assumed  a  positive  shape,  I  made  experiments
with  it  in  my  hospital.

“On  the  23rd  Feb.,  I  caused  two  men  to  inhale  the  fumes
of  nitric  ether,  (not  having  sulphuric  ether  at  hand)  but  only


188


Great  Progress  of


with  the  effect  of  making  them  disagreeably  drunk  for  several
hours  without  any  remarkable  modification  of  sensibility.  On
the  28th  February,  having  procured  sulphuric  ether,  I  put
two  ounces  of  it  into  a  pint  of  water,  and  desired  two  of  the
hospital  coolies,  then  in  perfect  health,  to  inhale  the  fumes
from  the  common  inhaler  used  in  hospitals,  in  the  way  that
they  smoke  a  hookah.  It  was  very  disagreeable,  and  I  had
some  difficulty  in  getting  the  first  man  to  persevere  for  five
minutes.  He  then  became  very  drunk,  and  begged  to  be
allowed  to  go  and  lie  down,  which  he  was  permitted  to  do.
Up  to  this  point  he  was  sensible  to  pricking,  and  named  the
place  injured.

“  Another  man  was  made  to  smoke  the  hookah  for  seven
minutes,  with  considerable  intermissions,  and  when  he  ceased
to  be  able  to  smoke,  I  held  the  bottle  of  ether  under  his  nose.
At  the  end  of  seven  minutes,  he  begged  to  be  taken  to  bed,
and  had  to  be  supported  to  it.  Immediately  after  lying  down,
he  became  insensible  to  all  questions,  and  to  pricking  all  over
his  body.  This  I  was  quite  prepared  for,  knowing  that  we
can  be  made  sooner  insensible  by  the  lungs  than  by  the  sto¬
mach  often,  by  means  of  carbonic  acid  gas,  opium,  bhang,
stramonium,  &c.  But  judge,  my  surprize  when  I  found  him
to  be  as  completely  cataleptic  as  any  person  I  ever  saw  in  the
mesmeric  trance  !  Not  only  so,  but  he  exhibited  the  same
spasmodic  closure  of  the  eyelids,  and  trembling  of  the  eye
lashes,  and  his  insensibility  from  head  to  foot  was  perfect.
On  forcing  open  his  eyes,  the  white  of  his  eye  could  only  be
seen,  and  in  no  respect  could  I  have  distinguished  his  con¬
dition  from  that  of  a  person  in  the  most  intense  degree  of  the
mesmeric  coma.

“  The  pulse  when  he  desired  to  lie  down  was  small  and
frequent,  but  when  the  coma  was  established,  it  became  full
and  regular,  like  a  healthy  or  mesmeric  sleeper's,  and  his
breathing  was  quite  tranquil  without  snoring.  He  was
reduced  to  this  state  at  ten  minutes  after  1  o'clock  p.m.  I
pricked  him  most  pertinaciously  all  over,  at  intervals,  for  ten
minutes  more,  and  tried  to  awake  him  by  rubbing  his  eyes,
blowing  in  them,  squirting  water  into  them,  and  sprinkling
his  face  and  chest  with  cold  water,  but  all  to  no  purpose.

“  His  teeth  were  firmly  clenched,  and  he  could  not  be  made
to  swallow  a  drop  of  fluid.  The  catalepsy  continued  intense  all
the  time.  At  twenty-five  minutes  past  1  o'clock,  I  desisted,
and  desiring  him  not  to  be  disturbed,  I  drove  to  the  medical
college,  a  mile  off,  in  the  hope  of  finding  Dr.  Mouat,  as  I
wished  to  have  a  competent  witness  of  the  man's  condition.
I  found  Dr.  Mouat  at  home,  and  he  obligingly  accompanied


Mesmerism  in  India.


189


me  to  the  hospital.  We  reached  it  at  twenty  minutes  to  2
o’clock,  and  found  the  catalepsy  to  be  going  off,  and  the  man
beginning  to  move.  The  spasm  of  the  eyelids  continued,  and
the  eye  was  still  turned  upwards.

“  When  urged  by  questions,  he  answered  precisely  like  a
person  in  the  mesmeric  somnambulism,  but  when  pricked  all
over,  he  said  that  he  felt  nothing.  We  now  attempted  to
rouse  him  farther,  by  causing  him  to  inhale  the  fumes  of  car¬
bonate  and  liquor  of  ammonia,  which  seemed  to  disturb  him
a  little,  but  he  said  that  he  smelt  nothing,  and  it  did  not
materially  dissipate  the  torpor  of  the  senses.  Shortly,  after,
he  began  to  call  upon  me  by  name,  begging  me  to  open  his
eyes,  which  I  tried  to  comply  with,  but  could  not  succeed  in
effecting,  and  still  the  insensibility  of  the  skin  continued.
At  ten  minutes  to  2  o’clock,  he  was  carried  out  of  doors,  and
seated  on  the  steps  leading  to  the  hospital.  A  bheestie  was
placed  several  steps  above  him,  and  was  ordered  to  empty  his
mussuk  slowly  on  his  head  and  spine.  He  was  asked  if  he
felt  anything  ?  He  replied,  ‘  nothing.’  In  about  six  minutes,
he  opened  his  eyes  for  the  first  time,  but  it  was  evident  that
their  sense  was  shut,  and  he  said  I  was  a  Baboo.  The  cold
affusion  was  continued,  and  at  2  o’clock  he  suddenly  jumped
up ;  an  instantaneous  expression  of  intelligence  spread  over
his  countenance,  and  he  showed  that  he  was  restored  to  full
consciousness,  by  getting  into  a  passion  with  the  bheestie  for
wetting  him.  This  was  the  first  moment  of  consciousness
since  he  had  gone  to  sleep,  and  as  is  often  seen  in  mesmeric
sleepers,  he  had  no  recollection  of  the  means  used  to  put  him
to  sleep.  In  a  word,  the  state  of  coma  and  somnambulism
was  perfectly  identical  with  the  parallel  mesmeric  conditions.*

“  How  long  this  man’s  state  of  unconsciousness  would
have  continued,  if  not  so  violently  dissipated,  I  cannot  pre¬
tend  to  say,  but  I  am  certain  that  he  might  have  been  flayed
alive  for  fifty  minutes  without  feeling  it,  for  he  was  quite
insensible  to  external  impressions  in  his  half-roused  state  of
somnambulism,  or  sleep-waking  rather,  and  in  this  also  he
resembled  a  mesmeric  sleeper.

“  The  other  man  did  not  attract  so  much  of  my  attention
at  first,  as  he  continued  sensible  to  pricking  for  some  time
after  lying  down,  and  he  only  seemed  very  drunk.  But  when


*  “  4th  March.  I  have  done  the  same  thing  again  to-day,  and  contrasted  the
catalepsy  and  somnambulism  caused  by  ether,  with  the  same  states  induced  by
mesmerism,  and  they  could  not  be  distinguished.  The  former  was  only  more
intense,  and  would  yield  to  nothing  but  long  continued  affusion  of  cold  water.
But  I  suppose  the  etherial  effects  were  real,  and  the  mesmeric  ones  delusion  or
humbug . — J.  E.”


190


Great  Progress  of


I  returned  with  Dr.  Mount  he  was  fast  asleep,  and  it  took
much  cuffing  and  pulling  to  get  him  to  answer.  There  was
no  catalepsy  in  his  arms,  but  on  Dr.  Mouat  lifting  his  legs,
he  found  them  to  be  in  a  sigularly  rigid  state — another  mes¬
meric  symptom.

“We  continued  to  rouse  him  with  ammonia,  &c.,  and  got
him  to  speak  plainly,  and  then  he  complained  of  not  being
able  to  open  his  eyes;  the  eyelids  seemed  glued  together,  and
while  begging  to  have  his  eyes  opened,  he  was  insensible
to  my  pricking  him  assiduously.  It  was  now  upwards  of  an
hour  since  he  had  smoked  the  ether,  and  we  could  not  yet
dissipate  its  effects.  He'  also  therefore  was  subjected  to  the
cold  affusion  for  several  minutes,  of  whose  action  he  was
quite  unconscious,  although  he  kept  rubbing  his  eyes  all  the
time  to  open  them,  and  occasionally  answered  questions  cor¬
rectly.  He  at  last  suddenly  awoke  into  the  full  possession  of
his  senses,  and  recollected  nothing  that  had  happened  since
he  went  to  sleep.

“  Here  then  is  a  most  exact  imitation  of  the  physical
phenomena  witnessed  in  the  mesmeric  trance,  and  the  sleep¬
waking  state  caused  by  ether  beautifully  illustrates  the  dis¬
tinction  between  sensation  and  consciousness  so  often  seen  in
the  mesmeric  state,  and  which  I  have  insisted  upon  so  fre¬
quently,  with  little  effect  I  fear.  These  men  were  capable
of  talking  and  acting,  and  made  the  reasonable  request  to
have  their  eyes  opened,  although  they  were  unconscious  of
a  deluge  of  water  that  was  falling  on  their  naked  bodies  from
a  height.

“  The  opponents  of  mesmerism  will  probably  have  little
difficulty  in  believing  all  this,  because  it  was  done  ‘  secundum
artem,}  with  an  orthodoxly  nauseous  drug.

“  I  am  satisfied  that  the  man  least  affected  might  have
been  operated  on  to  any  extent  almost,  not  without  appearing
to  feel  it,  but  without  being  conscious  of  it  afterwards,  just
as  is  seen  every  day  in  mesmeric  operations.

“  Here  then  is  a  prodigious  engine  for  good  or  evil,  ac¬
cording  as  it  is  used  or  abused,  for  if  the  advantages  are
mo.st  striking,  the  evils  are  not  less  so  in  the  above  examples.

“ ( E  ccelo  descendit  Ether  !’  is  no  doubt  gratefully  ejacu¬
lated  by  the  medical  opponents  of  mesmerism,  to  whose  aid
it  has  come  at  their  greatest  need ;  but  if  their  love  and  gra¬
titude  are  not  tempered  with  discretion,  they  may  find  their
new  ally  a  dangerous  enemy.

“  The  speedy  induction  of  insensibility  of  long  duration
is  most  satisfactory  and  complete,  and  I  apprehend  no  danger
from  prolonged  etherial  coma,  for  the  pulse  was  natural  during


Mesmerism  in  India.


191


its  greatest  intensity,  and  the  breathing  not  disturbed,  nor
did  the  men  suffer  afterwards  from  what  they  had  under¬
gone.

“  I  believe  that  any  amount  of  mere  pain  might  have  been
inflicted  without  the  knowledge  of  the  patient,  but  I  should
be  extremely  reluctant  to  perform  a  capital  operation  entailing
a  great  loss  of  blood  on  a  person  in  this  state,  till  I  had
obtained  more  command  over  my  too  active  ally.

“  In  many  of  my  late  operations  in  the  mesmeric  trance,
for  example,  the  pulse  became  insensible  from  the  sudden
and  profuse  hemorrhage,  and  it  became  necessary  to  revive
the  sinking  system  by  restoratives.  The  patients  were  there¬
fore  awoke  for  this  purpose,  and  this  can  be  generally  very
easily  done.  But  in  the  coma  from  ether  it  has  been  seen
there  was  no  power  of  swallowing  left  in  one  of  the  men,
and  that  stimuli  applied  to  the  skin  and  nose  had  no  decided
effect  on  the  torpor ;  in  fact  there  was  no  means  of  getting
at  the  vital  powers.  Now,  if  this  man’s  life  had  depended
on  our  being  soon  able  to  restore  him  to  consciousness  and
sensibility  to  ordinary  stimuli,  I  think  it  very  probable,  and
Dr.  Mouat  agreed  with  me,  that  he  would  have  died  before
this  could  have  been  done.

“  But  let  us  hope  that  we  shall  soon  be  able  to  regulate
as  easily  as  we  can  set  in  action,  this  potent  influence.  In
the  man  most  intensely  affected,  one-tenth  of  the  power  ex¬
erted  would  probably  have  sufficed  for  all  practical  purposes,
and  more  control  might  therefore  have  been  preserved  over
the  vital  functions.  By  cautious  and  graduated  doses,  and
with  a  knowledge  of  the  best  antidotes,  I  think  it  extremely
probable  that  this  power  will  soon  become  a  safe  means  of
procuring  insensibility  for  the  most  formidable  surgical  opera¬
tions  even.

“  All  mesmerists,  who  are  lovers  of  truth,  and  not  mere
traders,  will  rejoice  at  having  been  the  means  of  bringing
to  light  one  truth  more,  especially  as  it  will  free  them  from
the  drudgery  required  to  induce  mesmeric  insensibility  to
pain,  which,  although  the  most  striking,  is  the  least  impor¬
tant  branch  of  the  subject.

“  It  is  only  of  late  years  that  the  application  of  mesmerism
to  surgery  has  been  prominently  brought  forward,  principally
with  the  view  of  affording  an  ocular  demonstration  of  the
existence  and  power  of  this  great  vital  agent.

“  But  the  great  field  for  a  display  of  its  usefulness  is  in
the  treatment  of  medical  diseases,  where  it  often  comes  to
our  aid  when  all  other  resources  have  failed,  and  it  would
take  a  library  to  contain  the  volumes  of  well-attested  cures


192


Great  Progr  ess  of


performed  through  its  agency  on  the  Continent,  before  it  was
ever  heard  of  for  surgical  purposes.

“  Not  the  least  curious  part  of  this  history  is  to  observe
how  the  passions  and  prejudices  of  men  have  been  made  not
only  to  establish  known  truths,  but  to  discover  new  ones.

“  I  am,  your  obedient  Servant,

“James  Esdaile.

“Calcutta,  1st  March,  1847.”

I  have  received  a  pamphlet  published  at  Madras  in
February,  entitled,  Notes  of  a  Case  of  painless  Surgical  Ope¬
ration  performed  while  the  patient  was  under  the  influence  of
Mesmeric  Agency ,  by  J.  TV.  T.  Johnstone ,  M.D.  Edin.  Licen¬
tiate  of  the  Royal  College  of  Surgeons ;  late  President  of  the
Royal  Medical  Society ;  Member  of  the  Medico -Chirurgical
Society,  Edinburgh,  fyc.,  fyc.  Madras:  1847.”  I  make  the
following  extracts : —

“I  am  at  liberty,”  says  Dr.  Johnstone,  “to  mention  that
my  patient  in  this  case  is  the  lady  of  a  clergyman  of  the
church  of  England.  Both  she  and  her  husband  have  perused
the  following  notes  in  MS.,  and  are  ‘most  thankful  to  be
able  to  bear  testimony  to  their  entire  correctness/

“Mrs. - ,  European,  of  a  well  regulated  mind — a

well  formed  figure — and  a  system  remarkably  free  from  any
kind  of  nervousness.  Has  been  six  years  and  a  half  in  India.
General  health  good.  Before  leaving  England  she  observed
a  tumor  about  the  size  of  a  field  bean  over  the  posterior  aspect
of  the  right  shoulder.  It  continued  to  enlarge  gradually  but
slowly,  and  at  the  end  of  five  years  had  attained  the  size  of  a
small  egg.  For  the  last  two  years,  it  has  increased  much
more  rapidly,  and  now  constitutes  a  tumor  of  an  adipose
nature,  tabulated,  mobile  and  kidney  shaped.  It  measures
about  six  inches  in  length,  four  inches  in  breadth,  and  two
and  a  half  inches  in  thickness  at  its  thickest  part,  and
stretches  from  the  spinous  process  of  the  seventh  cervical
vertebra,  downwards  and  outwards  towards  the  acromion  and
outer  third  of  the  spine  of  the  scapula,  along  the  upper  border
of  the  trapezius  muscle.  A  sensation  of  weight,  and  slight
numbness  of  the  right  arm  are  the  chief  inconveniences  com¬
plained  of.

“  I  recommended  extirpation  on  first  seeing  it,  twelve
months  ago,  but  the  patient  would  not  consent.  Leeches,
discutient  ointments,  &c.,  were  had  recourse  to  with  no  good
effect.  Seeing  it  thus  increase,  she  at  last  made  up  her  mind
to  have  it  removed.  I  recommended  her  to  try  the  effect  of


Mesmerism  in  India.


193


mesmerism  prior  to  the  operation,  to  which  she  at  first  ob¬
jected,  as  neither  she  nor  her  friends  believed  in  its  efficacy.
She  at  length  consented,  and  agreed  that  I  should  try  it  on
the  morning  previous  to  the  operation.”

Mesmerism  was  begun  on  the  2nd  of  January,  and  con¬
tinued  daily  till  the  9th.  The  events  of  this  day  are  thus
described.

“  8 th  Mesmeric  Sitting ,  January  9th.

“  I  commenced  at  a  quarter  past  7  a.m.,  and  continued
for  three  hours.  She  felt  no  drowsiness,  sickness  nor  langour
after  yesterday’s  proceedings,  and  again  expressed  herself  as
feeling  better  than  she  did  previous  to  the  commencement  of
the  mesmeric  sittings.  Position,  manipulations,  &c.,  the
same  as  yesterday.  Pulse  80 — skin  cool — respiration  natural
— ears  filled  with  cotton.  She  soon  fell  into  a  deep  sleep.
Muscular  twitches  were  well  marked.  At  10  o’clock  a.m.,
the' mesmeric  trance  seemed  perfect,  the  cataleptic  condition
was  well  developed,  and  sensibility  to  pinching,  pricking,
loud  noises,  strong  light  and  ammonia,  entirely  absent.  Soon
after  10  a.m.,  Superintending  Surgeon,  D.  S.  Young,  who
had  been  requested  to  be  present  at  the  operation,  arrived.
Professor  Key  had  also  been  invited  and  promised  to  be  pre¬
sent,  but  was  unavoidably  detained  at  his  class  room.  The
state  of  the  patient’s  perfect  insensibility,  and  the  cataleptic
condition  were  shown  to  S.  S.  Young’s  entire  satisfaction.
At  a  quarter  past  10,  I  turned  her  full  upon  her  face,  and
made  other  necessary  arrangements,  to  proceed  with  the  ope¬
ration.  Pulse  80 — skin  cool — respiration  slow  and  tranquil.

“ Operation . — I  made  two  elliptical  incisions  over  the
tumor,  commencing  about  half  an  inch  superior  and  external
to  the  spinous  process  of  the  seventh  cervical  vertebra,  and
meeting  about  half  an  inch  below  the  centre  of  the  outer  half
of  the  spine  of  the  scapula.  The  length  of  each  incision  was
about  7  inches  3  lines,  consequently  the  extent  of  skin  divided
by  the  knife  equalled  14 J  inches.  I  carefully  dissected  out
the  tumor,  which  was  slightly  adherent,  from  below  upwards.
This  occupied  about  three  minutes  and  a  half.  Three  arteries
of  no  great  size  required  ligatures.  The  bleeding  was  profuse
at  first,  and  seemed  not  to  differ  in  this  respect  from  an  ordi¬
nary  operation.  The  edges  of  the  wound  were  brought  toge¬
ther  by  four  stitches,  the  intermediate  distances  being  sup¬
ported  by  straps  of  adhesive  plaister.  S.  S.  Young  kindly
assisted  me  in  the  operation,  and  Dr.  Smith  assiduously  kept
up  the  mesmeric  passes  along  the  patient’s  back  all  the  time.


194  Great  Progress  of

The  patient's  husband,  my  apothecary,  and  a  nurse  were
present.

“  The  time  of  the  operation,  from  the  commencement  of
the  first  incision  to  the  application  of  the  last  roll  of  bandage,
amounted  to  eighteen  minutes,  during  all  of  which  time  not
the  slightest  trace  of  suffering  or  sensibility  on  the  part  of
the  patient  could  be  detected.  The  pulse  continued  un¬
changed  at  80,  as  S.  S.  Young  satisfied  himself,  and  the
respiration  perfectly  tranquil ;  no  moan  or  sigh  escaped  her
lips — no  alteration  in  the  expression  of  her  features  was  ob¬
served — no  instinctive  motion  or  wincing  was  detected ;  once
only  she  moved  her  head  instinctively  to  free  her  mouth  and
nostrils  from  a  little  pool  of  blood  which  had  collected  about
them,  and  was  interfering  with  her  breathing.  She  was
easily  demesmerised,  before  which  care  was  taken  to  conceal
as  much  as  possible  all  traces  of  the  operation.  When  she
awoke  the  following  dialogue  ensued.

“  Q.  Well,  have  you  been  asleep  to-day  ?

“  A.  Yes,  I  think  I  have.

“  Q.  Do  you  think  you  slept  more  soundly  to-day  than
yesterday  ?

“  A.  I  cannot  say.

“  Q.  Did  you  feel  me  turn  you  or  do  anything  to  you
to-day.

“  A.  No,  but  I  feel  something  smarting,  and  my  face  and
eyes  feel  stiff.

“  She  now  put  her  left  hand  up  to  her  shoulder,  as  she
had  often  done  before,  and  perceived  that  the  tumor  had
been  removed,  of  which  she  confessed  perfect  unconscious¬
ness.  The  stiffness  of  the  eyelids  and  face  was  caused  by
dried  blood.  Pulse  80 — respiration  natural.

“  The  tumor  weighed  3  lbs.  1  dr.  two  hours  after  removal.
The  wound  was  dressed  with  cold  dressings,  and  almost  en¬
tirely  healed  up  by  the  first  intention.  She  suffered  no  pain
in  the  wound,  continued  perfectly  free  from  fever,  and  was
confined  to  her  room  only  one  day.  The  pulse  continued  at
80  for  two  or  three  days  after  the  operation,  when  it  rose  to
90,  apparently  its  natural  standard.  She  speedily  recovered,
and  now  feels  better  than  she  did  previous  to  the  commence¬
ment  of  the  mesmeric  sittings."

Thus  Mr.  Young,  the  Superintending  Surgeon  of  the  Pre¬
sidency,  requested  to  be  present  (observe  the  word  requested) ,
and  assisted  in  the  operation  :  and  another  medical  man,  “Dr.
Smith  assiduously  kept  up  the  passes  along  the  patient's  back
all  the  time."


Mesmerism,  in  India.


195


This  was  not  all.  The  Superintending  Surgeon  forwarded
Dr.  Johnstone’s  account  of  the  operation  to  the  Medical
Board,  hoping  “  that  the  present  most  triumphant  illustration
of  the  practice  may  be  brought  to  the  notice  of  Government.”

“  In  making  this  request,”  continues  Mr.  Young,  “  I  am  im¬
pelled  by  a  sense  of  justice  to  call  the  Board’s  especial  attention  to
the  merits  of  Dr.  Johnstone,  a  private  practitioner  at  this  Presi¬
dency,  by  whose  well-directed  and  unwearied  skill  and  perseverance,
the  great  work  has  been  achieved  for  the  first  time  in  the  case  of  an
European  patient  in  British  Indiai  or  indeed  in  the  eastern  world.
Nor  can  I  close  this  letter  without  reminding  the  Board  that  Assistant
Surgeon  G.  Smith,  who  so  admirably  seconded  Dr.  Johnstone’s
efforts  throughout,  is  the  same  promising  young  medical  officer  who,
when  the  cholera  broke  out  in  H.  M.’s  57th  Foot  at  Arcot,  elicited
my  warmest  commendations  by  his  humane  exertions,  as  well  as  a
highly  favourable  report  on  his  professional  acquirements.

“  I  have  the  honour,  &c.

“  (Signed)  D.  S.  Young,

“  Superintending  Surgeon.

<(  Supt.  Surgeon’s  Office,!

Madras ,  19  th  January,  1847.”/

Did  the  Medical  Board  of  Madras  spurn  the  account  in
imitation  of  the  Medical  and  Chirurgical  Society  of  London  ?
No.  They  ordered  the  following  reply  : —

“  Sir, — I  am  directed  by  the  Medical  Board  to  acknowledge  the
receipt  of  your  letter  No.  44,  with  its  inclosure,  a  Report  of  a  Case
of  ‘  Painless  Surgical  Operation,’  under  mesmeric  influence,  per¬
formed  by  Dr.  Johnstone  of  Madras.

“2.  The  Board  request  you  will  be  so  good  as  to  communicate
their  thanks  to  Dr.  Johnstone  for  his  very  interesting  communica¬
tion,  which  they  consider  highly  creditable  to  that  gentleman’s  pro¬
fessional  talents  and  zeal  in  the  pursuit  of  science,  and  it  has  afforded
them  much  pleasure  to  bring  his  report  to  the  notice  of  the  Madras
Government.

“  I  have  the  honour,  &c.,  &c.

“  (Signed)  Geo.  Pearse,  M.D.,

“  Secretary  Medical  Board .”

The  matter  was  next  laid  before  the  Government  in
Council  by  the  Medical  Board,  and  this  was  the  acknowledg¬
ment  : —

“  The  Most  Noble  the  Governor  in  Council  has  perused  with
much  interest  the  communication  above  recorded,  and  will  be  glad
to  receive  the  further  reports  on  the  same  subject  promised  by  the
Medical  Board.

“  2.  His  Lordship  in  Council  fully  concurs  with  the  Medical
Board  in  considering  the  exertions  of  Dr.  Johnstone  in  the  case  now


19G  Great  Progress  of  Mesmerism  in  India.

brought  to  notice,  highly  creditable  to  that  gentleman’s  professional
talents  and  assiduity  in  the  cause  of  science.

“  (True  Extract.)

"  (Signed)  C.  A.  Browne,  Lieut. -Colonel,

“  Secretary  to  Government .”

After  reading  all  this,  I  confess  myself  distressed  on
reflecting  upon  the  sad  conduct  of  my  professional  brethren
in  England.  I  will  not,  however,  dwell  upon  it,  but  make
one  more  extract  from  the  pamphlet.

“  I  am  glad  to  learn,”  says  Dr.  Johnstone,  “  that  other  medical
men  at  this  Presidency  have  incurred  the  same  risk,  and  I  observe
that  the  subject  has  been  taken  up  at  the  Medical  School,  since  the
occurrence  of  this  case,  where  the  students  have  been  mesmerising
one  another  under  the  superintendence  of  the  surgeon  at  the  head  of
that  institution.  It  is  said  to  have  been  first  tried  on  two  native
pupils,  and  then  on  a  few  of  the  apprentices,  and  ‘  on  the  whole
with  complete  success.’  I  further  observe  on  the  same  authority
(an  anonymous  writer  in  the  Athencenm  newspaper)  that  some  of  the
sick  inmates  of  the  Male  Asylum  have  been  mesmerised  under  direc¬
tions  of  the  surgeon  of  that  institution,  where,  it  is  mentioned,

‘  the  patients  who  had  been  previously  afflicted  with  internal  diseases
awoke  perfectly  recovered.’  Be  this  as  it  may,  the  simple  fact  that
mesmerism  has  been  tried  in  the  above  institutions,  leads  us  to  hope
much  interest  is  about  to  be  manifested  in  its  behalf  at  Madras,  and
that  the  least  success  will  stimulate  to  further  inquiry  in  all  institu¬
tions  where  such  opportunities  for  its  investigation  present  them¬
selves.

“  It  is  not  my  intention  to  offer  any  remarks  whatever  on  the
nature,  pretensions,  &c.,  of  the  general  subject  of  mesmerism.  I
will  merely  mention  that  at  one  time  I  was  as  great  a  sceptic  in  its
belief  as  any  one  could  be,  regarding  it  as  a  subject  so  novel  in  its
nature,  and  so  irreconcilable  in  its  general  conclusions  to  all  past
experience,  that  nothing  short  of  the  most  complete  inductive  evi¬
dence,  entirely  incapable  of  being  explained  away,  ought  to  be
admitted  in  support  of  it.

“  In  the  course  of  time,  I  saw  men  of  high  and  established
reputation, — accustomed  to  investigate  such  matters; — men  of  ac¬
knowledged  wisdom  and  probity,  whose  authority  on  other  subjects
would  not  be  doubted  for  a  moment,  not  failing  to  come  forward  and
add  their  unswerving  testimony  in  support  of  some  of  the  facts  of
mesmerism.  I  was  thus  led  to  the  conclusion  that,  however  encom¬
passed  with  error  and  abused  by  impostors  and  charlatans,  it  no  doubt
deserved  to  be  regarded  more  as  the  abuse  of  some  great  truth  than
an  absolute  fiction,  and  that  instead  of  treating  it  with  the  ridicule
and  contempt  with  which  it  was  received  at  the  hands  of  many  of
my  professional  brethren,  it  better  became  every  candid  observer  to
endeavour  to  find  out  what  part  of  it  was  true,  and  what  was  false.
With  these  sentiments  I  carefully  attended  to  all  well-attested  reports


Three  more  painless  Surgical  Operations.  197

upon  the  subject,  and  incidentally  instituted  a  few  experiments  of
my  own,  limited  more  from  want  of  opportunity  in  prosecuting  them
in  such  a  place  as  a  public  hospital,  than  from  any  disbelief  in  many
of  the  conclusions  arrived  at  by  others,  and,  partly  by  the  evidence
of  my  own  senses,  was  compelled  to  acknowledge  that  Dr.  Elliotson
was  not  altogether  wrong  when  he  declared,  years  ago,  ‘that  he
should  despise  himself  if  he  did  not  declare  his  conviction  of  the
truth  of  mesmerism.’  ”

By  the  order  of  Government  a  Mesmeric  Committee  has
been  formed  at  the  Presidency  of  Madras,  as  one  was  in
Bengal ;  and  I  learn  that  Bombay  is  also  wide  awake,  and
we  may  soon  expect  to  hear  of  a  mesmeric  hospital  there.
Mr.  Clark  visited  Dr.  Esdaile’s  hospital  before  going  to  Bom¬
bay,  and  was  deeply  and  favourably  impressed  with  the  im¬
portance  of  the  subject.

John  Elliotson.


XIII.  Three  more  painless  Surgical  Operations  performed  at
Cherbourg  in  France.  Communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson.

I  have  to-day,  June  18th,  received  the  Journal  de  Cherbourg
of  the  13th  inst.,  and  the  Phare  de  la  Manche  of  the  15th
inst.,  each  giving  an  account  of  three  more  painless  surgical
operations  at  Cherbourg.  I  will  translate  the  whole  of  it
from  the  former.


“  Mesmerism.

“  Perfect  Insensibility  produced^  by  Mesmeric  Sleep.

(<  Fresh  Surgical  Operations.

“  Three  very  interesting  operations  were  performed  at
Cherbourg  on  Friday  the  4th  of  June,  with  complete  success,
by  Dr.  Loysel,  assisted  by  Dr.  Eleury,  Aide-Major  of  the
62nd  regiment  of  the  line,  who  obligingly  favoured  Dr.  Eleury
with  his  talents  and  experience.  Three  persons,  one  man
and  two  women,  thrown  into  mesmeric  sleep  in  a  few  minutes
by  M.  L.  Durand  and  Dr.  Loysel,  in  the  presence  of  a  large
number  of  spectators,  gave  a  fresh  proof,  of  the  most  con¬
vincing  kind,  that  it  is  possible  perfectly  to  destroy  sensi¬
bility  in  the  organs  and  perfectly  to  prevent  pain  by  means  of
mesmerism.  This  singular  phenomenon  produced  upon  the
company  an  effect  which  it  would  be  difficult  to  describe.
The  remarkable  calm,  and  the  astonishment  of  the  pa¬
tients,  who,  on  awaking  as  suddenly  as  they  had  been  sent


198  Three  more  painless  Surgical  Operations ,

to  sleep,  were  all  surprized  at  finding  a  painful  operation
over,  and  who  had  felt  nothing,  perceived  nothing,  and  been
passive  and  motionless,  while  the  operator  forcibly  plunged  a
bistoury  into  the  flesh,  dissected  away  enormous  portions  of
it,  and  tied  the  arteries, — was  certainly  a  most  extraordinary
fact,  well  calculated  to  arrest  the  attention  of  physiologists
more  and  more.

“  Of  the  three  operations,  which  all  presented  the  same
character,  the  last  was  the  most  important  from  the  depth
and  extent  of  the  incisions,  and  consisted  in  the  extirpation
of  a  bulky  mass  of  glands  and  ganglions  situated  at  the  side
and  back  of  the  neck.  The  patient  was  Miss  Caroline
Lemire,  26  years  of  age,  a  native  of  Vretot,  in  the  district
of  Yalognes.

“  These  fresh  surgical  operations  are  the  tenth,  eleventh,
and  twelfth,  performed  at  Cherbourg,  by  means  of  mesmerism,
since  October,  1845.

"  The  greater  part  of  mesmeric  phenomena  are  not  pro¬
duced  with  uniformity.  The  advantage  of  the  phenomenon
of  insensibility,  which  so  many  have  seen  and  established
perfectly  at  their  ease,  is  that  when  it  has  once  been  deve-
veloped,  as  is  often  the  case  at  the  first  trial,  no  external
influence  can  destroy  or  even  diminish  it,  and  that  it  may  be
protracted  as  much  as  the  longest  surgical  operation  can
require.  It  is  most  interesting  to  witness  the  instantaneous
change  from  the  most  exquisite  insensibility  to  the  deepest
and  completest  torpor.  But  this  sudden  invasion  of  insensi¬
bility  is  not  an  object  of  mere  curiosity.  To  give  surgeons,
about  to  perform  long  and  painful  operations,  more  certain
means  of  success,  by  presenting  them  with  an  inert  body,  a
corpse,  if  one  may  so  say,  instead  of  a  living  subject  always
acutely  affected  by  the  sight  of  the  preparations  and  the
terrors  of  the  operation ;  to  renovate  by  means  of  a  tranquil
sleep,  prolonged  at  pleasure,  the  vital  powers  exhausted  by
such  a  shock ;  and  to  prevent  all  kinds  of  nervous  accidents
which  sometimes  follow  a  great  and  dreaded  operation,  is,  in
our  opinion,  the  realization  of  a  true  progress.”

How  different  from  the  happy  lot  of  Mdlle.  Lemire  was
that  of  a  friend  of  mine,  Lieut. -Col.  Davidson,  author  of  a
Diary  of  Travels  and  Adventures  in  Upper  India,  a  man  of
the  highest  courage  and  resolution,  who  lately  underwent  a
similar  operation  with  all  its  agonies  in  Jersey.  I  am  sure
he  will  not  be  displeased  at  my  publishing  part  of  a  letter
written  by  him  to  me.


performed  at  Cherbourg  in  France.  199

“  St.  Ilelier’s,  Jersey,
“  15th  May,  184/.

“  My  dear  Sir, — I  am  now  fully  qualified  to  appreciate  the  ines¬
timable  blessing  of  mesmerism  in  all  surgical  operations,  but  in  a
negative  sense.

“  You  may  remember  the  enlarged  parotid  on  my  right  cheek.
For  its  removal  I  bad  faithfully  followed  the  prescription  of  a  phy¬
sician,  whom  I  am  bound  to  honour  and  admire,  and  taken  iodine
until  it  exerted  itself  on  my  liver  in  the  most  potent  manner.  I  sub¬
sequently  at  the  strong  solicitation  of  an  old  army  surgeon,  tried  that
medicine  topically,  for  weeks  or  months  together,  and  equally  with¬
out  success.

i(  For  more  than  2^  months  I  was  subjected  to  mesmeric  action,
and  under  its  influence  the  tumor  was  reduced  about  one  quarter,
but  latterly  it  remained  stationary,  if  not  increasing.  My  wife,
unknown  to  me,  consulted  an  eminent  surgeon,  who  strongly  recom¬
mended  its  early  extirpation  in  apprehension  of  its  becoming  scirr¬
hous;  and  I  at  last  consented  to  an  operation,  which  was  performed
on  the  11th  by  Mr.  Preshawe,  a  Scottish  surgeon  lately  practising
here.

“  The  operation  lasted  one  hour  and  ten  minutes,  having  been  thus
unexpectedly  protracted  by  the  immense  number  of  arteries  requiring
to  be  tied,  and  smaller  ones  requiring  torsion,  and  during  the  acute
pain,  not  to  call  it  agony,  that  I  suffered  during  its  dissection  from
the  surrounding  mass,  of  which  it  formed  part,  I  assure  you  that
my  utmost  resolution  was  exerted  to  avoid  moaning;  but  it  was
quite  insufficient  to  restrain  me,  and  I  was  repeatedly  obliged  to
drink  cold  water.  If  there  be  a  man  on  earth  who  in  his  normal
state,  in  robust  health,  can  bear  a  dissection  of  more  than  an  hour
amongst  his  facial  nerves,  without  a  similar  exhibition,  I  should
like  to  see  him  !

“  Mr.  Preshawe  was  assisted  by  his  partner,  Mons.  Julius
Clement,  a  very  clever  French  surgeon,  who  undertook  the  arterial
dep^.,  and  hence  I  lost  but  little  blood  under  his  hands.  Mr.
Preshawe  slept  in  my  room  during  the  night,  but  did  not  arrive
before  I  found  the  blood  streaming  down  my  bosom  in  such  a  torrent
as  to  throw  me  into  a  cold  sweat,  with  great  dizziness,  and  muscae
volantes  as  plentiful  as  mosquitoes  in  Calcutta.

“  I  knew  that  you  would  not  disapprove,  but  on  the  contrary
have  recommended,  etherisation,  and  I  was  previously  subjected,  on
two  separate  occasions,  to  the  most  powerful  inhalation  of  ether,
and  I  must  say  that  it  had  no  more  effect  on  me,  quoad  diminution
of  insensibility,  than  if  I  had  swallowed  a  tasse  of  cognac.  At  the
conclusion  of  an  ounce  and  a  half,  I  felt  my  scull  pressed  by  my
brain,  and  was  under  pain  for  more  than  four  hours  afterwards.

“  I  do  not  pretend  to  say  that  I  bore  the  pain  as  I  wished,  but
as  the  scalpel  passed  through  the  little  nerves,  I  was  satisfied  that  it
would  have  been  better  for  all  parties  if  I  had  been  mesmerised.

“  Dr.  Duncan  (late  of  the  Bengal  Medical  Establishment),  Dr.
Hallett,  and  Dr.  Collier,  were  present,  and  unanimously  agreed  that
VOL.  v.  p


200


Three  more  painless  Surgical  Operations ,  fyc.


Mr.  Preshawe  exhibited  great  coolness,  skill,  and  judgment,  and
that  there  was  no  unnecessary  delay  on  the  occasion,  and  I  am  fully
satisfied  on  this  and  all  other  points.”

The  following  gentlemen  were  witnesses  of  the  three  pain¬
less  operations  in  France  : —

Messieurs  Noel-Agnes,  Sub-Prefect  of  the  district,  and  formerly  Mayor  of
Cherbourg.

Lemaistre,  Receiver  of  the  Taxes,  and  formerly  Sub-Prefect  of
Cherbourg.

D’Alphonse,  Colonel  of  the  62nd  regiment  of  the  line.

Obet,  M.D.,  Paris,  Corresponding  Member  of  the  Royal  Academy
of  Medicine.

Henry  Merchant,  Commandant  of  the  National  Guard,  and  Mem¬
ber  of  the  Municipal  Council.

Labbey,  M.D.,  Paris.

Le  Seigneurial,  Judge  of  Instruction  in  the  Civil  Tribunal,  Mem¬
ber  of  the  Council  of  the  District.

Des  Rives,  Military  Superintendent  of  Cherbourg.

Viscount  de  Tocqueville.

Chevrel,  Barrister,  Member  of  the  Council  of  the  District  and  of
the  Municipal  Council.

Heriard,  Major  of  the  62nd  regiment  of  the  line.

De  Rancourt,  Chief  of  Battalion  of  the  62nd.

Du  Montela,  Chief  of  Battalion  of  the  62nd.

The  Abb6  Fafin,  Almoner  of  the  Civil  Hospital.

The  Abbe  de  Gournay,  Almoner  of  the  College.

De  Viaris,  Captain  of  Artillery.

Rossignol,  Barrister,  Member  of  the  Council  of  the  District  and
of  the  Municipal  Council.

Fleury,  M.D.,  Aide-Major  of  the  62nd.

Gtibin  de  Verusmor,  Chief  Editor  of  the  Phare  de  la  Manche.
Mangin,  Naval  Engineer.

Herouville,  M.D.,  Paris.

Numa  Marie,  private  gentleman,  Member  of  the  Municipal
Council.

Bresson,  Engineer  of  Water-works.

Coutance,  Chief  Military  Commissary.

Chevrel,  Receiver  of  Registration.

Drouet,  Barrister.

Leroy,  Director  of  the  Post.

Boissiere,  private  gentleman,  Member  of  the  Municipal  Council.
P.  Marie,  Vice-Principal  of  the  College.

Jules  Duprey,  Professor  of  Rhetoric.

C6noff,  Professor  of  Special  Mathematics  at  the  Naval  Academy.
Henry  Duchevreuil,  Captain  of  Cavalry.

Edward  Duchevreuil,  private  gentleman.

Le  Goupil,  Clerk  of  the  first  class  of  Marine.

Corrard,  Naval  Engineer.

Boissiere,  Chancellor  of  the  Civil  Tribunal.

H61ain,  private  gentleman.

De  la  Tribonni&re,  Receiver  and  Secretary  of  the  Farms  of
Tobacco.

Gregory  Cook,  Esq.

De  Roussel,  Naval  Engineer.

Delente,  Director  of  the  Military  Wards.

Hippolyte  de  Riencourt,  private  gentleman.

Turpain,  Receiver  of  Direct  Taxes.

Dumont-Moulin,  Barrister.


201


Refutation  of  the  Calumnies ,  fyc.,  fyc.

Charles  Chevrel,  Barrister’s  Clerk.

Raynal,  Professor  of  Mathematics.

Lecocq,  Merchant.

Rodriguez,  Spanish  Colonel.

Henry  Jouan,  Naval  Lieutenant.

A.  Durand,  Writer  of  the  Naval  Board  of  Control.

Adolphe  Lambert,  private  gentleman.

Charles  Loysel,  Notary.

Martin,  Professor.

Laloe,  Merchant.

Hippolyte  Loysel,  Barrister,  Doctor  of  Laws.

Gustavus  Lemagnen,  Merchant.

Le  Rendu,  formerly  a  Notary.

Le  Houguais,  Director  of  the  Upper  Primary  School.

Feuardent,  Bookseller.

Digard,  private  gentleman.

Le  Carpentier,  Chief  Steward  of  the  Count  of  Du  Moncel.

L’6veill6,  Writer  of  the  Marine.

Caillet,  Contractor  of  the  Public  Works.

De  Riencourt,  jun.

Charles  Le  Magnen.

Le  Roy.

Poittevin.

“  P.S.  To-day,  the  10th  of  June,  the  wounds  of  the
three  operations  are  entirely  healed,  and  the  patients  are  per¬
fectly  well.”

How  delightful  it  will  be  when  the  public  hospitals  of
England  exhibit  clergymen,  barristers,  military  and  naval
officers,  and  other  unprejudiced  persons,  collected  to  witness
surgical  operations  without  pain  in  the  mesmeric  state —
a  state  which  may  be  renewed  with  ease  when  the  wounds
have  to  be  dressed  or  pain  happens  to  come  on,  and  after
which  operations  every  patient  yet  has  done  well.

John  Elliotson.


XIY.  Refutation  of  the  Calumnies  promulgated  against  Mi's.

Bird,  whose  case  is  recorded  in  No.  XIV.

After  the  important  case  of  Mrs.  Bird  had  transpired,  a
medical  person  at  Exeter,  whose  restless  activity  to  prevent
his  fellow-creatures  from  availing  themselves  of  the  inestim¬
able  blessings  of  mesmerism,  instead  of  hoping  that  it  is  a
reality  in  the  midst  of  our  countless  diseases  and  the  wretched
poverty  of  our  means  of  curing  them,  is  inconceivable  to
every  one  with  a  particle  of  benevolence  or  conscientiousness
in  his  composition,  set  to  work  in  one  of  the  Exeter  papers
to  prove  that  the  history  was  a  tissue  of  falsehoods,  and  his
effusions  were  so  regularly  sent  to  Mr.  Wakley  that  among
the  Lancet’s  notices  to  correspondents  is  the  following.

“  Western  Times. — We  are  much  obliged  to  the  correspondent

f  2


202


Refutation  of  the  Calumnies


who  has  so  regularly  forwarded  this  spirited  and  impartial  newspaper
during  the  mesmeric  exposures  that  have  occurred  at  Exeter.”

When  the  case  was  published  irj  The  Zoist,  his  excitement
became  extreme  :  he  could  not  contain  himself,  and  despatched
a  letter  to  another  spirit,  more  reckless  than  himself  and
inhabiting  dry  places  :  and  out  of  the  rocky  and  fallen  city  of
Jerusalem  came  back  to  him  a  letter  from  Dr.  Macgowan,
who  had  formerly  attended  Mrs.  Bird.  This  letter  was  of
course  all  truth,  and  sufficient  to  destroy  the  reputation  of
the  lady  in  whom  Dr.  Macgowan,  when  attending  her,  dis¬
covered  no  guile ;  and  sufficient  to  destroy  the  reputation  of
her  mesmeriser  and  of  mesmerism  itself,  with  which  Dr.
Macgowan  is  of  course  so  well  acquainted  as  to  be  qualified
to  speak  decidedly  upon  it.  Another  newspaper  was  sent  off
to  Mr.  Wakley,  and  the  medical  man  succeeded  to  his  heart's
content.  For  Mr.  Wakley  at  once  went  greater  lengths  than
he  had  dared,  and  praised  him  to  the  skies.

“  The  ‘  Arsenic  Prophetess,’  the  ‘  Witch  of  Whipton,’  to  whom
we  formerly  devoted  an  article,  has  made  a  final  re-appearance.  By
a  letter  which  appears  in  the  Exeter  papers,  it  appears  that  the  inde¬
fatigable  Dr.  Elliot ,  not  content  with  exposing  every  falsehood  and
deception  connected  with  the  immediate  scene  of  knavery  and  cre¬
dulity  upon  which  the  Exeter  mesmerists  played  their  parts ,  has
brought  evidence  all  the  way  from  Jerusalem,  which  gives  a  final
and  disgraceful  discomfiture  to  the  actors  in  this  business.  It  will
be  remembered  that  the  Arsenic  Prophetess,  Mrs.  Bird,  made  a
mesmeric  prophecy  of  the  existence  of  poison  in  her  stomach,  and
foretold  that  on  a  certain  day  the  arsenic  would  be  rejected  by  vo¬
miting.  It  will  be  remembered,  also,  that  vomiting  took  place  ac¬
cording  to  promise,  and  that  Professor  Gregory,  of  Edinburgh,  Mr.
Parker,  M.R.C.S.,  Mr.  Luxmoore,  county  magistrate,  and  Mr.
Janson,  president  of  the  Exeter  Philosophical  Institution,  produced
a  pretended  chain  of  evidence ,  which  professed  to  show  clearly  that
arsenite  of  lime  had  been  in  her  stomach,  had  been  vomited,  and
had  been  detected  by  chemical  analysis  in  the  rejected  contents  of
the  stomach.  The  hypothesis  upon  which  all  these  wonders  were
accounted  for  was,  that  her  former  medical  attendant,  Mr.  Macgowan,
had  given  her  liquor  arsenicalis  and  lime  water,  and  that  an  insoluble
arsenite  of  lime  had  been  formed,  which  remained  many  years  in
the  woman’s  stomach.  The  following  extracts,  submitted  to  Dr.
Macgowan,  who  now  resides  at  Jerusalem,  by  Dr.  W.  H.  Elliot,
offer  a  truly  mesmeric  specimen  of  lying  for  a  present  purpose,  and
of  spotted  slander  directed  against  an  absent  physician.

^  ;jc  sfc  %

“  The  answer  of  Dr.  Macgowan  is  a  direct  contradiction  of  every
one  of  the  statements  of  Messrs.  Luxmoore,  Parker,  and  Janson,
and  is  so  conclusive,  that  since  its  publication  they  have  been  unable
to  answer  a  word.


promulgated  against  Mrs .  Bird


203


“The  profession  of  medicine  is  fortunate  in  having  men  like
Dr.  Elliot  and  Mr.  Forsbroke  springing  up  from  time  to  time  to
defend  it  against  the  knavery  of  quacks,  and  the  dishonesty  of  the
unworthy  among  its  own  members.  Dr.  Elliot  has,  in  obtaining  a
written  denial  from  Dr.  Macgowan,  of  Jerusalem,  turned  his  last
stone,  and  completed  the  evidence  against  the  Exeter  mesmerists.
He  has  nobly  done  his  duty ,  and  the  result  ought  to  be  a  stimulus
to  other  medical  men  to  investigate  any  mesmeric  wonders  that  may
be  paraded  before  the  public  to  the  detriment  of  the  profession.  Let
them,  as  Dr.  Elliot  did,  bring  the  touchstone  of  truth  and  logical
examination  to  bear  upon  the  imposture ,  and  exposure  will  follow,
as  in  the  present  case.  As  it  is,  one  more  heroine  of  The  Zoist  is
satisfactorily  proved  no  better  than  she  should  be.  We  shall
see  the  next  addition  of  the  late  Harveian  Orator  to  his  collection.
It  must  be  an  extraordinary  moral  phenomenon,  who  shall  prove
herself  worthy  to  be  added  to  the  list  of  female  adherents,  which
began  with  an  Okey,  and  which,  for  the  present,  ends  with  a  Bird.”
— Lancet ,  June  bth,  1847.

Our  readers  will  presently  perceive  that  Dr.  Macgowan
allows,  what  before  was  pretended  not  to  be  believed,  that  Mrs.
Bird  was  a  dreadful  sufferer ;  that  her  fits  were  so  violent  as
to  draw  lier  body  into  an  arch ;  and  her  agony  from  tic  dou¬
loureux  extreme.  Of  the  disease  of  the  uterus  he  says
nothing,  though  he  well  knew  it;  nor  a  word  about  the  almost
constant  vomiting.  His  remark  that  she  had  all  the  requisites
for  a  performer  in  mesmerism  at  will,  is  as  cruel  as  it  is  igno¬
rant,  and  what  he  would  not  have  dared  to  say  while  he  was
attending  her  and,  like  his  correspondent,  struggling  hard  for
a  little  practice  in  Exeter.  It  is  certain  that  lie  could  do  her
no  good,  and  that  mesmerism  has  put  an  end  to  all  her  suffer¬
ings  ;  and  every  body  is  struck  with  her  healthy  appearance
after  her  pale  and  sickly  looks  for  so  many  years.

We  were  satisfied  with  the  truth  of  the  statements,  because,
Mr.  Luxmoore  only  was  present  when  the  arsenical  substance
was  ejected  and  did  not  let  it  go  out  of  his  keeping  till  he
despatched  it  to  Dr.  Gregory ;  Dr.  Gregory  found  it  contain
arsenic;  and  after  its  ejection  the  stomach  has  retained  the  food,
— what  it  had  scarcely  done  for  fifteen  years.  The  matter
ejected  had  no  external  resemblance  to  arsenic,  as  it  would  if
common  arsenic  had  been  taken,  or  prepared,  were  this  pos¬
sible  in  the  circumstances,  with  a  view  to  deceive ;  the  inflam¬
matory  vomiting,  the  kind  of  eruption,  &c.,  &c.,  were  ex¬
actly  the  symptoms  induced  by  arsenic.  But  we  have  just
received  the  following  communication  from  Mr.  Luxmoore.

“to  the  editor  of  the  zoist.

“After  having  been  permitted  to  occupy  so  much  space
in  your  January  number,  I  should  not  venture  again  to  tres-


204


Refutation  of  the  Calumnies


pass  oil  you,  were  it  not  to  correct  certain  mis-statements  con¬
tained  in  the  following  letter  written  by  Dr.  Macgowan,  one
of  Mrs.  Bird’s  former  medical  attendants,  and  published  in
the  Exeter  papers.


“Jerusalem,  2nd  April,  1847.

“  My  dear  sir, — I  have  much  pleasure  in  acknowledging  the
receipt  of  your  letter  of  the  25th  January,  which,  with  the  accom¬
panying  extracts  of  your  correspondence  in  the  Exeter  papers,  has
given  me  the  first  and  only  intelligence  I  have  received  of  the  con¬
troversy  in  which  you  have  taken  so  distinguished  a  part,  on  the
subject  of  ‘mesmerism  and  arsenic,’  as  exhibited  in  the  person  of  my
old  patient,  Mrs.  Bird.  That  the  remedies  prescribed  by  me  for  that
lady,  whether  arsenic  or  lime,  should  again  have  made  their  appear¬
ance,  after  an  interval  of  thirteen  years,  not  only  unabsorbed  and
undissolved,  but  wonderfully  increased  in  quantity,  is  a  mesmeric
phenomenon  which  would  only  have  afforded  me  a  little  amusement:
but  that  my  esteemed  friends,  Mr.  Janson  and  Mr.  Parker,  should,
either  directly  or  by  inference,  have  affirmed  the  same  to  be  a  fact,  is
to  me  a  matter  both  of  astonishment  and  regret.  I  can  only  account
for  such  a  delusion  on  their  part  by  supposing  that  they  have  fallen
into  the  same  mesmeric  trances  as  their  patient.

“  I  have  a  distinct  recollection  of  poor  Mrs.  Bird,  and  of  my
general  treatment  of  her  case.  Her  case  was  one  of  epilepsy  of  the
spine,  complicated  with  disorder  of  the  digestive  and  other  functions.
She  suffered  also  severely  from  tic  douloureux,  which  is  not  an  unfre¬
quent  symptom  in  such  cases.  The  epileptic  fits  were  remarkably
violent;  the  body  of  the  patient  being  at  times,  during  the  convul¬
sions,  thrown  backwards  and  drawn  into  an  arch  in  which  the  head
and  heels  almost  came  in  contact.  These  fits  always  passed  off  into
delirium,  during  which  the  patient  gave  utterance  to  language,  gene¬
rally  incoherent,  but,  at  times  vivid,  eloquent,  and  descriptive.  Dur¬
ing  these  melancholy  exhibitions  of  morbid  excitement,  the  patient
remained  apparently  in  a  deep  sleep,  but  with  sufficient  conscious¬
ness  to  understand  and  answer  questions  which  were  addressed  to
her.  A  more  promising  subject  for  mesmerism  could  not  be  found  ;
for  she  already  possessed  all  the  necessary  requisites  of  a  performer
in  that  system.  It  is  worthy  of  remark,  and  I  believe  that  the  secret
of  mesmerism  consists  mainly  in  this,  that  in  persons  who,  from
organic  disease  or  nervous  temperament,  are  predisposed  to  convul¬
sions,  spasm,  fits,  somnambulism,  and  sleep  with  delirium,  there
exists  a  capability  of  throwing  themselves  into  these  states  at  will,  or
of  simulating  the  same  as  if  they  were  real.  It  is  possible  also,  that
the  act  of  volition  by  which  they  effect  this,  may  be  so  intimately
associated  with  the  look,  word,  and  action,  of  some  particular  indi¬
vidual,  as  to  deceive  both  him  and  themselves  that  the  states  in
question  are  superinduced  by  the  agency  of  some  mysterious  power
with  which  the  operator,  or  mesmeriser,  is  invested.  I  can  readily
believe  that  instances  have  occurred  in  which  both  parties  have
unknowingly  been  mutually  deceiving  and  deceived ;  but  I  fear  that  in


promulgated  against  Mrs.  Bird.


205


the  great  majority  of  mesmeric  histories  there  is  wilful  imposition
either  on  one  or  both  sides.

“  I  now  proceed  to  answer  your  queries,  which  I  do  the  more
readily  as  I  cannot  but  approve  of  your  object  in  proposing  them,
viz.: — ‘the  elucidation  of  the  truth  in  this  singular  controversy;  and
not  a  personal  attack  on  the  other  parties  concerned  in  it.’

“  1.  I  never  conveyed  to  Mrs.  Bird,  in  my  own  pocket  or  by
messenger,  any  preparations  containing  arsenic.  Mrs.  Bird  never
received  any  medicines  from  me  except  through  my  prescriptions ;
which  were,  I  believe,  all  dispensed  by  my  respected  friend,  Mr.
Knott.

“  2.  I  never  ordered  the  patient  liq.  calcis  (lime  water)  and  milk
at  the  same  time  with  liq.  arsenicalis.

“  3.  I  never,  at  any  period  of  my  attendance  on  Mrs.  Bird,
observed  such  effects  as  those  described  by  M.  M.  Janson,  Luxmoore
and  Parker,  as  having  been  caused  by  arsenic.

“4.  The  patient  was  not  kept  salivated  by  me  for  twelve  conse¬
cutive  months.  Salivation  formed  no  part  of  my  treatment  of  the
case.

“  You  are  quite  at  liberty  to  make  any  use  you  may  think  proper
of  the  above  testimony,  though  I  think  it  will  scarcely  be  required,
as  the  controversy  seems  to  be  already  satisfactorily  disposed  of  by
you.  Should  this  not  be  the  case,  I  should  be  glad  to  hear  from
you  of  the  result.

“  Believe  me  to  be,  my  dear  Sir,

“  Very  faithfully  yours,

“To  Dr.  W.  H.  Elliot.  Edward  Macgowan.”

“  It  will  be  observed  that  Dr.  Macgowan  admits  Mrs.
Bird's  sufferings  from  violent  epilepsy,  tic  douloureux,  deli¬
rium,  &c.,  &c.

“  With  respect  to  answer  No.  1  in  Dr.  Macgowan's  letter,
I  have  never  stated  that  he  conveyed  in  his  pocket  medicines
containing  arsenic  to  Mrs.  Bird  ;  but  as  to  his  having  never
conveyed  any  medicines  to  Mrs.  Bird  except  through  his
prescriptions,  Mrs.  Bird's  statement  and  the  Doctor's  are  at
variance,  and  I  have  no  means  at  present  of  proving  who  is
correct.  The  whole  of  Dr.  M.'s  prescriptions  were  not  dis¬
pensed  by  Mr.  Knott,  as  I  shall  presently  shew.

“  In  reply  to  answer  No.  2,  Dr.  Macgowan  ordered  lime
water  and  milk  for  Mrs.  Bird  as  a  common  drink  long  before
he  prescribed  arsenic ;  but,  having  had  no  direction  to  the
contrary,  she  continued  it  while  taking  the  arsenic  and  for
some  time  after.

“No.  3.  Dr.  Macgowan  says  he  never  observed  such  effects
as  those  described  by  Messrs.  Janson,  Luxmoore,  and  Parker.
The  fact  is,  that  Dr.  M.,  finding  that  the  arsenic  appeared  at
first  to  be  of  benefit  to  Mrs.  B.,  directed  her  to  continue


20G


Refutation  of  the  Calumnies


taking  it  until  he  saw  her  again,  and  this  not  happening  for
nearly  six  weeks,  Mr.  Parker  was  sent  for  and  found  her  in
the  state  described  in  the  January  number.

“  No.  4.  It  has  not  been  stated  that  Mrs.  Bird  was  kept
under  salivation  by  Dr.  Macgowan  for  twelve  months,  but
that  she  was  salivated  for  twelve  months ;  had  the  former
been  asserted,  it  would  not,  I  believe,  have  been  very  far
from  the  truth.  Now  comes  the  most  extraordinary  por¬
tion  of  Dr.  Macgowan’ s  letter — ‘  Salivation  formed  no  part  of
my  treatment  of  the  case and  this  is  said  after  Dr.  M/s
statement,  ‘  I  have  a  distinct  recollection  of  poor  Mrs.  Bird,
and  of  my  general  treatment  of  her  case/

“  The  answer  to  salivation  forming  no  part  of  the  treat¬
ment,  is  contained  in  the  following  copy  of  Dr.  Macgowan's
prescriptions,  taken  from  Mr.  KnotPs  books  by  Mr.  Parker,
and  verified  in  Mr.  KnotPs  presence.


1832.  June  20.

„  26.
July  28.

Aug.  17.
Sept.  17.
Oct.  12.

1833.  Feb.  21.


March  4.
March  14.
April  2.

April  12.


1  gr.  of  calomel  every  other  night — 3  doses.

1  gr.  of  calomel  every  four  hours — 24  doses.

10  gr.  of  blue  pill  to  be  taken  in  gr.  doses —
4  doses.

5  gr.  of  mercurial  powder  every  six  hours — 6  doses.

2  gr.  of  calomel  every  night — 6  doses.

4  gr.  blue  pill  every  hour — 15  doses.

gr.  of  blue  pill  every  two  hours — 6  doses.

2  gr.  of  mercurial  powder  night  and  morning —

6  doses.

3  gr.  of  calomel  every  night — 3  doses.

2  gr.  of  mercurial  powder  every  night — 2  doses.

1  drachm  of  mercurial  ointment  in  friction  every
night — 8  doses.

The  last  perscription  of  Dr.  Macgowan’ s  in  Mr.
Knotts’  books  is  half  an  ounce  of  solution  of
arsenic.


“  How  often  each  prescription  was  dispensed  I  am  not
aware.

“  Mr.  Knott  has  copies  of  many  more  prescriptions  of  Dr.
Macgowan’s  dispensed  to  Mrs.  Bird,  but  they  do  not  contain
mercury.  In  addition  to  this,  Mr.  Ham,  a  highly  respect¬
able  chemist,  dispensed  twenty-nine  prescriptions  of  Dr.
Macgowan' s  for  Mrs.  Bird,  between  March  1832  and  Feb¬
ruary  1833,  but  it  was  not  then  his  practice  to  take  copies  of
all  the  prescriptions  he  dispensed.  Mr.  Palk,  also  a  chemist,
has  dispensed  prescriptions  of  Dr.  Macgowan's  for  Mrs.  Bird,
containing  mercury,  but  he  has  not  copies.  Mrs.  Bird  has
procured  medicines  of  Mr.  Yisick  from  Dr.  Macgowan's  pre-


promulgated  against  Mrs.  Bird.


207*


scriptioiis,  but  they  did  not  contain  mercury.  Mrs. - ,*

who  lived  in  the  next  house  to  Mrs.  Bird  during  a  great  por¬
tion  of  the  time  Dr.  Macgowan  was  in  attendance  on  her,
has  a  distinct  recollection  of  Mrs.  B.  frequently  complaining
of  a  sore  mouth  and  her  teeth  being  very  loose.  She  also
remembers  being  shewn  on  one  occasion  by  Mrs.  Bird  a
small  bottle  of  drops  which  Dr.  M.  had  but  a  few  minutes
before  brought  for  her,  Dr.  Macgowan  having  given  her  the
first  dose  from  his  own  hands,  as  Mrs.  Bird  stated  at  the
time.  How  far  Dr.  Macgowan’s  statement  that  salivation
formed  no  part  of  his  treatment  of  Mrs.  B.’s  case  is  in  accord¬
ance  with  the  fact,  I  leave  your  readers  to  judge ;  and  also
whether  Dr.  M/s  memory  may  not  have  been  equally  treach¬
erous  in  regard  to  his  having  carried  medicines  in  his  pocket
to  Mrs.  Bird.  Both  Mr.  Parker  and  I  carefully  avoided  men¬
tioning  Dr.  Macgowan's  name  in  The  Zoist,  first  because  we
believed  he  treated  Mrs.  B.  to  the  best  of  his  judgment,  and
secondly  because  he  was  absent.

“Although  twelve  months  have  now  elapsed,  I  am  de¬
lighted  to  say  Mrs.  Bird  has  had  no  return  of  fits  nor  vomit¬
ing  of  food,  and  her  sufferings  from  tic  have  been  next  to
nothing.  The  tumor  in  her  side  (uterus)  has  not  risen,  nor
are  there  any  indications  of  its  again  causing  her  inconve¬
nience.  Many  circumstances  during  the  late  unhealthy  sea¬
son  have  occurred  to  retard  her  re-establishment,  but  still  she
is  and  has  been  for  many  months  in  far  better  health  than
for  the  last  seventeen  years.

“  J.  C.  Luxmoore.

“  Alphington,  Exeter,

“June  21,  1847.”


NOTICES  TO  CORRESPONDENTS.

Mr.  Wakley' s  desire  that  Mr.  Braid  should  utter  an  untruth. — The  facts  are
these.  Mr.  Wakley,  in  his  Lancet  of  the  21st  of  last  November,  states  that
Mr.  Braid,  a  medical  practitioner  of  Manchester,  has  said  that,  when  lately  in
London,  he  called  on  a  physician  who  offered  to  shew  him  the  power  of  magnets
in  producing  catalepsy  ;  and  their  application  was  followed  by  the  expected  result.
Mr.  Braid,  in  the  hearing  of  the  patient,  then  remarked  he  had  in  his  pocket  an
instrument  quite  as  powerful;  only  that  if  he  closed  the  patient’s  hand  upon  it,
the  hand  would  open  and  the  instrument  drop.  He  touched  the  patient  with  it
and  the  expected  result  followed.  He  spoke  of  other  properties  which  it  had  ;
and  on  trial  all  results  ensued  as  he  foretold.  The  instrument  was  only  Mr.
Braid’s  portmanteau  key  and  ring.  Mr.  Wakley  asks,  “  Why  did  not  the  writer
at  once  name  Dr.  Elliotson?”  We  have  Dr.  Elliotson’s  authority  for  saying
that,  if  the  writer  had,  he  would  have  been  guilty  of  falsehood  ;  and  that  he


*  The  person  alluded  to  objects  to  her  name  appearing  in  print,  but  will
answer  any  questions  on  the  subject.

YOL.  V.  Q


208  Notices  to  Correspondents ,  Books  received,  fyc,

never  saw  Mr.  Braid  during  that  person’s  visit  to  London.  Mr.  Wakley  adds
that  the  prototype  of  the  key  was  a  bit  of  lead  substituted  by  himself  for  nickel
in  an  experiment  upon  Elizabeth  Okey.  Now  when  Mr.  Wakley  applied  lead
instead  of  nickel,  and  lead  only,  lead  not  preceded  by  nickel,  to  Elizabeth  Okey
in  1838,  the  effects  of  nickel  upon  her  did  not  take  place,  as  he  would  wish
to  have  it  believed.  The  poor  girl  fell  asleep,  as  she  always  did  at  that  period
of  her  great  susceptibility  if  two  or  three  persons  stood  close  to  her  in  silence  ;
and  there  was  Mr.  Wakley  close  to  her  in  front,  and  one  of  his  sons  and  his
reporter  at  each  side.  If  she  fancied  the  lead  was  nickel,  her  fancy  was  inope¬
rative,  for  the  effects  of  nickel  did  not  ensue.  Mr.  Braid  does  not  accuse  the
physician’s  patient  of  imposture,  but  correctly  ascribes  the  effects  to  imagination,
in  accordance  with  what  Dr.  Elliotson  said  of  the  immense  force  of  imagination
in  mesmeric  patients  some  years  ago :  see  Zoist,  Vol.  I.,  pp.  313,  346,  422,  440;
Vol.  II.,  pp.  47,  462.  As  soon  as  Mr.  Braid  saw  Mr.  Wakley’s  attempt  to
make  people  believe  he  meant  Dr.  Elliotson,  it  was  his  duty  to  set  the  matter
right.


BOOKS  RECEIVED.

Mesmerism,  in  India ,  and  its  practical  application  in  Surgery  and  Medicine.
By  James  Esdaile,  M.D.,  Civil  Assistant  Surgeon,  H.E.I.C.S.  Bengal.  London,
1846. — The  surgical  facts  of  this  work  have  been  extracted  into  different  numbers
of  The  Zoist.  The  book  itself  should  be  carefully  read  by  every  medical  man  in
Europe,  Asia,  Africa  and  America.  The  time  will  come  when,  like  The  Zoist ,
it  will  be  regarded  as  one  of  the  brightest  jewels  of  medical  libraries.

Phrenological  Journal.  April,  1847. — Every  person  should  read  the  excel¬
lent  article  on  mesmerism,  written,  we  presume,  by  Dr.  Gregory,  the  Professor
of  Chemistry  in  the  University  of  Edinburgh.

The  article  upon  education,  by  Mr.  George  Combe,  in  the  previous  number,
should  also  be  universally  read.  It  is  very  far  in  advance  of  all  the  treatises  and
views  of  the  generality  of  the  friends  of  education,  though  Mr.  Combe  still
either  panders  to  certain  prejudices  or  he  himself  has  not  shaken  them  off.


THE  ZOIST.


No.  XIX.


OCTOBER,  1847.


I.  On  the  joint  operation  of  the  two  halves  of  the  Brain :
with  a  notice  of  Dr.  Wigan’s  work,  entitled,  The  Dua¬
lity  of  the  Mind  proved  by  the  structure,  functions,  and
diseases  of  the  Brain,  and  by  the  phenomena  of  mental
derangement,  and  shewn  to  be  essential  to  moral  respon¬
sibility,  1845  ;  and  his  pamphlet,  entitled,  A  few  more
words  on  the  Duality  of  the  Mind  and  on  some  of  its
corollaries,  1847.  By  Dr.  Elliotson.

Whoever  reflects  with  wonder — though  few  do  so  upon  any
great  number  of  the  innumerable  wonderful  facts  in  even  the
ordinary  matters  of  nature  constantly  before  our  eyes — that
the  brain  is  double,  is  composed  of  two  perfectly  correspond¬
ing  halves,  that  in  truth  every  person  has  two  brains  per¬
fectly  corresponding  to  each  other,  must  feel  anxious  to  learn
whether  he  feels,  thinks,  judges,  desires,  and  wills,  with  one
or  with  both ;  and,  if  with  both,  whether  with  both  at  the
same  time.

All  the  organs  of  the  body  concerned  with  our  personality
are  double.  We  have  two  eyes,  two  ears,  two  nostrils,  a
tongue  with  two  symmetrically  correspondent  halves,  and  not
only  two  hands  and  feet,  but  two  symmetrically  correspond¬
ent  halves  of  the  whole  surface,  of  the  bony  system,  and  of
the  apparatus  of  voluntary  muscles.  The  brain  and  its  con¬
nection  with  the  spinal  chord,  the  nerves  of  sensation  and
volition,  are  all  likewise  double.

We  can  employ  one  only,  or  one  side  only,  of  any  of  our
organs  of  sensation;  or  both  at  a  time.  We  can  touch  an
object  with  one  hand,  or  with  both,  though  of  course  in  the
latter  case  not  the  same  points  of  the  object  at  the  same
time :  taste  an  object  by  means  of  one  half  of  the  tongue ;
or  of  both  halves  of  the  tongue  at  the  same  time  :  smell  an

VOL.  v.  R


210  Joint  operation  of  the  two  halves  of  the  Brain.


odor  by  means  of  one  nostril  only ;  or  of  both  nostrils  at  the
same  time :  hear  by  means  of  one  ear ;  or  of  both  ears  at  the
same  time :  see  an  object  by  means  of  one  eye;  or  of  both
eyes  at  the  same  time.*

How  is  it  with  the  brains  ?  Do  we  feel,  think,  judge,
desire,  and  will,  with  one  brain ;  or  with  both  at  a  time  ?
It  is  fair  to  speak  of  our  two  brains,  as  the  two  halves  are  to
a  great  extent  separate,  like  the  eyes,  ears,  hands,  and  nos¬
trils;  and  but  partially  one  mass,  still  with  two  corresponding
halves,  like  the  tongue  whose  two  independent  halves  are  so
united  that  they  form  one  mass  and  we  therefore  cannot  say
our  tongues  and  yet  its  halves  are  so  distinct  that  one  may
act  and  be  acted  upon  and  not  the  other.

Do  we  think,  &c.,  with  one  brain  or  with  both  at  a  time  ?
That  we  can  with  either,  as  far  at  least  as  regards  the  hemi¬
spheres  or  perfectly  distinct  portions  of  its  halves,  is  certain,
because  one  hemisphere  may  be  diseased,  nay,  destroyed  or
disorganized  to  a  great  extent,  and  yet  the  faculties,  ob¬
servers  declare,  be  little  or  not  at  all  impaired.  Gall  allows

*  “  Gassendus,  Porta,  Tacquet,  and  Gall  maintained  that  we  see  with  only
one  eye  at  a  time  though  both  remain  open,  one  according  to  them  being  relaxed
and  inattentive  to  objects,  while  the  other  is  upon  the  stretch.  It  is  a  sufficient
refutation  of  this  hypothesis,  that  we  see  an  object  double  when  one  of  the  optic
axes  is  displaced  either  by  squinting  or  by  pressure  on  the  eyeball  with  the  finger ;
if  we  saw  with  only  one  eye,  one  object  only  under  such  circumstances  should
be  seen.  Again,  in  many  cases  which  I  have  already  explained,  the  simultaneous
effect  of  the  two  retinae  excites  a  different  idea  in  the  mind  to  that  consequent
on  either  of  the  single  impressions,  the  latter  giving  rise  to  the  idea  of  a  repre¬
sentation  on  a  plane  surface,  the  former  to  that  of  an  object  in  relief ;  these
things  could  not  occur  did  we  see  with  only  one  eye  at  a  time.

“  Du  Tour  held  that  though  we  might  occasionally  see  at  the  same  time  with
both  eyes,  yet  the  mind  cannot  be  affected  simultaneously  by  two  corresponding
points  of  the  two  images.  ”  “  All  that  the  experiments  adduced  in  favour,
and  others  relating  to  the  disappearance  of  objects  to  one  eye  really  prove,  is,
that  the  mind  is  inattentive  to  impressions  made  on  one  retina  when  it  cannot
combine  the  impressions  on  the  two  retinse  together,  so  as  to  resemble  the  per¬
ceptions  of  some  external  objects  ;  but  they  afford  no  ground  whatever  for  sup¬
posing  that  the  mind  cannot  under  any  circumstances  attend  to  impressions  made
simultaneously  on  points  of  the  two  retinae,  when  they  harmonize  with  each  other
in  suggesting  to  the  mind  the  same  idea.” — Professor  Wheatstone  ;  Phil.  Trans.,
1838,  pp.  390-1.

Gall  supposed  that  we  look  with  one  eye  only,  because,  1.  when  such  an
object  as  a  pencil  is  placed  between  us  and  the  light,  and  we  keep  both
eyes  open  and  throw  the  axis  of  vision,  the  pencil,  and  the  light,  into  one
line,  the  shadow  of  the  pencil  falls  on  one  eye,  which  is  that  usually  employed
by  us  in  looking  attentively,  and  not  upon  the  nose  between  the  eyes  :  2.  if  the
eye  not  used  be  shut,  the  relative  situation  of  the  objects  will  remain  the  same  ;
but,  if  the  other  be  shut,  the  relative  situation  will  be  altered,  and  the  pencil
appear  removed  far  from  its  former  situation  :  3.  if  we  look  at  a  point  but
little  distant,  both  our  eyes  appear  directed  towards  it :  if  we  then  shut  the  eye
which  we  do  not  habitually  use,  the  other  is  motionless ;  but  if  we  shut  this
other,  the  eye  not  habitually  used  turns  instantly  a  little  inwards  to  be  directed
to  the  point.


By  Dr.  Elliotson.  211

the  truth  of  such  cases,  and  adds  that  he  himself  saw  one  at
Vienna.

“A  clergyman  had  suffered  from  repeated  attacks  of
erysipelas  of  the  head.  All  his  left  side  became  at  length  so
weak,  that  he  was  obliged  to  walk  with  a  stick  :  at  length  he
was  struck  with  apoplexy,  and  died  in  a  few  hours.  Three
days  previously  he  had  preached  and  had  given  his  usual
instructions  to  young  persons.  On  opening  the  body,  I  found
the  right  hemisphere  of  the  brain  converted  into  a  grumous
substance,  of  a  dirty  yellowish  white  colour.”

Gall  then  gives  the  following  explanation :

“  I  have  proved  in  the  first  volume  of  the  large  work,*
that  the  nervous  systems  of  the  spinal  chord,  of  the  organs
of  sense  and  of  the  brain,  are  double  and  in  pairs.  We  have
two  optic  nerves,  two  acoustic  nerves,  just  as  we  have  two
eyes  and  two  ears ;  and  the  brain  is  equally  double  and  all
its  constituent  parts  are  in  pairs.  But,  just  as,  one  of  the
optic  nerves  or  one  of  the  eyes  being  destroyed,  we  continue
to  see  with  the  other  eye ;  so,  one  of  the  hemispheres  of  the
brain  having  become  incapable  of  performing  its  functions,
the  other  hemisphere,  or  the  other  brain, t  may  perfectly
continue  its  functions ;  in  other  words,  the  functions  may  be
disturbed  or  suspended  on  one  side  and  be  undisturbed  on
the  other.”!

It  is  thus  clear  that  Gall  considered  it  a  fact  that  the
functions  of  both  brains  are  the  same  and  simultaneous ;
that  in  health  they  cooperate  in  all  our  thoughts,  &c.  This
fact  is  self-evident  from  the  circumstance  that  if  one  brain  or
hemisphere  is  rendered  useless  by  disease  and  the  other
retains  its  powers,  whichever  be  the  hemisphere  that  is  sound
and  whichever  is  diseased,  all  the  previous  knowledge  and  cha¬
racter  of  the  individual  are  retained,  and  surprise  has  been
expressed  on  finding  one  hemisphere  of  the  brain  a  mass  of
disease,  or  destroyed,  where  no  disturbance  of  the  intellectual
or  moral  powers  had  been  noticed — a  proof  that  both  halves,
or  brains,  to  use  Gaiks  expression,  had  previously  acted
together.

That  the  hemispheres  are  masses  of  mental  organs  is
obvious  to  every  real  observer.

Sir  Charles  Bell  said,  in  1826,  “  as  the  nerves  are  double,
and  the  organs  of  sense  double,  so  is  the  brain  double ;  and


*  Anatomie  et  Physiologie  du  Systeme  Nerveux  et  du  cerveau  en  particu¬
lar.  4  vols.  4to. ;  with  an  Atlas  of  100  plates.  Paris,  1810-19.

f  In  my  quotations  I  am  responsible  for  the  italics  and  capitals  which  make
my  points  the  clearer.

X  Fonctions  du  Cerveau,  t.  ii.,  p.247.  6  vols.  8vo.  Paris,  1822.

R  2


212  Joint  operation  of  the  two  halves  of  the  Brain.

every  sensation  conveyed  to  the  brain  is  conveyed  to  the  two
lateral  parts,  and  the  operations  performed  must  be  done  in
both  lateral  parts  at  the  same  moment.  I  speak  of  the  lateral
divisions  of  the  brain  being  distinct  brains  combined  in
function  :”  “  there  is  every  provision  for  their  acting  with
perfect  sympathy.”  “We  are  forced  to  admit  that  there  are
four  brains,”  (the  brain  being  divided  into  cerebrum  and  cere¬
bellum,  large  and  little  brains  ;  and  each  of  these  having  two
corresponding  halves.)*

This  assertion  that  we  have  four  brains  is  the  same  as
Gaiks  that  we  have  two ;  because  Gall  here  means  by  the
word  brain  the  half  of  the  cerebrum  and  cerebellum,  and
Sir  Charles  Bell  speaks  of  the  cerebrum  and  cerebellum  as  two
brains.  Gall  and  Sir  C.  Bell  intend  to  point  out  that  the  whole
cerebral  mass  through  its  extent,  whether  viewed  as  one,  or
as  divided  into  the  large  and  superior  mass  of  cerebrum  and
and  the  smaller  and  inferior  mass  of  cerebellum,  has  two
symmetrically  correspondent  lateral  halves.

But  Gall  knew  moreover  that  one  brain  might  be  insane
and  the  other  healthy.  He  thus  continues  from  the  quota¬
tion  just  made.

“  Tiedemann  relates  the  case  of  a  man,  named  Joseph
Moser,  who  had  one  side  of  his  brain  deranged,  and  who
observed  its  derangement  with  the  healthy  side.

“  Some  physiologists  consider  that  such  an  insanity  is
rather  a  partial  one,  than  an  insanity  of  one  half  of  the
brain;  but  I  have  good  reasons  for  differing  from  them.  At
Vienna  a  minister  laboured  under  the  same  disease  for  three
years :  he  described  it  to  me :  he  minutely  detailed  the
manner  in  which  each  half  of  his  brain  was  affected :  on  the
left  side  he  constantly  heard  insults,  and  therefore  always
turned  his  eyes  from  this  side,  although  he  knew  distinctly
with  his  right  side  that  those  insulting  sounds  were  the  simple
result  of  a  disease  of  the  left  half  of  his  brain.  When  he
was  feverish  he  was  no  longer  able  to  subdue  the  illusion.
Long  after  his  cure,  as  soon  as  he  took  too  much  wine,  or
gave  way  to  anger,  he  felt  threatenings  of  a  relapse  in  the
left  half  of  his  head.

“  At  Paris,  I  attended  a  young  lady  who  often  mentioned
to  me  her  apprehension  that  she  should  go  mad  on  one  side
of  her  head,  because  she  noticed  that  the  course  of  her  ideas
was  not  the  same  on  this  side  as  on  the  other.

“  Another  lady,  a  woman  of  great  talent,  spoke  to  me  in
nearly  the  same  language ;  she  assured  me  that  she  was  dis-

*  The  Anatomy  and  Physiology  of  the  Human  Body.  By  John  and  Charles
Bell.  Vol.  ii.,  p.  401.


By  Dr.  Elliotson.


213


tinctly  conscious  of  perceiving  quite  differently  on  the  left
side  from  what  she  did  upon  the  right ;  that  everything  affected
her  differently  on  the  left  side.  She  told  me  that  sometimes
her  power  of  thinking  was  quite  interrupted  on  the  left  side,
and  that  the  impediment  was  accompanied  by  an  icy  torpor  :
it  seems  (these  were  her  expressions,  and  she  applied  her
hand  perpendicularly  upon  her  forehead  in  the  median  line,)
it  seems  to  me  that  from  the  forehead  to  the  back  of  the
head  my  brain  is  divided  into  two  distinct  halves.  Neither
of  these  ladies  had  the  least  knowledge  of  the  structure  of
the  brain,  nor  of  my  physiological  discoveries.

“  The  following  case,  which  I  have  repeated  elsewhere,
is  apposite  here.  A  physician,  with  whom  I  studied  at  Vienna,
often  regretted  that  he  could  think  with  only  one  side  of  his
head.  He  was  distinctly  conscious  of  his  inability  on  the
other.  In  fact  the  weak  side  was  much  less  elevated  and
broad  than  the  other.”

After  referring  to  these  passages  in  Gall,  Dr.  Wigan  ex¬
claims  : —

“  Strange  that  such  words,  from  such  a  source,  should  have
dropped  unheeded  into  oblivion,  their  existence  even  known  but  to  a
few  phrenologists,  and  that  no  one  in  more  than  thirty  years  should
have  drawn  a  single  inference  from  such  important  premises.  It  is
obvious  that  Gall’s  assertions  on  this  subject  were  generally  disbe¬
lieved,  or  they  would  not  have  failed  to  create  general  notoriety,  and
lead  to  very  important  results.”  p.  54.

Is  it  not  stranger  still  that  Dr.  Wigan  should  have  neg¬
lected  to  make  himself  acquainted  with  the  other  words
from  such  a  source,  with  the  great  doctrine  and  views,  and
the  mighty  array  of  facts,  in  Gaiks  great  work  ?  Such  truths
from  such  a  source,  that  they  have  all  been  unheeded  by  Dr.
Wigan  during  forty  years,*  for  he  expresses  himself  still
ignorant  of  Gaiks  science.

*  One  of  the  great  misfortunes  of  phrenology  in  this  country  is  the  want  of
an  English  translation  of  Gall’s  work.  Not  one  in  a  thousand  British  students
of  the  science  has  read  it,  or  perhaps  seen  it.  Mr.  Combe  evidently  learnt  his
phrenology  second  hand  from  Dr.  Spurzheim,  and  most  persons  have  learnt  it
third  hand  from  Mr.  Combe.  Had  the  money,  bequeathed  by  Mr.  Henderson
to  further  the  spread  of  phrenology,  been  applied  to  a  translation  of  Gall,  its
spread  would  have  been  a  hundred-fold  more  rapid.  The  work  bears  all  the
marks  of  a  master  mind,  and  stands  as  high  above  that  of  Dr.  Spurzheim  and
Mr.  Combe  as  Mount  Blanc  does  above  the  Rigi  and  Mount  Pilatus.  Not  only
is  it  most  powerful  and  eloquent,  but  plain  and  free  from  a  number  of  assertions
and  speculations  in  which  these  abound.  It  does  not  deter  the  reader  with  organs
of  Weight,  Size,  Individuality,  Eventuality,  Supernaturality  !,  Concentrativeness,
and  others,  which,  if  they  exist,  had  better  not  have  been  presented  in  an
elementary  book  to  the  student  till  ample  proofs  had  been  collected  of  them.  If
the  English  had  possessed  a  translation  of  it  instead  of  the  writings  of  Dr.  Spurz-


214  Joint  operation  of  the  two  halves  of  the  Brain.

“  I  DO  NOT  PROFESS  TO  UNDERSTAND  THE  SUBJECT.  It  has

advocates  and  opponents  among  the  ablest  men  of  the  age;  and  till
phrenologists  themselves  approach  unanimity  in  the  minute  divisions
and  localizations,  it  would  be  useless  for  one  so  uninformed  on  the
subject  as  myself  to  attempt  its  elucidation”  p.  95.

Can  Dr.  W.  adduce  one  opponent  of  phrenology  who  is
acquainted  with  it  and  has  investigated  it  fairly  ?  Are  the
differences  among  phrenologists  more  than  upon  solitary  and
comparatively  subordinate  points  ?  Are  they  greater  than
those  among  chemists,  general  physiologists,  and  the  culti¬
vators  of  every  other  science  upon  various  points  of  which
sufficient  labour  has  not  yet  been  bestowed  or  upon  which
particular  cultivators  are  still  not  on  a  level  of  knowledge  with
others?  Were  men  in  general  to  act  with  reference  to  other
sciences  as  Dr.  W.  acts  with  reference  to  the  physiology  of
the  brain,  where  would  the  cultivators  of  any  science  be
found  ?  No  sooner  had  two  men  cultivated  a  science  and
begun  to  differ  on  some  point,  as  men  always  have  done,
than  no  third  cultivator  would  have  existed  from  that  time
forward.  Why  are  chemists,  astronomers,  botanists,  general
physiologists,  still  working  at  their  respective  sciences  and
disputing  earnestly,  if  unanimity  and  full  knowledge  exist
among  them  ?  Nay,  I  am  not  aware  that  all  the  researches
of  chemistry  into  the  nature  of  our  solids  and  fluids,  in  either
health  or  disease,  have  yet  contributed  a  single  improvement
in  practice :  that  a  practitioner  acquainted  with  animal  che¬
mistry  can  treat  any  disease  better  than  one  who  is  ignorant
of  it  but  sagacious  in  observing  and  well  informed  of  the
effect  and  proper  administration  of  remedial  measures.*  If
we  enquire  of  writers  upon  insanity  what  they  think  of  blood¬
letting  in  the  disease,  we  learn,  according  to  Dr.  W.,  that, —

“  Pinel  says  bleeding  is  alwa}^s  injurious.

“  Cullen  approves  of  bleeding.

“  Esquirol  condemns  it.

“  Haslam  recommends  it.

“  Rush  bleeds  to  the  extent  of  thirty  or  forty  ounces  at  a
time.

heim  and  Mr.  Combe,  those  authors  would  not  have  made  so  much  money,  but
phrenology  would  have  been  fully  admitted  here  long  ago.

My  friend  Mr.  Symes  has  had  a  perfect  translation  of  Gall's  octavo  work,
called  Fonctions  du  Cerveau,  (for  Gall  does  not  use  the  word  phrenology,  disliking
to  coin  unnecessary  names,)  prepared  for  many  years  ;  and  a  bookseller  might  now
hnd  its  publication  a  good  speculation.

*  Every  medical  practitioner  knows  that  calomel  produces  green  intestinal
excretions,  when  prescribed  freely.  If  he  enquires  of  the  chemists  what  is  the
cause  of  the  green  color,  one  tells  him  it  is  bile  with  green  fat,  another  sulphuret
of  iron,  and  another  sulphuret  of  mercury  !  See  Dr.  J.  Franz  Simon’s  Animal
Chemistry.  Translated  by  Dr.  Day.  Chap.  x.


By  Dr.  Elliot  son.


215


“  Foville  doubts  about  it,  but  uses  it  in  the  intermittent
form.

“Joseph  Franck  has  a  high  opinion  of  it.

“  Fodere,  I  think,  condemns  it.

“  Hitch  and  Dr.  Shute  proscribe  it.

“  Pritchard  approves  it.”

Delightful  harmony  !  “  Rush  took  away  200  ounces  from

a  man  sixty-eight  years  of  age  in  less  than  two  months,  and
from  another  man  470  ounces  in  the  course  of  seven  months.”
p.  340 — 1.

In  another  part,  Dr.  W.  says  with  perfect  truth,  “  A  large
proportion  of  the  works  on  insanity  are  the  most  perfect  trash
that  ever  a  man  wasted  his  faculties  in  reading.”  p.  116.

But  what  is  the  inference  from  all  this  ?  Not  that  we
know  nothing  of  animal  chemistry  or  insanity,  not  that  we
are  despairingly  to  cease  to  enquire  into  animal  chemistry,
or  the  nature  and  treatment  of  insanity ;  but  that  many  who
presume  to  teach  us  are  incompetent,  and  that  far  more  labor
has  yet  to  be  bestowed  upon  these  subjects  before  we  can
emerge  from  the  regions  of  imperfect  knowledge.

Yet,  notwithstanding  his  confession  of  ignorance,  Dr.  W.
does  not  hesitate  to  take  upon  himself  to  declare,  in  the  face
of  Gaiks  great  array  of  facts  in  regard  to  the  functions  of  the
cerebellum,  that, —

“  If  there  be  one  fact  more  clear  than  another  as  to  the  functions
of  this  mysterious  organ,  it  is  that  it  has  no  connexion  with  the  re¬
productive  faculty,  but  is  chiefly  a  co-ordinator  of  muscular  action

putting  faith  in  the  cruel  experiments  of  Flourens  upon
poor  brutes,  from  which  experiments  he  knows

“  not  how  we  are  to  withhold  our  assent,”
and  yet  in  the  same  sentence  saying  that

“  the  entire  subject  is  still  involved  in  obscurity,  and  we  can  infer
but  little  as  to  the  human  brain  from  experiments  upon  the  lower
animals,”

and  that  the

“  extraordinary  and  cruel  mutilations  (the  French  cut  the  cere¬
bellum  in  slices  and  also  remove  it  entirely)  have  hitherto  produced
no  result  to  be  depended  upon.”  p.  96 — 7.

“  Numerous  experiments  have  been  performed  upon  living  ani¬
mals  with  the  object  of  ascertaining  its  functions,  but  the  results  are
unsatisfactory  and  indeed  contradictory.”  p.  18.

Not  aware  that  GalFs  phrenological  discoveries  were  made
before  his  anatomical,  and  that  the  anatomy  of  the  brain
no  more  explains  its  functions  than  that  of  the  liver  explains
why  this  forms  bile  or  that  of  the  nerves  of  the  tongue  and


216


Joint  operation  of  the  two  halves  of  the  Brain.


nostrils  why  these  are  fit  respectively  for  taste  and  smell,  Dr.
W.  regrets  that  we

“  had  not  the  advantage  of  Dr.  Gall’s  sagacious  plan  of  dissecting
the  brain  before  it  had  been  attached  to  the  fantastic  theories,  which
have  since  been  pushed  to  so  great  an  extent  by  the  more  enthusiastic
of  his  followers.*  Had  we  been  able  to  commence  the  dissection  of
the  brain  on  true  principles  five  and  thirty  or  forty  years  ago,  un¬
incumbered  with  his  hypothesis  of  its  functions,  we  should  probably
have  admitted  a  large  portion  of  his  deductions  ;  and  some  of  the
quiet,  steady,  well  cultivated  minds  of  anatomists  in  this  country
might  have  elaborated  a  system  which  should  have  been  free  from  the
gross  non-sequiturs  contended  for  by  him  and  his  colleague.”  p.  39,

What  the  gross  non-sequiturs  are,  he  does  not  inform  us ;
and  he  believes  that  if  we  had  first  learnt  GalFs  anatomy  of
the  brain,  we  should  then  have  admitted  a  large  portion  of
his  deductions  !  What,  whether  they  are  gross  nonsense  or
not,  and  whether  they  are  hypotheses!*  or  truths  ?

This  is  pretty  well  from  one  who  declares  that  he  does
not  “  understand  the  subject.”

“It  seems,”  he  says,  “more  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the
intellectual  organ  is  employed  upon  the  whole  process  of  thinking  :
this,  however,  I  leave  to  the  phrenologists,  whose  doctrines  I  do

*  Dr.  W.  perhaps  learnt  this  mistake  from  Dr.  Bostock,  who  in  his  Physi¬
ology,  vol.  iii.,  p.  263,  says,  “The  subject  was  first  placed  in  this  point  of  view
by  Drs.  Gall  and  Spurzheim,  who,  in  consequence  of  their  recent  dissection  of
the  brain  and  their  mode  of  separating  its  different  parts  from  each  other,  were
led  to  conjecture  that  these  parts  were  appropriated  to  distinct  mental  faculties.”
Now,  1st  ,  (I  quote  from  an  answer  of  my  own  to  Drs.  Magendie  and  Bostock,
in  the  Phrenological  Journal,  vol.  ii.,  p.  96,)  Dr.  Gall  expressly  states,  over  and
over  again,  that  he  made  his  discoveries  of  the  faculties  and  their  organs  before
he  made  any  in  the  structure  of  the  brain  ;  and  he  particularly  insists,  in  numer¬
ous  parts  of  his  work,  that  the  functions  of  no  organ  can  be  learnt  from  anatomy
alone.  2.  I  am  not  aware  that  any  part  of  the  brain  separated  peculiarly  in  Dr.
Gall’s  method  is  considered  by  him  as  having  a  distinct  faculty  appropriated  to
it.  “Partly,”  continues  Dr.  Bostock,  “  as  it  would  appear  from  his  idea  of  the
anatomical  structure  of  the  brain,  in  what  regards  the  relation  of  its  parts  to  each
other,  and  partly  from  a  preconceived  hypothesis,  he  fixed  upon  the  external
convolutions  of  the  cerebrum  and  cerebellum  as  the  respective  seats  of  the  in¬
dividual  faculties.”  The  truth  is  that  Gall  proceeded  upon  no  hypothesis,  but,
seeing  as  a  fact  now  allowed  by  nearly  all  the  world,  that  the  brain  is  the  organ
of  the  mind,  made  observations  to  learn  whether  peculiar  talents  were  accom¬
panied  by  large  development  of  particular  parts  of  the  head.  Ignorant  whether
this  was  the  case  or  not,  he  satisfied  himself  by  observation  that  it  was  so.  Dr.
Bostock  would  not  have  ventured  to  write  upon  any  other  branch  of  science  in
such  extreme  ignorance  ;  and  the  matter  reflects  the  greater  discredit  upon  him
because  he  wrote  a  large  System,  of  Physiology,  and  was  long  in  the  Council  of  the
Royal  Society.

f  So  ignorant  was  Father  Pardies  that,  when  Newton’s  discoveries  were  an¬
nounced,  and  in  the  words  of  Professor  Playfair,  “a  host  of  enemies  appeared,
each  eager  to  obtain  the  unfortunate  pre-eminence  of  being  the  first  to  attack  con¬
clusions  which  the  voice  of  posterity  was  to  confirm,”  “among  them  one  of
the  first  was  Father  Pardies,  who  wrote  against  the  experiments  and  what  he  was
pleased  to  call  the  hypotheses  of  Newton.” — Supplement  to  the  Encyclopaedia
Britanica.


By  Dr.  Elliot  son.


217


not  quite  understand.  Their  minute  subdivisions  when  they  can
shew  no  anatomical  distinction,  seem  gratuitous  and  unnecessary.”
p.  158.

No  anatomical  distinction  has  yet  been  shewn  between
any  organs  which  lie  together;  therefore  his  objections  are
general.  Anatomists  are  satisfied  that  one  portion  of  the
spinal  chord  is  for  sensation  and  another  for  motion,  and  yet
they  can  discern  no  distinction  between  them,  as  Dr.  W.
owns !  p.  31.

“It  is  when  he  (the  phrenologist)  passes  on  to  the  arbitrary  ap¬
propriation  of  parts,  and  to  the  assumption  that  such  parts  may  be
identified  on  the  surface  of  the  skull,  that  we  hesitate  to  follow  him
on  the  vague  and  scanty  authority  of  observations  necessarily  fallible
in  every  case  but  our  own,  since  the  real  mind  cannot  be  known  to
other's.'”  p.  89.

The  talents  of  Newton,  Shakspeare,  Raphael,  Galileo,
Beethoven,  of  the  host  of  mathematicians,  painters,  poets,
wits,  linguists,  musicians,  constructors,  &c.,  whose  produc¬
tions  are  universally  known  :  the  moral  character  of  Bacon,
Milton,  Howard,  Aristides,  Cicero,  Franklin,  Napoleon,
Robespierre,  Courvoisier,  and  the  host  of  men  whose  lives
are  universally  known,  cannot  be  known  to  us  !

Would  any  one  suppose,  after  reading  these  quotations,
that  the  following  are  also  from  his  book  ?

“  That  the  intellectual  organization  of  the  individual  is  in  some
way  connected  with  the  shape  of  his  head  is  a  fact  proved  beyond
all  question ,  &c.  Of  the  propensities,  the  sentiments,  the  perceptive
and  reflective  faculties,  the  grand  division  seems  logical  and  reason¬
able,  although  the  location  of  the  three  divisions  leaves  room  for
much  more  evidence  before  it  can  be  satisfactory.”  p.  160.

“  If  this  (faulty  action  of  the  brain’s  fibres)  take  place  among  the
organs  of  the  lower  propensities,  it  may  require  all  the  power  of  the
higher  organs  to  keep  them  in  check.”  p.  268.

Yet  at  p.  259,  we  read.

“  To  destroy  one’s  own  child  is  not  a  natural  propensity,  which
can  be  assigned  to  a  separate  phrenological  organ,  &c :  ‘it  is  a
diseased  action  of  the  whole  brain.’  ”

What !  Of  “  the  higher  organs  of  the  intellect”  employed
by  logicians,  mathematicians,  the  historical  painter,  the  sub¬
lime  musician,  &c.  ?  and  of  all  of  them  ?  Whoever  calls  the
propensity  to  destroy  one’s  offspring  a  natural  propensity  ?
it  is  no  more  a  natural  propensity  than  convulsions  are  natural
movements ;  are  they,  too,  produced  by  the  whole  brain  ?

“No  physician  who  has  attentively  watched  a  case  of  genuine
catalepsy,  (it  has  been  my  fate  to  see  three  such,  which  is  I  believe
a  large  proportion,)*  but  must  be  convinced  that  large  portions  of

*  If  Dr.  W.  wei’e  to  mesmerise  he  might  see  three  hundred.


218  Joint  operation  of  the  two  halves  of  the  Brain.

the  brain,  or  as  a  phrenologist  would  say,  a  great  number  of  the
organs  of  the  mind,  are  in  a  state  of  perfect  torpor,  while  others
are  in  unnatural  activity.”  p.  269.

“  I  believe  myself  then  able  to  prove,  &c.,  that  the  power  of  the
higher  organs  (organs  not  organ)  of  the  intellect  to  coerce  the
mere  instincts  and  propensities,  as  well  as  the  power  of  one  cerebrum
to  control  the  volitions  of  the  other,  may  be  indefinitely  increased  by
exercise  and  moral  cultivation.”  &c.,  p.  28.

Speaking  of  children  whose  intellects  after  two  or  three
years  are  developed  no  farther,  he  says,

“Those  portions  of  the  brain  which  minister  to  the  higher  facul¬
ties  of  the  intellect,  have  simply  ceased  to  grow,  as  we  see  the
body  cease  to  grow  in  some  dwarfs,  without  deformity,”  p.  310.

“The  number  of  extraordinary  coincidences  which  have  been
collected  between  the  shape  of  the  head  and  the  shape  of  the  mind,
will  ensure  the  permanence  of  the  discussion,  and  ultimately  lead
to  the  adoption  of  a  doctrine  satisfactory  to  all.”  p.  159.*

Again,

“  If  a  large  collection  of  examples,  thoroughly  authenticated,
shew  an  uniform  connexion  between  the  external  manifestation  and
the  moral  and  intellectual  qualities,  and  if  these  be  not  contradicted
by  any  single  example  of  the  quality  in  excess  without  the  corre¬
sponding  external  development  or  (what  would  be  still  more  conclusive)
no  example  of  the  external  manifestation  without  the  corresponding
character,  then  certainly  we  should  be  bound  to  put  faith  in  the
doctrines  of  phrenology  as  shewn  by  cranioscopy,”  p.  358.

Is  not  the  collection  of  examples  in  Gall  “  large  ?”  Why
has  not  Dr.  W.  made  himself  acquainted  with  them  :  and
why  has  he  not  proceeded  to  study  all  the  living  examples
around  him  ?  He  is  surrounded  by  proofs,  and  is  too  pre¬
judiced  or  indolent  to  bestow  a  single  regard  upon  them.
And  why  should  he  wish  us  to  furnish  him  with  a  “  large
collection  of  examples,”  when  at  starting  he  told  us  that  he
should  “  regard  all  such  observations  vague  and  scanty,  fal¬
lible  in  every  case  but  our  own,  since  the  real  mind  cannot  be
known  to  others,”  p.  89  :  our  labour  would  be  lost  upon
him.  Why  should  the  large  size,  without  a  single  absence
of  powerful  faculty,  be  “more  conclusive,”  or  be  expected?
With  great  power,  we  have  a  right  to  expect  great  size :  with
small  size  small  power.  But  large  size  may  exist  with  small

*  For  the  nature  of  the  objections  urged  by  other  better  known  opponents  to
the  true  physiology  of  the  brain,  I  refer  to  the  early  numbers  of  the  Phrenological
Journal,  and  to  a  work  called  The  Functions  of  the  Cerebellum ,  by  Drs.  Gall,
Vimont  and  Broussais,  translated  from  the  French  by  George  Combe;  also
Answers  to  the  Objections  urged  against  Phrenology,  by  Dr.  Roget,  Rudolphi,
Prichard,  and  Tiedemann,  by  George  Combe  and  Dr.  A.  Combe,  Edinburgh,
1838.  Every  one  interested  in  cerebral  physiology  should  possess  this.


By  Dr.  Elliotson.


219


power ;  the  brain  though  big  may  be  of  poor  composition  :
the  head  may  be  large  from  the  presence  of  water.*  Yet  though
he  “  should  certainly  be  bound  then  to  put  faith  in  the  doc¬
trines,”  he  next  declares  the  evidence  would  be  insufficient,
and  could  not  be  “  completely  satisfactory”  unless  the  loss  of
certain  portions  of  the  mind  and  the  loss  of  certain  portions  of
the  brain  by  disease  were  to  correspond.  His  faith  thus  would
have  been  a  faith  without  knowledge.  But  he  had  before
told  us  that  the  brain  is  double,  and  one  side  may  be  de¬
stroyed  by  disease,  and  yet  the  various  faculties  continue  in
full  play,  p.  48 ;  and  as  to  the  corresponding  organs  on  both
sides  ever  being  diseased.  Dr.  W.  tells  us

“  It  seems  almost  contradictory  to  common  sense  to  imagine
that  disease  in  a  certain  arbitrarily  defined  portion  of  a  convolution
should  be  accompanied  by  exactly  similar  disease  in  the  same  portion
or  organ  on  the  opposite  side,  having  no  connexion  with  it  but  at
the  base  of  the  brain.”  p.  159.

But  to  return  to  the  united  action  of  the  two  halves  of
the  brain.  The  harmonious  coincidence  of  action  of  the
halves  of  the  brain,  or,  to  use  GalFs  words,  of  the  two  brains ,
was  treated  of  more  largely  by  Bichat,  perhaps  the  most
distinguished  of  French  physiologists  and  anatomists,  in  one
of  the  most  celebrated  modern  physiological  books,  published
by  him  at  the  very  beginning  of  the  present  century,  before
the  appearance  of  Gall’s  great  work,  but  not  before  Gall  had
lectured  and  published  his  views.

“We  must  conclude,”  says  Bichat  in  his  Recherches
Physiologiques  sur  la  vie  et  la  Mort}  1800,  “  from  all  I  have
said,  that  in  all  the  apparatus  of  the  external  senses,
harmony  of  action  in  the  two  symmetrical  organs ,  or  in  the
two  similar  halves  of  the  same  organ}  is  a  condition  essen¬
tial  to  the  perfection  of  the  sensations.

“  The  external  senses  are  the  natural  excitants  of  the  brain,
the  functions  of  which  in  animal  life  constantly  follow  theirs,
and  would  languish  in  constant  inactivity  unless  excited  by
them.  From  the  sensations  are  directly  derived  perception,
memory,  imagination,  and  consequently  even  judgment ;  but
it  is  easy  to  prove  that  these  various  functions,  commonly
termed  internal  senses ,  follow  in  their  action  the  same  law  as

*  In  my  Physiology,  I  state  the  matter  thus  :  “  Any  phrenologist  may  always
without  fear  assert  positively  of  the  head  from  constant  positive  exhibition  of  the
mind,  and  always  fearlessly  assert  negatively  of  the  mind  from  negative  exhibi¬
tions  of  the  head :  he  would  not  assert  respecting  the  mind  from  positive  exhibi¬
tions  of  the  head,  nor  respecting  the  head  from  negative  exhibitions  of  the  mind,
without  certain  provisions,  viz.,  that  the  size  of  the  head  depends  upon  healthy
brain,  and  the  deficiency  of  mind  arises  from  no  want  of  excitement  nor  from
disease.’ ’  p.  374.


220  Joint  operation  of  the  two  halves  of  the  Brain.

the  external,  and,  like  the  latter,  approach  perfection  the  nearer
accordingly  as  there  is  the  more  harmony  in  the  symmetrical  por¬
tions  of  the  organ  which  is  their  seat.

“  If  one  of  the  hemispheres  is  better  organized  than  the  other ,
more  developed  in  all  its  points,  consequently  capable  of  being
more  strongly  affected ;  then  1  maintain  that  perception  will  be
confused,  for  the  brain  is  to  the  soul  what  the  senses  are  to
the  brain ;  it  transmits  to  the  soul  the  confusion  proceeding
from  the  senses,  as  these  transmit  to  it  the  impressions  made
upon  them  by  the  surrounding  bodies.  But,  if  the  defect  of
harmony  in  the  external  system  of  sense  disturbs  the  per¬
ception  of  the  brain,  why  should  not  the  mind  perceive  con¬
fusedly  when  the  two  hemispheres  being  of  unequal  strength  do
not  fuse  into  one  the  two  impressions  which  they  receive  ?

“  In  the  case  of  memory — the  faculty  of  reproducing  former
impressions;  in  the  case  of  imagination — the  faculty  of  creat¬
ing  new  ones,  each  hemisphere  appears  to  reproduce  or  to
create  one.  If  both  impressions  are  not  perfectly  alike,  the
perception  of  the  mind  which  ought  to  reunite  them,  will  be
inaccurate  and  irregular.  There  will  be  inequality  in  the
two  sensations  if  there  is  inequality  in  the  two  hemispheres
which  are  their  seat.

“  Perception,  memory,  imagination,  being  the  ordinary
foundations  of  judgment,  if  they  are  confused  how  can  this
be  distinct  ?

“We  have  just  supposed  inequality  of  action  in  the  two
hemispheres,  to  prove  that  defect  of  precision  in  the  intellec¬
tual  faculties  must  result  from  it ;  but  what  is  as  yet  only
supposition  is  a  reality  in  numerous  cases.  What  is  more
common  than  to  observe  numerous  alterations  of  memory,
perception,  imagination,  judgment,  coexist  with  the  com¬
pression  of  one  hemisphere  by  blood,  or  an  effusion  of  matter,
a  depression  of  bone,  or  a  diseased  growth  of  the  inner  sur¬
face  of  the  skull?

“  Even  when  all  signs  of  compression  have  disappeared,  if
one  half  of  the  brain  remains  weak  in  consequence  of  the
previous  compression,  do  not  the  alterations  of  function  con¬
tinue  ?  are  not  various  alienations  the  sad  sequels  ?  If  both
sides  are  equally  affected  the  judgment  will  be  weaker,  but
it  will  be  more  accurate.  May  we  not  thus  explain  those
frequent  cases  in  which  a  blow  on  one  side  of  the  head  has
restored  the  intellectual  faculties  which  had  long  been  dis¬
turbed  after  a  blow  upon  the  opposite  side  ?

“  I  think  I  have  established  that  if  there  is  inequality  of
action  in  the  two  hemispheres ,  the  intellectual  functions  must  be
disturbed.  I  have  pointed  out  many  cases  of  disease  in  which


By  Dr.  Elliot  son.


221


this  disturbance  is  evidently  the  result  of  this  inequality ;  we
here  perceive  the  effect  and  the  cause.  But  when  the  first
is  apparent,  does  not  analogy  point  out  the  second  ?  When
the  judgment  is  habitually  inaccurate,  when  all  the  ideas
want  precision,  are  we  not  led  to  believe  that  there  is  a  defect
of  harmony  between  the  two  sides  of  the  brain?  We  see
aslant  if  nature  has  not  rendered  the  power  of  the  two  eyes
equal.  We  perceive  and  judge  as  erroneously  if  the  hemi¬
spheres  are  by  nature  discordant :  the  soundest  sense,  the
most  accurate  judgment,  supposes  the  most  complete  harmony
in  them.  What  shades  there  are  in  the  operations  of  the
understanding !  Do  not  those  shades  correspond  with  equal
varieties  in  the  relations  of  the  powers  of  the  two  hemispheres?
If  we  could  squint  with  this  organ,  as  we  can  with  the  eyes,
that  is,  receive  external  impressions  with  but  one  hemisphere,
employ  but  one  side  of  the  brain  to  take  our  resolution  to
judge,  we  should  then  be  masters  of  the  accuracy  of  our  in¬
tellectual  assertions ;  but  such  a  power  does  not  exist.”  p.  35.

Such  are  the  words  of  Bichat,  which  I  read  when  first
studying  medicine,  and  have  never  forgotten.  In  the  va¬
rious  editions  of  my  Physiology ,  for  above  twenty  years,  I
have  never  failed  to  refer  to  them.  “  Hence  Bichat  infers  that
in  the  animal  functions  a  harmony  of  action  in  each  organ,
or  in  each  half  of  the  organ,  is  indispensable  to  perfection,
when  both  organs  or  sides  act  together ;  and  that,  if  such
harmony  do  not  occur,  it  is  better  for  one  organ  or  one  half
to  act  alone.  This  certainly  appears  true  of  the  eye  and  ear,
and  even  of  the  brain.”*

Dr.  W.  knows  the  work  of  Bichat,  for  he  says  in  one  part,

“  I  cannot  understand  how  he  (Bichat),  who  did  not  fail  to  ob¬
serve  the  completeness  of  the  two  organs  of  thought,  but  attributed
his  own  strange  character  to  his  two  brains,”  &c.  p.  373.

*  Human  Physiology ,  ed.  4,  p.  55,  1828  ;  ed.  5,  p.  21,  1835.

Dr.  Spurzheim  thinks  that  the  cerebral  organs  are  double,  “probably  be¬
cause  of  their  importance,  and  to  the  end  that  congenerate  parts  may  supply
each  other’s  places,  should  either  of  them  chance  to  be  injured.”  (Anatomy  of
the  Brain,  p.  178.)

What  a  miserable  view  to  take  of  the  arrangements  of  nature  !  To  con¬
ceive  that  the  human  race  and  myriads  of  other  animals  should  possess  a  double
brain,  each  half  constantly  acting  with  its  fellow,  merely  that  the  mental  opera¬
tions  may  continue  if  the  comparatively  rare  accident  happen  of  one  half  being
injured  !  Gall  would  never  have  engendered  such  a  fancy,  immeasurably  superior
as  he  was  to  his  pupil  Spurzheim  in  everything  intellectual,  and,  I  may  add,
moral.

Dr.  W.  advances  the  same  explanation,  but  without  mentioning  Dr.  Spurzheim
or  any  one  else  as  having  already  advanced  it.  “  Is  it  probable  that  ratiocination
would  have  been  entrusted  to  a  single  organ,  so  that  the  slightest  injury  would
annihilate  its  completeness  as  an  instrument  of  thought?”  (p.  156.)  Near  the
end  of  his  book,  Dr.  W.  calls  this  “  a  subordinate  object  no  doubt,”  p.  403,  and
farther  on  quotes  the  passage  in  Dr.  Spurzheim  second  hand,  p.  405.


222  Joint  operation  of  the  two  halves  of  the  Brain.

Dr.  W.  pronounces  himself  the  discoverer  of  the  united
and  harmonious  action  of  the  two  brains,  or  halves  of  brain,
in  health :

“ - the  two  brains  (for  here  lies  the  error,  the  belief  in  the

oneness  of  the  thinking  organ)  perform  but  one  function,  the  per¬
fectly  healthy  and  properly  cultivated  voluntary  exercise  of  their
energies,”  &c.  p.  110.

“  The  idea  of  two  distinct  and  complete  organs  of  the  intellect,
I  cannot  find  in  any  writer  of  any  age,  nor  even  the  qerm  of  such  an
idea  .”  p.  9.  1847.

“  Even  should  it  be  found  that  two  or  three  persons  have  slightly
indicated  a  slight  guess  at  a  slight  portion  of  the  theory  I  am  at¬
tempting  to  establish,  my  ideas  are  not  the  less  original,”  &c.  p.  vii.
1844.

“  You  might  say  of  Galileo  Galilei,  he  only  gave  a  demonstration
of  the  doctrine  of  Copernicus.  But  I  deny  the  fact,  and  claim
whatever  merit  may  be  due  to  strict  originality .”  p.  1.  1847.

“  I  feel  humiliated  that  for  five  and  twenty  years  I  allowed  my
firm  convictions  to  be  fruitless ;  still  more,  that  I  left  to  the  fag  end
of  my  life  the  announcement  and  demonstration  of  a  fact,”  &c.  p.  2.

“  If  the  discovery,  (for  such  I,  at  least, .  persist  in  calling  it,
and  take  all  risk  of  ridicule  for  my  presumption,)  if  the  discovery
be  an  absolute  truth,”  &c.

Which  discovery  has  given  Dr.  W.  the  firm  and  comfort¬
ing  conviction  from  the  beginning  of  manhood  that,  to  use
his  own  words,

“  I  shall  have  been  really  useful  to  my  fellow-creatures  to  an
extent  to  which  I  cannot  yet  set  limits.”  p.  3.

“  I  contemplate  consequences  more  extensive,  more  important,
and,  above  all,  more  conducive  to  the  happiness  of  mankind,  in  the
establishment  of  my  present  theory,  than  even  from  the  electric
telegraph.”  p.  4.  “  It  involves  distant  consequences  of  much  greater
importance  than  vaccination.”  vii.  1844.

“  Not  one  has  drawn  therefrom  (the  fact  of  one  hemisphere  being
a  perfect  mental  organ)  any  inference  whatever.”  p.  9.  1847.

After  explaining  instances  of  insanity  by  the  discordant
action  of  the  two  halves  of  the  brain,  as  Bichat  did,  he  com¬
pares  himself  to  a  man  who,  when  a  wall  had  been  stained
by  the  admission  of  rain,  and  others  had  analyzed  the  materials
of  the  wall  and  made  all  attempts  in  vain  at  discovering  the
cause,  ascertained  that  the  stains  were  produced  by  a  broken
tile.

“  I  confidently  assert  that  I  have  detected  the  broken  tile .”  p.  15.

In  not  having  published  before,  he  laments  :

“  I  have  neglected  a  duty  incumbent  on  every  man,  of  promul¬
gating  a  new  and  important  truth.”

“  It  is  from  no  feeling  of  arrogance  that  I  use  this  language


By  Dr.  Elliotson.


223


respecting  my  superiors  in  mental  power  and  acquirements.  The
idea  has  presented  itself  to  my  mind.”  p.  9.

To  the  question  which  he  supposes  put  to  him,

‘‘But  can  you  fairly  disclaim  the  accusation  of  vanity?”

He  replies,  apparently  with  great  pleasure,

“On  the  contrary,  I  own  the  soft  impeachment;  and  confess
that  I  had  the  sad  defect  from  my  youth.”  p.  7.

To  the  question,

“  What  can  men  do  to  you  if  they  dislike  your  doctrines,”

He  replies,

“  Bender  the  remainder  of  my  life  miserable !  !”

“  I  have  carefully  examined  established  authors  on  the  subject  of
the  mind  and  its  manifestations  through  a  material  organ,  as  well  as
those  on  the  anatomy  and  physiology  of  the  brain,  and  other  writers
on  collateral  subjects,  and  I  cannot  find  one ,  except  Dr.  Holland ,
who  has  advanced  a  single  step  on  the  road  to  the  important  truth
which  I  hope  to  establish;  namely,  that  the  mind  is  essentially  dual,
like  the  organs  by  which  it  is  exercised.  Even  Dr.  Holland  does  not
follow  up  his  ideas  to  their  legitimate  consequences,  nor  arrive  at  the
logical  result  to  which  they  seem  inevitably  to  lead.”  p.  4.  1844.

When  he  speaks  of  Mind,  he  wishes,

“To  be  understood  to  signify  the  aggregate  of  the  mental  powers
and  faculties,  whether  exercised  by  one  brain  or  two.”  p.  5.

Now  Dr.  Holland  makes  no  original  remarks  on  the  sub¬
ject,  as  far  as  I  am  aware,  and  actually  refers  to  Bichat's
views,  and  repeats  them,  speaking  of  u  unity  of  result  from
parts  double  in  structure  and  function;”  (p.  174) ;  of  its  being
probable  that  “  some  disturbances  of  the  mental  faculties
depend  on  changes  of  the  relation  of  parts  to  which  strict
unity  of  action  belongs  in  the  healthy  state;”  (p.  165) ;  of  the
unity  and  completeness  of  function  of  this  double  organization
(p.  166) ;  of  “any  breach  in  the  integrity  of  the  union  tending
to  disturb  the  action  of  the  brain”  (p.  165) ;  he  thinks  that
irregularity  of  action  in  the  two  hemispheres  may  disorder
trains  of  thought  in  any  degree  (p.  172);  and  he  says,  “in
the  almost  exact  symmetry  of  form  and  composition  of  each
hemisphere  we  find  argument  not  merely  for  correspondence
of  functions  but  for  even  that  unity  and  individuality  of  which
consciousness  is  the  interpreter.”  (p.  166.)  Again  :  “  There
may  be  cases  where  the  two  sides  of  the  brain  minister  dif¬
ferently  to  these  functions  (the  highest  faculties  of  the  mind),
so  as  to  produce  incongruity  where  there  ought  to  be  identity
or  individuality  of  result.”  p.  174.

To  me  it  is  clear  that  Gall  and  Bichat,  as  well  as  writers
who  have  followed  them,  conceive  the  two  halves  of  the  organ


224  Joint  operation  of  the  two  halves  of  the  Brain.


of  the  mental  faculties  in  health  to  do  always  each  the  same
thing,  and  their  double  operation,  when  properly  harmonious,
to  be  accompanied  by  but  one  consciousness.  Whether  we
call  the  two  halves  two  brains  or  two  independent,  yet  har¬
monious,  halves, — call  the  brain  dual  or  double,  must  be
quite  indifferent.  Each  is  regarded  by  them  as  a  perfect
organ,  and  both  as  acting  so  together  that  the  result  is  but
one.  The  brain  being  double  or  dual,  its  operations  are
double  or  dual,  but  the  result  is  not  double  or  dual.  The
employment  of  the  term  duality  of  the  mind  may  startle,  as
expressing  a  novelty ;  but  is  no  more  required  than  the
terms  duality  of  the  eye,  ear,  tongue,  or  duality  of  sight,
hearing,  &c.  If  we  say  the  eye  is  dual,  the  tongue  double,
the  physiological  truth  of  two  organs  and  one  impression  in
each  case  is  still  the  same.  Whatever  words  are  used  on  this
point,  writers  mean  the  same  thing,  and  a  smile  is  inevitable
on  reading  Dr.  W/s  pompous  announcement. —

e<  A  double  organ  the  brain  is  not,  but  dual  it  is,  as  I  shall
prove  beyond  a  shadow  of  doubt.”  p.  5.

Dr.  W.  draws  inferences  which,  with  his  fundamental  dis¬
covery  of  duality,  will,  he  is  satisfied,  secure  his  fame  through
all  generations.*

*  Dr.  W.  must  remember  that,  when  he  was  a  student  at  St.  Thomas’s  and
Guy’s  Hospitals,  the  physician  who  lectured  on  the  practice  of  medicine  in
the  latter,  (for  such  was  the  injustice  of  the  time,  through  the  influence  at
St.  Thomas’s  of  the  treasurer  of  Guy’s,  who  was  artful  and  ambitious  while
the  treasurer  of  St.  Thomas’s  was  weak  and  vain,  that  the  physicians  of  St.
Thomas’s,  the  older  and  larger  hospital,  were  not  allowed  to  lecture,  not  to  give
even  clinical  lectures  to  the  pupils  who  paid  to  see  their  practice ,  while  those  of
Guy’s  had  an  entire  monopoly,)  and  had  the  largest  class  of  the  kind  in  London,
referred,  in  every  lecture,  the  disease  or  an  important  share  of  its  mischief  to  the
liver,  and  advised  us  to  give  mercury  in  every  disease,  so  that  he  was  nicknamed
Liver  Curry  and  Calomel  Curry.  In  enforcing  his  absurd  and  mischievous  views,
he  used  to  declare  that,  if  they  were  not  true,  he  would  forfeit  his  “  future  repu¬
tation  and  posthumous  fame.”  And  now  he  is  completely  forgotten,  except  by
those  who  recollect  his  person,  and  who  will  all  soon  pass  away.  On  no  point
are  men  more  likely  to  be  mistaken  than  in  their  fancies  respecting  their  future
fame.  Some  never  obtain  it  who  hope  for  it  after  death  :  some  lose  it  completely
after  death,  however  it  may  blaze  during  their  lives ;  and  some  acquire  it  posthu¬
mously  who  never  expected  it.  The  inordinate  love  of  fame,  like  many  weak¬
nesses,  especially  those  of  superstition,  which  still  pervades  all  nations,  serves  a
most  useful  purpose  to  defective  or  ill  trained  persons,  like  crutches  and  sticks  to
the  lame.  But  the  high  human  being  will  not  require  these  miserable  aids  to  en¬
quiry  and  virtue,  he  will  pursue  truth  for  its  own  glorious  sake  and  practise  jus¬
tice,  benevolence,  humility,  liberality,  affection,  &c.  because  he  discerns  the  beauty
of  all  goodness  and  loves  it  also  for  its  own  glorious  sake,  persuaded  that  the
promotion  of  the  greatest,  the  most  enduring,  happiness  of  the  greatest  number
is  natural  and  a  duty,  since  we  must  desire  our  own  happiness  and  must  know
that  all  others  desire  theirs,  as  well  as  that  to  promote  the  general  happiness  is
the  surest  way  of  giving  a  due  well-balanced  play  to  each  of  our  faculties ;  and
persuaded  that  to  it  the  acquisition  of  truth  and  the  practice  of  virtue  are  indis¬
pensable.  The  greater  part  of  persons  whose  pursuit  of  knowledge  and  practice


By  Dr.  Elliotson.


225


They  are  of  two  kinds,  (1.)  the  one  physiological  and  patho¬
logical,  explaining  our  mental  workings  in  health  and  in
insanity;  (2.)  the  other,  though  still,  properly  speaking,  phy¬
siological,  very  serious,  appertaining  to  morality,  education
moral  responsibility,  &c.  He  has  not  the  smallest  doubt  of
having  proved,

“  1.  That  in  the  healthy  brain,  one  of  the  cerebra  (brains)  is
almost  always  superior  to  the  other,  and  capable  of  exercising  con¬
trol  over  the  volitions  of  its  fellow,  and  of  preventing  them  from
passing  into  acts  or  being  manifested  to  others.

“  That  when  one  of  these  cerebra  becomes  the  subject  of  functional
disorder,  or  of  positive  change  of  structure,  of  such  a  kind  as  to
vitiate  mind  or  induce  insanity,  the  healthy  organ  can  still,  up  to  a
certain  point,  control  the  morbid  volitions  of  its  fellow.

“  That  this  point  depends  partly  on  the  extent  of  the  disease  or
disorder,  and  partly  on  the  degree  of  cultivation  of  the  general  brain
in  the  art  of  self-government.  That  when  the  disease  of  one
cerebrum  becomes  sufficiently  aggravated  to  defy  the  control  of  the
other,  the  case  is  then  one  of  the  commonest  forms  of  mental  de¬
rangement  or  insanity ;  and  that  a  lesser  degree  of  discrepancy
between  the  functions  of  the  two  cerebra  constitutes  the  state  of
conscious  delusion.  That  in  the  insane,  it  is  almost  always  possible
to  trace  the  intermixture  of  two  synchronous  trains  of  thought,  and
that  it  is  the  irregularly  alternate  utterance  of  portions  of  these  two
two  trains  of  thought  which  constititutes  coherence.  That  of  the
two  distinct,  simultaneous  trains  of  thought,  one  may  be  rational
and  the  other  irrational,  or  both  may  be  irrational ;  but  that,  in
either  case,  the  effect  is  the  same,  to  deprive  the  discourse  of  coher¬
ence  or  congruity.

2.  “  That  the  object  and  effect  of  a  well-managed  education  are
to  establish  and  confirm  the  power  of  concentrating  the  energies  of
both  brains  on  the  same  subject  at  the  same  time.” — “Each  a  sen¬
tinel  and  security  for  the  other  while  both  are  healthy,  and  the
healthy  one  to  correct  and  control  the  erroneous  judgments  of  its
fellow  when  disordered.  That  it  is  the  excercise  of  this  power  of
compelling  the  combined  attention  of  both  brains  to  the  same  object,
till  it  becomes  easy  and  habitual,  that  constitutes  the  great  superiority
of  the  disciplined  scholar  over  the  self-educated  man:  the  latter  may
perhaps  possess  a  greater  stock  of  useful  knowledge,  but  set  him  to
study  a  new  subject,  and  he  is  soon  outstripped  by  the  other,  who
has  acquired  the  very  difficult  accomplishment  of  thinking  of  only  one
thing  at  a  time,  that  is,  of  concentrating  the  action  of  both  brains
on  the  same  subject.  That  every  man  is,  in  his  own  person,  conscious

of  virtue  have  not  this  philosophical,  natural,  solid,  noble  foundation,  and  yet
would  be  regarded  as  the  salt  of  the  earth  and  the  favorites  of  heaven,  do  things
continually  and  shamelessly  which  astonish  and  disgust  those  who  are  good  “  in
spirit  and  in  truth,”  and  would  cause  Christ  to  exclaim  again  that  “  it  shall  be
more  tolerable  for  the  land  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,”  & c., — strong  expressions,
but  not  too  strong  for  detestation  of  inconsistency  and  hypocrisy.

VOL.  V.  S


226  Joint  operation  of  the  two  halves  of  the  Brain.

of  two  volitions  and  very  often  conflicting  volitions,  quite  distinct
from  the  government  of  the  passion  by  the  intellect ;  a  consciousness
so  universal,  that  it  enters  into  all  figurative  language  on  the  moral
feelings  of  sentiments,  has  been  enlisted  into  the  service  of  every
religion,  and  forms  the  basis  of  some  of  them,  as  the  Manichean.”

p.  26.

The  admission  of  Dr.  W/s  views  are  to  lead  to

“  an  increased  amelioration  of  the  treatment  of  insanity,  in  the
education  of  youth,  in  the  management  of  criminals,  in  the  disci¬
pline  of  defective  or  distracted  or  retarded  minds.  It  will  establish
a  more  just  appreciation  of  the  boundaries  of  moral  responsibility,
which  it  is  my  belief  will  be  largely  extended  rather  than  diminished
by  it.”  p.  4.  1847.

It  may  be  proper  to  give  some  of  Dr.  W/s  illustrations  of
his  fancies.

“Among  the  most  singular  phenomena  connected  with  insanity,
we  must  reckon  those  cases  in  which  the  hallucination  is  confined  to
a  single  point,  while  on  every  other  subject  the  patient  speaks  and
acts  like  a  rational  man,  and  he  often  shews  the  most  astonishing
power  of  avoiding  the  subject  of  his  disordered  impression  when
circumstances  make  it  advisable  for  him  to  do  so.

"  The  mental  process  is  simple  enough,  if  my  theory  be  admitted
— the  man  has  a  disordered  sentiment  or  conviction  in  one  brain,  of
the  absurdity  of  which  he  is  perfectly  convinced  in  the  other ;  he
will  say,  for  example,  c  I  know  that  I  am  dead,  and  yet  I  know  that
the  idea  is  absurd;’  or  ‘I  am  very  ill,  and  it  is  strange  I  cannot
believe  it.’  He  may,  however,  have  this  diseased  idea  in  one  brain,
and  be  not  quite  convinced  in  the  other  that  it  is  entirely  false  and
unfounded,  but  merely  that  it  is  so  completely  in  opposition  to  the
general  belief  of  mankind,  that  he  would  make  himself  ridiculous
by  stating  it.  Is  there  any  man  who  has  never  had  a  crotchet  of
which  he  is  perfectly  assured,  yet  which  he  abstains  from  uttering,
because  he  knows  it  would  be  impossible  to  convince  others  of  it  ?
Men  in  general  suppose  that  a  notion  is  positively  either  right  or
wrong,  and  that  there  is  no  medium, — whereas  the  gradations  are
infinite,  and  that  which  is  right  to  one  man  is  not  quite  right  to
another,  wrong  to  a  third,  and  monstrous  to  a  fourth.  In  the  case
of  positive  insanity  of  one  brain,  the  trouble  of  controlling  it  by  the
other  may  be,  and  most  frequently  is,  a  painful  effort,  only  to  be
undertaken  through  the  influence  of  some  strong  motive,  as,  for
example,  that  of  obtaining  liberty.  Such  a  man  can  for  a  time
wind  himself  up,  as  it  were,  and  determine  that  the  notions  of  the
disordered  brain  shall  not  be  manifested.  Many  instances  are  on
record  similar  to  that  told  by  Pinel,  where  an  inmate  of  the  Bicetre,
having  stood  a  long  cross-examination,  and  given  every  mark  of  re¬
stored  reason,  signed  his  name  to  the  paper  authorizing  his  discharge,
Jesus  Christ,  and  then  went  off  into  all  the  vagaries  connected  with
that  delusion.  In  the  phraseology  of  the  gentleman  whose  case  is
related  in  an  early  part  of  this  work,  he  had  ‘  held  himself  tight  ’


By  Dr.  Elliotson.


227


during  the  examination,  in  order  to  attain  his  object:  this  once  ac¬
complished,  he  *  let  himself  down  *  again,  and,  if  even  conscious  of  his
delusion,  could  not  control  it.  I  have  observed  with  such  persons
that  it  requires  a  considerable  time  to  wind  themselves  up  to  the
pitch  of  complete  self-control,  and  that  the  effort  is  a  painful  tension
of  the  mind.  When  thrown  off  their  guard  by  any  accidental
remark,  or  worn  out  by  the  length  of  the  examination,  they  let
themselves  go ,  and  cannot  gather  themselves  up  again  without  prepa¬
ration.  Lord  Erskine  relates  the  story  of  a  man,  who  brought  an
action  against  Dr.  Munro  for  confining  him  without  cause.  He  under¬
went  the  most  rigid  examination  by  the  counsel  for  the  defendant,
without  discovering  any  appearance  of  insanity,  till  a  gentleman  asked
him  about  a  princess  with  whom  he  corresponded  in  cherry  juice,
and  he  became  instantly  insane.  This  was  in  Westminster;  and  by
the  strange  anomalies  of  law  he  was  enabled  to  bring  another  action
in  the  city  of  London,  when  he  had  so  completely  wound  himself  up
to  the  ‘  sticking-place,’  that  it  was  quite  impossible  to  elicit  the
slightest  evidence  of  insanity,  and  the  cause  of  justice  was  only
obtained  by  permission  to  record  the  evidence  taken  in  West¬
minster.  Another  similar  case  is  related  by  Lord  Erskine,  which
was  detected  by  addressing  the  patient  as  the  Saviour  of  the  World;
till  he  heard  which  he  had  given  perfectly  rational  answers  during

many  hours  of  cross-examination.  Another  case  occurred  at  Edin-

«/

burgh,  where  a  gentleman,  under  a  process  similar  to  our  writ  of  lu¬
nacy,  was  about  to  be  dismissed  for  lack  of  proof,  when  a  witness,  who
had  been  detained  till  the  last  moment  by  an  accident,  came  into
court  and  asked  him  what  news  from  the  planet  Saturn,  he  instantly
relapsed  into  incoherence,  and  gave  evident  proofs  of  insanity.

<c  Such  cases  are  common.  No  one  attempts  an  explanation  of
them, — yet  once  admit  two  perfect  instruments  of  thought,  one  of
them  out  of  order  (which  I  have  proved  till  there  cannot  rest  a
doubt,  I  think,  on  the  mind  of  any  one),  and  these  cases  are  as
simple  and  as  easily  explained  as  dropsy  or  jaundice.  This  is  a  sub¬
ject  on  which  I  have  thought  so  long  and  so  deeply,  that  I  cannot
admit  the  possibility  of  error.  If  the  evidence  here  collected  be  not
sufficient  to  establish  the  fact,  then  we  must  for  ever  remain  in
darkness.”  p.  140.

Dr.  W.  appears  to  have  been  a  little  odd  himself  at
times.*

*  At  another  time  he  was  as  odd  upon  the  subject  of  the  dreadful  truth  of
hydrophobia,  as  he  is  now  upon  phrenology,  and,  at  least  so  appeared  one  day
at  a  public  exhibition,  upon  mesmerism.

“  In  an  early  period  of  my  professional  studies  I  had,  with  the  natural  con¬
ceit  of  youth  and  with  a  large  stock  of  the  presumption  of  ignorance,  investigated
the  testimony  in  favour  of  the  existence  of  hydrophobia.  It  happened  at  that
time  that  an  epidemic  terror,  a  panic,  spread  over  the  land,  to  an  extent  of  which
we  have  had  no  subsequent  example.  Under  the  direction  of  surgeons  of  esta¬
blished  character  for  skill,  good  sense,  and  humanity,  I  had  assisted  to  mutilate
many  unhappy  individuals  who  had  been  bitten  by  dogs  (that  they  were  mad
was  never  doubted),  and  the  word  went  forth  throughout  the  land,  c  war  to  the
dogs.’  Strange  to  say,  the  dogs  disliked  being  killed  !  especially  by  persons


228  Joint  operation  of  the  two  halves  of  the  Brain.

“  George  IV.,  and  many  persons  whom  I  have  known,  could  go
on  making  a  succession  of  signatures  with  great  rapidity,  all  the
while  conversing  on  a  subject  of  importance,  or  telling  a  story  of
deep  interest;  but  suppose  a  knot  in  the  thread  with  the  spinner  or
sewer,  or  a  hair  in  the  pen  of  the  writer,  anything  to  require  even
the  momentary  attention  of  the  two  brains,  and  one  process  or  the
other,  the  singing  or  the  spinning,  the  narrative  or  the  signing,  in¬
stantly  stops.  I  have  noticed  this  in  innumerable  instances,  and  can
explain  it  no  otherwise  than  on  the  supposition  that  the  two  brains
are  occupied  on  the  two  distinct  subjects;  one  is  calling  to  mind  the
words  and  tune  of  the  song,  and  guiding  the  numerous  organs  of  the
voice  in  their  execution  of  them,  while  the  other  is  directing  the  pro¬
cess  of  spinning  or  sewing;  but  the  moment  a  difficulty  occurs,  either
in  the  mechanical  operation  or  in  the  memory  of  the  words,  attention
is  required :  the  two  thinking  organs  must  employ  themselves  on  the
same  subject,  and  the  two  synchronous  acts  become  incompatible
till  that  difficulty  is  removed.  I  fancy — but  this  I  put  forth  as  pure
hypothesis,  and  ask  no  assent,  although  convinced  of  it  myself — I
fancy  that,  when  the  occupation  is  resumed,  the  two  brains  trans¬
pose  their  labour,  and  that  this  is  one  of  the  reasons  of  the  relief
found  from  slight  occasional  interruptions.  The  power  of  directing
two  trains  of  thought  at  the  same  time  has  been  often  attributed  to
great  men.  Conquerors,  kings,  and  high  ministers,  dictating  to  two
secretaries  at  once,  metaphysicians  explain  by  rapid  alternation;
this  would  be  satisfactory  had  we  nothing  better  to  assign,  but  the
testimony  is  not  of  a  kind  to  be  depended  on.  Whether  true  or  not
in  those  cases,  I  have  myself  more  than  once  witnessed  a  banker’s
clerk  casting  up  a  long  column  of  figures,  which  practice  had  rendered
easy,  while  not  merely  conversing  with  another,  but  telling  an  amus¬
ing  tale,  with  great  rapidity;  and  this  without  an  interval  of  even  a
second  of  time  in  the  narrative.  If  from  defective  light,  or  any
other  cause,  more  attention  was  required  (that  is,  the  attention  of
both  cerebra),  his  narrative  ceased  instantly,  till  the  obstacle  being
removed,  the  two  trains  of  thought  were  resumed  with  the  same
fluency  and  facility  as  before.  There  is  no  banking-house  in  London


with  whom  they  were  not  acquainted  ;  and  had  the  audacity  to  stand  on  their
defence  ; — here  was  proof,  superfluous  proof,  that  they  were  mad,  and  they  were
therefore  massacred  without  mercy.  ...  I  reasoned  myself  into  a  conviction  that
hydrophobia  was  a  non-existent  disease,  and  exactly  on  a  par  with  witchcraft  in
its  claims  to  belief.

“  So  strong  was  this  conviction,  and  so  conclusive  did  my  arguments  seem  to
myself,  that  I  wondered  at  the  infatuation  of  the  public  which  could  resist  them,
as  expressed  in  the  many  letters  with  which  I  wearied  the  editors  of  newspapers.
Becoming  more  and  more  strenuous  as  my  reasonings  were  more  and  more  con¬
temned,  I  at  last  proposed  that  a  dog,  decidedly  mad  in  the  opinion  of  others,
should  be  allowed  to  bite  me  in  any  fleshy  part  of  the  body.  To  this  trial  I  was
perfectly  ready  to  submit,  and  preparations  were  made  for  the  experiment.  I
bound  up  my  arm  with  bandages  of  such  a  thickness  as  to  be  a  defence  against
the  teeth  of  the  dog,  leaving  only  a  small  portion  naked,  but  quite  sufficient  for
the  experiment.  When  the  time  approached  I  was  ‘  talked  down,’  but  not  con¬
vinced  ;  and  the  affair  dropped  for  some  years,”  p.  32G.


By  Dr.  Elliotson.


229


that  will  not  afford  an  example  of  this  faculty.  I  confess  myself
unable  to  conceive  any  other  explanation  of  it,  than  the  possession
of  two  brains,  each  carrying  on  its  process  simultaneously,  as  we
have  seen  in  the  former  examples  cited.

“  Among  the  many  trivial  examples  of  this  dual  process,  I  may
mention  one  perhaps  peculiar  to  myself,  although  analogous  pheno¬
mena  are  observed  in  others.  When  my  list  of  patients  was  very
large,  or  cases  of  peculiar  severity  or  difficulty  kept  me  in  a  state  of
anxiety,  or  my  rest  had  been  disturbed,  I  found  it  impossible  to
prevent  myself  from  counting  my  steps,  more  especially  in  ascending
stairs.  I  attempted  by  incessant  conversation  with  the  person  who
was  accompanying  me  to  prevent  this  annoyance,  but  in  vain.  On
arriving  at  the  top,  I  always  knew  the  number  of  stairs,  however
numerous.  The  same  when  walking  arm-in-arm  with  a  friend  along
a  frequented  street;  I  went  on  to  a  thousand  steps,  vexed  and  wor¬
ried,  yet  quite  unable  to  stop  the  process,  although  I  had  been  at
the  same  time  keeping  up  an  animated  conversation  the  whole  dis¬
tance.  Often  did  I  set  out  with  the  determined  resolution  not  to
allow  such  a  ridiculous  propensity  to  master  me,  but  in  vain :  the
firmer  my  resolves  against  it,  the  more  accurate  my  calculation.
Yet,  when  perfectly  well,  and  with  the  feeling  of  freshness  and
health,  I  had  not  the  power  to  perform  the  same  process ;  and,
indeed,  whenever  I  did  overcome  the  propensity,  it  was  by  trying
to  act  upon  it — that  is  to  say,  study  with  both  brains.

“  I  cannot  devise  any  other  explanation  of  this  disease ,  if  I  may
so  call  it,  than  the  discordant  exercise  of  two  brains,  and  the  inability
to  stop  the  involuntary  process  of  that  which  was  disturbed.”  p.  149.

“  I  can  conceive — but  do  not  assert — that  the  strange  contradic¬
tions  we  sometimes  notice  in  men  who  have  raised  themselves  into
notoriety  by  practising  on  the  religious  credulity  of  their  fellow-
creatures,  may  arise  in  a  great  measure  from  this  cause — that  with
one  brain  a  man  is  a  hypocritical  knave,  and  with  the  other  a  fana¬
tical  enthusiast.  One  of  the  most  extraordinary  men  which  the  last
half-century — so  prolific  in  extraordinary  men — has  produced,  was
the  late  William  Huntingdon,  the  preacher.  That  man  contained
moral  gunpowder  enough  to  split  the  world  asunder,  had  it  been
placed  under  compression.  Happily,  being  left  open,  it  made  little
noise  and  did  no  mischief.  I  have  listened  to  that  man  with
the  greatest  psychological  curiosity,  and  have  often  said  to  myself
long  before  it  occurred  to  me  to  take  up  the  question  physiologically,
‘That  man  has  two  brains  in  one  skull — sometimes  one  has  the  com¬
mand,  and  sometimes  the  other.’  That  he  was  equally  sincere  as
knave  and  fanatic,  I  firmly  believe;  and  his  voluminous  writings
— twenty  thick  octavo  volumes — shew  the  double  mind  at  every
page.”  p.  164.

“  I  have  heard  a  man  say,  ‘  Did  you  tell  me  to  do  so  and  so  ?’

‘  Did  you  tell  me  to  call  upon  you  ?  or  did  I  dream  it  V  In  its
aggravated  form  it  is  a  frightful  calamity,  and  can  be  alleviated  only


230  Joint  operation  of  the  two  halves  of  the  Brain.

by  the  excessive  kindness,  indulgence,  and  forbearance  of  those
around  him.  He  has  a  sound  brain  and  a  disordered  brain;  the
latter  gives  false  information  and  unreal  impressions  so  vivid  as
almost  to  baffle  the  judgment  of  the  former.”  p.  171.

“In  the  memoirs  of  that  amiable  and  highly-gifted  man,  the
poet  Cowper,  we  have  a  most  striking  example  of  the  influence  of
two  opposing  brains — the  sound  one  unfortunately  in  this  case  so
highly  imaginative,  as  to  be  in  some  degree  incapacitated  for  its
office  of  controller,  and  still  further  unfitted  for  its  duty  by  the  fer¬
vour  of  religious  enthusiasm.  ( The  use  of  a  Church  establishment
(as  a  high  dignitary  once  remarked  to  me)  is  not  to  encourage,  but
to  direct  and  control  religious  feeling,  which  will  be  always  in  excess
if  left  without  the  guidance  of  men  of  sound  education,  acting  on
system.’  Cowper  had  not  the  benefit  of  this  kind  of  discipline,  but
fell  among  crazy  enthusiasts  who  encouraged  the  hallucinations  which
should  have  been  restrained.”  p.  174.

“  *  I  was  brought  up,’  said  a  clergyman  to  Dr.  W.,  4  with  great
severity;  my  father  having  been  educated  in  the  Presbyterian  form
of  religion,  and  with  all  the  bigotry  of  that  harsh  and  intolerant  sect.
Every  innocent  joy  was  condemned  as  a  crime,  and  the  slightest
expression  of  pleasure  denounced  as  sinful.  I  became  a  morose  and
solitary  being;  and,  when  at  college,  made  no  acquaintances,  but
kept  myself  quite  aloof  from  human  sympathy.  I  took  honours,  and
obtained  ordination  at  the  earliest  period  that  was  possible.  My  father
determined,  as  he  phrased  it,  to  put  me  into  harness  as  soon  as  pos¬
sible,  to  keep  me  out  of  mischief  by  the  feeling  of  responsibility,  and
immediately  procured  me  a  curacy.  My  humble  living  was  bestowed
by  my  college  as  a  reward  of  merit;  and  well  it  was  so,  for  my
father  died  penniless  and  insolvent,  and  for  many  years  past  it  has
been  the  sole  support  of  my  widowed  mother  and  crippled  sister.  I
became  successful  as  a  preacher,  and  have  attained  to  a  local  emi¬
nence  which  promises  to  lead  to  a  valuable  appointment;  but  I  am
intensely  miserable,  and  always  ill  from  anxiety;  at  one  moment
tormented  with  the  idea  that  I  am  preaching  falsehood  and  encou¬
raging  delusion — Christianity  appears  to  be  a  fable  without  a  shadow
of  foundation,  and  it  seems  to  me  a  wicked  mockery  of  the  living
God  to  preach  it  as  a  truth;  in  these  moments  I  determine  to  give
up  my  living  and  abhor  myself  for  having  so  long  accepted  the
wages  of  sin  and  deceit;  then  the  thought  of  my  helpless  mother
and  sister  comes  over  me,  and  I  endeavour  to  endure  the  remorse
for  their  sake;  I  think  also  of  the  injury  of  such  an  example,  and
how  it  would  loosen  the  bonds  which  restrain  the  wicked,  and
I  cannot  resolve  on  the  sacrifice.  At  another  moment  I  have
the  most  entire,  unhesitating  faith  in  the  doctrines  and  in  the
authenticity  of  Christianity,  and  look  with  horror  at  my  previ¬
ous  sceptical  delusions  as  the  instigation  of  the  author  of  evil.
I  pour  out  my  soul  to  God  in  prayer  to  be  forgiven  for  having  lis¬
tened  for  a  moment  to  the  tempter;  feel  soothed  and  refreshed,  and


By  Dr.  Elliotson.


231


enter  again  on  my  duties  with  alacrity  and  zeal.  This  frightful
alternation  keeps  me  in  constant  alarm;  and  the  terror  I  feel  at  the
moment  of  full  belief,  lest  Satan  should  again  assail  me  with  his
suggestions,  more  than  countervails  the  timid  light  that  in  my  wan¬
dering  moments  tells  me  I  shall  again  believe  and  be  comforted.  I
feel  the  transition  from  one  set  of  convictions  to  the  other,  and  this
state  is  the  most  frightful  of  all;  seem  as  if  I  were  two  beings  ;  and
I  am  in  momentary  expectation  of  madness —  God  help  me  !’

“  Men  will  explain  this  state  of  mind  in  various  ways,  according
to  their  own  convictions.  I  can  only  conceive  it  to  proceed  from  a
discrepancy  in  the  action  of  the  two  organs  of  thought — that  in  fact,
however  incongruous  the  opinion  may  seem  to  those  who  have  not
studied  the  subject,  one  brain  believed ,  and  the  other  did  not  believe
— a  state  which  is  a  very  common  precursor  of  madness,  if  indeed
it  be  not  the  first  stage  of  it.

“  The  further  progress  of  this  case,  I  purposely  conceal.  It  was
very  remarkable;  but  were  I  to  give  the  details,  the  individual  would
be  recognized,  and  it  would  inflict  unjustifiable  pain  on  persons  whose
feelings  I  hold  sacred.  Analogous  cases  of  slighter  and  varying  in¬
tensity  are  by  no  means  rare.  On  the  subject  of  religion,  as  on
politics,  an  alternation  of  partial  convictions  is  frequently  seen.
Happy  those  who  have  no  doubts,  no  hesitations,  no  difficulties ;
but  repose  in  their  quiet  settled  convictions — who  have  ceased  to
reason,  and  to  weigh  probabilities  and  evidence — and  who  once  con¬
vinced,  are  convinced  for  ever.”  p.  187.

“  Where  a  dream  of  the  most  preposterous  kind  occupies  the
mind,  accompanied  by  a  conviction  that  it  is  only  a  dream,  this
last  case,  I  think  it  cannot  be  doubted,  on  consideration,  is  the  state
of  one  brain  as  fully  asleep  as  is  compatible  with  dreaming,  and  the
other  brain  in  a  state  analogous  to  that  where  we  are  able  to  will  a
continuation  of  the  dream — one  brain  half  asleep,  and  the  other
almost  awake,  and  capable  of  watching  it.”  p.  371.

How  the  fancy  of  hourly  opposition  in  the  two  brains  ex¬
plains  any  of  these  matters,  or  leads  to  useful  results,  better
than  our  previous  knowledge  and  views,  I  cannot  understand.
He  confesses  that  “  the  two  brains  perform  but  one  function
in  the  perfectly  healthy  and  properly  cultivated,  voluntary
exercise  of  their  energies,”- — that  “  perfect  consentaneity  of
the  two  brains  is  necessary  to  the  exercise  of  sound  judgment,”
and  that  “  it  is  a  great  object  for  both  brains  to  carry  on  the
same  train  of  thought  together ;”  and  yet  asserts  that  “  in  the
healthy  brain  one  of  the  brains  is  almost  always  superior  to
the  other  and  capable  of  exercising  control  over  the  volitions*
of  its  fellow  and  of  preventing  them  from  passing  into  acts,”
and  that  “  the  irregularity  in  the  powers  and  functions  of  the
two  thinking  organs  makes  the  world  what  it  is.”

*  This  word,  so  constantly  used  in  this  sense,  must  be  incorrect :  not  the  act
or  power  of  willing,  but  wishing,  must  be  meant.


232  Joint  operation  of  the  two  halves  of  the  Brain.

As  long  as  we  are  sane,  and  generally  in  insanity  likewise,
the  two  brains  or  halves  of  brain  afford  together  this  single
consciousness — we  are  conscious  of  but  one  personality — one
mind — of  our  oneness.  How  this  happens  we  cannot  explain.
We  can  only  witness  and  wonder.  But  the  brains  of  the
animals  around  us,,  beasts,  birds  and  fishes,  have  the  same
doubleness  or  duality  of  brain,  and  must  be  supposed  to  have
the  same  single  consciousness.  There  must  be  a  perfect
sympathy,  a  perfect  uniformity  and  simultaneousness  of  state,
between  the  two.  If  one  is  to  govern  the  other  in  thinking,
the  “two  minds,”  or  the  operations  of  the  two  halves  or
brains,  ought  no  longer  to  be  as  one  :  we  ought  then  surely
to  feel  two  personalities.  In  health,  and  after  good  training,
Dr.  W.  allows  that  the  two  halves  or  brains  carry  on  the
same  course  of  thought,  and  therefore,  I  presume,  think,
feel  and  will  together  completely  as  one.  How  then  can  one
be  almost  always  superior  to  the  other  and  capable  of  con¬
trolling  it  ?  How  can  they  rarely  act  together,  as  he  must
suppose  they  do,  since  he  maintains  that

“  The  inequality  in  the  functions  and  powers  of  the  two  thinking
organs  is  the  very  essence  of  that  variety  of  character  and  conduct
which  makes  the  world  what  it  is.”  p.  275.

“A  slight  inequality  in  the  two  brains  is  sufficient  to  produce
all  the  varieties  of  character  which  are  to  be  found  in  the  world.”
p.  157.

To  experience  two  opposing  inclinations  surely  does  not
require  two  brains.  The  operation  of  different  portions  of
the  same  organ  must  be  sufficient.  We  know,  nay  Dr.  W.
himself  allows,  that  different  portions  of  the  brain  are  for
different  functions :  he  speaks  of  “  the  organs  of  the  propen¬
sities.”*  Each  square  inch  of  brain  is  said  to  contain  above
three  thousand  millions  of  fibres.  It  would  consequently  be
very  strange  if  we  could  not  have  opposing  desires  in  the

*  In  fact,  we  know  that  the  organs  of  one  side  do  control  each  other.  The
phenomena  of  mesmerism  throw  the  greatest  light  upon  all  that  concerns  the
nervous  system  ;  from  mere  sensibility  and  motion  to  the  phenomena  of  insanity
and  the  nature  and  mutual  influence  of  the  mental  faculties. — By  touching  over
a  cerebral  organ  in  the  mesmeric  sleep -waking  of  some  persons,  even  by  pointing
at  it  in  some,  the  faculty  is  excited  (say  Pride  on  the  right  side.)  The  influence
presently  spreads  to  the  corresponding  organ  of  the  other  side  (say  Pride  of  the
left)  :  but,  if  an  opposing  organ  on  the  other  side  be  steadily  influenced  (say
Friendship  of  the  left)  with  the  finger,  the  organ  of  this  other  side  (Pride  of
the  left)  excited  only  sympathetically,  will  be  completely  overpowered  by  the  ac¬
tivity  of  the  organ  (of  Friendship)  of  this  left,  while  the  excitement  of  the  organ
of  the  right  (Pride  of  the  right)  will  continue  in  full  force  ;  as  shewn  by  the  right
hand  repelling  violently,  while  the  left  squeezes  and  presses  against  the  bosom,
the  hand  of  another  person.  (See  Zoist ,  Vol.  II.,  p.  222,  &c.  Vol.  Ill,,  p.  74,
468,  9.)


By  Dr.  Elliot  son.


233


same  brain.  Certainly  the  justice  or  benevolence  of  the
right  brain,  or  half,  can  control  the  covetousness  of  the  right
brain  or  half.  The  expressions — two  beings  within  us,  an
inner  and  an  outward  man,  the  carnal  and  the  spiritual  man,
are  purely  figurative :  and  when  the  operation  of  the  two
brains  is  so  discordant  that  one  side  is  felt  to  act  differently
from  the  other,  when  one  is  felt  wrong  and  the  other  right,
the  condition  is  one  of  disease.  All  day  long  we  have  innu¬
merable  opposing  impulses,  however  slight  and  rapid.  In  the
most  trifling  matters,  in  taking  this  seat  or  that,  in  the  whole
of  meal  times,  in  stirring  the  fire,  in  all  the  little  things
which  we  do,  we  have  them.  These  would  require  two  brains
just  as  much  as  the  strongest  impulses :  and  therefore  the
two  brains  would  be  in  pretty  constant  opposition.  Besides,
we  may  have  more  than  two  impulses  :  we  may  hesitate  not
between  doing  and  not  doing,  or  in  doing  one  in  preference
to  another  of  two  things,  but  in  doing  one  or  another  among
very  many  things,  and  then,  to  be  consistent,  Dr.  W.  should
fancy  very  many  brains  to  be  required.

But  after  all,  what  does  Dr.  W.  allow  ?  That  when,  after
death,  one  brain  or  half  of  the  brain  has  been  found  de¬
stroyed  by  disease,  all  have  been  astonished  because  to  their
view  no  mental  difference  had  been  perceptible  during  life.
With  his  single  brain  or  half  brain  the  man  must  have  expe¬
rienced  all  his  ordinary  double  impulses,  must  have  inclined
different  ways  before  he  acted,  controlled  inclinations,  thought
accurately,  &c.,  just  like  other  men  and  like  himself  during
the  former  part  of  his  life,  or  a  great  change  would  have  been
noticed  in  him.  He  also  must  have  walked  like  other  men,
although  Dr.  W.  asserts  that  the  right  brain  has  no  command
over  the  right  leg,  nor  the  left  brain  over  the  left  leg.

If  to  do  two  things  at  once,  a  person  requires  two  brains,
he  ought  to  require  several  brains  when  he  does  several  things
at  once,  and  a  countryman  walking  the  streets  of  London,
using  his  stick,  talking,  hearing,  and  staring,  as  he  proceeds,
could  not  dispense  with  fewer  than  five.

Dr.  W.  fancies  that  cases  of  double  consciousness  are
explained  by  the  existence  of  two  brains,  but  I  have  seen
treble  consciousness.

As  to  free-will,  the  evidence  for  and  against  it  is  afforded
by  experience  and  reasoning,  not  by  anatomy.  As  everything
must  have  a  cause,  every  act  of  willing  must  have  a  cause ;
our  determination  to  will  in  this  direction  or  in  that  must
have  a  cause  which  induces  the  act  of  willing  of  necessity,
whatever  direction  it  may  take ;  and  therefore  I  cannot  but
assent  to  the  doctrine  of  philosophical  necessity,  as  it  is


234  Remarkable  Cure  of  intense  Nervous  Affections,  fyc.

termed ;  my  intellect  compels  me  to  the  assent.*  But,  though
we  will  of  necessity,  still  we  will ;  we  move  our  hands  and
legs  in  the  direction  we  choose.  The  existence  of  different
powers  in  different  parts  of  the  same  brain  is  surely  as  ac¬
cordant  with  variety  of  motives  and  with  what  passes  under
the  name  of  free-will  and  responsibility  as  the  existence  of  two
brains.  Responsibility  certainly  does  not  require  two  brains,
though  Dr.  W.,  who  speaks  of  “  the  whole  congeries  of  organs
of  both  brains,”  p.  393,  thinks,

“  that  all  who  believe  in  the  responsibility  of  man  must  at  once
acquiesce  in  at  least  the  strong  probability  of  this  (my)  theory.”
p.  157.

He  is  so  enamoured  of  his  fancy  that  he  positively

“cannot  think  that  the  possession  of  an  immortal  soul ,  to  render
man  a  responsible  being,  is  compatible  with  the  existence  of  only
one  organ  for  the  exercise  of  its  subordinate  agent  the  mind”  p.  383.

I  cannot  discern  what  additional  views  to  those  afforded  by
the  ordinary  observation  of  mankind  and  by  the  established
physiology  of  the  brain,  spoken  of  commonly  as  phrenology,
is  afforded  by  his  speculation  to  education,  the  management
of  criminals,  or  the  treatment  of  insanity, f  though  Dr.  W.
terminates  his  recent  pamphlet  with  the  words,

“  I  confidently  assert  that  I  have  detected  the  broken  tile.”


II.  Remarkable  Cure  of  intense  Nervous  Affections ;  with  the
transference  of  disease  in  two  instances  to  the  mesmerisers :
decided  cerebral  sympathy  in  the  form  of  community  of
taste,  smell  and  touch,  fyc.  fyc.  By  Dr.  Elliotson.

“  In  matters  purely  intellectual,  and  in  which  the  abstract  truths  of  arithmetic  and  geo¬
metry  seem  alone  concerned,  the  prejudices,  the  selfishness,  or  the  vanity  of  those  who  pursue
them  not  unfrequently  combine  to  resist  improvement,  and  often  engage  no  inconsiderable
degree  of  talent  in  drawing  back,  instead  of  pushing  forward,  the  machine  of  science.  The
introduction  of  methods  entirely  new,  must  often  change  the  relative  place  of  the  men
engaged  in  scientific  pursuits,  and  must  oblige  many,  after  descending  from  the  stations  they
formerly  occupied,  to  take  a  lower  position  in  the  scale  of  intellectual  improvement.  The
enmity  of  such  men,  if  they  be  not  animated  by  a  spirit  of  real  candour  and  the  love  of
truth,  is  likely  to  be  directed  against  methods  by  which  their  vanity  is  mortified  and  their
importance  lessened.” — The  late  Piofessor  Playfair,  of  Edinburgh.  Supplement  to  the  Ency¬
clopaedia  Britannica.  part  ii.,  p.  27.

A  young  tradesman  in  my  neighbourhood,  whom  I  had  never
seen,  came  to  consult  me  on  the  25th  of  August,  1846.  He

*  See  my  statement,  Zoist ,  Vol.  III.,  p.  418.

f  As  my  purpose  was  to  consider  Dr.  W/s  leading  speculation  only,  and  not
to  review  his  book,  I  have  made  no  allusion  to  the  general  character  of  the  work,
nor  to  a  number  of  things,  some  of  which  are  laughable,  some  indicative  of  good
sense  and  feeling,  and  others  of  a  large  share  of  savoir  faire.


By  Dr.  Elliotson.


235


had  dark  hair,  and  was  pale  and  slim,  but  possessed  of  re¬
markably  firm  muscles,  and  was  so  swift  that  he  had  beaten
the  most  noted  runners.

He  informed  me  that  he  had  been  ill  more  or  less  for  four
years;  that  the  slightest  circumstance  cast  him  down  or
irritated  him,  according  to  its  nature;  that  he  felt  some¬
times  as  if  he  should  go  out  of  his  mind,  and  sometimes  as
if  he  were  about  to  die ;  that  he  slept  well,  but  was  tired  be¬
fore  going  to  sleep  and  awoke  in  the  morning  tired,  though
he  had  no  muscular  weakness ;  he  frequently  experienced  a
heaviness  of  his  eyes  ;  sometimes  numbness  and  tingling  all
over  him  ;  sometimes  violent  itching  of  his  arms  ;  his  hands
were  cold  and  shrivelled ;  the  bowels  were  often  torpid,  and
at  those  times  he  was  always  worse;  that  the  liver  secreted  too
sparingly ;  and  that  he  was  better  in  the  country.  His  mother
was  nervous.

I  prescribed  in  the  best  way  I  could  for  him.  In  about
ten  days  he  called  upon  me  one  evening,  with  his  symptoms
very  intense,  and  suffering  a  head-ache  so  severe  as  almost  to
drive  him  mad.  This  lasted  till  the  next  morning;  and  when
he  called  again  in  two  days,  he  was  in  the  same  state  as  when
I  first  saw  him.  On  the  evening  of  this  day  I  left  London
for  Switzerland,  and  did  not  see  him  again  till  the  beginning
of  November.  After  being  under  my  treatment  for  above
two  months  he  was  no  better.  I  had  not  mentioned  mes¬
merism  to  him,  although  I  believed  from  the  first  it  would  be
the  best  thing  for  his  case ;  because  I  have  been  compelled  for
a  long  while  never  to  name  this  subject  before  enquiries  are
made  to  me.  I  found  a  large  number  of  medical  men,  phy¬
sicians  and  general  practitioners  equally,  who  were  perfectly
ignorant  of  it,  who  had  done  their  patients  no  good,  and  had
no  hope  of  doing  them  good,  stare  at  me  with  a  far  more
sagacious  look  than  I  could  give,  and  assure  me  they  consi¬
dered  it  nonsense  and  would  not  consent  to  its  use :  and  I
found  large  numbers  of  patients  refuse  to  hear  of  it,  because
they  knew  it  was  nonsense,  dangerous,  or  satanic.  I  give
my  opinion  honestly  when  it  is  asked,  but  I  will  never  run
the  risk  of  finding  persons  unreasonable  and  ridiculous,  and
of  being  thwarted  in  an  attempt  to  do  my  duty  by  them.
This  patient  and  his  wife  had  heard  of  mesmerism,  and  now,
as  he  was  no  better,  enquired  what  I  thought  of  it  in  his
case.  I  immediately  informed  them  that  it  ought  to  be  tried,
and  was  very  likely  to  be  of  essential  service.  I  shewed  his
wife  how  to  make  very  slow  passes  from  opposite  his  forehead
to  opposite  his  stomach  with  one  hand,  held  at  the  distance
of  a  few  inches  from  his  face,  both  parties  looking  at  each


236  Remarkable  Cure  of  intense  Nervous  Affections,  &;c.

other  in  perfect  silence  and  all  in  the  room  being  perfectly
still,  for  at  least  half  an  hour  and  at  least  once  a  day.  I
told  her  she  might  change  her  hand  when  it  was  tired,  and
that  she  must  either  stand  before  or  at  one  side  of  her  hus¬
band,  or  sit  a  good  deal  higher  than  he  was,  or  her  hand  would
soon  tire ;  that,  if  he  should  ever  go  to  sleep,  she  had  better
continue  the  passes  till  the  sleep  was  deep,  and  then  content¬
edly  allow  it  to  expend  itself,  as  it  was  sure  to  do  sooner  or
later.  At  the  same  time  I  begged  him  to  omit  all  medicine,
and  live  just  as  had  always  been  his  habit.  This  was  done  :
and  he  obtained  a  complete  recovery  :  was  able  to  go  through
parts  of  his  business  in  his  cellar  without  inconvenience,  that
he  formerly  could  not  interfere  in  without  suffering  in  his
head :  and  is  at  present,  and  has  been  for  months,  in  full
health,  strength,  and  spirits.  As  with  Miss  Bernal,  whose
cure  is  related  by  herself  in  the  last  number  of  The  Zoist,  I
one  day  requested  him  to  draw  up  his  case  for  the  present
number,  and  I  now  transmit  his  account  without  the  alter¬
ation  of  a  syllable,  together  with  a  note  to  myself  which  ac¬
companied  it  the  very  day  after  my  request.

“  To  the  Editor  of  The  Zoist.

“  77,  Wells  Street,  Oxford  Street,
“  September  3rd,  1847.

“  Sir. — I  feel  it  to  be  a  duty  I  owe  to  suffering  humanity
to  make  known  my  experiences  of  the  powerful  agent  to
whose  salutary  influence  I  am  indebted  for  the  healthy  mind
and  body,  at  the  present  moment  engaged  in  writing  this
narrative  of  my  relief  from  mental  and  bodily  torture.  Yes  !
against  the  senseless  raillery  of  its  opponents,  I  will  record
my  grateful  testimony  to  its  virtues.  And  at  this  moment —
with  a  mind  undisturbed  by  phantasies,  and  a  body  in  which
the  stream  of  life  is  flowing,  redolent  with  health — I  might
be  pardoned,  were  the  pleasures  of  my  present  existence,  con¬
trasted  with  the  bitterness  of  the  past,  to  hurry  me  into  the
language  of  enthusiasm.  Such  however  is  far  from  my  inten¬
tion  ;  I  wish  to  give  a  plain  statement  of  my  sufferings  and
cure,  in  the  hope,  that  some  poor  sufferer  may  be  led  to  dis¬
regard  the  nonsensical  opposition  of  bigoted  ignorance,  and
use  the  means  which — by  the  blessing  of  God — proved  so
healing  to  me.  I  was  twenty-seven  years  of  age,  the  son  of
affectionate  parents,  the  husband  of  a  devoted  wife,  the  father
of  healthy  children,  and  in  a  position  of  life  ensuring  most  of
life's  comforts.  And  yet  with  all  these  means  of  happiness,

I  was  a  wretch,  to  whom  the  years  of  life,  were  years  of
misery— imaginary  if  you  will — yet  misery ;  my  smile  was


By  Dr.  Elliotson.


237


an  effort  to  prove  myself  not  divested  of  the  sympathies  of
humanity :  the  dread  of  suicide  followed  me  as  my  shadow,
while  from  my  temples  scarcely  ever  fled  the  dully  dull  pain,
which  sometimes  increased  into  positive  agony.  To  my  mor¬
bid  fancy,  no  security  could  preserve  my  children  from  un¬
timely  deaths,  no  precaution  ward  off  evils  whose  dark
shadows  blackened  my  soul.  These  symptoms  modified  and
softened  at  times,  yet  ever  preying  on  my  peace  of  mind,
were  my  companions  for  years.

“My  temples  are  indented  with  leech-bites,  my  arm  scarred
with  issues,  my  body  was  poisoned  with  medicine.  I  never
recollect  feeling  myself  what  I  could  emphatically  term  ‘  in
health/  until  the  last  few  months,  in  which  I  have  taken
greater  liberties  with  myself,  than  I  ever  did  in  my  life  before.
It  was  after  one  of  my  most  violent  paroxysms,  I  had  the
happiness  to  consult  Dr.  Elliotson,  the  indomitable  champion
of  mesmeric  truth.  The  man,  who  for  the  sake  of  a  great
principle  in  nature,  of  which  he  was  convinced,  defied  the
sneers  of  ignorance,  the  malice  of  envy,  and  the  filth  of  mis¬
representation  ;  and  who,  after  suffering  as  he  must  have
done  a  martyrdom  of  anxiety,  has  lived,  thank  God,  to  see  it
fully  borne  out  by  the  experience  of  thousands,  and — the  only
reward  he  sought — seen  its  salutary  influence  exhibited  in  the
alleviation  and  eradication  of  human  suffering.  Excuse  this
digression ;  it  is  the  outpouring  of  a  grateful  heart,  warmed
by  the  recollection  of  its  benefactor.  By  the  advice  of  Dr.
Elliotson  I  was  induced  to  try  mesmerism ;  and  my  wife,
having  been  shewn  the  way  to  exert  its  influence  upon  me,
commenced  operations.

“  From  my  excessive  nervousness,  and  being  full  of  faith,
I  expected  soon  to  find  myself  spell-bound,  and  subject  to
its  sleepy  influence.  But  no  !  days — weeks  passed  over ;  pass
after  pass  for  an  hour  together  was  made  before  me,  and
seemingly  without  effect.  My  wife  became  incredulous  and
dispirited.  She  has  made  passes  before  my  eyes  for  half  an
hour  at  a  time,  when  I  have  gone  to  bed  weary  and  sleepy,
and  when,  under  ordinary  circumstances,  I  should  have  been
asleep  in  a  few  minutes,  and  without  effect.  In  fact  it  seemed
to  banish  sleep.  But  I  was  better,  the  pain  in  my  head  was
relieved.  At  length,  about  a  month  after  the  first  essay,  I
sunk  into  a  mesmeric  sleep.  Its  influence  from  that  time
was  complete.  A  few  minutes  only  served  to  send  me  into  a
slumber,  from  which  I  awoke  a  healthier  man.  My  cure  was
rapid  and  complete ;  physic  was  thrown  to  the  dogs ;  and  any
recurrence  of  my  former  symptoms  vanished  at  the  wave  of
her  hand.  Then  it  was  that  a  most  singular  phenomenon


238  Remarkable  Cure  of  intense  Nervous  Affections,  fyc.

was  shewn.  I  looked  upon  my  wife  and  beheld  in  her  an
image  of  my  former  self.  The  ills  which  I  before  had  to
mourn  over  in  myself,  I  saw  in  her.  The  same  dejection,
the  same  feeling  of  weariness,  the  same  pains.  The  high-
spirited,  light-hearted  woman,  turned  into  the  desponding
invalid.  I  had  bequeathed  to  the  mother  of  my  children  the
malady  which  had  made  my  life  a  misery.  But  who  under
such  circumstances  could  give  way  to  despair  ?  Mesmerism
had  expunged  the  word  from  my  vocabulary.  We  waited
upon  Dr.  Elliotson,  who  kindly  mesmerised  my  wife  daily ;
and  in  less  than  a  fortnight  I  had  the  happiness  of  seeing  her
the  same  happy  creature  as  heretofore.  I  have  had  but  one
return  of  my  old  enemy.  I  shudder  at  the  recollection  !
My  wife  mesmerised  me ;  I  slept  for  an  hour,  and  awoke,
to  all  appearances,  well.  I  had  some  particular  business  to
transact,  and  I  found  I  had  presumed  too  much.  I  was  mes¬
merised  again,  went  to  bed,  and  rose  in  the  morning  free
from  pain.  Thus  was  an  attack  baffled,  which,  had  I  been
a  stranger  to  mesmerism,  would  have  subjected  me  to  leeches,
purgatives,  and  many  other  equally  agreeable  remedies.

“  I  have  occasionally  mesmerised  my  wife  since,  and  on  one
occasion  noticed  some  of  the  higher  phenomena  of  mesmer¬
ism.  She  displays  in  an  uncommon  degree  mental  touch
and  taste.  I  was  sitting  one  evening  after  having  mesmerised
her,  quietly  enjoying  a  cigar  and  a  glass  of  gin  and  water,
when  on  raising  the  glass  to  my  lips  and  drinking,  I  was
struck  by  the  alteration  in  her  features,  expressive  of  dislike ;
and  she  exclaimed,  “  How  can  you  give  me  that  horrid  gin,
when  you  know  it  makes  me  ill  ?”  Astonished,  I  cut  a  slice
off  a  lemon  and  put  it  in  my  mouth,  when  she  shuddered
and  said,  “  I  shall  suffer  with  the  cholic  for  that  to-morrow.”
I  communicated  these  effects  to  Dr.  Elliotson,  and  he  has
since  tested  them.  Such,  Sir,  are  the  particulars  of  my  case.
To  any  one  really  anxious  for  truth,  to  any  one  seeking  relief
from  pain,  I  shall  be  happy  at  any  time  to  render  any  in¬
formation  in  my  power ;  and  the  happiness  I  experience  in
my  recovery  will  be  enhanced,  if  I  can  be  assured  of  one
poor  sufferer  following  my  example,  with,  I  feel  confident,
the  same  happy  results.

“  I  am,  Sir,  your  obedient  servant,

“  William  Snewing.”

“  Friday.

“  Sir, — Accompanying  this,  is  the  narrative  of  my  case,
which  you  will  be  pleased  to  alter  and  amend  as  you  think
fitting.  I  have,  however,  one  favour  to  ask  of  you ;  it  is


By  Dr.  Elliotson.


239


that  you  will  permit  the  expressions  of  my  gratitude  to  you
to  remain  unaltered,  as  I  feel  so  great  a  pleasure  in  acknow¬
ledging  my  obligations  to  you.

“  Believe  me,

“  Your  obedient  servant,

“  To  Dr.  Elliotson.  “  William  Snewing.”

To  shew  the  disposition  of  the  patient  and  his  wife,  I  take
the  liberty  of  forwarding  also  a  note  which  I  received  a  few
months  back.


“  77,  Wells  Street,  Oxford  Street,
“  April  29th,  1847.

“Dr.  Elliotson, — My  life  having  been  changed,  by  the
salutary  influence  of  mesmerism,  from  a  painful  existence  to
a  state  of  health  and  happiness,  I  feel  it  my  duty  to  assist  in
extending  the  sphere  of  its  usefulness.  I  beg  to  enclose  you
one  guinea  as  my  first  subscription  to  the  Mesmeric  Infirmary,
and  will  thank  you  to  enter  me  as  an  annual  subscriber  of
that  sum.  With  grateful  recollections  of  your  kindness,

“  I  remain,

“  Your  most  obedient  servant,

“To  Dr.  Elliotson,  &c.  “William  Snewing.”

I  shall  now  speak  of  the  mesmeric  phenomena  of  the  two
cases.

After  Mrs.  Snewing  had  cured  him,  I  requested  to  be
allowed  to  see  her  send  him  into  sleep-waking,  and  frequently
afterwards  mesmerised  him  myself,  as  he  accompanied  her
whenever  she  came  to  me  to  be  mesmerised.  On  these  occa¬
sions  I  always  sent  them  to  sleep  at  the  same  time ;  and  fre¬
quently  both  were  so  obliging  as  to  come  whenever  I  wished
to  demonstrate  mesmerism  to  my  friends.

He  became  so  susceptible  that  one  pass,  almost  half  a
pass,  made  his  upper  eyelids  descend  and  vibrate,  his  eyes  to
turn  up,  and  sleep-waking  come  on.  In  a  very  few  seconds
he  was  in  sleep-waking,  perfectly  rational,  knowing  where  he
was  and  who  I  and  others  around  him  were,  just  as  if  awake;
but,  like  other  sleep-wakers,  speaking  in  a  tone  and  in
language  which  shewed  how  completely  he  was  at  his  ease —
exactly  as  if  he  was  in  his  family.  His  answers  were  short,
for  he  greatly  disliked  being  disturbed ;  and  he  would  have  re¬
mained  in  this  state  long,  leaning  back  in  the  chair  with  his
arms  hanging  down  perfectly  relaxed,  and  his  legs  and  feet
extended,  had  I  not  always  awakened  him  by  repeated  contact
passes  with  my  thumbs  upon  his  eyebrows  outwards,  and


240  Remarkable  Cure  of  intense  Nervous  Affections,  fyc.

blowing  in  his  face.  He  generally  remained*  even  after  several
repetitions  of  these  measures*  for  some  time  only  half  awake,
inclined  to  relapse  again ;  and  seldom  was  perfectly  awake  till
he  had  gone  into  the  open  air.

I  found  I  could  stiffen  his  arms  and  legs  by  contact  passes
along  them  :  but,  if  this  was  omitted  for  some  weeks,  the
susceptibility  of  stiffening  lessened  greatly,  though  he  was
sent  into  the  sleep-waking  as  readily  as  ever.  If  my  large
magnet  was  put  in  contact  with  his  hand,  this  and  the  arm
stiffened  :  and,  if  he  took  hold  of  the  magnet  when  awake,
gradually  his  hand  stiffened  upon  it,  his  arm  stiffened,  and
he  went  into  the  sleep-waking,  which  differed  in  no  respect
whatever  from  the  sleep-waking  induced  by  passes.  His  wife
I  never  could  stiffen  in  her  sleep  by  longitudinal  contact
passes,  however  long  I  continued  them  upon  her  arms :
neither  had  the  magnet  any  effect  upon  her  in  either  her  mes¬
meric  sleep-waking  or  in  her  ordinary  state.  These  results
agree  with  those  which  I  formerly  detailed,*  and  have  been
verified  in  every  trial  made  by  me  since  I  published  them.
I  have  not  yet  found  a  person  stiffened  by  the  magnet  who
was  not  stiffened  by  mesmeric  means,  nor  sent  to  sleep  by
the  magnet  who  was  not  stiffened  by  them.  The  great  ma¬
jority  of  persons  who  could  be  stiffened  by  mesmerism  have
been  stiffened  by  the  magnet  and  then  gradually  sent  to
sleep,  though  the  time  requisite  was  sometimes  long  :  but  a
few  who  could  be  stiffened  by  mesmerism  were  not  stiffened
at  all  times  by  the  magnet,  nor  sent  to  sleep,  and  some  never
stiffened  by  it  nor  sent  to  sleep  ;  though  I  dare  not  assert
that  these  effects  would  not  have  been  obtained  if  I  had  al¬
lowed  the  trial  to  continue  for  a  couple  of  hours.

I  sent  Mrs.  Snewing  into  a  mesmeric  state  the  first  time
after  making  passes  during  the  best  part  of  half  an  hour.
But  I  never  could  send  her  off  so  quickly  as  I  did  her  hus¬
band.  They  sat  in  two  arm  chairs  before  me,  and  I  made
passes  before  each  at  the  same  moment  with  one  hand,  which
was  always  the  right  in  regard  to  her.  The  greater  part  of
twenty  passes  were  to  the  last  required  for  her.  For  a  length
of  time  she  went  into  only  half  sleep-waking,  giving  few  signs
of  sleep  or  sleepiness,  but  evidently  in  a  mesmeric  state  from
the  change  of  her  manner  and  mode  of  expressing  herself :
they  becoming  those  of  home.  She  could  recollect  almost
everything  on  being  restored  to  her  ordinary  state  :  and  even
ultimately,  when  she  went  fully  into  sleep-waking,  she  re¬
membered  on  waking  a  little  of  what  had  passed  in  it.  She


*  Zoist,  Vol.  IV.,  p.  107—111,  278—284.


By  Dr.  Elliot  son.


241


went  to  sleep  with  a  very  little  perseverance,  and  was  awak¬
ened  most  readily  :  he  went  to  sleep  most  readily,  and  was  a
little  difficult  to  wake.  In  sleep-waking  he  was  short  in  his
answers  and  disposed  to  be  perfectly  silent :  she  would  laugh
and  be  inclined  to  talk.

To  witness  these  varieties  at  the  same  time  in  the  mes¬
meric  sleep-waking  of  the  husband  and  wife,  who  were  both
strangers  to  the  subject,  was  most  interesting.  It  reminded
me  of  the  sleep-waking  of  the  two  sister  Okeys,  each  of
whom,  though  both  displaying  the  same  general  phenomena,
displayed  them  with  such  differences  as  were  sufficient  to
satisfy  every  person  of  common  observation  that  the  cases
were  real ;  if  indeed  this  was  not  sufficiently  evident  when
either  alone  was  seen.  No  one  phenomenon  which  occurred  in
both  ever  occurred  in  precisely  the  same  modification  in  both
during  the  whole  period  of  above  two  years  that  I  attended
them.  Some  things  never  occurred  but  in  one  of  them.  The
metals  affected  each  differently.  Tbe  language  of  each  was
altered  from  the  first,  and  underwent  a  gradual  change,  words
and  sentences  being  strangely  perverted  :  but  the  kind  of  per¬
version  was  peculiar  to  each,  and  neither  ever  during  the
whole  time,  though  they  often  jabbered  rapidly,  tripped  and
fell  ever  so  slightly  into  the  language  of  the  other.  The  man
who  gave  out  that  the  younger  was  only  an  imperfect  imita¬
tion  of  the  elder,  gave  a  proof  of  his  own  total  ignorance  of
the  subject  and  his  incompetency  to  set  up  for  an  observer
of  nature.  The  matter  was  far  too  refined  and  delicate  for
him.  Certain  things  occurred  in  one  of  the  present  couple
also  that  never  occurred  in  the  other.  One  only  of  the  two
displayed  muscular  rigidity,  the  other  only  displayed  a  less
common  phenomenon — community  of  sensation ;  and  this  was
discovered  accidentally  by  the  husband  in  the  manner  de¬
scribed  in  his  letter.  He  was  taken  by  surprise ;  and,  when  he
related  the  fact  to  me,  I  was  anxious  to  investigate  it,  and
presently  found  its  reality  certain.

I  had  never  met  with  this  phenomenon  among  my  own
cases.  It  was  exhibited  to  me  satisfactorily,  but  not  fully,
once  at  my  own  house  in  a  person  from  the  country  :  and  Dr.
Engledue  exhibited  it  to  me  at  his  house  two  years  ago.  On
the  latter  occasion  the  phenomenon  was  community  of  taste.
I  was  struck  with  the  frequent  slowness  of  the  phenomenon, —
that  the  patient  occasionally  did  not  sympathize  with  him  in
taste  for  a  long  while,  sometimes  not  till  he  had  the  substance
no  longer  in  his  mouth.  I  immediately  remarked  to  him  that
I  thought  this  was  no  sympathy  of  the  palate,  or  of  the  nerves,

VOL.  Y.  T


242  Remarkable  Cure  of  intense  Nervous  Affections ,  §c.

as  people  generally  thought,  but  sympathy  of  the  brain.  For,
when  the  elder  Okey  sympathized  with  the  movements  of
others,  as  she  did  when  the  persons  were  placed  quite  out  of
her  sight,  making  the  very  same  grimaces,  the  same  movements
of  her  fingers  and  hands  that  they  did,  these  effects  often
came  out  slowly, —  after  the  persons  had  ceased  to  make  the
movements,  or  indeed,  having  given  up  the  attempt  in  de¬
spair,  had  begun  some  other  movement  for  her  to  imitate.
Here  the  affair  was  decidedly  cerebral — an  occult  perception
and  a  volition.  The  sympathy  of  taste  I  therefore  concluded
was  an  exactly  similar  phenomenon,  but  concerning  cerebral
parts  of  sensation  instead  of  cerebral  parts  of  motion,  tie
told  me  that  this  was  his  view,  and  he  had  expressed  it  to
friends  a  few  years  before  when  he  first  noticed  the  pheno¬
menon,  but  was  not  listened  to  by  them.  I  fancied  that  if  it
had  been  a  sympathy  of  nerves  of  sense,  it  would  have  oc¬
curred  instantly,  if  at  all.  Gall  saw  so  much  quackery  with
mesmerism  in  Paris,  and  read  such  exalted  and  visionary
mesmeric  speculations  in  the  writings  of  his  own  countrymen,
that,  though  he  believed  in  mesmerism  to  a  certain  point,*
he  rejected  all  that  was  beyond  common  experience.  Speak¬
ing  of  the  celebrated  German  anatomist  Peil,  who  adopted
Gall’s  anatomical  discoveries,  he  remarks  with  perfect  incre¬
dulity,  “  The  estimable  Reil,  after  having  spoken  of  the  ab¬
dominal  ganglia  as  capable  of  becoming  the  conductors  of
sensation,  says, — ‘the  transition  to  the  state  of  a  conductor
is  so  much  more  easy  in  living  than  in  inanimate  nature,  that
a  communication  may  be  established  between  the  magnetizer
and  the  magnetized,  so  that,  if  the  former  chew  pepper,  the
latter  tastes  it  :*  ”  “  ‘  the  magnetizer  scratches  himself,  the
magnetized  itches  at  the  same  part :  the  former  coughs,  pricks
himself,  the  latter  also  coughs  and  feels  the  prick  :  the  mag¬
netizer  takes  wine  and  pepper  into  his  mouth,  and  both  taste
them/”t  But,  being  convinced  of  the  fact,  I  resolved  to
avail  myself  of  the  present  opportunity  of  examining  into  it.
I  requested  my  butler  to  enclose,  in  five  different  packets  of
blotting-paper,  salt,  sugar,  cinnamon,  ginger,  and  pepper.
These  were  wrapped  in  one  common  cover  when  given  to  me,
and  I  handed  them  over  to  Mr.  Scarlet,  the  eldest  son  of
Lord  Abinger,  who  gave  me  one  packet  after  another,  any
that  he  chose,  as  each  was  done  with  by  me.  The  Archbishop
of  Dublin  and  several  clergyman  and  other  friends  were
present.

*  Zoist,  Vol.  I.,  p.  231.

f  Anatomie  et  Physiologic  du  cerveau,  vol.  i.,  p.  135,  &c.  See  my  Physiology ,
p.  675.


By  Dr.  Elliot  son.


243


When  I  put  each  into  my  mouth,  I  was  ignorant  of  its  con¬
tents,  and  learnt  its  nature  as  the  paper  became  moistened
and  gave  way.  The  first  was  salt,  and  I  stood  with  it  in  my
mouth  at  her  side  and  rather  behind  her,  saying  nothing.
Before  a  minute  had  elapsed  she  moved  her  lips,  made  a  face,
and  said,  “  Oh,  that’s  nasty  enough.”  “What  do  you  mean  ?”
“Why  you’ve  put  salt  into  my  mouth,  you  needn’t  have  done
that.”  I  removed  the  packet  of  salt,  and  took  another,
which  proved  to  be  cinnamon.  Presently  she  said,  “Well
that  is  odd ;  I  never  heard  of  such  a  thing ;  to  put  such  things
together  into  one’s  mouth  !”  “  Why  what  do  you  mean  ?”

“  Why  now  you’ve  given  me  something  nice  and  warm,  very
pleasant,  but  you’ve  mixed  salt  with  it The  impression  of
the  salt  thus  still  remained.  “  What  is  it  ?”  “  I  don’t  know

the  name  of  it,  but  it’s  very  nice ;  it’s  what  we  put  into  pud¬
dings  ;  brown,  and  in  sticks.”  She  puzzled  a  long  while  and
then  on  my  asking  if  it  was  cinnamon,  “  Yes,  that’s  it,”  she
replied,  “  How  odd  that  I  shouldn’t  recollect  the  name.”
I  then  removed  it,  and  took  into  my  mouth  another  packet,
which  proved  to  be  sugar,  and  I  observed  that  Mr.  Scarlet  very
properly  peeped  into  it  before  he  gave  it  to  me.  After  a
minute  or  two,  she  began,  “  Oh,  that’s  very  sweet ;  I  like
that ;  it’s  sugar.”  I  removed  it  from  my  mouth,  and  took
another  packet,  which  proved  to  be  ginger.  After  a  minute
or  two  she  exclaimed,  “Well,  this  is  the  funniest  thing
I  ever  heard  of,  to  mix  salt  and  cinnamon,  and  sugar,  and
now  to  give  me  something  else  hot.”  “What  is  it?”  “I
don’t  know  ;  but  this  is  very  hot  too.  It  sets  all  my  mouth
on  fire.”  In  fact,  I  felt  my  mouth  burning  hot.  After  some
difficulty,  for  she  was  puzzled  between  these  conflicting  im¬
pressions,  she  said  it  must  be  ginger,  and  went  on  complain¬
ing  of  the  heat  of  the  mouth.  I  took  a  glass  of  cold  water,
and  she  instantly  said,  smiling,  “  That  isn’t  hot,  that’s  nice
and  cool,  it  makes  my  mouth  quite  comfortable.”  “What
is  it  ?”  “  Why  it’s  water ;  what  else  can  it  be.”  The  last

packet  was  now  put  into  my  mouth,  and  proved  to  be
pepper.  She  cried  out,  “Why  you’re  putting  hot  things
again  into  my  mouth.  It  gets  down  my  throat,  and  up  my
nose ;  it’s  burning  me,”  and  she  soon  declared  it  was  pepper.
I  could  scarcely  endure  it,  and  took  a  draught  of  water.  She
was  instantly  relieved,  and  said,  “  How  cool  and  nice  that
is.”  She  could  not  have  seen  what  was  doing  had  her  eyes
been  open.  A  gentleman  now  came  beside  me  and  pricked
one  of  my  fingers  with  a  pin.  She  took  no  notice  of  it
at  first ;  but,  after  a  few  minutes,  slowly  began  to  rub  the
fingers  of  her  corresponding  hand,  and  at  last  rubbed  one

t  2


244  Remarkable  Cure  of  intense  Nervous  Affections,  fyc.

only,  that  corresponding  with  my  finger  which  had  been
pricked,  and  complained  that  some  one  had  pricked  it.  The
back  of  one  of  my  hands  was  now  pricked.  She  made  no
remark,  but  remained  in  quiet  sleep.  The  pricking  was  at
length  repeated  at  the  same  spot,  and  pretty  sharply,  in
silence.  Still  she  made  no  remark.  We  gave  it  up,  and  my
other  hand  was  pricked  in  silence.  After  a  little  time,  she
began  to  rub  her  hand,  corresponding  with  that  of  mine  which
was  the  first  pricked,  and  complained  of  its  having  been
pricked  at  the  very  same  spot  as  mine.  Gradually  she  ceased
to  complain,  and  was  still  again.  After  the  lapse  of  another
minute  or  two,  all  the  party  observing  silence,  she  com¬
plained  that  the  other  hand,  corresponding  with  that  of  mine
last  pricked,  was  pricked,  and  wondered  that  any  person  should
do  so.  This  is  a  most  remarkable  circumstance;  perfectly
corresponding  to  the  phenomena  of  sympathetic  movements  in
the  Okeys,  which  often  came  out  so  long  after  the  movement  of
the  operator  had  been  made.  Indeed  after  he,  in  despair  of
any  effect,  had  made  another  motion  for  them  to  imitate,
and  when  he  was  expecting  the  latter,  the  first  would  take
place.  It  shows  how  easily  persons  ignorant  of  the  subject
and  unqualified  to  make  experiments  may  come  to  false  con¬
clusions,  and  set  themselves  up  as  the  discoverers  of  failures
and  imposition.  In  my  patients  the  movement  given  for
sympathy  and  not  productive  of  apparent  effect  has  often
come  out  again  in  a  subsequent  sleep-waking ,  the  impression
remaining  unconsciously  in  the  brain.  The  heat  and  taste  of
the  pepper  still  remained  in  Mrs.  Snewing’s  mouth,  and  she
went  on  good-naturedly,  as  always,  complaining  of  it.  While
she  was  complaining,  I  suddenly  awoke  her,  and  asked  what
she  tasted  and  whether  her  mouth  was  hot.  She  looked  sur¬
prized,  and  said  she  “  tasted  nothing”  and  her  “  mouth  was
not  hot and  she  smiled  at  the  questions.

A  few  weeks  afterwards,  I  repeated  these  experiments  with
all  the  same  precautions,  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  H.  S.
Thompson  and  Mr.  Chandler,  who  are  very  accurate  ob¬
servers,  Mrs.  Thompson,  and  a  few  other  friends.  I  stood
quite  behind  her  large  high-backed  leather  chair.  Mr.  Chand¬
ler  gave  me  the  packets  at  his  own  pleasure,  and,  on  tasting
each,  I  wrote  on  a  slip  of  paper  what  I  tasted,  and  held  up
the  slip  at  a  distance  behind  her,  that  all  might  judge  of
her  accuracy  and  my  truth.  These  were  the  same  articles  as
in  the  former  experiments ;  but,  as  they  were  on  both  occa¬
sions  taken  at  random,  the  order  of  course  turned  out  to  be
different.  In  addition,  Mr.  Chandler  gave  me  a  piece  of  dried
orange-peel  from  his  pocket ;  and  I  tasted  water  and  wine.


By  Dr.  Elliot  son.


245


She  named  eacli  article  with  perfect  accuracy,  and  readily;
remarking  that  it  was  very  strange  she  once  could  not  recol¬
lect  the  name  of  cinnamon.  Indeed,  on  the  first  occasion,
she  described  the  taste  and  the  external  character  and  uses  of
the  various  articles  with  perfect  accuracy,  but  hesitated  in
giving  the  names  of  the  cinnamon  and  ginger  and  pepper ;  a
fact  shewing  that  the  sleepiness  extended  a  little  more  over
the  mental  powers  than  one  might  imagine.  In  a  note  sent
me  lately  by  Mr.  Thompson  are  the  following  remarks :

“  The  patient’s  lips  moved,  and  in  a  very  short  time  after  you
had  detected  its  nature,  she  appeared  to  taste  it  as  well  as  yourself;
and  when  it  was  anything  disagreeable  begged  you  would  not  put
the  nasty  stuff  into  her  mouth  in  this  way.  She  told,  without  the
slightest  mistake,  every  thing  you  tasted:  salt,  sugar,  cinnamon,
pepper,  ginger,  orange-peel,  wine,  water,  and  some  others.  Not  a
word  was  spoken  by  any  of  the  party  to  each  other,  and  the  only
question  that  was  asked  the  patient  was,  what  she  had  in  her  mouth
that  she  complained  of.  After  the  spices,  when  you  drank  water,
she  seemed  to  enjoy  it  much,  saying  it  cooled  her  mouth;  but  at
other  times,  as  you  drank  it  very  freely,  she  requested  that  you
would  not  give  her  any  more  water,  for  that  so  much  water  was  dis¬
agreeable  to  her.  There  were  present,  Mr.  Chandler,  Lord  Adare,
Baron  Osten,  a  friend  of  his,  whose  name  I  do  not  know,  myself,
and  my  wife.  We  were  all  perfectly  satisfied  with  the  entire  success
of  the  experiments.”

I  smelt  to  Eau  de  Cologne,  without  any  noise.  She  pre¬
sently  said,  “How  nice:  what  a  nice  thing  you've  given  me  to
smell."  But  she  could  not  tell  what  it  was :  when  I  men¬
tioned  its  name,  she  recognized  it.  I  did  the  same  with
water.  She  made  no  remark.  I  asked  her  if  she  smelt  any¬
thing.  She  replied,  “No,  I  don’t  smell  anything ;  what
should  I  smell?"

I  put  snuff  to  my  nostrils  :  she  almost  immediately  com¬
plained  of  snuff  being  given  to  her.

The  experiments  had  now  been  very  numerous,  and  I
proceeded  to  those  of  sympathy  of  touch.  But  the  severest
pinching  and  pricking  of  my  hands,  ears  and  neck,  for  a
length  of  time,  were  unnoticed  by  her.  All  present,  being
conversant  with  mesmeric  experiments,  agreed  that  no  more
experiments  should  be  made  :  that  no  result  could  be  expected
after  so  much  excitement  of  the  system.  I  therefore  desisted,
and  remarked  that  this  was  again  a  circumstance  which  I
noticed  in  the  Okeys  : — that  all  the  most  beautiful  experiments
with  metals,  water,  tractive  movements,  ceased  after  a  time
to  have  any  result ;  that  the  results  before  their  cessation
often  became  very  confused ;  and  that  uninformed  experi¬
menters  arc  sure,  from  this  cause  also,  if  they  conceitedly


246  Remarkable  cure  of  intense  Nervous  Affections,  §c.

take  things  into  their  hands,  to  meet  with  failures  and  be¬
come  celebrated  detectors  of  folly  and  imposture.

I  now  therefore  boldly  declare  that  the  accounts  given  us
by  mesmerists  of  sympathy  of  sensation  are  founded  on
truth.  This  fact  of  cerebral  sympathy  is  one  with  which  the
medical  world  and  metaphysicians  and  phrenologists  are  all
unacquainted.

The  transit  of  disease  from  one  part  of  the  body  to  another
is  universally  known,  and  is  technically  called  metastasis.
We  all  remember  the  lines  in  Horace  :

“  Emovit  veterera  mire  novus,  ut  solet,  in  cor
Trajecto  lateris  miseri  capitisve  dolore.”

The  ignorant  only  are  thought  to  believe  in  the  transit  of
disease  from  one  person  to  another :  and  those  only  of  lower
grades  in  society  are  known  to  endeavour  to  contaminate
with  their  own  disease  or  that  of  their  friends  another  person
whom  they  suppose  to  be  in  good  health.  I  have  read  that,
in  Greece  I  think,  peasants  are  in  the  habit  of  throwing  a
nosegay  to  you  which  they  have  first  placed  for  contamination
in  the  bosom  of  a  relative  or  friend  in  a  fever.  Instances  of  a
similar  practice  in  regard  to  a  loathsome  disease  are  met  with
occasionally  by  us  in  this  country,  and  crimes  supposed  always
to  have  another  motive  have  their  origin  now  and  then  in
this.  Sometimes,  though  rarely,  and  by  those  who  appear
the  most  ignorant  of  all,  the  practice  is  adopted  not  in  refer¬
ence  to  another  person,  but  in  reference  to  another  species.

In  the  Morning  Chronicle  of  Oct.  7,  1835,  is  the  follow¬
ing  account : —

“  Yesterday,  in  Currier  Street,  St.  Giles’s,  an  Irish  labourer,
named  Fagan,  having  a  child  with  hooping-cough,  was  persuaded
by  some  of  his  countrymen  to  borrow  a  donkey,  take  it  to  his  door,
bring  his  child  down  stairs  from  bed,  and,  he  being  on  one  side  and  his
wife  on  the  other  of  the  donkey,  to  pass  it  over  the  back  and  under  the
belly  three  times,  giving  the  donkey  a  piece  of  new  bread  every  time.
The  child  was  made  to  kiss  the  donkey’s  nose  three  times;  and  then
paddy,  muttering  some  unintelligible  words,  took  it  to  bed;  two
hundred  Irish  yelling  around  all  the  time.  The  father  was  confi¬
dent  the  disease  would  leave  the  child  for  the  ass  in  twenty-four
hours.”

The  fact  of  the  transit  or  metastasis  of  disease  from  one
individual  to  another,  whether  of  the  same  or  of  a  different
species,  is  unknown  to  the  medical  world.  But  this  patho¬
logical  occurrence  is  proved  by  mesmerism  as  clearly  as  the
physiological  fact  of  cerebral  sympathy  of  sensation  and
thought  between  two  individuals.  I  am  not  aware  that  any


By  Dr.  Elliot  son.


24  7


account  of  it  exists  in  medical  works ;  but  probably  very  many
instances  are  recorded  in  mesmeric  writings,  since  it  is  com¬
monly  spoken  of  among  mesmerists.*  The  record  of  the
only  example  within  my  very  limited  reading  is  ancient,  and
has  no  connexion  whatever  with  mesmerism ;  but,  like  the
ancient  account  of  the  production  of  deep  sleep  and  insus¬
ceptibility  of  pain  previous  to  what  would  otherwise  have
occasioned  agony, f  represents  the  matter  as  miraculous.  We
read  that  the  leprosy  of  Naaman,  when  he  was  cured,  clave
unto  GehaziJ  and  his  “seed  for  ever”  by  supernatural  power,
and  as  a  divine  punishment  for  his  sin  in  taking  money  and
clothes  for  the  miraculous  cure  performed,  not  by  him,  but
by  his  master  Elisha.

The  unexpected  production  of  hypochondriasis  in  Mrs.
Snewing,  when  she,  acting  the  part  of  a  good  wife,  dispelled
the  hypochondriasis  of  her  husband  by  the  natural  means  of
mesmerism,  is  mentioned  in  his  letter,  as  well  as  my  speedier
dispersion  of  the  disease  from  her  by  the  same  means.

But  this  was  not  the  only  transit  of  disease  between  them.
Mrs.  Snewing  for  years  had  often  suffered  severely  from  the
rheumatism  in  many  parts;  and  at  length,  sometime  after
both  had  been  cured  of  their  distressing  nervous  affection,
the  disease  settled  in  her  right  arm,  so  as  to  occasion  great
distress  night  and  day  and  seriously  to  interfere  with  her
duties.  Her  husband  of  his  own  accord  mesmerised  her  for
this,  in  the  way  she  had  mesmerised  him,  and  soon  cured
her ;  so  that  up  to  this  time,  a  distance  of  four  months,  she
has  had  no  relapse,  though  formerly  she  was  never  half  so
long  free  from  rheumatism  in  some  part  or  other.  As  soon,
however,  as  he  had  cured  her,  he  found  his  own  wrists  nearly
disabled,  and  his  ankles  became  painful.  He  came  to  me  in
the  hope  that  I  would  relieve  him  by  medicine.  I  at  once  offered
to  mesmerise  him ;  but  he  looked  very  sorrowful  at  the  pro¬
posal,  and  could  not  bear  the  idea  of  my  possibly  taking
his  disease  from  him  to  transfer  it  to  myself.  I  assured
him  that  I  had  no  apprehension,  because  I  had  not  yet  heard
of  an  instance  of  any  pain  contracted  by  a  mesmerist  from
another  that  had  been  contracted  by  a  third  party  on  curing
him.  He  then  consented,  and  after  being  mesmerised  twice
by  me  was  well.  He  did  not  return,  as  I  should  have  wished,
because  I  know  it  is  generally  very  important  to  consolidate
cures  by  continuing  mesmerism  some  time  after  the  cessation

*  A  clear  instance  of  the  transit  of  pain  from  a  patient  under  us  both  to  my
medical  friend,  Mr.  Case,  who  mesmerised  her,  and  who  has  never  suffered  from
the  pain  since,  is  well  worth  reading  in  The  Zoist,  Vol.  III.,  p.  330.

t  Genesis  ii.  21.  {  2  Kings  v.


248  Remarkable  cure  of  intense  Nervous  Affections,  fyc.

of  a  disease,  just  as  it  is  to  continue  medicines  and  treatment
after  cures  by  ordinary  means.  It  seems  that  he  could  not
bear  the  idea  of  troubling  me.  In  a  week,  the  rheumatism
returned  in  his  wrists,  but  not  in  his  ankles.  His  wife  set
to  work  to  cure  him ;  but  utterly  failed,  though  she  perse¬
vered  for  weeks  and  sent  him  into  sleep-waking  as  usual.
This  fact  is  remarkable.  Was  her  system  unable  to  cure
him  unless  by  receiving  back  his  disease,  and  incapable
of  this  reception  ?  But  a  little  sister  of  his  wife,  only
twelve  years  old,  cured  him  permanently  in  two  days  by
making  passes  first  upon  one  arm  and  then  upon  the  other  as
he  sat  reading :  and  she  did  not  contract  his  disease.


The  motto  prefixed  to  this  article,  coming  from  a  highly
informed  and  true  philosopher,  cannot  be  read  too  often  :  and
I  cannot  terminate  the  article  without  quoting  a  discourse
lately  delivered  by  one  of  the  cleverest  bishops  of  the  Church
of  England  before  the  University  of  Oxford  and  the  British
Association  of  Science,  the  latter  of  which  bodies,  excluding
as  it  still  does  both  true  cerebral  physiology  and  mesmerism
from  its  meetings,  stood  in  sad  need  of  the  Bishop  of  Oxford’s
honest  admonitions.  The  strong  feeling  which  Mr.  Prideaux’s
allusion  to  phrenology  excited  last  year  in  the  Association  is
recorded  in  the  16th  number  of  The  Zoist.  At  the  late
meeting,  the  subject  of  etherisation  before  surgical  operations
was  introduced  fully  and  forcibly  into  the  speech  of  the  es¬
timable  president,  Sir  Robert  Inglis,*  by  Mr.  Owen,  who  pre-

*  “  It  is  this  remakable  property  of  ether,”  said  Sir  Robert  Inglis,  “  which
has  led  to  its  recent  application  with  such  success  as  may  well  lead  us  to  thank
God,  who,  in  His  Providence,  has  directed  the  eminent  physicians  and  surgeons
amongst  our  brethren  in  the  United  States  to  make  this  discovery  : — a  discovery
which  will  place  the  name  of  Dr.  Charles  J.  Jackson  among  the  benefactors  of
our  common  nature.”  Mr.  Owen’s  incessant  praise  of  ether  I  do  not  find  fault
with  ;  nor  with  his  telling  every  body  that  he  is  certain  every  hospital  will  main¬
tain  an  officer  expressly  to  have  the  charge  of  all  that  relates  to  ether.  Would
that  every  hospital  would  maintain  a  group  of  officers  to  mesmerise  !  the  useful¬
ness  of  the  institutions  would  then  be  far  more  than  doubled.  But  it  is  remark¬
able  that  Mr.  Owen’s  enthusiasm  for  ether  is  in  exact  proportion  to  his  hostility
to  mesmerism.

Mr.  Owen  proceeded  to  say,  by  the  mouth  of  the  President :  “  With  regard
to  the  functions  of  the  primary  division  and  parts  of  the  brain  itself,  there  has
been  of  late  a  happy  tendency  to  substitute  observations  on  the  modifications  of
those  parts  in  the  series  of  the  lower  animals  in  the  place  of  experimental  muti¬
lations  on  a  single  species,  in  reference  to  the  advancement  of  cerebral  physiology.
Experiment  is,  no  doubt,  in  some  instances,  indispensable:  but' we  ought  ever
to  rejoice  when  the  same  end  is  attained  by  comparative  anatomy  rather  than  by
experimental  vivisections  ;  and  every  true  philosopher  will  concur  with  my  most
eminent  friend,  Professor  Owen,  in  his  doubt  (I  quote  his  own  words),  ‘  wffiether
nature  ever  answers  so  truly  when  put  to  the  torture  as  she  does  when  speaking
voluntarily  through  her  own  experiments,  if  we  may  so  call  the  ablation  and


By  Dr.  Elliotson.


249


pared  the  physiological  portion  for  him.  But,  though  between
two  and  three  hundred  surgical  operations  have  now  been  per¬
formed  under  mesmerism  without  pain,  and  all  have  termi¬
nated  successfully — a  result  very  different  from  that  of  the
employment  of  ether,  no  allusion  was  made  to  that  grave
and  wonderful  scientific  truth.  Great  is  the  disgrace  to  the
Association ;  still  greater  is  the  disgrace  to  Mr.  Owen.  The
time  must  come,  nay  the  hour  is  at  hand,  when  all  this  will
recoil  impetuously  and  with  jarring  sound  upon  those  scien¬
tific  men  who  now  recklessly  pursue  their  course  in  the
British  Association  and  the  Royal  Society,  scorning  the  doubt


addition  of  parts  which  comparative  anatomy  offers  to  our  contemplation.’ —
[Owen’s  Hunterian  Lecture,  Yertebrata,  p.  187.]”

Gall  is  not  mentioned,  who  preceded  Mr.  Owen  above  twenty  years,  thus  : —
“  Let  us  now  enquire,”  says  Gall,  ( Fonctions  du  Cerveau ,  t.  iii.,  p.  199.  1823.)
“  whether  comparative  anatomy  and  physiology  are  not  infinitely  more  fertile  and
conclusive  in  discovering  the  functions  of  cerebral  parts  than  those  violent  artificial
mutilations,  so  vaunted  and  so  barren  of  result.  The  animals  nearest  to  man
are,  as  far  as  regards  animal  life, — the  moral  and  intellectual  faculties,  only  so
many  fragments  of  man.  Their  brains  are  deprived  of  many  parts  which  the
human  brain  possesses.  All  these  brains,  therefore,  are  so  many  natural  mutila¬
tions,  compared  with  the  human  brain.  They  are  also  natural  mutilations,  if
compared  among  themselves.”  In  his  6th  volume,  between  p.  178  and  288,
he  says,  “  Physiologists  have  supposed  that  they  could  discover  the  functions
of  the  nervous  system,  especially  of  the  cerebral  parts,  by  means  of  mutilations,
and  I  have  proved,  and  will  prove  again,  that  it  is  impossible  to  avoid  confusion
by  any  method  whatever.”  “The  results  and  the  explanations  of  the  experi¬
ments  of  Rolando  and  Flourens  are,  in  many  respects,  opposed  to  each  other,
as  hitherto  has  happened  to  all  experimenters  by  lesion  and  mutilation,  and  as  it
must  necessarily  always  happen  ;  and  as  it  always  has  happened,  it  happens  also
to  our  two  estimable  co-labourers, — always,  sooner  or  later,  we  find  the  pro¬
mises  of  experimenters  by  lesion  and  mutilation  have  evaporated  almost  to
Zero.”  “  One  part  is  removed  after  another,  and  the  cessation  of  one  function
after  another  is  apparent  instantly.  They  take  no  account  of  the  suffering,  trouble,
and  restlessness  of  the  animal,  of  the  blood  which  inundates  the  injured  parts
and  which  has  to  be  stanched  every  moment,  which  very  often  coagulates
immediately,  and  the  stanching  of  which  necessarily  causes  compression,
friction,  laceration,  &c.”  “It  is  scarcely  possible  to  perform  the  very  same
operation  twice.”  “This  single  circumstance  is  generally  enough  to  disgust
those  who  enquire  after  truth  with  candour,  without  self-love  and  itching  after  a
momentary  gratification  of  vanity.” — “  Gall  had  a  horror  of  inflicting  pain  upon
poor  brutes,  and  would  allow  Magendie  to  be  little  more  than  a  canicide.”  See
my  Physiology ,  p.  424.

The  injustice  to  Gall,  habitual  in  the  Association,  was  shewn  in  the  Report
of  its  Third  Meeting.  I  quote  the  report  from  my  Physiology ,  p.  465  :  “  Dr.
W.  C.  Henry  says,  ‘  The  honour  of  this  discovery  (that  there  are  distinct  nerves
of  sensation  and  motion),  doubtless  the  most  important  since  the  time  of  Harvey,
belongs  exclusively  to  Sir  C.  Bell.’  (p.  62.)  Now  no  new  principle  was  dis¬
covered.  We  knew  before  that  some  nerves,  as  the  optic  and  olfactory,  were  for
sensation  only,  and  some,  as  the  common  motor,  the  external  motor,  and  the
internal  motor  of  the  eye,  and  the  lingual,  for  motion  only.  The  only  discovery
was  that  two  individual  nerves  were,  one  for  the  first  function  and  the  other  for
the  second.  That  no  one  nerve  could  be  for  both  sensation  and  motion  had  always
been  evident  to  reflecting  minds.  Galen  taught  his  cotemporaries  that  one  set  of
nerves  went  to  the  skin  for  sensation,  and  another  to  the  muscles  for  motion.”


250  Remarkable  cure  of  intense  Nervous  Affections ,  t$c.

that  things  will  always  go  on  exactly  as  at  present.  They
may  be  assured  that,

“  Veniet  tempus  et  quidem  celeriter,” —

Divines  had  before  always  found  it  necessary  to  urge  phi¬
losophers  to  listen  to  revealed  matters  in  the  midst  of  their
devotion  to  the  investigation  of  nature.  But  now  we  have
the  novelty  of  a  divine  finding  it  necessary  to  exhort  the
scientific  world  not  to  allow  their  pride  to  blind  them  to  por¬
tions  of  their  own  pursuits — necessary  to  instruct  them  in
their  pursuit  of  science :  and,  knowing  as  I  do,  that  the
bishop,  like  some  others  of  the  episcopal  bench,  admits  the
truth  of  both  phrenology  and  mesmerism,  and  takes  great
interest  in  them,  I  feel  assured  that  his  exhortation  to  scien¬
tific  men  was  prompted  by  these  two  subjects.

“  For  the  discovery  of  truth,  it  is  needed  that  the  facts  of  nature
around  man  should  be  questioned  by  his  intelligence.  For  this
questioning,  the  first  of  all  conditions  is,  that  he  should  have  those
facts  clear,  defined,  separated  from  others,  ascertained  in  themselves.
That  he  should  so  have  studied  them  as  to  know  their  true  relations,
to  see  through  seeming  resemblances,  to  catch  the  scattered  hints
which  declare,  in  the  midst  of  apparent  dissimilarity,  real  connection  ;
to  see  the  value  of  a  fact ,  which,  having  been  arbitrarily  thrust
from  its  true  place,  has  seemed  hitherto  a  perplexing  superfluity ;
that  he  should  thus  have  plain  and  clear  before  him  the  elements  of
which  the  insight  of  his  higher  reason  is  to  suggest  to  him  the  law.
Now,  for  all  this  the  very  first  mental  qualification  which  he  needs
is  patience  ;  a  patience  which  will  steadily  refuse  to  taste  prematurely
the  pleasure  of  generalization,  which  will  sustain  him  through  the
longest,  the  most  wearisome  processes  of  minute  investigation.  And
to  this  first  condition  of  successful  study,  pride  is  the  direct  anta¬
gonist.  The  pride  of  ignorance  is,  we  all  know,  most  impatient ;
it  gathers  up  the  merest  external  resemblances,  and  then  generalizes
at  a  grasp.  And  very  little  removed  from  this  state  is  the  impatient
man,  be  his  actual  attainments  what  they  may.  His  own  thoughts,
his  own  impressions,  his  own  fancies,  these  are  the  facts  of  the
self-sufficient.  He  cannot  endure  the  slow  laborious  processes  to
which  the  student  of  nature  must  submit.  Nor  is  this  all :  there
must  be  an  ardent  love  of  truth  as  truth  in  him  who  would  so  per¬
severe  as  to  follow  her  guidance  up  the  steep  path  which  alone  leads
to  her  secret  dwelling  place  ;  and  with  this,  too,  pride  interferes.
He  who  dwells  upon  or  looks  for  his  own  exaltation,  will  soon  have
in  all  his  studies  another  and  a  lower  aim  than  the  discovery  of  truth.
Not  what  she  will  reveal,  but  what  will  do  him  credit,  will  become
the  secret  law  of  his  motives  ;  and  to  such  a  tempter  soon  become
familiar  short  paths  and  little  ends,  and  tricky  means  which  lead
not  to  her  seat,  and  to  which  she  will  not  yield  her  hidden  store.
At  another  point  again  he  is  weakened.  He  only  who  will  be  indeed


By  Dr.  Elliotson.


251


a  learner  can  be  greatly  taught ;  and  to  be  a  learner  the  proud  man
will  not  bow  :  he  will  not  learn  of  others ,  for  he  looks  down  scorn¬
fully  upon  them,  and  scorn  is  no  learner  in  any  school.  He  wastes
the  rays  which  would  have  enlightened  his  eye,  not  believing  in  the
light  of  other  men.  He  will  rather  repudiate  the  richest  inheritance
of  transmitted  knowledge,  than  acknowledge  even  to  himself  what
he  receives  from  others — and  on  such  a  mind  there  soon  settles  down
the  thicker  darkness,  which  is  bred  by  all  the  storms  of  envy,  cap¬
tiousness,  jealousy,  and  hatred.  And  as  he  will  not  learn  from
others,  so  not  even  by  Nature  herself  will  he  be  taught .  He  thinks
he  knows  so  much,  that  his  estimate  of  what  is  to  be  known  is
lowered.  And  this  is  not  the  spirit  of  a  learner  :  he  grows  to  deal
boldly  with  Nature,  instead  of  reverently  following  her  guidance,
lie  seals  his  heart  against  her  secret  influences.  He  has  a  theory
to  maintain,  a  solution  which  must  not  be  disproved,  a  generalization
which  shall  not  be  disturbed  ;  and  once  possessed  of  this  false  cypher,
he  reads  amiss  all  the  golden  letters  around  him.”  p.  17.  (Pride
a  hindrance  to  Knowledge ;  a  sermon  preached  in  the  Church  of
St.  Mary  the  Virgin ,  Oxford ,  before  the  University ,  on  Sunday ,
June  27,  1847.  By  Samuel,  Lord  Bishop  of  Oxford.

I  offer  no  apology  for  introducing  the  following  beautiful
verses  from  a  recent  charming  volume  of  poetry.*

“  Truth’s  victories  are  slow.  Those  who  begin
The  glorious  battle  in  her  dear  behalf
Die  off — despairing  some  :  and  hapless,  all —

And  leave  the  harsh  inheritance  of  strife
To  those  who  love  them,  and  to  times  remote
The  dearly-bought  and  tardy -paced  success.

They  sow,  but  reap  not,  nor  their  sons,  nor  grandsons  :

But  strangers  to  them  garner  up  their  fruits.

Oft-times  not  knowing  even  the  saintly  names
Of  those  who  struggled  for  a  thankless  world.

“  But  Error’s  victories  are  sooner  won.

Who  fights  for  her,  fights  for  an  easy  spoil.

With  willing  soldiers,  valiant  in  the  cause.

And  gains  the  battle,  oft  without  a  scratch  :

For  Error  crowns  her  generals  ere  they  die,

And  blazons  in  men’s  ears  with  blatant  voice
Their  bloodiest  deeds,  until  the  foolish  world
Exalts  them  first  to  heroes,  then  to  gods,

And  swears  for  ever  after  by  their  names.

“  But  blessings  on  the  Truth,  it  prospers  still.

And  Error,  though  it  lives  luxuriantly,

Lives  fast,  and  grows  decrepit,  and  expires
To  be  succeeded  by  its  progeny.

But  Truth  ne’er  dies.  Once  let  the  seed  be  sown,

No  blight  can  kill  it :  neither  winds  nor  rain,

Nor  lightnings,  nor  all  wrath  of  elements,

Can  e’er  uproot  it  from  the  hungry  soil.”


*  Voices  from  the  Crowd.  By  Charles  Mackay,  LLD.
Error."


“  Truth  and


252  Remarkable  cure  of  intense  Nervous  Affections ,  fyc.

It  is  no  little  pleasure  to  me  to  mention  that  the  subjects
of  the  present  communication  are  Roman  Catholics.  Certain
Protestants  who  conceive  that  all  except  themselves  are  not
merely  in  gross  error,  but  narrow,  ignorant,  blind,  and
bigotted,  denounce  mesmerism  as  an  abomination,  wicked
and  satanic ;  preventing,  as  far  as  in  them  lies,  their  fellow-
creatures  from  participating  in  its  blessings,  and  injuring,  like
some  medical  men  as  far  as  in  them  lies,  the  characters  of
those  who  are  anxious  to  disseminate  its  blessings.  IIow
could  such  persons  stand  in  the  presence  of  this  enlightened
and  truly  excellent  couple,  who  saw  clearly  that  it  was  an
affair  of  nature  and  this  world,  and  to  be  resorted  to  with
thankfulness  ?  I  am  not  aware  that  they  asked  permission  of
their  priest ;  and,  if  they  did,  he  must  have  been  an  enlight¬
ened  man  and  have  viewed  the  subject  like  a  philosopher.
Let  such  protestant  persons  remember  that  the  most  enlight¬
ened,  (perhaps  too  in  regard  to  religion,)  the  most  unselfish,
the  most  glorious,  of  all  public  men  at  present  in  authority,
the  being  beaming  with  all  the  nobleness,  the  dignity,  the
intelligence,  and  the  goodness  of  which  human  nature  is
capable,  is  the  present  Pope,  of  whom  it  is  impossible  to
think  without  thinking  at  the  same  time  of  “  the  famous  sen¬
tence”  in  Claudian.

“  Nunquam  libertas  gratior  exstat
Quam  sub  Rege  Pio.”


P.S.  After  this  was  written,  I  received  the  following  valu¬
able  note  from  Mr.  Snewing.  It  ought  to  be  read  with  deep
earnestness  by  all  medical  practitioners ;  for  it  teaches  them
how  much  more  good  they  might  every  day  do  to  their  pa¬
tients  than  they  are  aware  of,  and  in  cases  for  which  they
already  possess  suitable  means,  and  which  are  widely  differ¬
ent  from  nervous  affections.  I  scarcely  know'  a  disease  to
which  mesmerism  is  not  applicable  either  as  the  sole  remedy
or  an  adjunct  to  well-established  means.

“  77,  Wells  Street,

“  Sept.  10,  1847.

“  Sir, — I  don't  think  I  ever  informed  you  of  the  following
case,  which  I  am  certain  will  interest  you  very  much,  as  it
so  fully  proves  the  efficacy  of  mesmerism,  and  likewise  its
independence  of  all  co-operation  from  the  imagination  of  the
patient.  My  little  girl,  a  child  3  years  old,  had  a  tendency
upon  the  slightest  cold  to  inflammation  of  the  lungs,  and


On  the  silent  'power  of  the  Will.  253

upon  two  occasions  has  had  to  be  leeched,  &c.  During  a
visit  in  the  country  she  caught  cold,  and  the  old  symptoms
appearing  I  became  somewhat  alarmed,  but  as  I  intended
returning  to  town  with  her  the  next  day,  I  did  not  call  in  any
medical  advice.

“When  she  went  to  bed  in  the  evening,  the  sj^mptoms
became  more  aggravated,  incessant  cough,  flushed  face,
parched  lips,  and  all  the  other  distressing  symptoms.  After
listening  to  her  coughing  for  nearly  an  hour,  I  went  up  stairs
to  her.  She  was  asleep,  and  I  resolved  to  try  mesmerism.
I  never  saw  such  a  thing  in  my  life.  I  had  not  manipulated
five  minutes  before  her  breathing  had  sunk  from  fifty  inspir¬
ations  in  a  minute  to  fifteen.  She  did  not  cough  once  more
that  night,  and  the  next  morning  she  was  as  well  as  ever  she
was  in  her  life.  Can  anything  be  more  conclusive  ?  How
grateful  ought  we  to  be  to  the  Author  of  all  good,  for  such
an  inestimable  boon  to  his  suffering  creatures  !

“  Believe  me,  Sir,

“  Your  faithful  servant,

“To  Dr.  Elliotson.”  “William  Snewing.


III.  On  the  silent  poiuer  of  the  Will  of  one  Person  over  another.

By  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson,  Fairfield  House,  near  York.

Communicated  bv  Dr.  Elliotson.

I  have  never  doubted  the  power  of  the  will  over  persons  in
the  mesmeric  state  or  susceptible  of  it.  The  testimony  of
others  has  always  been  too  powerful  for  me  to  entertain  a
doubt,  though  I  have  never  obtained  any  evidence  of  the
power  of  my  own  will.  During  the  process  of  mesmerising
I  have  repeatedly  willed  with  all  my  might  till  I  was  fatigued,
and  never  once  found  the  period  usually  required  for  the  pro¬
duction  of  sleep-waking  in  the  individual  patient  shortened  in
the  least.  Farther,  I  have  often  gazed  intently  upon  those  por¬
tions  of  the  head  of  mesmerised  patients  which  corresponded
with  cerebral  organs  capable  of  excitement  by  contact  or  point¬
ing  in  the  parties,  and  have  all  the  time  willed  to  the  utmost
that  the  particular  organ  should  be  excited.  I  have  willed  long
and  violently  upon  persons  in  the  ordinary  state ;  but  always
in  vain.  This  I  imagine  to  be  a  matter  of  mere  accident :  and
sooner  or  later  I  shall  have  patients  whom  I  can  influence  by
my  silent  will ;  and  meet  with  persons  more  or  less  capable  of
being  affected  by  it  in  the  ordinary  state.  Some  have  an  erro¬
neous  idea,  which  they  have  learnt  from  imperfectly  informed


254


On  the  silent  power  of  the  Will .


writers  either  without  any  or  with  limited  experience,  that
all  mesmeric  phenomena  result  from  the  will  only.  Many
older  writers  held  this  opinion,  and  their  estimate  of  the
power  of  the  will  was  so  high  that  they  conceived  it  extended
over  inanimate  matter.  On  the  authority  of  Mr.  Colquhoun,
in  his  Isis  Revelata,  I  wrote  the  following  passage  in  that  por¬
tion  of  the  last  edition  of  my  Physiology,  which  treats  of  the
wonders  of  somnambulism  and  mesmerism,  and  details  the
early  history  of  the  cases  of  the  Okeys.

“  Cornelius  Agrippa  ab  Nettesheym  asserts  that  a  man
naturally,  and  without  any  miracle,  unassisted  by  the  Holy
Spirit  or  any  other,  may  convey  his  thoughts  in  the  twinkling
of  an  eye  to  another  at  any  distance  :  ‘  et  ego  id  facere  novi,
et  scepius  feci.  Novit  etiarn  fecitque  Abbas  Trithenius/*
A  professor  of  philosophy  at  Padua,  Petrus  Pomponatius,
born  in  1462,  had  contended,  before  Van  Helmont,  for  the
power  of  the  imagination  or  will  of  one  person  to  send  forth
an  influence  upon  another ;  and  enumerated  the  conditions
of  the  exercise  of  this  power  in  nearly  the  terms  of  modern
magnetizers.  He,  too,  surpassed  all,  for  he  point-blank
declares  that  inanimate  matter  may  obey  this  influence.
f  Cum  hominis  animce  voluntas  et  maxime  irnaginativa  fuerint
vehementes,  venti  et  reliqua  materialia  sunt  nata  obedire  eis.’
p.  664.

In  my  communication  on  the  cases  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.
Snewing  I  recorded  my  conviction  of  the  fact  of  cerebral  sym¬
pathy,  from  unquestionable  experience  :  and  I  have  no  doubt
that  a  certain  class  of  spectral  illusions  are  instances  of  the
same  thing.  When  a  person  is  dying,  or  in  other  circum¬
stances  which  cause  him  to  think  most  intensely  upon  a  cer¬
tain  other  absent  person,  however  distant,  the  state  of  his
mind — his  brain — very  frequently  causes  the  absent  person
not  merely  to  think  of  him  but  to  fancy  an  appearance  of
him,  and  sometimes  of  few  or  more  of  the  circumstances  in
which  he  is  placed — a  thing  demonstrating  a  still  further
sympathy  with  his  brain,  for  the  impressions  upon  his  brain
from  the  surrounding  circumstances  are  then  also  sympa¬
thized  with.  Nay,  the  brain  of  a  third  person  in  company
with  the  sympathizing  party  will  occasionally  sympathize  with
the  brain  of  the  latter  and  see  the  very  same  appearance,
though  the  appearing  party  be  unknown  to  him.  Instances


*  “  De  Occulta  Philosophia,  1.  iii.  ‘  This  I  have  known  and  often  done  ;  and
so  has  Abbas  Trithenius.’

f  ie  De  Incantationibus.  Basil,  1577  ;  p.  237-  ‘  When  man’s  will,  and  espe¬

cially  his  imagination,  are  vehement,  the  winds  and  the  other  objects  of  the  ma¬
terial  world  are  made  to  obey  them  !  !  !'  ”


By  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson.


255


of  all  these  facts  I  hope  to  present  soon  to  the  readers  of
The  Zoist ;  and  shall  feel  greatly  obliged  for  any  well  authen¬
ticated  accounts  and  for  any  references  and  even  opinions
with  which  I  may  be  favoured.

I  have  received  two  communications  from  friends,  with
permission  to  forward  them  to  The  Zoist ;  one  from  Mr.  H.  S.
Thompson,  the  other  from  Dr.  Ashburner.

John  Elliotson.

Sept.  10,  1847.

In  a  late  number  of  The  Zoist *  I  made  a  few  remarks  on
the  action  of  the  will,  or  the  power  of  communicating,  by
the  will  alone,  ideas  and  thoughts  to  persons  in  a  mesmeric
state.  I  also  expressed  an  opinion  at  the  time,  that  the
same  effect  can  be  produced  upon  persons  in  a  waking  state,
and  upon  such  as  had  never  been  mesmerised ;  and  I  relaced
some  facts  in  confirmation  of  what  I  advanced.  Lately  the
attention  of  many  has  been  directed  to  this  very  interesting
subject,  by  the  exhibition  (in  London)  of  a  somnambulist,
Madlle.  Prudence,  who  was  said  to  have  a  perfect  sympathy
with  her  mesmeriser  Madlle.  Laurant,  exhibiting  the  power
of  knowing  what  is  passing  in  the  mind  of  her  mesmeriser,
or  others  put  en  rapport  with  her ;  and  being  completely  under
the  direction  of  the  mesmeriser’s  will.  I  went  to  witness
this  curious  exhibition.  The  somnambulist  played  at  ecarte
perfectly  correctly  with  her  eyes  bandaged  and  a  thick  shawl
tied  over  her  head.  She  moved  forwards,  was  drawn  back¬
wards,  or  fell  to  the  ground,  by  what  was  asserted  to  be  the
will  of  the  mesmeriser.  But  I  must  here  remark  that  the
mesmeriser,  to  produce  these  effects,  made  passes  with  the
hand  to  or  from  the  somnambulist,  or  in  a  downward  direction.
She  acted  admirably  several  tableaux  vivants ,  the  subjects  of
which  were  suggested  to  the  mesmeriser  by  parties  who  were
only  spectators  of  the  exhibition.  She  was  declared  to  de¬
scribe  persons  who  were  absent  when  put  en  rapport  with  their
relations  and  friends,  who  were  to  call  the  absent  person
strongly  to  their  recollection  at  the  time.

Convinced  of  the  possibility  of  all  these  things  being
effected  by  the  will  of  the  mesmeriser,  or  by  sympathy  with
the  parties  with  whom  she  was  placed  en  rapport,  I  had  no
reason  to  suspect,  nor  did  I  observe,  any  attempt  at  decep¬
tion.  That  Madlle.  Prudence  is  a  genuine  somnambulist  I
have  no  doubt ;  yet  the  performance  was  not  quite  so  satis¬
factory  as  I  could  have  wished,  and  I  could  not  feel  certain
that  the  will  was  the  only  agent  by  which  the  mesmeriser’ s

*  Vol.  III.,  p.  319.


256


On  the  silent  power  of  the  Will.


thoughts  and  wishes  were  conveyed  to  the  somnambulist.  For
all  who  have  seen  much  of  persons  in  a  mesmeric  state  must
be  well  aware  how  highly  exalted  all  the  senses  frequently
become,  so  that  some  mesmeric  patients  will  hear  a  whisper
inaudible  to  every  one  else,  and  distinguish  the  slightest
movement  of  the  mesmeriser' s  hand.  Therefore  it  is  possible
that  certain  ideas  may  be  connected  in  the  somnambulist's
mind  with  certain  sensations  produced  by  different  motions
of  the  mesmeriser's  hand,  and  I  observed  the  mesmeriser
stood  generally  very  close  to  the  somnambulist,  always  pointing
at  her  and  moving  her  hand.  If  all  the  phenomena  are  pro¬
duced  merely  by  the  will,  as  asserted,  I  cannot  see  the  neces¬
sity  of  the  mesmeriser  being  so  near  the  somnambulist,  nor
why  she  should  point  or  make  passes  with  her  hand.  This
certainly  spoils  the  appearance  of  the  experiment.  It  struck
me  that  the  somnambulist  had  been  practised  to  exhibit  some
of  the  phenomena,  from  the  circumstance  that  any  particular
character,  or  the  exhibition  of  any  distinct  feeling,  or  passion,
was  generally  represented  justly  and  admirably;  but  when
merely  a  simple  action  was  required,  such  as  clasping  the
hands,  touching  the  nose  with  the  finger,  crossing  the  arms,
&c.,  &c.,  several  times  she  appeared  not  to  understand  what
her  mesmeriser  intended.

In  the  description  of  a  person  whom  a  party,  put  en
rapport  with  her,  was  thinking  of,  she  was  not  quite  correct
the  day  I  saw  her ;  yet  it  is  but  fair  to  add  that  several  per¬
sons  have  told  me  they  have  tested  her  on  that  point  and
found  her  perfectly  accurate  in  her  descriptions.  I  think  if
she  was  quite  successful  in  that  experiment  it  would  be  con¬
clusive  proof  of  the  power  of  thought-reading,  as  no  signs
from  the  mesmeriser  could  avail  the  somnambulist  in  describing
a  person  unknown  to  the  mesmeriser.  I  have  stated  the  ob¬
jections  which  I  thought  the  exhibition  open  to ;  but  at  the
same  time  my  conviction  is  that  the  phenomena  I  witnessed
were  generally,  if  not  altogether,  produced  by  the  will  of
the  mesmeriser  upon  the  somnambulist.

Whilst  upon  this  interesting  subject,  I  cannot  help  offer¬
ing  a  few  remarks,  and  relating  a  few  facts,  which  have  come
under  my  own  observation.  I  expressed  an  opinion  before,
that  it  was  not  necessary  that  a  person  should  be  in  a  mes¬
meric  state  to  exhibit  the  phenomena  of  thought-reading,
community  of  taste  and  feeling,  or  of  being  acted  upon  by
the  will  of  another ;  that  there  are  highly  sensitive  persons
who  exhibit  this  wonderful  faculty  more  evidently  than  others,
but  that  all,  more  or  less,  are  endowed  with  this  susceptibility,
and  that  to  an  extent  which  is  rarely  suspected.  Though


By  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson.


257


perhaps  I  may  not  find  many  who  believe  this  susceptibility
to  be  so  general  as  I  do.  I  should  think  that  few  who  have
studied  the  subject  at  all  will  deny  the  occasional  exhibition  of
these  phenomena,  or  will  refuse  to  number  them  amongst  other
pathological  facts.  These  faculties  or  powers  are  no  new  dis¬
coveries.  In  history,  from  the  earliest  period  down  to  the
present  day,  we  read  of  persons  endowed  with  them.  In
the  epidemic  ecstasies  of  the  middle  ages,  the  communication
of  thought  was  deemed  a  certain  proof  of  possession,  and
no  exorcism  was  practised  unless  this  power  was  proved.
Father  Surin,  in  enumerating  the  proofs  of  possession  in  the
Ursulines  of  Loudun,  mentions  as  the  most  indisputable  one
that  they  told  the  most  secret  thoughts.

M.  Barier,  a  Physician  of  Privas,  in  a  communication
to  Dr.  Foissac,  mentions  a  case  of  a  young  female  ecstatic
who  penetrated  the  thoughts  of  all  who  were  around  her,
and  answered  every  question  which  was  put  to  her  mentally.

Community  of  taste  and  feeling  I  have  ranked  in  the
same  class  of  phenomena  as  thought-reading,  since  they
all  depend  upon  the  nervous  system  of  one  person  being  in
a  sympathetic  state  with  that  of  others ;  and  I  have  found  that
those  who  show  community  of  taste  or  feeling  have  generally
the  faculty  of  thought-reading.  '  One  patient  who  was  highly
sensitive,  and  whom  I  mesmerised  for  a  nervous  disorder,
could  when  awake  point  out  immediately  whatever  part  of
my  head  was  touched  by  a  third  person.  If  I  mesmerised  her
when  I  was  in  spirits,  she  was  in  spirits  also ;  if  I  was  grave,
she  was  grave ;  and  I  never  dared  mesmerise  her  when  I  was
suffering  from  any  annoyance.  I  did  not  find  that  she  often
had  distinct  thoughts  corresponding  with  my  own,  even  when
I  tried  to  impress  her  by  will  with  them.  But  she  has  ex¬
perienced  and  shown  a  feeling  corresponding  with  the  thoughts
I  had ;  and  I  have  often,  by  the  will,  made  her  perform  a
series  of  trifling  acts ;  though,  when  asked  why  she  did  them,
she  has  answered  that  she  did  them  without  observing  them,
and  had  no  distinct  wish  to  do  them  as  far  as  she  was  aware.
Of  community  of  taste,  I  have  never  met  with  any  cases
more  beautifully  distinct  than  two  which  I  and  several  friends
witnessed  last  week.  One  occurred  in  a  patient  of  Dr.  Elliot-
son,  mesmerised  by  him ;  the  other  to  Mr.  Chandler.*  They
were  cases  I  think  which  must  have  convinced  any  honest
enquirer,  however  incredulous  he  might  have  been.  I  have
tried  several  experiments  on  persons  not  in  a  mesmeric  state,


*  The  cases  of  Captain  Peach  related  in  No.  XVIII.,  and  that  just  related  in
the  present  number. — Zoist.

VOL.  V.


U


258


On  the  silent  power  of  the  Will .


and  on  some  who  had  never  been  mesmerised.  I  have  re¬
peatedly  found  that  I  have  been  able  by  will  to  suggest  a
series  of  ideas  to  some  persons,  which  ideas  have  induced
corresponding  actions;  and  again,  by  fixing  my  attention
upon  others  and  thinking  on  some  particular  subject,  I  have
often  found  them  able  most  accurately  to  penetrate  my
thoughts.  Neither  have  I  observed  that  it  was  always  neces¬
sary  to  be  near  them,  or  to  be  in  the  same  room  with  them,
to  produce  these  effects.

On  two  persons  with  whom  I  am  acquainted,  I  have  tried
the  following  experiment.  They  have  agreed  whenever  they
felt  an  inclination  to  write  to  me,  to  do  so  at  the  time,  or,  if
that  was  not  possible,  to  note  down  the  day  and  the  hour
when  the  idea  occurred  to  them,  to  see  that  it  was  at  the
time  that  I  willed  them.  When  I  have  fixed  my  attention
upon  them,  willing  them  to  write,  I  have  found  the  experi¬
ment  to  succeed  generally  three  times  out  of  four.

Some  months  ago  I  was  staying  at  a  friend’s  house,  and
this  subject  came  under  discussion.  Two  friends  had  left  the
house  the  day  before.  Neither  of  them,  that  I  am  aware
of,  had  ever  been  in  a  mesmeric  state :  but  I  knew  that  to
some  extent  they  had  this  faculty.  I  proposed  to  make  trial
whether  I  could  will  them  to  think  I  was  coming  to  see  them
at  that  moment.  I  accordingly  fixed  my  attention  upon  them
for  some  little  time.  Six  weeks  elapsed  before  I  saw  either
of  them  again :  and  w  hen  we  met  I  had  forgotten  the  cir¬
cumstance,  but  one  of  them  soon  reminded  me  of  it,  by
saying,  “  I  have  something  curious  to  tell  you,  and  want  also
to  know  whether  you  have  ever  tried  to  practise  your  power
of  volition  upon  either  of  us ;  for  on  the  evening  of  the  day
I  left  the  house  where  you  were  staying,  I  was  sitting  reading

a  book  in  the  same  room  with  Mr. - .  My  attention  was

withdrawn  from  my  book,  and  for  some  moments  I  felt  as
though  a  third  person  was  in  the  room,  and  that  feeling  shortly
after  became  connected  with  an  idea  that  you  were  coming  or
even  then  present.  This  seemed  so  very  absurd,  that  I  tried
to  banish  the  idea  from  my  mind.  I  then  observed  that  Mr.

- ’s  attention  was  also  drawn  from  the  book  which  he  was

reading,  and  he  exclaimed,  'It  is  positively  very  ridiculous,
but  I  could  have  sworn  some  third  person  was  in  the  room,
and  that  impression  is  connected  with  an  idea  of  Henry
Thompson.’  ”

The  next  case,  though  of  a  somewhat  different  character,
still  bears  upon  the  same  subject.

A  lady  in  a  house  where  I  was  staying  was  seized  with
very  violent  spasms,  accompanied  by  great  nervous  excite-


By  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson.


259


merit.  I  saw  her,  and  in  a  short  time  was  able  to  soothe  the
pain,  check  the  spasms,  and  put  her  into  a  calm  sleep  which
lasted  for  some  hours.  When  awake  she  begged  me,  if  pos¬
sible,  to  come  in  the  evening  and  again  mesmerise  her.  But
finding  the  medical  men  who  attended  her  were  extremely  averse
to  mesmerism*  I  thought,  for  the  patient's  sake,  it  was  better,
if  possible,  to  avoid  any  collision  with  them.  I  therefore
told  her,  as  I  found  her  so  sensitive,  I  thought  that  I  could
succeed  in  putting  her  to  sleep  without  coming  to  see  her,
and  that  at  10  o'clock  p.m.,  if  she  would  dismiss  every  one,
except  the  attendant  who  was  to  sit  up  with  her,  and  request
that  person  not  to  touch  her,  nor  even  go  near  her,  I  would
try  to  put  her  to  sleep  at  that  hour ;  but,  should  I  not  succeed,
if  she  would  then  send  for  me,  I  would  go  and  see  her.  She
did  as  I  directed,  and  at  10  o'clock  I  commenced  willing  her
to  go  to  sleep.  In  about  twenty  minutes  I  went  to  her  room
door  and  asked  the  attendant  whether  her  mistress  slept;
the  answer  was,  “Most  calmly."  She  slept  without  once
awaking  until  8  a.m.,  and  was  much  invigorated.  When  she
awoke,  the  medical  man  who  was  staying  in  the  house  con¬
gratulated  himself,  attributing  this  deep  and  refreshing  sleep  to
his  sleeping  potion,  which  she  had  not  taken.  For  some
following  nights  we  tried  the  same  experiment  with  the  same
success.  I  was  then  obliged  to  leave  the  house.  In  spite  of
the  apparent  success  of  the  experiments,  I  could  not  help
suspecting  that  the  whole  good  had  been  done  the  first  and
only  time  I  personally  mesmerised  the  patient,  but  thought
it  as  well  not  to  mention  my  suspicion  to  her.  She  was  pro¬
nounced  out  of  danger,  but  when  I  took  leave  she  expressed
a  fear  that  the  nervous  irritability  and  sleepless  nights  would
return.  I  promised  that  she  should  still  have  the  benefit  of
my  good  wishes  for  good  nights'  rest.  The  two  following
nights  I  kept  my  promise.  I  then  omitted  the  operation  of
willing  at  the  usual  time,  thinking  that  the  good  which  was
done  must  be  through  the  imagination  alone.  I,  however,
got  a  few  lines  on  the  fourth  day,  informing  me,  that,  though
she  was  much  improved  in  strength,  she  feared  the  magic
power  had  ceased,  or  could  not  be  felt  at  so  great  a  distance ;
that  she  had  passed  two  excellent  nights  after  I  left,  but  the
two  following  ones  had  been  restless  and  uncomfortable.
I  wrote  immediately  to  say,  that  I  had  been  trying  whether
it  was  only  the  effect  of  imagination  or  whether  I  really  could
produce  a  beneficial  effect  at  that  distance,  and  that  conse¬
quently  I  had  not  fulfilled  my  promise  the  last  three  nights,


*  We  wonder  whether  they  would  attempt  to  give  a  rational  or  honest  reason
for  this  aversion. — Zoist.


u  2


260


On  the  silent  influence  of  the  Will .


but  I  would  not  be  so  remiss  in  future.  Before  I  could  ob¬
tain  an  answer  to  my  letter,  I  received  a  few  lines  merely  to
say  that  she  was  glad  to  find  the  restless  nights  she  had  passed
were  only  accidental,  and  that  calm  sleep  had  again  visited
her  at  the  usual  time.

These  narratives  may  appear  strange,  and  perhaps  are
both  within  the  possibility  of  mere  coincidence.  I  find  that
it  is  most  difficult  to  write  anything  entirely  satisfactory  on
this  subject ;  for  the  more  extraordinary  phenomena  which
we  observe  are  too  astonishing  for  recital ;  so  that  we  can¬
not  adduce  sufficient  evidence  of  the  facts.  I  could  relate
a  hundred  successful  minor  experiments  upon  the  more  com¬
mon  phenomena,  such  as  Dr.  Elliotson  witnessed  on  one
of  his  patients  the  last  morning  I  was  with  him,  and  some

which  I  tried  at  Lord  A - ’s ;  but  they  are  all  nearly  of  the

same  kind  and  therefore  interesting  only  as  they  tend  to
confirm  the  truth  of  the  existence  of  this  power.  I  will
therefore  quit  this  subject  for  the  present ;  and  relate  two  or
three  cases  (as  briefly  as  possible)  of  the  salutary  effects  of
mesmerism,  which  to  my  mind  are  quite  as  curious,  wonderful,
and  inexplicable  as  any  of  the  other  phenomena ;  but,  having
become  so  familiar  to  us,  they  cease  to  astonish  us ;  and  for¬
tunately  they  are  so  numerous  and  of  such  constant  occur¬
rence,  that  we  can  prove  them,  any  day  and  every  day,  in
spite  of  the  sneers  of  the  unbelieving,  the  prejudiced,  and
the  ignorant.

Henry  Stafford  Thompson.

Fairfield  House,  near  York.

***  The  cases  we  shall  present  in  another  part  of  the
present  number. — Zoist.


IY.  On  the  silent  influence  of  the  Will.  By  Dr.  Ashburner.

Communicated  in  a  letter  to  Dr.  Elliotson.

My  dear  Dr.  Elliotson, — Your  request  that  I  should  give
you  my  views  on  the  human  will  is  most  readily  acceded  to,
but  it  was  not  necessary  that  you  should  say  you  would  do
justice  to  my  ideas.  The  motives  which  operated  on  your
mind  to  impel  you  to  investigate  the  subject  of  mesmerism
are  of  too  high  an  order  to  lead  any  one  to  believe  you  could
be  guilty  of  literary  or  scientific  piracy.  The  head  of  the
thieving  animal  has  combinations  very  different  from  those
that  exist  in  your  brain.  It  is  not  that  I  would  not  make
you  welcome  to  any  of  my  poor  speculations,  or  to  the  credit


By  Dr.  Ashburner .


261


of  having  made  out  any  of  my  own  facts, — for  no  man  can
value  less  the  honour  and  glory  of  reputation  than  I  do ;  but
to  do  you  justice,  it  is  well  known  that  you  are  punctilious
in  the  desire  to  give  to  each  his  own.  People  imagine  some¬
times  that  I  care  less  than  I  ought  to  do  for  external  signs  of
honour.  Barring  the  necessities  of  keeping  up  appearances
to  retain  a  footing  in  society,  the  man  who  reflects  on  his
position  as  an  unit  among  the  millions  in  this  wide  world  is
rather  weak  if  he  does  not  estimate  the  opinion  of  mankind
at  its  real  value.- — Ignorance,  selfishness,  and  malevolence
form  so  powerful  a  combination  in  jobbing  the  distinctions  of
professional  competitors  that  no  ordinary  courage  is  required
to  stem  the  currents  which  set  in  against  new  or  original
ideas.  You  ask  me  for  my  reflections  on  the  operation  of
willing.  You  have  heard  something  of  the  base  slanders  dis¬
tributed  in  certain  circles  by  the  paid  agents  of  parties  who
suppose  they  have  an  immediate  interest  in  backbiting  me.
It  has  answered  the  purpose  of  some  poor  wretches  to  tell
falsehoods  about  me  in  order  to  gain  the  sympathy  and  some¬
times  the  money  of  those  weak  persons  who  believe  in  the
satanic  agency  of  mesmerism.  Superhuman  power  has  been
ascribed  to  the  human  will,  and  I  ought  to  feel  thankful  to
you  for  giving  me  an  opportunity  of  reducing  within  rational
limits  the  wild  exaggerations  that  have  been  circulated  by
some  medical  men,  whose  baseness  and  cowardice  are  equalled
only  by  their  vulgarity,  pretension,  and  ignorance.  I  feel
that  it  is  degrading  to  belong  to  a  profession  some  of  the
leading  practitioners  of  which  claim  credit  for  their  want  of
knowledge,  and  endeavour  to  retain  themselves  in  their  posi¬
tion  by  tricks  and  cajolery  played  off  in  the  board-room  of  a
public  hospital  upon  confiding  noblemen  and  charitably-
disposed  persons.  I  feel  that  it  is  no  honour  to  be  the  asso¬
ciate  of  men  who  suspect  each  other  of  disgraceful  underhand
proceedings,  and  who  themselves,  regardless  of  all  medical
ethics,  take  means  to  disparage  the  reputation  not  only  of
competitors,  but  of  intimate  connexions,  to  whom  they  owe
the  bread  which  their  own  stupidity  never  could  have  ob¬
tained  for  their  gabbling  mouths.  You  may  have  had  occasion
to  feel  disgust  at  the  stolidity  or  the  cunning  of  physicians
who  have  opposed  the  progress  of  knowledge,  but  I  could
detail  to  you  facts  that  relate  to  a  class  of  practitioners  of  the
healing  art  that  are  too  melancholy  for  public  attention.
I  should  not  have  alluded  so  strongly  to  this  point  if  it  were
not  for  the  opportunity  it  gives  me  of  elucidating  the  facts
relating  to  the  slanderous  assertions  of  those  who  have  as¬
cribed  to  my  will  a  superhuman  power.  I  wish  it  to  be  dis-


262


On  the  silent  influence  of  the  Will.


tinctly  understood,  that,  in  the  numerous  experiments  I  have
made,  the  numbers  who  have  exhibited  a  susceptibility  to  be
influenced  by  the  power  of  the  will  are  comparatively  very
small.  Every  one  who  knows  anything  of  mesmerism  is
aware  that  it  is  very  difficult  to  induce  sleep  in  a  large  majo¬
rity  of  mankind.  Of  those  who  do  yield  to  the  sleep,  very
few  are  obedient  to  the  influence  of  the  will  directed  upon
them,  and  of  those  who  are  thus  obedient  the  varieties  in  the
degree  of  susceptibility  are  very  great.  If  these  facts  be  not
kept  in  view,  the  opportunities  for  misrepresentation  are  in
proportion  to  the  interesting  variety  of  the  curious  phenomena
belonging  to  our  most  engaging  subject.  Is  it  not  distressing
that  in  this  nineteenth  century  we  should  be  aimed  at  by  the
shafts  of  ignorant  medical  or  obstetrical  impostors  ?  That
the  antecedents  of  a  course  of  honest  life  for  thirty  or  forty
years  should  be  hustled  by  dirty  competitors,  and  that  the
simple  effort  to  widen  the  boundaries  of  knowledge  should
meet  with  obloquy  and  hatred  ?

You  tell  me  you  have  not  fully  investigated  the  pheno¬
mena  of  the  will ;  nevertheless  you  have  done  enough  in
mesmerism  to  call  down  upon  you  the  envy  of  the  sordid  and
of  the  base,  and  yet  more  will  you  have  to  endure.  With  all
the  industry  you  have  displayed  in  your  profession,  with  the
sound  reputation  you  have  acquired  for  your  powers  of  medical
and  physiological  investigation,  for  diagnostic  skill,  for  your
introduction  of  the  stethoscope,  for  your  pathological  re¬
searches,  for  your  therapeutical  improvements,  you  will
nevertheless  be  pointed  out  as  one  who  has  dared  to  meddle
with  that  unholy  mesmerism  !  If  it  be  not  satanic,  then  you
are  attacked  for  your  liberal  opinions.  You  have  no  right  to
think  as  you  like ;  in  vain  you  may  declare,  as  I  have  heard
you,  your  fervent  admiration  of  the  magnificent  doctrines  of
real  Christianity :  the  bigots  will  not  spare  you,  for  the  ten¬
dency  of  your  researches  is  not  agreeable  to  them.

What  will  they  say  to  my  observations,  for  the  facts  con¬
nected  with  the  operations  of  the  mind,  in  shedding  forth  the
fluid  of  the  human  will,  have  tendencies  that  may,  in  their
limited  comprehensions,  render  God’s  truth  a  fallacy  and  the
clearest  logic  unholy.  Sects  will  continue  to  exist  long
beyond  our  time,  and  the  spirit  of  caste  will  exclude  all  who
think  with  due  humility  on  the  eternity  of  time,  on  the
immensity  of  space,  and  on  the  unlimited  power  that  is  guid¬
ing  the  universe  to  good  !  Do  you  dare  to  enquire  into  the
facts  respecting  the  will  ?  Where  may  they  lead  you  ?  The
humble  philosopher  knows  that  investigation  is  never  ending  :
new  facts  produce  an  evolution  of  new  events,  and  the  spirit


By  Dr.  Ashburner.


263


of  enquiry  is  the  only  one  calculated  to  lead  man  with  due
humility  to  “look  through  nature  up  to  nature’s  God!”
Is  that  a  bad  conclusion?  The  narrow  bigot  who  would
limit  our  enquiries  in  natural  science  from  the  fear  of  ten¬
dencies  is  a  cruel  small  headed  pest,  wanting  in  all  the
nobler  attributes  of  moral  excellence ;  deficient  in  intellec¬
tual  grandeur  !  He  has  the  cunning  perhaps  which  the  love
of  money  or  of  other  wealth  may  ripen  into  a  character
sufficient  for  the  ephemeral  distinctions  of  this  life,  but  the
large  aspirations  of  the  great  mind  are  not  for  his  enjoy¬
ment.  You,  I  fear,  are  too  apt  to  feel  hurt  at  the  envious
stings  of  some  of  such  creatures.  Believe  me  their  influ¬
ence  is  temporary.  Their  pretension  to  exclusive  piety  is
a  mere  paltriness.  They  cannot  look  boldly  at  facts,  the
metaphysical  bearings  of  which  would,  could  they  but  know
it,  place  them  on  a  solid  logical  base.  A  bigot  may  fear  a
wrong  tendency  because  he  has  not  the  enlargement  of  mind
to  comprehend  that  the  scientific  knowledge  he  repudiates
may  lead  him  to  the  establishment  of  the  very  truth  he  is
anxious  to  establish.  I  hold  that  the  prejudices  of  contracted
piety,  the  hasty  judgments  of  a  weak  intellect,  are  awfully
mischievous  to  real  sacred  development,  by  which  I  mean  the
interest  of  a  true  and  enlightened  religion.  Believing  in
phrenology  the  true  science  of  the  mind,  I  cannot  conceive  of
any  tendencies  which  a  fearless  investigation,  logically  con¬
ducted,  into  the  phenomena  of  mesmerism,  and  especially
into  those  of  the  subject  of  the  will,  can  have  prejudicial  to
the  cause  of  truth.  The  tendencies  must  lead  to  good  results;
and,  though  small  ideas  and  bad  feelings  in  combination  may
for  a  time  arrest  the  progress  of  truth,  their  power  is  limited
and  they  cannot  prevail.  I  do  not  pretend  in  this  hurried
letter  to  treat  extensively  and  minutely  of  the  facts  that  have
presented  themselves  to  me  in  the  enquiries  I  have  made.
Your  kindness  has  enabled  you  to  know  the  extent  of  my
serious  illness,  and  by  your  directions  I  have  relaxed  in  the
pursuit  of  those  investigations  which  I  commenced  with  full
honesty  of  purpose,  without  a  sordid  or  an  interested  motive.
I  am  at  present  unable  to  give  you  more  than  a  mere  outline
of  the  facts  and  observations  I  have  collected  on  the  will.

1.  Mr.  Thompson  of  Fairfield  first  exhibited  to  me  and
established  in  my  mind  the  fact  that  one  human  being  is  ca¬
pable,  by  his  will,  of  influencing  the  organs  and  consequently
the  actions  of  another.  I  saw  him,  by  the  simple  effort  of  his
silent  will,  excite  one  person,  and  that  person  awake,  to  come
towards  him,  to  touch  his  elbow,  to  walk  back  to  a  chair,  and
sit  down.  These  things  were  done  repeatedly  and  the  person


264


On  the  silent  influence  of  the  Will,


acted  upon  did  not  appear  to  be  aware  of  the  dependence  of
her  actions  on  the  will  of  Mr.  Thompson.  I  saw  him  on
another  occasion  induce  a  lady,  by  his  silent  will,  to  go  to
an  empty  grate  in  summer  weather  and  hold  her  hands  as  if
to  warm  them  by  the  fire.  Of  course  these  experiments  were
made  upon  persons  who  were  exceedingly  impressionable.
My  first  experiments  were  tried  upon  persons  whom  I  had
mesmerised  to  sleep.  I  soon  found  that  among  these  there
was  great  variety  in  the  readiness  with  which  obedience  was
yielded  to  my  silent  commands.  Those  were  always  most
difficult  to  move  who  had  large  organs  of  Firmness,  Self¬
esteem,  Concentrativeness,  and  Combativeness  ;  and  generally
those,  who,  having  serious  disease,  slept  deeply,  were  most
obstinate  or  insusceptible  :  some  rose  up  from  their  seats  and
came  to  me  immediately ;  others  shook  their  heads  and  ap¬
peared  to  be  uncertain  for  awhile,  and  then  after  several  efforts
to  rise  finally  obeyed,  stating  that  they  felt  themselves  pulled
as  if  by  a  cord.  In  those  cases  where  any  degree  of  lucidity
was  evinced,  the  individuals  spoke  of  a  stream  of  light  com¬
ing  from  my  eyes  to  their  foreheads.  This  stream  was  said
to  be  of  a  blue  or  of  a  lilac  color.  One  patient  said  that  it
was  of  all  the  colors  of  the  rainbow.  For  the  most  part,  when
the  persons  willed  were  separated  from  all  others,  the  stream
was  described  to  be  of  a  beautiful  sky-blue.  When  asked
about  the  size  of  the  stream  of  light,  there  appeared  to  be  a
difference, — some  saying,  it  was  as  thick  as  the  arm, — others,
that  it  was  about  the  size  of  two  ropes  filling  the  eyes  and
then  surrounded  by  a  cloud  or  vapour  which  made  the  whole
stream  as  thick  as  the  arm.  Clairvoyants  have  agreed  that,
in  the  act  of  willing,  the  stream  commences  at  the  back  part
of  the  brain  and  proceeds  to  the  anterior  portions,  passing
out  at  the  eyes.

2.  The  question  arises ;  If  a  man  be  able  to  influence  his
fellow  man  by  the  simple  operation  of  his  will,  to  what  extent
can  this  power  be  exercised?  I  believe  that,  like  all  our
faculties,  the  will  is  very  limited  in  its  agency.  That,  accord¬
ing  to  the  organization  of  the  head  in  each  individual,  the
variety  in  degree  of  power  is  very  different.  Some  have  greater
power  than  others,  and  facts  have  brought  me  to  the  conclu¬
sion  that  the  quality  of  the  power  differs  in  different  indi¬
viduals  :  some  are  more  clear  in  producing  their  impressions ;
some  are  more  powerful  and  obtunding;  some  are  more  sooth¬
ing  and  attractive.

3.  There  are  some  curious  observations  to  be  noted  in
respect  to  the  recipients  of  the  power.  The  degree  of  sus¬
ceptibility  to  receive  mesmeric  impressions  is  well  known  to


By  Dr.  Ashburner.


265


vary  most  considerably,  and  the  obedience  to  the  influence  of
the  will  varies  in  the  same  manner.  Those  who  have  large
Firmness,  Self-esteem,  and  Combativeness  are  most  difficult
to  influence,  especially  if  a  good  Concentrativeness  assists
these  organs.  If  the  individuals  willed  to  be  impelled  to  lift
the  right  arm  to  the  cheeks,  or  do  any  similar  simple  act,  be
very  deficient  in  the  power  of  clear  apprehension  and  be  at
the  same  time  of  low  forehead  and  large  occipital  region,  the
chances  are  that  the  fluid  of  the  will  acts  as  a  series  of  mes¬
meric  passes  on  the  patient,  and  the  result  is  an  excitement
of  the  propensities  that  are  most  commonly  acting  upon  the
thoughts  of  the  individual.  I  had  a  case  of  erotic  epilepsy
under  mesmeric  treatment  in  which  the  characteristic  ten¬
dencies  were  called  into  play  by  the  mesmeric  passes,  or  by
the  exercise  of  the  will.  The  “  law  of  kindness”  was  in  vain
invoked,  for  all  human  attractive  agencies  produced  these
demonstrations,  and  all  repulsive  efforts  of  will  brought  on
epileptic  paroxysms.  I  found  it  very  difficult  to  obtain  sleep
until  I  employed  rock  crystals,  pointed  at  the  face ;  and  these
aided  by  Mr.  Road's  electro  dynamic  coil  produced  the
desired  effect.

4.  Finding  that  I  could  produce  obedience  to  my  silent
will  in  somnambulists  to  the  extent  of  inducing  some  to  lift
the  hand  to  either  cheek — others  to  get  up  from  a  chair  and
walk  across  a  room  towards  me — to  go  back  and  sit  down — to
come  again  to  me  and  touch  my  right  or  left  shoulder — others
to  wake  up  and  to  go  to  sleep  again  as  often  and  as  quickly
as  I  chose  to  alter  my  thoughts, — I  resolved  to  try  if  I  could
influence  some  of  my  patients  to  obey  me  in  the  performance
of  a  train  of  actions.  This  was  education,  and  this  I  take
it  requires  the  high  order  of  patience  to  bring  to  the  degree
of  perfection  which  we  have  seen  exhibited  in  the  oneiro-
mancie  of  the  cook-maid  Mile.  Isa  Prudence,  whose  mes¬
meric  education  does  so  much  credit  to  the  charming  Mile.
Herminie  Laurant  and  her  rotund  parent.  I  never  suc¬
ceeded  in  producing  many  compound  results.  I  have  made
two  patients  get  up  from  a  chair,  walk  to  a  sideboard,  and
bring  me  a  book  from  it.  I  have  repeatedly  made  one  of
them  select  articles  from  my  waistcoat  pocket,  and  produce
to  a  bystander  that  which  we  had  previously  determined
upon  unknown  to  the  patient.  I  have  repeatedly  made  this
same  somnambulist  take  my  pocket  handkerchief  out  of  my
pocket,  and  place  it  on  the  table  or  on  the  sideboard,  accord¬
ingly  as  I  willed  the  thing  to  be  done ;  and  each  repetition
of  the  act  was  found  so  much  to  facilitate  the  subsequent
practice,  that  finally  the  train  of  ideas  became  habitual,  upon


266


On  the  silent  influence  of  the  Will.


the  repetition  of  the  impulse  received  from  my  will.  Mr.
Baldock,  of  Chatham,  tried  several  experiments  with  the
same  patient,  and  produced  analogous  results.  The  point
is  to  me  satisfactorily  established,  that  a  somnambulist  can
be  educated  to  obey  even  complicated  trains  of  ideas  com¬
municated  by  the  will.

5.  To  what  extent  may  obedience  to  the  will  be  carried?
This  is  a  question  important  to  social  morality.  A  girl  who
has  never  been  mesmerised  goes  for  the  first  time  in  her  life
with  her  mother  to  Yauxhall  Gardens.  She  is  induced  to
stand  up  in  a  dance,  and  the  excitement  consequent  upon
the  event  has  led  to  an  intimacy  with  her  partner,  which  has
in  a  few  hours  afterwards  caused  the  ruin  of  the  young
woman.  What  has  this  to  do  with  mesmeric  will  ?  The
parties  were  not  conscious  that  the  giddiness  of  the  female
was  the  result  of  a  force  operating  upon  her  from  the  brain
of  the  partner.  It  is  to  this  description  of  character  that  we
are  indebted  for  the  exaggerated  statements  partly  founded
on  fact,  and  for  the  direct  falsehoods  which  have  been  cir¬
culated,  on  the  exercise  of  the  power  of  the  will  to  a  danger¬
ous  extent  and  for  the  basest  purposes.  It  is  of  importance
that  the  whole  truth  should  be  known,  not  only  as  respects
the  interests  of  science,  but  from  the  high  and  honourable
motive  of  publishing  all  that  relates  to  the  public  happi¬
ness.  Individuals  die,  rot,  and  are  forgotten ;  their  malice
is  more  ephemeral  than  their  small  amount  of  virtue ;  but
the  truths  they  leave  behind  them.  Infatuation  is  an  example
of  the  same  idea.  The  word  is  derived  from  Fatua,  the
wife  of  Faunus,  of  whose  inspiration  we  used  to  read  as
boys  in  Justin,  and  who  was  probably  an  example  of  mes¬
meric  prevision.

There  is  no  doubt  that  there  are  individuals  in  the  world
capable,  from  their  extreme  susceptibility  of  mesmeric  impres¬
sions,  of  being  willed  to  do  anything  which  a  strong  mind
may  choose  to  direct ;  but  the  persons  so  constituted  I  believe
to  be  extremely  few.  It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  one  of
the  conditions  to  a  perfectly  passive  obedience  to  the  will  of
another  is  a  complete  absence  of  those  habits  which  are  the
result  of  an  education  of  the  organ  of  firmness.  No  properly
educated  person  yields  up  at  once  without  resistance  the  bul¬
warks  of  social  morality.  It  follows  that  the  person  willed
by  another  to  perform  a  wrong  act,  however  easily  influenced,
must  break  through  an  established  barrier,  if  a  previous  good
education  have  impressed  a  virtuous  habit  of  resisting  im¬
pulse  ;  in  which  case  the  submission  is  a  yielding  to  seduction.
If  a  previous  education  have  not  established  this  habit,  the  will


By  Dr.  Ashburner.


267


acts  upon  an  already  passive  and  abandoned  mind.  In  all
cases  of  great  susceptibility,  I  have  found  the  readiness  to
obey  the  silent  behests  of  the  will  to  be  in  inverse  proportion
to  the  force  of  resistance  acquired  by  the  habits  of  education.
Place  these  in  every  variety  of  circumstance,  and  the  propo¬
sition  still  remains  true, — that  the  will  of  one  human  being
influences  the  actions  of  another  inversely  to  the  effects  pro¬
duced  upon  the  organization  of  the  brain  by  the  reiterat¬
ing  impressions  of  education.  Man  is  impelled  to  action
by  motive.  The  motive  to  the  impulse  may  be  the  will  of
his  neighbour.  If  a  weak  habit  allows  that  impulse  to  be
easily  excited,  the  organ  impelled  must  be  wanting  in  the  re¬
sistance  applied  in  all  well-educated,  well-regulated  minds,
by  the  counter-balancing  organs.

6.  Having  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  even  in  somnam-
bules  the  agency  of  the  will  of  another  directed  upon  them
is  limited  and  modified  by  the  action  of  their  cerebral  organs,
it  was  an  object  to  know  how  far  persons,  not  in  the  mesmeric
sleep,  could  be  influenced  to  action  by  the  will  of  another.
The  experiments  I  have  performed  have  been  very  numerous ;
and,  in  order  to  avoid  sources  of  fallacy,  the  greater  number
has  been  made  upon  persons  of  whom  I  have  known  nothing.
I  have  tried  while  sitting  in  an  omnibus  or  in  a  railroad  car¬
riage  to  will  the  person  near  me  to  do  some  trifling  act.  In
a  very  few  cases,  out  of  hundreds,  I  have  succeeded  in  my
object.  In  some  few  an  uneasy  sensation  has  been  evident,
but  in  three  instances  sleep  has  been  the  result  of  the  agency
of  my  will,  attended  by  some  very  ludicrous  circumstances.
In  one  case  a  gentleman,  six  feet  in  height,  got  into  an  om¬
nibus  at  Charing  Cross,  and  he  seated  himself  opposite  to  a
lady,  who  appeared  annoyed  at  his  gaze.  Without  any  in¬
tention  of  putting  him  to  sleep,  I  began  to  operate  with  my
will,  and  he  was  so  susceptible  to  the  influence  of  the  mes¬
meric  fluid,  that  he  fell  into  a  profound  sleep  in  about  a
minute.  I  have  stated  in  my  paper  on  a  Theory  of  Sleep,
in  the  July  number  of  The  Zoist ,  for  1846,  some  curious
facts  on  the  differences  in  the  power  of  willing,  between  our
friend  Thompson  and  myself.  His  will  is  so  much  clearer
than  mine,  that  when  directed  to  a  person  awake,  the  impulse
given  is  obeyed  in  the  waking  state.  Some  of  my  cases
have  obeyed  in  like  manner,  but  the  majority  of  them
have  fallen  asleep.  But  my  will  exerted  at  a  distance  has
not  had  this  effect.  %  I  was  in  the  habit  of  mesmerising  a
young  woman,  who  lived  near  the  Bloomsbury  Bank  in  Hol-
born,  and,  after  she  had  ceased  to  attend  at  my  house,  in
Wimpole  Street,  if  I  required  her  to  come  to  me  for  the  pur-


268


On  the  silent  influence  of  the  Will.


pose  of  shewing  some  interesting  phenomena  to  an  expected
visitor,  I  had  only  to  think  intently  upon  her  and  will  her
to  come  to  me,  and  she  arrived  within  the  hour.  This  hap¬
pened  on  three  occasions.  My  old  friend,  Professor  Mackenzie,
of  Glasgow,  paid  me  a  visit  one  morning,  a  few  weeks  ago,
and  I  shewed  him  some  phenomena,  connected  with  willing,
on  some  good  subjects ;  but  they  did  not  satisfy  him.  Acci¬
dentally  Captain  C.  brought  his  daughter  to  consult  me.  She
was  pretty  sure  that  I  could  not  mesmerise  her  to  sleep.  I
had  never  seen  this  lady  before.  In  a  few  minutes  I  put  her
into  a  mesmeric  sleep.  As  these  people  had  no  objection  to
the  presence  of  the  Professor,  I  exhibited  the  case  before
him,  and  he  could  not  help  being  much  struck  with  it,  but
he  was  more  surprised  at  the  phenomenon  which  followed.
The  lady  and  her  father  had  taken  leave  of  me,  had  passed
through  the  two  rooms  leading  into  my  library,  and  were
approaching  the  hall  door  to  depart :  I  willed  that  the  lady
should  return  to  me,  which  she  did  immediately,  but  she
was  fast  asleep,  and  I  awoke  her  that  she  might  really  depart.

The  varieties  in  degree  of  susceptibility,  even  among  the
easily  mesmerizable,  appear  to  myself  to  be  very  striking.
On  Saturday  last,  the  4th  of  September,  a  young  woman,
aged  23,  with  dark  hair,  grey  eyes,  of  short  stature,  narrow
but  high  prominent  forehead,  large  organs  of  Benevolence,
Imitation  and  Mirth,  good  Hope  and  Conscientiousness,  small
Veneration  and  Firmness,  and  almost  wanting  in  Self-esteem,
with  a  large  social  group,  was  brought  to  me  by  an  old  patient.
She  said  she  was  a  complete  sceptic  on  the  subject  of  mesmer¬
ism,  and  defied  my  power, — laughing  immoderately  at  what
she  was  pleased  to  call  imagination  and  nonsense.  I  willed  her
to  sleep  in  half  a  minute,  and  she  became  a  sleep-waker,  mani¬
festing  the  prostration  which  so  often  accompanies  the  excite¬
ment  of  No.  1.  Her  language  was  warmly  affectionate,  but
her  muscular  power  was  so  completely  gone,  that  she  sunk
on  the  floor  unable  to  move.  I  went  up  to  her,  and  made
passes  upwards  along  the  spine  past  the  occiput,  and  she
awoke,  regaining  her  strength  instantly,  though  quite  uncon¬
scious  of  all  that  had  passed.  In  this  case,  the  will  exerted
to  induce  sleep  acted  at  once  on  the  prominent  organs  of  the
brain ;  and,  according  to  my  theory  of  sleep,  the  attractive
force  of  the  fluid  of  the  human  will  produced  sleep.

6.  I  make  it  a  rule  in  all  very  susceptible  patients  not  to
touch  the  head.  Mr.  Hands  thinks  that  the  excitement  of
the  cerebral  organs  with  the  finger  is  apt  to  spoil  the  pheno¬
mena  of  clairvoyance,  and  I  have  produced,  by  making  expe¬
riments  on  the  organs  and  willing  at  the  same  time,  intense


By  Dr.  Ashburner.


269


head-ache  in  such  patients.  With  patients  not  so  susceptible,
and  in  the  ordinary  state  of  vigilance,  if  there  be  not  a  power¬
ful  set  of  organs  of  Concentrativeness,  Self-esteem  and  Firm¬
ness,  some  most  remarkable  phenomena  are  exhibited  if  the
experimenter  looks  steadily  into  the  eyes  of  the  patient,  and
wills  hard  and  perseveringly,  with  due  concentration  of  ideas,
while  certain  organs  are  excited  to  action  by  the  application
of  the  magnetism  of  the  thumb  and  finger.  I  believe  that
in  this  manner  mischief  has  been  done  after  the  excitement
of  the  brain  in  females  by  the  administration  of  intoxicating
drinks,  without  any  of  the  mesmeric  manipulations.  Weak
persons  will  indulge  in  frothy  indignation  at  such  conduct,
and  invoke  cruel  punishments  on  the  heads  of  the  offenders.
They  would  do  better  to  take  measures  for  the  universal  dif¬
fusion  of  a  knowledge  of  phrenology ;  the  only  means  by  which
a  conviction  can  reach  the  masses  of  the  vital  importance  of
that  education  which  habituates  the  mind  to  vigilant  self-
control.  The  clergy  and  the  medical  profession  are  grossly
ignorant  of  this  subject.  Few  of  them  know  anything  of,  and
most  of  them  care  nothing  for,  this  most  important  science.
Chatter  may  be  indulged  in  on  the  philosophy  of  the  mind,
but  no  great  practical  good  can  arise  for  the  education  of  the
human  race,  until  the  great  truth  is  accepted,  that  the  impel¬
ling  motives  to  the  conduct  of  man  are  forced  upon  him.  The
essence  of  true  religion  is  charity.  Heal  piety  without  charity
is  an  absurdity.  The  wide  scope  of  real  charity  embraces
man's  pardon  for  all  errors  committed  under  the  impulse  of  a
too  powerful  temptation.  Surrounding  circumstances  operate
in  producing  motives  which  impel  the  organs  of  the  brain  to
manifest  their  functions,  and  these  result  in  conduct  which
might  have  been  different,  if  a  proper  self-control  had  been
inculcated  by  education  and  practised  by  habit.  These  views
are  logically  correct,  and  their  diffusion  is  retarded  only  by
the  sordid  money-clutchers  who,  like  trade  unionists,  take
the  narrowest  views  of  their  own  interests,  and  fear  for  their
professional  emoluments.  The  claims  of  classes  will,  in  due
time,  give  way ;  for  these  truths  must  prevail,  and  universal
brotherhood  be  established.

7.  Another  consideration  on  the  phenomena  of  will  relates
to  its  agency  in  assisting  the  ordinary  manipulations  of  mes¬
merism.  The  mesmeriser  who  can  concentrate  his  will  in  the
form  of  prayer,  is  much  more  powerful  than  he  who  flippantly
skips  his  ideas  from  one  subject  to  another.  The  organ  of
Veneration,  combined  in  its  action  with  Benevolence,  Firm¬
ness,  Self-esteem  and  Concentrativeness,  is  capable  of  pro¬
ducing  great  results  in  mesmerism.  On  the  4th  of  December


270


On  the  silent  influence  of  the  Will.


last  I  was  called  to  visit  Mr.  Pereira,  an  attache  of  the
Brazilian  Legation,  who  kindly  and  freely  permits  me  to
state  his  case  publicly.  He  had  considerable  low  fever,  ac¬
companying  a  serious  attack  of  bronchitis.  He  was  treated
according  to  the  accepted  rules  of  practice,  and  became  so
much  better  that  he  was  about  to  leave  London  on  a  visit  to
his  friend,  Mr.  John  Abel  Smith,  in  the  beginning  of  January.
Several  symptoms  had  led  me  to  infer  the  existence  of  a
faecal  abscess,  for  he  had  at  one  time  a  tumor  which,  after
the  evacuation  of  an  abundance  of  fetid  purulent  matter,  had
left  him  with  a  complexion  that  indicated  the  absorption  of
unhealthy  material  in  his  blood,  and  that  produced  a  relapse
of  symptoms  of  typhoid  fever,  which  prevented  his  visit  into
Sussex.  Additional  advice  was  obtained,  and  the  patient
fluctuated  a  little.  On  the  14th  of  January  it  was  found  that
he  had  been  three  nights  without  sleep,  although  large  doses
of  opium  and  other  narcotics  had  been  administered.  Mut¬
tering  delirium,  and  a  small  thready  pulse  of  120,  jactitation,
subsultus  tendinum,  were  his  prominent  symptoms.  His
vacant  stare  and  constant  picking  of  the  bed-clothes,  left  no
doubt  in  the  minds  of  his  kind  friends,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Van-
zeller,  into  whose  hospitable  house  he  had  been  removed,  that
the  fatal  termination  of  the  case  was  at  hand.  They  had
called  in  the  ecclesiastics  of  the  Boman  Catholic  Church,
who  had,  while  the  patient’s  senses  remained,  already  ad¬
ministered  to  him  the  consoling  rites  of  their  religion.  I
visited  my  patient  at  ten  o’clock  at  night,  and  was  asked  if
I  had  the  slightest  hope,  for  with  such  delirium  and  the  im¬
possibility  of  procuring  sleep,  it  was  thought  idle  to  expect  a
favourable  change.  The  scepticism  and  astonishment  of  the
host  and  hostess  were  strikingly  manifested  when  I  said,
“  Will  you  object  to  my  trying  mesmerism  ?”  They  thought
me  at  once  a  fool,  but  offered  no  objection,  and  at  half-past
ten  I  commenced  making  very  slow  passes  from  the  crown  of
the  head  to  the  pit  of  the  stomach.  I  continued  to  work  in¬
cessantly,  without  the  relaxation  of  a  minute,  for  three  hours
and  a  half,  accompanying  the  toilsome  and  fatiguing  labour
by  the  concentration  of  my  will  in  a  prayer  more  efficacious,
more  powerful,  and  not  less  holy,  than  that  of  the  best  bigot
who  ever  dared  to  put  his  own  weak  judgment  between  the  will
of  the  Creator  and  his  created.  I  was  successful :  the  patient
slept  until  past  seven  in  the  morning.  From  that  day  his
principal  medicine  was  mesmerised  water,  with  occasional
assistance  from  a  gentle  dose  of  castor  oil.  A  mesmeriser
attended  him  daily  for  some  weeks,  during  which  time  his
abscess  declared  itself  externally,  and  Mr.  Copeland,  who,


By  Dr.  Ashburner.


271


with  his  usual  skill  attended  him  and  saved  him  from  a  serious
operation,  can  testify  to  the  progress  which,  under  the  influ¬
ence  of  a  daily  mesmeric  sleep,  he  made  towards  a  complete
recovery.

I  cannot  too  much  applaud  the  kind  and  generous  senti¬
ment  which  actuated  Mr.  Pereira  in  desiring  his  case  to  be
known  to  the  world.  It  is  by  the  aid  of  enlarged  minds  like
his  that  the  stupid  prejudice  against  mesmerism  must  give
way.

I  shall  recapitulate  my  views  on  the  human  will  by  a  con¬
fession  of  faith.  I  believe  in  the  power  of  one  human  being
influencing  another  by  the  mere  effort  of  the  will.  I  believe
that  the  will  of  the  rattle-snake  can  charm  the  bird  in  such
wise  as  to  attract  the  little  creature  to  its  jaws.  This  is  an
example  of  the  attractive  force.  I  believe  that  in  man  the
exercise  of  the  will  is  determined  by  the  power  of  the  organs
of  Concentrativeness,  Self-esteem  and  Firmness.  I  believe
this  from  my  having  experienced  at  times  considerable  heat
about  the  head  in  those  organs  when  I  have  for  any  length¬
ened  time  willed  intensely.  On  some  occasions  I  have  had
the  upper  and  back  part  of  the  head  bedewed  with  lymph
after  intense  willing,  and  this  lymph  has  coagulated  into  a
thin  film  or  layer  of  cuticular  substance,  separable  into  a
flake  of  the  size  of  a  crown  piece.  I  believe,  from  numerous
facts,  that  the  will  is  either  attractive  or  repulsive,  according
to  phrenological  circumstances  and  conditions.  I  believe  that
the  power  of  the  will  may  be  operative  at  great  distances.  I
believe  that  a  law  exists,  limiting  the  power  of  the  will  in  all
these  cases.  I  believe  that  the  amount  of  wisdom  possessed
by  any  individual,  who,  never  having  philosophically  exam¬
ined  this  subject,  would  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the
power  is  dangerous  or  superhuman,  is  little  greater  than  that
of  an  ass.  I  believe  too  that  there  are  plenty  of  gobe-mouches
who  are  easily  gulled  by  designing  and  knavish  medical  men
and  lying  women  of  abandoned  character  to  think  that  certain
persons  have  exercised  this  power  to  a  dangerous  extent  for
base  purposes.  The  liability  to  be  influenced  to  action  by  the
power  of  the  will,  is,  I  believe,  excepting  perhaps  in  some
most  rare  cases,  dependent  on  reiteration  of  mesmeric  doses.
It  is  a  matter  of  education.  Many  a  person  has  been  mes¬
merised  who  has  not  obeyed  the  force  of  the  will.  Of  those
who,  after  many  repetitions  of  the  trials  of  will,  have  re¬
sponded  to  the  influence,  very  few  have  acquired  the  habit  of
a  facility  of  obedience.  When  this  facility  of  obedience  has
been  established,  education,  by  which  I  mean  repetition  of
the  exercise  of  obedience,  has  been  requisite  in  order  to  faci-


272


On  the  silent  influence  of  the  Will,


litate  the  performance  of  any  action  that  may  have  been
determined  upon  by  the  person  willing.  I  believe  that  Isa
Prudence  is  a  somnambulist  who  in  sleep-waking  has  been
educated  by  the  operation  of  will  to  assume  the  exquisite
poses  which  she  practises.  I  believe  that  a  prayer  and  a
curse  are  each  examples  of  intensified  human  will.  The  curse
heartily  given  by  a  bad  man  is  extremely  repulsive  to  a  by¬
stander,  but  a  fervent  prayer  is  most  attractive.  The  extent
and  power  of  the  will  is  limited  by  the  organs  of  the  brain  :
the  fervour  and  efficacy  of  prayer  being  dependent  on  the
power  and  intensity  of  action  of  the  nobler  organs  of  the
brain ;  so  that  it  is  as  impossible  for  a  bigot  to  attain  the
objects  of  a  large  and  fervent  prayer,  as  it  is  for  a  small
brain  to  compass  the  holy  thoughts  of  a  large  organ  of  Vene¬
ration,  combined  with  extensive  Benevolence  and  ample  in¬
tellect.

To  those  who  doubt  the  power  of  the  human  will,  and
have  in  their  scepticism  to  incur  the  risk  of  a  severe  head¬
ache,  I  would  propose  an  experiment  which  is  ascribed  to
Phenard,  and  which  I  have  performed  with  success.  The
experimenter  should  have  a  good  organ  of  Perseverance  and
of  Concentrativeness.  The  willing  must  be  intense,  unvaried
and  continuous.  Two  perpendicular  glass  rods,  each  nine
inches  in  height,  should  be  fixed  into  a  piece  of  flat  board,
at  a  distance  of  ten  inches  from  each  other;  and  another
glass  rod  should  be  placed  so  as  to  rest  horizontally  upon  the
two  perpendicular  rods.  The  diameter  of  these  should  be
that  of  the  common  laboratory  stirring  rods,  nearly  a  quarter
of  an  inch.  To  the  horizontal  bar  of  glass  should  be  tied  a
filament  of  silk,  the  finest  wove  by  the  silk-worm,  in  order
to  suspend  in  the  centre  of  the  space  enclosed  by  the  rods,
a  lady's  gold  wedding  ring.  The  apparatus  thus  arranged
must  be  allowed  to  remain  until  the  gold  ring  has  ceased  to
oscillate.  Then  the  experimenter  being  seated  at  a  distance
of  eighteen  inches,  must  will  that  the  ring  shall  approach
him  ;  and,  if  his  willing  power  be  sufficiently  strong,  the
experiment  will  succeed.  Sceptics  will  doubt,  but  time  will
establish  the  fact,  that  the  human  will  has  the  power  of
attracting  gold  when  suspended  from  glass,  from  a  rod  of
sealing  wax,  or  from  a  cedar  pencil,  arranged  in  the  manner
I  have  recommended.

I  wish  I  had  time  and  health  to  prepare  a  better  paper  of
facts  and  observations  on  the  subject  of  the  will ;  but,  as  I
have  not  just  now,  I  send  you  this  crude  and  hasty  letter
instead  of  it.


Magnetism  and  Mesmerism  in  Antiquity.  273

With  continued  respect  for  your  courage  and  integrity,  I
remain,  my  dear  Dr.  Elliotson,

Yours  sincerely,

John  Ashburner.

65,  Grosvenor  Street,

9th  Sept.,  1847.


Y.  Magnetism  and  Mesmerism  in  Antiquity.

TauT*  ovv  Kai  wept  ra  roiavra  ^vfjnravTa  ovre  pa^Lov  onws  n ore  TTecpvae
yiyvcocTKeiv,  out,  ’et  r is  yvoir],  veiOeiv  evireres  erepovs. — Plato  Leg.  xi.,  p.  933.

In  an  essay,  published  in  Nos.  X.  and  XI.  of  The  Zoisty
numerous  traces  were  collected  from  the  classics  of  a  certain
knowledge  of  mesmerism  among  the  ancients,  and  of  the
practice  of  it  as  an  art  and  mystery  by  individuals,  castes  or
classes.  Still  more  rife  were  found  to  be  the  notices  of  mes¬
meric  phenomena — of  those  strange  facts  in  human  physi¬
ology  and  nature  which  never  cease  to  excite  the  wonder  and
admiration  of  those  most  familiar  with  them,  and  which  an
age  too  proud  of  scientific  achievements  to  admit  of  myste^
in  anything,  seems  to  find  it  most  convenient  to  disparage  or
ignore.  Such  phenomena,  it  was  noticed,  come  before  us  in
antiquity  as  spontaneous,  or  resulting  from  certain  manipu¬
lations  or  other  exciting  means.  Among  the  latter,  the  in¬
halation  of  gaseous  vapours  was  particularly  noticed — these
are  the  words :

“  By  whatever  mechanical  or  other  contrivances  assisted,
the  chief  effect  in  these  instances  (the  oracles  of  Trophonius)
was  probably  due  to  a  gaseous  exhalation  of  the  same  kind
as  that  to  which  we  are  told  by  such  numerous  authorities
the  prophetic  excitement  of  the  Delphic  priestess  was  due.
.  .  .  These  instances  suggest  the  question  ivhether  experiments
may  not  be  advantageously  directed  to  test  the  efficacy  of  the
gases  in  inducing  mesmeric  coma  or  somnambulism ,  or  influ¬
encing  it  when  produced.  The  effects  of  nitrous  oxide  or
laughing  gas  are  very  analogous  to  mesmerism.  The  pre¬
sumption  in  favour  of  their  influence  in  this  way  is  strongly
supported  by  some  statements  of  Strabo.  (The  Charonian
Cave  of  Tralles,  &c.)”

Becent  events  furnish  the  best  comment  on  this  passage ;
at  present  let  us  pass  to  other  relations  of  the  subject.

In  the  essay  referred  to  I  designedly  avoided  entering  on
the  consideration  of  ancient  traces  of  mesmeric  phenomena
as  connected  with  magnetism.  The  subject  led  sufficiently
far  to  be  treated  by  itself,  and  modern  investigations  had  not
vol.  v.  x


274  Magnetism  and  Mesmerism  in  Antiquity.

yet  furnished  materials  for  comparison.  Attention  however
seems  now  attracted  to  the  subject,  and  sueh  notes  as  I  have
gathered  may  perhaps  help  to  stimulate  enquiry  and  experi¬
ment.  It  is  from  enquiry  and  experiment  on  all  collateral
and  analogous  influences  that  we  must  look  for  the  consum¬
mation  so  devoutly  to  be  wished,  the  power  of  controlling  the
agency  so  potent  for  human  good,  but  at  present  so  uncertain
and  precarious,  of  binding  in  discipline  the  power  that  now
too  often  makes  us  its  sport  and  butt.

The  Byzantine  Tzetzes  gives  the  following  statement  of
the  influence  of  the  magnet  in  inducing  a  state,  the  analogy
of  which  to  mesmerism  will  be  recognized  at  once.

H  payvys  'y  Xt^o?  pev  rov  crLSypov  eX/cvec

7]$  T7]V  0\K7]V  KCU  T7JV  pOpOyV  KCLl  €T€pa  /3pa%€a

kcu  ft)?  rccfeeXfcei,  i rpos  avrrjv  ryv  (pvcrLV  rov  crLSypov
rrporepov  irpoeLpyKopev  aXXa  Se  vvv  epovpev,

T7] V  Xl&OV  TCLVT7] V  T7]V  payvyCJGaV  (TTpeopLVr)  TLVOS  y VVCUOV

XafXpco  ^et?  'vtto  SepvLov  ry  yvvaiKL  epcora,
kcll  povy  iracra ?  eLiry  ctol  ravrys  ra?  apaprLa ?
y  ry ?  arpcopvy ?  ft)?  7 rpo?  ryv  yyv  e^oXLa^ryay  ra^eL,
av  S' ear  lv  apapryros,  av  S'  ear  l  rcov  airraLarcov ,

€KT€LV6L  rrepLfiaXovaa  yeLpas  rep  acp  rpa^yXcp,
olScl  kcll  aXXa  irepLaaa  % yvcov  re  kcll  fiarpaywv
oaa  7TOL6L  kcl^X evSovr <z?  avSpas  re  kcll  7 vvcllkcl?

Tot?  epcorcocrL  irpoaXaXeLv  avrcov  ra  eirraLapeva,
apK€L  Se  ra  payvyrLSos  K.r.X.

“The  magnet  stone  attracts  iron;  of  its  power  of  attraction  and
of  its  form,  and  how  it  draws  to  itself  the  natural  quality  of  iron,  we
have  already  spoken,  (iv.  400.)  We  will  now  mention  other  pro¬
perties.  Place  this  stone,  the  magnet,  secretly  beneath  the  coverlet
of  the  bed  of  a  woman,  and  interrogate  her,  and  she  will  declare  to
you  all  her  frailties,  or  immediately  slip  from  the  couch  down  upon
the  ground.  But  if  she  be  faultless,  if  she  be  one  of  the  untripping,
she  will  extend  her  arms  to  throw  them  round  your  neck.  I  am  also
acquainted  with  other  strange  properties  of  geese  and  frogs,  causing
men  and  women  when  asleep  to  declare  their  slips  to  those  who
question  them;  but  the  instance  of  the  magnet  is  sufficient,”  &c.

In  the  previous  passage  to  which  Tzetzes  alludes,  he  refers
to  the  Orphic  Lithica,  a  poem  on  the  nature  of  stones,  of
uncertain  date,  but  certainly  containing  traditions  of  very
early  date ;  and  here  we  find  much  the  same  statement,  but
in  more  comfortable  metre.

avrap  eycoye

er?7?  aXo^ov  KeXopaL  ere  SaypevaL  €L  e^rev  ayvov
avSpos  air  aXXorpLOLO  Xe^o?  KaL  acopa  <pvXaaaeL,


Magnetism  and  Mesmerism  in  Antiquity .  275

e?  yap  puv  Kopuo-as,  vn to  Bepivca  /car^reo  Xa^rpy,

XetXecriv  aecBcov  ^eX^cpLppoTov  arpepias  wByv,

y  Se  KaraKvcocaovaa  teat  yBe'i  n rep  puaX  \v  'vttvw,

ay,(pL  ore  XeiP  opeyovera  'TronirTVcraeiV  pLeveatver

et  o e  e  pua^Xocrwycnv  eXavvet  Bt  AtypoBiry,

vyfrefoev  69  yaiav  reravvacreTai  eKirpoireo-ovaa.  v.  312  sqq.

“But  I  tell  you,  to  prove  your  wife  whether  she  preserves  her
purity;  for,  taking  the  magnetic  stone,  place  it  secretly  beneath  the
coverlets,  chanting  gently  with  your  lips  a  soothing  song,  and  she,
although  slumbering  in  sweet  sleep,  will  endeavour  to  embrace  you
with  her  arms;  but  if  divine  Aphrodite  urges  her  to  infidelities,  she
will  start  from  the  couch  and  fall  extended  on  the  earth.”

The  story,  if  not  the  secret,  was  too  good  to  be  lost,  and
we  have  it  next  on  the  unobjectionable  authority  of  Albertus
Magnus,  who  thus  averreth  :

“  Si  vis  scire  utrum  mulier  tua  sit  casta  accipe  lapidem  qui
magnes  vocatur:  est  autem  ferruginei  coloris  et  invenitur  in  mari
Indico  et  aliquando  in  partibus  Theutoniae,  in  ilia  provincial  quse
Francia  Orientalis  vocatur.  Suppone  ergo  lapidem  hunc  capiti  muli-
eris,  et  si  casta  est  ipsa  maritum  amplexabitur,  si  autem  non,  statim
cadet  a  lecto.”  (Albert.  Mag.  de  Virtut.  Lapid.  Lugduni,  1598.)

The  agreement  of  this  witness  with  Tzetzes  is  the  more
curious,  as  elsewhere  he  supplies  what  his  predecessor  only
hints  at,  as  to  the  employment  of  frogs,  &c.,  in  these  laud¬
able  arts.  (Id.  de  Mirab.  Mundi,  p.  223.)

“  Ut  mulier  confiteatur  quae  fecerit:  ranam  aqualem  comprehende
vivam,  et  tolle  ejus  linguam  et  remitte  illam  in  aquam :  et  pone  illam
linguam  super  partem  cordis  faeminse  dormientis,  quae  cum  interro-
getur,  vera  dicet.”

That  is — Catch  a  live  frog,  and  having  taken  out  its
tongue,  return  it  to  the  water;  then  place  the  tongue  over
the  heart  of  the  sleeper,  and  she  will  answer  truly  any  ques¬
tions  you  may  put  to  her.

And  what  it  will  naturally  be  asked  is  th6  value  of  these
stories,  and  why  attach  more  weight  to  them  than  to  the  count¬
less  monstrosities  that  have  been  handed  down  through  a
chain  of  credulity  and  imposture,  pure  and  mixed.  Witnesses
of  much  better  character  than  even  the  Bishop  of  Batisbon
might  be  brought  to  depose  to  the  virtues  of  the  stone  gagates,
from  Gagse  in  Lycia,  of  so  cold  a  nature  that  the  eagle  of
Jove  placed  it  among  its  eggs,  otherwise  liable  to  be  cooked
by  the  heat  its  body  contracted  from  constantly  bearing
the  thunderbolt.

The  answer  is  simply  this ; — Whatever  the  stories  may  be
worth  in  themselves,  their  circumstances  involve  remarkable

x  2


276


Magnetism  and  Mesmerism  in  Antiquity.


coincidences  and  analogies  to  facts  with  which  we  are  familiar,
and  afford  a  presumption  that  whether  in  fact  or  fallacy  one
root  is  common  to  both.  They  present  the  mesmeric  phe¬
nomena  of  double  consciousness,  sympathy  and  repulsion  in
a  group,  (and  such  coincident  collocations  of  phenomena  are
not  frequently  fortuitous),  and  moreover,  in  connection  with
a  specific  agency — magnetic  influence ;  for  the  relation  of
which  to  mesmeric  there  are  as  pregnant  intimations  as  ever
existed  between  electricity  and  magnetism,  before  the  con¬
clusive  experiments  demonstrated  what  for  years  had  been
conviction.  Magnetism,  moreover,  comes  before  us  in  anti¬
quity,  associated  in  numerous  other  instances  with  mesmeric
phenomena  or  a  favourite  agent  in  the  hands  of  the  classes
whose  mesmeric  proceedings  have  already  attracted  our  atten¬
tion,  and  the  consideration  of  the  agreement  of  these  traditions
and  analogies  leaves  a  strong  impression  on  my  mind  that
modes  were  known  of  applying  magnetism  that  whether  uni¬
formly  or  not  induced  the  same  states  that  now  result  from
mesmeric  manipulation.

The  Egyptian  Delta,  as  we  saw  in  the  former  essay  was
a  chief  seat  of  ancient  mesmerism  from  long  before  the  age
of  iEschylus*  to  the  decline  and  fall  of  heathenism  in  the
Roman  Empire.  It  was  intimately  connected  with  the  worship
of  iEsculapius  and  Serapis  at  Canobus,  where  insanity  in

*  To  the  illustrative  passages  already  adduced  from  this  poet  may  be  added
one  in  the  Eumenides,  v.  103.  The  Ghost  of  Clytemnestra  exhibits  her  gashes
to  the  sleeping  Furies,  exclaiming, —

O pa  Se  nX'pyas  TacrSe  Kapfha  (Te&ew
euSovira  yap  <ppr)V  op.p.a(nv  Aap.TrpweTai‘
ev  'rj/Aepa  Se  p.oip*  airpocncoTros  fipoTcov.

“  Look  upon  these  wounds  with  thy  heart ;  for  the  sleeping  mind  even  of
mortals  is  brightened  with  eyes,  (becomes  clear-sighted,  clairvoyant)  while  by
daylight  there  is  no  foresight  of  fate.”

These  views  are  elsewhere  assigned  to  the  Pythagoreans  (Iamblich.  in  Vil.)
and  the  Peripatetics  (iElian.  v.,  H.  1 11,  c.  ii.)  who  held  that  the  soul  released
in  sleep  from  its  servitude  to  the  body  became  collected  in  the  region  of  the  thorax
and  then  prescient  or  prophetic.  The  seat  assigned  to  this  faculty  appears  in  the
titles  of  soothsaying  ecstatics,  arepuop.avTLs,  eyyacrrpip-avrLS  or  eyyacrTpip.v&os,
whence  the  translation  ventriloquist  or  belly-talker.  Plutarch,  def.  Oracc.,  c.  9,
notices  the  childish  absurdity  of  the  current  idea  that  the  Divinity  himself  entered
into  the  bodies  of  these  seers  and  there  spoke  (vTrocp&eyyea&ai).  They  were
called  in  his  day,  he  says,  Pythons,  IluSwas  (Cf.  Act.  Apost.  xvi.,  16).  In
numerous  cases,  both  mesmeric  and  spontaneous,  (see  Bertrand,  &c.,)  the  pa¬
tients  have  appeared  to  have  their  entire  sensibility  transferred  to  the  region  of
the  stomach,  and  in  some  instances  it  appears  as  a  second  centre  of  conscious¬
ness  which  they  address,  answer,  expostulate,  and  quarrel  with  as  a  distinct  per¬
sonality,  The  superstition  which  explained  these  phenomena  by  the  assumption
of  demoniacal  agency  was  only  one  degree  more  blind  than  the  philosophy  that
escapes  from  its  perplexity  by  imputing  unlimited  and  unqualified  roguery.  E7-
yacfTpip.v&os  is  the  word  employed  by  the  LXX  and  Josephus  in  speaking  of  the
woman  of  Endor  and  the  witches  of  the  Old  Testament  generally.


Magnetism  and  Mesmerism  in  Antiquity.  2 77

particular  was  treated  with  particular  attention  and  success
(Bottiger,  Kleine  Schriften).  With  the  Serapeion  here  was
probably  connected  the  Egyptian  Serapion,  who,  according
to  Dion  Cassius,  predicted  to  Caracalla  a  few  days  before  his
death,  his  assassin  and  successor ;  in  requital  he  was  thrown
to  a  lion ;  he  pointed  his  hand  to  the  savage  and  it  refused  to
touch  him,  and  he  was  in  consequence  put  to  the  sword
(Xeovn  7rapa/3\rf&eL<;,  eireu  8  ov%  rj^aro  avrov,  ttjv  XeiPa  A mvov,
co?  (j)an,  TTpoTecvavTos,  e(j)ovev6r].  Dio.  Cass.  p.  882.)

In  the  Alexandrian  Serapeion,  the  temple  renowned  for
the  instinct  of  remedies  acquired  by  sleeping  there,  there
was,  according  to  the  Christian  Suidas,  an  application  of  mag¬
netism  which  he  styles  an  instrument  of  deception  and  im¬
posture  ;  (7 r\avr)<;  kcu  Ka/covp<yias  p.rjxavr)  ga)  it  was  a  metal
statue  suspended  from  the  roof  of  the  temple  by  the  attraction
of  a  powerful  magnet  (Cedrenus  relates  the  same).  This  may
have  been  merely  a  juggle  of  the  Egyptian  priests  to  excite
vulgar  wonder  or  superstition ;  it  is  not  directly  connected
with  the  therapeutic  powers  they  professed,  but  the  probability
is  obvious  that  their  adoption  of  the  agency  of  magnetism
for  such  a  purpose  was  due  to  their  acquaintance  with  its
powers,  accounted  for  at  once  by  their  association  with  the
iEsculapians.

Tricca  in  Thessaly  was  regarded  as  the  principal  and
original  seat  of  the  families  who  claimed  descent  from  iEscu-
lapius,  and  thence  formed  settlements  in  various  parts  of
Greece,  cultivating  medicine  as  an  hereditary  profession.
(Strabo).  At  Tricca  the  magnet  abounded  and  was  par¬
ticularly  employed  in  affections  of  the  eyes.  (Plin.  H.N.).
It  was  also  found  in  Thessalian  Magnesia,  whence  its  name :
modern  travellers  observe  the  “  magnetic  ironstone  with  beau¬
tiful  crystals  on  the  sands  at  Negropont.”  (Walpole’s  Memoirs,
II.,  38).  Magnesia  was  the  country  of  the  centaur  Cheiron,
reputed  to  be  the  medical  instructor  of  iEsculapius  :  his
descendants  the  Cheironidse  were  another  medical  tribe  who
particularly  studied  the  properties  of  the  salutary  roots  and
herbs  with  which  Mt.  Pelion  was  said  to  abound.  The  monu¬
ment  of  one  of  these  (Panofka,  Heilgotter  der  Griech.)  presents
him  in  a  relation  to  his  patient  so  similar  to  a  modern  mes¬
meric  group  as  to  suggest,  with  other  considerations,  that  the
name  of  Cheiron,  the  Hand  Man,  was  derived  from  mesmeric
rather  than  from  simple  surgical  manipulation.

However  this  may  be,  we  find  in  connection  with  Cheiron
and  his  friends  a  curious  group  of  mesmeric,  magnetic,  elec¬
tric,  and  galvanic  details.  Weary  of  life  he  desired  to  die,


278


Magnetism  and  Mesmerism  in  Antiquity.


and  like  a  Rosicrucian  of  Godwin  transferred  his  immortality
to  Prometheus,  the  Lemnian  fire  god.  Prometheus  was  re¬
presented  as  wearing  a  ring  set  with  a  magnetic  stone;  later
ingenuity  explained  it  as  a  contrivance  of  Jove  to  cheat  the
devil,  to  restore  Prometheus  to  freedom  yet  avoid  breaking
the  oath  he  had  sworn,  that  he  should  remain  for  ever  attached
to  the  rock.  Lemnos  was,  however,  along  with  the  other
islands,  Imbros  and  Samothrace,  a  chief  seat  of  Cabiric  wor¬
ship,  the  symbols  of  which  also  appear  on  the  coins  of  Mag¬
nesia,  and  hence  the  ring  of  Prometheus  seems  originally  to
have  been  related  to  the  Samothracian  rings,  so  frequently
mentioned  in  connection  with  the  magnet  and  formed  usually
of  two  metals  (iron  and  gold  are  mentioned  Plin.  H.N.,  33,
1  ;  Artem.  11,  5 ;  Isidor.  19,  32 ;  Cic.  de  Offic.  3,  38;  Lucret.
vi.,  1041  et  ant.)  like  those  which,  if  we  believe  the  manu¬
facturers,  are  still  “recommended  by  the  faculty.”

In  the  Cabiric  initiation*  the  novice  was  seated  girt  with
a  purple  band,  and  all  the  initiated  present  formed  a  circle
round  him,  and  joining  hands  danced  in  a  ring,  singing
hymns,  (Schol.  Apoll.  1,  9,  7),  like  the  chorus  of  Comus.
The  ceremony  is  evidently  of  the  same  class  as  the  7 repuca-
- \apTrjpca  with  which  the  idea  of  purification,  whether  of
body  or  mind,  was  connected  and  as  described  in  a  fragment
of  Menander, — frg.,  p.  42.,  Mein.  Demosthenes  makes  al¬
lusion  to  a  Lemnian  woman,  who  professed  to  cure  the  epi¬
leptic  by  certain  charms,  apparently  by  some  similar  form  of
the  sympathetic  cure.  (Demosth.  in  Aristog.).

The  Cabiric  ceremony  was  called  ^povaiac*;  or  enthrone¬
ment,  and  seems  to  have  produced  (with  whatever  aids)  a
stupifying  effect.  Dio  Chrysostom  XII.  alludes  to  its  ex¬
traordinary  influence.  It  was  evidently  due  to  the  suggestive¬
ness  of  these  local  customs  that  Hephaistos  (Vulcan),  the
Lemnian  God  was  fabled  to  have  presented  his  ungracious
mother  with  a  throne  from  which  she  found  herself  unable  to
rise  until  it  pleased  the  artificer  to  reverse  the  spell.t  The
same  jest  returns  in  another  form  in  the  fraudful  couch  he
contrived  to  detain  Aphrodite  and  her  paramour  Ares.  Ares
and  Aphrodite  were  parents  of  Harmonia,  a  member  of  the
Cabiric  Triad,  and  hence  I  conjecture  that  it  was  from  some
Cabiric  fane  that  Claudian  derived  his  description  of  the
solemn  representation  of  their  magnetic  marriage.

*  Cf.  Welcker  Trilogie.

t  Theseus  and  Peirithous  descending  to  Hades  to  carry  off  Persephone,  sat
down  on  a  rock  and  could  not  get  up  from  it  again.  Schol.  Apollon.  1,  101.
Hence  Virgil's, — “  Sedet  seternurncpie  sedebit,  Infelix  Theseus.”


Magnetism  and  Mesmerism  in  Antiquity.


279


Aurati  delubra  tenent  communia  templi.

Effigies  non  una  Deis :  sed  ferrea  Martis
Forma  nitet:  Venerem  magnetica  gemma  figurat.

Illis  connubium  celebrat  de  more  sacerdos,  &c.,  &c.

Claud.  Edit.  v.

Hence  we  may  perceive  that  it  was  not  without  that  spe¬
cial  propriety  that  governs  all  the  local  allusions  of  Homer
that  Juno  brings  the  god  of  sleep  to  seal  the  eyes  of  the
Thunderer,  from  Lemnos  and  Imbros,  and  with  what  gift
more  appropriate  to  the  locality  should  she  tempt  him  than
a  throne  and  footstool,  to  be  made  for  him  by  Hephaistos
himself.

The  Samothracian  initiation  was  in  particular  repute  with
the  seafaring,  and  held  to  preserve  from  all  dangers  of  the
deep ;  it  was  from  the  ceremony  already  described  that  Homer
borrowed  the  scarf  presented  by  Leucothea  to  Ulysses  in  the
storm ;  she  directs  him  to  bind  it  round  him,  and  then  cast
himself  fearlessly  into  the  waves.  The  Homeric  irony  is  at
least  as  delicate  as  that  of  Socrates ;  the  prudent  hero  re¬
solves  that  it  will  be  time  enough  to  trust  in  the  providence
of  the  goddess  when  he  can  no  longer  retain  his  hold  of  the
raft.  His  successors  in  the  navigation  of  the  Greek  seas  are
too  apt  at  the  first  appearance  of  a  squall  to  relinquish  rudder
and  sail,  and  apply  to  their  Virgin  in  the  first  instance.

It  was  as  powers  protecting  the  mariner  that  the  Dioscuri
were  worshipped  at  Samothrace,  their  symbolical  fires  appear
on  the  coins  of  these  islands  as  well  as  of  Magnesia,  and
numerous  mythologists  before  me  have  recognized  in  them  a
type  of  the  phenomena  of  St.  Elmos  fire,  the  electrical  illu¬
minations  so  frequent  in  the  storms  of  these  latitudes.  Some
have  even  regarded  them  as  personifications  of  positive  and
negative  electricity.*

*  The  effects  ascribed  to  witchcraft  on  the  human  body  have  an  obvious  and
remarkable  resemblance  to  those  that  are  produced  by  mesmerism  ;  so  similar  are
they,  that  there  is  little  doubt  that  they  who  succeeded  in  exploding  witchcraft,
i.e.,  demoniacal  agency,  as  a  vera  causa,  blundered  grossly  and  stupidly  when
they  provided  no  more  sufficient  and  evidenced  causes  in  its  place  than  mere
fraud  and  folly.  No  conceivable  form  or  degree  of  fraud  and  folly  can  explain
away  facts  supported  by  evidence  in  numerous  cases,  that  has  all  the  qualities  of
the  perfect  and  conclusive.  Now  to  the  same  power,  falsely  and  unfortunately
conceived  as  it  was,  to  which  these  physiological  phenomena  were  ascribed,  popular
prejudice  in  all  ages  has  been  of  common  consent  in  ascribing  others,  the  relation
of  which  to  magnetism  and  electricity  is  now  so  well  known.  Storms  of  thunder
and  lightning  and  of  hail  are  of  this  class,  and  even  the  predilection  of  witches
for  cats  is  worth  notice.  The  origin  of  the  combination  probably  lies  in  the  fact
that  sensibility  to  sympathetic  influence  is  not  unaffected  by  electrical  crises  in
nature.

The  effects  ascribed  to  witch  ointments  and  perfumes  in  magie,  are  also  con¬
nected  with  such  evidence  as  to  render  them  worthy  of  study  as  matters  of  natural
philosophy.


280


Magnetism  and  Mesmerism  in  Antiquity.


The  name  of  Iasius,  the  curer,  one  of  the  Cabiri,  bro¬
ther  of  Electra,  intimates  a  medical  legend  which  was  pro¬
bably  brought  into  connection  with  the  curative  properties
of  the  Lemnian  earth  (terra  Lemnia  or  Sigillata).  Galen,
de  simp.  med.  fac.  ix.  1  ;  Plin.  xxxv.  13,  6,  &c.).

The  name  of  Electra  also,  the  mother  of  the  Cabiri,  is
remarkable,  whether  derivable  from  rjXeKrpos  as  a  mixed
metal,  or,  as  I  think  more  probable  from  its  connection  here,
from  amber,  of  which  the  attracting  power  was  well  known
to  the  ancients.  The  golden  necklace  of  her  daughter  Har-
monia,  so  renowned  in  mythology,  was  decorated  with  amber
drops ;  fiera  h'rfKeKTpoLGLv  eepro.

The  worship  of  gods  of  fire  at  Lemnos  was  encouraged
not  more  by  the  volcanic  character  of  some  parts  of  the
island  than  by  its  mineral  wTealth;  and  the  direction  thus
given  to  the  industry  of  its  inhabitants  had  its  usual  effect
on  their  legends  and  superstitions.  Natural  philosophy  at
the  present  time  takes  cognizance  of  the  peculiar  electrical
phenomena,  both  of  volcanic  eruptions  and  of  mines,  but
the  belief  or  superstitions  prevalent  among  miners  of  all  ages
and  countries,  show  that  the  human  body  in  certain  circum¬
stances  is  sensibly  affected  by  conditions,  and  apprehends
variations,  while  instruments  are  yet  undevised  to  exhibit
them.  Hence  wherever  we  find  metallurgy  in  antiquity,  we
find  the  legends  of  the  sympathetic  sensibilities  of  the  miner
or  the  smith.  Prometheus  was  honoured  as  a  fire  god  not
only  in  Lemnos  but  Attica  also,  where  we  find  him  connected
with  localities  and  families,  whose  names*  have  the  same
relation  to  his  character  as  the  original  name  of  Lemnos,
Aithalia,  (from  afoea^ai.)  To  one  of  these  families  belonged
the  poet  Sophocles,  whose  father  was  a  sword  maker,  and
wrho  in  the  drama  which  celebrates  his  native  Deme  (CEdipus
Coloneus)  glorifies  the  fire  god.  Titan  Prometheus.  In  such
a  connection  medical  and  mystical  characteristics  cannot  be
far  to  seek;  the  Prometheus  of  iEschylus  declares  himself
the  revealer  to  man  of  medicine,  divinations  and  metallurgy,
arts  which  are  all  found  in  connection  with  or  assigned  to  his


The  uneasiness  produced  by  the  conditions  of  approaching  storms  among  the
brute  creation  is  matter  of  constant  observation  ;  human  beings  are  liable  to  the
same  influence,  and  in  particular  instances  so  long  beforehand,  and  with  such
distinctness,  as  to  gain  for  them  from  superstition,  or  to  enable  them  to  arrogate
the  power  not  only  of  foretelling,  but  of  actually  producing  the  natural  convul¬
sions  that  ensue.  The  same  conclusions  would  be  drawn  from  the  observation  of
those  affected  sympathetically  of  the  coincidence  of  the  periods  of  greatest  power
exercised  upon  them  by  the  supposed  witches,  with  periods  of  actual  or  approach¬
ing  storms.

*  yEthalidai,  Eupuridai,  Hephaistiadai,


Magnetism  and,  Mesmerism  in  Antiquity.  281

worshipper,  Sopliocles.  Scholl  (Leben  Sophokles)  even  re¬
marks  the  frequent  introductions  of  metallic  allusions  and
mythology  in  his  tragedies.  He  held  the  Lepwawg  of  Halon,
a  hero  who  studied  under  Cheiron  as  a  medical  student,  along
with  YEsculapius.  (This  priestly  character  of  the  poet,  as
noticed  by  Visconti,  appears  to  explain  why  his  busts  show
him  with  a  fillet  round  his  head,  while  Euripides  is  without
one,  even  when  their  busts  are  united  Hermes-fashion.  Cf.
Archseolog.  Zeitung  38,  p.  231,  where  the  distinction  is  re¬
ferred  to  the  greater  number  of  his  tragic  victories.)  He
wrote  a  Paean  to  YEsculapius,  which  was  said  to  lull  the  winds
when  blowing  unseasonably,  and  thus  unfavourably  to  health ;
the  god  himself,  according  to  Plutarch,  was  called  his  guest,*
and  Philostratus  represents  him  as  painted  standing  with
Aesculapius  on  one  side,  and  the  Muse  on  the  other.  The
Athenians  after  his  death  gave  him  heroic  honours,  and
sacrificed  to  him  every  year  (Vit.  sophist.),  an  honour  which
among  other  Greek  poets  seems  only  to  have  been  accorded
to  Homer,  Anacreon,  and  Sappho.  Thus  connected  with
iEsculapian  legend  and  religion,  it  is  a  remarkable  coinci¬
dence  that  he  comes  before  us  as  a  clairvoyant.  According
to  Ieronymus,  a  golden  crown  that  had  been  stolen  from  the
Acropolis  was  discovered  through  a  dream  of  Sophocles,  in
which  Heracles  indicated  to  him  the  house  in  which  it  was
concealed ;  he  received  a  talent,  the  proclaimed  reward,  and
with  it  erected  a  fane  of  Heracles  the  informer ;  doubtless,
as  Welcker  conjectures,  the  medical  Dactyl  Heracles.

To  return  to  the  Magnetes,  whether  of  Europe  or  Asia.
Tantalus  makes  a  great  figure  in  their  mythology  ;  and  after
what  has  been  seen  of  the  familiarity  of  the  tribe  with  the
employment  of  magnets,  there  are  some  details  in  his  legend
which  appear  to  have  been  suggested  by  the  same  class  of
ideas.  The  fruit  that  in  the  Homeric  mythus  constantly
receded  from  his  lips  reminds  of  magnetic  repulsion,  and
magnetism  seems  the  most  obvious  means  of  making  an
actual  representation  of  his  punishment,  as  he  was  painted
at  Delphi  with  a  huge  rock  suspended  above  his  head,  and
at  every  moment  appearing  about  to  fall.

Now  when  we  consider  with  Panofka  the  analogy  of  this
group  to  Atlas  and  his  polos ,  and  the  disk  over  the  head  of  a
giant  on  a  coin  of  the  Ionian  Magnetes,  and  moreover  that
Atlas  and  Tantalus  have  a  common  root  signifying  to  bear  or
suffer,  to  weigh,  to  suspend,  to  balance,  there  can  be  little
difficulty  in  assenting  to  his  conclusion,  that  Atlas  and  Tan¬
talus  are  but  varied  forms  of  the  same  original  mythical  idea.

*  Hence  his  title  Dexion.


282  Magnetism  and  Mesmerism  in  Antiquity.

Thus  in  Tantalus  we  appear  to  arrive  at  an  ancient  recogni¬
tion  of  magnetism  as  a  cause  having  a  certain  relation  to  the
suspension  in  space  of  the  heavenly  bodies.  This  may  be
the  meaning  of  the  philosopheme  ascribed  to  Tantalus,  and
referable  to  the  population  he  was  connected  with,  that  the
sun  was  a  stone,  (Tzetzes  v.  463,)  which  reminds  of  the  con¬
jectures  of  Faraday,  that  the  daily  aberration  of  the  magnet
may  perhaps  be  due  to  the  sun.

Tantalus,  it  was  said,  was  buried  under  Mt.  Sipylus,  rich
in  metals  (Strabo  xiv.  p.  680),  formerly  called  Ceraunion,
not  without  reference  to  its  tenant,  whose  fathers  name  is
given  by  Pausanias  (ii.  22,)  as  Brontes;  titles  these  perfectly
in  harmony  with  the  electro-magnetic  character  of  the  Titan.
It  seems  to  have  been  with  reference  to  such  speculations,
that  Claudian  in  the  fragment  already  referred  to,  proposes
to  explain  all  meteorological  and  astronomical  phenomena  by
the  properties  of  the  magnet.

I  may  remind  here  that  it  was  in  Magnesia  that  Pausa¬
nias  mentions  the  ancient  statue  of  Apollo,  which  in  some
way  communicated  to  the  priests  of  the  fane  extraordinary
strength,  enabling  them  to  perform  feats  of  combined  strength
and  agility,  which  recall  the  strangely  authenticated  accounts
of  the  muscular  energy  and  resistance  of  mesmerised  patients.

The  renown  of  the  Magnesians  also  for  imitation  or  pan-
tomimetic  talents,  (Strabo  xiv.  i.  p.  187 ;  Athense.  p.  620 ;
i.  Xenoph.  Exped.  Cy.)  is  a  parallelism  with  some  of  the
most  striking  phenomena  of  mesmerism.

Perhaps  we  have  already  wandered  far  enough ;  a  few
more  notes  however  not  less  to  the  purpose  than  what  have
gone  before,  may  preclude  the  necessity  of  returning  to  the
subject.

In  the  early  legendary  history  of  Greece,  and  especially
of  Samothrace,  frequent  mention  occurs  of  certain  mysterious
powers  under  the  titles  of  Dactyls,  Telchins,  Sintians,  &c.,
who  are  also  deeply  concerned  in  the  mythology  of  Thrace
and  the  Troad.

To  the  Dactyls  or  Finger  men  are  assigned  names  ex¬
pressive  for  the  most  part  of  medical  influence,  Heracles,*
Pseonius,  Epimedes,  Iasius,  Idas  or  Arcesilas.  Their  names
spoken  calmly  one  after  the  other  were  used  as  charms  by
frightened  persons;  they  gathered  medicinal  herbs,  healed
wounds,  prepared  medicines,  particularly  salutary  drinks.

*  From  the  connection  of  the  Dactyls  with  the  Cabiri,  I  suspect  that  the
Heracles  who  was  said  to  close  the  portal  of  Cabiric  Demeter  at  Mycalessus  every
night  was  the  dactylic  Heracles,  and  that  the  secret  of  the  trick  was  some
magnetic  arrangement.  (Paus.  X.)  It  was  from  this  power  that  the  magnet  was
also  called  Ai&os  HpanAua.


Magnetism  and  Mesmerism  in  Antiquity.


283


Their  numbers  are  various,  and  they  are  variously  divided
into  right  and  left  Dactyls,  (or  Fingers,)  the  right  dissolving
the  charms  made  by  the  left,  and  into  male  and  female.

Like  other  personages  of  the  same  class  they  are  closely
connected  with  mines  and  metallurgy,  they  discovered  iron
in  Cyprus,  made  the  first  statues  of  the  gods,  of  metal,  and
the  cymbals  of  the  Idsean  mother,  and  in  some  instances  bore
the  names  Kelmis,  Damnameneus  and  Acmon ;  Smith,  Ham¬
mer  and  Anvil.

Gyges  of  Lydia  was  son  of  Dascylos  (another  form  of  the
name),  and  the  story  of  his  ring  by  which  he  could  render
himself  invisible,  is  perhaps  most  easily  explained  by  sup¬
posing  that  it  arose  in  consequence  of  connecting  some  per¬
plexing  cases  of  what  we  shall  now  call  clairvoyance  with  the
Samothracian  ring.

The  Telchins,  by  their  names  the  soothers  or  charmers,
are  beings  of  much  the  same  class;  the  word  was  also  used  as
signifying  stupor,  dizziness,  deadly  coma,  or  rigidity.*  They
were  said  to  destroy  plants  and  animals  by  sprinkling  them
with  magic  water,  and  to  fascinate  with  the  evil  eye.  (Ovid.
Metam.  vii.)  Like  the  Dactyls,  they  were  discoverers  and
workers  in  brass  and  iron,  and  made  statues  of  the  gods.

Like  the  Dactyls  also  they  have  but  an  ill  name  in  legend,
yet  there  are  some  reasons  for  doubting  how  far  they  originally
possessed  or  deserved  it.  Some  authorities  associate  the
Dactyls  with  Kronos  as  beneficent  spirits,  (Plut.  de  fac.  lu. ;
Strab.  x.  726.)  and  the  occurrence  of  the  title  Telchinian  as
appropriated  to  Apollo,  Here  and  Athene,  proves  that  in  some
forms  it  bore  a  better  interpretation.


*  The  gentle  murmur  of  a  soothing  verse  &eA l»i[xfipoTov  adr/v  is  part  of  the
magnetizing  formula  of  Tzetzes  already  quoted  : —

K ara&e\£is,  enchantment,  charming  by  soothing,  is  a  word  appropriate  to
sympathetic  cures.  (Lucian  Philops.  c.  9.)  twv  e/c  TrepioSou  nupercw  ras  Kara-
i \teA£eis  /ecu  ffovfiewow  lacreis  ttai  raWa  oiroffa  kou  ai  ypaes  7]8r)  7 roiovcri.  The
idea  of  soothing  is  remarkably  prominent  in  the  practice  of  the  Handman
Cheiron  rovs  p.ev  p.a\a.Kcus  e-rraoidais  a/x<pe -jtccv.  (Pind.  Pyth.  iii.  51.)  The  medi¬
caments  that  Achilles  and  thence  Patroclus  had  learnt  from  him  are  -pma.  <pa.pp.aKa.
(Iliad  xi.  830),  and  yet  their  mildness  appears  to  be  due  to  the  mode  of  manipu¬
lating  and  applying  them ;  Patroclus  yielding  to  the  request  of  Eurypylus  to
apply  to  his  wound  “  the  mild  medicaments”  of  Cheiron,  throws  upon  it  as  a
styptic  a  bitter  root,  which,  however,  he  having  rubbed  it  in  his  hands,  (reducing
it,  it  is  to  be  supposed,  to  powder,)  assuages  the  pain  besides  stanching  the  blood,

€7 n  5e  pi(av  aAe  TTiKpr\v ,

%ep<rt  Siarpiif/as,  oduvrjcpaTov.  k.t.A.

The  wound  of  Odysseus  is  stanched  by  a  charm  such  as  employed  by  Cheiron  ;
(Odyss.  xix.  457  e7raotS??.)  The  control  of  the  haemorrhage  is  one  of  the  most
remarkable  characteristics  of  the  effect  of  mesmerism  on  patients  undergoing
operations.


284


Magnetism  and  Mesmerism  in  Antiquity.


The  Telchins  were  sons  of  the  sea  (Diodor.  Sic.  v.  55  and)
Ovid  Metarn.  vii.


Ialysios  Telchinas,

Quorum  oculos  ipso  vitiantes  omnia  visu

Jupiter  exosas  fraternis  subdidit  undis.

Nonnus  names  as  their  father  the  sea  god  Poseidon  (xxvii.  106)
and  some  legends  told  how  the  infant  Poseidon  was  com¬
mitted  to  their  care  by  Rhea,  (Schol.  Apollon,  i.  1141)  or
that  in  human  form  he  loved  their  sister  Halia  (marina)  who
bore  him  six  sons  and  one  daughter  Rhodos  who  gave  her
name  to  the  island  that  was  most  renowned  for  their  tra¬
ditions  ;  to  their  art  also  he  owed  his  trident,  (Strabo,
xiv.  654.)

These  relations  indicate  allied  cults,  and  may  also  be
connected  with  the  magical  operations  ascribed  to  the  Tel-
chins  by  sprinkling  with  magic  water,  (Tzetzes  Chil.  113,
“  with  their  hands,”  TraXagcus  kcu  ^epai,  whence  their  title
UaXa/juvcuoL  Handmen.

But  what  is  most  remarkable  is  the  trace  we  find  of  this
connection  in  Homer.  Homer  nowhere  mentions  the  Telchins,
nor  the  Dactyls  either,  but  the  word  'be'Xryeiv  the  root  of  their
name,  is  frequent  in  his  poems,  and  constantly  expresses
magical  influence  of  the  same  character  that  is  ascribed  to
the  Soothers  or  Telchins.  By  such  influence  (fcarcfaeXijas)
Kirke  transforms  the  companions  of  Odysseus  into  brutes,  a
power  assigned  by  Diodorus  to  the  Telchins  themselves,  and
such  is  the  influence  of  the  rod,  (the  golden  rod,  the  metal
gold  is  always  recurring  in  these  magical  fables)  which  closes
the  eyes  of  mortals  in  sleep,  and  rouses  them  again,  (Odyss.
xxiv.  4.)  The  same  word  is  used  to  express  the  enchant¬
ments  of  the  Sirens.  It  occurs  however  in  connection  with
Poseidon  in  a  manner  the  more  remarkable  from  his  my¬
thical  connection  with  the  Telchins.  Indeed  in  his  pro¬
ceedings  in  the  xiii.  Iliad,  where  he  issues  from  the  sea  to
assist  the  Greeks  during  the  sleep  of  Zeus,  procured  by  the
deceit  of  Here,  he  appears  a  proper  Telchinian  power.
Assuming  a  human  form  as  in  his  amour  with  the  sister  of
the  Telchins,  he  appeared  now  as  Calchas,  now  as  Andraimon
“in  body  and  voice,”  encouraged  the  Greeks,  infused  strength
and  elastic  vigour  into  the  Ajaces  by  a  blow  of  his  sceptre,
and  when  Alcathoos  was  opposed  to  Idomeneus  the  god  sub¬
dued  him,  charming  his  heammg  eyes  and  chained  his  glorious
limbs,  he  could  neither  fly  backwards  or  avoid  a  blow,  but
as  he  stood  stock  still  like  a  pillar  or  a  lofty  tree,  the  hero
Idomeneus  pierced  him  in  mid-breast  with  his  spear,  &c.


Magnetism  and  Mesmerism  in  Antiquity.  285

eSa/jiacro-e,

ocrcre  (fraecva,  7reSr]crG  Se  (ficuSc/na  yvca,
ovre  yap  e^oTnaco  cfrvy eecv  hvvar  ovft aXeaa^ai
aW'coare  arrj\7]V,  rj  SevSpeov  V'^rLTTGTrjXov
arpepbas  ecrraor ,  /c.t.X.

These  coincidences  appear  to  me  to  exhibit  one  of  the
many  indications  traceable  in  Homer  of  mythic  associations
which  suggested  his  incidents  and  illustrations,  and  which,
with  his  original  audience,  familiar  as  they  were  with  current
traditions,  he  intended  them,  only  not  too  obtrusively,  to
suggest.  The  delicacy  of  taste  and  tact  with  which  this
is  managed,  may  be  appreciated  to  a  certain  extent  by  the
instances  where  the  undercurrent  of  irony  is  detected  for  a
moment  at  the  surface,  to  relieve,  never  to  encumber  the
pure  flow  of  poetry,  but  these  recoverable  instances  serve  at
the  same  time  to  convince  us  how  much  of  the  Iliad  and
Odyssey,  as  heard  by  a  contemporary,  is  necessarily  lost  for
ever.

But  to  return  to  our  magical  personages,  though  only  to
dismiss  them.  A  more  minute  analysis  of  their  characteristics
than  is  requisite  or  in  place  here,  confirms  the  conclusion  of
Creuzer  that  the  titles  Dactyls,  Telchins,  &c.,  are  only  names
differing  according  to  place  and  language,  of  magical  priests
and  formers  of  humanity  in  Asia  Minor  and  Greece;  pos¬
sessors  probably  of  a  knowledge  of  nature  beyond  what  they
divulged,  and  pretenders  to  theurgic  power  by  proper  cre¬
dulity,  it  may  be,  but  never  without  a  mixture  of  calculating
imposture.  Classes  thus  characterized  have  at  various  stages
of  the  world's  progress  rendered  good  service  to  civilization ;
their  career  however  is  necessarily  transient  and  their  fate
certain.  The  demoralization  to  which  by  their  principles
they  are  liable,  brings  first  discredit  and  then  downfall,  and
thus  it  seems  to  have  been  that  the  arts,  which  at  one  time
commanded  the  reverence  of  extensive  tribes  and  upheld,  it
may  be,  a  proud  hierarchy,  become  objects  of  general  hatred
and  suspicion,  fall  back  into  obscurity,  and  carry  with  them
into  neglect  for  ages  the  germs  of  truth  and  glimpses  of
nature's  powers  and  working,  that  only  require  to  be  justly
appreciated  to  set  science  fairly  and  happily  on  its  way.

W.  Watkiss  Lloyd.


77,  Snow  Hill,  London.


(  286  )


VI.  Case  of  St.  Vitus’s  Dance  cured  by  Mesmerism  in  less  than
a  Month,  after  Seven  Years  of  suffering,  and  upwards  of
Nine  Months  passed  in  several  Hospitals.  By  Madame
Marie.

Catharine  Hogan  was  sent  to  me  on  the  4th  of  January,
1847,  with  a  note  from  my  friend,  Mr.  Briggs,  entreating
me  to  try  what  mesmerism  would  do  for  her,  and  giving  me
a  short  account  of  her  case.  It  appeared  that  seven  years  pre¬
vious,  when  she  was  four  years  of  age,  she  had  been  frightened
on  her  return  from  market  by  a  boy  snatching  her  basket  of
vegetables  and  running  off  with  it,  on  which  occasion  she
wandered  about  the  streets  for  several  hours,  fearing  to  re¬
turn  to  her  mother,  who  at  last  discovered  her  and  took
her  home.  Some  days  afterwards  she  fell  in  with  a  party  of
boys  and  girls  romping,  one  of  whom  laid  his  stick  across
her  shoulders.  The  consequence  was  a  fit,  that  lasted  three
quarters  of  an  hour ;  on  recovering  she  was  attacked  with
St.  Vitus's  Dance,  and  was  taken  to  University  College  Hos¬
pital,  where  she  became  an  out-patient  under  Dr.  Davis.  She
seemed  to  recover,  but  two  years  afterwards,  having  a  severe
relapse,  she  went  to  the  Middlesex  Hospital  as  an  in-patient,
where  she  remained  four  months.  They  then  made  her  an  out¬
patient,  but  the  distance  was  too  great  to  permit  her  attend¬
ance.  She  then  was  admitted  into  St.  Bartholomew's,  and
remained  there  nine  weeks  :  returned  to  the  Middlesex  for
seven  weeks,  and  University  College  Hospital  for  six  weeks, —
making  in  all  38  weeks.  Middlesex,  16  weeks;  Bartholo¬
mew's,  9  weeks;  Middlesex,  7  weeks;  University,  6  weeks.

When  Catharine  came  to  me  she  was  about  12  years  of
age,  and  I  then  took  down  her  appearance  and  symptoms  as
follows,  premising  merely  that  I  was  encouraged  to  under¬
take  the  case  from  the  late  observations  of  Dr.  Elliotson  in
the  January  number  of  The  Zoist,  who  there  mentioned  his
success  in  curing  the  same  disease  by  mesmerism,  though
failing  in  producing  sleep.

On  the  4th  day  of  last  January  I  began  my  operations  on
her,  and  henceforth  shall  transcribe  from  my  diary,  com¬
mencing  by  the  statement  of  her  case  and  appearance  as  I
first  formed  my  opinion.

Catharine  Hogan,  age  twelve ;  short,  thick-set ;  tempera¬
ment  sanguineo-lymphatic ;  hair  and  eyes  dark,  the  latter
expressing  idiotcy;  much  trembling  and  irregular  movements
of  the  limbs ;  continual  fits  of  hysteric  laughter  and  crying ;
her  hands  incapable  of  holding  anything ;  frightened  to  be
alone  or  in  the  dark ;  suffering  from  frequent  head-aches,


Case  of  St.  Vitus’s  Dance  cured  by  Mesmerism.  28 7

sickness  of  the  stomach,  giddiness,  palpitation  of  heart,  much
pain ;  bowels  costive,  not  being  relieved  more  than  once  in
ten  or  fourteen  days.

January  4th,  1847.  Mesmerised  Catharine  Hogan  for
about  half  an  hour,  making  long  passes  from  the  vertex  of
the  head  downwards,  along  the  chest,  arms,  the  region  of
the  lungs,  down  the  spine,  breathing  on  the  occiput  and  the
shoulders.  She  complained  of  faintness  and  sickness,  but  felt
warm,  whereas  she  was  very  cold  when  she  came.

5th.  C.  said  she  had  felt  very  drowsy  after  she  left  me
yesterday,  and  slept  at  night  better  than  usual.

6th.  C.  says  that  on  her  return  home  yesterday  she  slept
an  hour,  and  very  soundly  during  the  night ;  she  seemed  to
feel  my  influence  more  than  usual  to  day.

7th  and  8th.  I  was  prevented  mesmerising.

9th.  I  found  it  very  difficult  to  fix  her  attention ;  she  com¬
plained  that  I  made  her  eyes  smart,  and  my  passes  were  like
pins  and  needles  pricking  her ;  at  last  however  she  went  into
a  sound  sleep,  and  though  she  did  not  perceive  the  entrance
of  a  stranger  and  his  departure,  yet  she  did  not  lose  all  con¬
sciousness.  She  is  naturally  very  cold,  but  a  few  passes  are
sufficient  to  excite  warmth,  and  the  trembling  of  her  limbs
is  quite  cured ;  she  can  now  nurse  the  baby,  and  hold  any¬
thing  in  her  hands ;  her  bowels  act  daily ;  she  is  no  longer
so  nervous ;  this  day  on  my  exciting  the  organ  of  Colour,
she  saw  bright  light  like  stars.

10th.  Sunday.

11th.  Catharine  says  she  went  to  sleep  several  times  on
Saturday,  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour  at  a  time,  but  was  faint
and  sick  yesterday.

13th.  Mesmerised  her  and  she  slept  half  an  hour.

15th.  She  felt  cold,  and  her  left  arm  was  very  painful;  a
few  passes  completely  warmed  her ;  all  her  nervous  trembling
is  now  imperceptible.

Till  the  20th.  No  perceptible  change ;  on  that  day  she
slept  profoundly  for  a  long  time,  and  when  she  went  home
slept  again  for  four  hours.  Whenever  she  experiences  great
coldness,  I  breathe  on  her  through  muslin,  which  invariably
warms  her,  and  relieves  the  pain.

February  the  2nd.  Catharine  fell  asleep  in  three  minutes
by  my  merely  looking  at  her;  she  has  been  so  much  improved
that  I  now  mesmerise  her  twice  a  week  only ;  she  has  not  had
any  trembling  since  the  first  week  of  being  mesmerised ;  she
has  taken  no  medicine ;  her  bowels  act  regularly ;  her  nerves
are  strengthened,  and  she  does  not  mind  being  alone  or  in
the  dark  indeed  she  voluntarily  visited  a  friend  who  had  died,


288


Cures  of  various  Diseases  with  Mesmerism.


and  stayed  with  the  body.  The  last  sign  of  St.  Vitus’s  Dance
was  on  the  29th  of  January,  this  is  the  3rd  day  of  Sep¬
tember  :  from  the  month  of  February  last,  that  is  from  the
28th,  I  did  not  see  her  till  I  sent  for  her,  August  24th ;  her
appearance  was  very  different  from  what  it  was  last  J anuary ;
she  has  no  pretensions  to  beauty,  but  had  now  the  counte¬
nance  of  an  intellectual  person.  Finding  her  delicate  I  pro¬
posed  to  resume  mesmerism,  and  she  wras  under  my  influence
immediately.

Marie.


22,  Thayer  Street,  Manchester  Square,
Sept.  7,  1847.


VII.  Removal  of  rigidity  of  the  Neck,  debility  and  dyspeptic
disease  of  the  Heart,  irritation  of  the  Bladder,  and  severe
Pains.  By  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson.

I.  Relaxation  of  rigidity  of  the  Muscles  of  the  Neck.

A  poor  woman  who  was  severely  burnt  about  the  neck  and
face  three  years  ago,  in  consequence  of  which  the  mus¬
cles  had  become  so  rigid  that  she  could  not  raise  her  head  or
move  it  to  the  right  or  left,  and,  from  the  time  of  the  acci¬
dent  had  never  been  able  to  masticate  any  food  that  was  hard
or  solid,  obtained  immediate  relief  from  mesmerism  :  that  is,
the  muscles  were  all  completely  relaxed,  she  could  move  her
head  about  freely,  and  could  masticate  anything.  The  injury
was  so  severe  that  pieces  of  bone  are  continually  exfoliating
and  working  out ;  the  irritation  caused  by  this  reproduces  to
a  degree  the  rigidity  of  the  muscles  of  the  neck,  but  the  ope¬
ration  of  mesmerism  soon  relieves  her,  and  renders  her  com¬
fortable  for  days.  The  relaxation  of  the  muscles  was  very
extraordinary.

II.  Cure  of  extreme  debility  and  derangement  of  the

Digestive  Organs.

A  case  of  extreme  debility  was  much  benefited  by  the
operation  of  mesmerism.  A  young  man,  one  of  my  tenants,
became  suddenly  so  weak  that  he  was  not  able  to  go  about
his  usual  avocations.  This  debility  increased  till  it  was  with
difficulty  that  he  could  walk  about.  He  had  constant  aching
of  the  limbs  from  the  slightest  exertion,  a  sense  of  faintness,
cold  sweats,  and  loss  of  appetite,  and  his  evacuations  per¬
fectly  black.  His  sister  was  attacked  in  a  similar  way  last
year,  and  then  died  of  consumption.  It  was  more  than  three
months  from  the  commencement  of  his  illness  that  I  first  saw
him.  He  had  run  the  round  of  physic  and  tonics  by  the


289


By  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson.

advice  of  his  medical  men,  but  had  only  grown  the  weaker.
The  first  time  I  mesmerised  him  he  felt  stronger,  and  during
the  process  the  aching  sensation  up  his  limbs  was  removed.
He  rapidly  improved.  On  the  third  day  his  appetite  returned,
his  evacuations  were  natural,  and  he  was  able  to  ride  eight
miles.  I  continued  to  mesmerise  him  almost  daily  for  three
weeks,  at  the  end  of  which  time  he  had  nearly  quite  recovered
his  strength,  being  able  to  ride  any  distance  and  to  walk
tolerably  well.  The  only  trace  of  weakness  that  he  com¬
plained  of  was  in  his  legs  if  he  walked  any  distance.  As  I
left  home  about  that  time  I  sent  him  to  the  sea  for  change
of  air.

III.  W onderful  benefit  derived  from  Mesmerism  in  serious

Disease  of  the  Heart.

The  patient  had  been  afflicted  several  years  :  but  the  com¬
plaint  had  advanced  rapidly  during  the  few  last  weeks.  When
I  saw  her  she  had  been  confined  to  her  bed  six  weeks,  suffer¬
ing  great  agony  in  her  head,  shoulders  and  back ;  constant
“  palpitation  of  the  heart  and  fluttering  in  the  chest a
sense  of  suffocation  so  great  that  she  was  constantly  obliged
to  be  raised ;  her  legs  and  body  had  been  much  swollen  for
some  weeks;  she  had  been  unable  to  use  them.  She  was
instantly  relieved  from  her  pain,  and  half  an  hour  sufficed  to
restore  use  to  her  legs;  she  gradually  from  that  day  im¬
proved  ;  in  a  month  she  was  able  to  walk  daily  from  her  house
to  mine  and  back  again,  which  is  rather  more  than  a  mile —
a  thing  which  she  could  do  with  difficulty  a  year  ago.  She
enjoys  herself,  can  attend  to  her  family,  and  seems  daily  to
gain  strength.  This  case  was  pronounced  by  the  profession
as  incurable  from  the  first ;  but,  as  we  have  already  overcome
so  much  that  was  then  pronounced  impossible,  I  hope  that  in
a  short  time  I  may  be  able  to  add  that  she  is  quite  returned
to  health.*

IY.  Removal  of  irritation  of  the  Bladder.

This  is  another  instance  proving  the  use  of  mesmerism  in
inflammation  of  the  bladder.  A  friend  of  mine  had  suffered
a  very  severe  attack,  from  which  he  was  slowly  recovering
when  he  was  obliged  to  go  to  London  on  business.  I  chanced
to  be  there  at  the  time.  His  journey  brought  back  the
symptoms,  and  he  wrote  to  me  saying  how  ill  he  was.  I
went  to  see  him ;  he  was  suffering  from  constant  irritation,

*  We  intreat  our  readers  to  compare  this  case  with  those  in  Yol.  I.,  p.  405  ;
and  Yol.  V.,  p.  161. — Zoist.

YOL.  V.  Y


290


Cures  of  various  Diseases  with  Mesmerism .


great  pain,  and  tenderness  of  the  abdomen ;  so  much  so  that
he  could  scarcely  bear  the  pressure  of  the  bed-clothes.  I
asked  him  to  let  me  try  whether  I  could  do  him  any  good.
He  consented,  and  in  half  an  hour  the  tenderness  and  'pain
were  removed.  I  remained  with  him  two  hours,  during  which
time  he  had  no  irritation  nor  pain;  though,  previously  to  my
visit,  the  irritation  was  constant  and  the  pain  unvarying.
The  following  day  he  was  so  much  better  that  he  was  able  to
go  out  and  attend  to  the  business  which  had  brought  him  to
town,  and  on  the  day  after  he  was  well  enough  to  return
home.*


V.  Relief  of  Pain.

This  is  another  curious  instance  of  the  power  of  mesmer¬
ism  to  relieve  pain.  I  was  told  that  an  old  man  in  the  village
near  which  I  reside  was  suffering  great  pain.  I  went  to  see
him.  He  is  stone  blind.  I  found  him  on  his  bed,  groaning
and  moaning,  and  clenching  his  hands.  I  asked  him  what
was  the  matter  with  him ;  he  said  his  head  was  very  painful,
he  could  only  bear  it  in  one  position,  and  that  he  had  great
pain  in  his  legs  and  arms ;  and  added,  “  I  have  not  an  easy
spot  about  me.”  He  spoke  in  a  most  piteous  voice.  I  did
not  tell  him  what  I  was  doing,  but  made  passes  over  him.
He  very  soon  said,  “  Ah,  that's  nice;  the  pain  is  all  going.”
I  continued  making  passes  for  a  few  minutes,  when  I  asked
him  how  he  felt.  He  spoke  quite  cheerfully,  saying,  “  V ery
nicely,  thank  you.  Sir.  I  have  no  pain  now ;”  and  in  a  few
moments  he  was  in  a  sound  sleep.  He  has  had  little  or  no
pain  since,  and,  when  it  does  return,  a  few  wafts  of  the  hand
remove  it.  He  cannot  live  long :  he  is  very  old,  and  has  a
constriction  of  the  oesophagus,  but  it  is  pretty  certain  that  he
can  be  spared  all  pain.

VI.  Cure  of  inflammation  of  the  Eyes ,  and  opacity  and
prominence  of  the  Cornea.

The  sixth  and  last  case  that  I  shall  at  present  send,  is
one  of  inflammation  of  the  eyes  and  opacity  of  the  cornea  :
the  patient  was  a  lad  twelve  years  of  age.  From  two  years
old  his  eyes  had  been  defective.  At  that  age  he  had  serious
inflammation  in  them,  which  has  never  entirely  left  them,
being  more  severe  at  times.  The  cornea  had  become  opaque
and  very  convex.  The  inflammation,  in  the  course  of  a  few  times
mesmerising,  was  gone ;  the  eyes  began  gradually  to  assume

*  We  intreat  our  readers  to  compare  this  with  the  cures  in  Yol.  IV.,  pp.  50
187  ;  and  Yol.  V.,  p.  81. — Zoist.


A  recent  Specimen ,  fyc.


291


a  natural  and  healthy  shape,  and  the  only  trace  of  disease  at
present  is  the  slightest  film  or  spot  on  each  eye,  discoverable
only  in  certain  lights.  The  boy  declares  he  is  astonished  at
what  he  is  able  to  see  now.  He  does  not  appear  in  the  least
short-sighted.  He  says  that  he  can  see  clearly  and  at  any
distance ;  whereas  before  everything  was  dim,  and  he  could
only  see  objects  that  were  near  him.  The  film  seems  gradu¬
ally  wearing  away.

Henry  Stafford  Thompson.

Fairfield  House,  near  York,

August,  1847.


VIII.  A  recent  Specimen  of  Professional  Ignorance  and  Bigotry .

Whilst  perusing  the  half-yearly  abstract  of  the  medical
sciences,  from  January  to  June,  1847,  by  Dr.  Ranking,  of
Norwich,  we  noticed  the  following  : —

“  The  introduction  of  a  new  remedy,  or  a  new  means  of  ob¬
viating  the  many  undesirable  events  contingent  upon  the  practice  of
medicine  and  surgery,  is  always  regarded  in  a  different  light  by  dif¬
ferent  members  of  the  profession.  There  are  some  among  us,  on
the  one  hand,  who,  contented  to  move  along  in  the  mental  jog¬
trot’  to  which  they  have  been  long  accustomed,  look  with  suspicion
or  dislike  on  any  innovation  upon  the  ancient  opinions  with  which
they  have  enfolded  themselves.  There  are  the  men  who  ridiculed
and  opposed  the  introduction  of  the  stethoscope,  and  who  will  con¬
tinue  to  ridicule  and  oppose  everything  which  they  had  not  *  dreamt
of  in  their  philosophy,’  and  which  either  threatens  to  interfere  with
the  usual  routine  of  their  thoughts,  or  necessitates  a  greater  amount
of  intellectual  application  than  they  are  capable  of  devoting  to  it.
There  is,  on  the  other  hand,  another  equally  mischievous  perhaps,
but  far  more  interesting  class  of  practitioners,  whose  imagination
is  apt  to  lead  them  to  expect  something  great  of  every  chimera
which  a  busy  age  is  continually  forcing  upon  the  attention.  These
men  take  up  mesmerism ,  homoeopathy ,  and  such  like  vagaries,  fyc.”

Now  this  is  written  by  a  gentleman  who  professes  to  give
his  professional  brethren  the  most  important  and  attractive
portion  of  the  medical  improvements  and  suggestions  of  the
past  six  months.  He  thinks  it  right  and  conscientious  to
sneer  at  mesmerism  and  the  advocates  for  its  adoption,  but
he  does  not  think  it  right  to  place  facts  before  his  readers
that  they  may  judge  for  themselves.  He  does  not  quote  the
“  surgical  reports”  from  the  Calcutta  Hospital,  these  are  be¬
neath  his  notice, — he  does  not  refer  to  the  long  list  of  surgical
operations  performed  in  Europe,  Asia,  and  America, — he  does


292


A  recent  Specimen  of


not  in  his  physiological  report  notice  the  inexplicable  pheno¬
mena  presented  by  the  simplest  case  of  mesmeric  sleep.  All
this  most  important  information  is  not  to  be  found  in  The
Retrospect, — why  ?  This  is  the  course  which  would  be  followed
by  the  truth-seeker,  by  the  philosopher ;  but  it  is  not  the
course  to  be  pursued  by  the  medical  trader.  The  sale  of  the
book  is  the  first  consideration,  and,  to  ensure  this,  the  profes¬
sion  must  only  be  taught  what  is  palatable,  they  must  only
have  offered  to  them  what  it  is  known  they  will  buy.  Sir
Benjamin  Brodie  has  said  mesmerism  is  “  all  humbug  •”  how
then  could  Dr.  Ranking  presume  to  refer  to  a  subject  tabooed
by  the  surgical  luminary  ?

O  !  ye  men  of  the  world — ye  money-traders,  ye  would
be  obstructives  !  a  retrospect  of  philosophical  progress  proves
that  science  will  be  more  than  a  match  for  ye.  The  profes¬
sion  will  become  slowly  enlightened,  and  amidst  the  contents
of  some  future  medical  retrospect  will  be  found  a  summary
of  mesmeric  proceedings.  We  do  not  despair  of  Dr.  Ranking
even.  He  will  open  the  pages  of  his  Retrospect  when  it  is
safe,  and  the  exchequer  is  not  likely  to  suffer.  But  we  have
not  quite  done  with  Dr.  Ranking.  In  the  article  from  which
we  have  just  quoted,  he  says,

“  Pain  is  one  of  the  greatest  evils  which  the  operator  has  to  con¬
tend  with  :  mere  pain  may,  by  contributing  to  what  we  are  in  the
habit  of  calling  ‘  shock,’  be  the  immediate  and  sole  cause  of  death.
As  a  striking  instance  of  this  fact  we  may  mention  a  case  which  re¬
cently  occurred  within  our  own  knowledge,  that  of  the  application
of  a  ligature  for  the  cure  of  an  erectile  tumor  of  the  entire  breast.
The  patient,  a  healthy  female ,  bore  the  initiatory  steps  of  the  opera¬
tion  without  a  murmur,  without  failure  of  pulse,  and  without  change
of  countenance.  The  instant  the  ligature  was  tightened ,  which  it
was  with  the  full  force  of  two  surgeons ,  she  gave  a  yell  of  agony ,
the  pulse  became  imperceptible ,  the  countenance  became  ghastly  pale ,
and  in  eighteen  hours  she  was  a  corpse  !  !”

Horrible,  most  horrible !  Dr.  Ranking  says  that  this
operation  occurred  recently.  And  this  is  the  cause  of  our
complaint  against  the  gentlemen  who  had  charge  of  the  case.
Assuredly  they  ought  to  have  ascertained  whether  their  un¬
fortunate  and  confiding  patient  could  have  been  placed  in  the
mesmeric  sleep.  If  she  had  been,  the  yell  of  agony  would
not  have  been  heard,  and  we  may  be  almost  certain  that  the
system  would  have  calmly  borne  the  shock  of  the  sudden
application  of  the  ligature.  Let  us  contrast  the  above  horrible
operation  with  the  following  description  by  an  eyewitness
of  three  operations  at  Cherbourg,  performed  during  mesmeric
sleep  : —


Professional  Ignorance  and  Bigotry.


293


“  The  remarkable  calm,  and  the  astonishment  of  the  patients,
who,  on  awaking  as  suddenly  as  they  had  been  sent  to  sleep,  were
all  surprised  at  finding  a  painful  operation  over,  and  who  had  felt
nothing,  perceived  nothing,  and  been  passive  and  motionless,  while
the  operator  forcibly  plunged  a  bistoury  into  the  flesh,  dissected
away  enormous  portions  of  it,  and  tied  the  arteries, — was  certainly
a  most  extraordinary  fact,  well  calculated  to  arrest  the  attention  of
physiologists  more  and  more.”  (See  last  number  of  The  Zoist.)

There  is  no  excuse  for  the  conduct  of  Dr.  Ranking's
friends.  Many  years  ago  Cloquet  amputated  the  breast  of
a  lady  without  her  being  conscious  of  the  slightest  pain.  In
1838,  Dr.  Elliotson  proved  that  a  seton  could  be  inserted
without  the  knowledge  of  the  patient.  Dr.  Engledue,  in
August,  1842,  divided  the  ham-string  muscles  without  the
consciousness  of  the  patient.  In  October,  1842,  Mr.  Ward,
of  Wellow,  amputated  the  leg  of  a  man  under  the  same  cir¬
cumstances,  and  we  have  by  this  time  a  list  of  upwards  of
two  hundred  surgical  operations,  all  performed  without  suf¬
fering;  and  yet  Dr.  Ranking,  the  self-elected  editor  of  a
medical  Retrospect,  tells  his  brethren  that  “  pain  is  one  of
the  greatest  evils  which  the  operator  has  to  contend  with,”
and  at  the  same  time  closes  his  pages  to  the  description  of
one  of  the  most  important  means  by  which  this  pain  is  to  be
avoided.  Dr.  Ranking  is  in  a  false  position,  and  we  have  no
doubt  that  he  has  to  thank  his  confrere ,  Mr.  Wakley,  for  it.
There  are  many  medical  men  who  still  form  their  opinion  of
mesmerism  from  what  they  see  in  the  pages  of  the  Lancet.
We  really  feel  surprised  when  we  hear  a  person  quote  the
Lancet  as  his  authority  for  disbelieving  natural  facts.  He
little  knows  the  polluted  source  to  which  he  appeals,  nor  the
disgraceful  means  which  are  weekly  adopted  to  bolster  up
the  course  the  unscrupulous  editor  has  followed  for  so  many
years.  Here  is  a  specimen.  Can  any  of  our  readers  form
the  least  idea  to  which  page  of  The  Zoist  the  writer  of  the
following  disreputable  paragraph  refers  ?

“  M.D.  We  shall  not  allow  the  filthiest  of  all  filthy  slanders
contained  in  The  Zoist  to  go  unwhipped.  Of  course  the  parties  con¬
cerned  in  this  infamous  publication  are  in  a  state  of  perpetual  mor¬
tification  at  their  fallen  and  degraded  position,  and  therefore  they
bite  and  rail.  The  leper  must  be  taken  with  his  spots.” — Lancet ,
July ,  31st,  1847.

This  is  amongst  the  notices  to  correspondents,  and  similar
paragraphs  are  constantly  inserted.  The  object  of  the  writer
is  clear.  We  can  quite  understand  an  individual  who  has
never  seen  The  Zoist,  feeling  somewhat  sceptical  as  to  the
truthfulness  of  its  contents  after  reading  this  paragraph ;  but


294  Great  power  of  Mesmerism  over  Pain.

then  he  should  have  been  taught  by  this  time  not  to  go  to
such  a  journal  for  an  opinion  on  disputed  scientific  subjects.
We  should  just  as  soon  think  of  recommending  our  friend
to  apply  to  a  suspected  incendiary  to  protect  his  property,  as
refer  him  to  the  pages  of  the  Lancet  for  the  purpose  of  gra¬
tifying  and  educating  his  moral  and  intellectual  faculties.

L.E.Gr.E.


IX.  Instance  of  the  great  power  of  Mesmerism  over  Pain.  By
Mr.  G.  H.  Barth.  Communicated  in  a  letter  to  Dr.
Elliotson.


Great  Parndon,  Essex,

To  Dr.  Elliotson.  Sept.  5,  1847.

Dear  Sir, — Subjoined  are  a  few  cases  of  the  cure  or
relief  of  pain  by  local  mesmerism,  without  the  induction  of
sleep  being  attempted.  They  are  at  your  disposal  for  publica¬
tion,  if  deemed  worthy  a  place  in  The  Zoist.  Miss  Wallace's,
and  similar  cases  as  lately  published  in  that  journal,  are
valuable ;  they  teach  how  readily  and  easily  human  suffering
may  be  alleviated  by  mesmeric  means,  and  carry  a  conviction
of  the  utility  of  the  process,  which  comes  home  to  every
unprejudiced  understanding.  Cases  of  this  class  are  so  sim¬
ple,  that  they  resolve  themselves  into  a  question  of  fact ; —
true  or  not  true.  If  sceptics  can  detect  imposture  and  false¬
hood,  let  all  obloquy  fall  on  the  heads  of  the  impostors ;  if
they  admit  the  cases  but  deny  the  influence,  let  them  teach
us  what  influence  it  is  which  effects  the  cures.  Those  who
will  not  admit,  nor  disprove,  nor  investigate,  should  hold
their  tongues  quiet  as  regards  mesmerism.  Without  inves¬
tigation  they  are  not  in  a  condition  to  know,  and  those  who
prate  about  a  subject  of  which  they  know  not  any  thing,  are
merely  garrulous  boobies,  whose  convictions  are  no  more  than
idle  opinions.

Wyniard  Fawl,  aged  40,  single  woman,  cook  in  the  family
of  a  friend  in  this  parish,  asked  my  advice  on  December  4th,
1846,  respecting  an  excruciating  pain  in  her  left  arm  and
shoulder.  It  commenced  every  evening  in  the  middle  finger,
travelled  up  the  arm,  and  remained  all  night,  rendering  sleep
quite  impossible.  It  abated  a  little  in  the  morning,  but
sometimes  came  on  early  in  the  day,  and  was  so  bad  that,
though  I  might  “  think  her  childish,  she  could  not  help
weeping  with  the  pain."  Had  been  thus  afflicted  seven  or
eight  weeks,  and  had  nearly  lost  the  use  of  the  arm ;  could
not  dress  herself,-— her  fellow  servant  was  obliged  to  lace  and


By  Mr.  G.  H.  Barth.


295


unlace  her  stays ;  feared  she  could  not  continue  in  service,
but  must  try  and  get  into  an  hospital,  as  she  had  no  friends
who  could  assist  her.  I  desired  her  to  wait  until  the  pain
was  exceedingly  bad,  and  then  come  to  me,  and  I  would  try
what  I  could  do  to  relieve  her.  Called  on  me  in  the  evening
of  December  6th ;  said  she  had  cried  nearly  all  the  previous
night  with  the  pain,  and  that  the  arm  was  then  in  great
pain.  The  arm  and  hand  seemed  slightly  swollen  and  red¬
dened.  When  she  had  removed  her  bonnet  and  was  seated,
I  made  a  pass  at  two  or  three  inches  distance  over  her  head
and  face ;  she  described  the  sensation  as  a  warm  wind  from
my  fingers.  I  tried  it  down  the  arm ;  she  felt  it  distinctly
through  the  sleeve  of  her  dress,  its  lining,  and  some  flannel.

A  few  passes  over  the  head  and  face  told  me  I  might
easily  have  mesmeric  sleep ;  but  as  this  was  not  my  object,  I
went  to  work  on  the  arm,  drawing  from  the  shoulder  to  the  ex¬
tremities  of  the  fingers,  and  off.  The  pain  gradually  decreased,
until  in  twenty  minutes  it  was  not  felt.  She  said,  “  Only  a
sort  of  soreness,  not  any  wise  troublesome,  remained.”  She
left  me  then,  and  became  so  sleepy  she  could  hardly  reach
home,  and  had  a  sound  night's  rest,  the  first  for  many
weeks.  Three  more  similar  applications  of  mesmerism  ren¬
dered  the  relief  permanent.  She  now  resides  as  cook  with
James  Dobson,  Esq.,  of  Harlow,  a  well-known  and  long-
established  medical  practitioner.  I  have  not  had  any  commu¬
nication  with  her  since  she  quitted  Parndon,  but  feel  sure
she  will  verify  this  statement  if  asked  respecting  it.

Anne  Shipton,  housemaid  at  the  same  friend's  as  the
above,  got  a  thorn  in  her  thumb.  Inflammation  and  sup¬
puration  ensued,  and  a  great  portion  of  the  subcutaneous
tissue  or  cushion  sloughed  away,  and  is  not  yet  renewed.
She  consulted  a  highly  respectable  surgeon  of  Harlow,  who
I  have  no  doubt  did  all  that  was  proper  (except  trying  mes¬
merism),  according  to  the  established  routine  of  practice.
She  went  to  this  gentleman  several  times.  On  Friday,  the
18th  of  December  last,  when  he  saw  the  thumb,  he  shook
his  head,  said  he  wras  afraid  she  would  lose  her  thumb,  gave
her  the  needful  applications  and  directions,  and  instructed
her  to  come  again  on  the  following  Monday  or  Tuesday,
when  he  would  cut  it  off,  or  arrange  for  so  doing,  if  this  was
necessary.  I  saw  it  at  her  mistress's  request  on  the  Sunday
morning :  the  young  woman  had  suffered  so  much  pain,  that
she  had  quitted  her  bed,  and  walked  her  room  a  great  part
of  the  previous  night.  Servants  who  work  hard  in  the  day,
don't  do  this  when  they  can  help  it.  On  removing  the


296


Great  power  of  Mesmerism  over  Pain.


poultice,  the  thumb  appeared  swollen,  black,  and  gorged
with  a  thick  purulent  secretion  which  exuded  at  the  orifice
of  an  opening  which  had  been  previously  made.  I  seized
the  hand,  and  squeezed  out  a  quantity  of  thick  fetid  matter.
The  pain  this  caused  made  the  poor  girl  cry ;  so,  as  a  matter
of  course,  I  mesmerised  the  thumb :  in  a  few  minutes  the
pain  was  gone.  I  requested  permission  for  her  to  call  on
me  in  the  evening ;  and  then  more  matter  had  formed,  and
the  thumb,  hand,  and  arm  were  in  pain.  After  squeezing
out  the  matter,  I  mesmerised  the  arm  and  hand  half-an-hour.
The  pain  soon  quitted,  and  did  not  return  again.  Her  me¬
dical  attendant  saw  it  on  the  following  Tuesday,  some  forty
hours  after  the  mesmeric  operation ;  he  was  much  pleased
at  its  altered  appearance ;  said  it  was  almost  well,  but  he
should  like  to  see  it  once  more.  Anne  did  not  tell  him  of
the  mesmerism ;  feared  I  might  not  wish  her  to  do  so,  as  I
had  not  given  any  directions  about  it.  I  do  not  claim  for
mesmerism  the  credit  of  saving  the  thumb,  which  had  good
surgical  treatment ;  but  it  certainly  relieved  the  patient  from
severe  and  continuing  pain.  In  fact,  for  many  days  after¬
wards,  the  thumb  was  deprived  of  sensibility ;  Anne  could
not  feel  any  difference  betwixt  a  scalding  hot  poultice  and  a
cold  one  :  she  knew  her  thumb  was  on,  because  she  could
see  it ;  but  she  did  not  feel  any  thumb  on  that  hand.

I  have  met  with  several  instances  of  the  sensibility  of  a
part  being  entirely  obliterated  for  a  long  time  by  continued
passes  in  one  direction.  I  mesmerised  a  young  lady  in  town
last  year,  and  made  passes  for  some  twenty  minutes  over  her
feet  before  I  obtained  the  result  desired.  A  month  after¬
wards  she  assured  me  she  had  never  felt  her  feet  since ;  her
words  were,  “  I  know  I  have  feet  because  I  am  standing  on
them,  but  I  don't  feel  at  all  below  my  ankles,  neither  heat
nor  cold  :  I  don't  feel  as  if  I  had  feet."

Susan  Dennis,  a  blunt  strapping  old  woman  of  sixty-four,
keeps  a  shop  at  Ty-green,  parish  of  Netteswell.  I  mesmerise
her  daughter  who  has  fits,  and  many  other  sad  afflictions ;
or  I  should,  perhaps,  say  had ;  we  are  doing  so  well  I  am
not  sure  that  has  will  be  correct :  and  the  other  troubles
have  long  been  consigned  to  the  past.  However,  I  called
one  morning,  and  found  Mrs.  Dennis  in  great  suffering.
She  said  nothing,  but  looked  faint  and  white.  I  enquired  the
cause.  A  boy,  throwing  a  stone  at  a  cow,  missed  the  cow
and  hit  the  woman  on  the  shin,  where  the  bone  has  very
little  covering.  She  had  nearly  fainted,  and  described  the
pain  as  hardly  endurable.  The  stone  was  as  large  as  an


By  Mr.  G.  H.  Barth.


297


ordinary  fist.  “  Pull  off  your  stocking  and  show  me  your
leg.”  Leg  was  red,  hot,  and  very  much  swelled,  considering
it  had  not  been  hurt  more  than  an  hour.  Mesmerised  it  five
or  six  minutes,  when  she  exclaimed,  “  The  pain  has  gone
away  ;” — stamped  her  foot  on  the  ground,  and  said  her  leg
felt  quite  well,  only  stiff1.  Two  days  afterwards  I  made  my
usual  visit ;  “Well,  Mrs.  Dennis,  how  is  your  leg?”  “  Thank
you,  Sir,  have  never  felt  any  pain  since  you  was  here  :  the
swelling  has  gone  down,  but  it  looks  very  black.”  “  Let  me
see  it,  I  will  mesmerise  it  a  few  minutes.”  The  front  of  the
leg  was  discoloured  from  the  foot  to  the  knee :  so  large  a
blackened  surface  surprized  me.  “You  don't  mean  to  tell
me,  Mrs.  Dennis,  that  you  have  had  no  more  pain  in  that
leg  ?”  “  As  true  as  is  the  God  who  made  me,  I  have  felt  no

pain  since  you  did  it ;  why  should  I  say  I  didn't  feel  pain  if
I  did  all  the  while  ?”  The  leg  never  gave  any  more  trouble.

January  3rd,  1847.  Eliza  Pretty,  No.  7,  Evershalt  Street,
St.  Pancras,  severely  scalded  her  foot.  Her  mistress  took
me  to  see  her  an  hour  or  two  after  it  was  done.  Pound  her
in  bed  crying.  “Don't  cry,  my  girl,  that  will  do  you  no
good.”  “  I  can't  help  it.  Sir,  my  foot  hurts  me  so.”  “  Poke
it  out  of  the  bed,  and  let  me  see  it.”  It  had  an  application
of  flour  and  a  soft  linen  cloth  over  it.  Removed  this ;  the  top
of  the  foot  was  covered  nearly  by  a  vesica  or  blister,  distended
with  fluid,  some  four  inches  long  by  three  wide,  I  should
think ;  two  small  ones  nearer  the  ankle,  and  the  remaining
surface  inflamed.  Her  mistress  held  a  candle ;  the  girl  sat
up  to  see  what  I  was  going  to  do  to  her  foot.  “  Keep  your
head  on  the  pillow,  I  am  not  going  to  hurt  you  ;  never  you
mind  what  I  do,  tell  me  what  you  feel.”  “I  feel  something
warm  move  over  my  foot.”  “  What  else  do  you  feel  ?”  “  Only
warm,  Sir ;  it  seems  like  wind,  I  may  be  wrong,  but  I  think
so.”  “  Well,  tell  me  if  you  feel  anything  else  presently.”  I
continued  passes  for  four  or  five  minutes,  when  she  laughed
heartily  and  loudly  twice,  at  intervals.  Her  mistress  reproved
her,  saying,  “  There  was  nothing  to  be  laughed  at,  we  were
trying  to  do  her  good.”  I  explained  that  she  could  not  help
it.  This  laughter  was  involuntary,  a  sort  of  hysterical  mani¬
festation,  frequently  seen  by  mesmerists  when  their  subjects
feel  the  influence.

After  a  few  more  passes,  she  said,  “  I  feel  my  foot  cool
nowj  it  is  like  a  cool  wind.”  “How  is  the  pain?”  I  enquired.
“I  don't  know,  Sir,  I  don't  feel  it.”  “Is  it  gone  away?
Why  !  What  has  become  of  it  ?”  “  I  am  sure,  Sir,  I  don't

know ;  I  can't  feel  it  just  now.”  Nor  did  she  feel  it  any  more


298


Great  power  of  Mesmerism  over  Pain.


at  all.  The  fluid  in  the  vesica  was  not  absorbed  in  two  days
afterwards;  but  she  broke  it  by  accident,  and  let  it  out.  A
bit  of  rag  and  some  simple  cerate  to  keep  her  stocking  from
irritating  the  surface  was  put  to  it,  and  it  was  well  in  a  week.
It  never  occasioned  the  slightest  pain  after  that  one  mesmeric
application.

J uly  22nd,  1847.  Paid  a  visit  this  evening,  and  found
an  amiable  friend  and  neighbour  inconvenienced  by  a  burn
on  her  hand ;  a  portion  of  the  external  skin  as  large  as  a
shilling  was  destroyed,  and  a  watery  secretion  oozed  from
the  denuded  surface.  Now,  this  was  but  a  trifling  matter,
and  yet  caused  a  very  uncomfortable  sensation.  Those  who
venture  to  doubt,  can  burn  such  a  place  on  their  own  skins,
and  try  the  effect.  A  few  passes  totally  removed  the  pain  ;
and  a  few  more  covered  the  wound  with  a  firm  healthy
scab.  The  lady’s  husband,  and  a  friend  stood  beside  us,  and
watched  the  growth  of  this  scab,  while  I  made  short  passes
over  the  sore  place.  It  commenced  at  the  edge  and  spread
to  the  centre ;  somewhat  as  we  see  a  hot  saturated  solution
of  a  salt  form  its  pellicle  on  cooling.  This  little  burn  gave  no
more  inconvenience.  I  do  not  think  it  was  mesmerised  longer
than  eight  minutes.  I  have  seen  healthy  scabs  thrown  out
very  quickly  on  unhealthy,  raw,  surfaces,  after  local  mes¬
merism  is  applied,  in  several  cases.

July  27th,  1847.  Emma  Reid,  Great  Parndon,  is  mes¬
merised  for  a  disease  of  her  eyes.  Found  her  this  evening
with  a  severe  burn  on  her  arm,  portion  of  skin  destroyed  as
large  as  half-a-crown,  and  surrounding  surface  reddened.
She  declared  it  gave  her  pain,  and  “I  believed  her.”  I  made
a  few  passes  over  it,  and  she  said  the  pain  was  gone,  and  I
again  believed  her.  “  Credulous  simpleton  !”  exclaims  some
reader  of  the  Wakleyan  school.  After  inducing  her  customary
sleep,  at  the  end  of  an  hour,  I  awoke  her.  The  burnt  place
was  then  protected  by  a  firm  scab ;  the  surrounding  skin
puckered  at  the  edges.  It  never  gave  her  any  more  pain.

I  might  add  cases  of  relief  and  cure  by  local  mesmerism
of  gout,  painful  tumors,  neuralgic  and  rheumatic  pains,  vari¬
ous  other  troublesome  ailments ;  and  tooth-ache  more  fre¬
quently  than  I  can  name,  as  I  make  no  notes  of  tooth-aches
relieved.  But  these  few  may  suffice  to  shew  that  if  mesmerists
are,  as  some  wise  people  (? )  term  them,  “  humbugs.”  They
are  certainly  very  agreeable,  useful,  comfortable  “  humbugs,”
valuable  “  humbugs,”  to  all  who  are  afflicted  with  pain  and


By  Mr .  G.  H.  Barth.


299


suffering;  particularly,  when  they  perform  their  “ mountebank
feats ”  for  love  and  not  money.  Whenever  I  may  be  afflicted
with  disease,  I  pray  that  I  may  be  able  to  secure  the  services
of  “  some  healthy  and  benevolent  mesmeric  humbug.”

I  have  a  patient,  John  Burton,  of  Ty-Green,  who  has
allowed  me  several  times  to  whip  his  hands  and  wrists  soundly
with  stinging-nettles ;  when  the  redness  and  small  pimples
are  visible,  and  the  smarting  and  irritation  become  uncom¬
fortably  perceptible,  a  few  mesmeric  movements  of  my  hand
have  perfectly  and  permanently  removed  the  disagreeable  sen¬
sation.  I  have  repeated,  successfully ,  on  this  man,  some  of
your  experiments  with  metals;  and  yet,  though  I  mesmerised
him  daily  for  five  months,  I  could  not  put  him  to  asleep.

I  must  not  omit,  dear  Sir,  thanking  you  for  kindly  seeing
Miss  Mary  Markwell,  and  advising  gratuitously  in  her  case,
(one  of  fits.)  In  accordance  with  your  advice  I  persevered
with  mesmerism.  She  was  mesmerised  twice  daily  for  sixteen
months,  and  then  once  a  day  for  eight  months.  She  certainly
derived  benefit  from  the  treatment;  her  fits,  though  they
occurred  as  frequently  as  ever,  were  so  slight  as  to  be  hardly
worth  naming,  and  never  attacked  her  excepting  when  in  bed
at  night,  and  then  left  no  subsequent  ill  effects.  She  never
bit  her  tongue  or  lips  but  once,  after  being  subjected  to  mes¬
meric  treatment.  She  got  rid  of  many  nervous  fancies,  and
could  sleep  soundly  at  night,  which  she  had  not  done
previously.

Nevertheless,  I  could  not,  or  did  not,  cure  her;  for  if  she
was  worried  or  put  into  a  passion  in  the  day,  a  fit  came  at
night.  So  commonly  did  this  occur  that  it  appeared  as  cause
and  effect.  “  I  had  a  fit  last  night,  Sir  “  then  you  have
been  in  a  passion,  Mary and  so  it  always  proved.  As
neither  advice,  nor  reproof,  could  abate  the  folly,  (to  use
a  mild  term)  of  those  who  irritated  her ;  I  threw  the  case  up
in  disgust,  after  mesmerising  faithfully,  and  earnestly,  and
gratuitously  for  two  years.  It  is  probable,  that  in  cases  of
nervous  disease  when  yielding  to  mesmerism,  the  cure  is
retarded  by  the  injudicious  treatment  of  patients  friends,
more  frequently  than  the  mesmerist  suspects.

As  a  humble  disciple  of  that  good  cause,  which  you  have
so  nobly  and  successfully  maintained  against  cruel  calumny
and  ignorant  and  bigotted  opposition,  I  joyfully  congratulate
you  on  the  now  almost  universal  acknowledgment  of  its
truth ;  and  am,  dear  Sir,  with  warm  admiration  and  respect,

Your  obedient  servant,

G.  H.  Barth.


(  300  )


X.  Cure  of  Hypochondriasis,  Tic  Douloureux,  Inflammation
of  the  Eyes,  Loss  of  Voice  and  Loss  of  Sight .  By  Dr.
Stoker,  of  Bristol.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

Sir, — In  my  previous  reports  of  cases,  I  selected  those
which  afforded  the  best  opportunity  of  testing  the  power  of
mesmerism  as  a  medical  agent  both  in  surgery  and  distress¬
ing  diseases.  They  have  consisted  of  painless  operations,
epilepsy,  tic  douloureux,  and  other  severe  affections  of  the
nervous  system.  I  now  enclose  a  few  cases  which  may  prove
interesting,  inasmuch  as  each  presents  some  different  variety
of  mesmeric  phenomena,  and  thus  tends  to  confirm  the  general
truths  so  fully  illustrated  in  your  valuable  journal  and  else¬
where.

I  am,  Sir,  yours  obediently,

29,  Park  Street,  Bristol.  Henry  Storer,  M.D.

I.  Case  of  severe  Mental  Depression — application  of  Phrenology.

I  was  consulted  in  January  last  by  Mrs.  D,  the  wife  of  a
respectable  tradesman  living  in  this  city.  The  statement
made  to  me  was,  that  she  had  been  out  of  health  for  a  long
time  past;  had  suffered  extremely  from  lowness  of  spirits,
amounting  at  times  to  despair;  could  procure  no  sleep  at
night ;  had  no  appetite ;  but  great  general  debility.  She  was
also  subject  to  acute  pains  in  the  chest  and  side.  For  these
and  other  ailments  she  had  sought  relief  from  her  ordinary
medical  attendant  without  any  effect,  though  she  had  been
leeched,  blistered,  and  had  taken  large  quantities  of  medicine.
She  attributed  her  present  state  to  being  too  greatly  reduced :
and  this  appeared  to  me  too  near  the  truth.  I  attended  her
for  about  a  month.  She  became  easily  affected  after  the
third  sitting,  so  that  I  could  produce  coma  in  less  than  five
minutes.  I  generally  kept  her  in  this  state  from  half  an  hour
to  an  hour,  and  should  have  left  her  asleep  had  she  not
objected.

In  less  than  one  week  there  was  an  evident  improvement.
Comfortable  rest  at  nights  was  procured :  her  appetite  began
to  improve ;  and  she  had  less  anxiety  and  lassitude  during  the
day.  After  the  second  week  I  tried  the  effect  of  mesmerising
distinct  cerebral  organs,  and  found  that  I  could  excite  the
greater  number  I  tried  upon.  In  those  most  likely  to  antago¬
nize  her  dejection,  viz.,  Mirthfulness,  Benevolence,  Hope  and
Firmness,  the  results  were  highly  satisfactory.  On  being  de-
mesmerised,  she  expressed  herself  as  feeling  more  elastic  in


Cure  of  Hypochondriasis ,  Tic  Douloureux ,  fyc.  301

mind  and  stronger  in  body,  and  had  lost  that  lowness  or
sinking  sensation  which  had  so  distressed  her.  This  improved
state  generally  lasted  during  the  day.  If  I  missed  calling
for  a  day  or  two,  there  was  a  slight  remission  of  the  good ;
but,  by  my  continuing  mesmerism  for  three  weeks  regularly,
she  found  herself  so  well  as  to  require  it  onty  occasionally.
By  the  end  of  the  month  she  considered  herself  quite  well ;
and,  though  eight  months  have  now  elapsed  since  my  attend¬
ance,  she  assured  me  very  lately  that  she  had  not  been  so
well  for  years.  Her  looks  fully  confirm  this  report.

II.  Case  of  Tic  Douloureux ,  with  great  irregularity  of  the

Constitution — Lucidity.

I  was  called  in,  some  months  since,  to  see  a  young  lady
residing  at  Clifton,  who  had  long  suffered  from  what  was
termed  a  severe  nervous  affection,  attacking  chiefly  her  face
and  temples.  I  was  also  informed  that  there  had  been  no
regularity  of  system  during  the  last  few  months.  She  had
been  under  the  care  of  two  medical  gentlemen,  but  did  not
improve.  Her  friends  wished  a  trial  of  mesmerism.  The
young  lady  did  not  object,  and  I  found  her  very  susceptible
of  its  influence.  In  her  sleep-waking  state  she  was  quite
lucid,  describing  everything  that  was  passing  in  her  family.
I  took  advantage  of  this  state  to  question  her  respecting  her¬
self.  She  described  most  minutely  her  sufferings,  the  appa¬
rent  cause,  and  what  was  most  likely  to  benefit  her.  Her
diagnosis  was  quite  correct,  and  the  means  suggested  by  her¬
self  with  mesmerism  were  adopted  with  perfect  success.  In
three  weeks  her  pains  had  entirely  ceased,  and  in  another
fortnight  she  was  quite  well.

Local  Affections  cured  by  Mesmerism.

I  have  seen  so  many  facts  of  this  nature,  that  no  doubt  is
left  in  my  own  mind  as  regards  the  successful  application  of
local  mesmerism.  In  the  first  cases  I  witnessed,  I  was  rather
incredulous  of  the  fact,  the  relief  being  so  sudden  ;  but,  find¬
ing  so  much  corroboration  from  further  experience,  I  could
no  longer  resist  the  evidence  of  my  senses.  The  following
are  illustrations.


III.  Case  of  Ophthalmia.

During  my  attendance  in  a  family,  a  member  of  which
was  afflicted  with  severe  epileptic  fits,  1  was  requested  by  the
mother  to  see  her  son — a  young  man,  who  was  suffering  from
severe  inflammation  of  the  eyes.  There  was  great  pain  and


302  Cure  of  Hypochondriasis ,  Tic  Douloureux,  fyc.

sensibility  to  light.  Under  ordinary  circumstances  I  should
have  ordered  leeches  with  fomentations,  &c.,  but,  being  asked
respecting  the  efficacy  of  mesmerism,  I  resolved  to  try  it.  I
made,  for  about  half  an  hour,  passes  from  the  head  down¬
wards,  particularly  over  the  eyes,  which  were  closed.  I  then
asked  the  young  man  how  he  felt.  He  replied,  “  A  little
drowsy,  but  as  regards  the  eyes  they  feel  decidedly  easier,  the
sensation  of  sand  being  much  lessened.  On  looking  at  the
eyes,  his  mother  and  other  parties  present  with  myself  were
equally  surprised  to  see  the  change :  the  redness  was  consi¬
derably  abated,  and  so  was  the  pain.  I  made  a  few  more
passes;  he  was  mesmerised  again  that  evening  and  the  fol¬
lowing  day;  after  which  there  remained  no  appearances  of
inflammation,  and  the  young  man  was  enabled  to  resume  his
usual  duties.


IV.  Total  Loss  of  Voice.

The  daughter  in  a  respectable  family  residing  in  Princes
Street  in  this  city  entirely  lost  her  voice,  so  that  she  could
not  be  heard  to  speak  even  in  a  whisper.  She  remained  in
this  state  for  a  week  without  any  relief.  A  gentleman  hearing
of  the  case,  and  knowing  the  power  of  mesmerism,  urged  its
trial.  The  young  lady  assented,  and  soon  became  slightly
influenced,  but  not  to  lose  consciousness.  In  this  state  passes
were  applied  particularly  to  the  throat  and  neck ;  and,  by
the  end  of  the  first  sitting,  she  was  enabled  to  speak  so  as  to
be  heard,  and  by  the  repetition  of  mesmerism  for  a  few  times
her  voice  was  fully  restored.

V.  Loss  of  Sight .

A  little  girl,  residing  as  servant  in  the  same  house,  was
becoming  so  afflicted  in  her  sight  that  her  mistress  was  about
sending  her  home,  being  unable  to  keep  her  longer,  as  she
broke  almost  everything  she  laid  her  hands  on,  besides  being
unable  to  do  her  usual  work.  Mesmerism  was  also  recom¬
mended  and  applied  in  this  case.  A  few  sittings  were  suffi¬
cient  to  recover  the  sight,  which  had  become  so  affected,  and
in  a  very  short  time  she  was  enabled  to  follow  her  ordinary
duties,  with  other  work  to  which  she  was  quite  unequal  before
mesmerism  had  been  applied.


(  303  )


XI.  Cure  of  a  singular  Twisting  of  the  Head  in  a  young  man .

By  Dr.  Elliotson.

“The  world  has  had  its  laugh  at  mesmerism.  Its  mysteries  and  miracles  are  nearly  for¬
gotten.”— Mr.  Douglas  Jerrold.  His  Weekly  Newspaper,  Sept.  11,  1847.

Mr.  Douglas  Jerrold  is  a  daring  man.  He  snaps  his  fin¬
gers  at  our  steady  and  abundant  issue  of  solid  facts  every
quarter,  for  some  years,  to  his  knowledge.

On  the  2nd  of  last  December  I  was  consulted  by  a  young
man,  thirty-two  years  of  age,  occupied  in  a  city  banking-
house,  on  account  of  a  complaint  which  had  existed  seven
months  and  had  gradually  come  upon  him.  It  was  a  slow  but
powerful  involuntary  movement  of  his  head  over  to  the  left  side ,  -
till  the  face  came  nearly  above  the  left  shoulder ,  in  writing,  in
brushing  his  hat  or  coat,  and  particularly  in  taking  his  meals,
— all  acts  requiring  a  little  stooping  and  motion  of  his  hand  and
arm.  He  could  read  without  this  annoyance  because  neither
of  these  two  things  is  necessary  at  that  time.  He  began  to
write  at  my  request  that  I  might  observe  the  phenomenon.
His  face  almost  immediately  turned  slowly  round  to  the  left,
so  that  at  length  he  was  looking  at  the  paper  with  the  right
eye  only.  The  moment  he  left  off  writing,  he  could  move
it  back  to  its  original  position.

If  watched  by  others  at  the  time,  or  excited  by  any  cause,
the  head  turned,  he  said,  the  more  quickly  and  forcibly  to
the  left.  If  he  persevered  in  what  he  was  attempting,  the
head  at  length  trembled.  If  he  merely  raised  his  hand
towards  his  head,  this  was  inclined  to  move  to  the  left.  In
handing  a  paper  to  another  person,  the  head  turned.  If  he
looked  steadfastly  at  another  person,  and  was  at  all  excited,
though  his  hands  were  motionless  before  him,  his  head  would
turn :  but  not  if  he  held  them  tightly  behind  his  back.

He  was  naturally  nervous,  but  he  looked  remarkably
well;  and  indeed  his  general  health  had  improved  of  late,
though,  from  the  time  his  complaint  began,  he  had  felt,  and
still  felt,  somewhat  heavy  after  dinner,  as  well  as  in  the
morning  before  rising,  but  no  longer  than  he  was  in  bed.
The  exciting  cause  had  been  fatigue  and  anxiety.

He  tried  Brighton  a  month  :  and  Bamsgate  six  weeks ;
and,  though  better  while  there,  was  as  bad  as  ever  on  his
return.  He  had  been  galvanized  for  a  month  and  found
great  benefit  for  the  first  three  days,  but  no  longer.  He  had
been  under  a  consulting  surgeon  in  the  city,  who  sent  him
into  the  country  :  and  under  a  physician  who  gave  him  slight
aperients  which  reduced  him,  and  then  bitter  tonics.  I  con-


304  Cure  of  a  singular  Twisting  of  the  Head.

sidered  that  tonics  were  the  most  suitable  medicines  and  iron
the  most  suitable  of  tonics.  But  he  took  it  in  vain.  Mes¬
merism  was  substituted.  He  brought  a  friend  whom  I  in¬
structed  in  two  minutes  how  to  proceed,  just  as  I  instructed
Mrs.  Snewing :  this  friend  after  a  fortnight  instructed  the
father,  sixty-five  years  of  age,  who  mesmerised  him  regularly
and  cured  him.  None  of  the  parties  had  seen  anything,  or
indeed  known  anything,  of  mesmerism.

I  lately  begged  him  to  write  me  out  an  account,  and  it  is
as  follows :

“  Clapham,  Surrey,

“  30th  August,  1847.

“  In  the  beginning  of  the  summer  of  1846  I  was  attacked
with  a  violent  nervous  affection  in  my  head,  which  prevented
me  applying  myself  to  anything  requiring  my  head  to  be
steady.  It  gradually  increased  until  I  was  compelled  to
resign  for  a  time  my  usual  duties.  It  produced  an  involun¬
tary  motion  of  my  head,  particularly  when  writing,  which
was  my  daily  occupation.  It  almost  prevented  me  from  cut¬
ting  my  own  food,  and,  whenever  I  used  my  hands,  it  be¬
came  worse,  until  I  could  scarcely  sign  my  name  without
supporting  my  head  with  my  left  hand.  I  believe  it  to  have
been  brought  on  by  over-excitement  and  fatigue,  together
with  being  employed  in  a  confined  office ;  my  constitution  not
being  very  strong,  my  nervous  system  gave  way  under  it.

“  I  first  applied  to  a  surgeon  in - ,  who  told  me  all

I  wanted  was  rest  and  change  of  air  :  he  recommended  me
to  have  a  shower  bath  every  morning,  and  he  had  no  doubt
but  by  a  long  relaxation  from  business  I  should  be  once  more
restored  to  perfect  health :  he  gave  some  pills  to  take  occa¬
sionally,  and  said  he  could  do  nothing  more  for  me.  I  then
made  arrangements  for  going  in  the  country,  previously  to

which  I  applied  to  Dr. - ,  who  quite  agreed  with  all  my

previous  medical  adviser  had  done  :  he  also  said  it  would
be  a  very  long  time  before  I  got  quite  well  again.  I  then
went  to  Ramsgate,  and  bathed  every  morning  for  the  space
of  six  weeks ;  when  out  of  doors  in  the  air  I  felt  quite  well,
but  immediately  on  attempting  to  write  or  use  my  hands  in
any  way,  the  affection  in  my  head  returned.  I  was  induced
after  spending  a  week  at  Ramsgate  to  apply  to  a  medical  man
of  that  place  (who  I  believe  is  highly  spoken  of  in  his  pro¬
fession)  for  advice  :  but  he  likewise  seemed  to  think  nothing
could  be  done  for  me  :  he  gave  some  medicine  to  take  daily,
but  was  of  opinion  that  nothing  but  time  and  change  of  air
would  restore  me.  After  six  weeks  stay  at  Ramsgate,  and


By  Dr.  Elliot  son.


305


being  very  little  better,  I  began  to  despair  of  my  recovery.
I  returned  to  London  and  to  business,  thinking  that  employ¬
ing  my  mind  a  few  hours  in  the  day  would  prove  beneficial  to
me.  But  after  having  been  at  business  a  month,  (the  weather
at  the  time  was  very  hot  and  of  course  very  trying  to  me,)
I  was  compelled  once  more  to  resign  my  duties  for  a  time  :
the  complaint  returned  much  worse  than  before.  I  then
went  to  my  physician  again,  who  told  me  I  must  not  think
of  remaining  in  business  for  at  least  four  or  five  months,  but
must  remain  quiet  at  home,  as  rest  was  the  only  chance  I
had  of  recovery.

“  I  then  tried  galvanism ;  was  operated  upon  every  morn¬
ing,  Sundays  excepted,  for  a  month.  The  first  week  I  was
quite  cheered  at  the  effect,  it  seemed  to  make  my  head
steadier,  and  certainly  the  improvement  was  quite  apparent
to  myself  and  friends.  But,  alas  !  from  that  time  the  im¬
provement  ceased,  and  the  complaint  gradually  returned  to
its  former  obstinate  position.  I  then  again  began  to  despair,
thinking  I  never  should  recover  :  but  was  again  recommended
to  try  once  more  what  sea  bathing  would  do  for  me.  I  went
to  Brighton  in  the  commencement  of  October,  took  a  great
deal  of  exercise,  dieted  myself  according  to  my  medical  man's
advice,  and  used  all  the  means  in  my  power  which  I  thought
conducive  to  my  recovery.  After  spending  a  month  at
Brighton,  I  returned  to  London,  much  better  in  my  general
health,  although  still  suffering  from  the  affection  in  my  head
on  applying  myself  to  write  or  use  my  hands  in  any  way.

“  I  again  consulted  my  physician,  as  to  whether  he  thought
it  advisable  for  me  to  return  to  business  in  the  state  my  health
then  was.  He  recommended  me  to  do  so,  but  he  thought  a
few  hours  a  day  would  be  all  I  should  at  present  undertake.
My  employers  very  kindly  allowed  me  to  remain  at  business
as  long  as  I  thought  convenient  to  myself,  but  all  was  of  no
avail :  I  continued  getting  worse  until  the  end  of  November,
1846.  A  friend  of  mine  advised  me  to  have  further  advice.
He  recommended  me  to  apply  to  Dr.  Elliotson,  who  he  said
he  knew  to  be  very  clever  in  his  profession,  but  was  much
afraid  he  would  want  to  mesmerise  me.  I  said  Dr.  Elliotson
might  do  with  me  what  he  thought  fit;  that  if  I  went  to  him,
I  should  place  myself  entirely  at  his  disposal.  After  a  fort¬
night's  delay,  being  quite  low  spirited  at  having  tried  so
many  remedies  without  success,  I  went  to  Dr.  E.,  who  very
kindly  took  great  interest  in  my  case.  After  explaining  to
him  the  nature  of  my  complaint  and  the  means  I  had  used
without  success,  he  prescribed  for  me,  but  in  vain.  Mes¬
merism  was  now  suggested,  and  Dr.  Elliotson  offered  to  shew
vol.  v.  z


30G  Cure  of  severe  Head-ache  of  seven  years’  standing.

a  friend  of  mine,  who  kindly  consented  to  sacrifice  an  hour
every  evening  for  that  purpose.  I  tried  it  for  a  fortnight  and
was  certainly  a  little  better;  but  thought,  as  the  effect  pro¬
duced  was  so  slight,  and  as  I  slept  but  little  during  that
time,  that  my  friend  did  not  perform  the  operation  properly.
I  went  to  Dr.  E.  to  enquire  if  he  thought  I  should  continue
it.  He  told  me  by  all  means  go  on  with  it  at  least  for  three
months.  I  did ;  was  operated  upon  every  evening  by  my
father  for  half  an  hour,  when  in  less  than  a  month  the  change
was  apparent  to  myself  and  all  around  me.  I  again  went  to
Dr.  E.  to  inform  him  of  the  result,  when  he  again  urged  me
to  continue  with  it  lest  the  complaint  should  return  :  and
from  that  time  till  the  middle  of  May  in  this  year,  I  seldom
failed  being  operated  upon  every  evening,  and  am  thankful
to  say  am  now  quite  restored  to  my  wonted  health  and  strength.
The  effect  it  produced  was  sometimes  scarcely  visible,  occa¬
sionally  it  produced  sleep ;  but  at  all  times  it  so  rested  me
that  for  a  time  after  I  felt  quite  refreshed,  but  not  at  all  to
interfere  with  my  sleeping  at  night  in  bed.  I  do  entirely
attribute  my  cure  to  mesmerism,  and  bless  God  in  his  pro¬
vidence  that  I  was  ever  persuaded  to  try  it.”

All  this  time  he  took  no  medicine  :  and  resided  at  home,
going  daily  to  business.

The  sensible  effect  of  the  process  was  a  heaviness  and  un¬
willingness  to  move  :  without  unconsciousness  :  though  for  a
moment  perhaps  just  forgetting  himself.  This  occurred  after
the  first  few  days,  increasing  for  a  short  time,  but  at  length
no  farther,  and  was  never  followed  by  anything  more.  It
always  began  in  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  and  lasted  half  an
hour  after  the  mesmerisation  was  finished.  The  great  effect
noticeable  was  the  invigoration  he  always  experienced  when
the  heaviness  had  gone  off.


XII.  Cure  of  severe  Head-ache  of  Seven  Years’  standing ;  with
Cerebral  Sympathy ,  Mesmeric  Excitement  of  Cerebral
Organs,  and  Clairvoyance.  By  Mr.  Hockley.  Commu¬
nicated  in  a  letter  to  Mr.  Chandler.

16,  Great  James  Street,  Hoxton,
27th  August,  1847.

Dear  Sir, — Agreeably  to  your  request  I  beg  to  forward
you  a  short  statement,  the  daily  notes  of  which  I  also  enclose,
of  the  case  of  Elizabeth  Troth,  of  Sidemore,  near  Bromsgrove,
aged  22,  who  had  from  the  age  of  15  suffered  (though  in


By  Mr.  Hockley.


307


other  respects  in  robust  health)  most  severely  from  attacks  of
head-ache,  which  becoming  gradually  worse  (latterly  lasting
two  or  three  days  in  each  week)  had  compelled  her  to  leave
all  her  situations.  On  the  15th  Feb.,  1846,  she  having  suf¬
fered  much  from  head-ache  on  that  day,  I  commenced  mag¬
netizing  her,  and  continued  about  an  hour  and  twenty  minutes
with  scarcely  any  effect,  she  merely  going  into  a  dozing  state
and  waking  upon  the  slightest  questioning.  I  repeated  the
operation  on  the  16th,  17th,  and  18th,  for  about  an  hour
each  evening;  she  still,  however,  only  went  into  a  doze  and
woke  whenever  interrogated,  but  her  head-ache  had  become
much  easier.  On  the  19th,  she  having  had  the  head-ache  all
day,  I  commenced  at  ten  minutes  past  8  p.m.  to  magnetize
her :  in  three  or  four  minutes  she  fell  into  a  doze,  her  counte¬
nance  brightened,  she  said  she  was  “  easy  and  very  nicely,”  but
woke  upon  being  further  questioned.  I  made  a  few  passes  and
she  went  again  into  a  doze ;  she  said  she  felt  much  easier,
especially  the  right  side  of  her  head  was  very  comfortable,
and  she  appeared  very  unwilling  to  be  disturbed.  At  a  quarter
past  nine  I  awoke  her ;  her  head-ache  had  entirely  ceased.  I
continued  the  operation  every  evening  for  about  an  hour  until
the  13th  of  March ;  but  she  did  not  experience  from  the  19th
Feb.  up  to  the  26th  June,  when  she  left  us  to  return  home,
the  slightest  tendency  to  head-ache.  Her  cure  tvas  complete.

As  my  motive  in  subjecting  her  to  the  magnetic  influence
was  to  alleviate  her  pain,  I  had  but  little  desire  to  place  her
in  any  danger  of  a  relapse  by  making  (to  myself)  useless  ex¬
periments.  It  was  not  until  the  eighth  time  of  magnetizing  her
that  she  passed  into  the  magnetic  sleep,  when  she  at  once
became  to  a  considerable  degree  clairvoyant  and  supersentient,
(as  you  will  perceive  by  the  statement  herewith).  On  27th
Feb.,  having  two  friends  with  me,  Mr.  W.  G.  Dixon  and  Mr.
Walmsley,  both  of  Hands  worth,  and  exceedingly  sceptical,  I,
shortly  after  placing  my  patient  in  magnetic  sleep,  brought
Mr.  Dixon  en  rapport  with  her,  and  to  prove  to  him  the  recip¬
rocity  of  taste,  Mrs.  H.  put  into  Mr.  D/s  mouth  some  vinegar.
The  patient  immediately  began  tasting,  and  upon  being  ques¬
tioned,  said,  “  It  was  sour  and  she  did  not  like  it ;”  upon  his
taking  some  more  she  again  said  it  was  sour,  and  by  coun¬
tenance  shewed  her  repugnance  to  it.  Mrs.  H.  then  gave
him  some  sugared  milk  and  water.  She  said  it  was  nice,  it  was
sour  and  sweet ;  Mr.  Dixon  immediately  said  that  was  pre¬
cisely  what  he  felt,  having  some  of  the  vinegar  still  in  his
mouth.  I  took  a  pinch  of  snuff.  She  said  she  “  did  not  like
it ;  did  not  know  what  it  was ;  wouldn't  have  any  more  of  it.”
Tried  her  lucidity  ;  asked  what  was  on  the  table,  which  was

z  2


308  Clairvoyance  in  the  case  of  Master  Chapman.

entirely  hidden  from  her.  She  described  the  candlestick,
book,  snuffers.  I  asked  what  else.  She  said,  “  Something
round ;  thought  it  was  money  :  said  it  wras  gold.”  I  told  her
it  was  silver,  not  thinking  there  was  anything  at  all  of  the
kind.  She  said,  “  No,  it  was  not ;  it  was  gold.”  It  proved,
to  my  surprize,  to  be  Mrs.  H/s  gold  ring.  And  upon  closely
pressing  her  she  became  very  irritable.  I  tried  to  excite
Benevolence,  which  I  could  do  but  slightly.  Tried  Mirth¬
fulness  and  Tune,  and  pressed  her  to  sing.  She  smiled  and

said,  “No,  we  should  laugh  at  her:”  then  said  she  would,

and  began,  “  Young  Colin,”  &c.  I  asked  her  if  she  was

asleep :  she  said,  “  Yes.”  I  told  her  I  thought  she  was

dreaming.  She  said,  “No,  I  am  not  dreaming;”  and  her
face  assumed  a  peculiarly  mirthful  incredulous  smile.  I  asked
her  how  much  longer  she  would  sleep.  She  said,  “  Fifteen
minutes.”  We  then  left  her  alone  and  quiet.  Mr.  Walmesley
immediately  looked  at  his  watch.  At  the  thirteen  minutes
she  said,  “  I’m  coming,  Fm  coming ;”  and  in  two  minutes
more,  “  Fm  coming,  Sir,”  and  began  to  get  up,  which  woke
her.  Mr.  W.  said  she  was  precise  to  a  minute.

Both  Mr.  Dixon  and  Mr.  Walmesley  expressed  themselves
convinced  of  the  mesmeric  influence  exhibited.

It  is  most  curious  that,  although  she  had  been  so  long
and  so  severely  afflicted,  she  expressed  but  little  surprise  at
being  relieved ;  and  when  questioned  by  any  one  about  it,
merely  replied  that  “  it  was  a  good  job  master  had  slept  it
away.”

I  am,  Sir,  yours  most  obediently,
Thos.  Chandler,  Esq.,  Fred.  Hockley.

&c.,  &c.,  &c.


XIII.  Clairvoyance  in  the  case  of  Master  Chapman  recorded
by  Dr.  Storer ,  in  No.  XVI.  of  The  Zoist ;  and  Mesmeric
Phenomena  in  a  young  lady.  By  Lieut.  Hare,  B-.N.
Communicated  in  a  letter  to  Dr.  Elliotson.

6,  Somerset  Place,  Bath,
Sept.  2,  1847.

Sir, — Knowing  how  justly  you  advocate  mesmerism,  I
take  the  liberty  of  communicating  the  results  of  a  few  expe¬
riments  I  have  made.  Before  Dr.  Storer  left  Bath,  he  fre¬
quently  invited  me  to  see  his  patients  under  the  influence  of
mesmerism ;  one  of  these,  (whose  case  is  given  by  him  in  the
January  number  for  this  year,  p.  449  of  The  Zoist ,)  Edward
Chapman,  interested  me  much.  His  parents  confirm  Dr


By  Lieut.  Hare,  R.N.


309


Storer’s  account  of  his  malady  and  cure  by  mesmerism.  After
Dr.  S.  left  Bath,  he  felt  sometimes  a  little  faint,  and  by  the
wish  of  his  father  and  mother  I  frequently  mesmerised  him.
He  went  readily  into  the  sleep-waking  in  periods  varying
from  five  minutes  to  ten  seconds,  exhibiting  the  change  from
his  natural  shyness  in  the  presence  of  strangers  to  bold  and
unreserved  loquacity,  making  fun  of  persons  present,  and
ridiculing  any  peculiarity  of  appearance  or  manner  he  noticed
in  those  about  him  :  but  upon  being  awakened  he  seemed  un¬
conscious  of  what  he  had  done  or  said.  A  proof  of  this
occurred  on  one  occasion  when  I  gave  him  a  sixpence,  which
he  placed  in  his  pocket.  Upon  awaking,  his  sisters  asked
him  to  buy  some  trifle  for  them  in  the  town,  slipping  two
fourpenny- pieces  into  his  pocket.  He  purchased  the  article,
and  gave  the  change,  and  also  the  sixpence  I  had  given  him,
seeming  quite  unaware  of  having  had  any  money  given  to
him.  But  the  next  time  he  was  in  the  mesmeric  sleep  he
related  to  me  the  trick  his  sisters  had  played  him,  asking  at
the  same  time  that  the  sixpence  should  be  returned  to  him.

I  could  readily  make  his  arms  rigid  by  will,  or  by  passes
made  at  distances  varying  from  one  to  forty  feet,  and  could
produce  the  same  effect  from  a  room  above  or  below  the  one
in  which  he  might  be.  Upon  these  occasions  the  arm  sud¬
denly  appeared  elongated  with  a  start  as  if  electrified.  Upon
placing  round  rulers  in  each  of  his  hands,  and  making  the
latter  clasp  them  firmly,  I  could  relax  either  by  gazing  in¬
tently  at  it  for  a  short  time.  I  varied  these  experiments  in
the  presence  of  friends  who,  though  at  first  sceptical,  con¬
fessed  the  power  of  mesmerism.

On  the  8th  of  last  June,  Chapman,  whilst  in  the  sleep,
predicted  that  on  the  following  Friday  he  should  soon  after
8  a.m.  be  very  ill,  have  an  attack,  be  unconscious,  and  that
during  the  time  it  lasted  it  would  be  necessary  to  hold  him
and  keep  things  out  of  his  reach  or  he  might  do  mischief,
and  that  he  should  have  a  second  and  third  attack :  but  he
begged  his  mother  not  to  be  alarmed,  as  he  should  recover
and  be  in  better  health  than  before.  I  called  on  Mrs.  Chap¬
man  on  the  Friday,  and  learned  from  her  that  her  son  had
been  attacked  precisely  in  the  manner  he  described,  first  soon
after  8  a.m.,  and  a  second  time  during  the  morning ;  that  he
was  delirious,  and  attempted  to  get  hold  of  things  near  him.
These  left  him  very  weak,  and  he  wished  me  to  mesmerise
him  the  next  day,  which  I  did.  In  the  sleep  there  was  a
convulsive  movement  of  the  limbs,  which  he  extended ;  the
attack  was  very  slight.  His  mother  suggested  his  being
awakened ;  but,  upon  my  commencing  reverse  passes,  he


310  Clairvoyance  in  the  case  of  Master  Chapman.

pushed  me  back,  and  in  a  low  voice  asked  me  to  “  send  him
deeper,”  which  I  did.  He  told  us  this  was  the  third  and  last
attack,  consoling  his  mother  by  telling  her  he  should  be
better  than  ever.  It  is  only  fair  to  mention  that  his  two
sisters  were  staying  with  his  mother,  and  that  they  left  on
the  Friday  morning  early,  which  may  have  made  him  expect
to  be  excited  and  distressed  at  their  leaving ;  but  this  does
not  account  for  the  accuracy  (as  to  time  and  number  of  the
attacks)  with  which  he  predicted  what  would  happen  to  him,
that  he  would  be  delirious,  inclined  to  do  mischief,  &c.  After
this  he  became  better :  and  when  I  left  Bath  did  not  complain
of  anything  but  being  a  little  faint  in  hot  weather.

A  young  lady  whom  I  frequently  mesmerised  for  debility,
nervousness,  and  pain  in  the  side,  occasionally  came  with
Mrs.  Chapman  and  her  son.  She  was  far  more  sensitive ;  a
look  at  her  hand  was  at  any  time  enough  to  make  it  rigid,
and  a  few  seconds’  gaze  would  relax  it.  I  could  produce  the
same  effect  from  another  room  by  will  or  passes.  I  could
also  deprive  her  for  a  time  of  the  power  of  speech ;  sometimes
whilst  speaking  to  another  person.  She  never  spoke  unless  I
touched  her,  or  I  addressed  my  voice  to  her  hand ,  when  a
whisper  was  sufficient  to  make  her  hear  and  respond  :  but  no
other  person  could  make  her  speak.  This  young  lady  was
thrown  into  the  sleep  with  a  few  passes,  but  it  was  always
difficult  to  waken  her.  One  thing  I  have  noticed  in  many
cases,  viz.,  that  there  is  a  sympathy  existing  between  the
corresponding  nerves  of  the  mesmeriser  and  patient.  Thus
this  young  lady  whom  I  could  not  awaken  for  many  minutes
by  either  transverse  or  reverse  passes  or  by  fanning,  would
upon  my  shutting  my  eyes  opposite  to  her  and  opening  them
once  or  twice,  open  tier’s  and  awake.

If  any  of  the  above  experiments  are  worth  insertion  in
The  Zoist  they  are  at  your  service.  I  was  requested  by  a  sci¬
entific  friend  to  communicate  them,  for  he  observed  that,
coming  from  a  gentleman  who  has  no  interest  to  serve,  who
is  an  amateur  only,  and  who  can  have  no  object  in  practising
deception,  the  communication  of  facts  he  has  witnessed  would
not  excite  suspicion.  I  am  aware  there  is  nothing  new  in
what  I  relate,  at  least  to  a  mesmerist.

Trusting  you  will  pardon  the  liberty  I  take  in  writing
to  you,

I  am,  Sir,  yours  very  faithfully,

To.  Dr.  Elliotson.  Richard  Hare,  Lieut.  R.N.


(  311  )


XIV.  Apparent  Clairvoyance  independent  of  Mesmerism ,  but
connected  with  Insanity.  Communicated  in  a  letter  to
Dr.  Elliotson.

The  following  particulars  were  sent  me  by  a  medical  gen¬
tleman  who  has  already  contributed  with  his  name  to  The
Zoist ,  but  begs  his  name  not  to  be  disclosed  on  the  present
occasion :  though  I  am  at  liberty  to  mention  it  to  any  person
privately.

John  Elliotson.

Dear  Sir, — The  perusal  of  your  curious  cases  of  “  double
consciousness”  in  some  numbers  of  that  most  instructive
periodical,  The  Zoist ,  has  greatly  interested  me,  as  has  also
that  communicated  by  Mr.  Clark,  in  p.  30,  No.  XVII.,  for
April,  1847.  I  have  some  personal  analogous  experience.  It
is  nearly  nine  years  since  I  took  the  immediate  charge  of  a
gentleman  of  deranged  intellect,  with  whom  I  reside  in  inti¬
mate  association  as  friend.  I  have  often,  particularly  in  the
earlier  years  of  my  charge,  been  thoroughly  puzzled  to  ac¬
count  for  his  knowledge  of  circumstances,  perhaps  mere  trifles,
with  which  we  did  not  wish  him  to  become  acquainted.  I  did
not  deem  them  worthy  of  note  at  the  time ;  that  is,  I  did
not  make  any  memorandum  of  them;  and  would  not  now
like  to  trust  my  memory  as  to  particulars,  nor  would  they  be
clearly  apprehended  without  entering  into  tedious,  prosy
details.  Suffice  it  that  long  before  I  read  The  Zoist,  I  had
expressed  to  the  able  medical  gentleman  who  regularly  visits
us,  an  opinion  that  “  our  friend  seemed  to  know  things  as  if
a  spiritual  intelligence  was  at  his  elbow  and  whispered  in  his
ear ;”  “  formerly  they  would  have  said  he  had  a  familiar
spirit ;”  “  know  he  certainly  does,  but  how,  I  can't  make
out ;”  and  such  like  remarks,  showing  my  impression  at  the
time.  Our  patient's  mental  condition  has  greatly  improved,
and  I  do  not  now  often  observe  these  curious  perceptions,  or
they  are  not  so  singular  or  strongly  marked  as  to  preclude
the  possibility  of  their  being  matters  of  accidental  coin¬
cidence.

About  three  years  since,  for  a  few  evenings,  this  per¬
ceptive  power  was  wonderfully  acute ;  he  was  in  an  argument¬
ative  and  quarrelsome  humour  at  the  time.  We  sat  together
by  the  fire-side  while  our  tea  was  infusing,  seemingly  both
engaged  in  thought,  when  my  friend  exclaimed,  “I  don't
think  that,  Sir ;  I  don't  think  that.''  “  I  don't  believe  it.”
“I  sav  I  don't  believe  it.”  I  replied  quietly,  “  Don't  believe
what  Mr. - ?  I  have  not  spoken ;  what  do  you  allude


312


Clairvoyance  independent  of  Mesmerism.


to  ?”  He  immediately,  without  noticing  my  remark  that  I
had  not  spoken,  referred  to  the  precise  subject  of  which  I
had  been  just  thinking,  and  began  to  contradict  me  respect¬
ing  it.  Had  this  occurred  but  once  it  might  be  said  I  was
“  unconsciously  thinking  aloud,”  but  several  similar  mani¬
festations  of  perceptive  power  took  place  about  this  time;
and  as  I  was  on  my  guard  I  can  certainly  state,  with  as  firm
a  conviction  of  the  truth  of  my  averment  as  any  one  who
confides  in  his  senses  and  memory  can  feel,  that  I  did  not
speak  my  thoughts,  but  that  there  was  a  clairvoyant  percep¬
tion  of  them,  or  perception  in  some  unaccountable  manner.
Another  instance  is  well  marked  and  caused  as  much  interest
and  wonder  at  the  time.

Four  and  a  half  years  since  it  became  necessary  that

M - ,  our  house-steward  and  butler,  should  be  discharged.

As  he  was  an  old  family  servant,  and  his  dismissal  might  irri¬
tate  our  patient,  it  was  deemed  advisable  that  we  should  pay
a  visit  to  the  sea-side  for  a  month,  and  his  removal  be  effected
during  our  absence.  This  was  exceedingly  well  managed,  the
secret  well  kept.  Without  tedious  explanation  I  cannot
convey  the  grounds  of  my  conviction,  but  surely  convinced
am  I  that  our  poor  friend  neither  did  nor  could  know  any
thing  of  the  contemplated  change  until  the  day  preceding
that  of  our  return  home.  He  was  then  informed  by  letter

that  M - had,  for  certain  reasons,  been  sent  away,  and  a

very  comfortable,  respectable  elderly  person,  a  Mrs.  T - ,

installed  in  his  place.  We  were  at  breakfast  when  the  letter
was  delivered ;  he  perused  and  handed  it  to  me ;  enquired

why  M - was  gone ;  supposed  he  would  “  turn  up  again

some  day  •”  and  made  such  remarks  as  would  naturally  occur
on  being  for  the  first  time  apprised  of  the  circumstance.  Next
morning  we  started  for  home,  a  distance  of  sixty  miles.
Whilst  the  horses  were  being  changed  for  the  last  stage,  our
friend,  who  wanted  his  dinner,  (having  declined  refreshment
on  the  road,)  expressed  his  hope  that  we  should  find  some¬
thing  good  when  we  got  home.  I  explained  that  as  the  time
of  our  arrival  was  uncertain,  a  cold  dinner  would  be  on  the
table  waiting  us ;  that  we  might  be  sure  our  new  housekeeper,

Mrs.  T - ,  would  take  care  to  make  us  comfortable ;  that

she  was  a  very  respectable  person — that  we  would  not  con¬
sider  her  a  common  servant,  but  call  her  our  lady  house¬
keeper,  &c.,  &c. :  in  the  same  strain,  trying  to  impress  that
she  was  a  very  superior  person  to  the  one  she  had  succeeded.
As  I  finished  we  started ;  my  friend  threw  himself  back  in
the  carriage  and  did  not  speak  for  eight  or  ten  minutes,  and
then  said,  “  I  don't  see  that,  Mr. - ,  (addressing  me,)  I


313


The  “  Christian  Remembrancer  ,”  fyc.

don’t  see  that ;  I  don’t  believe  it.  M - kept  a  grocer’s

shop  before  lie  came ;  Mrs.  T - kept  a  grocer’s  shop  before

she  came ;  one  grocer  is  as  good  as  another ;  both  shop¬
keepers;  no  difference  in  respectability  I  think.”  This  was
strictly  true ;  and  the  enquiries  which  I  made  to  discover  how
our  friend  knew  it  only  tended  to  puzzle  me,  as  the  attendants
whose  casual  remarks  might  have  been  overheard,  declared

that  they  did  not  know  Mrs.  T - was  a  grocer  until  I

named  it ;  and  other  sources  of  information  there  were  not.

If  those  who  have  the  opportunity  would  take  the  trouble
to  notice  and  communicate,  some  curious  matter  of  the  above
kind  might,  I  think,  be  educed ;  such  communications  could
not  be  otherwise  than  interesting  to  all  who  are  engaged  in
the  study  of  the  phenomena  of  mind,  or  treatment  of  diseased
mental  functions.

Your  most  obedient  servant,

yL.

^  ^  ^  ^

It  has  frequently  happened  that  these  highest  forms  of
clairvoyance  were  connected  with  insanity.*  Such  high  powers
may  be  more  readily  called  forth  when  the  brain  is  in  an  ex¬
cited  and  disordered  state,  and  perhaps  exist  more  readily
with  a  disposition  to  disorder  of  the  brain.  “  Great  wit  to
madness  nearly  is  allied.”  Indeed  the  greater  part  of  alleged
clairvoyants  whom  we  hear  of  around  us  talk  at  times  great
nonsense.  We  cannot  be  too  careful  in  attempting  to  dis¬
tinguish  between  their  clairvoyant  moments  and  their  periods
of  wildness.

John  Elliotson.


XY.  “  The  Christian  Remembrancer ,”  or  Arrogance  unmasked .

We  are  not  in  the  habit  of  devoting  our  leisure  to  the  perusal
of  the  periodicals  emanating  from  the  religious  sects  of  this
country,  but  our  attention  has  been  specially  directed  to  an
article  in  the  Christian  Remembrancer  for  April,  1847,  and
after  reading  it,  we  feel  bound  to  make  a  few  remarks.  It
has  been  our  misfortune  to  wade  through  many  articles
written  for  the  avowed  purpose  of  crushing  mesmeric  truths,
— to  read  many  articles  so  weak  and  ridiculous  that  they
might  be  safely  left  without  a  word  of  comment  to  the  judg¬
ment  of  the  most  superficial  thinker ;  but  we  certainly  did


*  Such  were  the  cases  related  in  the  last  number  but  one  of  The  Zoist,
p.  30,  occurring  in  several  members  of  the  same  family.


314


The  “  Christian  Remembrancer”


not  expect  in  the  middle  of  the  nineteenth  century  to  be
compelled  to  read  the  proclamation  of  a  species  of  religious
crusade  against  a  small  knot  of  natural  philosophers, — men,
whose  lives  are  devoted  to  the  searching  after  new  methods
and  appliances  for  the  purpose  of  alleviating  the  miseries  of
suffering  humanity.  Our  readers  will  be  astonished  to  hear
that  the  attempt  to  open  an  institution  for  the  application  of
mesmeric  treatment  has  attracted  the  attention,  and  aroused
that  innate  desire  for  domination,  so  evident  through  all  time
amongst  many  of  the  paid  professors  of  religious  doctrines;
and  we  are  sorry  to  say  that  the  article  we  shall  now  refer  to
has  been  written  for  the  sole  purpose  of  slyly  putting  forth
“  a  feeler”  as  to  the  necessity  for  the  clergy  becoming  the
managers  of  the  proposed  hospital,  and  the  expediency  of
obtaining  this  end  by  detracting  from  the  character  of  their
lay  brethren.  Let  us  at  once,  in  limine ,  state  that  we  respect
the  clergy  as  long  as  they  keep  within  the  limits  their  pro¬
fession  prescribes  for  them.  We  have  the  pleasure  of  inti¬
mately  knowing  and  we  may  add  of  living  on  terms  of  friend¬
ship  with  many  members  of  this  profession,  and  we  know
that  a  considerable  number  to  whom  we  have  spoken  on  this
subject  regret  the  publication  of  the  language  in  the  Christian
Remembrancer.  What  we  are  about  to  write,  therefore,  refers
only  to  those  who  interfere  with  the  right  of  thought  of  their
neighbours,  and  who  are  constantly  detracting  from  the  trust¬
worthiness  and  moral  character  of  men  who  they  suppose  do
not  think  precisely  as  they  think,  and  who  are,  therefore,
according  to  their  narrow  views  incapacitated  from  fulfilling
the  common  duties  of  citizenship.

Here  are  the  opinions  of  the  writer  in  the  Christian  Re¬
membrancer.

“  Nothing  is  more  to  be  deprecated  than  that  any  great  instru¬
ment  should  be  left  in  evil  hands.  Such  cannot  but  use  it  for  evil
purposes.  Has  it  ever  happened  that  medicine  has  been  left  in  the
hands  of  unbelievers  without  signal  injury  to  the  faith?  Has  no
harm  been  done,  when  science  has  been  left  in  the  possession  of
those  who  longed  to  employ  it  against  God  and  his  church  ?  Has
any  good  come  of  the  abandonment  of  history  during  the  last  cen¬
tury  to  the  infidel  party?  And  if  we  see  all  this  clearly,  as  we  now
do,  shall  we  not  also  see  that  to  leave  a  great  instrument  of  mitigat¬
ing  human  sufferings,  and  powerful  medical  agent,  in  the  hands  of
irreligious  men,  will  be  an  act  of  great  responsibility.  Much  more
when,  as  in  this  instance,  there  is  much  in  it  which  is  not  only  use¬
ful  but  exciting  ;  many  curious  facts  of  psychology,  many  unex¬
pected  results,  and  ensnaring  speculations.  Neither  is  this  an  ima¬
ginary  evil.  Animal  magnetism,  indeed,  has  no  necessary  or  even
natural  connexion  with  unbelief.  But  it  is  equally  true  that  some  of


or  Arrogance,  unmasked.


315


its  ablest  advocates  in  this  country  are  evidently  unbelievers,  and
desirous  of  using  it  as  an  instrument  against  Christianity.  Under
these  circumstances,  is  it  wisest  to  leave  it  in  their  hands,  or  to
employ  it  ourselves?

"  We  earnestly  trust,  that  religious  men,  and  churchmen,  will
come  forward  to  take  upon  themselves  the  management  and  direction
of  the  proposed  mesmeric  infirmary.  It  is  to  be  established.  It
will  assuredly  lead  to  many  cases  of  cure;  it  will,  therefore,  be
lamentable  if  the  patients  are  left  to  attach  themselves  by  gratitude
for  benefits  received  there,  to  irreligious  men  or  false  guides,  because
others  would  not  undertake  the  direction.”

The  arrogance  displayed  in  these  passages  is  really  almost
beyond  criticism.  This  writer,  and  those  with  whom  he  is
associated,  are  surely  not  the  only  men  who  are  to  be  con¬
sidered  to  entertain  correct  opinions.  “  Evil  hands”  indeed  !
Are  all  then  who  live  and  think  beyond  the  confines  of  his
meagre  intelligence  to  be  denounced,  and  none  considered
good  but  those  who  applaud  the  doings  of  his  party,  and
fetter  themselves  to  thoughts  stereotyped  in  an  age  when
liberty  was  crushed  and  men  dared  not  speak  but  according
to  prescribed  rules  and  formulae  ?  And  we  should  wish  to
enquire,  when  and  where  has  any  English  mesmeric  writer
attempted  to  interfere  with  Christian  doctrines  ?  When  and
where  has  it  been  attempted  to  use  mesmerism  “  as  an  instru¬
ment  against  Christianity  ?”  We  demand  an  answer  to  this
simple  question.  We  have  a  right  to  ask  for  the  authority
which  the  Rev.  H.  Wilberforce*  possesses  for  making  this
statement.  We  challenge  him  to  the  proof  and  we  await  the
result.  “  Has  any  good  ever  come  of  the  abandonment”  of
truth  ?  Surely  “  religious  men  and  churchmen”  should  have
some  little  consideration  for  its  value  !f

Every  body  knows  who  the  writer  means  by  the  “  ablest
advocates  in  this  country,” — every  body  knows  who  has  suf¬
fered  most  in  asserting  the  truth  on  the  subject  of  mesmerism,
—  every  body  knows  who  were  the  movers  in  the  attempt  to
establish  this  hospital,  and  therefore  this  very  religious  writer


*  The  Rev.  H.  Wilberforce  is  said  to  have  written  this  article,  and  to  have
been  prompted  to  do  so  by  Mr.  Newnham,  of  Farnham,  a  very  weak  man,  who
has  been  afflicted  for  many  years  with  the  cacoethes  scribendi.  His  writings  are
of  no  value,  but  they  serve  his  purpose.

f  The  unbelieving  Athenians  understood  the  high  value  of  truth.  So  great
was  their  love  of  this  virtue,  that  they  would  not  sanction  even  in  their  thea¬
trical  displays  a  single  word  or  sentence  that  could  by  any  possibility  be  construed
into  an  attempt  at  its  perversion.  To  such  an  extent  was  this  carried,  that  during
the  performance  of  a  play  written  by  the  great  tragic  poet,  Euripides,  when  the
following  sentence  was  uttered,  “/  swore  with  my  mouth,  but  not  with  my
heart, ”  a  great  tumult  arose  amongst  the  audience,  and  they  were  not  satisfied
till  the  poet  had  been  publicly  tried  for  corrupting  the  morals  of  his  countrymen.


316


The  “  Christian  Remembrancer  ”


has  no  right  to  arouse  the  hostile  feelings  of  the  religious
sects  of  this  sectarian  land,  by  denouncing  certain  members
of  the  medical  profession  as  unfit  to  carry  out  the  benevolent
measures  they  think  it  right  to  adopt.  We  have  never  in  the
pages  of  this  journal  entered  upon  any  other  discussion  than
such  as  was  our  legitimate  duty, — we  have  distinctly  confined
ourselves  to  scientific  subjects, — we  have  never  encroached  on
the  domain  of  this  writer,  and  most  assuredly  we  are  not  now
about  to  offer  any  remarks  on  supernaturalism  or  any  of  its
numerous  offshoots.  The  advocates  of  mesmerism  as  far  as
we  know  them  have  never  written  on  religious  subjects ;  they
may  or  may  not  entertain  orthodox  opinions  on  supernatural
doctrines — we  have  nothing  to  do  with  a  man's  private
thoughts, — but  surely  a  man's  belief,  be  it  good,  bad,  or  in¬
different,  tested  by  the  latitude  and  longitude  in  which  he
happens  to  have  been  born,  or  in  any  other  way  more  con¬
sonant  with  the  views  of  this  very  liberal  critic,  is  not  to  be
made  the  guage  by  which  his  power  of  doing  good  is  to  be
estimated.  What  possible  connection  can  there  be  between
the  wish  or  the  power  to  do  good,  and  the  opinions  a  man
may  entertain  regarding  religious  disputes  and  doctrines  ?
What  right  has  any  one  to  demand  that  a  man's  private  opi¬
nions  shall  be  made  the  test  for  the  due  performance  of  his
public  and  philanthropic  duties  ?  Are  orthodox  divines  on  all
occasions  the  men  who  have  shewn  themselves  the  most  in¬
clined  to  carry  out  in  a  conscientious  manner  the  duties  they
have  been  entrusted  with  ?  Look  at  the  long  list  of  chari¬
table  funds  perverted  from  their  proper  course.  Reflect  on
the  exposure  which  Lord  Brougham  made  some  years  since.
And  as  to  character — if  religious  opinions  are  to  be  made  the
test  of  character,  why  the  daily  police  sheets,  to  say  nothing
of  the  trials  for  “  breach  of  promise,"  or  the  recent  disgrace¬
ful  proceedings  in  the  diocese  of  the  Bishop  of  London,  will
indicate  on  the  part  of  the  clergy  how  very  fallacious  it  is  to
take  the  mere  belief  in  any  particular  doctrine  as  a  guarantee
for  correct  conduct.

We  write  strongly  on  this  point,  because  we  think  it
necessary.  We  care  not  who  it  is  who  advances  the  doctrine
that  the  avowal  of  a  certain  belief  is  essential  to  the  con¬
scientious  performance  of  a  certain  duty — we  think  the  doc¬
trine  infamous,  and  we  consider  the  author  to  be  regardless
of  social  peace,  a  nourisher  of  the  demon  of  discord,  and  an
enemy  to  the  progress  of  humanity.  We  know  perfectly  well
that  with  rational  men  such  doctrine  is  viewed  in  its  true
light,  but  then  we  have  to  consider  the  immense  number  of
persons  who  never  think,  who  have  been  drilled  into  a  certain


or  Arrogance  unmasked.


317


belief,  and  who  consider  it  wrong  to  doubt  the  correctness  of
the  notions  they  have  acquired,  or  to  reflect  on  the  possibility
of  any  individual  being  right  but  themselves.  Unfortunately
they  have  been  taught  also  that  there  is  merit  due  when  the
intellectual  faculties  arrive  at  certain  conclusions,  and  demerit
when  they  do  not,  and  they  forthwith  consider  that  they  are
performing  a  great  public  duty  by  attempting  to  induce  a
species  of  uniformity ;  and  if  they  fail  in  accomplishing  this,
then  the  character  of  those  they  have  endeavoured  to  coerce
is  at  a  discount, — if  a  life  has  been  ever  so  blameless  and  a
career  such  as  ought  to  be  considered  a  model  for  the  rising
generation,  it  counts  as  nothing  in  the  supernatural-belief
balance — forms  of  faith  and  not  character,  professions  and
not  actions,  appear  to  be  the  grand  requisites.  The  question
appears  to  be,  not  whether  a  certain  individual  be  a  good  man
and  true,  but  is  he  one  of  us  ?  We  constitute  the  standard
by  which  men  are  to  be  judged,  albeit  we  profess  to  believe  in
the  command,  “  Judge  not  lest  ye  be  judged we  alone  are
capable  of  arbitrating  as  to  his  trustworthiness,  notwithstand¬
ing  we  have  daily  before  us  the  most  glaring  examples  of
dozens  of  our  professors  privately  doing  what  they  publicly
declare  to  be  a  great  crime  and  worthy  of  condign  punish¬
ment.

Can  any  man  who  reflects  for  a  moment  avoid  deploring
such  a  state  of  social  intercourse  ?  Can  any  philanthropist —
not  the  man  of  mere  impulse,  but  the  man  whose  philan¬
thropic  aspirations  are  the  result  of  enlightened  intellect  and
moral  training — avoid  perceiving  that  the  incessant  inculca¬
tion  of  the  necessity  of  a  belief  in  certain  tenets,  instead  of
encouraging  by  every  means  at  our  disposal  a  yearning  after
the  highest  virtue,  must,  as  we  unhappily  every  day  perceive,
depreciate  the  standard  of  morality,  and  loosen  the  only  safe
bonds  which  can  strengthen  and  consolidate  the  social  fabric  ?
As  the  system  is  now  worked,  it  must  be  considered  a  gigantic
plan  for  the  destruction  of  the  sincerity  of  our  fellow  beings,
and  therefore  a  cruel  attempt  to  make  the  weak,  the  selfish,
and  the  imbecile  in  morals,  offer  professions  and  advance
statements  directly  opposed  to  their  real  opinions  and  con¬
scientious  convictions.  We  venture  to  ask,  is  this  the  task
which  the  writer  in  the  Christian  Remembrancer  has  given
himself?  Tractarian  as  he  is,  and  led  away  as  he  may  be  by
his  efforts  to  substitute  a  seductive  mannerism  for  increasing
intelligence,  he  surely  does  not  inculcate  the  doctrine  that  a
return  to  the  antiquated  absurdities  of  our  forefathers  is  ad¬
visable,  and  that  before  an  individual  can  be  considered  com¬
petent  to  take  charge  of  the  health  of  his  neighbours,  he  shall


318


The  “  Christian  Remembrancer,”


be  made  to  subscribe  to  certain  abstract  propositions.  In  the
days  we  are  referring  to,  the  stake,  the  faggot,  the  torch,  and
the  pitch-barrel  were  the  alternatives  offered  to  those  who
refused  their  assent, — these  days,  we  in  our  advanced  stage  of
civilization  are  in  the  habit  of  designating  “  the  days  of  bar¬
barism;”  but  in  how  much  has  the  barbarism  diminished,
when  it  is  apparent  that  we  have  only  changed  the  kind  of
persecution,  and  by  a  species  of  refinement,  which  we  shall
always  hold  up  to  reprobation,  the  slow  suffocation  and  the
frying  of  the  flesh  have  been  discontinued,  and  the  far  more
cruel,  because  indefinitely  prolonged  persecution  of  private
and  public  slander,  substituted.

We  have  already  given  the  name  of  the  author  of  the
paper  we  are  referring  to,  but  we  wish  it  to  be  understood
that  we  are  not  fighting  with  individuals, — we  attack  the  sin
but  not  the  sinner ;  we  are  contending  against  a  great  public
abuse,  nay,  a  great  crime,  for  it  is  a  crime  to  set  man  against
man  for  what  must  continue  to  be  a  matter  of  opinion.  But
it  is  necessary  in  this  instance  to  enter  into  particulars,  and
to  point  out  the  secret  springs  which  moved  the  author,  and
prompted  him  to  indulge  in  such  offensive  observations.  If
our  readers  will  refer  to  a  former  number  of  our  journal,  they
will  remember  reading  an  article,  entitled  “Fact  against
Fancy.”  Bespect  for  truth  made  us  on  that  occasion  enter
fully  into  a  consideration  of  the  qualifications  which  Mr.
Newnham  possessed,  and  which  would  authorize  him  in  be¬
coming  a  public  instructer.  We  found  him  to  be  lamentably
deficient,  and  we  were  compelled  to  come  to  the  conclusion
that  no  conscientious  individual  would  have  written  an  octavo
volume  on  what  must  be  considered  a  most  difficult  problem,
without  having  some  little  experience  in  the  matter  under  dis¬
cussion.  A  glance  at  one  case  we  considered  not  sufficient  to
warrant  him  in  authoritatively  discussing  mesmeric  pheno¬
mena.  There  are  acute  thinkers  who  have  been  engaged  for
years  in  continued  observation,  and  yet  they  do  not  feel  jus¬
tified  in  doing  this.  The  power  to  look  through  a  telescope
does  not  necessarily  constitute  an  astronomer,  neither  does
the  ability  to  work  out  an  algebraic  equation  confer  the  power
of  rivalling  the  achievements  of  our  ill-used  countryman,
Mr.  Adams.

There  is  a  list  of  twelve  works  prefixed  to  the  article  in
the  Christian  Remembrancer ,  but  The  Zoist ,  a  quarterly  journal
now  in  its  fifth  year,  is  not  mentioned.  Mesmerisers  in  all
parts  of  the  world  have  recorded  their  facts  in  this  periodical;
it  is  quoted  on  all  occasions  when  mesmerism  is  the  topic  dis¬
cussed — men  who  have  investigated  mesmerism  for  the  last


or  Arrogance  unmasked.


319


twelve  years  write  in  it,  and  their  views,  their  facts,  and  their
investigations,  appear  to  be  of  no  value  in  the  opinion  of  this
candid  critic.  He  seems  to  have  no  affection  for  The  Zoist,
where  then  does  he  place  his  affections  ?  Who  is  his  autho¬
rity  ?  He  evidently  knows  nothing  about  the  matter  himself ;
who  has  attempted  to  enlighten  him  ?  When  the  blind  lead
the  blind  both  parties  fall  together  into  the  ditch,  and  assur¬
edly  Messrs.  Newnham  and  Wilberforce  are  in  the  same  pre¬
dicament.  When  Mr.  Newnham  compiled  his  huge  volume
of  other  men’s  experience  and  experiments,  he  had  never
seen  but  one  case  of  mesmeric  sleep.  He  commenced  his
career  by  sneering  at  what  he  did  not  understand,  and  when
he  began  to  investigate,  not  by  experiment  as  one  anxious
for  the  truth  would  have  done,  but  by  reading  the  works  of
others,  he  suddenly  became  convinced  that  his  opposition  had
been  senseless,  and  forthwith  published  a  work  brim-full  of
the  most  absurd  statements  and  undigested  crudities,  and
which  of  course  has  done  no  good  because  it  was  not  based
on  a  personal  examination  of  natural  facts.  The  Rev.  H.
Wilberforce  is  so  enamoured  with  this  sudden  Jem  Crow  evo¬
lution,  with  this  vast  display  of  worldly  candour,  that  he
adopts  Mr.  Newnham  for  his  monitor  and  lauds  him  in  the
highest  degree,  but  never  mentions,  except  once  in  an  inci¬
dental  manner  amongst  the  list  of  writers,  the  name  of  him
who  has  suffered  more  than  any  man  living  for  the  advocacy
of  a  great  truth.  What  colour  of  justice  is  there  in  exalting
the  man  who  was  not  so  dishonest  as  to  stifle  the  verdict
returned  by  his  intellectual  faculties  after  years  of  neglect,
and  when  all  fear  from  popular  prejudice  had  passed  away,
whilst  he,  who  has  always  stood  foremost  in  the  cause  of
truth,  is  treated  with  the  most  contemptuous  neglect  ?  To
our  view  the  man  who  gives  an  opinion  on  any  subject  with¬
out  careful  examination  should  be  disqualified  from  becoming
a  leader  on  any  philosophical  subject,  and  so  far  from  quoting
such  an  individual  as  an  authority,  he  should  be  considered
unsafe  and  reckless,  and  probably  dishonest.

Mr.  Newnham  not  only  prompted  the  Rev.  H.  Wilber¬
force  to  write  the  article,  but  he  dictated  the  manner  of  its
construction,  and  writhing  under  the  stripes  which  we  inflicted
in  a  previous  number,  he  suggested  the  advisability  of  sup¬
pressing  all  reference  to  the  labours  of  Dr.  Elliotson,  and  sly
fellow  !  requested  as  a  particular  favour  that  the  name  of
The  Zoist ,  the  only  journal  on  mesmerism  published  in  this
country,  might  be  altogether  left  out  of  the  list  of  mesmeric
works.  From  previous  experience  we  were  well  acquainted
with  the  uncharitable  feelings  of  Mr.  Newnham,  but  what


320


The  “  Christian  Remembrancer  ,”


are  we  to  say  regarding  the  writer  in  the  Christian  Remem¬
brancer  ?  Here  is  a  paid  teacher  of  the  people,  a  bishop’s
brother,  a  writer  by  choice  in  the  journal  of  the  high  church
party,  a  journal  whose  title  proclaims  that  it  is  intended  to
teach  men  the  path  of  duty — to  teach  them  “  to  live  in
charity  with  all  men,”  “  to  give  every  man  his  due,”  “  to
render  unto  Caesar  the  things  which  are  Caesar’s,” — here  is
this  man,  we  say,  at  the  suggestion  of  one  more  cunning
than  himself,  committing  a  gross  act  of  literary  dishonesty,
and  voluntarily  falsifying  the  data  on  which  his  readers  were
to  judge  of  the  progress  of  what  he  himself  considers  to  be
“  a  great  truth,”  and  worthy  of  the  recognition  of  the  church  !
O!  tempora.  0!  mores*

Now,  when  a  man  puts  himself  forward  as  a  religious  and
moral  character,  par  excellence ,  proclaiming,  like  the  Pharisee
of  the  olden  times,  his  own  goodness,  and  criticizing  the  belief
of  his  neighbours,  it  is  not  only  becoming,  but  a  matter  of
necessity  to  ascertain  how  far  he  deserves  to  retain  his  self-
elected  position.  Candour  is  always  considered  one  of  the
attributes  of  a  moral  character.  Many  persons  would  have
presumed,  a  priori ,  that  a  writer  in  the  Christian  Remem¬
brancer ,  and  a  public  censor,  would  have  been  particularly
careful  to  place  before  his  readers  all  the  facts  necessary  to
the  elucidation  of  his  subject,  and  if  this  were  impossible,  as
it  would  have  been,  at  any  rate  to  furnish  a  reference  to  the
only  repertory  for  facts  published  in  this  country.  We  say
that  a  strictly  conscientious  man  would  have  done  so,  but
then  we  are  fastidious,  we  hold  the  unpopular  and  foolish
doctrine  that  the  truth  however  unpalatable  should  be  spoken,
— we  advocate  the  unceasing  inculcation  on  all  occasions  of
the  importance  to  be  attached  to,  and  the  vast  benefit  which
must  accrue  from,  a  judicious  collection  of  facts,  and  we  care
not  so  much  for  what  can  be  proved,  as  for  what  can  be  proved
to  be  true.  As  the  eloquent  Dr.  Channing  has  said,  “  The  love
of  truth,  a  deep  thirst  for  it,  a  deliberate  purpose  to  seek  and
hold  it  fast,  may  be  considered  as  the  very  foundation  of
human  culture  and  dignity.”  The  man  who  suppresses  a
series  of  facts,  is  as  deserving  of  reprobation  as  the  man  who

*  There  seems  to  be  a  desire  with  some  Englishmen  to  treat  with  neglect,
or  to  damage  the  reputation  of  those  amongst  their  countrymen  who  step  beyond
them  in  the  race  of  intellect.  Thus,  as  a  recent  illustration  of  this  statement,
we  have  now  before  us  the  proof,  that  the  astronomer  royal,  Mr.  Airy,  so  far
forgot  his  duty  to  truth,  to  science,  and  to  his  countryman,  as  to  write  to
M.  Le  Versier  these  words,  (i  You  ought,  without  any  doubt,  to  be  considered
as  the  person  who  has  really  predicted  the  position  of  the  planet/  ’  when  it  is  a
notorious  fact  that  Mr.  Airy  had  in  his  possession  seven  months  before,  the  cal¬
culations  of  Mr.  Adams,  predicting  the  very  position  of  the  planet  which  it  was
afterwards  found  to  occupy  !


or  Arrogance  unmasked .


321


suggests  a  false  explanation  of  them,  merely  to  make  them  for
a  time  suit  his  own  purpose  and  tally  with  his  preconceived
theories  and  fancies.  A  philosophical  writer  should  be  like
Csesar’s  wife,  above  the  breath  of  suspicion.  There  should  be
no  attempt  at  a  suppression  of  facts,  no  perversion  of  facts,
no  exaggeration  of  the  true  value  of  facts,  all  should  be  clearly
stated,  lucidly  arranged,  and  labelled  as  far  as  our  knowledge
will  permit  with  their  proper  value.  We  can  quite  under¬
stand,  although  we  by  no  means  countenance  the  practice,  a
barrister  keeping  back  all  the  facts  hostile  to  the  view  he
wishes  those  before  whom  he  is  pleading  to  take  of  his  cause;
but  we  cannot  understand  a  philosopher  and  a  moralist,  whose
object  is  the  ascertainment  of  truth,  and  who  should  be  per¬
petually  striving  after  the  acquisition  and  elucidation  of  prin¬
ciples  and  laws  necessary  for  the  elevation,  the  happiness,  and
the  onward  movements  of  society,  keeping  back  aught  that
can  be  considered  essential  to  the  correct  appreciation  of  a
disputed  topic.  It  is  the  work  of  a  trickster — a  sophist — a
man  striving  merely  for  victory,  regardless  of  the  means  by
which  it  is  obtained,  and  not  the  course  likely  to  be  pursued
by  a  man  whose  aspirations  are  in  accordance  with  the  prin¬
ciples  which  we  have  above  enumerated.  The  vulgar  and
illiterate  may  attempt  such  a  course,  but  “  the  chief  part  of
a  philosophers  life  must  be  spent  in  unlearning  the  errors  of
the  crowd.”

L.  E.  G.  E.


NOTICES  TO  CORRESPONDENTS.

Last  Mesmeric  Surgical  Operations  at  Cherbourg. — “  An  obscure  and  not
a  hospital  surgeon”  is  informed  that  the  two  surgical  operations  rendered  pain¬
less  at  Cherbourg  by  mesmerism,  and  only  referred  to  in  our  last  number,  were
perfectly  similar,  we  understand,  to  that  which  was  fully  detailed.  On  this
account  no  details  were  published  by  M.  Durand.

The  Rev.  Dr.  Cumming. — We  thank  “  Ignotus”  for  pointing  out  this  teacher
in  Israel’s  attack  upon  “  Infidel  Craniolo gists.”  A  true  Christian  is  not  puffed
up,  does  not  behave  himself  unseemly,  estimates  no  man  for  his  opinions  upon
difficult  matters  which  it  requires  a  course  of  hard  study  to  judge  of :  but  he
looks  to  the  hearts  of  others,  and  at  the  same  time  strikes  upon  his  own  heart
and  exclaims,  “  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner.”

Transferrence  of  Disease. — “  Selwyn”  is  informed  that  it  is  not  likely  that
such  a  disease  would  be  transferred.  Should  the  occurrence,  however,  take
place,  the  transferred  affection  would  probably  be  slight  and  temporary  :  and  at
any  rate  might  be  dissipated  by  a  second  mesmeriser,  who  would  have  no  chance
of  taking  it.  The  enquirer  is  referred  to  p.  246  of  the  present  number,  and
p.  330  of  Vol.  III.

Dr.  Piclcford,  of  Brighton. — We  cannot  inform  “  A  Brighton  Apothecary’*
who  Dr.  Pickford  is.  We  saw  his  wise  letter  in  the  papers,  telling  the  world  that

“  Pain  during  operations  is,  in  the  majority  of  cases,  even  desirable ;  its  pre¬
vention  or  annihilation  is,  for  the  most  part,  hazardous  to  the  patient.  In  the
lying-in  chamber  nothing  is  more  true  than  this  :  pain  is  the  mother’s  safety,  its
VOL.  V.  A  A


322  Notices  to  Correspondents ,  Books  received ,  fyc.

absence  her  destruction.  Yet  are  there  those  bold  enough  to  administer  the
vapour  of  ether  even  at  this  critical  juncture,  forgetting  it  has  been  ordered  that
‘  in  sorrow  shall  she  bring  forth.’

“  I  have  the  honour  to  be,,  Sir,

“  Your  obedient  servant,

“  1,  Cavendish  Place,  Brighton,  “James  H.  Pickford,  M.D.

“29th  May,  1847.”

We  ask  this  doctor  what  sort  of  cases  they  are,  forming  not  the  whole,  but  the
majority,  in  which  pain  is  desirable,  and  what  those  in  which  pain  is  not  desirable  ?
We  ask  this  doctor  what  he  says  to  the  operations  by  Dr.  Esdaile  and  all  the
others  recorded  in  The  Zoist,  exceeding  two  hundred,  performed  without  pain,
and  all  ending  most  successfully  ?  We  ask  him  what  he  thinks  of  the  horrible
affair  related  at  page  292  of  the  present  number  ;  whether  the  pain  was  “  even  de¬
sirable”  and  the  poor  female  would  have  suffered  any  hazard  if  she  had  felt  no
pain,  but  wakened  tranquilly  and  been  happily  astonished  at  finding  the  operation
all  over  ?  We  ask  him  also  what  he  thinks  of  those  semi-barbarous  women  who
suffer  so  little  from  parturition,  that  as  soon  as  their  offspring  is  born  they  pro¬
ceed  on  their  journey  and  go  to  work  ?  The  Indian  women  of  South  America,
if  on  a  journey,  retire  to  a  thicket,  bring  forth,  wash  with  water  or  melted  snow,
take  up  their  load  again,  weighing  perhaps  80  pounds,  put  their  child  wrapped  in
skins  on  the  top  of  it,  and  rejoin  their  companions.  Do  those  recover  better
who  have  severe  and  long  agony  for  days,  or  those  with  whom  it  is  no  great
matter  and  the  business  of  but  half  an  hour  ?  We  once  heard  a  lady,  whose
husband  was  a  man  of  fortune,  contend  that  she  would  not  forego  the  pain  by
means  of  mesmerism  or  ether  because  God  had  ordained  it :  on  which  Dr.  Elliotson
asked  her  how  then  she  could  reconcile  it  to  her  conscience  to  allow  her  husband
to  pass  a  life  of  ease,  when  God  had  commanded  man  to  live  by  the  sweat  of  his
brow  :  he  asked  her  if  consistency  would  not  require  that  she  should  compel
her  spouse  to  work  hard  daily  and  make  his  brow  sweat.

Mr.  Braid  and  the  Lancet. — “Justice”  is  informed  that  we,  like  himself,
are  not  aware  that  this  practitioner  has  yet  denied  the  false  insinuation  of  the
Lancet,  referred  to  at  p.  207  of  our  last  number.  If  he  has  not,  and  has  seen
that  insinuation,  his  conduct  is  very  had:  if  he  has  denied  it,  we  shall  be  happy
to  extract  his  denial  from  any  publication  in  which  it  may  have  appeared.


BOOKS  RECEIVED.

The  True  Cure  for  Ireland,  the  development  of  her  Industry  ;  being  a  letter
addressed  to  Lord  John  Russell;  by  the  Rev.  G.  H.  Stoddart :  with  a  notice  of
the  Irish  Amelioration  Society,  as  organized  upon  the  plan  of  Mr.  Jasper
Rogers,  C.C.  London,  1847.

The  Edinburgh  Phrenological  Journal,  July,  1847.

The  Scotsman  Newspaper  of  Sept.  15.


LITERARY  INTELLIGENCE.

The  Rev.  George  Sandby  is  preparing  for  publication  a  cheap  and  considerably
enlarged  edition  of  his  work,  entitled.  Mesmerism  and  its  Opponents ,  with  a
Preface,  &c.


ERRATA  IN  No.  XVIII.

In  Mr.  Topham’s  paper,  p.  123,  line  3  from  bottom,  for  “  Middleton ,”  read  Middleham.
p.  125,  line  28,  for  “resting,”  read  fasting.

p.  125,  line  36,  for  “  the  following  April,”  read  the  second  following  April.

In  the  present  Number,  p,  288,  line  14,  for  “  Dyspeptic  Disease  of  the  Heart,"  read
Dyspepsia,  Disease  of  the.  Heart.


THE  ZOIST.

No.  XX.


JANUARY,  1848.


I.  Fads  illustrating  the  silent  power  of  the  Will.  By  the

Rev.  L.  Lewis.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

Sir, — In  the  last  number  of  The  Zoist,  I  read  with  much
interest  some  excellent  philosophical  observations  on  the
“  Silent  influence  of  the  Will.”  They  were  made  in  the  usual
spirit  of  the  journal,  a  spirit  of  dauntless  freedom,  and  with
a  heart  single  but  earnest  in  its  aim  in  the  pursuit  of  truth.

The  business  of  the  philanthropist,  as  of  the  philosopher,
is  with  the  knowledge  of  facts,  not  with  the  fears  of  their
apprehended  consequences.  The  timid  and  the  bigot  would
limit  enquiry  in  the  province  both  of  science  and  of  religion ;
and,  when  the  sun  of  knowledge  presents  its  full  orb  above
the  horizon  of  ignorance,  would  rather  “  hide  their  dimin¬
ished  heads”  in  their  fancied  blissful  shades,  than  welcome
the  healing  beams  which  throw  such  light  on  hitherto  obscure
portions  of  God’s  mysterious  creation.  Hoping  that  Dr.
Ashburner’s  remarks  on  the  influence  of  the  will,  especially
in  mesmeric  sleep,  may  in  some  degree  be  illustrated  by  an
account  of  a  few  experiments,  I  send  you  the  following.

My  son,  having  read  that  a  person  when  magnetized
might  be  made  to  fancy  himself  any  inanimate  object  by  the
will  of  the  magnetizer,  resolved  to  try  the  experiment  on
E.  C.,  whom  he  had  frequently  sent  into  the  sleep-waking.
The  girl  being  gone  into  the  sleep,  the  first  thing  that  occurred
to  him  was,  that  she  should  imagine  herself  a  camphine  lamp,
which  was  then  burning  on  the  table.  He  wrote  down  the
wrords,  which  were  not  uttered  by  any  one,  and  were  handed
to  the  company ;  then,  without  speaking,  he  strongly  willed
that  she  should  be  a  lamp,  making  over  her  head  the  usual
magnetic  passes.  E.  C.  was  in  a  few  minutes  perfectly  im¬
moveable,  and  not  a  word  could  be  elicited  from  her.  When
VOL.  v.  B  E


324  Facts  illustrating  the  silent  power  of  the  Will,

she  had  continued  in  this  strange  state  for  some  time,  he
dissipated  the  illusion  by  his  ivill,  without  awaking  her,  when
she  immediately  found  her  tongue  again ;  and  being  asked
how  she  had  felt  when  she  would  not  speak,  she  replied,
“  Very  hot,  and  full  of  naphtha.”

Soon  after  it  was  suggested  again  on  paper,  by  one  of  the
company,  that  she  should  become  a  cat.  When  the  mag-
netizer  made  passes  with  that  intention,  and  without  speak¬
ing  a  word,  and  not  a  syllable  having  been  breathed  about  a
cat  by  any  one  in  the  room,  E.  C.  became  stupidly  mute,
and  sat  with  her  head  a  little  crouched  between  her  shoulders,
as  if  intently  looking  before  her  with  a  sort  of  vacant  stare.

On  another  evening  at  a  friend's  house,  and  in  the  pre¬
sence  of  several  spectators,  E.  C.  was  put  into  the  sleep,  when
I  suggested  to  the  magnetizer  that  he  should  attempt  induc¬
ing  personation ,  that  is,  making  the  magnetized  person  assume
different  characters  by  means  of  the  will  and  passes  alone.

The  first  individual  silently  agreed  upon  was  myself,  with
whom  E.  C.  was  well  acquainted,  and  my  name  was  given  to
the  magnetizer  on  paper.  After  a  few  passes  having  been
made  by  him  over  E.  C.,  she  assumed  rather  a  dictatorial
tone,  complaining  of  interruption  when  spoken  to,  as  it  wras
Saturday  night  when  she  was  busy  writing.  I  shall  draw  a
curtain  over  my  other  frailties,  and  proceed  to  the  mention  of
characters  well  known  in  the  world,  but  whom  E.  C.  had
never  seen.

The  first  of  these  was  Queen  Victoria.  With  regard  to
this  name  the  company  observed  the  same  silence  as  before
by  only  writing  it  on  paper,  and  the  magnetizer  pursued  the
same  method  also  with  E.  C.  But  the  dignity  which  she
very  soon  assumed,  the  lofty  tone  with  which  she  asked
questions,  so  contrary  to  her  usual  disposition,  the  orders
she  issued  to  various  persons  of  the  household,  and  especially
her  conversation  with  Prince  Albert,  (whose  person  the  mag¬
netizer  had  assumed,)  her  remonstrances  at  his  staying  so
long  from  the  castle  contrary  to  her  express  commands,  and
her  threats  that  he  should  not  be  permitted  to  leave  again,
excited  instantly  peals  of  laughter,  and,  on  reflexion,  the
most  intense  astonishment.

The  name  of  Sir  Robert  Peel  was  then  written  by  one  of
the  company,  and  given  to  the  magnetizer.  He  then  mag¬
netized  her,  and  she  soon  gave  unequivocal  proofs  of  her  per¬
sonating  the  noble  baronet  by  conversations  with  the  queen
on  the  state  of  the  country,  and  answering  several  political
questions  in  accordance  with  his  well-known  sentiments.

Prom  conservatism  it  was  thought  the  best  step  next  to


Instances  of  Sympathetic  Influence.


325


take  was  liberalism,  and  the  name  of  Daniel  0‘Connell  was
handed  to  the  magnetizer.  Now  E.  C/s  replies  were  of  a
different  nature,  whether  political  or  religious ;  but  there  was
one  question  which  she  answered  in  a  peculiar  manner,  yet
whether  in  unison  with  the  views  of  the  late  celebrated
“  Liberator/’  I  know  not.  When  the  magnetizer  asked  her
what  she  thought  of  the  English  church  establishment,  she
replied  that  the  “  establishment  was  already  on  crutches,  and
would  soon  be  down.”

The  last  personation  was  that  of  a  young  lady  whom  E.  C.
had  never  seen  or  heard  of,  and  who  was  then  more  than  one
hundred  miles  distant,  but  her  mother  and  sisters  were
present.  The  same  mode  of  secrecy  was  adopted  in  this  as
well  as  in  all  other  instances,  so  that  it  was  impossible  E.  C.
should  have  been  able  to  guess  the  name.  The  absent
person  was  the  daughter  of  the  lady  at  whose  house  these
experiments  were  made.  When  E.  C.  was  willed  to  personate
the  proposed  character,  the  first  thing  she  uttered  was  an  ex¬
clamation  of  surprise  at  finding  herself  suddenly  at  home.
Being  asked  her  name,  she  ridiculed  the  idea  of  such  a  ques¬
tion  being  put  in  the  presence  of  her  family,  but  being
pressed  by  her  magnetizer  to  pronounce  it,  and  promised  not
to  be  troubled  with  any  further  questions,  she  ingeniously
said,  and  with  somewhat  of  an  arch  look,  that  it  began  with
the  third  letter  in  the  alphabet.  On  being  told  that  she  had
not  given  a  direct  reply,  she  rather  pettishly  answered,  “  Well
then,  it  is  Clara.”  This  was  the  fact.

Except  in  the  precise  order  in  which  these  cases  occurred,
I  can  vouch  for  their  correctness,  having  been  present  when
they  happened.

L.  Lewis.

Gateacre,  Oct.,  1847.


II.  Instances  of  Sympathetic  Influence.  By  Mr.  Reynoldson.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

Bootle,  near  Liverpool,
Nov.  8,  1847.

Sir, — The  very  important  papers  published  in  your  last
number,  “  On  the  silent  influence  of  the  Will,”  lead  me  to
offer  you  a  few  observations  on  sympathetic  influences,  that  I
have  been  noting  for  three  years,  without  daring  to  commu¬
nicate,  lest  my  veracity  or  sanity  should  be  violently  impugned.

Allow  me  to  premise  that,  having  for  several  years  devoted

b  b  2


326


Instances  of  Sympathetic  Influence ,


myself  entirely  to  the  cure  of  disease  by  mesmeric  action
alone,  I  have  been  daily,  and  often  hourly,  conscious  of  sym¬
pathetic  pain  when  mesmerising  a  patient ;  and  I  notice  this
pain  to  occur  the  same  minute  that  the  correspondent  pain
leaves  the  sufferer.  If  this  occur  from  the  “  fluid  of  the
human  will”  being  attracted  from  my  frame  in  considerable
quantity  to  that  particular  point  of  the  patient’s  frame,  and
just  at  the  moment  when  supplied  to  the  sufferer,  we  shall
expect  the  mesmeriser’s  pain  to  remain  a  longer  or  shorter
period,  in  proportion  to  the  severity  of  the  disease  attacked.
And  such  is  my  experience :  the  pain  generally  passing  away
in  a  few  moments  or  minutes,  but  occasionally  continuing
with  much  severity  for  some  hours,  and  once  it  continued
about  the  diaphragm  for  eight  days,  and  was  then  relieved  by
a  clergyman’s  right  hand.

In  the  summer  of  1844,  an  interesting  case  came  under
my  notice.  A  young  lady  was  then  staying  at  No.  2,  Marine
Crescent,  Waterloo.  I  mesmerised  her  twice,  and  found  the
highest  degree  of  susceptibility  to  the  slightest  pass  or  action
of  my  hand  placed  upon  her’s,  that  I  had  yet  met  with  in
any  human  being.  My  efforts  at  both  visits  were  directed  to
reduce  the  palpitation  of  her  heart,  an  object  which  was  ac¬
complished  by  taking  the  patient’s  left  hand  in  my  left  hand ;
treating  the  left  hand  as  her  negative  pole.  I  had  at  first
taken  it  in  my  right.  She  complained  of  “  fulness  in  the
vessels  at  the  back  of  her  neck.”  I  made  two  passes  down  the
spine  :  she  fell  forward  in  the  chair,  and  described  her  feelings
as  being  that  “all  the  inflammation  had  been  taken  away,
and  all  the  strength  with  it.”  In  a  few  minutes  she  rallied  :
her  sisters  who  were  present  retained  their  self-possession
very  well,  and  I  ventured  no  more  action  that  day.  After  a
night’s  reflection  I  tried  my  left  hand  upon  her  left,  which
relieved  the  palpitation  of  her  heart  without  any  excitement.
In  other  portions  of  the  frame,  and  in  asthma  always,  I
adopt  this  mode  of  treatment  at  first,  and  during  a  paroxysm
I  have  met  with  none  that  did  not  yield  in  ten  minutes  on
the  first  application.*  I  have  found  downward  passes  from  the
cerebellum  dispel  the  sleepy  sensation  consequent  upon  a  rest¬
less  night,  as  well  as  the  tendency  to  it  produced  by  passes  in
front.

At  this  time  I  was  residing  next  door  to  the  chapel  at
Waterloo,  a  distance  of  four  hundred  to  five  hundred  yards
from  her.

On  Saturday  night,  after  having  retired  to  bed  perhaps
an  hour,  my  mind  was  strongly  occupied  with  this  lady’s
*  We  fear  this  experience  is  limited. — Zoist.


By  Mr.  Reynoldson.


327


case.  I  was  thinking  of  her,  but  not  consciously  willing ,
when  a  severe  pain  struck  me  in  the  back.  Next  morning  I
was  gratified  to  hear  of  the  lady  being  better,  and  I  took  the
earliest  opportunity  of  ascertaining  from  herself  that  the  exact
point  in  which  I  felt  pain  was  the  exact  point  in  which  she
had  been  suffering  in  her  back — a  fact  which  had  never  been
communicated  to  me  in  any  other  way.

In  April,  E.  Simpson  Samuell,  Esq.,  had  invited  me  to
take  tea  at  his  residence  in  Canning  Street.  There  were  four
gentlemen  and  one  lady  (his  sister)  in  the  room,  when  I
became  conscious  of  a  dull  aching  pain  in  the  left  side,  just
below  the  third  rib,  for  fully  ten  minutes.  The  lady  had
left  the  room  when  I  communicated  this  circumstance  to
those  who  remained.  I  obtained  no  explanation  of  the  phe¬
nomenon  until  the  next  morning,  when  I  learned  from  the
lady  herself  that  she  suffered  much  from  the  kind  of  pain  I
had  described,  and  in  the  exact  point  indicated.  There  was
nothing  to  lead  my  mind  to  such  a  supposition :  nor  was  I
aware  till  she  made  this  communication  to  which  member  of
the  party  I  was  indebted  for  the  pain.  It  may  be  necessary
to  state  that  we  had  never  met  before,  that  I  did  not  at  all
suppose  the  lady  to  be  an  invalid,  and  that  we  remained  apart,
being  at  opposite  sides  of  a  large  room.

In  a  very  severe  case  of  spasmodic  asthma,  successfully
treated  last  yeqj^  the  morbid  sympathy  became  so  intense
that  at  three  miles  distance  I  could  trace  the  progress  of  a
severe  attack,  and  upon  one  occasion,  January  17th,  1847,
at  8^  p.m.,  experienced  severe  sympathetic  pain  when  at  Man¬
chester,  a  distance  of  thirty-five  miles,  from  the  sufferer.

I  verified  this  by  informing  Dr.  Chapman,  who  was  then  in
attendance  upon  her,  of  the  date  of  the  invasion  of  the  pa¬
roxysm  and  hour  of  its  relief,  and  learning  from  him  that
they  corresponded.  This  occurred  nearly  three  weeks  after
my  direct  mesmeric  action  upon  the  lady  had  been  discon¬
tinued.

Dr.  Elliotson's  invaluable  researches  illustrative  of  the
power  of  sympathy,  at  p.  234  of  last  Zoist,  will  throw  a
flood  of  light  upon  this  subject :  and  the  laws  of  sympathy,
once  recognized  and  elucidated,  will  explain  the  necessity
for  the  continuation  of  a  mesmeric  course  of  treatment  until
the  cure  be  complete,  for  the  safety  of  the  mesmerist,  who  in
a  very  severe  case  has  intensely  sympathized  with  a  sufferer,
for  whose  benefit  he  has  made  very  strenuous  efforts.  If  in
the  ordinary  intercourse  of  life  a  person  can  influence  the
brain  of  “  a  certain  other  absent  person,  however  distant,”
this  power  is  much  increased  by  a  mesmeric  action  or  rela-


328


Extraordinary  case  of  Cure


tion  having  been  established  between  the  parties.  At  p.  260
of  last  Zoist ,  Mr.  Thompson  justly  observes,  “We  cannot
adduce  sufficient  evidence  of  the  facts.”  But,  in  my  practice
here,  upon  two  occasions  I  have  been  banished  from  my
patient  in  fever  by  the  advice  of  physicians.  The  one  patient
turned  dark  in  typhus  fever  and  recovered :  the  other  soon
recovered :  but  my  nights  were  sleepless  for  hours  during  the
progress  of  each  case,  and  I  can  testify  from  most  painful
experience  that  intense  suffering  may  be  inflicted  upon  the
mesmerist,  who,  after  establishing  a  strong  sympathy  with
his  patient,  is  not  allowed  to  continue  to  manipulate  during
the  severe  stages  of  disease.

The  greatest  amount  of  suffering  from  this  cause  was
always  recognized  by  me  when  in  a  recumbent  posture.  In
the  case  of  spasmodic  asthma,  above  referred  to,  I  suffered
very  severely  whenever  I  was  induced  to  spend  the  night
under  the  same  roof.  This  was  done  four  or  five  times,  and
on  each  occasion  the  prostrating  effect  upon  my  frame  was
apparent  to  every  friendly  observer.  “  Have  you  been  ill  ?”  a
person  whom  I  met  in  the  street  would  say.  I  dare  not
therefore  mesmerise  for  a  heavy  chronic  complaint  one  who
sleeps  under  the  same  roof.  Do  not  the  cases  of  Mr.  and
Mrs.  Snewing  give  us  another  significant  indication  of  this
danger  ?


I  remain,  Sir,  *yours,  & c.,

Wm.  Reynoldson.


III.  Mesmeric  Cure  of  a  Case  pronounced  by  different  Phy¬
sicians  to  be  Consumption ,  Dropsy,  and  Disease  of  the
Kidneys,  with  numerous  instances  of  Clairvoyance  that
appeared  in  it.  By  Mr.  Joseph  Hands,  Surgeon.

Frances  Gorman,  residing  at  No.  12,  Union  Place,  Harper
street,  New  Kent  Road,  after  cutting  her  first  teeth,  became
sickly,  and  was  in  her  fifth  year  subject  to  leucorrhoea,  and  had
inflammation  of  the  bowels.  After  the  production  of  her
second  set  of  teeth,  her  ailments  increased.  At  16,  she  was
seized  with  typhus  fever,  which  greatly  reduced  her  strength.
The  catamenia  were  retarded  until  her  18th  year,  and  were
always  irregular;  and  the  leucorrhoea  continued.

On  one  occasion,  being  very  ill,  she  went  to  the  Surrey
Dispensary  and  was  placed  under  the  care  of  Dr.  Birkett.
She  continued  to  attend  there  until  too  weak  to  walk  the  dis¬
tance,  when  she  was  visited  by  the  doctor  at  her  mother's,
and  he  prescribed  for  her  there  for  twelve  months.  Subse-


and  Phenomena.


329


quently  she  lost  the  use  of  her  right  arm  and  leg,  and  was
taken  to  Dr.  Barlow,  who,  on  examining  her,  shook  his  head
and  said  the  brain  and  spine  were  affected,  and  he  feared  he
could  do  but  little  for  her.  She  was  desired  to  go  to  Guy’s
Hospital,  where  she  underwent  a  second  examination,  on
which  Dr.  Barlow  stated  that  she  had  tubercles  in  the  lungs,
and  afterwards  pronounced  that  there  existed  also  disease  of
the  kidneys  and  liver.  He  placed  her  under  Dr.  Golding  Bird,
who  confirmed  Dr.  Barlow’s  opinion  that  she  was  the  subject
of  decided  consumption,  and  that  they  could  do  her  no  good.
He  however  tried  a  generous  diet  and  wine,  which  treatment
brought  on  delirium.  Shortly  after,  she  began  to  swell  very
much  and  was  again  attended  by  Dr.  Barlow,  who  said  he
thought  she  was  dropsical,  and  requested  Dr.  Lever,  the  ac¬
coucheur  physician,  to  examine  her;  Dr.  Lever  did  so  with  the
speculum  and  pronounced  it  a  hopeless  case  :  she  had  fainted
during  his  manipulations,  in  fact  she  did  so  mostly  upon  being
moved  about.  Whilst  under  treatment,  she  was  salivated
twice,  blistered  on  her  back  and  chest,  and  had  many  leeches
on  the  abdomen  near  the  right  hip  and  over  a  tumour  which
they  said  she  had.  After  being  in  the  hospital  five  months
she  was  turned  out  as  incurable,  and  again  became  the  patient
of  Dr.  Birkett  for  an  attack  of  rheumatic  fever,  which  con¬
fined  her  for  three  weeks  to  her  bed.  Dr.  Birkett  continued
to  attend  her  up  to  the  time  I  saw  her  in  October,  1845.  I
received  these  particulars  from  her  mother  and  herself.  The
mother  was  persuaded  to  apply  to  me  by  the  maid  of  a  lady
whom  I  had  cured  by  mesmerism  of  bleeding  from  the  bowels
of  10  years  duration.

When  Mrs.  Gorman  brought  her  daughter  to  my  house,
I  had  her  presented  to  Ellen  Dawson,  (whose  clairvoyance  has
been  published  in  Yol.  III.,  No.  X.,  of  The  Zoist ),  and  I
put  Ellen  into  the  deep  sleep,  from  which  in  a  few  minutes
she  passed  into  the  sleep-waking  condition,  and,  being  re¬
quested  to  try  if  she  could  discern  the  malady  Frances  laboured
under,  gently  took  her  hand  and  after  a  short  time  exclaimed,
“  Your  liver  is  twice  the  size  it  ought  to  be,  and  the  great  side
of  it  is  black  and  smells  very  badly.”  This  is  a  frequent  ex¬
pression  with  clairvoyants,  and  the  odours  in  disease  often
annoy  them.  “You  have  taken  mercury ;  I  can  see  it  on  all
your  bones ;  that  is  one  of  the  causes  of  your  present  state.
I  see  black  spots  on  the  left  lung  the  size  of  a  shilling (from
the  deposition  of  carbon  or  charcoal,)  “  there  are  two  dark
patches  on  the  marrow  of  the  back  the  colour  of  lead,  one
above  the  other  below (these  of  course  were  congested  por¬
tions  of  the  spinal  chord,)  “  they  have  been  thicker  than  they


330


Extraordinary  case  of  Cure


are  now.  Did  you  not  once  lose  the  use  of  your  right  side  ?”
Answer,  “  Yes.”  “  Do  you  not  find  pain  here  ?”  placing  her
finger  over  the  right  kidney.  Answer,  “  Yes.”  “  I  see  it  does
not  act ;  the  liver  squeezes  it  and  it  is  smaller  than  it  ought
to  he,  and  the  water  cannot  pass  through  those  threads,”  (tu-
buli  uriniferi) .  Ellen  now  became  silent  for  a  short  time,  and
presently  exclaimed,  “  You  will  get  well ;”  then,  turning  to¬
wards  the  mother,  told  her  “  not  to  fret,  for  that  her  daughter
would  be  restored  to  health  in  six  months ;”  adding,  “  but  the
only  thing  that  will  cure  her  is  mesmerism.

Oct.  28th.  Frances  Gorman  came  by  appointment  to  be
mesmerised,  accompanied  by  her  mother  and  a  young  friend.
Having  placed  her  in  the  chair,  I  applied  the  tips  of  my  thumbs
to  the  points  of  her  own,  and  gazed  steadily  at  one  of  her
eyes.  In  a  few  minutes  they  both  closed,  and  shortly  after¬
wards  the  head  fell  towards  the  window  near  which  she  was
sitting.  Allowing  some  time  to  elapse,  I  addressed  her  to  try
if  she  could  speak,  but  she  remained  silent.  On  waking  her
in  the  usual  way,  she  began  to  describe  with  delight  all  she
had  seen  whilst  reposing.  Frances,  up  to  the  present  day,
recollects  everything  that  has  occurred,  or  that  she  has  seen
or  felt,  in  the  mesmeric  sleep ;  the  only  person  I  have  met  with
who  can  do  this.  She  related  that  she  saw  me  rise  and  ring
the  bell,  and  then  go  to  the  door  and  receive  the  lamp,  place
it  on  the  table,  and  smiling  observed  that  the  maid  had  slip¬
pers  on  and  very  old  ones  too,  (Frances  had  not  seen  her
before,  for  the  servant  boy  let  the  party  in) ;  she  also  said  she
saw  a  lady  in  the  drawing-room  with  a  black  cap  on,  talking
to  a  stout  gentleman  whom  she  described,  (it  was  Dr.  Jenner)  ;
she  likewise  perceived,  she  said,  a  tall  thin  person  enter  from
the  street  and  that  he  had  a  large  blue  cloak  on,  she  had  heard
him  cough  and  said  his  lungs  were  very  bad,  and  she  thought
he  would  not  live  long,  (it  was  Mr.  Charles,  another  medical
gentleman  who  since  died  of  consumption).  After  Frances
had  left,  I  found  all  these  particulars  were  correct.  I  re¬
quested  the  maid  to  be  sent  for  and  asked  her  to  let  us
see  her  shoes :  the  girl  blushed  and  could  not  be  pre¬
vailed  upon  to  show  them ;  but  the  lady  followed  her  out
and  returned  to  us  stating  that  the  girl  had  on  an  old  pair  of
shoes  as  described,  which  she  said,  she  “  had  slipped  on  to
ease  her  corns.”  These  circumstances  proved  that  Frances
was  clairvoyant.

Oct.  30tli.  Put  Frances  to  sleep  and  addressed  her  as  be¬
fore  ;  found  she  could  now  converse  with  me.  I  led  her
attention  to  her  own  case ;  at  first  she  appeared  frightened
and  shuddered.  All  my  patients  have  a  great  horror  of  look-


and  Phenomena.


331


ing  at  the  internal  organs,  until  they  get  interested;  and
then,  either  to  gratify  their  curiosity  and  wonder,  or  to  learn
some  of  the  arcana  of  nature,  or  please  their  magnetizer,  they
proceed  to  contemplate  the  state  (hid  from  us  in  the  common
condition)  of  the  different  viscera.  What  a  strange  new
world  they  must  see !  what  a  different  aspect  objects  must
wear  !  how  curious  the  animal  economy  must  seem  to  them  !
how  different  organs  must  appear,  whilst  that  property  called
life  pervades  them  !  what  a  thousand  wonders  must  the  inte¬
rior  present,  whilst  animated !  and  how  altered  when  the
quick  blood  has  ceased  to  pulsate  through  them,  and  the  life-
engendering  electricity  generated  in  the  lungs  during  the
combustion  of  carbon,  and  conveyed  by  the  nerves  to  their
inmost  recesses,  has  ceased  to  stimulate  them  !  In  the  nor¬
mal  state  we  have  only  seen  them  after  death  has  put  his
dark  seal  upon  them,  and  then  can  only  discern  their  exte¬
rior;  and  when  we  have  laid  all  the  viscera  open,  still  it  is  but
the  exterior  that  is  presented  to  our  senses.  Of  the  effects
of  the  principles  and  laws  they  obeyed,  or  that  act  upon,
through,  and  around  them  during  life,  and  after  death,  we
have  no  conception.  But  clairvoyants  seem  to  feel  and
perceive  them  all,  and  these  no  doubt  give  rise  to  strange
sensations  in  them,  which  induce  those  curious  gesticulations
and  strange  combination  of  words,  which  to  us  appear  foreign
to  the  subject,  but  to  them  may  be  a  tongue,  to  image  the
new  actions  perceived,  and  the  new  feelings  to  which  they
give  rise.  For  it  is  always  found  that  new  things,  and  the
effects  of  nature’s  principles  on  those  things,  require  new
names  and  long  association,  before  we  can  so  describe  them
as  to  awaken  an  adequate  sense,  and  enable  those  we  converse
with  to  appreciate  and  form  a  just  estimate  of  our  impressions.

But  to  return.  Frances’s  alarm  being  soothed,  she  over¬
came  her  repugnance,  and  proceeded  to  examine  herself;  after
a  time  she  exclaimed,  “  Oh,  how  happy  I  am !  I  shall  soon
get  well.  The  doctors  said  my  left  kidney  was  decayed,  but
it  is  not ;  one  of  them  is  smaller  than  the  other,  and  it  is  the
right,  and  that  will  soon  be  restored.  Gracious,  what  a  size
my  liver  is.  It  was  the  nasty  drugs  that  did  that  :  how  they
have  poisoned  me  !  But  never  mind,  I  shall  be  well  in  six
weeks.”  I  asked  if  she  was  certain.  She  said,  “  Yes;”  but
that  she  must  be  mesmerised  now  and  then  for  six  months.
I  ought  not  to  omit  that  Frances  was  brought  to  my  house  in
a  cab  for  the  consultation,  and  also  when  she  was  first  mes¬
merised  ;  after  which  she  felt  so  much  better,  and  so  greatly
relieved,  that  the  next  visit  was  made  on  foot,  a  distance  of
three  miles.  In  a  fortnight’s  time,  the  catamenia,  which  had


332


Extraordinary  case  of  Cure


left  her  for  a  very  long  period,  returned  regularly ;  she  ate
and  slept  well,  and  to  all  appearance  seemed  recovered.  She
thought  herself  so  when  awake,  but  in  her  sleep  would  tell
me  she  must  continue  to  be  mesmerised  or  she  should  be  ill
again.  Each  time  she  directed  or  gave  instructions  in  what
way  I  should  proceed  whilst  mesmerising  her.  Thus  improv¬
ing,  she  gained  flesh,  and  the  red  blood  was  no  longer  a
stranger  to  her  lip  and  cheek.  Since  her  cure,  she  has  never
ailed  anything,  except  two  or  three  casualties,  which  I  will
proceed  to  mention.  She  one  day  presented  herself,  possessed
of  a  dreadful  tooth-ache  and  swollen  face,  of  which  in  ten
minutes,  by  making  a  few  passes,  I  relieved  her.  She  is  one
of  those  patients  who  feel  in  their  sleep.  Some  are  more  sen¬
sible  to  pain  and  touch  during  the  sleep-waking  state,  than
when  in  the  common  condition ;  but  generally  they  are  in¬
sensible  to  the  mechanical  infliction  of  pain,  and  always  so  in
the  dead  sleep.  When  she  arrived  home,  the  tumefaction
had  so  greatly  diminished  that  her  mother  could  not  distin¬
guish  any  difference  in  the  size  of  the  cheeks.*  At  another
period,  she  suffered  from  inflammation  of  the  chest,  and  was
attended  by  a  Mr.  Rathbone  for  three  weeks,  and,  when
brought  to  me,  she  appeared  the  ghost  of  what  I  had  last
seen  her.  Having  put  her  to  sleep,  and  mesmerised  her  in
the  way  she  directed  for  half  an  hour,  I  was  astonished  at  the
effect  produced ;  and  she  actually  walked  home,  which  of
course  was  wrong.

On  a  subsequent  occasion  she  caught  cold,  and  could  not
move  her  arm  without  acute  pain ;  the  head  was  turned  to  one
side  (cricked  necked) ,  and  it  gave  her  torture  to  place  it  in  any
other  position ;  she  had  been  thus  for  three  days.  Having  sent
her  to  sleep  and  made  her  rigid,  in  a  few  minutes  she  was  well !
When  she  arrived  home,  her  father  declared  I  dealt  in  magic.

In  June  last,  during  those  very  warm  days  and  nights,
she  had,  after  a  long  walk,  thrown  off  her  flannels  and  slept
with  the  window  up ;  in  consequence  of  which  the  lungs  be¬
came  congested.  By  congestion,  we  mean  that  state  of  the
vascular  system,  in  which  the  part,  being  robbed  of  the  healthy
or  natural  nervous  influence,  loses  some  of  its  irritability  and
contractility;  the  vessels  consequently  become  gorged  with
blood,  which  blood  nature,  if  left  to  herself,  will  sometimes
get  rid  of  by  the  process  termed  inflammation,  in  which  the
momentum  of  the  blood  is  augmented  and  the  temperature
raised :  thus  restoring  the  irritability  of  the  blood-vessels,
and  causing  them  to  contract  upon  their  contents.  When

*  See  a  case  as  rapidly  cured  by  one  of  the  highest  dignitaries  of  the  church,
in  Zoist,  Vol.  III.,  p.  514. — Zoist.


and  Phenomena.


333


this  is  effected,  a  state  of  quietude  ensues.  W c  produce  the
same  result  by  the  mesmeric  agency.  Frances  was  so  alarm¬
ingly  ill  that  her  mother  sent  for  me.  On  arriving,  I  found
she  had  gone  through  the  first  stage  of  congestion  and  de¬
pression,  and  was  now  entering  into  that  of  excitement  :
the  air  did  not  permeate  half  the  substance  of  the  lungs,  the
lips  were  of  a  chocolate  colour,  the  cheeks  of  a  leaden
hue.  This  arises  from  the  stagnation  of  the  blood,  and  from
its  not  being  decarbonized,  through  the  absence  of  the  nervous
influence,  and  is  also  owing  to  the  mucus  on  the  lining  mem¬
brane  of  the  air-cells  having  increased  and  become  viscid,
thus  preventing  the  oxygen  of  the  air  uniting  with  the  char¬
coal  of  the  blood,  and  passing  off  in  the  state  of  carbonic
acid.  The  alae  or  wings  of  the  nose  were  playing  like  those
of  a  horse  after  a  race,  there  was  a  physical  brightness  with
an  intellectual  dulness  about  the  expression  of  the  eyes,  (from
the  brain  being  disturbed  by  the  circulation  of  the  black  blood
through  it ;)  the  cough  was  continuous,  accompanied  with  a
deep  pain  in  the  chest,  and  the  sound  on  percussion  was  dull ;
on  auscultation  the  vesicular  respiration  or  pulmonary  mur¬
mur  could  only  be  heard  in  parts,  and  that  high  up  ;  the  pulse
was  hard  and  quick,  and  she  was  lying  prostrate  on  the  back.
After  examination,  I  paused  to  reflect  what  course  to  pursue,
and,  in  contemplating  the  countenance,  came  to  the  conclu¬
sion,  that  as  disorder  and  disease  are  communicable  from  one
to  the  other,  so  also  must  be  health ;  and  as  my  lungs  were
sound  and  playing  in  all  the  harmony  of  freedom  from  ma¬
lady,  I  decided  to  try  what  the  undulations  from  them,  con¬
veyed  through  the  points  of  my  fingers,  would  effect ;  and,
on  placing  my  hand  on  her  head,  she  soon  passed  into  the
mesmeric  sleep.  I  now  glided  my  fingers  over  the  throat  and
down  the  chest,  and  after  a  few  minutes  recognized  that  she
began  to  breathe  more  freely ;  continuing  the  process,  I  per¬
ceived  her  take  a  long,  deep  inspiration,  and  then  she  sank
into  a  soft  sweet  sleep,  as  hush  as  an  infant's,  and  presently
a  happy  smile  spread  over  her  countenance,  like  a  child's
dream,  unmixed  with  care.  Her  mother,  who  was  present,
regarded  me  with  a  look  of  wonder  and  gratitude,  for  she
remembered  previous  attacks,  and  the  many  restless  hours
she  had  passed;  and  she  exclaimed,  “  God  bless  me,  how  won¬
derful  \”  In  about  forty  minutes  Frances  passed  into  the  sleep¬
waking  state,  and  cried  out,  “  Oh,  beautiful,  the  blackness  of
my  lungs  is  all  gone,  and  I  can  breathe  so  nicely.  I  feel  quite
well."  I  woke  and  then  left  her;  two  days  after  she  pre¬
sented  herself  at  my  house,  quite  recovered.*

*  See  Mr.  Snewing’s  similar  cure  of  his  own  child,  in  the  last  Zoist,  No.


Extraordinary  case  of  Cure


331


I  will  now  proceed  to  relate  some  of  Frances’s  feats  in
clairvoyance.  One  day,  during  her  recovery,  Mrs.  Gorman
(who,  by  the  bye,  is  like  Ellen  Dawson’s  mother  styled  a  fatal
dreamer ,  that  is,  one  of  those  whose  dreams  are  said  always
to  come  true)  accompanied  her  daughter,  and  told  me  her  ob¬
ject  was  to  discover  if  possible  where  a  certain  deed  was  be¬
longing  to  her  son,  I  having  on  a  former  occasion  mentioned
to  her  the  powers  some  have  in  the  mesmeric  sleep.  Her  son
had  married  a  woman  of  some  property,  who  was  of  a  strange
temper,  and  very  shortly  after  her  marriage  had  quarrelled
with  her  husband’s  friends,  and  would  never  hold  any  commu¬
nication  with  them.  This  woman  had  secreted  the  lease  of  the
house,  and  her  husband,  who  wanted  it  in  order  to  consult  his
lawyer  respecting  some  alterations,  demanded  the  deed ;  but
the  wife  would  never  give  it  up,  and  even  told  him  she  had
lost  it,  and  finally  that  she  had  burnt  it.  He  being  a  quiet,
peaceable  man,  put  up  with  this ;  but  frequently,  during  his
wife’s  absence  from  home,  would  hunt  in  all  the  drawers  and
boxes,  yet  notwithstanding  all  his  pains,  he  could  never  meet
with  the  document,  and  gave  it  up  as  lost.  He  sometimes
complained  to  his  mother  stealthily  (for  his  wife  used  to
threaten  him  with  dire  vengeance  if  he  ever  had  any  inter¬
course  with  his  friends)  of  the  disadvantages  he  laboured
under  in  consequence  of  the  loss  of  the  deed :  and  this  in¬
duced  Mrs.  Gorman  to  try  if  her  daughter  could  discover
where  it  was  concealed.  Having  sent  Frances  to  sleep,  I  re¬
quested  her  to  go  to  her  brother’s  residence.  Paragon  Mews,
New  Kent  Road.  Presently  she  exclaimed,  “  Here  is  the
house,  but  she  won’t  let  us  in  you  know,  for  she  never  speaks
to  us,  and  would  kill  me  if  I  entered.”  It  must  be  mentioned
that  in  her  sleep-waking  she  always  mistook  me  for  a  friend
named  Clara.  I  said,  “  Never  mind,  let  us  knock  at  the
door.”  Frances  cried  out,  “  There  she  is,  sitting  down  ;  she
will  see  us.”  I  now  quieted  her  fears,  and  coaxed  her  to  pass
by  her  sister-in-law,  through  the  sitting-room,  and  in  imagi¬
nation  we  entered  the  bed-room.  After  resting  a  few  seconds,
as  if  in  contemplating  something,  she  suddenly  exclaimed,  “  I
see  it  in  that  large  black  box  under  the  bed ;  there  are  three
boxes ;  it  is  the  middle  one,  which  is  lined  with  blue-spotted
paper.”  I  said,  “  Let  us  pull  it  out  and  look  in  it.”  “  Oh,”  she
observed,  “  how  hard  it  is  to  come  out :  (the  bed  rested  on  it,  I
afterwards  learnt :)  there  it  is  in  that  paper  under  the  books

XIX.,  p.  252  ;  and  Mr.  Thompson’s  case,  in  Vol.  Ill,  p.  520.  Bleeding,  and
mercury,  antimony,  or  similar  anti-inflammatory  drugs,  with  blisters,  &c.,  would,
without  mesmerism,  have  been  judged  indispensable,  and  the  cure  protracted. —
Zoist.


and  Phenomena.


335


on  the  left-hand  side  •”  and  added,  “  how  cunning ;  she
thought  no  one  would  ever  suspect  it  was  there.”  I  told  her
to  look  at  the  lease,  and  she  put  out  her  hand  as  though  to
take  hold  of  it,  saying,  “I  can  see  John  Shepperd,  Esq.,

to - ,  I  cannot  make  out  the  next  word.  Oh,  now  I  see,

M-e-ss-rs.  Thos.  and  Wm.  Grenstone,  Lease,  Nov.  1834.”
I  asked  if  she  could  read  anything  inside.  She  replied,  “  I
can  see,  house  and  stables ;”  and  she  read  some  more  which
is  immaterial.  She  noticed  in  the  room  a  new  chest  of
drawers  and  many  other  things,  and  said  she  wondered  her
brother  had  never  mentioned  them.  I  awoke  her,  and  they
left  me.  I  should  state  that  Frances  had  never  been  into  the
house  but  once,  and  that  was  shortly  after  her  brother's  mar¬
riage,  and  then  she  only  entered  the  front-room.

I  was  not  at  all  surprised,  when  next  I  saw  them,  to  hear
that  all  Frances  had  stated  was  correct.  I  have  seen  long
paragraphs  read  many  times  by  different  patients,  out  of  the
room  in  which  they  were  asleep.  Mrs.  Gorman  told  me  she
mentioned  to  her  son  that  his  sister  in  her  sleep  had  seen
where  the  deed  was,  at  which  he  merely  laughed,  and  said
that  he  had  looked  in  all  the  boxes  many  times  and  it  was
not  there ;  but  when  she  mentioned  the  chest  of  drawers  and
the  other  things,  he  began  to  stare  and  wonder,  and  said  at
all  events  he  would  go  and  look  again,  and  the  next  day  per¬
suaded  his  wife  to  call  on  a  friend  at  a  distance.  When  she
was  gone,  he  opened  the  box,  and  found  the  deed  exactly  in
the  position  as  related.

Some  persons  do  not  attach  much  merit  to,  or  rather  do  not
wonder  at,  the  power  which  clairvoyants  have  of  seeing  into
places  at  a  distance,  though  they  do  to  reading  words  and  sen¬
tences  par  excellence  in  boxes ;  so  I  give  the  following  facts.
On  the  evening  of  April  the  9th,  1846,  Frances  was  sent  to
sleep  in  my  drawing  room,  (there  were  many  present,)  and
on  the  table  were  lying  some  hundreds  of  pieces  of  paper,
from  which  four  were  taken  up  at  random,  and  placed  in  a
box.  At  first  she  said,  “  I  do  not  think  I  can  read  them.”
She  was  told  to  try,  and  after  an  effort  succeeded  in  reading
the  word  “  praise then  the  monosyllable,  “  two ;”  the  sen¬
tence,  “  in  the  metropolis ;”  and  lastly,  “  industry.”  Often
whilst  deciphering  these  words,  she  exclaimed,  “  They  will
not  keep  still,  they  all  dance  about.”  This  is  no  doubt  from
some  electrical  effect ;  or  perhaps  at  times  the  brain  cannot
create  enough  intensity  to  throw  the  desired  light  on  or
into  the  object  they  wish  to  examine,  or  the  subject  in  ques¬
tion  may  not  throw  off  its  undulatory  rays  with  sufficient
power,  so  as  to  excite  the  sensorium  into  action.  Again,  the


336


Extraordinary  case  of  Cure


organs  in  the  head  at  times  may  not  be  so  sensible  to  delicate
impressions  as  at  others,  and  the  inherent  electricity  of  bodies
often  varies  in  character.  They  can  see  very  well  when  things
are  imbned  with  the  animal  magnetism  of  one  person,  whilst
not  with  that  of  another ;  as  the  touch  of  one  individual  will
make  all  objects  dark,  another’s  rendering  them  quite  lumin¬
ous  and  clear.  On  one  occasion  a  gentleman  put  a  word  into
a  box,  and  requested  Frances  to  read  it.  She  said  she  was
sure  she  could  not.  She  has  a  great  dislike  at  any  time  to
make  the  attempt,  because  it  always  gives  her  head-ache :
however,  she  commenced  the  trial,  and  in  doing  so  again  com¬
plained  that  the  letters  would  not  remain  at  rest.  “  It  is  a
short  word  :  no,  I  cannot  read  it.”  She  now  became  quiet
for  a  time,  and  then  all  of  a  sudden  the  word,  “  The,”  burst
from  her  lips,  and  she  added,  “  I  saw  the  word  long  ago,  but
I  could  not  pronounce  it :  I  have  been  trying  all  this  time  to
utter  it.”  Frances  is  not,  like  many  of  my  patients,  apt  in
reading  in  boxes.  I  have  some  that  will  decipher  any  number
of  scraps,  and  often  without  an  effort,  in  fact,  rather  with
pleasure;  and  to  shew  it  is  not  merely  cerebral  sympathy,
the  persons  in  putting  them  into  the  receptacle  have  turned
their  faces  away  from  the  heap  lying  on  the  table  at  the  time
of  selection,  and  yet  the  words  have  been  read  by  the  som-
nambule .  Some  of  these  papers  contained  paragraphs  of  70,
80,  and  100  words  ;  and  different  colours  of  papers  and  print,
as  yellow  upon  green,  blue  upon  white  &c.,  &c.  In  some
cases  we  placed  four  or  five  sentences  in  a  box  whilst  they
were  asleep,  and  requested  these  to  be  read  on  awaking ,  and
this  has  been  done  with  equal  facility,  only  the  sentences
were  uttered  with  intense  rapidity,  so  as  often  to  create
mirth,  and  a  few  minutes  after,  neither  patients  nor  ourselves
could  perhaps  repeat  one  of  these  scraps  correctly.

Individuals  in  the  mesmeric  sleep  perceive  characters  and
objects  through  and  by  the  same  means  as  persons  in  the
normal  state,  but,  without  the  addition  or  aid  of  the  stimulus
of  our  common  light,  they  imbibe  their  quality  by  feeling ;
(a  term  we  propose  to  use  for  all  senses,)  the  sensorium  re¬
ceives  the  undulations  from  the  letters  as  they  do  those  of
other  objects,  and  it  is  in  this  way  we  in  the  common  con¬
dition  are  made  conscious  of  the  presence  of  bodies ;  we  never
see  or  rather  feel  them,  upside  down,  yet  this  is  the  effect
that  light  produces,  when  it  is  reflected  from  objects  into  the
eye,  and,  if  nothing  but  these  rays  were  thrown  off  from  sub¬
stances,  that  would  be  light  still,  and  not  the  qualities  apper¬
taining  to  those  things  that  surround  us.  The  effect  of  light
merely  increases  the  intensity  of  the  undulations  always  coming


and  Phenomena.


337


off  from  substances.  Each  single  object  is  doubled  by  the  two
eyes,  yet  the  brain  is  only  conscious  of  one.  Persons  are
amazed  at  the  distance  things  are  sometimes  discerned.  I  my¬
self  with  many  others  have  known  inscriptions  read  hundreds
of  miles  distant.  The  sun  acts  on  the  earth  though  ninety-five
millions  of  miles  off,  and  also  the  stars  though  hundreds  of
times  more  distant ;  an  extension  so  vast,  that  even  an  astro¬
nomers  brain  cannot  imagine  it,  though  by  the  aid  of  light,
his  instruments,  and  the  language  which  figures  and  other
characters  convey,  he  is  convinced  that  the  space  said  to  be
between  them  is  correct.  The  sun  acting  on  the  earth  as  a
mass,  must  act  on  every  atom  in  it,  and  they  again  react  on
the  sun,  and  also  on  each  other.  When  bodies  are  at  sen¬
sible  distances,  we  can  demonstrate  by  inanimate  matter,  in
the  shape  of  instruments,  the  influence  their  properties  exert
on  each  other,  even  to  a  shade  of  change ;  and  these  are  the
only  tests  the  schools  employ,  for  living  matter  has  not  been
employed.  But  let  us  use  the  brain  as  an  electrometer,  and  we
shall  find  it  not  only  can  do  this,  but  can  also  be  employed  as
a  test  of  actions  and  changes  taking  place  between  substances
at  insensible  distances,  that  their  apparatus  do  not  tell  of.
We  shall  one  day  find,  that  by  a  judicious  application  of  its
powers,  it  will  unravel  all  the  arcana  of  nature.  Its  capacity
is  immense,  even  to  recall  the  causes  with  the  effects  that
played  in  and  upon  bodies  in  times  past,  and  rip  up  again
the  occurrences  of  bygone  ages ;  and  when  all  is  in  tune ,  and
the  brain  is  pulsating  in  unison  with  surrounding  nature,  it
can  then  also  look  into  the  future,  and  have  prevision  of
coming  events.  If  the  sun  influences  at  such  an  immense
inconceivable  remoteness  the  pen  between  my  fingers  (which
in  many  ways  philosophers  can  shew),  the  difficulty  is  not
great  to  concede  that  we  can  feel  the  waves  coming  off  from
an  apple  placed  at  the  antipodes.  It  is  a  fact  that  brain-
matter  under  certain  circumstances  can  and  does  appreciate
these  undulations,  and  animals  having  the  power  to  commu¬
nicate  what  they  feel,  either  by  natural  or  artificial  language,
can  relate  to  each  other,  the  character,  state,  position,  and
changes  momentarily  taking  place  in  and  upon  substances  a
long  way  off.  Some  men  formerly,  (as  now,)  were  so  crude
in  their  composition  that,  to  act  on  their  vision,  objects  must
be  as  evident  as  a  church  on  a  hill,  and  to  make  an  impression
on  their  obtuse  feelings,  you  must  “  knock  them  down”  or
they  could  not  estimate  the  qualities  of  the  things  they  were
in  relation  with :  and  thus  many  of  the  properties  of  matter
escaped  their  senses.  They  looked  so  to  mass,  and  the  quan¬
tity  of  an  action,  and  not  to  intensity;  never  considered


338


Extraordinary  case  of  Cure


nature  relatively,  or  examined  things  by  analogy,  and  thus
their  instruments  were  coarse  and  heavy,  not  calculated,  as
now,  to  dissect  a  ray  of  light,  or  detect  slight  undulations  of
electricity  in  a  few  pulsations  of  heat.  Education  has  height¬
ened  our  feelings,  and  we  are  become  more  sensible  to  im¬
pressions,  and  have  now  constructed  apparatus  so  delicate  in
their  action,  that  we  can  demonstrate  the  distance  of  a  planet
by  a  pencil  of  light,  and  the  electrical  effect  of  the  heat  es¬
caping  from  a  fly,  as  it  alights  on  Mellonks  thermo-electric  bat¬
tery,  through  thousands  of  feet  of  wire.  By  the  dissolution
of  a  single  grain  of  zinc  in  sulphuric  acid,  we  could  hold
converse  with  our  friends,  though  placed  at  opposite  sides  of
the  earth.  And  the  time  is  not  distant  perhaps,  when  we
shall  be  able  to  change  the  galvanic  into  electrical  waves,  (as
we  do  at  present  into  waves  of  light,)  and  so  by  dilution,
as  it  were,  or  by  this  change  altering  their  shape,  thus  in¬
creasing  their  intensity,  throw  the  fluid  into  that  dynamic
state,  in  which  some  of  its  powers  of  action  are  tremenduously
increased,  though  its  quantity  remains  the  same;  for  by  em¬
ploying  a  like  proportion  of  metal  and  acid,  we  elicit  as  much
galvanic  fluid  in  quantity  as  is  equal  to  the  electricity  con¬
tained  in  the  largest  thunder-cloud  that  ever  floated  over  our
planet,  as  seen  on  comparing  separately  the  power  the  two
have  in  deflecting  the  needle,  or  as  oxy dising  or  deoxy dising
agents.  By  our  present  mode  of  employing  galvanism  we
can  effect  but  little,  and  the  power  appears  small ;  but  when
we  have  arrived  at  nature's  process,  to  be  capable  of  chang¬
ing  the  condition  of  one  into  that  of  the  other,  (for  they  are
both  the  same  principle,  only  differing  in  states,)  we  shall  be
able  to  rend  the  tree,  crumble  the  building,  and  tear  asunder
the  crusts  of  the  earth.

Among  our  notions  of  the  phenomena  developed  during
the  magnetic  sleep,  we  must  not  forget  the  extraordinary
power  possessed  by  some  of  feeling  the  ailments  of  others :
but  this,  like  clairvoyance,  is  not  always  present,  and  here  is
the  difficulty.  Some  do  not  like  to  confess  the  periods  when
the  lucidity  has  left  them,  for  I  find  them  to  be  the  same  in
character ,  asleep  as  when  awake,  and  ruled  or  excited  by  their
organization  and  by  passing  events,  and  it  is  difficult  in  this
world  to  distinguish  the  honest  from  the  dishonest.  Some
(and  these  chiefly  among  the  educated)  always  frankly  confess
they  cannot  feel  or  perceive  the  object  in  question  at  that  time,
whilst  others  will  try  and  blunder  at  any  thing.  Sometimes
they  require  to  be  coaxed  to  exert  their  efforts,  and  in  this
way  often  excel.  One  point  must  not  be  forgotten,  that  they
are  often  correct  in  the  things  they  are  portraying,  but  it  is


and  Phenomena.


339


foreign  to  the  personal  subject  required,  and  they  often  de¬
scribe  things  past  which  we  imagine  to  represent  things  pre¬
sent,  and  thus  misconstrue  their  statements  although  correct.
This  must  be  guarded  against  by  close  interrogation.  For  in¬
stance,  a  lady  was  enquiring  respecting  her  sister’s  disorder,
and  the  description  given  was  minutely  that  of  a  friend  of
hers ;  and  why  the  sympathy  of  the  somnambule  should  be  led
to  her  companion,  instead  of  the  person  she  was  anxious  about,
we  cannot  tell ;  w^e  only  know  the  brain  is  acted  upon  by  some
external  objects  in  preference  to  others  and  quite  independently
of  our  will  or  that  of  others  present :  all  that  we  can  do  is  to
bear  in  mind  previous  facts  and  not  forget  that  they  often
effect  the  desired  object,  if  the  persons  questioning  them  are
intent  upon  the  subject  and  present  themselves  with  the  feel¬
ings  they  possessed  when  they  went  first  to  school,  that  is,
with  a  wish  to  be  taught,  to  acquire  knowledge  and  to  place
*  confidence  in  their  teachers.  The  clairvoyant  powers  often
vary  in  different  individuals ;  one  is  capable  of  taking  up  the
sufferings  or  pains  of  those  presented  to  them :  others  of
sometimes  suggesting  remedies,  and  this  unsolicited,  and  this
occurs  to  the  ignorant  as  well  as  the  educated.  This  power  of
prescribing  for  themselves  belongs  to  all  animals  in  their  wild
and  natural  state,  and  they  often  lead  their  offspring  to  par¬
take  of  certain  remedies  in  certain  disorders,  as  I  shall
prove  in  a  future  paper.  If  nature  bestow  this  economy  on
the  lower  animals,  why  not  on  man  ?  and  she  does,  and  every
physician  must  have  noticed  at  times  the  longing  of  his  pa¬
tients  in  certain  states  for  some  one  thing,  which  if  adminis¬
tered  does  the  individual  good ;  and  many  a  nurse,  after  the
retiring  of  the  doctor,  has  gained  credit  for  giving  the  sick
person  the  forbidden  substance  that  his  or  her  feelings  had
craved  after.  Some  are  best  adapted  to  mental  travelling  and
describing  scenes  and  houses  with  their  contents.  Many
excel  in  reading  printed  or  written  characters.  A  fourth  set
go  back  into  the  past,  and  relate  like  a  tale  the  passages  in
persons’  lives.  But  the  rarest  of  all  are  those  who  can  place
before  the  hearer  the  future.  Again,  all  these  vary  according
to  the  person  they  are  placed  en  rapport  with.  I  have  seen
some  throw  away  a  lock  of  hair  as  if  they  had  been  bitten  by
it,  and  they  have  afterwards  described  with  the  greatest  con¬
tempt  the  feelings  and  opinions  of  the  person  by  whom  it  was
sent.  At  other  times  I  have  seen  it  rejected  as  if  some  horrid
contagion  rested  upon  it,  and  yet  they  have  pictured  most
minutely  the  diseases  the  owner  laboured  under.  On  being
presented  to  some  individuals,  the  approach  of  these  is  noticed
with  repugnance,  and  this  often  of  their  dearest  friends,  and
yol.  v.  c  c


340


Extraordinary  case  of  Cure


the  hand  that  touches  them  is  repelled  or  thrown  off ;  with
others  the  reverse  is  observed,  and  the  actions  are  beautiful
to  contemplate.  It  is  nature  radiant  in  all  that  is  innocent
and  truthful,  divested  of  every  art.  It  is  Niobe  mourning
her  children.  It  is  the  mother  regarding  and  feeling  the
sighs  of  her  firstborn.  There  is  a  sympathy  awakened,  and
the  countenance  assumes  that  of  care  and  anxiety  for  the
welfare  of  their  friend  or  the  patient,  and  then  they  proceed  to
name  each  feature  of  the  ailment  and  its  cause ;  and  this  often
extends  a  long  way  back,  so  that  the  person  has  forgotten
the  accident,  and  only  recalls  it  by  an  effort  of  the  memory,
or  by  being  reminded  of  the  surrounding  circumstances  at  the
time  of  exposure.  Sometimes  they  suggest  a  nostrum  imme¬
diately  ;  at  others  they  state  a  future  period,  when  they  shall
see  or  feel  a  remedy.  I  have  observed  before  now  a  tremour
and  paleness  pass  over  them  at  the  touch  of  a  piece  of  hair,
or  of  the  hand,  should  the  person  be  present ;  and  from  this  I
augur  the  case  is  hopeless.  They  never  alarm  the  patient,
but  on  their  departure  they  will  tell  you,  “Nothing  will  cure,
him  or  her  •”  “  they  may  be  soothed,  but  the  case  is  gone
too  far “  I  smell  death  !”  and  sometimes  they  predict  the
period  of  dissolution,  as  in  Mr.  Flower’s  case.  On  the  other
hand,  they  will  with  a  burst  of  delight  exclaim,  “  They  will
get  well,”  and  dictate  the  means  to  be  used.  In  their  sleep
they  appear  to  feel  where  and  when  to  apply  the  magnetic
fluid,  and  if  it  should  be  left  in  or  taken  out ;  they  can  per¬
ceive  when  the  patient  is  receiving  the  fluid  or  rejecting  it,
also  the  period  when  to  leave  off ;  for  after  a  time  we  receive
back  the  principle  we  had  been  giving,  and  return  that  which
we  had  acquired, — there  is  an  interchange.  There  is  always
a  great  desire  in  patients  to  go  to  sleep,  and  a  great  deal
of  time  is  wasted  in  mesmerising  the  brain,  instead  of  the
part  affected ;  this  sleep  of  itself  will  not  effect  all,  for  the
patient  in  tha  somnolent  condition,  when  ailing  anything,
will  ask  to  be  mesmerised  in  a  certain  way  and  for  a  certain
period,  which  would  not  be  the  case  if  the  magnetic  sleep
was  to  do  everything.  We  should  yield  ourselves  up  to  their
manipulations  and  suggestions,  and  have  faith,  as  it  is  called,
or,  in  other  words,  will,  that  their  efforts  should  be  success¬
ful  ;  and  now,  like  the  animals  we  encourage  in  the  chase,
they  increase  their  efforts,  and  exert  more  happily  their
powers,  and  arrive  more  certainly  at  the  wished-for  result.
And  this  is  the  state  of  feeling  people  if  possible  should
assume,  when  they  present  themselves  to  test  clairvoyance ;
they  should  believe  that  the  somnambule  can  do  this  or  that,
or  they  should  will  them  to  do  it,  and  now  their  efforts  will


and  Phenomena.


341


be  crowned  with  success ;  but  generally  it  is  the  opposite
course  which  persons  adopt,  and  thus  they  meet  with  disap¬
pointment.  We  should  always  pursue  the  means  to  obtain
the  end.  They  disturb  the  instrument,  or  put  it  out  of
order,  and  then  expect  it  will  answer  equally  well  in  this
deranged  state.  Will  not  the  touch  of  the  hand,  the  loud
noise,  a  little  damp  air  or  breath,  put  the  musical  apparatus
out  of  tune,  and  often  prevent  our  shewing  many  electrical
experiments  ?  Will  not  the  rude  cold  wind  check  the  deve¬
loping  effort  of  the  plant,  whilst  the  wooing  warm  breeze  will
excite  it  to  put  forth  its  leaves  ?  Could  the  poet  write,  the
painter  compose,  or  the  player  act,  if  those  near  them  inter¬
fered  with  their  feelings  ?  No.  Nor  can  the  somnambule
enact  the  part  or  effect  the  object  when  their  senses  are  dis¬
turbed  by  the  presence  of  anything  that  is  not  congenial.

And  now  a  word  to  the  sceptics.  In  what  an  unfortunate
position  the  doubters  of  everything  which  they  cannot  compre¬
hend  or  measure,  are  placed  :  how  they  allow  prejudice  to  blind
them :  how  many  pleasures  do  they  lose  by  suffering  their  senses
to  remain  thus  chained  :  how  strange  to  become  the  slaves  of
opinion  and  ignorance,  leaving  their  inferiors  to  become  ac¬
quainted  with  beautiful  physiological  facts  which  through  their
inaptness  have  escaped  their  notice  :  and  thus  they  bear  and
hug  their  mental  fetters,  sightless  to  themselves,  but  very  evi¬
dent  to  those  who,  having  lifted  the  curtain  of  the  penetralia,
have  been  bold  enough  to  enter,  casting  aside  all  trammels,  and
have  dared  to  see  and  think  for  themselves.  How  long  will  they,
like  their  forefathers,  refuse  to  look  at  things  but  through
their  own  glasses  ? — oh  !  that  they  could  discern  how  badly
constructed  these  are,  and  how  they  distort  the  objects  they
regard.  I  would  implore  them  to  forsake  the  mode  that
schools  and  colleges  in  times  gone  by  have  pursued ;  seldom,
if  ever,  was  the  great  first  link  of  a  science  or  art  discovered
or  made  among  them.  It  was  always  without  the  pale,  that
anything  to  benefit  the  human  race  has  been  made  known,  and
on  its  presentation  it  has  generally  been  rejected  and  treated
with  contempt ;  but  after  it  has  become  too  evident  and  too
general  to  be  denied,  then  they  have  taken  up  the  subject,
and  perhaps  made  improvements,  or  perchance  added  to  it,
because  they  had  the  means;  whilst  the  unfortunate  deve¬
loper  lay  in  obscurity,  buried,  or  was  driven  mad  by  the
worlds  obloquy.  To  instance  a  few  in  modern  times.  Newton,
who  called  “  philosophy  an  impertinent  litigious  lady,”  was
made  insane,  although  he  always  kept  aloof  from  their  circle,
and  his  Principia  were  very  nearly  lost  to  the  world  ;  the
manuscript  lay  idle  for  ten  years  in  the  hands  of  Flamsteed

c  c  2


342


Extraordinary  case  of  Cure


the  great  astronomer,  and  was  brought  into  notice  by  mere
accident,  and  after  many  years  of  rejection  was  introduced
first  into  France  by  a  lady.  Electricity  was  made  known  by
Franklin,  a  poor  printer,  who  in  many  ways  was  ill-used  by
the  world.  The  learned  Sir  John  Pringle,  who  advocated
Franklin's  pointed  lightning  conductors  in  opposition  to  those
terminating  with  a  knob,  was  obliged  to  vacate  his  seat  as
president  of  the  Royal  Society,  after  having  told  that  body
with  George  the  Third  at  their  head,  “  that  the  laws  of  nature
were  unalterable  at  royal  pleasure.”*  Watt,  a  peasant,  linked
steam  to  his  car,  and  shewed  how  to  saddle  and  bridle  its
power  so  as  to  make  it  subservient  to  our  will.  Priestley,  who
presented  to  us  the  knowledge  of  the  gases,  was  a  cloth-
dresser's  son,  and  himself  a  poor  Unitarian  parson;  was
obliged  to  fiy  his  country,  and  prosecuted  his  pursuits  on
the  poor  pittance  of  <£15  a  year,  subscribed  by  some  private
gentlemen  ;  the  document  of  which  agreement  so  to  do,  was
presented  some  years  ago  to  the  University  of  Glasgow,  by
Dr.  Ashburner.  Galvanism  was  discovered  by  a  lady,f  and
her  husband's  experiments  proved  there  was  such  a  thing  as
animal  magnetism  in  muscles  and  nerves.  But  the  schools
rejected  this  until  last  year,  when  it  became  too  evident  for
them  to  be  silent  any  longer.  Sir  H.  Davy  laughed  at  poor
Winsor's  suggestions  and  experiments  on  coal  gas  for  illumi¬
nation,  and  observed  we  might  as  well  try  to  light  London
with  a  slice  of  the  moon.  We  perceive  they  are  in  the  same
mood  at  the  present  hour,  and  will  be  until  the  pressure  with¬
out  forces  them  to  yield.  It  often  creates  our  mirth  when
they  tell  us  we  imagine  the  results  of  our  experiments, — then
surely  we  must  be  insane :  some  conjecture  we  are  deceived, —
then  without  doubt  we  are  dupes — the  dupes  of  the  young
and  simple,  and  also  of  ourselves.  Others,  when  listening
to  the  relations  so  placed  and  described,  that  the  two  former
observations  cannot  apply,  shrug  their  shoulders,  and  by  an
incredulous  smile  politely  express  their  disbelief  of  our  asser¬
tions.  Surely  they  deserve  a  great  deal  of  credit,  for  it  is  a
bold  thing  to  stand  up  and  contradict  the  evidence  of  so  many
thousands,  coming  from  all  parts  of  the  world,  who  have
arrived  at  the  same  conclusions  by  the  same  processes  :  these
facts  have  been  attested  by  the  most  learned,  by  persons  ac¬
customed  to  examine  carefully  all  the  things  presented  to
their  senses.  But  our  subject  is  not  common  or  general
enough  to  attract  the  attention  of  the  schools  !  the  present
occupiers  of  these  large  buildings  will  live  and  die  in  their

*  Penny  Cyclopaedia,  article  “  Pringle.”

f  Vide  Penny  Cyclopaedia ,  vol.  ii. ,  p.  54.


and  Phenomena.


343


ignorance ;  and  it  would  be  well  for  the  good  of  mankind  if
an  inscription  could  be  placed  on  their  monuments,  stating
that  they  disbelieved  in  the  attested  facts  resulting  from
animal  magnetism,  in  order  that  posterity  may  read  it  and
smile  as  they  read.

I  intend  giving  a  series  of  papers  on  motion,  sound,
odours,  gravitation,  light,  heat,  electricity  and  galvanism,
which  will  lead  on  to  the  part  that  masses  of  matter  at  rest
play  upon  each  other,  and  the  changes  they  excite  as  they  act
and  are  reacted  upon  by  surrounding  bodies,  comprehending
magnetism  as  connected  with  inanimate  substances,  and  then
magnetism  as  associated  with  living  beings,  also  the  sympa¬
thies  existing  in  and  among  organized  things.  I  shall  then
regard  the  oneness  or  unity  of  all  these  principles,  and  ob¬
serve  the  part  they  play  on  our  external  senses,  which  senses
I  purpose  examining  into,  so  as  to  appreciate  them  after  a
different  mode  to  what  is  at  present  adopted.  By  these  means
we  shall  be  led  to  develop  the  origin  of  ghosts,  vampires,
witchcraft,  dreams,  second-sight,  the  predictions  of  astrolo¬
gers  and  fortune-tellers,  with  the  whole  host  of  hitherto  in¬
explicable  things.  This  will  bring  us  to  clairvoyance,  the
results  of  which  to  us  are  as  referable  to  common  causes  as  any
of  the  other  observed  phenomena  appertaining  to  the  powers  in
nature.  I  shall  also  demonstrate,  that  there  are  no  results
in  mesmerism  that  do  not  occur  every  twenty-four  hours
naturally  and  commonly  in  and  among  the  race  of  animated
beings,  if  we  take  the  world  as  the  field  for  our  observation ;
they  will  not  all  of  them  be  found  in  a  village,  and  there
must  be  many  living  subjects  examined  to  find  a  few  of  the
cases.  No  two  persons  in  the  magnetic  sleep  are  alike,  their
powers  vary ;  one  can  effect  this,  another  that :  the  results
will  also  alter  according  to  the  mesmeriser,  and  in  the  same
patient  at  different  times.  We  merely  shew  by  our  manipu¬
lations  that  we  have  learnt  how  to  command,  manage,  and
use  some  of  these  results,  as  others  have  those  of  electricity
and  steam,  &c.,  &c.

Joseph  Hands.

23,  Duke  Street,  Grosvenor  Square.


(  344  )


IV.  Goethe’s  Grandfather’ s  Clairvoyance,  independent  of
Mesmerism.  By  Mr.  T.  S.  Pride aux.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

Sir, —  Perusing  Goethe’s  Warheit  und  Dichtung,  a  few
days  since,  I  met  with  a  curious  anecdote  relating  to  the  pos¬
session  by  his  grandfather  of  a  power  of  foreseeing  future
events.  As  all  such  cases  appear  to  me  to  possess  an  interest
in  connection  with  the  well-known  fact  of  the  occasional  de¬
velopment  of  such  a  power  during  the  mesmeric  state,  I  en¬
close  a  free  translation  for  insertion  in  The  Zoist  should  you
deem  it  deserving.

Speaking  of  his  grandfather,  Goethe  says,  “  What,  how¬
ever,  encreased  to  the  highest  degree  the  reverence  we  felt
for  the  venerable  old  man  was  the  conviction  of  his  being
possessed  of  the  gift  of  foreseeing  future  events,  especially
such  as  related  to  himself  and  his  destiny.  Although,  it  is
true,  he  did  not  express  himself  decidedly  and  circumstantially
on  these  topics  to  any  one  but  our  grandmother,  yet  we  all
knew  that  he  obtained  information  through  significant  dreams.
Thus,  during  the  time  of  his  being  one  of  the  junior  aldermen,
he  assured  his  wife  that  he  should  obtain  the  next  vacancy
on  the  bench  of  justices.  Soon  afterwards  one  of  the  justices
died  of  apoplexy ;  and  on  the  day  of  the  ballot  and  election
he  ordered  that  everything  should  be  silently  prepared  at  home
for  the  guests :  and  in  reality  the  decisive  golden  ball  fell  to
him.  The  simple  dream  which  gave  him  this  information  he
confided  to  his  wife  as  follows  ; — he  had  seen  himself  in  the
assemblage  of  the  full  council  where  everything  had  happened
in  the  usual  way  :  all  at  once,  the  alderman  lately  deceased
had  risen  from  his  seat,  descended,  and  in  an  obliging  man¬
ner  beckoned  to  him  to  occupy  the  vacant  seat,  and  then
gone  out  at  the  door.

“  Something  similar  happened  at  the  death  of  the  mayor.
In  such  a  case  no  time  is  lost  in  appointing  his  successor,
through  fear  lest  the  emperor  should  revive  his  old  right  of
making  the  appointment.  On  this  occasion  an  extraordinary
session  was  announced  by  special  summons  at  midnight  for
the  following  morning.  The  messenger,  whose  light  was  nearly
out,  asked  for  a  candle-end  to  enable  him  to  see  his  way.  ‘  Give
him  a  whole  one/  cried  our  grandfather  to  his  wife,  ‘  he  has
the  trouble  on  my  account.’  A  successful  result  corresponded
also  to  this  information,  and  he  became  really  mayor.  One
circumstance  connected  with  his  election  was  yet  more  par¬
ticularly  remarkable,  viz.,  that,  though  his  representative  had
to  draw  in  the  third  and  last  place,  the  two  silver  balls  came


Swedenborg  on  Trance.


out  at  first,  and  consequently  the  golden  one  remained  for
him  at  the  bottom  of  the  bag.

“  Entirely  prosaic,  plain,  and  without  any  trace  of  the
fantastic  or  miraculous,  were  the  other  dreams  which  were
made  known  to  us.  As  a  boy,  I  recollect  that  rummaging
amongst  his  books  and  writing  materials  I  found  amongst
some  remarks  relating  to  gardening  such  memoranda  as  follow,
‘  This  night  came  N.  N.  to  me  and  said,  .  .  .  .'  here  the  name
and  revelation  would  be  written  in  ciphers ;  or  ( This  night  I
saw  .  .  .  with  the  remainder  in  ciphers  as  before.”

T.  S.  Prideaux.

Southampton,  November,  1847.


V.  Swedenborg  on  Trance.  Communicated  by  Mr.  J.  J.  G.

Wilkinson,  Surgeon,  in  a  letter  to  Dr.  Elliotson.

25,  Church  Row,  Hampstead,
Sept.  10,  1847.

Dear  Dr.  Elliotson. — Feeling  a  deep  interest  in  the  sub¬
ject  of  mesmerism,  and  having  a  thorough  knowledge  of  the
truth  of  many  of  its  least  credible  manifestations,  I  beg  to
hand  you  the  following  short  extract  from  a  posthumous  work
of  Swedenborg  lately  edited  by  me,  and  which  is  curious,  as
indicating  the  wide  geographical  and  historical  basis  on  which
mesmeric  relations  stand ;  for  the  pages  of  The  Zoist  have
already  furnished  parallel  passages  (and  passes)  to  mesmerism
from  the  ancient  world,  and  from  all  quarters  of  the  globe.

Swedenborg's  work*  was  probably  written  about  1740,  and
it  may  be  inferred  that  he  had  travelled  himself  in  Lapland,
(to  which  country  he  doubtless  alludes)  from  the  graphic  des¬
cription  of  the  Laps  contained  in  his  early  poems.  But  I  have
heard  that  a  similar  assertion  to  that  contained  in  the  follow¬
ing  extract,  is  also  made  in  Scheffer's  History  of  Lapland ,  a
work  which  has  been  translated  into  English,  though  I  have
not  been  fortunate  enough  to  meet  with  it.

“  Ecstacy  or  trance,''  says  Swedenborg,  “  is  a  state  of
separation  between  the  body  and  the  soul,  while  the  life  still
continues ;  and  at  such  times  the  soul  is  believed  to  have  left
the  body,  or,  if  it  remains,  the  connexion  between  the  two  is
supposed  to  be  broken.  Some  persons  fall  into  trance  before  the
agony  of  death,  and  their  souls  are  raised  in  a  manner  out  of

*  “  Emanuelis  Swedenborgii  CEconomia  Regni  Animalis  in  Transactiones
divisa ,  quarum  luxe  tertia  de  Fibra ,  de  Tunica  Arachnoidea,  et  de  Morbis  Fi-
brarum  agit ;  anatomies ,  physice,  et  philosophice  perlustrata.  Ex  autoyrapho
ejus  in  Bibliotheca  Academics  Regice  Holmiensis  asservato,  nunc  primuni  edidit
Jac.  Jo.  Garth  Wilkinson.  London,  Newbery,  1847.


346


Swedenborg  on  Trance.


the  world,  but  afterwards  they  again  return  into  their  mortal
tenement  or  prison.  Some  authors  are  accustomed  to  call
the  state  of  suspended  animation  from  drowning,  ecstacy,  in
which,  when  the  body  is  taken  out  of  the  water,  the  whole
frame  and  the  face  are  livid,  and  there  are  the  usual  appear¬
ances  of  death ;  but,  the  water  being  disgorged  and  heat  ap¬
plied,  the  former  condition  of  life  returns.  Cases  of  suffo¬
cation  and  obstruction  of  the  gullet,  in  which  the  patients  are
put  upon  the  bier,  or  even  buried,  and  afterwards  come  to
life  again,  also  come  under  the  designation  of  trance.  Some
species  of  animals,  as  swallows,  bears,  and  the  like,  pass  the
winter  in  a  sort  of  death,  neither  taking  food  nor  drawing
breath  ;  nor  are  there  wanting  cases  of  the  same  thing  in  the
human  species ;  and  this  mode  of  life  is  also  regarded  as  en¬
tranced.  In  the  northern  latitudes  there  are  certain  reputed
magicians  who  have  the  power  of  passing  spontaneously  into
the  state  of  trance,  during  which  they  are  deprived  of  the  ex¬
ternal  senses  and  of  motion  altogether,  and  are  simply  atten¬
tive  or  alive  to  the  operations  of  the  soul ;  and  this  to  the
end  that,  after  they  are  wakened  up  again,  they  may  disclose
the  particulars  of  thefts  that  have  been  committed,  and  in
general  gain  a  knowledge  of  any  secrets  desired  to  be  ascer¬
tained.  It  appears  then  that  there  are  several  different  kinds
of  trance,  but  which  all  agree  in  the  fact,  that  the  entranced
subjects  lie  like  dead  persons,  but  their  inner  life  continues.

*  *  *  *  “  A  peculiar  disposition  [of  structure]  is  required
in  persons  leading  the  ecstatic  life.  *  *  *  *  The  causes  of
trance  are  numerous,  viz.,  as  we  said  above,  suffocation  of  the
gullet,  of  the  windpipe,  of  the  bronchia  in  angina,  of  the  lungs
and  stomach  by  water  swallowed  during  immersion,  also  by  air
itself,  by  rush  of  blood  from  the  arteries  into  the  veins  during
the  agony  of  death,  when  the  supply  of  animal  spirits  fails.
Nor  would  it  be  quite  contrary  to  reason  to  aver,  that  there  are
persons  who  can  throw  themselves  into  trance  by  natural  means ;
whence  the  belief  in  magic

Such,  my  dear  Doctor,  is  the  extract  from  the  despised,
visionary  Swedenborg,  whose  case,  however,  demands  the  se¬
rious  study  of  all  mesmerists,  and  furnishes,  I  am  bold  to
say,  many  points  which  before  your  valuable  crusade  in  the
name  of  truth  and  humanity,  must  have  seemed  bizarre ,  and
alien  to  all  our  knowledge,  but  now,  through  your  labours,
take  rank  as  likely,  nay  among  common,  facts.  I  allude  par¬
ticularly  to  the  biographical  particulars  of  Swedenborg^s  clear-
seeing,  and  which  are  as  well  attested,  (and  I  can  say  no  more,)
as  the  most  solid  cases  in  the  pages  of  The  Zoist.  These  par-


Swedenborg’s  Clairvoyance  independent  of  Mesmerism.  34 7

ticulars,  nearly  all  of  tliem,  may  be  seen  in  Smithson's  Trans¬
lation  of  Tafel's  Documents  concerning  Swedenborg ,  and  I  beg
respectfully  to  invite  your  attention  to  them.

As  to  the  above  extract,  I  believe  there  is  no  one  more
sure  than  yourself  to  make  all  allowance  for  difference  and
antiquity  of  phraseology,  or  to  be  practically  more  generous
to  one  who  adopts  so  different  a  theory  of  first  principles  from
your  own,  as  Swedenborg.

I  am,  my  dear  Dr.  Elliotson,

Always  your  obliged  and  obedient,

J.  J.  G.  Wilkinson.^'


VI.  Swedenborg’ s  Clairvoyance  independent  of  Mesmerism.

By  Mr.  Roffe.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

Sir, — In  The  Zoist  for  July,  1847,  I  perceive  a  communi¬
cation  of  an  extract  from  Mr.  Forbes's  Oriental  Memoirs,  con¬
taining  a  remarkable  case  of  prospective  power  displayed  by  a
Brahmin,  and  which  your  correspondent  notes  as  a  striking
contrast  to  the  retrospective  power  shown  by  Zscliokke.  It
occurs  to  me  that  the  following  instance  of  simultaneous  power
may  not  be  without  interest,  as  tending  to  illustrate  Dr.  El-
diotson's  remark,  “  that  nothing  is  produced  in  the  mesmeric
state,  that  does  not  occur  spontaneously  and  independently
of  it.’'  It  relates  to  the  Swedish  philosopher  and  theologian,
Emanuel  Swedenborg,  and  is  narrated  by  the  celebrated  Kant,

*  As  I  have  made  a  free  translation,  I  subjoin  the  passage  in  the  original : —
“  Exstasis  varie  accipitur,  est  quasi  status  separati  corporis  et  animae,  dum  adhuc
vivitur ;  et  creditur  anima  corpore  interea  emigrata,  vel  licet  remaneat;  vinculum
esse  disruptum.  Quidam  ante  agonem  mortis  in  exstasin  solent  labi,  et  anima
tenus  quasi  extra  mundum  elevari,  sed  iterum  in  suam  casam  seu  carcerem  redire.
Quidam  etiam  statum  semiexstinctum  naufragorum  exstasin  vocant,  qui  scilicet
undis  immersi,  extrahuntur,  corpore  et  facie  lividi,  tanquam  mortui,  sed  evomita
ferali  unda,  et  calore  foti  in  pristinam  suam  vitam  redeunt.  Turn  etiam  qui  suffo-
cati,  et  gula  obstructi  saepe  lecticis  suis  et  sepulcris  inferuntur,  et  tamen  revi-
viscunt.  Quaedam  animalium  species  hyemem  in  quadam  morte  sine  victu  et  re-
spiratu  traducunt,  ut  hirundines,  ursae  et  alise  ;  etiam  hominum  dantur  exempla  ;
lianc  vitam  etiam  exstaticam  vocant.  In  regionibus  septentrionalibus  creduntur
aliqui  magicae  artis  periti  sponte  in  quandam  exstasin  posse  labi,  ac  sensibus  ex¬
tends  omnique  motu  privari,  ac  interea  operationibus  solius  animae  vacare,  ut  re-
suscitati  deinceps  furta  revelent,  et  desiderata  arcana  nuntient.  Ita  apparet,
quod  plures  exstasium  species  sint,  inque  eo  conveniant,  quod  corpore  quasi  ex-
stincti  jaceant,  superstite  vita  interiore.

* *  *  *  “  requiritur  dispositio  peculiaris  ad  vitam  exstaticam  ducendam  :  *  *  *
“Causae  sunt  plures,  scilicet  ut  dictum  est,  suffocatio  guise,  tracheae,  bron-
chiorum  per  anginam,  pulmonum  et  ventriculi  per  aquam  naufragam,  perque
aerem  :  per  sanguinis  eruptionem  ab  arteriis  in  venas,  spiritu  deficiente  animalq
in  agonizaturis.  Nec  rationi  prorsus  contrarium  foret  adstruere,  quosdam  etiaui
se  in  exstasin  modis  naturalibus  posse  praecipitare,  unde  tides  magi8e.”


348  Swedenborgs  Clairvoyance  independent  of  Mesmerism.

in  a  letter  to  a  lady  of  quality,  Charlotte  de  Knoblock  (after¬
wards  widow  of  Lieutenant  General  de  Klingsporn).

The  letter  is  in  the  collection  of  Kant’s  Works,  and  was
first  published  in  1804.  Dr.  Tafel  (now  Librarian  of  the
University  at  Tubingen)  having  inserted  it  in  his  documents
concerning  Swedenborg,  has,  from  a  minute  historical  exami¬
nation,  corrected  certain  erroneous  dates  in  Kant’s  letter,
such  as  1756  for  1759,  &c. :  the  dates  are  therefore  taken
from  the  Doctor’s  rectification.

Alfred  Roffe.

48,  Ossulston  Street,  Somers  Town.

Extracts  from  Kanfs  Letter.

“  I  would  not  have  deprived  myself  so  long  of  the  honour
and  pleasure  of  obeying  the  request  of  a  lady  who  is  the  or¬
nament  of  her  sex,  in  communicating  the  desired  information,
if  I  had  not  deemed  it  necessary  previously  to  inform  myself
thoroughly  concerning  the  subject  of  your  request.  Permit
me,  gracious  lady,  to  justify  my  proceedings  in  this  matter,
inasmuch  as  it  might  appear  that  an  erroneous  opinion  had
induced  me  to  credit  the  various  relations  concerning  it  with¬
out  careful  examination.  I  am  not  aware  that  anybody  has
ever  perceived  in  me  an  inclination  to  the  marvellous,  or  a
weakness  approaching  to  credulity.  So  much  is  certain,  that
notwithstanding  all  the  narrations  of  apparitions  and  visions
concerning  the  spiritual  world,  of  which  a  great  number  of
the  most  probable  are  known  to  me,  I  have  always  considered
it  to  be  most  in  agreement  with  the  rule  of  sound  reason  to
incline  to  the  negative  side ;  not  as  if  I  had  imagined  such  a
case  to  be  impossible,  although  we  know  but  very  little  con¬
cerning  the  nature  of  a  spirit,  but  because  the  instances  are
not  in  general  sufficiently  proved.  There  arise,  moreover,
from  the  incomprehensibility  and  inutility  of  this  sort  of  phe¬
nomena,  too  many  difficulties ;  and  there  are,  on  the  other
hand,  so  many  proofs  of  deception,  that  I  have  never  con¬
sidered  it  necessary  to  suffer  fear  or  dread  to  come  upon  me,
either  in  the  cemetries  of  the  dead,  or  in  the  darkness  of
night.  This  is  the  position  in  which  my  mind  stood  for  a
long  time  until  the  accounts  of  Swedenborg  came  to  my  no¬
tice .

“  In  order,  gracious  lady,  to  give  you  two  proofs,  of  which
the  present  existing  public  is  a  witness,  and  which  the  person
who  related  them  to  me  had  the  opportunity  of  investigating
at  the  very  place  where  they  occurred,  I  will  relate  to  you  the
two  following  occurrences  ; — ”


Swedenborg1  s  Clairvoyance  independent  of  Mesmerism.  349

Kant  then  gives  a  relation  concerning  a  Madame  Von
Marseville,  and  continues  thus, —

“  But  the  following  occurrence  appears  to  me  to  have  the
greatest  weight  of  proof,  and  to  set  the  assertion  respecting
Swedenborg’s  extraordinary  gift  out  of  all  possibility  of  doubt.
In  the  year  1759,  when  M.  de  Swedenborg,  towards  the  end
of  February,  on  Saturday,  at  4  o’clock,  p.m.,  arrived  at  Got-
tenburg  from  England,  Mr.  William  Costel  invited  him  to
his  house,  together  with  a  party  of  fifteen  persons.  About
6  o’clock  M.  de  Swedenborg  went  out,  and  after  a  short  in¬
terval  returned  to  the  company  quite  pale  and  alarmed.  He
said  that  a  dangerous  fire  had  just  broken  out  in  Stockholm,
at  the  Sudermalm,  (Gottenburg  is  about  three  hundred  miles
from  Stockholm)  and  that  it  was  spreading  very  fast.  He
was  restless  and  went  out  often  :  he  said  that  the  house  of  one
of  his  friends,  whom  he  named,  was  already  in  ashes,  and
that  his  own  was  in  danger.  At  8  o’clock,  after  he  had  been
out  again,  he  joyfully  exclaimed,  ‘  Thank  God  !  the  fire  is
extinguished  the  third  door  from  my  house.’  This  news  oc¬
casioned  great  commotion  through  the  whole  city,  and  par¬
ticularly  amongst  the  company  in  which  he  was.  It  was
announced  to  the  Governor  the  same  evening.  On  the  Sun¬
day  morning,  Swedenborg  was  sent  for  by  the  Governor,  who
questioned  him  concerning  the  disaster.  Swedenborg  de¬
scribed  the  fire  precisely,  how  it  had  begun,  in  what  manner
it  had  ceased,  and  how  long  it  had  continued.  On  the
same  day  the  news  was  spread  through  the  city,  and,  as  the
Governor  had  thought  it  worthy  of  attention,  the  conster¬
nation  was  considerably  increased ;  because  many  were  in
trouble  on  account  of  their  friends  and  property,  which  might
have  been  involved  in  the  disaster.

“  On  the  Monday  evening  a  messenger  arrived  at  Gotten¬
burg,  who  was  despatched  during  the  time  of  the  fire.  In
the  letters  brought  by  him,  the  fire  was  described  precisely  in
the  manner  stated  by  Swedenborg.  On  the  Tuesday  morn¬
ing  the  royal  courier  arrived  at  the  governor’s  with  the  melan¬
choly  intelligence  of  the  fire,  of  the  loss  which  it  had  occa¬
sioned,  and  of  the  houses  it  had  damaged  and  ruined,  not  in
the  least  differing  from  that  which  Swedenborg  had  given
immediately  after  it  had  ceased,  for  the  fire  was  extinguished
at  8  o’clock.

“  What  can  be  brought  forward  against  the  authenticity
of  this  occurrence  ?  My  friend,  who  wrote  this  to  me,  has
not  only  examined  the  circumstances  of  this  extraordinary
case  at  Stockholm,  but  also  about  two  months  ago,  at  Got¬
tenburg,  where  he  is  acquainted  with  the  most  respectable


350  Swedenboip’s  Clairvoyance  independent  of  Mesmerism.

houses,  and  where  he  could  obtain  the  most  authentic  and
complete  information ;  as  the  greatest  part  of  the  inhabitants
who  are  still  alive  were  witnesses  to  the  memorable  occur¬
rence.

“  I  am,  with  profound  reverence,  &c.,

“  Koenigsburg,  Aug.  10,  1768.”  “  Emanuel  Kant.

***  "Whoever  has  had  the  most  ample  experience  of  the
truth  of  clairvoyance  must  be  convinced  that  those  who  are
gifted  with  it  talk  frequently  great  nonsense.  The  power
does  not  always  glow  in  them  when  they  fancy  or  would  have
you  believe  that  it  is  present.  No  faculty  is  always  in  full
vigour,  no  intellectual  discernment  is  never  at  fault :  and  it  is
with  clairvoyance  as  with  all  others.  Clairvoyants  are  probably
sometimes  deceived, — erroneously  conceive  that  they  are  not  on
the  particular  occasion  destitute  of  the  power.  But  sometimes,
through  the  desire  of  pleasing  or  of  showing  off,  they  rashly
make  a  false  pretence  to  it.  The  clairvoyance  and  cerebral
sympathy  of  Ellen  Dawson  seem  established  :  yet  we  learn
that  Dr.  Elliotson  found  her  completely  fail  every  time,  and
the  times  were  no  fewer  than  eight,  that  a  trial  was  made  of
her  clairvoyance  in  his  presence :  and  that  Eanny  Gorman  as
completely  failed  when  he  went  to  witness  her  clairvoyance,
as  well  as  upon  other  occasions.

Even  on  occasions  of  real  clairvoyance,  the  faculty  is  not
unfrequently  unsteady,  and  nonsense  may  be  mixed  with  as¬
tounding  clairvoyance.  In  both  these  circumstances  the  parties
may  pour  forth  the  mere  opinions  and  ignorant  prejudices  of
their  waking  state,  and  talk  about  even  supernatural  matters,
precisely  in  accordance  with  what  they  have  learnt  from  those
with  whom  they  have  lived,  and  with  what  they  are  known  to
believe.  However  much  they  may  pour  forth  upon  the  super¬
natural  they  are  safe,  they  cannot  be  refuted ;  for  experience
and  proof  are  concerned  with  nature  only.  Neither  let  it  be
forgotten,  that  delirium  is  often  mixed  up  with  clairvoyance
in  those  whose  intellect  and  feelings  are  sound  in  their  ha¬
bitual  state :  and  that  mad  persons  are  occasionally  clair¬
voyant  ;  of  which  latter  fact  instances  have  been  presented  to
our  readers  in  the  two  preceding  numbers.

The  learned  and  virtuous  Swedenborg  we  doubt  not  was
actually  sometimes  clairvoyant :  but  the  majority  of  persons  see
proofs  enough  of  a  strong  mixture  of  innocent  partial  insanity
having  affected  him  for  at  least  thirty  years  of  his  life.  Pas¬
cal  believed  that  a  yawning  gulf  was  open  before  him,  and,
while  working  the  problem  of  the  cycloidal  curve,  would  be
tied  in  his  chair  lest  he  should  be  swallowed  up  in  it. — Zoist.


(  351  )


VII.  On  the  Physics  of  the  Nervous  System.  By  Dr.  Jacoby,
of  Konigsberg.  Translated  from  the  German  and  pre¬
sented  to  The  Zoist  for  publication  by  Mr.  R.  R.  Noel.

Such  is  the  progress,  which  has  been  made  of  late  years,  in
the  knowledge  of  the  structure  and  mechanism  of  the  nervous
system,  that  the  time  seems  to  have  arrived  when  it  behoves
us  to  examine  how  far  our  insight  into  the  real  nature  of
nervous  action  itself  has  been  advanced.  Tired  with  the
fruitless  dreams  of  philosophic  schools,  more  given  to  playing
with  words  than  dealing  with  realities,  physiologists  have
latterly  again  turned  their  attention  to  the  strict  observation
of  nature ;  and  with  the  aid  of  experiments  and  the  micro¬
scope  they  have  collected  a  not  unimportant  treasure  of  em¬
pirical  facts.  But  man  cannot  long  remain  satisfied  with  this
kind  of  knowledge  only.  However  often  repulsed,  he  strives
again  and  again  to  obtain  an  explanation  of  the  cause  of  the
phenomena  and  the  laws  which  he  observes;  thus  proving
that  the  cause  he  seeks  lies  within  himself,  and  that  its  dis¬
covery  is  necessary  to  him  before  he  can  gain  a  full  conscious¬
ness  of  his  own  nature.  All  knowledge  of  things  is  in  fact
but  maids  self-knowledge,  and  therefore  no  faith  is  more
justifiable  than  the  faith  in  the  unlimited  power  of  the
human  mind.

Amongst  the  departments  of  science  in  which  speculation,
long  repressed,  has  latterly  again  been  active,  must  be  num¬
bered  physiology.  Hitherto  the  current  coin  in  this  science
has  consisted  almost  exclusively  of  experiments  and  facts  of
direct  observation;  but  we  now  find  that  questions  concern¬
ing  vitality,  the  nervous  principle,  and  such  like,  which  had
been  long  out  of  fashion,  are  becoming  more  and  more  fre¬
quently  examined.  With  this  new  awakened  thirst  for  theo¬
retical  inquiries,  the  old  dispute  about  materialism  and
idealism  has  again  come  forth;  and  if  the  newer  philoso¬
phy,  with  its  supposed  identity  of  being  and  thought  (sein
unci  denkenj,  apparently  acts  as  a  mediatior  between  these
two  opposing  doctrines,  still  it  perhaps  remains  for  physiology
to  bring  the  contest  to  a  satisfactory  conclusion  with  those
wreapons  which  it  alone  has  at  command.

Have  those  things  only  a  real  existence  which  either  are
cognizable  to  our  senses,  or  which,  if  they  escape  our  per¬
ception,  nevertheless,  in  their  peculiar  being  (wesen)  agree
with  such  things  as  are  cognizable  to  the  senses  ?  or  do
things  exist,  the  essence  (wesen)  of  which  is  qualitatively
different  from  the  nature  of  all  sensible  objects  ?

The  materialist  asserts  the  first,  the  idealist  the  second.


352  On  the  Physics  of  t/m  Nervous  System.

The  former  explains  the  non-perception  of  many  things  which
exist,  through  the  want  of  sufficient  acuteness  and  attention
of  the  senses ;  the  latter  finds  it  to  arise  from  the  immate¬
riality  of  the  things  themselves.

Let  us  make  this  clear  by  a  few  examples.

That  there  are  great,  beautiful,  and  virtuous  men,  and
yet  that  greatness,  beauty,  and  virtue  are  not  actual  exist¬
ences,  but  are  merely  conceptions  of  our  reasoning  faculties,
every  one  will  allow.  Still  with  what  eagerness  does  the
idealist  enter  his  protest,  if  doubts  are  expressed  of  the  real
existence  of  a  higher  order  of  things,  or  of  the  spirit,  the
soul,  &c. ;  and  yet  these,  too,  are  but  mere  conceptions  of
the  reasoning  faculties,  for  real  existence  belongs  only  to  the
order  of  things  in  the  universe, — to  man  endowed  with  cer¬
tain  qualities,  to  the  body,  &c.

The  idealist  even  goes  further.  Not  only  does  he  attri¬
bute  existence  to  his  imperceptible  (immaterial)  beings,  but
he  considers  them  to  be  the  cause  of  the  things  which  are
cognizable  to  the  senses — to  be  the  creative,  motive ,  and
preserving  principle  in  the  same.  Thus  it  is  the  soul  which
constructs  its  own  organism ;  it  is  the  mind  which  sets  the
body  in  motion,  and  which  continues  to  he  independently
after  death.  But  how  is  it  to  be  imagined,  that  an  unexpan-
sive,  immaterial,  and  formless  essence  (wesen)  can  produce  a
body  ?  How  can  such  an  essence  (wesen),  when  there  is  a
complete  absence  of  every  point  of  contact,  of  every  relation,
determine  the  body  to  a  change  of  place  ?  The  vast  chasm
which  lies  between  matter  and  “  spirit,”  cannot  escape  the
idealist ;  “  pre-established  harmony,”  “  absolute  negation,”
“self-abnegation,”  &c.,  are  words  with  which  he  seeks  to
fill  up  this  chasm,  however  poor  the  bridge  they  afford.  No
one  has  better  described  this  permutation  of  conceptions  of
the  reasoning  faculties  and  actual  things,  than  T.  G.  Hamann
in  his  letters  to  Jacobi.

“  The  question  with  me,”  he  says,  “  is  not  so  much  what
is  reason ,  as  what  is  language ;  and  in  this  I  see  the  cause  of
all  those  paralogisms  and  antinomies  which  we  attribute  to
the  first.  Defend  me  from  your  refined,  abstract,  empty
words  ;  these  I  avoid  like  stagnant  water  and  very  thin  ice.*
Our  whole  philosophy  consists  more  of  words  than  of  reason¬
ing,  and  the  misconceptions  of  numberless  words,  the  pro¬
sopopoeias  of  the  most  arbitrary  abstractions,  yes,  even  of
the  most  usual  figures  of  speech  of  the  sensus  communis ,  have
given  rise  to  a  whole  world  of  questions  as  groundlessly
started  as  replied  to.”

*  In  English  called  cats’  ice. — Zoint.


On  the  Physics  of  the  Nervous  System.


353


The  magus  of  the  north  is  in  the  right !  prosopopoeias,
personifications  of  the  most  arbitrary  abstractions,  in  this
lies  the  fundamental  error,  from  which  the  new  philosophy,
aiming  as  it  does  at  being  nothing  else  than  anthropology,  is
now  endeavouring  to  free  itself.

The  word  power,  which  is  constantly  used  in  physics  and
physiology,  belongs  to  those  refined,  abstract,  empty  words,
which  Hamann  recommends  us  to  avoid  like  stagnant  water
and  very  thin  ice.

It  is  not  the  aim  of  this  essay  to  point  out  the  abuses
which  natural  philosophers  of  former  ages  have  committed
with  the  word  just  mentioned.  At  the  present  day  they  still
speak,  it  is  true,  of  mechanical  and  chemical  powers,  of
electricity,  galvanism,  of  the  power  of  attraction  and  of  that
of  the  lever ;  the  physical  enquirer  knows,  however,  that  all
these  powers  are  not  real,  independent  things,  separable  from
material  substances.  Power  is  not  in  the  eyes  of  a  natural
philosopher  a  reality,  but  merely  an  abstraction  of  certain
actual  changes  which  take  place  in  sensible  objects.  When
we  say  courage,  virtue,  produce  great  results,  this  is  but  a
mere  figure  of  speech  of  the  sensus  communis.  In  thus  speak¬
ing  we  are  perfectly  conscious  that  courageous  and  virtuous
men  are  to  be  understood.  In  like  manner,  the  natural  phi¬
losophers  speak  of  the  effects  of  a  power,  without  forgetting
for  a  moment  that  it  is  the  bodies  themselves  only  which
produce  effects.  Thus  it  is  not  the  power  of  the  lever  which
moves  a  heavy  body,  but  another  body,  which  is  brought  into
a  particular  relation  with  the  weighty  one.  And  lastly,  as
an  effect  upon  any  particular  body,  be  it  shewn  either  in
change  of  place  or  of  condition,  is  never  possible  without
another  body,  we  plainly  see  that  whenever  in  physics  a
power  is  mentioned,  two  bodies  at  least  must  be  present.  In
short,  it  is  only  to  the  relation  between  two  bodies,  that  we
apply  the  term  power.

We  have  not  unintentionally  dwelt  thus  long  on  a  well-
known  subject.  The  disregard  of  the  meaning  of  words  has
in  physiology,  unfortunately,  given  rise  to  numerous  miscon¬
ceptions  and  to  a  confusion  which  has  lasted  to  the  present
day.

Vital  power,  nervous  power,  irritability,  power  of  self¬
conservation,  power  of  assimilation,  power  of  the  soul,  (which
Ritzen  again  divides  into  body-forming,  form-forming,  and
self-forming  powers,)  motive  power,  (to  which  Ritzen  even
opposes  a  power  of  repose,)  power  of  the  will,  power  of  con¬
ception,  power  of  imagination ;  these  are  some  of  those
efficient  powers  to  be  met  with  in  our  physiological  text-books.


354


On  the  Physics  of  the  Nervous  System.


to  enumerate  all  which  would  be  a  task  of  no  little  diffi¬
culty.  To’  distinguish  these  powers  from  the  physical  ones,
they  are  called  organic  or  vital,  and  it  is  this  very  designa¬
tion  which  has  led  physiologists  to  form  the  most  erroneous
ideas.  If  we  had  been  satisfied  to  use  the  word  power  to
imply  particular  relations  between  bodies,  the  so-called  vital
powers  w  ould  then  neither  have  been  supposed  to  have  an  in¬
dependent  being,  free  from  the  relations  of  space,  nor  to
possess  self-action,  a  thing  of  which  we  have  no  proof  in  the
whole  range  of  phenomena.  Spirit,  as  an  abstract  concep¬
tion,  the  sum  of  all  the  vital  powers,  is  still  considered  by
the  greater  number  of  physiologists  to  be  an  incorporeal
essence,  penetrating  the  organisms,  and  thus  the  effective
cause  of  the  physiological  processes.  That  a  power,  as  an
expression  for  a  mere  relation,  may  be  the  proximate  cause
(grund)  of  a  phenomenon,  but  never  the  ultimate  cause
(ursache),  has  troubled  physiologists  but  little  ;  for  they  con¬
sider  it  to  be  their  duty — in  the  teeth  of  all  logic — “  to  vin¬
dicate  the  supremacy  of  spirit.”  When  the  follower  of
physical  science  speaks  of  the  electrical  or  chemical  power  of
a  single  body,  he  means  its  relation  to  other  bodies,  or,  in
the  sense  of  electro-chemistry,  the  relation  of  its  own  atoms
to  one  another ;  he  does  not,  however,  one-sidedly  attribute
cither  a  power  or  an  effect  to  the  single  body  per  se.  But
the  physiologist  acts  very  differently.  In  his  eyes,  for
instance,  nervous  power  is  a  power  belonging  exclusively  to
the  nervous  substance,  and  it  is  even  that  which  is  properly  effi¬
cient  in  it ;  when  a  muscular  fibre  contracts,  the  contraction  is
said  to  be  produced  by  the  peculiar  motive  power  of  the  nerve.
The  natural  philosopher  would  say,  in  such  a  case,  when  mus¬
cular  fibre  and  nerve,  under  certain  conditions,  enter  into  a  re¬
lation  to  one  another,  the  phenomenon  of  motion  takes  place.
We  have  not  to  do  here  merely  with  a  better  form  of  expres¬
sion  ;  the  point  in  question  is  of  decided  influence  on  the
progress  of  the  investigation.  The  natural  philosopher  (phy-
siker)  cannot  rest  satisfied  whilst  the  physiologist  of  the  ideal¬
ist  school  admits  an  active  moving  power  in  the  nerves  to  be
the  ultimate  cause  (letzter  erklarungsgrund)  of  motion.  The
former  knows  that  no  one  body  can  produce  a  change  in
another,  without  at  the  same  time  experiencing  a  reaction  it¬
self  ;  that,  for  instance,  a  cannon-ball  cannot  be  fired  off  with¬
out  at  the  same  time  causing  the  cannon  to  recoil.  Accord¬
ing  to  this  universal  law,  not  only  the  muscle,  but  likewise
the  nerve,  must  experience  a  change  during  the  phenome¬
non  of  motion.  When  the  natural  philosopher  has  dis¬
covered  the  laws,  according  to  which  the  changes  in  muscle


On  the  Physics  of  the  Nervous  System.


355


and  nerve  mutually  condition  each  other,  he  will  then,  and
not  till  then,  come  to  a  conclusion  about  the  relation  of  both,
and  form  the  conception  of  a  power  in  a  physical  sense.

In  like  manner  as  the  idea  of  a  power,  rightly  conceived,
has  promoted  the  progress  of  physics,  has  the  admission  of
“  powers  in  an  objective  sense”  brought  uncertainty  and  con¬
fusion  into  physiology.  Reil  was  one  of  the  first  to  warn  us
against  the  mischievous  influence  of  these  imaginary  beings
(wesen),  and  yet  even  the  most  distinguished  physiologists  of
our  times  have  not  quite  been  able  to  emancipate  themselves
from  them.  Thus,  for  instance,  Johannes  Muller  says :
“  Although  the  clearness  and  distinctness  of  our  conceptions
and  thoughts  and  the  depths  of  our  sufferings  can  be  changed
by  material  alterations  of  the  brain,  and  although  the  inte¬
grity  of  the  brain  is  decidedly  necessary  for  consciousness,
still  our  psychical  life  (seelenleben)  cannot  he  explained  by  ma¬
terial  changes  of  the  brain ,  and  this  psychical  life  must  be
considered  as  [an  aggregate  of]  actions  (eine  thdtigkeitj  in
their  nature  (wesen)  entirely  independent  of  the  conditions  of
space.”  Muller  here  admits,  in  plain  terms,  an  immaterial
soul.  And  what  has  led  him  to  this  conclusion  ?  Because
“  certain  phenomena  cannot  be  explained  as  material  changes.”
Now,  this  may  depend  on  the  impossibility  of  such  an  expla¬
nation  ;  it  may,  however,  result  from  our  deficient  knowledge
of  material  processes.  As  long  as  Muller  cannot  prove  the
explanation  to  be  impossible,  the  acknowledgment  of  our
ignorance  is,  in  every  case,  far  better  than  the  arbitrary
assumption  of  an  immaterial  soul.  Or  is  perhaps  something
explained  by  the  hypothesis  of  “  actions  independent  of  con¬
ditions  of  space?”  How  are  these  actions  to  be  at  once
“  independent ”  of  matter,  and  yet  be  influenced  by  material
alterations  of  the  brain  ?  Muller  calls  the  attempt  to  deduce
conception  and  thought  ( vorstellen  und  denken)  from  reci¬
procal  actions  of  intimately  connected  ganglionic  bodies,  “  a
vague  and  entirely  unfounded  hypothesis.”  We  ask,  how¬
ever,  if  his  assumed  soul,  with  its  irreconcileable  contradic¬
tions,  which  he  first  creates  to  explain  certain  phenomena,
and  then  receives  as  their  cause,  is  anything  more  than
“  a  vague  and  entirely  unfounded  hypothesis  ?”  By  means
of  his  hypothesis,  is  the  way  in  which  the  so-called  mental
actions  ( seelenthdtigkeiten )  take  place,  better  understood,  than
when  we  regard  them  as  the  result  of  changes  as  yet  not  suffi¬
ciently  known  ?  The  phenomena  of  reflex -actions  were  known
much  earlier  than  their  cause  (grund).  Accordingly,  the  physi¬
ologists  before  Bell  (Prochaska)  ought  to  have  reasoned  thus  :
“  because  these  appearances  cannot  be  explained  as  material
vol.  v.  n  n


356


On  the  Physics  of  the  Nervous  System .


changes,  their  cause  must  be  acknowledged  to  consist  in  some
action  entirely  independent  of  the  conditions  of  space.”

We  find  the  very  same  grounds,  which  J.  Muller  adduces
for  the  existence  of  an  immaterial  soul,  brought  forward  by
the  earlier  physical  enquirers,  who  attributed  to  each  body,
even  to  the  inorganic ,  an  especial  soul ;  we  find  them  advanced
by  many  of  the  earlier  physicians,  who  explained  the  origin
of  diseases  through  the  influence  of  Satan  and  demons ;  and
we  meet  with  them  again  amongst  the  astronomers  before
Newton,  who  deduced  the  course  of  the  heavenly  bodies  from
the  principle  of  their  possessing  souls.

The  history  of  science  teaches  that  the  idealist  views,
which  seek  the  causes  of  phenomena  in  something  else  than
the  bodies  themselves,  have  never  led  to  the  discovery  of  a
single  truth ;  whereas  materialism,  as  even  its  opponents  con¬
fess,  urges  us  on,  at  least,  to  incessant  investigation.

In  physiology,  as  in  physics,  we  have  to  deal  exclusively
with  sensible  objects.  We  divide  their  relations  into  such
as  we  have  gained  a  knowledge  of,  and  into  such  as  are  yet
unknown.  Let  us  never  assume  incorporeal  and  metaphysical
creations  of  our  imagination  to  be  the  cause  of  the  latter,
but,  discarding  this  cloak  for  our  ignorance,  honestly  con¬
tinue  our  investigations,  bearing  in  mind  the  physical  axiom
that  a  body  only,  and  not  a  power ,  can  produce  effects  upon
another  body.

Against  the  materialist  school  in  physiology,  opposition
has  been  raised  on  various  sides.  The  objections  derived
from  theology  and  morals,  we  may  be  allowed  here  to  pass  in
silence.  As  natural  philosophers  we  are  permitted,  as  is
known,  “  to  penetrate  as  deep  as  we  can.”  If  the  materialist
views  are  the  true  ones,  we  may  take  for  granted  that  morals
and  theology  will  in  the  end  be  found  to  agree  with  them,  or
they  must  accommodate  themselves  to  them.  We  have  here
to  speak  only  of  scientific  objections.

But  it  is  far  from  our  purpose  to  enumerate  and  refute  all
these,  particularly  as  we  consider  the  foregoing  explanations
applicable  to  the  main  question.  We  shall  confine  ourselves,
therefore,  to  a  few  remarks.

1.  Burdach  in  his  Sketch  of  a  Physiology  of  the  Nervous
System,,  written  professedly  in  defence  of  idealism,  has  the
following  words  :  “  The  comparison  of  the  structure  of  the
nerves  with  the  phenomena  of  life  convinces  us  that  a  me¬
chanical  view  of  the  nerves  as  conductors  is  absolutely  un¬
tenable.  Sensation  enables  us  to  distinguish  the  impressions
which  are  made  on  two  proximate  points  of  the  skin.  If  this
should  be  the  result  of  each  impression  touching  a  particular


On  the  Physics  of  the  Nervous  System.  357

nervous  fibre,  which  thus,  in  its  speciality,  conveys  the  im¬
pression  to  the  sensorium,  then  there  must  be  the  end-point
of  a  nervous  fibre  at  every  part  of  the  skin.  But  such  end¬
points  do  not  exist ,  for  the  fibres  at  the  peripheral  ends  of  the
nerves  spread  themselves  out  on  the  surface  and  form  loops,
so  that  two  impressions,  although  sensation  distinguishes
them  as  such,  nevertheless  touch  one  and  the  same  fibre,  only
at  two  different  points.”

We  might  reply,  that  this  fact,  at  the  most,  only  proves
our  yet  deficient  knowledge  of  the  material  causes  of  sensation,
and  by  no  means  the  necessity  of  an  ideal  explanation.  We
have  not  cited  this  objection,  however,  to  refute  it,  but  rather
to  call  attention  to  a  new  and  important  discovery  as  regards
the  nerves.

Johannes  Muller  and  Briicke,  in  a  series  of  observations
made  on  the  muscle  of  the  eye  of  pikes,  saw  nervous  tubes
actually  become  divided  into  two.  According  to  Savi,  the
primitive  threads  (primitivfdden)  of  the  nerves  do  not  only
become  divided  on  the  laminae  of  the  electrical  organs  of  the
torpedo,  but  form  a  connected  net.  “  It  becomes  a  question,”
Muller  remarks,  “  whether  these  nervous  tubes  do  not  give
out  still  finer  elements,  which  have  hitherto  escaped  observa¬
tion,  whether  these  consist  of  finer  tubes,  or  of  the  central
threads  contained  in  the  nervous  tubes.  The  nervous  tubes
may  be  called  thick  in  comparison  with  the  muscular  fibres,
and  in  comparison  with  the  greater  number  of  the  elementary
tissues,  and  are  certainly  complex  parts.”  Schwann  saw  a
great  many  delicate  fibres  arise  from  the  so-called  primitive
fibres,  which  here  and  there  formed  small  knots,  from  whence
several  branches  spread  out.  In  like  manner  Hannover  found,
besides  the  loops  (boyen),  also  free  ends  of  the  nervous  threads,
and  he  remarks  that  the  loops  may  possibly  find  their  end  at
another  spot ;  so  that  he  considers  a  division  of  the  nervous
fibres  into  more  delicate  and  free  ends,  to  be  the  manner  in
which  the  nerves  of  the  skin  end.  We  recall  to  mind  here,
too,  the  free-ending  nervous  fibres  in  the  parts  discovered  by
Parini  (Parinischen  Korperchen)  .*

*  “  The  hypothesis  of  the  absolute  continuity  of  the  nervous  fibres  has  latterly
been  brought  forward  with  a  degree  of  assurance,  generally  accorded  only  to
well  certified  facts.  But  the  anatomists  who  adhere  to  it  have  always  been  but
few  in  number,  and  few  indeed  are  the  grounds  on  which  their  arguments  are
based,”  (Article  “Physiology  of  the  Nerves,”  by  Prof.  Volkmann,  in  Wager's
Handworterbuch  der  Physiologie.)  This  article  contains  an  admirable  critique  of
the  “  Hypothesis  of  the  nervous  loops,  originally  started  by  Valentin,  and  a
favorite  hobby  of  Carus.”  Volkmann  has  brought  considerable  powers  of  dis¬
crimination  and  combination  and  logical  reasoning  to  bear  on  the  physiology  of
the  nerves,  the  results  of  experiments  and  other  investigations.  Without  losing
sight  of  the  connexion  of  the  nervous  system  as  a  whole,  he  demonstrates  the

D  D  2


358


On  the  Physics  of  the  Nervous  System.


2.  In  another  part  of  his  essay,  Bnrdach  says,  under  the
title,  “  Sensation  without  nerves,” — “  In  consequence  of  the
discovery  that  when  nerves  had  been  cut  through  or  ligatured
(unterbunden) ,  sensation  ceases,  it  has  been  concluded  that
sensation  is  only  possible  by  means  of  the  nerves ;  therefore  a
part  which,  in  a  healthy  or  diseased  state,  may  be  the  seat  of
pain ,  must  have  nerves,  even  when  they  are  not  visible.  A
really  exact  physiology  can  hardly  allow  such  a  hazardous
conclusion.  Organic  substance,  newly  formed  to  replace  what
is  lost  by  waste,  although  it  may  not  contain  nerves,  is  never¬
theless  particularly  sensible  of  impressions,  and  indeed  in  an
equal  degree,  whether  it  is  destined  to  restore  bony  substance,
or  parts  rich  in  nerves,  even  if  the  nerves  which  go  to  these
parts  have  been  cut  through .”

To  this  we  may  reply,  if  the  nerves  which  go  to  such  a
part  are  really  cut  through,  the  sensibility  of  the  nervous
substance  is  certainly  incomprehensible ;  for  in  this  case,  as
we  learn  by  experiments,  insensibility  would  be  the  result,
even  when  visible  nerves  are  present.  If,  however,  the  nerves
going  to  the  part  remain  in  undisturbed  connexion  with  the
brain,  the  explanation  of  the  phenomena  observed  is  not  dif¬
ficult.  The  substance  of  the  cicatrice,  being  touched,  will
cause  a  pressure  on  the  neighbouring  parts  and  their  nervous
trunks  (nervcnstamme) ,  and,  according  to  the  laws  of  eccentric
motions,  the  impression  will  be  felt  especially  in  that  part
where  the  nerves  ended  before  the  wound  was  made,  and
therefore  on  the  scar.  Thus,  on  this  hand,  the  assumption
of  “  sensation  without  nerves”  can  hardly  be  maintained.

3.  As  a  proof  that  “  organic  power  and  organic  matter
are  two  different  things,”  Johannes  Muller  appeals  to  the
fact,  that  “the  vital  organic  matter  enters  into  inorganic
combinations,  as  soon  as  the  cause  of  the  organic  appear¬
ances — the  power  of  life — ceases.”  Here  we  again  meet
with  the  same  erroneous  idea  of  power  amongst  the  physio¬
logists,  which  we  have  already  had  occasion  to  find  fault  with.
The  power  of  life  is  not  only  made  the  cause  of  the  organic
appearances,  but  is  likewise  separable  from  organic  matter  in
death.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  body  enters  into  inorganic
combinations  after  death.  This  does  not  take  place,  however,

speciality  and  independence  of  various  parts,  and  upsets  completely,  I  think,
the  arguments  for  the  “absolute  continuity  and  oneness  of  nervous  fibre.”

As  certain  physiologists  of  the  idealist  school  have  supposed  the  continuity  of
nervous  fibre  to  corroborate  beautifully  their  spiritualist  doctrines  and  views  of
the  oneness  of  the  mind,  and  as  these  again  have  been  made  a  foundation  for
attacks  on  phrenology,  the  adherents  of  this  science  may  derive  many  important
arguments  from  the  article  in  question — far  more  than  the  author,  who  repu¬
diates  phrenology,  is  aware  of. —  ( Translator .)


On  the  Physics  of  the  Nervous  System.


359


because  an  abstract  being,  the  so-called  vital  power,  ceases,
but  rather  because  the  state  of  the  life — capable  or  vivifiable
organic  matter — changes  in  such  a  manner  in  death,  that  it
becomes  adapted  for  inorganic  combinations,  and  consequently
the  results  of  organic  matter,  the  phenomena  of  life,  must
cease.  Do  not,  for  instance,  the  phenomena  of  fire  last
only  as  long  as  those  combinations  and  separations  necessary
to  burning  take  place  ?  and  we  cannot  say  that  these  combi¬
nations  and  separations  cease,  because  the  fire  goes  out.

In  many  other  places  of  Muller’s  physiology,  particularly
in  his  explanation  of  the  functions  of  the  senses ,*  is  this
arbitrary  and  nothing-explaining  idea  of  power  introduced.
It  is  the  same  idea — in  a  modern  dress  only — as  contained  in
the  belief  of  the  ancients,  that  spirits  move  up  and  down  in
the  nerves.

4.  In  vindication  of  his  idea  of  power,  Muller  even  ap¬
peals  to  physics.  “  There  are,”  he  says,  “  powers  of  nature
or  imponderable  substances,  as  light ,  electricity ,  and  mag-
netism,  which,  if  they  do  not  depend  upon  matter,  yet,  without
a  change  taking  place  in  the  material  condition  of  the  body ,
leave  one  kind  of  matter  and  pass  over  to  another.  The  ex¬
istence  of  these  principles,  their  appearance  in  bodies,  and
their  transilience  from  one  body  to  another,  show  us  clearly
that  that  materialism  which  will  acknowledge  nothing  but
the  powers  of  atoms  is  without  foundation ;  and  without  in
the  least  meaning  to  compare  the  /i/e-principle  and  the  psy-
cA«ca/-principle  with  these  imponderable  substances  or  powers,
we  see  at  least  that  there  is  nothing  in  the  facts  of  physics
which  removes  the  possibility  of  there  being  an  efficient  im¬
material  principle,  independent  of  matter,  although  it  ope¬
rates  in  organic  bodies  and  in  matter.”

So  far  Muller  !  The  entia  rationis  are  taken  here  again
for  realia,  power  and  immaterial  principle  are  classed  together
with  imponderable  substances.  In  fact,  this  and  the  follow¬
ing  passage  form  an  admirable  specimen  of  the  physiologico-
mystical  confusion  of  language.

The  instances  which  Muller  borrows  from  physics,  are
not  very  happily  chosen,  for,  in  opposition  to  his  own  views,

*  Muller’s  theory  of  the  “  specifically  different  functions  of  the  senses”  is
entirely  repudiated,  and  justly  so,  it  seems,  by  many  of  the  later  physiological
writers,  as  Valentin,  Volkmann,  Spiess,  Lotze.  Volkmann,  in  the  article  cited
above,  where  speaking  of  the  one-sided  and  narrow  views  concerning  the  func¬
tions  of  the  nerves  and  the  possibility  of  vicarious  sensations  (vicarirender  emp-
findunyen),  says,  “If,  according  to  the  assertions  of  magnetizers  (mesmerists),
the  points  of  the  fingers  and  the  region  of  the  stomach  are  sensible  to  light,  we
can  only  say  that  their  statements  may  not  be  sufficiently  proved,  but  we  cannot
reject  them  as  absurd  in  themselves.”  A  trifling  concession  from  a  professional
physiologist. — Translator.


360  On  the  Physics  of  the  Nervous  System.

they  prove  that  the  natural  philosophers,  wherever  they  do
not  perceive  material  causes  of  phenomena,  out  of  timid
respect  for  immaterial  principles  think  themselves  in  duty
bound  to  assume  them  hypothetically .  As  regards  the  asser¬
tion,  that  “  light,  electricity,  and  magnetism,  without  any
change  in  the  material  condition  of  bodies,  leave  them  and
pass  over  to  others the  physical  enquirers  will  hardly  be  of
the  same  opinion  as  Muller.

5.  The  opponents  of  the  materialist  school  in  physiology,
take  most  particular  pains  to  prove  the  difference  between  the
so-called  dead  powers  of  nature  and  the  powers  of  life,  es¬
pecially  between  electricity  and  nervous  action.  But  how
this  is  to  show  the  incorrectness  of  the  materialist  views,  and
even  the  incorporeity  of  the  soul,  is  difficult  to  understand.
Even  if  they  had  themselves  succeeded  in  demonstrating  this
difference,  still  this  would  only  have  taught  us  that  the  phe¬
nomena  of  life  depend  on  other  causes,  distinguishable,  to  be
sure,  from  electricity,  but  still  on  material  causes.

However,  up  to  this  hour,  our  opponents  are  far  from
their  goal.  At  present  we  will  not  assert  the  identity  of
both  phenomena, — as  Sauvages,  de  Haen,  Prochaska,  and
others  maintain, — neither  will  we  deny  it.  Thus  much  ap¬
pears  to  us,  however,  to  be  fully  established ;  that  the  grounds
which  have  hitherto  been  brought  forward  to  refute  the  iden¬
tity,  are  by  no  means  tenable.

The  physiologists  have  laid  particular  stress  upon  the  fol¬
lowing  points.  1.  That  the  nerves  in  their  entire  course  are
surrounded  by  moist  parts,  which  are  therefore  perfect  con¬
ductors  of  electricity,  and  that  the  nerves  themselves  are
worse  conductors  than  the  cellular  tissues  of  which  their
sheaths  are  formed.  Accordingly,  the  entirely  isolated  action
of  the  several  nervous  fibres,  showing  itself,  as  it  does,  exclu¬
sively  at  the  peripheral  and  central  ends,  could  not  take
place,  if  this  action  were  of  an  electrical  nature,  since,  the
nerves  being  surrounded  by  a  moist  substance,  a  lateral  diver¬
sion  of  the  electricity  must  everywhere  obtain.

A  short  time  ago,  this  objection  must  doubtless  have
appeared  to  be  of  great  importance;  whether  it  is  so  now,
the  following  fact  will  best  show.

The  microscope  teaches  us,  as  is  well  known,  that  each
primitive  nervous  fibre  consists  of  a  cylindrical  transparent
tube  and  medullary  matter;  further  that,  in  this  medullary
matter  a  central  streak  may  be  remarked  (called  by  Purkinje
the  axis-cylinder,  by  Remak  the  primitive  cord,  and  by
Miiller  the  central-thread).  It  was  formerly  believed  that
the  central-thread  was  nothing  more  than  the  firmer  part  of


On  the  Physics  of  the  Nervous  System.  361

the  medullary  matter  arising  from  coagulation.  But  this  is
not  the  case ;  for  if  the  medullary  matter  be  extracted  by
boiling  the  nerves  in  spirits  of  wine,  the  central-thread
remains  and  is  visible  through  the  transparent  skin  of  the
cylinder.  Schwann  and  Purkinje  find  the  medullary  matter
surrounding  the  central-thread  to  be  distinguishable  from  the
extraordinarily  delicate  skin  of  the  nervous  cylinder,  in  which,
therefore,  both  medullary  matter  and  central-thread  are
enclosed.  The  medullary  matter  is  of  an  adipose  nature,  and
consequently,  like  all  fatty  substances,  isolating  electricity.
It  results,  therefore,  from  these  discoveries,  that  the  central
thread  of  each  primitive  fibre  is  surrounded  by  an  insulating
substance  (as  to  electricity).  This  fact  is  of  great  importance,
and  Johannes  Muller  himself,  who  at  the  time  he  first  pub¬
lished  his  physiological  work  (1834)  belonged  to  the  decided
opponents  of  the  doctrine  of  identity,  has  found  himself
obliged  to  make  considerable  concessions  in  his  late  edition
(1844).

“  We  must  acknowledge,”  he  says,  “  that  the  identity  of
the  nervous  principle  and  electricity  is  far  from  being  proved,
but  we  can  say  no  more.  A  deeper  still  unknown  connexion
between  these  phenomena,  analogous  to  that  between  electri¬
city  and  magnetism ,  may  exist.  The  methodical  progression
of  science  forbids  us,  however,  from  making  use  of  a  suppo¬
sition  as  a  basis  for  scientific  systems.”

No  one  can  refuse  assent  to  this  last  remark ;  still  in  every
case  the  above  cited  objection  to  the  identity  is  upset  by  the
experience  already  gained.

2.  Another  objection  is  based  on  a  well-known  experiment.
If  a  nerve  is  cut  through  in  several  places,  but  in  such  a
manner  that  the  cut  ends  remain  in  immediate  contact  with
each  other,  or  if  a  nerve  is  surrounded  with  a  tightly-drawn
thread  (unter  bindungsfadenj) ,  mechanical  and  chemical  irrita-
tation  can  no  longer  stimulate  this  nerve  to  action ;  the  pas¬
sage  of  the  so-called  “  nervous  power”  is  cut  off.  Neverthe¬
less  nerves  thus  cut  through  or  tied,  if  the  part  lie  between
two  armatures,  are  as  good  conductors  of  electricity  as  unin¬
jured  nerves.

We  could  reply  to  this  objection  with  effect  by  appealing
to  our  experience,  that  thermo-electricity  likewise  is  checked
by  every  interruption  of  the  conducting  wire,  but  that  on
this  account  no  one  has  ever  asserted  that  thermo-electricity
is  no  electricity.

However,  the  apparent  contradiction  in  the  two  experi¬
ments  can  be  explained  otherwise  than  by  mere  analogy,


362


On  the  Physics  of  the  Nervous  System.


when  we  consider  that  animal  electricity  operates  only  in  the
insulated  central-thread  of  the  nerve.

If  the  entire  nerve  be  tied  or  cut  through,  animal  electri¬
city  cannot  pass  over  the  injured  spot ;  in  the  first  instance,
because  the  ligature  at  once  surrounds  the  central-thread  and
the  adipose  substance  which  causes  its  insulation ;  in  the
second  instance,  because  the  divided  ends  of  the  central-
thread  shrink  back  in  the  tubes  of  the  primitive  fibres,  and
these  tubes  contract  and  close  themselves.

Electricity,  on  the  other  hand,  when  introduced  from
without,  can  very  easily  be  transmitted  through  the  moist
ligature  or  through  the  watery  vapour  lying  between  the
divided  nerves,  and  then,  beneath  the  tied  or  cut  point,  pene¬
trate  the  insulating  medullary  matter,  and  thus  operate  on
the  uninjured  central-thread  below.  For  electrical  currents
which  are  cut  off  from  conductors  by  insulators,  effectuate
nevertheless  currents  in  such  conductors  through  induction.

Lastly,  the  opponents  of  the  doctrine  of  identity  attach
great  weight  to  the  experiment,  that,  when  the  nerves  are
examined  during  their  action  by  means  of  the  galvanometer,
no  variation  of  the  magnetic  needle,  or  only  the  most  trifling
deviation,  takes  place.  Amongst  experiments  cited  are  those
of  Bischof  on  frogs  (MiilleFs  Archio.,  1841),  which  led  this
physiologist  to  the  conclusion  that  no  electric  current  exists
in  the  nerves.

Again  ;  according  to  the  observations  of  Matteucci,  a  gal¬
vanometer  in  connexion  with  the  insulated  nerves  of  the
electrical  organ  of  the  torpedo  displayed  no  deviation.

But  the  observations  of  Bischof,  supposing  them  to  be
correct,  do  not  justify  the  deductions  he  draws  from  them.

Even  Johannes  Muller  now  objects,  that  the  primitive  or
central-thread  in  the  interior  of  its  nervous  tube  is  surrounded
with  a  layer  of  insulating  adipose  substance,  and  consequently
that  its  own  current  is  purely  lengthwise ;  and  further,  that
the  action  of  the  nerves  on  the  galvanometer  is  arrested  by
the  approximation  of  centrifugal  and  centripetal  currents  in
different  fibres  of  one  and  the  same  nerve.

But  against  Bischof;s  experiments  on  frogs  other  experi¬
ments  may  be  brought  to  bear,  and,  in  conclusion,  we  will
mention  what  has  been  observed  by  Nobili  and  Matteucci
(Paris,  1840).

These  experimenters  mutilated  a  frog  in  such  a  manner
that  nothing  but  the  lower  part  of  the  spine  and  the  hind  legs
remained,  and  with  no  other  connexion  between  the  two  than
that  formed  by  the  nerves.  On  the  lower  spinal  portion,


363


On  the  Physics  of  the  Nervous  System.

with  part  of  the  nerves,  being  placed  in  a  vessel  containing  a
solution  of  common  salt,  and  the  legs  in  another,  filled  in
like  manner,  and  on  the  wire-ends  of  a  galvanometer  being
brought  in  connexion  with  the  solutions,  a  declination  of  the
magnetic  needle  of  several  degrees  was  the  result.  In  this
case,  therefore,  an  electrical  current  Trom  the  feet  towards
the  head  must  have  taken  place.

All  these  experiments  show  at  least,  that,  up  to  the  present
time,  the  views  of  the  identity  of  nervous  action  with  the
phenomena  of  electricity  are  not  controverted,  and  that  even
if  this  should  ever  take  place,  still  the  correctness  of  the  ma¬
terialist  doctrines  would,  on  this  account,  by  no  means  be
disproved.

R.  R.  Noel,  (Transit

Rosawitz,  Bohemia,  Dec.,  1847.


***  We  think  it  right  to  state  that  the  experiments  which
Professor  Matteucci  has  adopted  for  the  purpose  of  ascertain¬
ing  whether  there  exists  an  electric  current  in  nerves  which
are  exciting  muscles  to  vigorous  contraction,  seem  to  prove
that  such  is  not  the  case,  for  in  no  one  instance  has  he  been
able  to  obtain  the  least  indication  of  such  a  current.  He
considers  nervous  force  and  electricity  to  be  two  distinct
agencies,  but  at  the  same  time  allows  that  there  is  a  close
analogy  between  them.  He  believes  the  phenomena  of  con¬
traction  induced  in  muscles  by  the  simple  contact  of  their
nerves  with  another  muscle  in  the  act  of  contracting,  as  a
phenomenon  altogether  sui  generis ,  and  as  indicating  that
the  action  of  the  nervous  power  produces  a  peculiar  condition
in  the  latter,  which  is  capable  in  its  turn  of  inducing  a
state  of  nervous  excitation  in  the  trunk  of  a  nerve  brought
into  simple  contact  with  it.  He  attributes  great  weight  to
the  following  phenomena  of  induced  contraction.  If  we  lay
the  nerve  of  a  galvanoscopic  frog  upon  the  exposed  muscles
of  one  or  both  thighs  of  a  frog  prepared  in  the  ordinary
manner,  and  cause  the  latter  to  contract  by  an  irritation  of
any  kind  applied  to  the  nerves  or  to  the  spinal  cord,  the  mus¬
cles  of  the  leg  of  the  galvanoscopic  frog  are  also  thrown  into
contraction.  The  experiment  is  made  still  more  striking  by
arranging  three  or  four  galvanoscopic  frogs  in  such  a  manner
that  the  nerve  of  the  second  shall  lie  upon  the  muscle  of  the
first,  the  nerve  of  the  third  upon  the  muscle  of  the  second,
and  that  of  the  fourth  upon  the  muscle  of  the  third.  Upon
irritating  the  nerve  of  the  first,  and  throwing  its  muscles  into
contraction,  the  muscles  of  the  second,  third,  and  fourth  will


364  Further  particulars  of  Mr.  Snewing’s  Case,

also  be  thrown  into  contraction,  each  having  its  action
induced  by  that  which  precedes,  and  inducing  the  action  in
that  which  follows ;  just  as  in  a  succession  of  bodies,  the  first
of  which  is  subjected  to  a  disturbance  of  its  electric  equili¬
brium.  If  the  nerve  of  the  galvanoscopic  frog  be  laid,  not
upon  the  muscle  but  upon  the  nerve  of  that  which  precedes
it,  no  contraction  is  induced.  And  if  the  irritation  of  the
nerve  does  not  produce  muscular  contraction  in  the  first
animal  (it  is  not  essential  that  frogs  should  be  employed),  no
action  is  induced  in  the  succeeding.  Now  as  the  induced
contraction  takes  place  as  well  when  the  nerves  of  the  first
animal  are  excited  by  any  other  stimulus,  as  by  electricity,
it  is  obvious  that  the  induction  in  the  second  cannot  be  ex¬
plained  by  the  passage  of  electricity  from  the  first,  unless
that  electricity  be  generated  either  in  the  action  of  the  nerve
or  in  that  of  the  muscle.  The  experiments  already  cited
prove  that  the  action  of  the  nerve  cannot  be  concerned,
and  by  a  long  series  of  experiments,  in  which  particular  care
was  necessary  to  avoid  the  sources  of  fallacy  occasioned  by
the  muscular  current,  Professor  Matteucci  has  satisfied  him¬
self  that  no  electricity  is  generated  by  muscular  contraction.
Moreover  he  found  that  by  interposing  a  thin  layer  of  Vene¬
tian  turpentine  between  the  thighs  of  the  inducing  frog  and
the  nerve  of  the  galvanoscopic  frog  laid  upon  them,  he  could
prevent  the  passage  of  an  electric  current,  without  interfer¬
ing  with  the  action  induced  from  the  muscle  to  the  nerve.
Such  of  our  readers  as  wish  to  investigate  this  subject
more  completely,  we  refer  to  Lectures  on  the  Physical  Pheno¬
mena  of  Living  Beings,  by  C.  Matteucci,  and  to  a  review  of
the  same  in  the  British  and  Foreign  Medical  Review,  No.  46,
from  which  we  have  borrowed  the  above  remarks. — Zoist.


VIII.  Further  Particulars  of  Mr.  Snewing’s  Case.

By  Himself.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

77,  Wells  Street,
Dec.  22nd,  1847.

Sir, — When  the  truth  is  misrepresented  by  ignorance,
distorted  by  prejudice,  aspersed  by  envy,  and  denied  by  evil,
it  becomes  not  a  matter  of  choice  but  an  absolute  duty,  that
they  who  know  the  certainty  of  its  existence,  should  battle
boldly,  firmly,  unflinchingly,  in  its  dear  behalf.  The  truth
smothered  to  day  may  plunge  generations  in  ignorance,  and


by  Himself.


365


a  professional  burking  of  a  healing  agent  may  fling  the  shadow
of  death  over  thousands  of  hearths,  where  the  domestic  affec¬
tions  might  have  flourished  with  the  hue  of  health  and  happi¬
ness  for  years.  No  testimony,  however  trifling,  should  be
deemed  unimportant;  no  fact,  however  small,  useless,  when
it  tends  to  demonstrate  the  truth.  Prejudice,  however
stubborn,  must  bow  beneath  the  accumulated  weight  of  well-
attested  evidence ;  and  every  one  who  can  speak  from  expe¬
rience  should  add  his  testimony,  however  humble,  to  the
mass ;  in  the  hope  that  his  fact ,  coming  at  the  right  time,
may  help  to  free  mesmeric  truth  from  the  trammels  which
bigotry,  ignorance,  and  a  feeling  worse  if  possible  than  either,
have  cast  around  its  usefulness,  by  poisoning  the  minds  of
thousands  against  its  health-restoring  influence.  At  least  it
ought  to  be  expected  of  us,  who  have  benefited  in  health  by
mesmerism,  that  we  should  endeavour  to  cause  a  diversion,
and  by  procuring  a  portion  of  the  filth  which  is  hurled  about
to  be  directed  at  us,  save  our  benefactors  from  bearing  the
whole  shower  of  nasty  vituperation.  I  write  warmly  and  ear¬
nestly  upon  this  matter,  because  my  heart  swells  with  indig¬
nation  against  those  who  seek  to  stifle  the  truth,  and  bleeds
with  pity  for  those  who  are  deterred  by  them  from  seeking  its
healing  powers.  How  many  poor  creatures  are  as  I  was,  who
might  be  as  I  am  !  Oh !  could  I  but  persuade  one  to  cast
aside  prejudice  and  be  well,  how  should  I  rejoice.  It  is  the
cherished  hope  of  accomplishing  this,  and  not  an  itching  to
see  my  name  in  print,  which  impels  me  to  send  you  this
second  narrative  of  my  cure.  My  first  was  written  too  much
at  the  impulse  of  the  moment,  when  the  pleasure  of  my  task
led  me  from  particularizing  to  a  more  general  statement.
Those  who  read  would  readily  perceive  that  I  had  been  ill  and
was  well ;  but  perhaps  had  I  been  more  particular  in  stating
my  case,  those  suffering  from  similar  affections  might  have
been  more  powerfully  moved  to  follow  my  example.  From
what  cause  it  originated  I  know  not,  but  I  was  always,  as  long
as  I  remember,  what  is  generally  termed  sickly.  A  little  of
what  others  might  do  with  impunity,  was  sure  to  bring  chas¬
tisement  to  me.  The  stomach,  the  brain,  the  limbs,  not  only
rebelled  against  excess,  but  seemed  to  set  themselves  against
all  work ;  and  for  their  compulsory  allegiance,  visited  me  with
head-ache,  indigestion,  and  lassitude.  With  years  came  no
remission  of  these  symptoms,  and  at  the  age  of  22  I  was  a
being  “  used  up”  (except  under  excitement),  without  having-
satiated  myself  with  those  “  pleasant  vices”  which  is  the
usual  prelude  to  that  unenviable  state.  Dr.  Macleod,  of  St.
George's  Hospital,  whom  my  family  consulted,  recommended


366  Further  particulars  of  Mr.  Snewing’s  Case,

my  removal  to  Madeira,  considering  me  in  a  consumption.
I  did  not,  however,  like  the  idea  of  transportation,  and  re¬
mained  to  die  at  home.  I  did  not  die,  however;  and  Dr.
Wake,  of  Warwick,  whom  I  afterwards  consulted,  assured  me
that  I  was  not  in  that  state,  but  diseased  in  the  liver.  After
a  time  the  danger  of  a  very  premature  exit  from  this  busy
scene  seemed  remote.  I  myself  could  not  see  or  feel  that  I
carried  within  me  anything  likely  to  be  immediately  fatal  to
life,  and  I  was  sorry  for  it.  Yes,  however  strange  it  may  ap¬
pear  to  the  healthy,  with  a  keen  perception  of  the  beautiful
in  the  physical  and  moral  world,  I  yet  longed  for  that  “bourn
from  whence  no  traveller  returns.”  I  was  so  nervous,  so  ir¬
ritable,  that  the  least  excitement,  the  least  untoward  circum¬
stance,  would  cause  my  pulse  not  “temperately  to  keep  time,”
but  my  “  bosom's  lord”  to  flutter  like  a  maiden's  heart  at  the
first  breath  of  love,  but  with  far  different  emotions.  Time,
however,  wore  on,  and  with  the  use  of  medicines  and  leeches
occasionally,  when  the  pain  in  the  head  became  agonizing,  I
contrived  to  live — save  the  mark — through  two  or  three  more
winters.  But  with  the  increase  of  years  came  the  increase  of
duties.  In  the  arena  of  life  I  was  called  on — 'tis  the  lot  of
man — to  do  and  to  suffer.  I  felt  myself  giving  way  under
the  effort.  I  flung  myself  into  the  arms  of  the  profession,
resolved  to  leave  no  means  unsought,  which  promised  health ;
and  I  really  believe  that  all  which  medical  skill  could  do  for
me  was  done.  I  had  no  alleviation  of  pain,  however,  except
under  the  direct  action  of  medicine,  and  several  times  have  I
declared  myself  well  that  I  might  suffer  undisturbed.  I  re¬
member  on  one  occasion  telling  my  medical  man  that  I  felt
myself  well :  “  Well !”  he  exclaimed,  “your  lips  are  trembling
with  emotion  and  denying  your  assertion.”  I  had  an  issue  in
my  arm ;  I  was  denuded  of  my  hair ;  I  was  leeched ;  I  was
purged ;  I  was  calmed  by  soothing  medicines  ;  I  was  roused
by  stimulants  ;  I  lived  well ;  I  was  starved ;  I  drank  wine ;  I
drank  beer ;  I  drank  water ;  I  was  deluged  by  it  in  shower-
baths  ;  but  if  relief  came  it  was  too  evanescent  to  be  called
such.  I  left  the  profession  and  went  to  the  Rev.  Dr.  Moseley.
My  wig-crowned  head  favoured  his  mode  of  action,  which
consisted  of  mixing  a  powder  and  a  liquid  in  wrater  and  pour¬
ing  it  upon  the  head  and  down  the  spine ;  but  he  was  as  un¬
successful  as  his  more  orthodox  brethen.  I  think  that  were
they  who  attended  me  to  speak  honestly,  they  would  confess
that  they  directed  the  whole  battery  of  medicine  against  my
relentless  enemy  without  avail ;  and  their  failure  I  ascribe,
not  to  want  of  skill  in  their  profession,  but  to  the  obstinate
and  hidden  nature  of  the  disease.  I  blame  them  not,  that


by  Himself.


367


they  failed  in  their  attempt,  but  I  do  hold  that  they  are  cul¬
pable  in  this,  that,  knowing  what  they  failed  in  has  been  ac¬
complished  by  another  agent,  they  yet  stand  aloof  from  en¬
quiry,  when  that  enquiry  might  be  made  under  such  favour¬
able  auspices ;  thus  jeopardizing  the  health  and  happiness  of
those  who  seek  their  assistance  in  similar  affections  to  that
under  which  I  suffered.  Were  they  to  do  their  duty,  I  repeat
it,  their  duty ,  they  would  perfectly  investigate  my  case.  They
might  still  treat  their  patients  according  to  the  authorized
mode ;  if  with  success,  well ;  but  if  that  failed,  they  might
then,  from  experience,  recommend  another  which  might  not
fail,  which  I  am  morally  certain  would  never  fail  in  a  case
like  my  own.  So  much  for  that.  I  now  went  to  Dr.  Elliot-
son,  not  to  be  mesmerised,  but  because  I  believed  from  what
I  had  heard  of  him,  that  he  was  not  a  man  to  be  chained  to
any  particular  mode  of  action,  but  one  who  would  boldly  ven¬
ture  into  regions  new  if  he  found  not  what  he  wanted  in  the
old,  and  that,  therefore,  there  was  yet  a  hope  of  my  recovery.
I  was  not  deceived  when  I  imagined  some  fresh  remedy  would
be  employed ;  the  medicine  he  prescribed  was  unlike  any  other
I  had  ever  taken,  and  when  that  also  failed,  the  last  tints  of
the  rainbow  of  hope  faded,  I  thought,  for  ever.  I  abandoned
medicine.  I  found  it  was  my  life  :  I  took  to  it  again.  When
I  look  back  at  what  I  have  suffered,  I  shudder.  I  have  had
the  head-ache  until  my  limbs  have  become  almost  insensible
to  feeling,  and  the  whole  power  of  suffering  seemed  centred
in  the  brain.  And  then  the  mental  torture,  the  dejection,
the  morbid  fancy  which  gives  all  things  the  aspect  of  hell,
the  want  of  power  to  laugh,  the  sad  heart  that  never  rejoices,
the  cheerless  past,  the  embittered  present,  the  hopeless  future,
the  consciousness  that  you  are  performing  the  office  of  a  demon,
making  a  desert  of  your  own  life,  and  blasting  the  happiness
of  others  without  the  power  to  avoid  it,  the  dread  (hell  to
every  one  it  must  be)  of  becoming  a  suicide ;  why  need  I  enu¬
merate  the  several  sensations  which,  as  a  whole,  is  a  doom  the
most  horrible  to  which  the  most  awful  depravity  could  plunge
the  object  of  its  hate.  I  was  incapable  of  all  continued  men¬
tal  exertion.  Milton,  Spenser,  Pope,  Shakspeare,  Byron,
Scott,  Cervantes,  in  whose  beautiful  creations  I  had  so  often
found  solace  and  forgetfulness,  became  forbidden  things.
Twice  I  commenced  the  study  of  Latin,  more  for  pastime
than  any  other  purpose,  with  an  interval  of  twelve  months
between  each  attempt,  and  was  compelled  to  relinquish  it  each
time  in  less  than  a  month ;  not  that  the  study  was  beyond
my  capacity, — I  do  not  say  this  from  vanity,  I  write  for  the
truth, — I  was  intellectually  more  than  equal  to  it,  but  because


368  Further  particulars  of  Mr.  Snewing’s  Case,

the  dreadful  state  I  was  in  put  it  beyond  me.  I  lost  a  gold
watch  and  chain,  and  when  I  sent  for  the  police  to  search
my  house,  I  was  compelled  to  request  a  friend  to  superintend
the  matter,  and  go  into  the  country  until  it  was  settled ;  had
I  remained,  a  severe  fit  of  illness  would  have  been  the  result.
I  was  sometimes  compelled  to  preside  at  meetings  at  my  house
convened  for  convivial  purposes  :  My  God  !  what  agonies  I
have  experienced  upon  those  occasions.  I  was  advised  to
sleep  out  of  town,  and  ride  to  and  fro.  I  confess  that  from
sheer  cowardice  I  did  not  do  it :  I  could  not  do  it ;  my  heart
would  have  been  in  my  mouth  every  step,  and  I  should  have
imagined  all  London  laughing  at  my  jockeyship.  My  infir¬
mity  caused  me  to  suffer  severely  in  my  business,  both  from
pain  and  in  a  pecuniary  point  of  view.  When  I  stooped  for
a  few  moments,  the  vessels  of  my  face  and  brain  seemed
bursting,  and  on  rising  I  could  scarcely  see.  The  smell  of
the  spirits  when  I  drew  them  from  the  vats  in  the  cellar  to  fill
the  casks  in  the  bar  had  always  the  same  effect,  followed  by  a
distressing  head-ache ;  as  for  serving  in  the  bar,  I  could  not
think  of  it,  my  irritable  temper  and  morbid  feelings  causing
me  to  offend  almost  every  one  I  had  any  dealings  with.  It  was
in  the  midst  of  this  intensity  of  mental  and  bodily  suffering
that  I  had  recourse  to  mesmerism,  with  the  results  narrated  in
the  last  number  of  The  Zoist.  I  do  not  consider  that  my  cure
was  in  any  way  advanced  by  or  dependent  upon  faith  or  the
imagination,  but  it  entirely  resulted  from  mesmerism,  simply
and  alone ;  for  although  I  had  faith  at  the  commencement,  the
apparent  want  of  success,  (neither  sleep  nor  any  other  visible
effect  being  produced  for  a  month,)  completely  banished  it.
Yet  relief  was  found ;  all  the  bad  symptoms  of  my  complaint
diminished,  and,  although  the  cure  became  more  rapid  when
the  sleep  was  produced,  I  am  confident  it  was  commenced,  and
would  have  been  completed  had  not  the  prospect  of  success  en¬
listed  my  faith  and  imagination  in  the  work.  I  purposely
avoid  giving  any  opinion  as  to  the  nature  of  the  mysterious
power  called  mesmerism.  Doubtless  those  qualified  for  the
task  are  perseveringly  and  philosophically  noting  the  different
phases  in  which  it  presents  itself  to  us,  and  may  yet  be  en¬
abled  to  tell  its  opponents,  bigoted,  selfish,  or  ignorant,  what
it  is ;  sufficient  for  me  is  the  fact  that,  be  it  what  it  may,  it
has  healing  powers,  for  which  I  in  all  thankfulness  express  my
gratitude  to  God.

A  word  in  conclusion  respecting  the  agency  of  Satan,
which  is  by  some  alleged  to  be  the  polluted  source  from  whence
the  waters  of  mesmerism  flow.  As  a  sincere  and  trusting
believer  in  Revelation,  as  a  member  of  that  church  under


by  Himself.


369


whose  guidance  Catholic  England  sought  and  I  trust  found
salvation,  I  utterly  and  unconditionally  disavow  all  intention
or  the  remotest  thought  of  seeking  health  from  the  hands  of
the  ministers  of  evil.  Mesmerists  did  not  profess  to  be  in
possession  of  any  supernatural  or  miraculous  powers,  but  de¬
clared  their  cures  to  be  the  result  of  natural  causes.  Such  I
believed  them  to  be,  and  such  I  am  confident  from  experience
they  are ;  and  until  the  assertors  of  the  contrary  are  prepared
to  avow  that  a  more  firmly  anchored  faith  in  God,  and  an  en¬
larged  charity  towards  man  are  the  fruits  of  Satanic  agency,
I  shall  as  heretofore  offer  my  thanksgivings  for  recovery  to  Him
from  whom  the  blessings  of  mesmerism,  and  all  other  bless¬
ings  flow,  boldly  asserting  it  to  be  a  more  Christian-like  vision
which,  in  acts  of  benevolence  and  charity,  sees  the  finger  of
God  rather  than  the  cloven-hoof  of  the  demon  :  for  although
Satan  may  assume  the  likeness  of  an  angel  of  light,  I  never
yet  heard  of  his  performing  the  ministration  of  one.

I  am,  Sir,

Your  obedient  servant,

William  Snewing.

P.S.  I  think  it  proper  to  state,  that  since  the  date  of  my
letter  in  the  last  number  of  The  Zoist ,  I  have  never  felt  the
slightest  symptoms  of  my  old  affliction.  A  most  severe  bowel
complaint,  which  rapidly  reduced  me  to  such  a  state  of  weak¬
ness  that  I  could  scarcely  stand,  was  by  the  kindness  of  Dr.
Elliotson  cured  in  a  few  days  by  mesmerism  without  any  me¬
dicine;  the  pain  ceasing  almost  entirely  the  first  time  I  was
mesmerised,  and  my  strength  being  restored  by  the  same
means.  I,  during  nearly  the  whole  of  yesterday,  had  a  vio¬
lent  pain  in  the  side,  which  about  half-past  9  in  the  evening
became  most  intense.  I  went  up  stairs  for  the  purpose  of
going  to  bed  and  having  a  mustard  poultice  on.  As  the  old
women  say,  I  was  drawn  up  all  of  a  heap.  I  took  off  my
coat  and  waistcoat,  and  lying  in  a  heap  upon  the  bed  with  my
knees  to  my  mouth,  desired  Mrs.  Snewing  to  make  a  few
passes  down  my  side  prior  to  resorting  to  the  mustard  ;  and
in  a  few  seconds  I  felt  the  pain  leaving  me ;  in  a  few  minutes
I  had  my  coat  on  again,  enjoying  a  cigar  with  some  friends
in  my  public  room.


Appendix  to  Mr.  Snewing’ s  case.

A  colleague  of  the  physician  of  St.  George’s  Hospital,  who
considered  Mr.  Snewing  in  a  consumption  and  ordered  him  to
Madeira,  not  only  never  uses  the  stethoscope, '  but  has  been


370


Perfect  mesmeric  cure  of  a  Twisted  Neck,


ridiculing  for  above  twenty  years  all  who  use  the  ear  in  pec¬
toral  diseases ;  although  it  is  a  matter  of  absolute  necessity
that  the  various  sounds  of  the  chest  are  altered  in  certain
ways  in  different  diseases  of  the  chest,  and  thus  give  us  great
information  of  its  condition.* *

He  also  ridicules  mesmerism  as  strongly  as  he  does  the
use  of  the  ear  in  diseases  of  the  chest.  He  shall  speak
for  himself,  under  examination  by  a  committee  of  the  House
of  Commons  upon  Mr.  Wakley's  Registration  Bill,  June  18,
1847.

“Mr.  Macaulay.  You  mentioned  as  a  remarkable  instance  that
a  person  of  great  rank  in  the  state  was  a  patron  of  the  mesmeric
hospital. — Dr.  Seymour.  Yes.  I  have  seen  a  proposal  going  round
with  his  name  at  the  end  of  it.

“Mr.  M.  Do  you  conceive  that  in  patronizing  the  mesmeric
hospital,  he  shewed  a  disregard  to  the  College  of  Physicians  ? —
Dr.  S.  I  think  he  shewed  a  great  disregard  to  our  acquirements,  to
common  sense,  and  to  everything  else!

“  Mr.  M.  Is  not  the  principal  of  the  mesmeric  hospital  a  fellow
of  the  Royal  College  of  Physicians  ? — Dr.  S.  That  I  cannot  help.
He  became  a  fellow  before  he  took  up  his  apostolic  mission.

“Mr.  M.  Has  he  been  allowed  by  the  college  to  make  a  public
appearance  ,upon  an  occasion  of  great  interest  ?f — Dr.  S.  He  was
not  passed  over :  that  was  all.  I  think  it  was  a  bad  measure,  but  I
cannot  help  it.”  (Report  from  the  Select  Committee  on  Medical
Registration ;  together  with  the  Minutes  of  Evidence,  pp.  1300 —
1303.)

In  the  index  this  rich  evidence  is  referred  to  under  the  word
quackery.

Zoist.


IX.  Perfect  mesmeric  Cure  of  a  Twisted  Neck.  By

Mr.  Collins.

To  Dr.  Elliotson.

19,  Breck  Road,  Everton,  Liverpool,
3rd  Dec.,  1847.

Dear  Sir, — I  take  the  liberty  of  forwarding  to  you  the
following  case  of  perfect  cure  of  a  twisted  neck,  and  of
restoration  to  health  of  a  lady,  by  mesmerism,  and  shall  feel
greatly  obliged  by  your  kindly  sending  it  to  the  Editor  of  The
Zoist,  if  you  think,  with  me,  that  it  possesses  sufficient  in¬
terest  to  be  laid  before  the  public.  I  am  the  more  desirous

*  A  frightfully  severe,  but  most  merited,  castigation  of  this  contempt  of
science,  &c.,  &c.,  will  be  found  in  The  Brit,  and  For.  Med.  Review  for  October
last.

f  The  delivery  of  the  Harveian  Oration. — Zoist.


by  Mr.  Collins.


371


of  making  the  communication  through  you,  as  it  was  your
kind  advice  and  encouragement  that  gave  us  heart  to  proceed
in  a  most  obstinate,  and  what  appeared  to  be,  a  hopeless  case.

I  am,  dear  Sir,

Your  ever  obliged  and  faithful  Servant,

James  Collins.

On  the  24th  March,  1846,  I  received  a  letter  from  the
daughter  of  Mrs.  Freeman,  a  lady  residing  at  Welby  Hall,
near  Grantham,  requesting  to  be  informed  as  to  the  nature
of  my  daughter's  long  continued  affliction,  and  by  what  means
she  was  cured.  This  information  was  sought  on  account  of
her  mother,  who  was  ill  and  her  head  drawn  aside.  In  my
reply  I  gave  some  particulars  of  the  case,  and  referred  for
further  details  to  the  eleventh  and  twelfth  numbers  of  The
Zoist.

Mr.  Freeman  afterwards  came  over  to  see  me  on  the  sub¬
ject,  and  in  consequence  of  my  statements,  and  the  encou¬
ragement  I  gave  him  to  try  mesmerism,  of  the  curative  power
of  which  I  had  had  so  great  a  proof,  it  was  determined  to
lose  no  time  in  testing  its  efficacy  in  the  case  for  which  these
enquiries  had  been  made.

Mrs.  Freeman,  accompanied  by  her  husband,  came  on
the  23rd  April,  1846,  to  Newark,  where  I  then  resided,  and
placed  herself  under  my  care.  Her  health  had  not  been  good
for  many  months,  and  I  found  her  very  feeble,  and  greatly
depressed  in  spirit.  Her  head  was  much  drawn  to  the  left
side,  and  also  backward.  She  complained  of  numbness,  with
a  sensation  of  coldness,  on  the  top  of  her  head,  and  of  great
pain  in  the  muscles  of  the  right  side  of  her  neck.  She  could,
by  using  both  hands,  sometimes  place  her  head  in  its  natural
position,  but  it  could  not  be  kept  so  if  she  removed  them.
When  she  rose  from  her  seat,  or  attempted  to  walk,  her  head
was  always  drawn  aside,  and  frequently  with  great  pain,  and
then  especially  the  muscles  on  the  right  side  of  the  neck  were
hard  and  swollen.  She  had  been  attended  for  some  time  by
two  medical  gentlemen,  one  of  them  a  physician,  and  had
been  bled  and  blistered ,  and  had  taken  much  medicine  without
the  least  benefit.  I  requested  her  to  discontinue  taking  any
medicine  whilst  she  was  under  mesmeric  treatment;  and
which  injunction  was,  I  believe,  strictly  attended  to.

I  commenced  mesmerising  her  by  downward  passes  in
front,  and  continued  it  for  thirty-five  minutes.  In  about
fifteen  minutes  she  appeared  to  be  drowsy,  but,  as  she  after¬
wards  told  me,  she  felt  alarmed ;  her  heart  palpitated  through
dread  of  the  unknown  result,  for  she  had  never  seen  anv  one

YOL.  V.  E  E


372  Perfect  mesmeric  cure  of  a  Tivisted  Neck,

mesmerised,  and  was  altogether  ignorant  of  the  effects  usually
produced.  After  discontinuing  the  downward  passes,  I  made
frequent  passes,  with  contact,  from  the  crown  of  the  head
along  both  sides  of  the  neck  for  some  time,  which  appeared
to  be  beneficial,  as  she  arose  and  walked  several  times  across
the  room,  her  head  remaining  straight,  and  the  pain  had
considerably  diminished.

24th.  Feels  better  to-day,  and  is  in  good  spirits.  She
can  sit  and  walk  without  having  occasion  to  hold  her  head  or
move  it  with  her  hands.  Mesmerised  her  as  before,  but  did
not  produce  sleep.  She  heard  several  noises  in  the  street,
but  had  no  power  either  to  speak  or  move  her  arms,  which
lay  by  her  side,  as  she  expressed  it,  like  two  pieces  of  lead.
The  pain  in  her  neck  was  much  diminished,  and  she  had  a
control  over  the  muscles  of  the  neck,  and  her  head  continued
straight  whilst  she  walked  about  the  room.

25th.  Till  10  o^clock  this  morning  she  was  free  from  pain,
and  her  head  was  straight;  but,  having  walked  probably  for
too  long  a  time,  her  neck  became  very  painful,  and  her  head
was,  as  usual,  as  much  drawn  aside  as  at  first.  I  mesmerised
her  and  sent  her  to  sleep,  but  continued  to  make  passes
locally  for  nearly  another  hour,  till  she  awoke  spontaneously.
This  removed  the  numbness  from  the  top  of  her  head,  and
the  pain  in  the  neck  had  in  a  great  measure  subsided.  Dur¬
ing  the  mesmerisation,  her  arms  and  hands,  as  she  afterwards
informed  me,  became  very  hot,  heavy,  and  benumbed,  but
not  painful,  and  she  had  a  sensation  of  weight  and  heat  in
her  legs.

My  patient  appearing  to  be  very  ill,  and  unable  to  sleep
at  night,  I  was  anxious  to  mesmerise  her  when  she  was  in
bed ;  but,  as  her  husband  had  left  her,  and  her  daughter
only  was  present,  I  desired  my  wife  to  mesmerise  her.  This
was  done  for  two  or  three  evenings  without  any  apparent
benefit,  and  I  therefore  determined  to  mesmerise  her  just
before  bed-time.  The  effect  was  so  satisfactory,  that  I  con¬
tinued  to  do  so  during  the  whole  time  I  attended  her.  Her
appetite  too  was  very  indifferent,  and  she  suffered  much  pain
after  eating ;  but  in  a  few  days  no  kind  of  food  seemed  to
disagree  with  her,  and  the  pain  after  eating,  which  had  so
much  distressed  her,  entirety  ceased.

26th.  She  complained  of  feeling  very  unwell  all  the  day,
and  her  head  was  so  much  drawn  aside  that  she  could  not
see  her  way  to  my  house.  I  mesmerised  her  generally  and
locally  for  more  than  an  hour,  which  diminished  the  numb¬
ness  both  of  her  head  and  neck.  She  afterwards  felt  quite
composed  and  comfortable,  and  her  head  remained  perfectly


by  Mr.  Collins.


373


straight;  but,  on  discontinuing  the  mesmerism,  her  head
turned  as  before.  After  waiting  for  a  few  minutes,  I  mes¬
merised  the  right  side  of  the  head  and  neck,  and  along  the
arm  to  the  ends  of  the  fingers.  This  enabled  her  to  keep
her  head  straight,  but  a  numbness  came  on  over  both  tem¬
ples,  which  I  removed  by  passes;  but  it  only  changed  its
position,  as  it  was  felt  quite  as  severely  on  the  back  of  the
head,  from  which  I  soon  took  it  away  entirely.  After  this
she  became  much  more  cheerful,  and  left  me  with  her  head
quite  straight.

On  the  27th,  she  informed  me  she  had  had  a  goodnight’s
rest,  and  that  her  appetite  had  improved,  but  her  head  had
been  all  the  day  so  much  drawn  aside  as  to  oblige  her  to  rest
it  forcibly  on  a  cushion  placed  against  the  wall.  I  mesmer¬
ised  her  for  half  an  hour  in  the  usual  way,  and  then  made
passes  from  the  top  of  the  head  along  both  sides  of  the  neck
and  along  the  spine,  and  I  breathed  frequently  behind  the
ears.  A  singular  sensation  was  produced  in  the  arms,  but
unattended  by  pain ;  and  also  in  the  legs,  but  the  right  leg
especially  felt  benumbed  and  as  heavy  as  lead.  She  was
much  more  cheerful  this  evening,  and  begins  to  think  that
mesmerism  will  cure  her.

As  the  effects  of  mesmerism  upon  her  system  from  day  to
day  were  similar  to  those  above  mentioned,  I  need  not  parti¬
cularize  them,  although  some  of  them  were  very  curious  and
interesting.  Her  arms  and  legs  always  felt  heavy,  and  she
was  unable  to  move  them  after  I  had  mesmerised  her,  till  I
removed  the  sensations  by  passes  made  along  the  limbs.

Mesmerising  her  just  before  going  to  bed  had  the  effect,
although  I  very  rarely  produced  more  that  drowsiness,  of  pro¬
curing  sound  and  refreshing  sleep.  This  was  most  desirable
in  her  case,  for  the  least  noise  disturbed  and  alarmed  her,
and  her  head,  previously  to  being  mesmerised,  turned  when
in  bed,  and  she  was  unable  to  help  herself,  so  that  her  family
was  in  constant  dread  of  her  being  suffocated;  but  shortly
after  I  began  to  mesmerise  her,  her  head  did  not  turn  when
it  was  laid  on  the  pillow.

On  the  14th  May  she  could  both  wash  and  dress  herself,
neither  of  which  was  she  previously  able  to  do  since  she  came
to  Newark,  but  her  head  turned  very  much  during  the  day,
owing  to  a  fright  occasioned  by  an  accident  to  some  parties
in  a  gig  which  occurred  in  the  early  part  of  the  day,  just
opposite  to  the  window  at  which  she  was  sitting.  I  desired
her  to  spend  the  rest  of  the  day  at  my  house,  and  after  having
mesmerised  her  she  became  tranquil  and  cheerful.

From  this  period  she  gradually  grew  stronger,  and  could

e  e  2


374


Perfect  mesmeric  cure  of  a  Twisted  Neck.

frequently  sit  for  some  time  without  any  twisting  of  the  neck,

but  it  almost  always  turned  when  she  walked.

«/

About  the  middle  of  August,  as  her  health  was  then  re¬
established,  although  her  head  was  still  drawn  aside,  she
returned  home,  and  on  leaving  us,  I  desired  her  husband,
whom  I  instructed  for  the  purpose,  to  mesmerise  her  daily,
as  I  felt  confident  that  if  persevered  in,  mesmerism  would
quite  cure  her.  He  regularly  attended  to  it,  and  with  the
happiest  results.  In  June  of  the  present  year,  fourteen
months  after  I  first  saw  Mrs.  Freeman,  I  was  invited  to  spend
a  few  days  with  the  family  previously  to  my  leaving  that  part
of  the  country,  and  my  delight  may  readily  be  conceived,  on
seeing  my  former  patient  come  out  to  welcome  me  with  her
head  quite  straight,  and  having  the  appearance  of  good  health.

In  a  letter  which  I  received  from  Miss  Freeman,  dated
27th  Nov.,  she  says :  “  My  dear  mother  continues  quite  well,
for  which  we  can  never  be  sufficiently  thankful.”

James  Collins.

In  the  letter  accompanying  this  communication  to  me  is
the  following  statement,  which  I  beg  to  forward  to  The  Zoist,.

John  Elliotson.

“  Ellen  informed  you,  I  believe,  that  I  mesmerise - ,  daily

for  a  slight  attack  of  paralysis,  with  threatening  symptoms  of
increased  violence.  I  am  happy  to  say  that  her  general  health
is  improved  under  the  treatment,  and  I  feel  confident  that
perseverance  will  do  all  we  wish  in  establishing  a  cure.  She
has  never  been  to  sleep  under  the  operation,  but  is  occa¬
sionally  drowsy,  and  she  frequently  felt  cold  under  it.

“  It  occurred  to  me  one  day  that  I  would  insulate  myself
while  mesmerising  her,  and  I  therefore  placed  a  board  upon
a  number  of  glasses,  taking  care  that  nothing  touched  me.
The  result  was,  that  I  produced  a  glow  over  the  whole  system
of  my  patient,  and  she  described  her  feeling  as  being  exceed¬
ingly  pleasant,  and  the  mesmeric  influence  remarkably  sooth¬
ing,  with  a  sensation  of  warm  water  flowing  under  the  skin
to  the  extremity  of  her  feet.  I  had  an  opportunity  of  trying
the  effect  on  the  next  day,  upon  a  gentleman  whom  I  had
mesmerised  several  times  tor  severe  pains  in  the  head  and
nervous  depression  of  spirits.  He  also  remarked  a  greater
intensity  of  mesmeric  influence,  and  described  the  glow  and
the  comfortable  feeling  it  produced.

“Mr.  Eeynoldson,  who  is  mesmerising  professionally  in
Liverpool,  called  upon  me  and  introduced  himself  a  few  days
since,  and  I  mentioned  the  circumstance  to  him.  He  gave


Mesmeric  cure  of  St.  Vitus’s  Dance.


375


me  the  opportunity  of  seeing  his  gratuitous  patients,  and  lie
tried  the  insulation  upon  four  of  them,  and  the  effect  was
so  much  encreased  as  to  surprize  them.  It  is  very  possible
that  this  may  have  been  tried  before,  or  whether  tried  or  not
it  may  be  of  no  practical  value  even  if  the  effect  should  be
found  to  be  tolerably  constant.  Still  if  it  should  prove  useful
only  occasionally,  it  is  worth  being  kept  in  view,  and  on  this
account  I  have  ventured  to  trouble  you  with  these  remarks
upon  it.”


X.  Mesmeric  Cure  of  St.  Vitus’s  Dance.  By  Miss  Collins.

Miss  Harriet  Johnson,  about  17  years  of  age,  dark  com¬
plexion,  with  dark  hair  and  eyes,  rather  slim,  was  dreadfully
afflicted  with  St.  Vitus’s  dance  about  five  years  ago,  and  has
suffered  from  it  more  or  less  ever  since.  She  had  been  at¬
tended  by  several  medical  men  at  different  times  without  any
good  results.  In  January  last,  Mr.  Spencer  Hall  was  deli¬
vering  lectures  on  mesmerism  in  Lincoln,  and  was  asked  to
call  and  see  if  any  effect  could  be  produced  upon  this  poor
creature,  who  was  then  very  bad,  had  no  appetite,  could  not
sleep  at  night,  spirits  very  much  depressed,  the  whole  of  the
left  side  in  a  constant  motion,  and  she  could  scarcely  walk
across  the  room  without  falling.  He  succeeded  in  getting  her
to  sleep  in  a  few  minutes.  The  Rev.  Mr.  Larken  afterwards
mesmerised  her,  perhaps  a  dozen  times,  when  she  always
went  to  sleep  easily,  though  never  very  deep,  and  she  always
awoke  spontaneously  in  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour  or  twenty
minutes  after  the  mesmeriser  had  left  her.  She  never  remem¬
bered  on  first  awaking  what  had  passed  during  her  mesmeric
state,  but  in  the  evening  she  recollected  all.  She  was  gene¬
rally  mesmerised  at  10  o’clock  in  the  morning.  From  the
first  her  appetite  and  spirits  improved,  and  she  slept  better
at  night.

As  Mr.  Larken  was  unable  to  attend  to  her  every  day,
and  as  it  appeared  necessary  for  her  to  be  mesmerised  daily,
I  undertook  the  case  on  the  5th  of  February,  and  succeeded
in  getting  her  to  sleep  in  less  than  a  jninute,  when  the  mo¬
tion  in  the  left  hand  and  arm  increased  considerably.  I
placed  a  round  ruler  in  her  hand,  and  requested  her  to  hold
it ;  she  tried,  but  could  retain  it  no  longer  than  a  second  or
two.  She  preferred  taking  hold  of  my  hand,  which  she
strove  hard  to  keep,  but  was  unable  to  do  so  above  half  a
minute.  Before  I  left  her  she  could  hold  it  for  four  minutes.


376


Mesmeric  cure  of  St.  Vitus’s  Dance.


After  mesmerising  her  for  half  an  hour,  I  left  her  in  a  com¬
fortable  sleep.

6th.  She  slept  for  ten  minutes  after  I  left  her  yesterday,
and  was  rather  stronger  when  first  she  awoke,  but  the  violent
twitching  returned  towards  night.  I  mesmerised  her  for  half
an  hour  and  left  her  asleep,  feeling  rather  better.  Slept
better  last  night.

7th.  Slept  for  about  twenty  minutes  after  I  left,  and  was
much  stronger  for  several  hours,  but  at  night  the  twitching
returned.  Mesmerised  her  for  half  an  hour,  and  left  her
sleeping  very  comfortably  when  I  came  away ;  but  the  arm
was  shaking  violently.  I  noticed  both  yesterday  and  to-day,
that  as  my  fingers  approached  her  left  elbow  the  motion  was
greatly  increased,  and  breathing  upon  the  shoulder  produced
the  same  effect.

8th  and  9th.  Rather  stronger  and  in  better  spirits.

10th.  Had  a  much  better  night,  and  is  a  great  deal  better
and  stronger.

11th,  12th  and  13th.  Still  improving.

14th  to  the  20th.  I  had  a  bad  cold,  and  was  in  conse¬
quence  prevented  mesmerising  her.  She  relapsed,  and  was
not  nearly  so  well ;  but,  after  Mr.  Larken  kindly  mesmerised
her  on  the  18th  and  19th,  she  felt  rather  better,  and  slept
better  at  night.

20th.  With  two  passes  she  went  to  sleep,  and  for  the  first
time  the  arm  was  tolerably  quiet  during  the  mesmeric  state  ;
nor  did  the  motion  in  the  arm  return  till  she  got  to  bed.

21st  and  22nd.  The  twitching  is  now  confined  to  the
hand.

23rd.  I  was  delighted  to-day  to  find  her  able  to  carry  a
glass  of  water  from  one  room  to  another  without  the  least
movement  of  the  arm.  When  mesmerised,  too,  the  hand
alone  shook.

24th.  Is  a  great  deal  better,  and  says  she  walked  out
yesterday  afternoon,  and  was  quite  astonished  to  find  herself
so  much  stronger.  I  forgot  to  say  that  since  the  18th  she
has  had  mesmerised  water,  and  appears  decidedly  benefitted
by  it.

25th  to  the  28th.  Continues  to  improve.

March  1st.  Still  improves,  and  gains  strength  in  the  arm
and  hand.  She  has  had  no  movement  in  the  former  since
the  21st  of  February.

2nd  to  the  6th.  The  hand  gains  strength  and  the  twitch¬
ing  daily  diminishes.  She  now  sleeps  but  a  quarter  of  an
hour  after  I  leave  her.

7th.  Better.  Has  had  no  periodical  returns  of  the  mo-


The  ready  adoption  of  Ether  and  Chloroform.  377

tion  in  the  hand  since  Feb.  27.  Slept  but  ten  minutes  after
I  left  her.

8th.  There  is  very  little  motion  in  the  hand  to-day.  It  is
now  generally  confined  to  the  third  and  fourth  fingers.

9th  and  10th.  Is  very  well  in  health,  and  the  hand  gains
strength.  Sleeps  five  minutes  after  I  leave  her.

15th.  Yesterday  she  went  out  of  town  for  the  day,  and  I
fancy  there  is  a  little  more  twitching  in  the  hand  to-day,
though  it  seemed  rather  less  before  I  left  her.

16th,  17th  and  18th.  I  do  not  think  she  has  been  so  well
since  she  went  out,  and  yesterday  there  was  a  slight  motion
in  the  arm.

19th  to  28th.  A  friend  mesmerised  her  for  me,  as  I  was
suffering  from  cold,  and  on  the  28th  I  found  her  much  im¬
proved.

April  5th.  Is  gradually  mending.  The  motion  in  the
hand  is  decidedly  on  the  decrease.

27th.  Since  the  9th  she  has  only  been  mesmerised  once
or  twice  a  week.

May  14th.  I  mesmerised  her  for  the  last  time,  as  she  is
going  from  home.  There  is  now  only  a  very  slight  twitching
occasionally  in  the  third  finger,  and  she  feels  quite  well  and
strong.

On  the  1st  of  June  she  writes  me  word  that  she  shall  not
come  again  to  be  mesmerised,  as  she  is  quite  cured.  I  heard
from  my  patient  again  on  the  I4th  of  this  month  (November),
and  she  says  that  she  has  not  had  the  least  return  of  her  old
complaint  since  I  discontinued  mesmerising  her,  and  that  she
has  grown  so  stout,  and  looks  so  well,  that  she  thinks  I
should  scarcely  know  her  again.

Ellen  Collins.

19,  Breck  Road,  Everton,  Liverpool.


XI.  Letter  on  the  ready  adoption  of  Ether  and  Chloroform  by
the  Medical  Profession ,  to  Dr.  Elliotson  from  Mr.  Parker.
Communicated  with  Mr.  Parker's  permission.

Brighton,  November  23rd,  1847.

Royal  Marine  Library.

Dear  Sir, — I  yesterday  morning  witnessed  the  extraction
of  a  tooth  from  a  young  French  woman,  under  the  influence
of  chloroform ;  about  a  hundred  drops  were  used  on  the  occa¬
sion.  It  was  poured  into  and  round  the  edge  of  a  small  cup¬
shaped  sponge,  and  this  was  held  over  the  mouth  by  the
dentist,  Mr.  Wood,  of  German  Place,  who  has  used  the  ether
continually  for  man}'  months.


378  The  ready  adoption  of  Ether  and  Chloroform,

The  patient  gasped  painfully,  and  after  a  few  seconds
struggled  to  free  herself,  and  the  operator  was  compelled  to
hold  it  forcibly ;  pinching  her  nose  to  close  the  nostrils,  while
her  hands  were  held  by  his  assistant ;  in  fact,  to  the  beholder,
it  was  a  most  complete  exhibition  of  burking.  She  never
appeared  to  lose  consciousness  at  all,  but  continued  to  struggle
and  oppose  throughout  the  operation,  calling  out  in  broken
English,  “  that's  enof,  enof  enof,”  like  a  person  in  an  hyste¬
rical  paroxysm.  She  closed  her  teeth  to  resist  the  introduction
of  the  instrument,  and  bit  Mr.  Wood's  finger  sharply,  when
he  succeeded  in  forcing  them  open.

At  the  moment  of  extracting  the  tooth  I  watched  her,
and  she  evinced  the  usual  amount  of  suffering  in  the  usual
manner,  by  contracting  her  body  and  crying  out,  striving  to
remove  the  instrument  from  her  mouth.

Under  such  circumstances  the  tooth  was  drawn  with  an
unusual  difficulty,  and  when  extracted  fell  out  of  the  pincers ;
and  as  the  operator  could  not  find  it,  he  was  obliged  to  grope
in  the  socket  with  his  finger  to  ascertain  if  it  really  was  out.
The  socket  was  empty,  and  the  tooth  was  found  under  her
tongue.

At  the  same  instant  she  raised  herself  from  the  chair  in
high  glee,  and  began  to  talk  very  glibly  about  the  “  funny
dream  she  had  when  she  went  to  sleep,"  and  the  “horrid
sensation "  before  she  lost  consciousness ;  “  I  was  dreaming
all  de  time  about  having  my  tooth  out ;  and  I  thought  I  was
board  a  ship,  and  all  de  sailors  were  crowded  round  me."

Her  friend  now  came  forward  (who  had  left  the  room  while
the  operation  was  proceeding),  and  congratulated  her  on  its
successful  accomplishment.  She  interrupted  her  with  “bot
eef  you  think  eet  was  without  pain,  you  are  mosh  mistaken."
I  then  asked  her,  “  Did  you  feel  the  pain  of  your  tooth  being
drawn  out?"  “No,"  said  she,  “bot  I  thought  I  should  be
suffocate  wid  that  nasty  stuff ;  bot  I  nevare  knew  anything
about  my  tooth  being  taken  out."  She  began  laughing  again
about  her  funny  dream.

I  asked  her  if  she  felt  any  pain  or  soreness  in  the  socket.
“None  at  all."  As  she  was  evidently  exhilirated,  I  asked
her  how  she  felt.  “  Oh  quite  well”  “  Do  you  feel  as  if  you
had  taken  a  couple  of  glasses  of  champagne,"  said  I.  “  That
is  jost  how  I  feel,"  she  replied ;  quite  glad,  as  it  seemed,  of
an  illustration  to  describe  her  sensations  by.

I  requested  her  to  inform  Mr.  Wood  if  she  experienced  any
uncommon  sensations  during  the  day ;  and  she  went  away.

In  this  case  I  believe  what  the  patient  said  was  true.  The


by  the  Medical  Profession.


379


pain  of  extraction  was  unfelt ;  I  believe  it  in  spite  of  my  eyes,
for  there  was  no  motive  for  saying  so,  if  it  had  not  been  true.
A  somnambulic  state  was  induced  by  the  chloroform,  in
which  state  she  really  did  feel,  but  she  retained  such  an  im¬
perfect  remembrance,  when  it  passed  off,  of  the  event  which
occurred  in  it,  there  was  also  such  a  delirious  confusion  in
her  mind  while  in  it,  that  the  pain  of  extraction  was  merged
in  the  painful  sensation  of  the  whole  operation.

A  similar  extraction  had  taken  place  an  hour  earlier,  when
several  medical  men  met  at  Mr.  Wood's  house,  in  order  to
test  the  effects  of  this  new  anaesthetic  agent.

I  asked  Mr.  Wood  if  the  state  of  trance  in  that  case  was
more  profound  than  in  this.  He  said,  “No,  about  the  same."
“  Well,"  said  I,  “  my  impression,  as  a  looker-on,  was  that
this  experiment  was  a  complete  failure,  quoad  the  sleep  and
the  insensibility ;  because  the  patient  exhibited  every  token
of  suffering  pain,  and  never  appeared  to  me  to  lose  conscious¬
ness  from  beginning  to  end,  and  if  she  had  not  said  that  she
went  to  sleep,  dreamed,  and  did  not  feel  her  tooth  drawn  out,
I  should  not  have  so  concluded.  How  did  the  medical  men
express  themselves  about  it  ?”  Mr.  Wood  replied,  “  They
were  quite  satisfied  with  the  success  of  the  experiment."

I  could  but  feel  grateful  for  the  change  which  had  come
over  their  minds  in  this  respect,  when  I  contrasted  their  easy
credulity  to-day  with  their  obstinate  rejection  of  the  facts  of
James  Wo  mb  ell's  leg  amputation  under  the  influence  of  mes¬
merism.

I  came  home,  and  read  again  that  account  in  your  little
book  containing  the  history  of  it ;  “  To  the  end  of  the  opera¬
tion,  the  placid  look  of  his  countenance  never  changed ;  his
whole  frame  rested  uncontrolled  in  perfect  stillness  and  repose,
not  a  muscle  was  seen  to  twitch,  he  lay  like  a  statue ."

What  a  contrast !  But  because  he  confessed  “  he  once
thought  he  heard  a  sort  of  crunching ,"  they  utterly  rejected
his  testimony,  that  he  felt  no  pain.  Well,  I  reflected,  no
wonder  they  treat  these  two  matters  in  a  different  spirit,  for
certainly  they  are  not  at  all  alike.  I  thought  you  would  be
interested  as  to  how  we  behave  in  the  provinces,  quoad  hanc
rem.

Yours  very  truly,

W.  H.  Parsons.


(  380  )


XII.  On  the  probability  of  the  discovery  of  Physical  Agents
able  to  produce  the  Mesmeric  State.  By  Dr.  Gregory,
Professor  of  Chemistry  in  the  University  of  Edinburgh.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

Edinburgh,  Nov.  23rd,  1847.

My  dear  Sir, — You  have  by  this  time  heard  of  the  disco¬
very  made  by  my  colleague,  Dr.  J.  Y.  Simpson,  Professor  of
Midwifery  in  this  University;  namely,  that  the  terchloride
of  formyle,  or  chloroform,  is,  in  many  respects,  superior  to
ether  as  an  anaesthetic  agent.  Having  seen  it  administered
to  above  twenty  persons,  I  am  satisfied  that  it  will  supersede
the  use  of  ether  for  surgical  operations  and  labours.

In  common  with  yourself,  and  with  all  who  are  acquainted
with  the  facts,  I  have  been  much  struck  with  the  difference
between  the  reception  given  by  the  profession  to  the  disco¬
very  of  the  use  of  ether,  nitrous  oxide,  and  chloroform  in
surgical  operations,  and  that  which  they  have  accorded  to
the  not  less  wonderful,  not  less  important,  and  not  less  fully
substantiated  discovery  of  the  use  of  mesmerism  in  the  same
circumstances.

I  have  alluded  to  this  remarkable  discrepancy  in  the  en¬
closed  paper,  published  in  the  Phrenological  Journal  last
spring ;  and  I  have  there  expressed  the  opinion  that  there  is
no  real  ground  or  justification  for  the  conduct  of  the  bulk  of
the  profession  in  reference  to  the  use  of  mesmerism  as  an
amesthetic  agent.

It  is  true  that  the  more  tangible  agents,  ether  and  its
fellows,  possess  one  advantage,  namely,  that  of  superior  cer¬
tainty,  inasmuch  as  it  is  not  every  one  subjected  to  a  surgical
operation,  nor  every  parturient  female,  that  can  be  brought
under  the  influence  of  mesmerism.  But  I  need  not  tell  you,
Sir,  that  this  was  not  the  ground  taken  by  the  opponents  of
mesmerism.

Moreover,  admitting  that  at  present  the  mesmeriser  will
fail  to  induce  insensibility  in  a  certain  proportion  of  cases,  it
appears  probable  that  this  may  be  in  some  measure  counter¬
poised  by  the  greater  safety  of  the  mesmeric  process.

It  is  further  highly  probable,  that  as  the  cultivation  of
mesmeric  science  extends,  means  will  be  found  of  insuring
success  in  many  cases  which  at  present  resist  the  mesmeriser,
and  thus  giving  to  the  mesmeric  method  the  certainty  in
which  it  is  as  yet  deficient.

Bearing  in  mind  that  the  mesmeric  state,  or  the  state  of
somnambulism,  often  occurs  spontaneously,  both  in  healthy
and  in  morbid  conditions  of  the  body,  and  that  this  state


Physical  Agents  to  produce  the  Mesmeric  State.  381

undoubtedly  depends  on  a  peculiar  condition  of  the  nervous
system,  it  has  long  appeared  to  me  certain,  that  means  would
be  discovered  of  producing  artificially,  by  tangible  physical
agents,  this  condition,  with  all  its  accompanying  phenomena.
It  is  impossible  not  to  view  the  discovery  of  the  anaesthetic
properties  of  the  inhaled  vapours  of  ether,  nitrous  oxide,  and
chloroform,  as  a  step  in  this  direction.

Some  have  declared  that  the  sleep  produced  by  these
agents  has  nothing  in  common  with  the  mesmeric  sleep;
others,  that  these  two  forms  of  sleep  are  the  same.  Now,
without  adopting  either  view,  I  cannot  help  thinking,  that
the  fact  of  both  being  characterized  by  insensibility  to  pain
is  a  proof  of  a  certain  analogy  or  relation  between  them ;
and  a  fact  which  has  lately  come  to  my  knowledge  appears  to
me  greatly  to  strengthen  this  analogy.

A  gentleman,  who  inhaled  the  vapour  of  chloroform,  came
to  tell  me  that  up  to  a  certain  point  the  sensations  were  exactly
the  same  as  those  caused  by  the  nitrous  oxide ;  but  that,  hav¬
ing  pushed  the  inhalation  further,  he  found  himself,  just  when
he  was  losing  full  consciousness,  and  much  to  his  surprise,
possessed  of  a  certain  degree  of  the  power  of  introvision,  so
that  he  felt  as  if  he  could  see  into  and  describe  his  own
brain,  with  its  vessels,  &c.

Does  not  this  indicate,  in  this  case,  a  still  nearer  approach
to  the  ordinary  mesmeric  state  than  has  yet  been  observed  as
the  result  of  inhalation  ?

It  is  probable  that  when  the  phenomena  produced  by  in¬
halation  shall  have  been  carefully  studied  in  a  large  number
of  cases,  the  higher  stages  of  sleep-waking  will  be  found
occasionally  to  occur.

Since  there  appears,  therefore,  to  exist  some  relation  be¬
tween  the  mesmeric  sleep  and  the  sleep  which  follows  the
inhalation  of  ether,  &c.,  would  it  not  be  worth  while  for
those  who  are  in  the  habit  of  mesmerising,  and  who  possess
considerable  mesmeric  powrer,  to  try  whether  the  individuals
who  resist  their  influence  under  ordinary  circumstances,  might
not  be  rendered  more  sensitive  by  the  preliminary  inhalation
of  ether  or  chloroform.  Is  it  not  conceivable  that,  if  once
set  to  sleep  by  these  means,  and  exhibiting  in  that  sleep  in¬
sensibility  to  pain,  they  may  be  found  susceptible  of  the  mes¬
meric  influence,  in  the  form  of  passes  and  contact.

Should  this  turn  out  to  be  the  case,  we  should  have  an
additional  means  of  subjecting  patients  to  the  mesmeric  in¬
fluence,  and,  when  once  subjected  to  it,  they  might  probably
be  found  to  yield  afterwards  to  the  same  mesmeric  process
which  at  first  they  resisted.


382  0?i  the  Organ  of  the  Love  of  the  Past.

I  beg  to  suggest  this  investigation  to  you,  and  through
you  to  practical  mesmerists  in  general,  because  I  consider  it
of  the  greatest  importance  to  render  the  mesmeric  action
more  certain  of  success  than  it  is  at  present.  I  repeat,  that
I  confidently  look  forward  to  the  discovery  of  some  physical
means  of  inducing  the  mesmeric  state;  and,  in  the  mean¬
time,  I  consider  the  investigation  of  the  relation  between  the
sleep  caused  by  ether  and  the  mesmeric  sleep,  as  likely  to  aid
us  in  approaching  to  the  desired  result  of  certainty  and
uniformity.

William  Gregory.


XIII.  On  the  Organ  of  the  Love  of  the  Past.

By  Mr.  T.  S.  Prideaux.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

Sir, — In  the  last  number  of  the  Phrenological  Journal,
Mr.  Hytche,  in  an  article  on  “  Love  of  the  Past,”  quotes  me
in  support  of  the  organ  being  seated  in  the  spot  marked  (?),
as  follows : — “  Mr.  Prideaux,  in  his  Speculative  Analysis  of
the  Mental  Faculties,  thus  relates  a  similar  case.  ( I  have
now  before  me  the  cast  of  the  head  of  a  gentleman,  which  I
took  in  consequence  of  the  unusual  development  of  this  organ
which  it  presents.  I  am  intimately  acquainted  with  this  in¬
dividual,  and,  during  a  long  intimacy  with  him,  have  never
heard  him  utter  a  single  expression  which  would  induce  me
to  suppose  that  he  was  much  affected  by  the  sublime,  but
quite  the  reverse.  His  Veneration  is  not  by  any  means  large,
and  I  believe  him  to  possess  less  than  an  average  endowment
of  the  feeling;  he,  however,  possesses  a  more  than  ordinary
disposition  to  dwell  on  the  past.  I  have  heard  him  say  that
he  never  passes  a  day  without  looking  back  to  the  events  of
his  past  life ;  and  he  has  observed  to  me,  that  he  has  often
noticed  that,  whilst  he  was  particularly  fond  of  recurring  to,
and  conversing  on,  the  incidents  of  his  early  days,  others
amongst  his  friends  scarcely  ever  adverted  to  the  subject/  ”

Now  I  have  no  fault  to 'find  with  the  accuracy  of  the
quotation  so  far  as  it  is  carried,  but  I  must  confess  that  I
think  Mr.  Hytche’s  conduct  scarcely  justifiable  in  quoting
my  name  in  a  manner  calculated  to  mislead  every  one  into
the  belief  that  I  support  the  view  of  the  seat  of  the  organ
advocated  by  himself,  and  originally  propounded  to  phreno¬
logists  by  a  writer  under  the  signature  of  J.  K. ;  when  the
fact  is,  that  not  only  have  I  never  given  in  my  adhesion  to
the  correctness  of  this  localization,  but  actually,  in  the  very
page  from  which  Mr.  Hytche  makes  this  quotation,  assigned


On  the  Organ  of  the  Love  of  the  Past.  383

another  seat  for  the  faculty,  the  accuracy  of  which  all  my
subsequent  observations  have  tended  to  confirm.

In  the  publication  from  which  Mr.  Hytche  quotes,  I
remarked  :  “  With  reference  to  f  Love  of  the  Past /  I  think  it
extremely  probable  that  an  attentive  study  of  the  heads  of
the  members  of  the  Antiquarian  Society  by  a  competent
phrenologist,  would  at  once  determine  its  seat.  There  are
few  points  on  which  the  characters  of  men  present  more
marked  and  decided  differences,  than  in  their  tendency  to
regard  the  present ,  past ,  and  future ;  and  the  cause  of  these
differences  of  disposition  must  be  sought  for  in  varieties  of
organization.”  The  opportunity  for  observation  here  deside¬
rated  I  have  since  enjoyed.  During  the  congress  of  the
Archaeological  Association  at  Winchester,  in  1845,  I  was  in¬
troduced,  through  the  kindness  of  a  friend,  to  many  of  the
leading  members,  who  obligingly  allowed  me  to  manipulate
their  heads.  The  result  was  to  my  mind  so  satisfactory,  that
I  have  ever  since  regarded  the  position  of  the  organ  as  esta¬
blished.

According  to  my  view,  the  organ  is  seated  on  each  side  of
the  posterior  portion  of  Benevolence — a  spot  now  appropriated
on  the  Edinburgh  bust,  but  without  a  tittle  of  evidence,  to
Imitation,*  which  organ  has  been  extended  backwards  till  it
came  into  contact  with  Veneration,  according  to  the  most
approved  rules  for  manufacturing  a  fancy  bust ;  not  because
nature  in  the  extraordinarily  developed  case  which  led  to  the
discovery  of  the  organ  exhibited  any  such  outline  or  has  ever
authorized  such,  but  because  the  aspirations  after  complete¬
ness  of  our  Scottish  friends  might  not  be  shocked  by  the
exhibition  of  vacant  spaces  on  their  philosophic  toy.

In  this  position,  it  will  be  observed  that  it  lies  between
Marvellousness  and  Veneration,  two  faculties  with  which  the
feeling  is  unquestionably  prone  to  enter  into  combined  acti¬
vity;  and  in  contact  with  Benevolence,  wdrich  organ  is.  often
accessible  to  the  claims  of  auld  lang  syne ,  after  almost  every
other  channel  to  its  sympathies  has  become  dried  up.  The
largest  development  of  the  organ  I  have  ever  seen,  I  met
with  quite  lately  in  the  head  of  Sir  Walter  Scott,  where  it
deserves  to  be  designated  as  enormous,  presenting  two  large
rounded  protuberances ;  and  it  would  be  quite  superfluous  to
say  anything  to  shew,  what  must  be  matter  of  notoriety  to

*  It  would  be  difficult  to  estimate  how  much  the  progress  of  phrenology  as  a
science  has  been  retarded  by  the  practice  adopted  by  Dr.  Spurzheim  and  the
Edinburgh  school  of  phrenologists,  of  unwarrantably  extending  the  limits  of  the
organs,  and  thus  simulating  a  perfection  which  had  no  existence  but  in  their  own
imagination.


384


On  the  Organ  of  the  Love  of  the  Past.


every  body,  viz.,  that  this  love  of  the  past  was  his  predomi¬
nant  mental  tendency — the  distinguishing  characteristic  of
his  literary  productions — the  colour  which  gave  a  tone  to  his
whole  life — the  trait  in  which,  more  than  in  any  other  single
point  in  his  character,  his  personal  identity  consisted.

As  far  as  my  observations  have  extended  amongst  national
crania,  in  none  have  I  found  the  organ  so  generally  large  as
amongst  the  North  American  Indians ;  and  the  attachment
of  these  people  to  the  customs  and  traditions  of  their  ances¬
tors — their  periodical  visits  to  their  burial-places,  and  their
perpetual  recurrence  to  the  scenes  and  adventures  of  their
youth,  all  indicate  a  high  possession  of  the  feeling.

Since  the  first  suggestion  of  the  existence  of  such  a
faculty  as  a  distinct  primitive  emotion  by  J.  K.,  in  the
Phrenological  Journal  for  September,  1837,  I  have  felt  clearly
satisfied  of  being  able  to  recognize  the  operation  of  the  feel¬
ing  in  my  own  mind,  and  the  result  of  its  activity  in  others ;
and  when  I  view  the  extraordinary  interest  which  mere  anti¬
quity  attaches  to  a  brick  from  the  ruins  of  Babylon  or
Nineveh,  or  a  mummy  from  Thebes,  and  the  determinate  in¬
fluence  exercised  by  the  antiquarian  tendency  in  the  pursuits
of  many  individuals,  I  feel  convinced  that  nothing  but  the
intellectual  torpor  generated  by  the  supposed  possession  of  a
perfect  system  can  have  retarded  for  so  long  a  period  the
general  admission  of  the  organ  as  a  faculty  primitive  and
distinct.

The  Phrenological  Journal  for  October,  1 838,  contained  an
extract  from  a  letter  of  Mr.  Combers,  stating  that  “the
reverence  for  antiquities  and  the  Hove  of  the  past  ’  have
already  been  referred  on  good  grounds  to  Veneration.”  To
this  assertion  I  wrote  a  reply,  and  sent  to  the  journal  in
November  of  the  same  year,  but  it  was  refused  insertion  by
Mr.  Watson,  as  “  a  lucubration  not  likely  to  confer  much
benefit  on  the  readers  of  the  journal  or  on  its  own  credit,  in
the  estimation  of  scientific  and  philosophical  minds.”  As,
however,  I  do  not  regard  Mr.  Watson’s  judgment  as  infallible,
and  the  views  then  put  forth  by  Mr.  Combe  remain  to  the
present  day  unanswered  and  generally  current,  as  I  believe
to  the  detriment  of  truth,  it  appears  to  me  that  I  cannot
close  this  communication  more  appropriately  than  by  append¬
ing  to  it  the  rejected  article,  the  arguments  of  which,  so  little
progress  has  public  opinion  made  on  the  subject,  seem  as
much  demanded  now  as  nine  years  ago.

T.  S.  Prideaux.

Southampton,  November,  1847.


On  the  Organ  of  the  Love  of  the  Past.


385


Remarks  on  “  Facts  in  contradiction  to  Mr.  Hytch's  Views  on  the

Functions  of  the  Organ  marked  ‘  V  ” — sent  to  the  Journal,

November ,  1838.

Mr.  Combe  observes,  “The  reverence  for  antiquities  and  the
‘  love  of  the  past,’  have  already  been  referred,  on  good  grounds,
to  Veneration,  and  Mr.  Hytch  does  not  mention  the  state  of  that
organ  in  his  cases.”  Mr.  Combe  does,  however  mention  the  size  of
the  organ  in  the  example  he  cites,  and  singularly  enough,  in  his
anxiety  to  attach  the  feeling  of  the  sublime,  to  the  portion  of  the
brain  marked  *?’,  he  appears  to  overlook  the  fact,  that  the  conclusion
to  be  drawn  from  two  of  the  three  cases  he  refers  to,  is  opposed  to
the  opinion  given  immediately  before,  as  to  the  validity  of  the  grounds
for  referring  “love  of  the  past,”  to  Veneration.  “In  Bath,”  says

Mr.  Combe,  “  I  met  Dr. - ,  who  has  large  Veneration ,  and  the

organ  4  ?  ’  large,  with  deficient  Cautiousness,  and  moderate  Ideality.
He  told  me  that  he  had  little  pleasure  in  the  beautiful,  but  is  en¬
tranced  in  the  sublime.  He  is  very  strongly  religious,  but  I  heard
nothing  of  any  distinguishing  love  of  the  past.  Yesterday,  I  met
Dr.  P.,  in  whom  Ideality  is  rather  small,  the  organ  ‘  ?  ’  large,  and
Cautiousness  not  so  large.  He  said,  that  he  was  deeply  affected  by
the  sublime,  and  not  strongly  by  the  beautiful.  Veneration  was
well  developed ,  and  he  did  not  give  any  indications ,  in  a  long  con¬
versation,  of  a  mind  that  dwelt  on  the  past,  but  the  reverse .”

Considering  the  great  latitude  allowed  by  Mr.  Combe,  to  the
function  of  an  individual  faculty,  as  evinced  in  his  assigning  the
“  love  of  place,”  and  the  “  desire  and  capacity  for  concentrating
intellect  and  feeling,”  to  one  organ,  I  am  not  surprized  at  his  sup¬
posing  the  “  love  of  the  past,”  to  be  an  appendage  of  the  organ  of
Veneration.  Such  an  opinion  however,  seems  to  me  quite  at  vari¬
ance  with  the  special  nature  of  the  individual  powers,  a  primary
principle  of  phrenology ;  and  in  analyzing  mental  manifestations
metaphysically,  there  is  scarcely  a  feeling,  the  independent  existence
of  which,  appears  to  me  more  clearly  demonstrated  than  that  of  the
“  tendency  to  dwell  on  the  past.”

As  however,  the  conclusions  of  individuals  are,  and  ought  to  be,
regarded  as  most  unsatisfactory  evidence  for  others,  let  us  examine
for  a  moment  the  function  of  the  organ  of  Veneration,  supposing
Mr.  Combe’s  views  to  be  correct.  Veneration  then,  must  be  defined
to  be,  “  an  organ,  originating  a  disposition  to  Venerate,  without
directing  this  disposition  to  any  particular  object,  except  in  one
single  instance,  and  this  single  instance  of  exception,  is,  that  it
gives  the  Venerative  tendency,  a  determinate  direction  towards  the
past.”  Now  I  think  it  will  hardly  be  necessary  to  peruse  this  defi¬
nition  a  second  time,  to  perceive  that  such  a  heterogeneous  function,
is  quite  inadmissible  as  the  office  of  a  primitive  faculty.  Facts,
however,  must  decide  the  question  at  issue,  and  Nature  must  be
appealed  to  as  the  umpire,  and  I  do  not  hesitate  to  say,  that  all
except  those,  who  “  trouvent  trop  difficile  1’  abnegation  de  leurs
opinions,  et  de  lcur  savoir  puise  dans  V  instruction  anterieure,  pour


386


On  the  Organ  of  the  Love  of  the  Past.


hr


se  croire  obliges  de  les  soumettre  a  une  experience,  mille,  et  mille
fois  repetee,”  may  readily  convince  themselves,  that  a  powerful
“  tendency  to  dwell  on  the  past,”  is  often  coexistent  with  a  small
organ  of  Veneration ,  and  vice  versd.

With  regard  to  the  specific  nature  of  the  mental  faculty  in  ques¬
tion,  I  was  at  one  time  disposed  to  think,  that  it  partook  decidedly
of  a  poetic  character,  but  from  more  extensive  observations,  par¬
ticularly  on  individuals  deficient  in  Ideality,  and  of  mediocre  intellect,
I  am  inclined  to  believe,  that  its  special  function  is  limited  to  pro¬
ducing  the  “  tendency  to  recur  to,  and  dwell  upon,  the  past,  accom¬
panied  with  an  emotion  of  a  peculiar  character,  which  of  course  must
be  felt,  to  be  understood.  Acting  however  in  combination  with  the
“  sense  of  the  beautiful,”  and  the  “  disposition  to  the  marvellous,”
I  conceive  the  “love  of  the  past”  to  be,  if  not  a  necessary  ingredient
in  the  poetic  talent,  at  least  a  most  ornamental  addition  to  it.  If  we
suppose  a  poet  indulging  his  favourite  penchant  on  the  site  of  a  ruined
castle  by  moonlight,  after  the  first  bursts  of  impassioned  feeling
called  forth  by  the  beauty  of  the  scene,  have  been  given  vent  to,  and
the  good  and  evil  genii,  with  which  his  fancy  has  peopled  the  locality,
severally  apostrophized,  we  naturally  expect  to  hear  him  recur  to
those  by-gone  ages,  when  the  now  deserted  ruin  which  silently  re¬
poses  in  the  moonlight  before  him,  was  the  abode  of  gentle  knights,
and  courtly  dames,  and  when  the  deep  stillness  which  now  pervades
its  precincts,  was  broken  by  the  measured  tread  of  the  warder,  or
the  midnight  revels  of  the  stalwart  baron  and  his  noisy  retainers.
Indeed,  I  believe  it  will  be  found,  that  many  of  the  most  admired
passages  of  our  best  poets,  have  been  penned  under  the  joint  influ¬
ence  of  this  feeling  and  Ideality.  The  pages  of  Ossian  teem  with  its
manifestations ;  its  activity  is  strikingly  displayed  in  Scott,  and
Byron  thus  distinctly  recognizes  its  existence.

“  Hues  which  have  words,  and  speak  to  ye  of  heaven.

Float  o’er  this  vast  and  wondrous  monument,

And  shadow  forth  its  glory.  There  is  given
Unto  the  things  of  earth,  which  time  hath  bent ,

A  spirit’s  feeling,  and  when  he  hath  lent

His  hand,  hut  broke  his  scythe,  there  is  a  power

And  magic  in  the  ruined  battlement.

For  which  the  palace  of  the  present  hour

Must  yield  its  pomp,  and  wait  till  ages  are  its  dower.”

With  regard  to  the  seat  of  the  feeling,  which  “  disposes  to  dwell
upon  the  past,”  the  evidence  I  have  yet  been  able  to  obtain,  is  far
from  sufficiently  conclusive,  to  enable  me  to  speak  with  decision.  I
am,  however,  inclined  to  refer  it  to  the  portion  of  brain  before,
and  above,  the  organ  marked  ‘  V .

I  will  conclude  these  remarks  by  observing,  that  in  considering
the  evidence  in  favour  of  the  existence  of  a  primitive  faculty  in  the
human  mind,  which  disposes  man  to  “  dwell  on  the  past,”  the  fact
that  there  are  several  songs  and  ballads,  as  “The  Light  of  other
Days,”  “Auld  Lang  Syne,”  &c.,  addressed  almost  exclusively  to
such  a  feeling,  must  not  be  lost  sight  of.  I  am  disposed  to  attach
considerable  importance  to  it.

November  18,  1838.  T.  S.  Prideaux.


(  387  )


XIY.  Successful  mesmeric  treatment  of  Phlegmasia  Dolens}
Injury  of  the  Ear,  Deafness ,  Palsy,  Sciatica,  Injury  of
the  Knee,  St.  Vitus’s  Dance,  After-pains,  Threatening
Tetanus ;  painless  Surgical  Operation  under  Mesmerism,
with  most  instructive  Clairvoyance.  By  Mr.  Parker,
Surgeon.

Phlegmasia  Dolens,  or  white  leg,  after  lying-in.

Mrs. - was  confined  with  her  third  child,  January,  1846.

The  labour  was  natural,  and  all  things  went  on  well  for  a
fortnight,  when  she  complained  of  much  pain  in  the  side  of
the  bowels,  extending  down  the  thigh,  and  phlegmasia  dolens,
or  what  is  commonly  called  white  leg,  took  place.  This  very
painful  and  obstinate  swelling  of  the  lower  extremities  per¬
sisted  for  four  months,  when  she  was  gradually  restored  to  her
usual  health.  Some  months  since  she  was  confined  with  her
fourth  child.  The  labour  was  natural,  and  at  the  end  of
ten  days  she  was  able  to  attend  to  her  domestic  duties.  On
the  fifteenth  day  from  her  confinement,  pain  of  the  side  of
the  bowels  and  down  the  thigh  began,  and  was  similar  in  every
respect  to  the  former  attack.  The  thigh  was  much  swollen.
Mesmerism  was  resorted  to  from  the  beginning  of  the  attack :
and  such  was  the  good  effect,  that  at  the  end  of  a  fortnight
all  the  disagreeable  symptoms  had  disappeared  and  she  was
convalescent .


Deafness  and  injury  of  the  Ear.

A  boy,  three  years  old,  was  playing  with  his  little  neigh¬
bour,  when  she  took  an  iron  skewer  and  pushed  it  into  his
ear.  Considerable  haemorrhage  followed,  with  great  pain.
The  parents  sent  for  their  ordinary  medical  attendant,  who
tried  various  remedies.  The  little  patient  became  delirious ;
there  was  almost  complete  deafness  on  the  injured  side;  and
at  the  end  of  three  weeks  the  surgeon  thought  the  case  would
terminate  fatally.  The  mother  of  the  girl  who  had  inflicted
the  injury  now  came  to  me  in  great  distress;  and,  on  my
arrival  at  the  house  of  the  patient,  he  appeared  in  great  pain,
listless  and  stupid,  with  an  offensive  discharge  from  the  in¬
jured  ear.  I  recommended  mesmerism,  which  was  immedi¬
ately  tried,  and  repeated  twice  daily :  at  the  end  of  three
weeks,  the  little  patient  had  no  more  pain  or  discharge  from
the  ear,  and  was  as  playful  and  lively  as  before  the  accident,
and  the  hearing  was  as  well  as  ever.

Deafness.

A  young  man,  20  years  of  age,  had  an  attack  of  fever
VOL.  v.  F  F


388


Cures  of  Palsy ,  Sciatica,  fyc.,  fyc.


seven  years  since,  which  left  considerable  dulness  of  hearing
in  both  ears.  On  his  applying  to  me,  I  could  with  difficulty
make  him  hear  two  words  in  succession.  He  was  mesmerised
for  two  months,  and  now  hears  conversation  in  an  ordinary
tone.

Palsy  of  the  Arm.

A  young  man,  19  years  of  age,  had  lost  the  use  of  his
left  arm  for  three  weeks;  a  week's  mesmerism  completely
cured  him.

Sciatica.

Mr. - ,  aged  74  years,  had  been  suffering  severely  for

many  months  from  neuralgia  of  the  sciatic  nerve  and  its
ramifications,  from  the  hip  down  to  the  foot.  He  was  groan¬
ing  from  pain  on  my  first  visit.  Finding  other  applications
of  no  service,  he  tried  the  hydropathic  treatment,  and  I  had
to  request  the  removal  of  the  wet  bandages.  Mesmerism
was  then  tried  ;  at  the  end  of  the  third  day  all  the  pain  ceased
while  he  was  being  mesmerised,  and  he  has  had  no  return  of  it.

Sciatica.

Mr. - ,  65  years  of  age,  had  suffered  from  neuralgia

of  the  sciatic  nerve  for  twenty-five  years.  Seventeen  years
since  he  was  obliged  to  relinquish  his  business  in  consequence
of  the  excruciating  pain  and  the  deformity  which  the  hip-
joint  had  sustained  from  the  long-continued  suffering.  The
pain  very  seldom  left  him :  it  was  very  much  increased  by
any  exertion  and  at  night.  At  the  end  of  six  days  from  his
being  mesmerised,  he  has  had  no  pain,  and  has  been  able  to
walk  six  or  eight  miles  a-day  without  any  pain,  and  his
general  health  is  likewise  very  much  improved.

Injury  of  the  Knee.

A  young  man,  20  years  of  age,  a  blacksmith.  Whilst  he
was  shoeing  a  horse,  the  nail  was  driven  through  the  hoof
more  quickly  than  he  expected,  and  penetrated  at  least  half
an  inch  into  his  knee-joint,  close  by  the  patella  or  knee-pan.
The  pain  was  immediately  most  agonizing.  He  went  to  a
medical  man,  who  prescribed  some  fomentation.  At  the  end
of  ten  days,  he  could  scarcely  walk.  When  he  applied  to
me,  at  the  end  of  half  an  hour’s  mesmerism  he  was  quite  free
from  pain.  He  had  lost  several  days'  work  before,  but  has
not  lost  any  work  since.

St.  Vitus’s  Dance.

m

Mary - ,  a  girl  of  16  years  of  age,  had  St.  Vitus's


by  Mr.  Parker.


389


dance  from  a  fright.  She  was  almost  constantly  shaking
and  very  frequently  starting  and  jumping.  She  consulted
her  ordinary  medical  attendant,  who  blistered  the  spine,  be¬
sides  administering  various  other  remedies  for  five  weeks.
Not  being  relieved,  she  applied  to  me.  She  was  mesmerised
for  a  week,  when  all  the  involuntary  movements  were  sub¬
dued,  and  she  was  restored  to  her  usual  health.

After  Pains.

Mrs. - was  delivered  of  her  second  child  a  few  months

since,  and  as  I  was  about  to  leave  the  room  she  complained
of  very  violent  pain ;  I  returned  to  her  bed-side,  and  made  a
dozen  passes  over  the  bowels  to  shew  her  nurse  what  to  do  in
case  the  pains  returned.  On  my  visit  the  following  day,  the
patient  expressed  herself  surprised  that  she  had  had  no  pain
since  I  left  her.


Threatening  Tetanus.

Some  years  since  I  witnessed  a  case  of  tetanus  occasioned
by  a  slight  injury  of  the  branch  of  the  median  nerve  in  the
ball  of  the  thumb.  Within  the  last  twelve  months  I  have
been  called  to  two  patients  who  were  suffering  from  the  most
agonizing  pains  from  similar  wounds  in  the  same  part :  and
when  every  kind  of  application,  as  well  as  morphine  inter¬
nally,  failed  to  give  the  least  relief,  the  pains  were  effec¬
tually  relieved  by  mesmerism,  and  tetanus  was  prevented.
But  in  each  case  there  has  been  considerable  suppuration  in
the  part  where  the  injury  was  received.  From  what  I  have
observed  in  these  two  cases  I  am  quite  convinced  that  mes¬
merism  would  be  of  greater  service  in  tetanus  than  any  other
known  remedy  ;  and  I  shall  be  happy  if  my  observations
should  attract  the  notice  of  the  numerous  readers  of  The
Zoist,  and  induce  them  to  give  it  a  trial  in  such  forlorn  cases.
Several  patients  have  lately  died  from  tetanus  in  the  Devon
and  Exeter  Hospital :  but  the  surgical  staff  at  that  institution
are  too  much  prejudiced  to  give  mesmerism  a  trial.

Painless  Ligature  of  an  Artery  through  mesmerism :  with

most  instructive  Clairvoyance.

William  Nichols,  aged  21  years,  a  cabinet  maker,  of  spare
habit,  was  at  work  on  May  8,  1847,  when  he  inflicted  a
wound  with  a  half-inch  chisel  on  his  left  wrist,  where  the
pulse  is  felt.  The  wound  was  inflicted  from  below  upwards.
Considerable  haemorrhage  immediately  followed,  and  he  ap¬
plied  to  the  Devon  and  Exeter  Hospital  to  have  the  wound
dressed,  and  was  surprised  to  find  himself  ordered  to  be  put

f  f  2


390


Painless  Ligature  of  an  Artery ,


to  bed.  The  wound  was  enlarged,  and  an  attempt  made  to
secure  the  bleeding  vessel,  but  without  success.  Several
pieces  of  sponge  were  then  introduced  into  the  wound  and
bound  tight.  The  haemorrhage  returned  at  the  end  of  ten
days,  when  a  second  attempt  by  Mr.  James  was  made  to  tie
the  artery,  but  without  success.  The  pieces  of  sponge  were
replaced,  and  he  was  detained  in  the  hospital  eight  weeks,
during  five  of  which  he  was  confined  to  his  bed.  He  then
requested  to  be  made  an  out-patient :  when  he  received  strict
injunctions  that  he  was  not  to  remove  the  sponge.  He  now
resumed  his  work.  There  was  a  frequent  return  of  the
haemorrhage,  and  a  daily  discharge  of  putrid  matter.  In  this
state  he  continued  his  work  until  Sept.  7th,  when  he  sent
for  me.  I  found  him  under  very  considerable  fever :  his
hand  and  fingers  very  much  inflamed  :  with  a  sore  like  an
issue  in  appearance  and  an  offensive  putrid  effluvium.  In
the  course  of  two  days  the  backs  of  the  fingers  were  covered
with  bladders  filled  with  bloody  serum.  Having  on  several
occasions  tested  the  clairvoyant  powers  of  a  young  woman,
I  caused  her  to  be  mesmerised  in  the  adjoining  room,  and
then  took  her  to  the  bed-side  of  my  patient :  when  she  soon
described  the  nature  of  the  injury,  and  said  that  if  the  yellow
substance  was  removed  from  the  wound,  (she  did  not  say  it
was  a  piece  of  sponge ,)  there  would  be  considerable  bleeding
from  both  ends  of  the  wounded  pipe.  She  then  said  it  might
be  necessary  to  tie  the  pipe  above  and  below  the  wound.  He
was  then  put  into  mesmeric  sleep  by  the  same  mesmeriser ;
and  on  the  following  morning  was  again  mesmerised,  when
he  described  the  nature  of  the  wounded  artery,  and  gave
directions  for  me  to  tie  the  artery  an  inch  above  the  old
wound.  He  then  put  his  arm  over  the  side  of  the  bed,  and
allowed  me  to  proceed  with  the  operation,  without  any  person
to  hold  him.  When  I  had  passed  the  needle  under  the  radial
artery,  his  attention  was  particularly  directed  to  the  artery
raised  by  the  needle ;  and  after  a  few  minutes  he  told  me
that  it  was  the  vessel  which  furnished  the  bleeding.  I  then
fastened  the  ligature,  and  placed  a  piece  of  transparent  stick¬
ing  plaster  over  the  wound.  Half  an  hour  after  this  the
mesmeriser  awoke  him :  when  he  was  unconscious  of  any
thing  having  been  done  to  him  except  a  very  slight  pricking,
but  that  had  not  been  sufficient  for  him  to  require  the  arm  to
be  held.  This  was  no  doubt  occasioned  by  his  master’s  wife
holding  him  by  the  other  hand  during  the  whole  of  the  ope¬
ration,  which  was  not  perceived  by  the  mesmeriser  or  myself
until  the  artery  had  been  tied,  as  we  were  both  very  intent
on  what  we  were  about ;  for  the  mesmeriser  had  never  seen


by  Mr.  Parker.


391


an  operation  before,  and  I  did  not  know  how  he  would  stand
it.  Two  days  after  the  operation,  my  clairvoyant  patient  was
again  mesmerised  in  the  adjoining  room,  and  she  soon  dis¬
covered  that  the  pipe  had  been  tied,  and  that  there  was
nothing  else  included  in  the  ligature.  She  then  said  if  the
yellow  substance  was  removed  from  the  old  wound,  the  lower
end  of  the  wounded  pipe  would  bleed :  that  I  had  better  ivait
two  days,  by  which  time  congealed  blood  would  very  nearly
close  it,  although  even  then  it  would  bleed  a  little,  but  would
be  easily  stopped.  Four  days  after  I  had  tied  the  radial
artery,  Wm.  Nichols  was  again  mesmerised,  when  he  said
the  piece  of  sponge  might  then  be  removed,  but  that  the
wound  would  bleed  a  little  from  the  lower  mouth  of  the
vessel.  This  haemorrhage  actually  took  place  of  arterial  blood  :
but  by  the  application  of  powdered  matico  was  soon  stopped.
It  was  necessary  to  apply  the  matico  for  several  days.  The
incision  which  I  made  did  not  require  any  more  dressing ;
but  on  the  twelfth  day  the  ligature  fell  off  and  the  cicatrix
was  quite  firm.  The  only  obstacle  to  his  going  to  work  was
the  healing  of  the  old  sore,  which  did  not  cicatrise  for  160
days  after  the  wound  had  been  inflicted.  He  has  resumed
his  work  with  the  full  use  of  his  hand.

John  B.  Parker.

Exeter,  Dec.  3,  1817.

***  The  patient  was  a  tenant  of  the  foreman  of  the
Western  Times,  and  this  person  requested  Mr.  Parker  to
send  an  account  to  the  newspaper.  Mr.  Parker  complied  with
the  request  by  furnishing  the  following  detail,  which  appeared
Sept.  25th,  and  gave  rise  to  two  more,  which  we  copy  for
the  amusement  of  our  readers,  who  will  see  that  the  old  me¬
dical  game  is  still  played  with  reference  to  mesmerism. — Zoist

“Mesmeric  Surgery.

“We  have  been  requested  to  notice  an  extraordinary  case  of
‘Mesmeric  Surgery,’  by  Mr.  Parker,  the  particulars  of  which  he
gives  as  follows  :

“Mr.  Parker  stated  that  his  patient  was  Mr.  Nichols,  who
worked  for  Mr.  Marshall,  in  Exe  Island.  He  had  been  a  patient
for  eight  weeks  in  the  hospital,  in  consequence  of  a  half-inch  cut  in
the  left  wrist,  which  he  received  on  the  8th  of  May.  While  in  the
hospital,  it  was  considered  advisable  to  take  up  the  radial  artery  ;
but  after  an  attempt  to  do  this  for  two  hours,  it  was  not  accomplished.
A  subsequent  similar  attempt  by  Mr.  James  was  made  without  suc¬
cess.  A  piece  of  sponge  was  then  placed  on  the  wounded  artery,
and  bound  upon  it,  and  the  man  was  directed  not  to  remove  it  or
he  might  bleed  to  death,  and  he  was  told  that  if  he  neglected  these


392


Painless  Ligature  of  an  Artery,


instructions,  it  would  probably  be  necessary  to  remove  the  limb.
He  was  made  an  out-patient,  and  went  to  work,  the  wound  healing
over  the  sponge.  The  place,  however,  became  greatly  inflamed,
and  so  painful,  that  the  man  could  not  work,  and  consulted  Mr.
Parker.  Mr.  Parker  caused  him  to  be  mesmerised,  and  while  in
the  mesmeric  state,  he  became  clairvoyant,  described  the  nature  of
the  injury,  at  the  same  time  saying  that  the  vessel  should  be  tied
above  the  wound,  and  presented  his  arm  to  Mr.  Parker,  telling  him
he  might  commence  when  he  liked,  and  that  it  would  not  be  neces¬
sary  for  any  assistant  to  hold  the  limb.  Mr.  Parker  also  caused  a
clairvoyant  young  woman  to  be  put  into  the  mesmeric  sleep  the  day
before,  and  she,  while  in  this  state,  directed  him  to  tie  the  artery
above  and  below  the  wound.  He  considered  this  to  be  a  remarkable
direction,  but,  as  he  was  understood,  he  only  tied  the  artery  above
the  wound.  The  operation  was  performed  without  pain,  and  after
the  artery  had  been  found,  without  any  delay,  lying  between  two
other  vessels,  and  the  needle  passed  under  it,  the  patient  was  asked
by  the  operator,  if  the  latter  had  got  the  right  vessel,  and  the  reply
was  in  the  affirmative.  The  operation  was  performed  on  the  12th
instant.  On  removing  the  dressing  on  the  21st,  Mr.  Parker  found
a  slight  bleeding  from  the  lower  mouth  of  the  artery,  which  he  dis¬
covered  arose  from  the  lower  mouth  of  the  original  wound.  This
satisfied  him  that  the  directions  given  by  the  clairvoyant  young
woman  were  correct.  He  considered  that  his  patient  would  be  well
and  able  to  work  in  a  week  from  the  21st.

“  Mr.  Parker  considers  this  the  most  important  case  which  has
yet  occurred  in  the  annals  of  mesmerism,  because,  independently  of
the  patient  being  spared  the  pain  of  the  operation,  the  benefit  of
the  clairvoyance  of  another  mesmeric  patient,  as  well  as  that  of  the
patient  himself,  was  brought  to  aid  before,  and  even  during,  the  ope¬
ration.  The  success  of  the  operation  has  been  tested  by  the  subse¬
quent  clairvoyance  of  both  parties.

“  The  patient  himself  has  confirmed  the  account  given  by  Mr.
Parker.  He  declares  that  he  felt  no  pain  whatever  during  Mr.
Parker’s  operation,  but  that  he  endured  great  agony  when  the  at¬
tempt  was  made  at  the  hospital  to  take  up  the  vessels,  and  that
eight  persons  held  him  down.


Oct.  2.  “  ‘  Mesmeric  Surgery.’

<f  Under  this  head  we  last  week  gave  the  narrative  of  a  case,
which  had  been  ‘ cured’  by  Mr.  Parker,  the  mesmeric  surgeon,
accompanied  by  a  statement  made  by  the  patient  himself.  We  were
challenged  to  publish  the  case,  as  it  was  alleged  that  we  were  ever
ready  to  report  the  failures  of  mesmeric  experiments,  and  were
bound,  therefore,  in  honour  to  report  mesmeric  success.  We,  there¬
fore,  published  the  narrative.  We  cannot,  however,  permit  judg¬
ment  to  go  by  default  in  the  charge  that  we  are  animated  by  a  feeling
of  malice  prepense  against  mesmerism  ;  nor  can  we  admit  that  we
have  ever  gone  out  of  our  way  to  publish  the  failures  of  mesmerism.


by  Mr.  Parker.


393


We  have  never  reported  any  mesmeric  phenomena,  till  first  invited
to  attend  and  witness  experiments.  If  instead  of  meeting  with
phenomena  we  have  encountered  funomena,  it  has  been  no  fault  of
ours — though  it  has  been  our  misfortune  to  encounter  failures  instead
of  proofs,  and  to  have  been  held  responsible  for  not  believing  in
miracles  against  the  evidence  of  our  senses.  We  have  never  pro¬
nounced  against  mesmerism — we  have  only  gone  to  this  extent — if
there  be  such  a  law  of  human  experience  as  the  mesmerists  profess
to  develope  and  expound,  then  that  which  we  have  seen  has  not
been  it — at  least  it  has  not  been  so  revealed  to  our  senses.  A  man
is  bound  to  stand  by  his  own  judgment,  duly  exercising  his  faculties
of  observation,  not  rejecting  lightly  any  new  phenomena,  because
they  may  appear  strange  and  incomprehensible,  if  he  be  satisfied
that  they  really  do  exist,  and  taking  care  on  the  other  hand  not  to
receive  as  a  miracle  that  which  may  reasonably  be  proved  to  be  sheer
humbug.  Mr.  Parker  has  no  right,  therefore,  to  denounce  us  as
an  enemy  to  ‘  new  truths.’  If  he  feel  conscious  that  he  possesses
a  new  truth — then  let  him  go  forth  on  his  ‘  mission,’  and  expound
it  to  all  the  world,  in  all  sobriety  of  teaching  and  humility  of  bearing.
The  mission  is  one  of  vast  responsibility,  and  the  consciousness  of
possessing  it  is  enough  to  weigh  down  an  ordinary  mortal  with  a
profound  sense  of  his  unworthiness  to  be  one  of  heaven’s  high
priests.  We  do  not  see  in  Mr.  Parker  evidence  of  consciousness
of  his  mission.  Neither  in  the  thing  ‘  sent  ’  nor  the  teachers  who
have  it  in  charge,  do  we  as  yet  witness  in  this  district  that  internal
evidence  of  truth  and  a  truthful  consciousness  which  all  truth  and
truthholders  must  manifest.  ‘  New  truth  ’  is,  of  course,  a  mere
arbitrary  term.  If  the  thing  be  true  now  it  has  been  always  true,
and  the  man  who  has  the  truth  is  conscious  thereof.  Mr.  Parker
must  work  out  his  mission  with  patience  and  fortitude.  If  his  mes¬
meric  facts  be  true  facts,  he  will  experience  present  internal  support
and  future  glory.

“  Touching  the  hospital,  we  are  glad  to  find  that  the  medical
officers  have  determined  that  the  facts  which  concern  the  treatment
of  the  patient  should  be  fairly  set  before  the  public,  and  the  state¬
ment  of  Mr.  James,  (a  name  eminent  in  the  annals  of  surgical  science)
— gives  a  somewhat  different  version  of  the  treatment  received  by
the  patient.  For  the  credit  of  the  hospital,  we  are  glad  that
this  statement  is  thus  frankly  and  explicitly  made.

We  felt  assured  that  the  patient  must  have  proper  treatment,
because  there  is  a  resident  house  surgeon,  and  cases  of  accident  are
not  therefore  left  to  the  treatment  of  learners.

“  To  the  Editor  of  The  Western  Times.

“Exeter,  Sept.  30th,  1847.

“  Sir, — The  communication  inserted  in  your  paper  of  last  week,
purporting  to  be  from  Mr.  Parker,  and  relating  to  a  late  patient  of
mine  in  the  hospital,  named  Nichols,  requires  some  notice.  The
statements  therein  made  appear  to  rest  upon  the  testimony  of  that
patient — at  least  no  other  foundation  for  them  is  given.  As  they


394


Painless  Ligature  of  an  Artery ,


are  calculated  to  disparage  both  my  own  professional  conduct,  and
perhaps,  the  noble  institution  to  which  I  belong,  I  must  request
your  insertion  of  the  following  statements,  which  I  believe  will  prove
that  those  I  have  alluded  to  are  altogether  erroneous.

“I  shall  quote  verbatim  the  part  of  Mr.  Parker’s  communication
which  relates  to  the  treatment  of  Nichols  in  the  hospital,  viz.,
‘  That  he  had  been  a  patient  for  eight  weeks  in  the  hospital,  in  con¬
sequence  of  a  half-inch  cut  in  the  left  wrist,  which  he  received  on
the  8tli  of  May.  While  he  was  in  the  hospital  it  was  considered
advisable  to  take  up  the  radial  artery ,  but  after  an  attempt  to  do
this  for  two  hours,  it  was  not  accomplished.  A  subsequent  similar
attempt  by  Mr.  James  was  made  without  success.  A  piece  of  sponge
was  then  placed  on  the  wounded  artery,  and  bound  upon  it,  and  the
man  was  directed  not  to  remove  it,  or  he  might  bleed  to  death ;  and
he  was  told  that  if  he  neglected  these  instructions  it  would  probably
be  necessary  to  remove  his  limb.  He  was  made  an  out-patient,  and
went  to  work,  the  wound  healing  over  the  sponge .’  And  again,
‘  When  the  attempt  was  made  at  the  hospital,  to  take  up  the  vessels,
eight  persons  held  him  down.’

“  Now,  instead  of  there  being  ‘  a  half-inch  cut,’  there  was  a  deep
stab  with  a  chisel,  penetrating  from  the  wrist  under  the  ball  of  the
thumb  (a  very  important  difference).  I  saw  the  man  when  he  was
first  brought  to  the  Hospital :  at  that  time  the  haemorrhage  had
ceased,  but  every  proper  precaution  was  adopted  to  meet  any  recur¬
rence.

“  It  was  never  ‘  considered  advisable’  by  me  cto  take  up  the  radial
artery,’  for  I  found  that  pressure  on  it  did  not  arrest  the  haemorrhage,
and  I  may  further  remark,  that  it  is  the  proper  course  to  tie  each  end
of  the  wounded  artery  if  possible,  and  not  the  trunk  leading  to  it,
particularly  in  such  a  case.  It  should  here  be  stated  that  there  is
every  reason  to  suppose  that  a  deep-seated  artery ,  and  not  the  radial
had  been  wounded.

“  Instead  of  ‘  a  piece  of  sponge  being  placed  on  the  wound,’
pieces  of  sponge  were  passed  deep  into  it,  forming  what  surgeons
understand,  as  a  graduated  compress,  and  this  effectually  prevented
any  further  bleeding.

“  If  he  was  ever  told  that  it  might  ‘  be  necessary  to  remove  his
limb,’  it  certainly  was  not  by  me,  for  I  never  had  such  an  unneces¬
sary  measure  in  contemplation ;  but  it  will  appear  that  I  thought  it
not  impossible  I  might  have  been  required  to  tie  the  trunks  which
led  to  the  wounded  vessel.

“  With  respect  to  the  ‘two  hours’  and  ‘  eight  persons,’  both  the
one  and  the  other  are  greatly  exaggerated,  and  as  to  f  the  wound
healing  over  the  sponge,’  it  can  be  shewn,  that  when  the  man  last
attended  at  the  hospital,  this  certainly  was  not  the  case.  When  the
man  was  made  an  out-patient,  there  was  not  the  least  reason  to  doubt
his  perfect  recovery,  and  although  he  was  encouraged  to  use  his  hand
a  little,  under  the  impression  that  it  might  assist  in  throwing  off
what  remained  of  the  sponge  ;  yet,  had  he  continued  his  attendance
at  the  hospital  as  he  ought  to  have  done,  so  that  the  progress  of  the


by  Mr .  Parker.


395


case  might  have  been  watched,  and  any  necessary  measures  taken,  I
have  no  doubt  that  the  sponge  would  have  been  separated,  and  the
limb  perfectly  restored,  without  any  further  interference  or  operation.
And  here  it  should  be  stated,  that  the  very  fact  of  his  having  been
in  a  condition  to  use  his  hand,  shows  how  far  the  limb  must  have
advanced  towards  recovery  when  he  left  the  hospital.

“  The  subjoined  statements  of  the  dressers,  who  were  experienced
pupils  (both  now  gone  to  London)  and  who  were  most  diligent  in
their  attendance  on  this  man,  will,  I  submit,  verify  my  account,  and
I  may  add,  that  having  brought  the  whole  matter  under  the  con¬
sideration  of  my  colleagues,  I  am  authorized  by  them  to  say,  that
the  treatment  employed  meets  with  their  entire  approbation.

“  I  have  the  honour  to  be,  sir,

“  Your  most  obedient  servant,

“  J.  H.  James.


“  We,  the  undersigned,  being  desired  to  state  what  we  know  with
reference  to  certain  points  in  William  Nichols’s  case,  as  given  in  a
communication  to  The  Western  Times  paper  of  September  the  25th,
beg  to  say —

“  That  instead  of  the  wound  being  a  cut  of  half  an  inch  in  length,
it  was  a  deep  stab  caused  by  a  chisel  penetrating  obliquely  into  the
ball  of  the  thumb.

“  That  no  attempt  was  made  to  perform  the  operation  of  ligature
of  the  radial  artery;  as  it  was  deemed  inadmissable,  from  the  fact
that  pressure  on  that  vessel  did  not  control  the  haemorrhage;  but
that  the  original  wound  was  enlarged  with  a  view  to  secure  both
mouths  of  the  divided  vessel,  the  attempt  to  do  which  did  not  oc¬
cupy  more  than  a  fourth  part  of  the  time,  or  require  more  than  a
fourth  part  of  the  assistance,  stated  to  have  been  employed.

"  That  amputation  was  never  mentioned,  as  Mr.  James  expressed
his  intention,  if  the  haemorrhage  continued,  either  to  tie  both  the
radial  and  ulnar  arteries,  or  the  brachial  alone.

“  That  a  sponge  was  not  laid  on  the  wound,  but  that  it  was  filled
with  small  pieces,  so  as  to  form  a  graduated  compress,  from  the
first  introduction  of  which,  all  haemorrhage  ceased.

“  That  the  wound  did  not  heal  over  the  sponge,  but  that  when
at  the  end  of  seven  weeks,  retaining  the  perfect  use  of  his  arm  he
was  made  an  out-patient,  all  but  a  very  small  piece  had  come  away,
which  had  been  gradually  pared  off  till  the  time  of  his  last  attend¬
ance,  viz.,  August  18th,  since  which  time  we  have  lost  sight  of  him.


“  Signed


f  T.  Wilson  Caird.
\  C.  Harri  Roper.


“  I  beg  further  to  add,  that  Mr.  James  saw  the  man  immediately
on  his  admission,  that  the  haemorrhage  had  then  ceased,  and  that
he  gave  the  necessary  directions  as  to  what  should  be  done  if  it  re¬
turned.

“T.  Wilson  Caird,  Dresser  to*  Mr.  James.”


396


Painless  Ligature  of  an  Artery ,


“The  Mesmeric  Case.

“  To  the  Editor  of  the  Western  Times.

“  Sir, — As  there  appears  to  be  some  discrepancy  between  the
account  given  by  William  Nichols  to  your  reporter,  relative  to  his
case,  and  the  statement  furnished  by  Mr.  James,  I  think  it  desirable
that  the  public  should  know  the  truth  of  the  case.

“The  following  is  copied  from  the  Hospital  books: — ‘William
Nichols  admitted  for  accident  of  cut  arm,  13th  May,  1847.  St.
Mary  Steps  Parish;  23  years  old.  Mr.  James,  surgeon.  He  was
made  an  out-patient,  on  July  1,  1847,  and  on  23rd  Sept.,  1847,
discharged  for  benefit.’

“  William  Nichols  has  no  colleagues  or  pupils  to  prove  (what  is
a  very  important  difference)  that  the  wound  was  inflicted  on  any  part
of  the  ball  of  the  thumb,  but  his  arm  is  a  living  proof  that  the
wound  was  not  inflicted  on  the  ball  of  the  thumb,  but  on  that  part
of  the  wrist  (from  below  upwards)  where  medical  men  feel  the  pulse,
which  can  be  compared  with  the  other  arm,  and  which  has  been
attested  by  many  persons  since  the  appearance  of  Mr.  James’s  and
pupils’  letters,  and  can  be  seen  any  day  at  his  lodgings,  at  Mr.
Southwood’s,  Bartholomew  Street ;  and  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt
that  the  radial  artery  was  wounded  and  furnished  the  haemorrhage,
which  required  him  to  remain  five  weeks  in  bed,  and  three  additional
weeks  before  he  requested  to  be  made  an  out-patient.

“That  plugging  the  wound  with  sponge  was  not  had  recourse  to
until  a  proper  and  persevering  attempt  to  tie  the  artery  had  been
made,  no  one  would  doubt  for  a  moment ;  and  to  have  the  arm  held
steady  during  the  necessary  enlargement  of  the  wound  and  trying
the  usual  method  of  seizing  the  wounded  vessel,  (an  operation  at¬
tended  with  considerable  pain,  without  mesmerism  or  ether)  every  one
must  think  that  several  assistants  would  be  necessary,  independently
of  the  anxiety  of  the  numerous  hospital  pupils  to  witness  the  opera¬
tion.  That  the  hcemorrhage  was  very  alarming,  there  is  no  doubt,
as  the  patient,  if  he  had  only  brohen  his  arm,  would  have  been  made
an  out-patient  as  soon  as  the  fracture  had  been  reduced  and  put  in
splints.  Whereas  William  Nichols  was  required  to  be  put  to  bed
very  soon  after  he  reached  the  hospital,  on  May  8th,  and  for  several
nights  he  had  an  especial  nurse  to  watch  him  ;  he  remained  in  bed
35  days,  and  in  the  hospital  1 9  additional  days,  when  he  requested
to  be  made  an  out-patient.  During  the  48  days  he  was  an  out-patient,
he  went  to  the  hospital  several  times  to  be  inspected.  By  this  time
102  days  had  elapsed,  when  William  Nichols  found  that  the  wound
of  his  arm  had  not  only  not  healed,  but  having  an  excrescence  of
proud  flesh,  an  inch  and  half  in  length,  an  inch  wide,  and  raised
nearly  half  an  inch  above  the  surrounding  skin,  with  almost  daily
discharges  of  blood  and  putrid  effluvia.  Since  August  18th,  he
discontinued  his  visits  to  the  hospital,  but  still  continued  to  work  to
maintain  himself  and  wife.  On  September  7th,  he  went  to  work  in
the  morning,  but  was,  soon  after,  obliged  to  go  to  bed ;  he  then  sent
for  me,  when  I  found  him  with  very  considerable  fever,  his  hand  and
fingers  very  much  inflamed,  with  a  sore  like  an  issue  in  appearance.


by  Mr.  Parker.


397


with  an  offensive,  putrid  effluvium.  In  the  course  of  two  days,  the
backs  of  the  fingers  were  covered  with  bladders  filled  with  bloody
water.  The  cuticle  has  been  separated  from  the  whole  of  the  hand
and  fingers  ;  the  present  appearance  of  the  nails  bears  evidence  of
considerable  mischief.  The  incision  which  I  made  to  tie  the  radial
artery  was  healed  in  a  week  ;  there  was  no  need  of  a  second  plaster,
which  shows  that  the  patient’s  flesh  was  well-disposed  to  heal.  The
necessity  of  tying  the  radial  artery  has  been  fully  justified  by  the
lower  end  of  the  wounded  artery  bleeding  when  the  piece  of  sponge
was  removed  129  days  after  it  was  inserted,  which  is  a  strong  proof
that  the  upper  end  of  the  artery  was  still  open,  as  the  stream  of
blood  came  direct  from  the  heart  to  this  wound,  and  only  in  a  back
stream  to  the  lower  mouth  of  the  wounded  vessel.

“  I  do  not  attach  much  importance  to  the  operation  of  tying  the
radial  artery,  for  I  performed  it  without  assistance,  even  for  the  pa¬
tient  to  be  held,  as  he  was  unconscious  of  pain  during  the  operation.
The  suppuration  of  the  old  wound  with  the  proud  flesh  has  been
the  only  obstacle  to  his  resuming  his  work,  which  he  intends  doing
in  the  course  of  a  few  days.

“  I  remain,  Sir,  yours  respectfully,

“John  Battishill  Parker.
“The  Close,  Exeter,  October  6th,  1847.

“  [At  Mr.  Parker’s  invitation  we  accompanied  him  to  the  cham¬
ber  of  the  patient.  Mr.  Parker  pointed  out  the  scar  caused  by  his
operation  on  the  artery,  and  the  patient  stated  that  he  was  wholly
unconscious  that  any  operation  had  been  performed  on  him,  till  told
of  it.]” — Ed.  West.  Times.


*jjs*  Mr.  Parker’s  letter  has  not  been  answered.  Many
medical  men  in  Exeter  have  expressed  their  opinion,  behind
his  back,  that  his  practice  was  right  and  Mr.  James’s  wrong;
but  not  before  his  face,  because  his  treatment  was  mixed  up
with  mesmerism,  about  which  they  are  all  more  cross  than
ever,  still  denouncing  it  as  barefaced  imposture.  But  in  spite
of  this,  mesmerism  is  making  a  most  triumphant  progress  in
Exeter.

In  corroboration  of  Mr.  Parker’s  remarks  upon  the  efficacy
of  mesmerism  in  phlegmasia  dolens,  we  subjoin  the  following
note  from  the  Bev.  Mr.  Sandby  to  Dr.  Elliotson,  who  has
favoured  us  with  it.


“  Flixton,  Dec.  15,  1847.

“My  dear  Elliotson, — I  have  a  remarkable  instance  of
the  remedial  powers  of  mesmerism  to  narrate  to  you,  and
had  I  been  able  to  remain  and  complete  the  cure,  it  would
have  been  as  striking  as  anything  you  have  yet  recorded  in
The  Zoist.


398


Painless  Ligature  of  an  Artery,  fyc.

“  A  lady  after  her  confinement  was  attacked  with  what  is
called  ‘  white  leg/  She  was  extremely  ill,  dangerously  so,
and  her  sufferings  were  dreadful.  The  most  painful  remedies
were  applied ;  what  appeared  to  be  successful  with  one  leg
produced  no  benefit  to  the  other.  She  was  quite  lame,  the
leg  immensely  swollen,  stiff  at  the  knee,  and  exquisitely
painful,  and  the  general  health  greatly  impaired.  When  I
saw  her,  she  had  been  in  bed  and  on  the  sofa  eleven  weeks :
her  countenance  was  indicative  of  severe  illness,  she  was  very
much  emaciated,  and  could  not  bear  the  leg  to  be  touched.
The  medical  men  said  that  she  was  very  ill,  her  whole  nervous
system  shaken,  and  that  her  recovery  would  be  so  slow  as  to
be  almost  imperceptible.  I  mesmerised  her ;  in  about  five
minutes  she  went  off  into  a  deep  sleep,  in  which  she  could
bear  the  leg  to  be  rubbed,  and  the  leg  felt  easier  when  she
awoke.  I  remained  with  her  six  days,  mesmerising  her  twice
a  day.  The  change  was  extraordinary  ;  the  swelling  of  the
leg  greatly  diminished,  the  stiffness  of  the  knee  reduced,  and
the  general  health  improved.  She  slept  well  at  night,  and
was  carried  down  into  the  drawing  room  the  first  time  for
twelve  weeks.  When  in  the  mesmeric  sleep,  the  applica¬
tion  of  gold  to  the  leg  would  set  it  in  motion  as  if  through
galvanism,  and  she  could  bear  the  leg  to  be  rubbed  hardly,
though  when  awake  a  touch  would  make  her  scream  with
pain.  On  the  sixth  day  after  the  application  of  mesmerism,
the  medical  men  expressed  great  surprise  at  the  improvement
in  her  leg,  and  said,  f  Something  or  other  has  done  you  good/
Unfortunately  business  obliged  me  to  leave  at  the  end  of  the
week,  consequently  the  cure  has  not  been  completed,  but  the
leg  has  never  been  as  swelled  or  as  painful  since.

“  Believe  me,  faithfully  yours,

“  George  Sandby,  jun.”

Mr.  Parker’s  success  with  mesmerism  in  another  case  of
after  pains  was  mentioned  in  No.  XVII.,  p.  154.

We  saw  mesmerism  tried  fully  in  a  case  of  tetanus  and  in
vain.  But  the  case  was  most  rapid, — lasting  little  more  than
a  day, — too  rapid  for  mesmerism  to  be  of  use  unless  the
patient  had  happily  been  very  susceptible  of  its  influence.  As
medicine  is  generally  useless  in  the  disease,  unless  it  be  im¬
mense  doses  of  iron,  mesmerism  deserves  a  fair  trial :  but
should  be  employed  the  first  moment  that  the  disease  threatens.
When  tetanus  arises  from  a  wound,  especially  from  a  wound
of  the  hand  or  foot,  and  especially  of  the  thumb  or  great
toe,  as  in  Mr.  Parker’s  case,  the  danger  is  very  far  the
greatest. — Zoist.


(  399  )


XV.  Mesmeric  Cure  of  Neuralgia  of  one  side  of  the  Neck.

Communicated  bv  Dr.  Elliotson.

“  Magnetism,  Animal. — This  pretended  influence  or  agent,  had  its  origin  in  Vienna  about
the  year  1776,  &c.” — “As  the  jargon  of  Mesiner  has  been  revived  in  our  own  day,  it  may  be
worth  while  to  give  his  own  definition  of  his  art,  which  is  quite  as  intelligible  as  some  of  the
later  versions  of  it  which  have  recently  appeared  in  London;  for  in  this  hot-bed  of  quackery ,
mesmerism,  as  it  is  called,  has  occasionally  taken  root,  and  at  one  time,  but  for  an  accident
which  we  shall  presently  notice,  threatened  to  thrive  and  prosper.” — “  Many  of  our  readers
have  probably  witnessed  the  silly  and  disgraceful  exhibitions  in  this  line  of  practice  which
have  lately  been  tolerated  in  London,  and  are  therefore  aware  of  the  means  by  which  the
magnetized  are  brought  under  the  “  influence.”  It  is  always  necessary  that  the  magnelizer
himself  should  be  charged  with  the  fluid,  and  that  the  magnetizees  should  be  susceptible  of
its  influence,  which,  be  it  observed,  all  persons  are  not:  nor  can  all  persons  be  magnetizers;
some  want  power  and  others  faith  ;  in  short,  there  must  be  a  due  share  of  folly  or  of  impos¬
ture,  or  both,  on  the  one  hand,  and  of  credulity,  cunning,  or  morbid  irritability,  on  the  other:
and  then  all  goes  right.  The  inagnetizer,  with  his  wand  of  office,  performs  certain  antics
before  the  patient,  &c.” — “  Within  the  last  five  years  some  lamentable  attempts  have  been
made  to  revive  it  in  London  ;  not  by  quacks  and  impostors,  but  by  regular  practitioners,  and
even  by  persons  who  enjoyed  no  inconsiderable  share  of  public  respect  and  favour.  They
have  unfortunately  reaped  the  bitter  fruits  of  their  credulity  and  folly  :  and  the  mania
HAS  AGAIN  SUBSIDED,  AND  WILL  NOW  PROBABLY  REMAIN  DORMANT.” — (A  Dictionary  of
Science,  Literature,  and  Art,  &c.  Edited  by  W.  T.  Brande,  F.R.S.,  L.  &  E.  of  Her
Majesty’s  Mint,  Professor  of  Chemistry  in  the  Royal  Institution  of  Great  Britian,  Professor
of  Chemistry  and  Materia  Medica  to  the  Apothecary’s  Company.  184*2  )

I  will  venture  to  predict  that  the  chief  thing  for  which
Professor  Brande  will  be  remembered,  will  be  these  notable
passages.  Five  years  have  elapsed  since  he  had  the  “  folly”  to
publish  them,  and  mesmerism,  so  far  from  “  remaining  dor¬
mant,”  has  steadily  and  rapidly  spread  here  and  abroad :  a
very  large  number  of  cures  have  been  effected  and  operations
rendered  painless  through  its  means,  and  a  variety  of  indis¬
putable,  though  singular  phenomena — stumbling-blocks  and
foolishness  to  the  wise  in  their  own  conceit — become  perfectly
established.  A  journal  of  fresh  facts  in  the  “  dormant  science”
has  appeared  quarterly  :  and,  if  the  Professor  is  ignorant  of
what  has  been  done  and  is  doing,  still  greater  is  his  fault.
Let  him  follow  the  noble  example  of  Dr.  Gregory,  the  Pro¬
fessor  of  Chemistry  in  the  University  of  Edinburgh;  and
begin  with  studying  that  physiciaiFs  admirable  article,  entitled
On  the  true  Scientific  Spirit  in  which  the  claims  of  Phrenology
and  Mesmerism  ought  to  be  examined ,  published  in  the  last
number  but  two  of  the  Edinburgh  Phrenological  Journal ,  and
now  printed  separately  as  a  pamphlet.

I  was  summoned  in  the  autumn  to  a  lady  suffering  violent
pain  in  the  right  side  of  her  neck,  so  that  she  could  not  bear
the  least  movement  of  the  part  or  the  least  pressure ;  and,
when  perfectly  still,  was  yet  in  a  state  of  extreme  suffering.

It  has  seemed  preferable  that  she  should  describe  her  own
case,  and,  on  my  making  this  request  to  her,  she  obligingly
sent  me  the  following  account.  John  Elliotson.

Dear  Dr.  Elliotson, — I  send  herewith  the  particulars  of
my  late  illness,  and  have  endeavoured  to  render  them  as
intelligible  as  possible  :  but  oh,  how  few  can  imagine  the


400


Mesmeric  Cure  of  Neuralgia  of  the  Neck.


dreadful  sufferings  I  experienced,  the  very  remembrance  of
which  causes  me  to  write  in  fear  and  trembling.  You  will  no
doubt,  in  your  practice,  meet  with  many  as  sceptical  with
regard  to  mesmerism  as  I  have  been.  Whenever  you  do  so,
you  are  at  liberty  to  make  use  of  my  name  and  address  :  I
will  with  pleasure  convince  any  one  of  its  efficacy  in  my  case.
In  offering  my  thanks  for  your  very  kind  attention,  I  hope
you  will  accept  them  as  conveying  all  that  the  most  eloquent
language  could  express,  from  one  whom  you  have  preserved.

A  continual  state  of  bodily  exertion  and  anxiety  of  mind  for
the  space  of  five  months  so  acted  on  my  nerves,  which  are  at
all  times  excitable,  as,  by  paroxysms  of  pain,  to  completely
draw  my  head  to  the  right  shoulder.  Had  it  remained  in  that
position  with  but  little  pain  I  should  not  have  complained,
and  should  in  all  probability  have  allowed  it  to  continue  so  for
some  time  rather  than  have  medical  advice.  But  the  catch-
ings  and  twitchings  were  so  terrible  in  that  contracted  state,
that  I  could  not  possibly  avoid  crying  out,  which  to  me,  who
had  suffered  illness  in  almost  every  shape  and  way  without
complaining,  was  humiliating, — so  like  a  child  fretting  about
a  stiff  neck.  That  it  was  anything  but  a  cold  I  had  not  the
most  distant  idea,  although  the  pain  teased  me  very  much.
I  treated  it  for,  and  as  a  cold,  by  taking  warm  baths,  mus¬
tard  baths  for  the  feet,  mustard  plasters  round  the  neck  and
at  the  chest,  with  all  things  usually  in  request  for  a  cold ;  but
without  effect.  I  kept  gradually  getting  worse ;  and  one
morning,  at  the  end  of  the  first  week  of  my  complaining,  I
felt  too  unwell  to  dress  myself,  but,  recollecting  that  I  had
but  little  which  would  require  my  attention  that  day,  I  got
into  bed  again.  I  had  not  been  quiet  many  minutes,  when  a
note  came  from  a  dear  friend  who  had  been  taken  suddenly
ill.  I  then  determined  to  be  dressed  and  go  to  him ;  and  for
the  first  time  in  my  remembrance  had  the  whole  of  my  cloth¬
ing  put  on  as  if  I  were  an  infant ;  and  in  a  like  manner  it  was
taken  off  on  my  return.  But  what  struck  me  as  very  odd,
when  with  my  friend  the  twitchings  of  my  neck  were  worse
than  before  or  after  I  had  left  his  residence.  I  had  not  been
able  to  bear  the  light  for  two  or  three  weeks,  perhaps  more,
and  on  this  day  in  particular  it  gave  me  shooting  pains  in  the
eyes  and  temples,  then  darted  round  to  the  back  part  of  the
head.  In  this  pitiable  condition  I  did  not  consider  it  safe  to
go  home  alone,  I  therefore  called  on  my  mother  who  was
much  concerned,  thought  it  something  serious,  and  begged
me  to  have  medical  advice.  But  I,  thinking  it  only  a  cold,
treated  the  matter  rather  lightly,  and  said  the  air  from  the  drive
home  would  dome  good.  Arrived  at  home,  I  found  the  hope


401


Mesmeric  Cure  of  Neuralgia  of  the  Neck.

of  being  better  quite  out  of  the  question;  I  could  not  walk,
get  up,  or  sit  down,  without  crying  out.  I  then  could  not
be  prevailed  on  to  have  advice,  but  hoped,  almost  against  hope,
that  I  should  be  better  on  the  morrow,  trying  again  an  appli¬
cation  of  hot  mustard  to  the  throat,  that  took  all  the  remaining
skin  off.  I  then  knew  not  what  to  think  would  be  likely  to
do  me  good.  My  face  was  in  pain  as  well  as  my  neck,  and
the  back  of  my  head  began  to  pain  and  burn  so  greatly  that
lie  quiet  I  could  not ;  for,  independently  of  the  pain,  the
contraction  was  so  great  that  I  found  it  difficult  to  remain  in
one  position  in  bed  for  more  than  five  minutes  at  a  time.  I
however  endeavoured  to  forbear  as  much  as  possible  and  dis¬
turbed  my  husband  but  little,  thinking  to  have  an  hour  or
two’s  rest  in  the  morning,  in  which  hope  I  was  disappointed.
The  twitchings  became  more  violent,  and  the  pain  in  my  head
and  neck  increased  towards  evening.  A  medical  gentleman
was  sent  for,  who,  on  seeing  me,  ordered  me  to  be  put  into
a  warm  bed  immediately,  gave  me  an  aperient,  and  a  powder
every  four  hours  which  threw  me  into  a  violent  perspiration.
His  treatment  was  continued  for  three  or  four  days,  with  hot
hops  to  the  neck,  yet  I  obtained  no  relief,  so  that  I  began  to
doubt  if  my  illness  could  proceed  from  a  cold,  and  to  ascribe
it  to  the  real  cause, — an  over-excited  state  of  the  nerves.  For
had  it  been  a  cold,  the  powders  must  have  benefited  me  long
before.  I  had  been  so  completely  drenched  with  perspiration,
as  to  be  obliged  to  change  my  sleeping  dress  every  three  or
four  hours.  Up  to  this  time  I  had  not  slept,  and  my  cry
for  hot  hops  was  incessant.  The  paroxysms  of  pain  were  then
worse  than  ever,  and  the  muscles  at  the  back  of  the  neck  felt
tightly  contracted.  More  than  a  week  had  now  passed,  yet
I  had  not  slept.  I  then  had  medicine  given  to  produce  sleep,
but  it  had  quite  a  contrary  effect, — that  of  causing  occa¬
sional  delirium,  notwithstanding  which  it  was  still  admin¬
istered,  and  other  medicine  likewise  which  threw  me  into  a
salivation.  My  mouth  became  much  ulcerated ;  the  whole  of
my  body  so  painfully  sensitive  that  I  could  scarcely  bear  to
be  touched ;  the  sheets  even  gave  me  pain  and  were  taken
away,  the  room  was  quite  darkened,  and  if  any  one  only  whis¬
pered,  I  felt  almost  beside  myself.  I  went  on  in  this  way  for
nearly  a  fortnight,  neither  aperients  nor  any  other  medicine
did  me  good ;  food  of  any  kind  I  had  not  taken  the  whole  of
the  time  ;  a  little  tea  and  a  little  water  was  all  I  could  swallow.
Sleep,  which  I  most  stood  in  need  of,  I  could  not  get  and  the
pains  at  last  came  over  me  in  shivers.  I  then  said  it  was  use¬
less  to  go  on  in  this  way  any  longer ;  I  would  have  further
advice ;  if  I  could  get  no  sleep,  I  could  not  live.  An  eminent


402  Mesmeric  Cure  of  Neuralgia  of  the  Neck.

physician  was  sent  for,  who,  after  examining  my  head  and
neck,  told  my  friends  there  was  little  chance  of  my  recovery;
prescribed  for  me,  ordered  leeches  to  be  applied  to  the  back
of  the  head  immediately,  and  the  continuation  of  the  sleeping
powders  and  an  aperient.  He  feared  there  was  some  mischief
in  the  brain.  My  heart  became  painful.  I  did  not  sleep,  nor
was  I  better.  When  the  medical  man  came  the  next  morn¬
ing,  finding  me  still  the  same,  he  wished  to  pnt  a  blister  to
the  throat,  but  I  would  neither  take  more  medicine  or  have
the  blister  on.  I  would  see  Doctor  Elliotson.  When  he
found  this  to  be  my  determination,  he  said  on  leaving  the
house  there  was  no  time  to  lose,  send  for  him  at  once.  My
reason  for  wishing  to  see  Doctor  Elliotson  in  preference  to
any  other  physician,  was  this, — during  the  first  week  of  my
illness,  a  solicitor  called  on  business,  and  as  I  alone  could
answer  his  questions,  he  was  shewn  into  my  room.  Observing
my  head  twitching,  he  said,  “  Why  do  you  not  be  mesmer¬
ised  ?”  I  ridiculed  the  idea ;  was  sure  it  would  do  me  no  good ;
but,  when  everything  else  failed,  I  thought  of  Doctor  Elliot¬
son;  not  that  I  for  one  moment  supposed  I  should  recover,  but
I  knew  it  would  afford  great  satisfaction  to  those  who  were  so
anxiously  looking  forward  for  a  favourable  change  in  my
health.  My  husband  called  on  Doctor  Elliotson  that  day,
described  my  illness,  said  I  wished  to  be  mesmerised  and  asked
if  he  thought  it  would  do  me  good.  He  said  it  probably
would,  it  was  not  his  practice  to  mesmerise  patients,  but  that
under  the  circumstances  he  had  no  objection  to  do  so  as  a  les¬
son  for  my  husband,  to  enable  him  to  mesmerise  me  himself.
Doctor  Elliotson  came,  examined  my  heart  with  a  stethoscope,
said  that  some  of  the  nerves  of  my  neck  were  affected ;  he  next
attended  to  the  head,  neck,  and  mouth,  which  was  in  a  sad
state  by  reason  of  the  salivation,  wrote  a  prescription  for  a
wash  for  my  mouth,  which  I  found  very  soothing,  desired
that  no  medicine  of  any  kind  should  be  given  to  me  unless
quite  necessary,  and  then  only  one  teaspoonful  of  castor  oil
at  a  time.  He  then  began  to  mesmerise  me.  After  about
thirty  passes  I  experienced  a  sudden  chill  in  the  arms,  from
the  elbows  to  the  ends  of  the  fingers.  At  this  time  my  arms
were  under  the  bed-clothes.  I  did  not  at  the  time  attribute
the  sensation  to  mesmerism.  Oh,  dear  no  !  I  prided  myself
on  my  good  sense  too  much  to  be  imposed  on  by  anything  so
ridiculous  as  mesmerism  ;  and  as  I  could  speak  but  little  that
could  be  understood,  endeavoured  to  look  both  grave  and
wise,  while  cherishing  my  own  opinion  on  the  subject.  The
pain  continued  most  acute  on  the  right  side  of  the  face  and
neck.  My  husband  mesmerised  me  the  same  evening,  which


Mesmeric  Cure  of  Neuralgia  of  the  Neck.  403

I  deemed  a  great  piece  of  folly ;  and,  although  afterwards  I
suffered  less  pain,  I  could  not  believe  the  relief  obtained  to  be
the  effects  of  mesmerism,  inasmuch  as  I  had  not  been  to
sleep.  I  yet  felt  more  composed ;  and,  towards  morning,  slept
for  an  hour  or  two  for  the  first  time  since  I  had  taken  to  my
bed.  When  the  medical  attendant  came  the  following  morn¬
ing,  he  enquired  what  had  been  given  to  me;  he  was  told  I
had  been  mesmerised  but  had  taken  nothing,  when  he  pro¬
nounced,  with  much  pleasure,  but  with  evident  surprise,  that
I  was  decidedly  better,  and  that  something  had  done  me  good.
Still  I  had  no  belief  in  mesmerism.  Doctor  Elliotson  came
the  next  morning  and  proposed  another  trial.  I  said  it
was  perfectly  useless,  I  did  not  feel  better,  nor  would  it  make
me  well.  But  the  good  Doctor  was  very  persevering,  my
husband  solicitous,  and  I  consented,  but  I  fear  with  a  very
ill  grace.  It  did  not  at  the  time  produce  sleep  or  the  least
heaviness.  Towards  evening,  the  shiverings  of  pain  were  less
severe  and  I  slept  for  a  longer  period.  My  husband  saw  Dr.
Elliotson  every  morning,  who  still  advised  him  to  continue
the  mesmerism,  assuring  him  that  it  would  eventually  benefit
me.  In  a  few  days  from  the  period  I  first  saw  Doctor  Elliot¬
son,  I  began  to  take  tea  with  eggs  in  it,  occasionally,  both
night  and  day,  in  which  I  found  great  comfort  to  my  mouth
as  well  as  nourishment.  The  catchings  became  less  frequent,
the  heat  and  pain  in  the  head  not  near  so  teasing,  and  I  slept  in
the  day  for  a  short  time  as  well  as  at  night.  I  went  on  in  this
way  progressing,  some  days  a  little  worse  and  some  days  much
better,  until  able  to  leave  my  bed  for  the  sofa ;  and,  although
the  twitchings  had  not  entirely  left  me,  I  was  sensible  they
were  far  less  frequent,  and  that  I  was  gaining  strength.  As
soon  as  I  could  walk  across  the  room  alone,  I  ventured  down
stairs,  still  unable  to  bear  the  light  without  pain  for  some
time.  My  mouth  getting  better,  I  began  to  take  a  larger
quantity  of  food,  and  a  few  weeks  later  my  general  health  was
quite  restored,  but  greatly  wanting  in  strength.  It  must  be
remembered  that  the  loss  to  the  system  was  very  great  from
the  perspiration  and  salivation.  I  nevertheless  remained  an
unbeliever  in  mesmerism  until  my  second  attack,  which  was
precisely  similar  to  the  first.  Something  at  this  time  again
occurred  to  cause  me  a  little  anxiety,  when  the  catchings  in
the  neck  came  on  very  painfully.  I  lost  my  appetite,  and  for
three  nights  could  get  no  sleep ;  indeed  I  thought  I  must  now
die.  My  husband  begged  me  to  allow  him  to  mesmerise  me.
I  smiled  at  the  idea,  it  appeared  so  absurd ;  but  I  submitted
to  about  forty  passes,  and  to  my  surprise  slept  for  a  few
hours.  From  that  time  I  believed  it  must  have  been  the


yol.  y.


G  G


404


Experiments  with  Crystals.


mesmerism  which  benefitted  me  in  the  first  instance,  and  I
consented  to  be  mesmerised  the  following  night,  and  went  to
sleep  at  the  time  the  passes  were  being  made,  and  did  not
wake  until  the  next  morning,  when  I  felt  much  refreshed  and
the  pains  were  far  less.  The  mesmerism  was  continued  once,
sometimes  twice,  every  day,  till  I  was  quite  well :  and  the
only  medicine  I  have  taken  since  Dr.  Elliotson  first  came  to
me  has  been  a  mild  aperient,  and  that  very  seldom.  I  was
not  able  to  take  castor  oil  as  prescribed  by  the  good  doctor,
to  whom  my  grateful  thanks  are  due  for  his  kind  attention
and  consideration ;  for  had  it  not  been  for  his  kind  persever¬
ance,  I  certainly  should  not  now  have  been  in  the  land  of  the
living.

A.  F.  P.

King’s  Road,  Chelsea.


XYI.  Experiments  with  Crystals :  case  of  Epilepsy,  and  cure
of  Hiccup  of  twelve  years’  standing  with  Mesmerism.
By  Mr.  Chandler.

Experiments  with  Crystals.

Nov.  12th,  1847.  Having  procured  a  large  and  tolerably
perfect  specimen  of  rock  crystal,  I  tried  its  effect  on  Miss
M.  H.,  who  is  very  susceptible  of  mesmerism,  and  has  re¬
ceived  great  benefit  from  it  (see  Zoist,  Yol.  III.,  p.  193).
On  applying  the  point  of  the  crystal  within  a  quarter  of  an
inch  of  the  palm  of  her  hand,  she  immediately  said,  “  It
feels  like  a  small  blowing.”  On  continuing,  the  same  sensa¬
tion  remained,  and  the  fingers  were  gradually  drawn  up  round
the  crystal  in  spite  of  her  attempts  to  keep  them  straight.
A  cold  sensation  was  also  felt  on  the  arm  when  the  crystal
was  applied,  though  a  thick  dress  intervened.  I  may  remark
that  neither  this  patient,  nor  any  other  on  whom  I  have  tried
the  crystals,  had  ever  heard  previously  of  Reichenbach’s  ex¬
periments  :  and  I  am  always  particularly  careful  not  to  hint
at  the  probable  result  of  these  or  any  other  experiments
before  the  effect  has  been  produced,  so  that  I  can  with  the
greatest  confidence  vouch  for  their  genuineness.

I  next  tried  the  same  crystal  in  the  same  manner  on  a
member  of  my  own  family,  who  had  witnessed  the  former
experiment,  and  who  is  very  slightly  and  irregularly  affected
by  mesmeric  passes  made  with  the  hand.  If  the  effect  was
produced  by  imagination,  it  would  of  course  be  nearly  the
same  in  all  instances  :  but  more  particularly  in  this  case,
where  the  lesson  had  just  been  learnt.  Great  therefore  was


405


by  Mr.  Chandler.

my  surprise  to  see  the  hand  suddenly  drawn  away  after  the
crystal  had  been  applied  a  few  seconds,  and  to  hear  the  ex¬
clamation,  “  It's  all  pins  and  needles  up  to  my  elbow. ”  My
surprise,  however,  was  destined  not  to  stop  here.  For  upon
repeating  the  experiment  on  the  other  hand,  the  effect  soon
became  much  more  bearable,  and  in  a  few  seconds  the
patienFs  head  suddenly  dropped,  and  I  found  she  was  in  a
profound  sleep,  from  which  she  was  immediately  aroused  by
transverse  passes,  showing  clearly  that  the  sleep  was  mes¬
meric.  The  experiment  was  repeated  several  times  with  the
same  result :  but  I  found  that,  if  the  eyes  were  not  fixed  on
the  crystal,  sleep  was  not  produced.  I  therefore  held  it
before  the  face  at  about  a  foot  distant,  and  found  the  result
even  more  rapid  than  when  held  to  the  hand.  There  was  also
a  beneficial  effect,  as  it  relieved  a  very  severe  nervous  head¬
ache  from  which  the  patient  was  suffering.  She  says  the  mo¬
ment  she  casts  her  eyes  on  the  crystal,  her  head  appears  to
be  drawn  towards  it ;  and  the  head  always  shows  a  disposition
to  fall  on  it.  She  remains  perfectly  conscious  the  whole
time,  but  cannot  move  or  speak :  so  that  she  is  in  a  state  of
semi-coma.

Nov.  27th.  I  have  continued  my  experiments  daily  with
the  same  results,  and  to-day  had  an  opportunity,  assisted
by  my  friend,  Mr.  Holland,  of  verifying  the  relative  energy
of  different  crystals.  One  out  of  each  of  ReichenbaclFs  three
active  classes  was  tried.

Class  A  (the  weakest).  A  very  large  and  perfect  single
crystal  of  adularia,  weighing  5^  lbs.,  and  measuring  6  inches
long  and  3^  by  3  square.

Class  B.  A  good  specimen  of  rock  crystal,  weighing  1  \  lbs.,
about  3  inches  diameter,  being  the  pyramid  only  of  a  large
prism.

Class  C.  An  immense  crystal  of  selenite,  weighing  2  lbs.,
and  measuring  diagonally  7  inches,  the  parallel  side,  5  inches.

The  adularia  produced  the  effect  (sleep)  on  my  patient  in
one  minute  thirty  seconds — there  was  very  slight  rigidity.

The  rock  crystal  in  twenty-four  seconds — rigidity  much
more  marked.

The  selenite  produced  sleep  in  eleven  seconds,  in  a  much
more  sudden  manner,  and  the  rigidity  was  as  great  for  about
one  minute  as  I  ever  remember  to  have  seen  in  any  patient ;
and,  as  with  other  instances  of  mesmeric  rigidity,  it  wras
instantly  relaxed  by  blowing  on.

In  all  the  experiments  the  breathing  became  more  heavy
the  moment  the  eve  fell  on  the  crystal :  but  the  selenite  pro-

g  g  2


406  Experiments  with  Crystals,

duced  laboured  breathing  in  a  much  higher  degree  than  the
others.

On  another  occasion  Mr.  Holland  assisted  me  in  the  fol¬
lowing  series  of  experiments,  in  the  order  in  which  they
stand.

Alum. — A  large  crystal,  or  rather  mass  of  crystals,  show¬
ing  many  large  and  perfect  points.  Sleep  produced  in  thirteen
seconds,  and  when  held  in  the  patients  own  hand  in  ten
seconds ;  very  slight  rigidity ;  effect  sudden.  This  appeared
at  first  sight  to  be  at  variance  with  Reichenbach^s  experience,
as  alum  stands  in  his  weakest  class ;  but  on  looking  a  little
more  closely  into  the  matter,  we  found,  1st.  That  the  crystal
was  large  in  proportion  to  the  others  employed  on  the  same
patient  at  the  same  time.  2nd.  That  though  the  effect  was
quickly  produced  and  came  on  suddenly,  there  was  very  much
less  rigidity  than  in  the  experiments  with  the  stronger  classes.

Rock  crystal. — The  same  used  in  former  experiments,  and
with  the  same  results ;  viz.,  sleep  in  twenty-four  seconds,  less
sudden,  considerable  rigidity.

Calcareous  spar. — A  large,  single,  perfect  crystal.  Sleep
in  one  minute  twenty-three  seconds,  coming  on  very  gra¬
dually,  slight  rigidity.

Sandstone. — A  very  beautiful  mass  of  crystals,  showing
numerous  very  perfect  points.  Sleep  in  fifty-three  seconds,
accession  gradual,  rigidity  considerable.

Sandstone. — Two  very  perfect  crystals  joined,  a  much
smaller  specimen  than  the  former.  Sleep  in  eighty  seconds,
accession  gradual,  rigidity  very  slight.

I  have  merely  thrown  these  few  facts  hastily  together,
without  comment,  for  the  purpose  of  attracting  attention  to
this  new  phenomenon.  I  have  succeeded  in  mesmerising  many
other  patients  with  the  crystals,  but  not  at  all  times  satisfac¬
torily;  for  I  find  that  very  susceptible  patients  become  hyp¬
notized  by  looking  at  anything,  a  piece  of  wood,  for  instance,
or  a  shell,  though  I  have  in  several  instances  hinted,  for  the
purpose  of  testing  them,  that  such  and  such  an  article  does
not  produce  sleep ;  still  they  have  gone  off.  It  requires  much
caution,  therefore,  in  making  these  experiments,  that  we  do
not  deceive  ourselves.  The  phenomena  in  my  own  case  were
as  unexpected  as  they  were  extraordinary.  My  patient  is  very
slightly  susceptible  of  mesmerism  in  the  ordinary  way,  and
she  was  quite  prepared  for  a  different  effect  from  that  which
she  experienced,  as  she  was  unconsciously  looking  at  the
crystal,  whilst  I  was  holding  it  to  the  palm  of  her  hand,
when  her  head  suddenly  fell  forwards.


by  Mr.  Chandler.


407


I  have  tried  the  effects  of  crystals  on  the  hands  of  some
dozens  of  persons,  and  in  a  very  large  majority  the  f  small
blowing*  is  immediately  felt,  though  I  am  always  particularly
cautious  not  to  tell  them  what  they  are  to  expect.

Epilepsy.

Mr.  J.  F.,  set.  22,  a  married  man,  has  suffered  from  epi¬
leptic  fits  about  eighteen  months.  At  first  six  or  eight  weeks
intervened  between  the  fits,  but  latterly  he  has  never  gone
more  than  a  fortnight  without  one,  and  between  the  fits  he
has  very  severe  shocks  or  twitchings,  increasing  in  frequency
as  the  fit  approaches ;  they  are  often  sufficiently  violent  to
occasion  him  to  drop  a  cup  or  anything  else  he  may  happen
to  have  in  his  hand.  His  general  health  is  otherwise  excel¬
lent,  though  he  has  been  addicted  to  habits  of  intemperance,
which,  if  they  did  not  in  the  first  place  occasion  the  fits,  have
certainly  been  the  means  of  aggravating  them.

Jan.  1st,  1846.  I  commenced  mesmerising  him;  his  eye¬
lids  began  to  drop  in  five  minutes,  and  in  twelve  they  were
quite  closed.  He  had  a  fit  in  the  night,  it  being  about  his
time.  I  should  observe  that  his  attacks  do  not  usually  occur
in  the  night,  but  in  the  day  when  he  is  awake  and  occupied.

2nd.  Asleep  in  five  minutes,  and  much  more  profoundly.

11th.  This  was  the  ninth  time  of  mesmerising  him.  He
has  made  rapid  advances ;  he  goes  off  in  three  minutes,  and
remains  very  profound ;  awakes  by  transverse  passes  made
even  from  the  further  side  of  the  room;  goes  to  sleep  a  second
time  in  two  minutes  in  spite  of  a  third  person  talking  to  him
for  the  purpose  of  keeping  him  awake ;  says  he  sleeps  much
better  at  night;  from  being  very  restless,  he  now  sleeps  the
whole  night  without  waking ;  he  has  also  entirely  lost  the
shocks,  and  finds  his  general  health  decidedly  improved.

30th.  He  is  still  improving,  though  he  had  a  fit  this  even¬
ing  about  two  hours  after  he  was  mesmerised ;  it  was  a  par¬
ticularly  mild  one,  as  he  did  not  bite  his  tongue,  and  he  has
gone  twenty-seven  days  without  an  attack.

I  can  now  mesmerise  him  at  any  distance  so  that  I  can
see  him,  just  as  quickly  as  when  close  to  him,  and  can  awake
him  at  the  same  distance,  or  by  making  transverse  passes
under  the  table  quite  out  of  his  sight,  or  even  behind  him,  a
partition  being  between  us.  I  afterwards  found  that  these
phenomena  appeared  to  depend  on  my  will,  as  reported  in
The  Zoist,  Yol.  IV.,  p.  102.  I  have  tried  it  over  and  over
again  in  various  ways,  and  I  find  that  I  do  not  succeed  unless
I  move  one  finger  transversely,  it  matters  not  where — in  my


408


Case  of  Epilepsy,

pocket,  for  instance.  It  appears  to  require  this  to  fix  my  will,
as  I  have  always  made  a  practice  of  awaking  my  patients  by
means  of  transverse  passes  without  contact.

March  6th.  Going  on  well,  has  had  no  fit,  hut  to-day  he
had  one  of  his  shocks,  and  on  mesmerising  him  I  found  he
was  not  under  the  same  control  as  usual.  I  therefore  kept
him  longer,  and  I  believe  he  passed  over  his  fit,  for  the  next
evening  I  found  him  as  usual  perfectly  obedient.

23rd.  He  had  an  attack  this  morning  caused  by  very
great  excitement  (his  wife  presented  him  with  a  son  and  heir)  ;
this  being  the  fifty-third  day  since  his  last  fit,  he  did  not
suffer  any  of  the  premonitory  shocks.

April  3rd.  He  had  another  slight  fit  this  evening,  again
caused  by  excitement.  The  phenomena  are  becoming  more
and  more  curious  and  interesting.  He  is  perfectly  insensible
to  pain,  is  quite  deaf  to  the  loudest  noises,  though  he  hears
me  whisper  and  answers,  but  does  not  appear  to  hear  any
other  person,  and  he  is  perfectly  oblivious  of  anything  that  is
told  him  if  he  is  awakened  and  then  remesmerised.  This  phe¬
nomenon  is  so  perfect  that  I  have  awakened  him  and  given  him
a  glass  of  wine,  and  then  sent  him  off  again,  and  on  awak¬
ing  him  a  second  time,  he  would  not  believe  that  he  had
drunk  it.  On  one  occasion  I  awoke  him  and  made  him  write
his  name  and  the  precise  time  by  the  clock,  which  he  noticed
himself.  I  then  remesmerised  him,  and  on  awaking  him
again  ten  minutes  after,  he  was  much  puzzled  to  know  how
he  could  have  written  his  name  ten  minutes  before  without
recollecting  it,  and  I  do  not  think  that  to  this  day  he  believes
he  drank  the  glass  of  wine.  On  another  occasion  I  told  him
a  circumstance  of  much  interest  four  different  times,  giving
a  nap  after  each  time,  and  sent  him  away  at  last  quite  uncon¬
scious  of  having  heard  it.  Though  he  shows  neither  rigidity
nor  catalepsy,  I  can  mesmerise  a  single  limb  or  a  portion  of
a  limb  with  one  pass,  so  as  to  render  it  perfectly  insensible
to  pain,  he  being  wide  awake  at  the  time.  The  same  thing
happens  with  several  other  patients ;  they  could  look  at  their
own  arm  or  leg  whilst  being  amputated  without  feeling  the
slightest  pain.  Some  of  our  opponents  may  call  this  rather
a  bold  assertion.  I  can  only  say  let  them  take  the  trouble  to
practise  mesmerism  for  themselves,  and  they  will  very  soon
be  convinced ;  but  it  is  the  fashion  with  most  of  these  wor¬
thies  to  decline  believing  all  the  phenomena  of  mesmerism,
because  these  are  at  variance  with  their  common  sense — with¬
out  even  deigning  to  witness  them.  How  ridiculous  people
make  themselves  when  they  talk  on  a  subject  of  which  they
have  taken  the  greatest  pains  to  remain  totally  ignorant.


by  Mr.  Chandler.


409


May  12th.  I  took  him  to  Mr.  Bell  to  have  his  tooth  ex¬
tracted,  as  described  in  a  former  number  of  The  Zoist  (Yol.
IV.,  p.  209),  and  again  on  the  3rd  of  June,  when  he  had
six  stumps  removed  by  punching,  without  the  slightest  know¬
ledge  of  what  had  occurred.  Neither  did  the  excitement
produce  any  bad  effect  upon  his  disease ;  but  soon  after  this
time  he  became  very  irregular  in  his  attendance,  and  began
to  return  to  his  former  habits  of  frequently  drinking  to  ex¬
cess,  which  produced  a  very  marked  deleterious  effect  upon
his  disease ;  indeed,  it  was  always  considered  by  his  friends
that  intemperance  had  caused  his  fits  in  the  first  instance*
At  the  present  time,  a  debauch  is  almost  certain  to  be  fol¬
lowed  by  an  attack  the  next  day.  I  continued  mesmerising
when  I  could  find  him  until  the  end  of  the  year,  but  seeing
it  impossible  to  prevail  on  him  to  lead  a  sober  life  and  to
attend  me  regularly,  I  gave  him  up  altogether  ;  though  I
feel  certain  that  had  he  become  a  teetotaler  and  been  regu¬
larly  mesmerised,  he  would  have  been  cured ;  so  great  and
rapid  was  the  benefit  during  the  first  part  of  the  time  he  was
mesmerised.

Cure  of  Hiccup  of  twelve  years’  standing.

Miss  C.,  set.  28, — very  tall,  complexion  fair,  temperament
nervous — has  suffered  from  constant  paroxysms  of  hiccup  for
the  last  twelve  years.  She  has  scarcely  passed  a  day  without
an  attack  of  longer  or  shorter  duration,  and  more  frequently
two  or  three.  The  disease  was  first  occasioned  by  fright ;  in
other  respects  she  is  in  perfect  health,  though  when  an  attack
of  hiccup  is  approaching  she  becomes  completely  prostrate,  and
is  obliged  to  give  up  whatever  she  may  be  doing.  It  is  always
preceded  by  a  very  unpleasant  sensation  in  the  chest  and
great  lowness  of  spirits ;  when  the  hiccup  comes,  these  symp¬
toms  are  immediately  relieved.  It  is  evidently  of  an  hyste¬
rical  character,  and  she  has  been  recommended  and  often
urged  to  try  mesmerism  for  the  last  four  years,  but  has
always  objected  because  she  had  a  great  dislike  for  any  one
to  know  that  she  had  been  put  under  its  influence :  however,
having  at  different  times  taken  vast  quantities  of  drugs  with¬
out  the  slightest  benefit,  she  at  length  consented  to  submit.

Sept.  14tli,  1847.  I  commenced  mesmerising  her;  the
eyelids  dropped  in  twenty  minutes,  and  continued  to  re-open
and  close  as  long  as  I  continued  the  passes ;  she  said  after¬
wards  that  the  disposition  to  close  the  eyes  was  irresistible.

15th.  Finding  that  the  present  stated  time  of  the  attack
is  a  quarter  before  5  p.m.,  I  determined  to  mesmerise  at  half¬
past  4.  The  eyelids  dropped  in  fifteen  minutes,  but  she  did


410


Cure  of  Hiccup  with  Mesmerism,


not  remain  permanently  asleep.  She  had  no  symptom  of
hiccup  the  whole  evening.

16th.  It  was  not  convenient  for  her  to  be  mesmerised
until  7 ;  the  consequence  was,  she  had  her  attack  at  5,  which
lasted  until  I  commenced  making  passes.  The  eyelids  closed
in  ten  minutes,  and  remained  almost  permanently  closed
whilst  I  continued.

17th.  Mesmerised  at  ten  minutes  to  5;  she  had  just
begun  to  have  slight  symptoms  of  the  attack.  The  eyes
closed  permanently  in  six  minutes ;  after  a  quarter  of  an  hour
I  spoke  to  her,  and  she  awoke :  said  she  felt  the  effect  much
quicker  and  stronger  to-night,  but  was  quite  conscious  all  the
time  she  appeared  to  be  asleep.  No  further  symptom  this
evening,  though  the  attack  has  usually  continued  till  bed-time.

18th.  Mesmerised  at  5  :  no  symptom  of  an  attack.  She
has  also  lost  an  unpleasant  feeling  as  though  an  attack  were
approaching,  immediately  after  breakfast,  that  has  occurred
for  some  time  past.

19th.  She  went  out  of  town  for  the  day,  and  was  not
mesmerised  till  9  p.m.  She  had  very  slight  symptoms  of  an
attack  at  7.

20th.  Mesmerised  at  half-past  7 :  had  a  slight  warning  at
5,  but  it  soon  passed  off.

25th.  Mesmerised  daily  at  a  quarter  to  5,  except  one  day,
when  she  had  a  slight  attack  at  about  7,  which  lasted  only  a
few  minutes.

29th.  Mesmerised  daily :  no  attack.  She  asked  me  this
evening  whether  mesmerism  had  anything  to  do  with  making
her  sleep  at  night :  she  has  for  a  long  time  passed  most  rest¬
less  nights,  and  now  she  sleeps  the  whole  night  without
waking.  This  question,  coming  spontaneously,  was  very  im¬
portant  and  interesting  ;  for  her  general  health  being  so  good,
it  had  never  occurred  to  me  to  ask  her  anything  about  her
sleeping  at  night.  It  is  a  very  common  and  early  effect  of
mesmerism  to  produce  good  nights.

Oct.  4th.  She  still  continues  without  hiccup,  but  has
occasionally  a  little  globus  hystericus;  to  relieve  which,  I
provide  her  with  a  bottle  of  mesmerised  water,  a  sip  of  which
immediately  relieves  her.  I  can  now  omit  mesmerising  her  a
day  without  any  bad  effect,  and  she  begins  to  feel  the  great¬
est  confidence  in  the  remedy.

9th.  Having  occasion  to  leave  town  for  two  days,  I  left
her  a  bottle  of  mesmerised  water  as  a  substitute,  which  how¬
ever  she  scarcely  required,  being  so  much  better.  She  now
sleeps  in  about  two  minutes,  but  does  not  entirely  lose  her
consciousness.  I  can,  by  means  of  local  passes,  very  nearly


by  Mr.  Chandler.


411


remove  sensation  from  any  part  of  the  body ;  and  no  doubt,
by  persevering  for  some  time,  I  could  render  any  part  to¬
tally  insensible  to  pain :  but,  as  I  have  no  particular  object
in  so  doing,  I  shall  not  waste  time  on  the  experiment.  I  am
only  intent  on  curing  her  disease.

20th.  I  have  only  mesmerised  her  every  alternate  day
since  last  report.  She  remains  quite  well ;  and,  as  a  proof
that  her  health  is  improving,  all  her  friends  compliment  her,
on  her  improved  appearance,  without  knowing  the  cause,  as
no  one  but  her  immediate  relations  know  that  she  is  being
mesmerised.

Nov.  5th.  She  has  been  mesmerised  every  second  or  third
day,  and  remains  quite  well,  not  having  had  hiccup  for  six
weeks,  which  is  a  much  longer  time  than  she  has  ever  re¬
mained  well  before.  She  has  now  left  town  for  a  week.

Dec.  6th.  The  week  has  been  converted  into  a  month,
during  which  time  she  has  remained  perfectly  well.

Dec.  14th.  As  she  still  remains  free  from  her  troublesome
disease,  I  think  I  may  fairly  consider  her  cured.  At  any
rate,  should  there  be  a  return  at  any  future  time,  it  will
always  be  under  the  command  of  mesmerism,  just  as  much
as  other  diseases  are  commanded  by  their  appropriate  re¬
medies.

This  appears  a  very  good  opportunity  of  again  alluding  to
the  subject  of  common  hiccup  being  relieved  instantly  by  a
few  mesmeric  passes,  as  I  before  mentioned  ( Zoist ,  Yol.  IV.,
p.  574).  I  have  frequently  repeated  the  experiment,  and
have  prevailed  on  other  persons  to  do  the  same,  and  have
never  found  it  to  fail;  there  is  seldom  more  than  one  hiccup
after  the  first  pass,  let  them  have  been  ever  so  violent  pre¬
viously.  I  have  also  carried  the  experiment  a  step  further.
On  several  occasions  I  have  been  attacked  with  hiccup  in  the
street  from  walking  fast  soon  after  dinner,  and  I  have  always
instantly  relieved  them  by  making  two  or  three  mesmeric
passes  before  my  own  face  as  I  walked.  Let  me  beg  of  our
worthy  opponents  just  to  try  these  easy  experiments  them¬
selves,  rather  than  call  them  tomfoolery  at  a  venture,  as  they
are  pleased  to  do  with  most  mesmeric  phenomena.

Thomas  Chandler.

58,  Paradise  Street,  Rotherhithe.

P.S.  I  am  happy  to  find  mesmerism  making  such  pro¬
gress.  I  seldom  meet  any  person  now  who  has  not  some
sort  of  belief  in  it,  and  I  am  happy  to  have  been  able  to
strengthen  that  belief  in  many  instances.  Even  medical
men,  from  various  parts  of  town,  are  frequently  sending


412


The  decline  and  fall  of


requests  to  be  allowed  to  witness  cases ;  so  that  the  members
of  the  profession  are  beginning  to  open  their  eyes,  in  spite  of
the  Lancet,  which  has  been  so  long  endeavouring  to  keep
them  in  the  dark.  I  expect  the  editor  of  that  time-serving
journal  will  ere  long  find  it  expedient  insensibly  to  change
his  tone.


XVII.  The  decline  and  fall  of  the  Edinburgh  Phrenological

Journal.

For  some  years  cerebral  physiologists  have  been  compelled
to  regret  the  manifest  want  of  vigour  to  be  observed  in  the
pages  of  the  Phrenological  Journal.  The  freshness  of  joyous
youth  was  soon  succeeded  by  symptoms  of  a  premature  decay,
and,  at  the  early  age  of  twenty-four  years,  the  journal,  esta¬
blished  for  the  advancement  of  cerebral  physiology  and  the
promotion  of  moral  science,  has  been  compelled  to  sound  its
own  death-note  by  registering  the  appearance  of  its  last
number.  Having  the  physiology  of  man  and  the  interests  of
humanity  for  a  theme — having  to  make  cerebral  physiology
enlighten  moralists  and  legislators,  teachers  of  youth  and
criminal  jurists — having  the  glorious  task  to  teach  mankind
the  causes  of  their  thoughts  and  actions,  and  the  laws  which
govern  their  evolution — having  to  set  forth  all  the  phases  of
that  neglected  and  unworked  problem  of  human  duties,  which
even  this  much  vaunted  intellectual  age  leaves  uncared  for, —
we  say,  with  this  great  work  of  regeneration  in  view,  and
to  be  accomplished,  the  marvel  is,  how  the  enthusiasm  of  its
readers  could  ever  be  allowed  to  flag,  or  its  contents  ever
become  of  that  common-place  character,  as  to  make  the  an¬
nouncement  of  its  suppression  by  no  means  a  matter  of  sur¬
prize,  and  much  less  a  subject  for  lamentation.  Strikingly
wanting  in  the  energy,  ability,  and  above  all  the  earnestness,
which  characterized  its  early  numbers,  its  periodical  appear¬
ance  has  long  ceased  to  be  looked  forward  to  with  interest  by
its  readers.  Kept  on  its  last  legs  in  a  state  of  helpless  decre¬
pitude,  by  the  reluctance  of  many  of  its  early  subscribers  to
allow  their  sets  to  be  broken,  or  from  early  association  and
good-will  to  the  cause,  its  cessation  will  be  generally  felt  to
be  a  boon  rather  than  a  misfortune,  a  subject  for  congratula¬
tion  rather  than  regret.  A  regard  for  truth  necessitates  us  to
say  that  it  has  not  fallen  before  it  deserved.  Never  exceeding
its  six  sheets  of  matter,  scarcely  ever  presenting  its  readers
with  an  illustration,  containing  no  articles  from  the  pen  of  its
editor,  it  has  for  a  long  period  existed  as  if  for  the  purpose  of


the  Edinburgh  Phrenological  Journal .


413


exhibiting  to  the  world  with  how  small  a  modicum  of  exertion
a  scientific  journal  could  be  kept  going ,  or  as  if  its  sole  func¬
tion  began  and  ended  with  furnishing  a  medium  for  the  ad¬
vertisement  of  the  publications  of  its  proprietor.  The  sceptre
of  criticism  it  has  long  abandoned,  as  if  from  a  sense  that  its
arms  were  too  nerveless  to  sway  it  with  effect;  and  those
who  have  sought  guidance  and  instruction  from  some  central
authority  amidst  the  conflict  of  opinion  and  belief,  have
sought  it  in  vain.

Its  work  is  finished — its  career  has  closed.  For  a  few
years  after  its  establishment  it  moved  on  with  right  good-will
and  fixity  of  purpose ;  but  even  at  this  period  there  was  occa¬
sionally  a  temporizing  spirit  manifested  in  many  of  its  arti¬
cles,  and  too  frequent  an  attempt  to  make  truths  which  must
ever  be  unpalatable  to  the  bigoted,  the  prejudiced,  and  the
ignorant,  subservient  to  the  reception  of  the  mere  organology
and  the  belief  in  the  thirty-five  organs.  And  as  regards  the
last  ten  years,  one  would  suppose  that  cerebral  physiology,  as
set  forth  in  that  journal,  had  lost  its  vitality;  for  till  the
recent  articles  by  Mr.  Combe  on  Education,  there  was  a
tameness  which  ill-comported  with  the  inherent  vigour  and
power  of  the  principles  and  doctrines  which  the  science  un¬
folds  and  inculcates.  But  we  must  not  always  judge  of  the
importance  of  natural  facts,  or  of  the  great  value  of  a  science,
by  the  methods  adopted  for  their  promulgation.  We  must
remember  that  history  unfolds  to  us  the  humiliating  fact,  and
even  our  own  daily  experience  proves  the  same,  that  few  men
can  unlearn  what  it  has  cost  them  great  labour  to  attain;  and
that  a  still  smaller  number,  albeit  they  may  profess  again  and
again  their  anxiety  for  the  progress  of  truth  and  the  advance¬
ment  of  science,  can  receive  with  complacency  and  a  philo¬
sophic  spirit,  the  labours  of  their  compeers  who  may  have
outstripped  them  in  the  race.  It  is  this  want  of  cordiality
amongst  men  labouring  in  the  same  cause  which  too  fre¬
quently  retards  for  years  the  reception  of  facts  which  are  of
the  greatest  importance,  and  we  are  sorry  to  say  that  some
cerebral  physiologists  are  peculiarly  open  to  this  remark,  and,
in  our  opinion,  none  more  so  than  the  editor  and  proprietors
of  the  late  Phrenological  Journal.  We  say  all  this  advisedly,
and  we  shall  give  good  reasons  for  our  statement.  We  shall
present  certain  facts  to  our  readers,  and  then  each  individual
can  answer  for  himself  the  query,  Why  has  the  Phrenological
Journal  ceased  to  appear  ?

We  remarked,  in  the  prospectus  which  heralded  the  ap¬
pearance  of  The  Zoist,  that,  "  The  promulgation  of  cerebral
physiology  has  cast  upon  the  world  of  thought  a  flood  of  new


414


The  decline  and  fall  of


ideas,  new  views,  and  new  prospects.  But,  instead  of  testing
their  truth,  men  have  been  engaged  in  questioning  their
applicability  to  favourite  doctrines  and  established  ways.  Too
often  those  who  should  have  defended  them,  have  adopted
the  equivocal  and  coward-like  policy  of  endeavouring  to  trim
and  square  them  with  the  standard  of  opinion  for  the  hour,
thus  pandering  to  ignorance,  and  sacrificing  truth  at  the
shrine  of  a  mistaken  expediency ;  for  vain  and  fruitless  will
ever  be  the  attempt  to  amalgamate  the  facts  and  inductions
of  science  with  the  dreams  and  chimeras  of  a  bygone,  ill-
informed  age.”  Thoroughly  convinced  of  the  truth  of  this
statement,  we  have  endeavoured,  in  several  articles  which
have  appeared  in  this  journal,  to  place  a  few  of  the  conclu¬
sions  to  which  the  facts  of  cerebral  physiology  inevitably  lead
before  our  readers,  and  we  rejoice  to  find  that  Mr.  Combe  is
now  convinced  of  the  necessity  of  discontinuing  a  mere  system
of  defence  when  our  doctrines  are  attacked,  and  that  he  is
now  engaged  in  carrying  the  Avar  into  the  enemy’s  camp,  and
thus  endeavouring  to  make  the  tree  which  has  been  so  long
under  cultivation  bear  its  legitimate  fruit.

“  Oh  !  for  the  guilty  husbandman’s  default
Bring  not  thyself  to  execrate  the  plant.”

Mr.  Combe’s  papers  on  Education,  and  some  papers  in  the
People’s  Journal  by  one  of  the  late  proprietors  of  the  Phreno¬
logical  Journal ,  clearly  indicate  the  character  of  the  thoughts
which  their  brains  would  have  cast  forth ;  but  till  the  present
moment  they  appear  to  have  been  wanting  in  that  most
essential  element  of  the  philosophic  character, — the  courage
to  avow  the  true  thoughts  which  within  them  lie.  But  better
late  than  never.  Better  that  the  thoughts  come  forth  at  the
ninth  hour,  than  that  they  come  forth  not  at  all.  Better,
far  better,  that  men  Avould  always  wait  till  they  can  wield
with  earnestness  the  logic  necessary  to  prove  their  position,
than  that  they  content  themselves  with  a  f  canny/  yea-nay,
half-and-half  kind  of  advocacy,  which,  much  as  it  may  assist
their  temporary  exaltation,  is  certainly  not  the  way  to  ad¬
vance  truth,  or  to  promote  the  real,  as  contradistinguished
from  the  apparent  and  momentary,  interests  of  humanity.
It  is  this  prostration  to  the  opinions  of  the  many — it  is  this
dallying  with  sacred  truth — this  determination  to  give  the
world  just  as  little  as  possible  above  what  the  world  is  pre¬
pared  to  receive — this  squaring  one’s  opinions  to  the  popular
errors,  and  only  just  allowing  sufficient  truth  to  appear  to
save  one’s  character  and  consistency  as  a  disciple  of  progress —
it  is  this  system  which  we  have  always  denounced,  and  con-


the  Edinburgh  Phrenological  Journal.  415

tended  to  be  a  disgrace  to  the  professors  of  cerebral  physiology.
It  is  not  by  mutilating  truths  that  man  can  render  them  sub¬
servient  to  his  real  interests.  Truth  can  bear  the  light,  and
should  be  placed  in  the  most  transparent  position  ;  error  must
be  made  to  bear  it,  and  share  the  same  scrutiny.  To  Mr.
Combe,  therefore,  we  say  speed  onwards.  Make  up  for  the
loss  of  the  last  few  years  by  an  increasing  energy  of  purpose,
and  by  a  determination  to  fight  manfully  with  those  errors
which  oppress  and  retard  the  progress  of  humanity.  Let
there  be  no  delay.  Let  not  your  attention  be  distracted  by
party  cries  either  on  the  right  hand  or  on  the  left,  and  look
for  no  reward  except  the  approval  of  your  own  conscience,
and  the  conviction  that  you  are  assisting  to  disseminate  cor¬
rect  principles,  and  in  so  far  promoting  the  happiness  and
freedom  of  this  and  succeeding  generations.

These  alone  are  the  sentiments  which  should  stimulate
cerebral  physiologists.  They  should  bring  all  things  to  the
test  of  their  philosophy,  and  fear  not  the  opinions  or  the
denunciations  of  the  interested  and  ignorant.  They  should
remember  that  “  the  doubts  of  a  wise  man  are  a  more  pre¬
cious  legacy  than  the  convictions  of  a  fool,  and  that  philo¬
sophy  will  not  end  in  truth  which  does  not  begin  in  scep¬
ticism.”  Courage,  then,  we  say  to  our  northern  friend ;  and
since  we  know  that  he  now  entertains  similar  views  to  our¬
selves,  and  since  he  has  always  been  considered  the  phreno¬
logical  leader,  right  glad  shall  we  be  to  still  stand  in  the  same
ranks  with  him,  and  to  wield  our  pen  in  support  of  the  same
efforts,  and  for  the  same  glorious  object.  As  that  great
thought-producer,  Carlyle,  says,  “  Honour  to  the  strong  man
in  these  ages,  who  has  shaken  himself  loose  of  shams,  and
is  something.  For  in  the  way  of  being  worthy ,  the  first  con¬
dition  surely  is  that  one  be.  Let  cant  cease,  at  all  risks  and
at  all  costs  :  till  cant  cease,  nothing  else  can  begin.  Of  human
criminals  in  these  centuries,  writes  the  moralist,  I  find  but
one  unforgiveable — the  quack.”  We  re-echo  the  cry,  down
with  shams  and  cant,  quackery  and  no  facts  !  Let  doctrines
which  are  hurtful,  as  well  as  those  which  are  only  doubtful  in
their  tendency,  be  cast  alike  into  the  crucible,  and  by  the
refining  logic  which  our  science  enables  us  to  wield,  let  truth
alone  come  forth  dressed  in  her  simple  garb,  and  supported
by  the  facts  and  arguments  which  alone  deserve  her  com¬
panionship.

To  return  to  the  deceased  journal.  Notwithstanding  the
able  and  eloquent  manner  in  which  the  founders  of  the  Phreno¬
logical  Journal  expounded  the  causes  which  indispose  mankind
from  modifying  the  opinions  they  have  adopted  in  youth,  and


416


The  decline  and  fall  of


the  skilful  mental  analysis  they  gave  of  the  mode  in  which
the  envy  and  self-esteem,  vanity  and  jealousy  of  the  teachers
of  anatomy  and  physiology  operated  in  retarding  the  recep¬
tion  of  cerebral  physiology  by  preventing  them  from  descend¬
ing  from  the  elevation  of  their  curule  chairs  to  become  again
pupils, — never  before  was  exhibited  to  the  world  a  more
remarkable  example  of  a  number  of  individuals  allowing  a
certain  set  of  ideas  to  become  stereotyped,  and  having  their
brains  sealed  up  to  the  further  reception  of  truth,  than  has
been  afforded  by  the  proceedings  of  the  conductors  of  the
Phrenological  Journal.  Embracing  as  comparatively  young-
men  with  a  happy  docility  the  twenty-seven  organs  of  Gall
and  the  nine  of  Spurzheim, — with  the  death  of  their  masters
their  perceptive  faculties  appear  to  have  suffered  paralysis,
and  what  is  still  more  to  be  regretted,  they  themselves  to
have  become  blind  to  the  duty  which  devolved  upon  them
as  journalists,  of  laying  before  their  readers  the  facts  and
opinions  collected  and  published  by  younger  and  more  active
brains.

It  is  to  this  latter  circumstance  we  imagine  that  their
diminished  circulation  must  in  a  great  degree  be  attributed.
When  subscribers  accidentally  learn  through  other  channels
important  and  interesting  facts,  the  knowledge  of  which  has
been  withheld  from  them  for  years  through  the  partizanship
and  jealousy  of  the  conductors  of  their  own  journal,  dissatis¬
faction  can  scarcely  fail  to  be  experienced.  We  promised
just  now  to  enable  each  individual  to  answer  for  himself  the
query, — why  has  the  Phrenological  Journal  ceased  to  appear  ?
Surely  the  facts  we  shall  now  relate  at  any  rate  indicate
the  necessity  for  the  removal  of  the  conductors  of  such  a
journal.

In  our  fourth  number  we  presented  to  our  readers  a  short
review  of  A  Speculative  Analysis  of  the  Mental  Functions,  by
Mr.  Prideaux.  We  also  specially  directed  the  attention  of
our  northern  contemporary  to  the  pamphlet,  because  we  be¬
lieved  it  contained  several  original  views,  and  suggestions  of
considerable  importance.  From  that  time  to  the  present,
exactly  four  years,  not  one  word  has  appeared  in  the  pages  of
the  Phrenological  Journal  for  the  purpose  of  calling  the  atten¬
tion  of  practical  men  to  the  suggested  new  organs.  We  have
heard  very  recently  in  society  more  than  one  individual  express
his  indignation  in  the  strongest  terms  at  having  been  for
several  years  deprived  of  what  he  now  regards  as  most  valu¬
able  knowledge,  through  the  editors  sacrificing  their  duty  to
science  and  their  subscribers,  by  suppressing  all  notice  of  this
gentleman's  contributions,  and  surely  the  complaint  is  not


the  Edinburgh  Phrenological  Journal.


417


made  without  ample  foundation.  That  Mr.  Watson,*  who
conducted  the  journal  for  three  years,  and  during  whose  edi¬
torship  Mr.  Prideaux’s  views  were  published,  should  have
done  so,  need  surprise  no  one,  but  that  such  a  course  should
be  not  only  sanctioned  but  imitated  by  Mr.  Combe,  has  we
confess  excited  our  astonishment.  If  there  be  a  tacit  under¬
standing  between  the  editors  of  a  scientific  journal  and  its
subscribers,  that  the  former  shall  place  the  latter  “  au  courant ”
with  all  the  new  ideas  of  the  day  having  reference  to  their
own  peculiar  topic,  (and  we  apprehend  it  will  be  universally
admitted  that  such  is  the  case,)  then  have  the  subscribers  to
the  late  journal  just  ground  of  complaint  against  its  conduc¬
tors  for  keeping  them  in  the  dark  as  to  what  was  going  on
around.

Bad  as  we  consider  this  conduct,  we  have  a  still  more
serious  charge  to  make.  The  October  number  of  the  British
and  Foreign  Medical  Review  for  1846,  contained  a  shallow
but  specious  and  plausible  attack  upon  cerebral  physiology,
which  was  answered  and  demolished  by  Mr.  Prideaux  in  the
January  number  of  The  Zoist.  On  this  occasion  Mr.  P.
brought  forward  and  supported  by  powerful  arguments  many

*  During  the  editorship  of  this  individual,  the  journal  lost  all  pretension  to
be  regarded  as  an  authority,  and  we  believe  it  never  recovered  the  position  it
previously  occupied.  As  a  specimen  of  his  total  incapacity  and  unfitness  for  his
office,  no  stronger  example  could  be  adduced  than  the  history  of  his  misunder¬
standing  with  Mr.  Prideaux.  Mr.  Watson  having  broached  the  preposterous
notion  that  “loudness  was  appreciated  by  the  organ  of  Comparison”  (!  !  !)  and
Mr.  P.  seeing  the  matter  passed  over  in  the  next  number  without  comment,  was
induced  to  protest  against  it,  to  prevent  such  an  absurdity  put  out  under  editorial
authority  from  misleading  youthful  cerebral  physiologists.  Mr.  Watson  in  his
reply  vouchsafed  not  a  single  argument,  but  sheltered  himself  behind  the  au¬
thority  of  Spurzheim.  When  called  upon  however  to  adduce  a  quotation  from
Spurzheim  which  could  justify  him  in  fathering  upon  this  cerebral  physiologist
the  nonsensical  emanations  from  his  own  brain,  although  notoriously  unable  to
do  so,  he  yet  pertinaciously  refused  to  make  the  amende  honorable  to  his  me¬
mory  ;  and  this  scandalous  outrage  upon  justice — the  destroying  of  the  reputation
of  the  dead  to  make  a  shield  to  hide  the  imbecility  of  the  living,  remains  to  the
present  day  unatoned  for  in  the  pages  of  the  Phrenological  Journal.

One  more  illustration  of  Mr.  Watson’s  editorial  qualifications  and  we  will
take  our  final  leave  of  him.  In  the  sixtieth  number  of  the  journal  he  published
a  scheme  for  estimating  development  proposed  by  a  Mr.  Nichol  of  such  an  in¬
credibly  absurd  nature,  that  in  the  development  of  Greenacre,  which  was  given
as  an  illustration  (!  !),  it  characterized  Amativeness,  Combativeness,  Destructive¬
ness,  and  Secretiveness,  which  are  amongst  the  largest  organs  in  the  head,  as
each  three  degrees  below  average  (!  !)  Acquisitiveness,  perhaps  the  largest  organ,
as  four  degrees  belov;  average  (!  !)  and  Time  and  Tune,  decidedly  amongst  the
smallest  organs,  as  respectively  one  and  two  degrees  above  average  (!  !) .  Let  us
however  be  just  to  Mr.  Watson.  Mr.  Combe  pronounces  “  that  he  conducted
the  journal  with  great  ability .”  In  his  eagerness  to  prop  up  Mr.  Watson,
Mr.  Combe  appears  to  make  no  scruple  of  throwing  overboard  the  reputation  of
his  old  friend  and  master,  Spurzheim,  and  thus  sacrificing  the  interests  of  science
and  truth.


418


The  decline  and  fall  of


new  views  and  ideas  of  the  most  interesting  and  important
character,  amongst  which  we  may  particularize  the  doctrines,

*

That  the  central  lobe  of  the  cerebellum,  or  vermiform
process,  is  the  ganglion  of  the  nerves  of  muscular  resistance ,
the  great  nervous  centre  of  the  dynamic  system  of  voluntary
motion,  or  voluntary  dynamic  ganglion ;  (in  the  same  way  as
the  true  spinal  cord  is  the  centre  of  the  involuntary  or  excited
system,  and  may  be  termed  the  involuntary  dynamic  gang¬
lion  ;)  and  that  it  has  for  its  vegetative  function  the  presiding
over  the  nutrition  of  the  voluntary  muscles.

That  the  great  lateral  lobes  of  the  cerebellum  are  the
ganglia  of  the  nerves  of  common  sensation  passing  from  the
skin  and  always  developed  in  the  ratio  of  its  sensibility,  and
that  they  have  for  their  vegetative  function  the  control  of  the
vegetative  function  of  the  latter.*

That  the  corpus  callosum  is  not  a  commissure,  but  a  de¬
cussation  formed  by  the  fibres  of  each  hemisphere  crossing  to
enter  the  ganglion  of  the  opposite  side.

That  the  cerebral  surface  or  brain  proper  (excluding  the
thalamus  and  corpus  striatum)  is  not  a  ganglion,  as  now  incor¬
rectly  named,  but  an  organ  belonging  to  the  same  class  as
the  nervous  expansions  at  the  extremity  of  the  nerves  of  the
external  senses,  though  constituting  a  genus  apart.  That
designating  the  brain  a  ganglion,  betrays  a  total  misconcep¬
tion  of  its  analogy  and  relationship  with  other  portions  of  the
nervous  system,  and  is  in  fact  a  similar  misapplication  of
language  to  that  which  would  be  exhibited  by  denominating
the  nervous  expansion  of  the  skin,  pituitary  membrane,  or
retina,  ganglions.

It  is  almost  superfluous  for  us  to  inform  our  readers  that
should  these  views  be  verified  they  must  occupy  the  very  first
rank  amongst  the  physiological  discoveries  of  the  present  era.
Yet,  will  it  be  believed  that  these,  by  far  the  most  important  ad¬
ditions,  if  established,  to  our  knowledge  of  the  functions  of  the
nervous  system  which  have  been  presented  to  the  world  during
the  existence  of  the  Phrenological  Journal,  have  been  passed  over

*  This  function  Mr.  Prideaux  now  believes  to  be  the  changing  the  uric  acid
formed  by  the  oxydation  of  the  tissues  containing  protein  into  urea.  Where  the
lateral  lobes  of  the  cerebellum  are  wanting,  or  only  rudimentarily  developed,  as
in  birds  and  serpents,  this  change  does  not  take  place.  Mr.  P.  is  inclined  to
conclude  from  several  recent  experiments  that  the  normal  quantity  of  uric  acid  in
the  urine  of  man  varies  with  the  size  of  the  lateral  lobes  of  the  cerebellum,  being
least  where  these  are  largest,  and  also  that  individuals  in  whom  these  ganglia  are
largely  developed  suffer  more  disturbance  of  the  general  health  from  urinary
affections  than  those  oppositely  organized.


the  Edinburgh  Phrenological  Journal.


419


by  it  without  one  loord  of  notice ,  and  such  of  its  readers  as
have  not  been  fortunate  enough  to  see  The  Zoist,  have  been
left  in  total  ignorance  of  the  fact  of  any  such  doctrines  hav¬
ing  been  propounded  !  Now,  we  ask,  as  cerebral  physiolo¬
gists,  have  we  not  just  grounds  for  complaint  ?  After  such
gross  dereliction  of  duty,  ought  not  the  Phrenological  Journal
to  disappear  from  the  list  of  truth-loving  periodicals?  Has
it  fallen  before  its  time  ?  Could  there  be  a  more  fitting  ter¬
mination  to  ten  years  of  complete  inactivity,  than  the  deter¬
mination  on  the  part  of  its  proprietors  to  burk  the  only  novel
opinions  with  which  cerebral  physiologists  have  been  cheered
since  the  days  of  Gall  ?  And  this  is  done  with  the  cognizance
of  the  man  on  whom  the  mantle  of  Spurzheim  is  said  to  have
fallen  !  Let  us  not  again  refer  to  the  conduct  of  those  who
opposed  Gall,  for  they  denied  his  facts  and  wrote  works  to
disprove  his  statements ;  they  considered  his  doctrines  as  to
their  tendency  of  sufficient  importance  to  occupy  their  atten¬
tion,  albeit  they  totally  disbelieved  them ;  they  thought  it
right  to  disabuse  men  of  the  absurdities  attempted  to  be
imposed  upon  them,  and  as  teachers  of  physiology  to  set
forth  what  they  considered  to  be  truth ;  they  at  least  fought
manfully,  although  their  strength  was  exhausted  in  a  bad
cause.  But  now  what  do  we  see  ?  Mr.  Combe  and  his  coad¬
jutors  conducting  a  journal  for  the  express  purpose  of  advanc¬
ing  the  philosophy  of  their  great  master,  and  yet  neglecting
to  chronicle  observations  which  may  most  materially  assist  in
perfecting  a  science  which  he  was  conscious  he  left  unfinished.
Is  this  the  way  to  advance  truth  ?  Is  this  the  course  which
Gall  himself  would  have  followed?  Verily,  ye  are  the  un¬
worthy  disciples  of  a  worthy  master.

If  any  one  individual  more  than  another  was  particularly
called  upon  to  notice  these  new  views,  surely  George  Combe,
who  centred  in  his  own  person  the  proprietorship  of  the
Phrenological  Journal ,  and  the  authorship  of  a  work  expressly
devoted  to  the  consideration  of  the  functions  of  the  cerebellum ,
was  that  man.  Why  has  he  not  done  so?  We  know  that
his  conduct  has  by  many  been  attributed  either  to  personal
pique  or  jealousy  at  these  views  appearing  in  a  rival  journal.
For  ourselves  we  put  a  less  reprehensible  construction  upon
it,  and  see  in  his  silence  mere  cowardice,  the  fear  of  commit¬
ting  himself  either  one  way  or  the  other  by  expressing  any
opinion  on  the  subject, — to  avoid  which  he  determined  to  say
nothing.  We  need  scarcely  say  that  the  straightforward  course
to  have  been  pursued,  and  that  which  duty  alike  to  science
and  his  readers  obviously  dictated,  would  have  been  to  have
stated  the  facts  and  arguments  adduced,  and  if  he  hesitated
VOL.  v.  II  h


420


The  decline  and  fall  of


to  commit  himself  by  passing  any  opinion  for  or  against,  to
have  openly  said  so.  At  the  very  least,  the  disciple  of  Gall
might  have  followed  the  example  of  the  opponents  of  Gall,
and  might  have  adopted  an  open  and  candid  course  of
conduct.

We  must  confess  that  for  the  honour  of  our  common
science  we  should  have  preferred  to  have  seen  the  Phreno¬
logical  Journal  pursue  a  course  which  would  have  contrasted
with  that  of  the  other  physiological  periodicals.  That  the
editors  of  the  ordinary  medical  journals  should  carefully  avoid
all  mention  of  a  physiological  discovery  first  announced  to
the  world  in  the  pages  of  The  Zoist  was  to  be  expected.  No
one  acquainted  with  the  ordinary  proceedings  of  these  parties
could  fall  into  the  mistake  of  supposing  that  any  sense  of
their  duty  to  science  and  their  readers,  or  any  consideration
of  justice  or  fair  play,  would  be  allowed  to  interfere  with  the
display  of  their  animosity  towards  a  journal,  which  however
they  may  affect  to  despise  it,  is  in  reality  the  object  of  their
fear  and  hate.  We  can  readily  imagine  the  mortification
they  must  feel  at  having  to  come  to  the  pages  of  The  Zoist
(as  come  they  must)  to  learn  their  physiology,  and  O  !  climax
of  humiliation,  submit  to  be  instructed  by  one  of  those  doubly
hair- brained  visionaries,  a  cerebral  physiologist  and  mes¬
merist.  Verily  they  have  a  most  unpalatable  potion  before
them,  and  many-  will  be  the  wry  faces  they  will  make  before
stern  necessity  compels  them  to  swallow  it.  Poor  creatures,
they  have  chosen  their  part,  which  is  to  foster  the  existing
ignorance  and  bigotry  of  their  readers,  and  cry,  “  Great  is
Diana  of  the  Ephesians,”  for  their  own  pecuniary  profit.
When  we  reflect  that  as  men  become  enlightened  no  tools
are  so  contemptuously  cast  aside  as  those  which  have  pan¬
dered  to  their  own  prejudices,  we  cannot  doubt  as  to  the  fate
which  time  has  in  store  for  these  expediency-mongers.  Over¬
whelmed  with  disgrace  and  well-merited  contempt,  and  un¬
supported  in  their  downfall  by  the  consciousness  of  having
acted  honestly,  they  will  become  objects  of  pity  to  their
opponents.

There  are  other  points  on  which  we  could  dilate,  but  we
forbear.  And  yet  we  cannot  avoid  referring  to  the  course
which  the  conductors  of  the  late  journal  pursued  with  regard
to  mesmerism.  After  this  subject  was  brought  prominently
before  cerebral  physiologists  by  Dr.  Engledue  in  his  address
to  the  Phrenological  Association  in  June,  1842,  the  conduc¬
tors  of  the  journal  pronounced  no  opinion  which  can  in  any
way  be  considered  authoritative,  till  the  most  able  and  elo¬
quent  paper  by  Dr.  Gregory  appeared  in  their  pages  exactly


the  Edinburgh  Phrenological  Journal.


421


four  years  after.  They  certainly  reported  the  opinions  of
others,  and  referred  to  several  of  the  discussions  which  hap¬
pened  from  time  to  time,  but  they  cautiously  abstained  from
committing  themselves  to  an  opinion,  although  the  subject
was  one  on  which  they  could  have  satisfied  themselves  by  a
few  hours,  nay,  a  few  minutes  investigation.  And  yet  what
did  they  permit  Dr.  Weir  to  do?  To  sully  their  pages  with
a  gross  attack  on  the  reputation  of  Dr.  Elliotson,  on  one  who
had  worked  hand  in  hand  with  them  for  years  in  disseminat¬
ing  the  truths  of  cerebral  physiology,  and  who  they  knew
from  previous  experience  to  be  a  most  careful  and  pains-taking
observer  of  facts.  They  permitted  Dr.  Weir*  to  sneer  at  his
character  regarding  a  subject  on  which  all  truth-loving  men
should  have  come  manfully  forward  to  support  him.  They
permitted,  without  one  word  of  remonstrance,  Dr.  Weir  to
doubt  the  accuracy  of  his  facts,  when  they  knew  that  he  had
not  adopted  measures  calculated  to  render  him  a  competent
judge.  They  permitted  Dr.  Weir  to  insinuate  that  he  was
wanting  in  the  first  element  of  a  philosophic  character,  the
love  of  truth, — and  that  he  could  not  rise  above  the  tempta¬
tion  of  the  moment  and  declare  his  observations  to  be  faulty,
if  he  really  thought  them  so.  They  permitted  Dr.  Weir  to
state  to  the  world  in  the  pages  of  their  own  journal,  that
most  probably  there  were  other  reasons  for  the  persecution
he  had  received,  than  his  mere  attachment  to  mesmeric  truth,
when  they  knew  perfectly  well,  that  there  is  no  instance  on
record  since  the  days  of  Harvey,  where  a  man  has  experienced
such  ungrateful  treatment  from  his  professional  brethren  and
the  public,  for  no  other  reason  than  his  ardent  attachment  to
what  he  believed  to  be  truth,  and  what  the  world  now  recog¬
nizes  as  truth.  Men,  knowing  the  fate  of  Gall, — men,
acutely  feeling  the  persecution  he  received  and  which  com¬
pelled  him  to  leave  his  country, — men,  engaged  for  twenty-
five  years  in  trumpetting  forth  the  grandeur  of  his  character —
his  incessant  appeal  to  facts — his  cry  when  apparently  over¬
whelmed  by  the  number  of  his  opponents,  “  This  is  truth,

THOUGH  OPPOSED  TO  THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  AGES,” - We  SRV,

men  who  could  feel  and  apparently  admire  the  moral  gran¬
deur  of  all  this,  and  yet  allow  themselves  to  be  led  away  in  a
course  of  conduct  directly  opposed  to  its  spirit,  by  permitting
one  of  their  brethren  to  be  denounced  and  crushed  without

*  We  are  not  at  all  surprized  to  learn  that  Dr.  Weir  has  been  compelled  to
discontinue  his  course  of  lectures  on  cerebral  physiology  in  Anderson’s  Uni¬
versity  at  Glasgow.  It  appears  that  he  would  have  lectured  to  empty  benches  if
he  had  attempted  to  deliver  another  course.  From  the  first  we  considered  the
selection  of  Dr.  Weir  most  unfortunate,  and  the  result  clearly  proves  the  accuracy
of  our  surmise.  See  No.  XII.,  p.  544.


422


The  decline  and  fall  of


uttering  one  word  to  mark  their  detestation  of  such  proceed¬
ings,  deserve  to  suffer  in  the  opinion  of  all  conscientious
men,  and  the  organ  which  they  made  subservient  to  their
purposes  merits,  what  it  has  received,  extinction.

But  enough  of  fault-finding.  In  the  present  instance,  it
was  a  duty ;  and,  at  the  call  of  duty,  we  shall  never  flinch,
although  we  may  possibly  give  offence  to  those  whose  con¬
duct  we  criticize.  We  have  detailed  simple  facts,  we  believe
we  have  stated  nothing  but  the  truth.  “  If  an  offence  come
out  of  the  truth,  better  is  it  that  the  offence  come,  than  the
truth  be  concealed.”  Although  we  do  not  hesitate  freely  to
censure  Mr.  Combe  where  we  think  the  interests  of  truth
demand  it,  we  are  as  ready  as  his  warmest  friends  to  admit
the  great  extent  to  which  his  clear,  eloquent,  and  popular
writings  on  cerebral  physiology  have  contributed  to  spread  an
acquaintance  with  the  outlines  of  the  science  wherever  the
English  tongue  is  spoken.  With  this  avowal  our  commenda¬
tion  must  end,  for  it  is  our  deliberate  belief  that  as  a  science
its  progress  towards  completeness  has  been  retarded  by  the
writings  of  the  Edinburgh  school.  Oppressed  almost  from
birth  by  the  intellectual  torpor  generated  by  the  supposed
possession  of  a  comparatively  perfect  system,  this  strange
delusion,  disseminated  by  their  writings  and  marked  busts ,
has  been  like  an  incubus  upon  the  science,  and  stopped  its
upward  growth.  On  this  point  our  views  so  entirely  agree
with  those  published  long  since  by  Mr.  Prideaux,  that  we
shall  take  the  liberty  of  quoting  them,  more  especially  as
we  are  convinced  that  the  great  body  of  cerebral  physiolo¬
gists  in  this  country  still  stand  greatly  in  need  of  being
enlightened  on  the  points  to  which  they  refer.

“In  considering  the  lamentably  little  progress  which  has  been
made  of  late  years  in  phrenology,  it  naturally  becomes  a  subject  for
enquiry,  whether  this  want  of  progression  is  to  be  attributed  to  there
being  little  left  behind  to  be  discovered,  or  to  some  defect  in  the
ability  or  industry  of  the  cultivators  of  the  science,  and  the  methods
they  have  adopted  for  its  extension.  I  believe  that  the  former  sup¬
position  cannot  be  for  a  moment  entertained  by  any  one  who  takes
an  enlarged  and  comprehensive  view  of  the  subject ;  and  individually,
I  do  not  hesitate  to  express  a  very  decided  opinion,  that  the  chief
cause  of  a  stationariness,  which  all  must  regret,  is  to  be  traced  to
the  false  and  exaggerated  notions  entertained  and  promulgated  by
phrenologists,  with  regard  to  the  present  state  of  perfection  of  their
science,  and  more  especially  to  the  absurd  and  insane  practice  of
appropriating  the  whole  surface  of  the  head  to  the  organs  at  present
discovered,  by  stretching  one  into  the  other,  not  only  without  a
shadow  of  evidence,  but  absolutely  in  defiance  of  the  outline  pre¬
sented  by  nature  in  those  very  cases  of  extraordinary  development


the  Edinburgh  Phrenological  Journal.


423


■which  led  to  the  discovery  of  the  functions  of  the  organs.  A  con¬
nexion,  for  example,  was  discovered  between  the  tendency  to  fight,
and  a  circular  elevation,  just  behind  each  ear,  and  also  between  the
fondness  for  children,  and  two  rounded  prominences,  just  above  the
occipital  spine — a  space  of  about  two  inches  intervened  between  the
extreme  edges  of  these  separate  organs  ;  and  a  maxim  often  stated
by  phrenologists  is,  that  an  organ,  when  prominently  developed,
occupies  a  larger  extent  of  surface  than  usually  belongs  to  it,  yet  in
delineating  these  two  organs  on  the  bust,  instead  of  slightly  con¬
tracting  their  limits,  in  conformity  with  the  above  rule,  with  a  con¬
summate  folly  unparalleled  in  the  annals  of  any  other  science,  they
were  extended  till  they  met,  in  order  that  philosophers  might  see  no
unsightly  chasms  and  vacancies  in  the  heads  of  the  little  images
with  which  they  amused  themselves.  It  is  really  difficult  to  treat  of
a  proceeding  so  preposterous  and  so  inimical  to  the  progress  of  know¬
ledge,  with  common  patience  ;  the  aspiration  for  completeness  or
perfection  which  has  prompted  it,  may  be  a  very  laudable  feeling
in  itself,  but  when  it  so  altogether  outruns  discretion  as  to  have
recourse  to  means  so  absolutely  suicidal  of  its  own  objects,  it  becomes
a  curse  to  the  science  about  which  it  employs  itself.

“  I  regard  the  present  arrangement  of  the  organs,  not  only  as
not  warranted  by  observation,  and  opposed  to  the  analogy  to  be
drawn  from  their  respective  sizes,  but  also  at  variance  with  what
1  believe  to  be  the  fact,  viz.,  that  many  more  than  are  now  recog¬
nized,  are  required  to  account  for  the  varieties  of  mental  character
exhibited  by  mankind,  and  considering  the  extent  to  which  the  prac¬
tice  of  extending  them  has  been  carried,  I  think  there  is  every  reason
to  believe,  that  if  they  were  reduced  within  proper  limits,  full  one-
fourth  part  of  the  surface  of  the  head  would  be  unappropriated,
and  were  this  accomplished,  phrenologists  having  their  attention
attracted  by  the  vacant  spaces,  would  be  much  more  likely  to  dis¬
cover  the  functions  connected  with  them  than  at  present ;  the  first
step  to  knowledge,  is,  to  be  sensible  of  the  extent  of  our  ignorance.

“Phrenology  must  be  perfected  by  individualizing

EACH  CONVOLUTION  OF  THE  BRAIN,  AND  ATTACHING  TO  IT  ITS

appropriate  organ  or  organs  ;  a  result  which  never  can  be
expected  to  be  effected,  as  long  as  phrenologists  content  themselves
with  examining  the  exterior  of  the  head,  and  still  less  by  inspecting
casts  taken  with  the  hair  on.  Let  phrenologists  reflect  on  the  fact,
that  the  organs  in  the  extent  of  their  surfaces  do  not  bear  any  inva¬
riable  proportion  to  each  other — that  an  organ,  the  development  of
which  is  large ,  is  often  very  slightly  more  prominent  than  its  neigh¬
bour,  which  may  be  only  moderate — the  large  size  of  the  one  being
principally  shown  by  its  surface  being  more  expanded  than  usual —
and  the  moderate  size  of  the  other,  by  its  being  more  than  usually
contracted  ;  let  them  consider,  that  in  such  cases  in  order  correctly
to  estimate  the  development  of  the  organs,  it  is  necessary  narrowly
to  notice  the  degree  of  convexity  of  their  surfaces,  and  the  situation
of  the  point  at  which  the  greatest  concentration  of  brain  takes  place,
and  vice  versa,  and  they  will  be  convinced,  that  except  for  demon-


424


Books  received.


strating  the  intellectual  faculties,  and  the  relative  development  of  the
different  regions  of  the  head,  casts  taken  with  the  hair  on  are  next
to  worthless.  Notwithstanding  the  parade  phrenologists  make  of
the  number  of  specimens  contained  in  their  museums,  from  the  un¬
satisfactory  and  futile  practice  of  taking  casts  with  the  hair  on,
together  with  the  meagre  details  possessed  of  the  conduct  of  the
individuals,  a  very  large  proportion  of  the  contents  of  existing  phre¬
nological  collections  are  in  reality  little  better  than  rubbish,  and
valuable  only  in  the  eyes  of  individuals  of  heated  imaginations.  One
hundred  casts  of  the  brains  and  skulls  of  such  individuals  as  Bentham,
Napoleon,  Shelley,  Goethe,  Fichte,  or  Schelling,  whose  names  would
constitute  a  sufficient  description  of  their  characters,  would  afford
more  materials  for  advancing  the  progress  of  phrenology  than  all
the  present  phrenological  museums  united,  the  skulls  and  casts  of
skulls  they  contain  excepted.” — Speculative  Analysis  of  the  Mental
Functions,  pp.  55 — 58.

L.  E.  Gr.  E.


BOOKS  RECEIVED.

Mesmerism  and  its  Opponents.  By  George  Sandby,  M.A.,  Vicar  of  Flixton,
Suffolk.  Second  Edition,  considerably  enlarged.  With  an  Introductory  Chapter.

We  introduced  the  first  edition  of  this  excellent  work  to  our  readers  in  our
sixth  number.  The  new  edition  contains  such  a  mass  of  new  matter,  that  it  is
almost  a  new  book  :  and  the  author,  intent  solely  upon  doing  good  to  his  fellow-
creatures,  has  fixed  a  price  upon  it  which  can  be  but  just  sufficient  to  pay  his
expenses  if  a  large  impression  is  sold.  He  brings  the  recent  progress  of  mes¬
merism  down  to  the  present  moment :  shewing  that  three  hundred  and  twelve
surgical  operations  have  been  rendered  in  this  country  and  abroad  painless  try
mesmerism ,  and  endless  cures  of  diseases  effected,  many  of  which  had  proved
too  much  for  the  ordinary  course  of  treatment  conducted  by  men  of  the  highest
reputation  ;  and  that  a  very  large  number  of  converts  have  been  of  late  made  to
the  conviction  of  the  truth  and  utility  of  mesmerism,  many  of  them  medical  men,
whose  names  and  residences  he  furnishes.

As  the  reverend  author  is  a  mesmerist,  not  from  reading,  but  from  witnessing
the  phenomena  in  a  very  great  number  of  cases  belonging  to  others,  and,  what  is
a  much  better  method  of  studying  the  subject,  were  people  sufficiently  interested
to  take  the  trouble,  from  inducing  the  phenomena  himself,  and  procuring  all  the
blessings  of  mesmerism  to  the  diseased  and  anguished  himself,  he  is  qualified  to
write  boldly  :  and  he  does  write  boldly  and  fervently,  like  one  having  authority,
and  in  very  deed  he  has  the  full  authority  of  truth  and  good  intention.  As  an
exhorter  of  mankind  to  that  religion  which  professes  universal  benevolence  and
sympathy  with  all  sufferers,  he  spares  no  pains  in  any  part.  He  states  his  own
experience,  and  that  of  others  in  this  country,  and  then  breaks  forth, —

“  Here,  then,  is  a  train  of  witnesses  in  favour  of  our  science  !  Here  is  a
succession  of  evidence  from  men  of  ability,  of  education,  of  honourable  standing
in  society,  from  whose  report  alone,  the  existence  of  mesmerism  as  a  fact  in
nature  might  be  confidently  predicated  !  And  this  list  might  have  besn  swelled
to  any  extent !  What  an  amount,  moreover,  have  we  here  of  happiness  conferred  !
What  a  mass  of  pain,  of  sickness,  of  sorrow,  lightened  or  removed  !  Here  at
length  are  a  few  pleasing  pages  in  the  long  sad  chapter  of  human  life  !  Here,  at
last,  is  a  delightful  study  for  the  philanthropist  and  the  Christian  !  And  all  these
blessings  communicated  by  means  of  a  power  that  is  derided,  or  dreaded,  or  dis¬
believed  !  We  have  confined  our  testimony  to  what  has  occui’red  in  this  country
alone  and  within  the  last  few  years — but  what  a  pile  of  narratives  could  have  been


Books  received.


425


added  to  it,  if  the  limits  of  a  humble  work  like  this  would  have  allowed  it.  It
might  have  been  added,  that  on  the  continent  mesmerism  has  been  received  as  a
fact  (un  fait  accompli )  for  years  :  that  in  Germany  it  is  studied  and  practised  to
a  considerable  extent ;  that  in  Prussia  many  physicians  make  use  of  it  under  the
authority  of  government ;  and  that  in  Berlin  in  particular  the  greatest  success  has
attended  its  use  ; — that  in  Stockholm  degrees  are  granted  in  the  university  by  an
examination  on  its  laws  ;  that  in  Russia,  the  emperor  appointed  a  commission  of
medical  men  to  inquire  into  it,  and  that  this  commission  pronounced  it  e  a  very
important  agent,’ — that  the  first  physician  of  the  emperor,  and  many  others  at
Petersburgh,  speak  in  favour  of  its  utility  ;  and  that  at  Moscow  a  systematic
course  of  treatment  under  the  highest  auspices  has  been  employed  for  years.  In
Denmark,  physicians  practise  it  under  a  royal  ordinance,  and  by  a  decree  of  the
College  of  Health.  In  Holland,  some  of  the  first  men  take  it  up.  In  France,
the  extent  to  which  it  is  practised  is  considerable  indeed.  A  commission  of  the
Royal  Academy  of  Medicine  there  recommended  that  mesmerism  should  be  allowed
a  place  within  the  circle  of  the  medical  sciences  (comme  moyen  therapeutique
devrait  trouver  sa  place  dans  le  cadre  des  connaissances  medicales).  Some  of  the
first  physicians  in  Paris  affixed  their  signatures  to  this  report.  I  might  mention
the  cases  related  by  Foissac  in  his  report :  I  might  give  extracts  without  number
on  the  subject  from  different  French  and  German  works.  I  might  quote  from
De  Leuze,  Puysegur,  Wienholt,  Treviranus,  Brandis  of  Copenhagen,  See.  usque
ad  nauseam.  The  great  name  of  Hufeland,  of  Berlin,  is  a  host  in  itself.”

He  takes  much  trouble  with  those  dolts  of  his  own  profession  who  ascribe  the
effects  of  mesmerism  to  the  devil.  The  task  of  noticing  these  men  must  have
filled  him  with  disgust  and  shame — disgust  with  them  as  authorized  and  ordained
teachers  of  mankind,  found  on  examination  fit  for  their  office,  and  shame  that  they
belong  to  the  same  profession  as  himself.  Will  the  world  believe  that  a  most
popular  preacher,  and  we  believe  a  canon  of  some  cathedral,  who  condemns  mes¬
merism,  says,  “  I  go  of  course  on  what  I  have  read.  I  have  seen  nothing  of  it,
nor  do  I  think  it  right  to  tempt  God  by  going  to  see  it.  I  have  not  faith  to  go
in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  and  command  the  devil  to  depart.”  What  can
the  educated  men  in  Germany,  France,  and  Switzerland,  think  of  the  Church  of
England  when  many  of  its  clergy  hold  forth  as  they  do,  grossly  ignorant  as  they
are,  in  words  similar  to  these  of  the  Rev.  Hugh  M‘Neile.  Nothing  more  could
be  expected  from  an  ignorant  and  dirty  village  priest  of  Belgium  or  Italy.  “  In
the  time  of  Elizabeth,”  says  Mr.  Sandby,  “  there  was  a  strong  feeling  and  pre¬
judice  against  the  use  of  forks.  One  divine  preached  against  the  use  of  them  as
‘  an  insult  on  Providence  not  to  touch  one’s  mouth  with  one’s  fingers.’  Probably
the  eloquent  preacher  would  not  enter  a  room  where  a  fork  was  laid  in  order  to
boast  that  he  had  seen  nothing  of  one.”

The  work  is  rich  in  information,  given  in  the  most  agreeable  manner  and
illustrated  by  innumerable  anecdotes  and  interesting  references.  Every  question
is  argued  well, — the  evidence  of  mesmerism,  the  fallacy  of  the  objections  to  it,
the  highly  improper  conduct  of  the  medical  profession  in  prejudging  it  when  it  is
one  of  the  mightiest  powers  in  the  healing  art  :  and  he  is  always  courteous  and
polished,  as  a  clergyman  should  be.  No  one  will  read  the  book  without  great
instruction  and  improvement  as  well  as  entertainment,  and  we  think  that  every
reading  person  throughout  the  kingdom  should  peruse  it.  We  entreat  every
mesmerist  to  purchase  one  or  more  copies,  and  lend  in  every  direction.  The
price  is  a  very  trifle  ;  and  the  good  which  must  be  accomplished  by  the  book
is  incalculable.  We  have  no  doubt  of  its  rapid  sale  :  nor  do  we  doubt  that,
coming  at  this  opportune  moment,  it  will  do  far  moi'e  service  to  the  holy  and
mighty  cause  of  mesmerism  than  any  work  which  has  appeared  upon  the  subject
in  this  country.

Essay  on  the  Constitution  of  Society,  as  designed  by  God.  By  Daniel
Bishop.

The  Edinburgh  Phrenological  Journal.  No.  XCIII.

The  Principles  of  Nature,  the  Divine  Revelations,  and  a  Voice  to  Mankind.
By  and  through  Andrew  Jackson  Davis,  the  “  Poughkeepsie  seer”  and  “  Clair¬
voyant.”  In  Three  Parts.


426


Notices  to  Correspondents.


Record  of  Cases  treated  in  the  Mesmeric  Hospital  from  November,  1846,  to
May,  1847  :  with  reports  of  the  official  visitors.  Printed  by  order  of  Govern¬
ment.  Calcutta.

Howitt’s  Journal.  Numbers  from  September  to  January.


NOTICES  TO  CORRESPONDENTS.

Mr.  Braid  has  addressed  a  long  letter  to  the  editor  of  the  Medical  Times ,
and  which  is  inserted  in  the  number  for  November  20th,  1847.  He  requests  the
editor  of  The  Zoist  to  insert  it  in  full,  but  we  must  really  decline  acceding  to  this
modest  request.  The  letter  contains  nothing  which  can  in  the  least  interest  our
readers,  except  the  simple  fact,  which  Mr.  Braid  has  thought  it  right  at  the  ninth
hour  to  record,  viz.,  that  the  assertion  made  by  Mr.  Wakley,  that  Dr.  Elliotson
was  the  gentleman  before  whom  Mr.  Braid  performed  some  experiments  in
London,  is  (as  are  all  the  other  statements  relating  to  mesmerism  in  the  pages  of
the  Lancet )  perfectly  untrue.

Since  this  was  penned,  we  have  been  apprised  by  Mr.  Braid  of  his  letter  to
the  Medical  Times,  and  of  its  rejection  by  the  Lancet,  to  which  also  he  sent  it.

We  x-egret  that  want  of  room  compels  us  to  defer  the  interesting  communica¬
tions  of  Miss  Wallace,  Mr.  Barth,  Mr.  Armour,  Dr.  Elliotson,  Mr.  Holland,
Mr.  Reynoldson,  Mr.  Saunders,  and  Mr.  West,  Surgeon,  till  our  next  number.

We  have  just  seen  the  following  in  Galignani  of  last  week  : —

“  Madame  Sancerotte,  a  somnambulist,  living  at  No.  3,  Rue  Turgot,  was  on
Friday  brought  before  the  Tribunal  of  Correctional  Police,  to  answer  the  charge
of  swindling,  and  of  illegally  practising  the  medical  art  by  means  of  somnam¬
bulism.  The  wife  of  a  person  at  Montmorency  having  lost  two  horses  which  she
had  let  to  two  young  men  to  make  a  promenade  in  the  forest,  went  to  Mme.  San¬
cerotte,  who  put  herself  into  a  magnetic  trance,  and  took  hold  of  the  woman’s
hand.  The  latter  then  put  several  questions  to  her  respecting  the  horses.  The
somnambulist,  to  the  intense  astonishment  of  the  woman,  correctly  described  the
colour  of  the  animals,  and  stated  that  her  husband  and  another  person  had
sought  for  them  in  a  particular  part  of  the  forest,  which  was  perfectly  true.  The
sleeping  lady  then  added,  that  one  of  the  horses  would  be  found  at  the  lie  Adam,
and  the  other  in  the  forest  of  Montmorency.  For  this  consultation  she  received
lOfr.  It  turned  out  that  the  horses  were  found,  not  in  the  lie  Adam  or  in  the
forest  of  Montmorency,  but  at  La  Cliapelle,  St.  Denis,  and  this  falsification  of
the  prediction  constituted  the  alleged  act  of  swindling.  But  the  woman  who  was
said  to  have  been  swindled  gave  the  strongest  testimony  in  favour  of  the  accused,
stating  that  the  description  she  had  given  of  the  colour  of  the  horses  and  of  the  search
made  by  her  husband,  convinced  her  that  she  was  no  impostor,  adding  that  she  had
no  doubt  whatever  that  the  horses  had  really  been  taken  to  the  He  Adam  and  to  the
place  she  had  mentioned  in  the  forest  of  Montmorency,  and  that  she  was  con¬
vinced  that,  if  she  had  pressed  the  accused  with  questions,  she  would  have  finished
by  stating  that  the  horses  were  at  the  Chapelle  St.  Denis.  In  the  face  of  this
testimony  the  public  prosecutor  abandoned  the  charge  of  swindling.  To  estab¬
lish  the  accusation  of  illegally  practising  the  medical  art,  a  witness  was  called  who
stated  that  she  had  paid  the  somnambulist  to  prescribe  for  some  dreadful  pains
which  she  had  in  the  head ;  but  she  added  that  the  prescriptions  of  that  person
had  completely  cured  her,  though  she  had  not  been  able  to  obtain  relief  from  all
the  doctors  of  Paris.  The  witness  added  that  before  placing  confidence  in  the
accused,  she  determined  to  put  her  skill  to  the  test,  by  asking  her  where  the  key
of  a  drawer  which  she  had  lost  for  a  long  time  could  be  found  ;  whereupon  the
accused  mentioned  a  spot,  and  there,  sure  enough,  the  key  was  discovered.  In
consequence  of  this  favourable  evidence,  the  tribunal  only  condemned  the  som¬
nambulist  to  a  fine  of  5fr.  The  President  recommended  her  for  the  future  not
to  give  consultations  without  the  presence  of  a  physician.

All  communications  must  be  addressed  to  the  care  of  Mr.  Baillicre,  219,
Regent  Street ,  for  the  Editors  ;  and  it  is  earnestly  requested  that  they  be  sent
a  month  before  the  day  of  publication.


END  OF  VOL.  V.
